11744 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 S AURON E YES: Disentangling Voluminous Logs to
 Unveil Camouflaged Attack Intentions
 Wei Qiao , Weiheng Wu, Song Liu, Yebo Feng , Zehui Wang, Junrong Liu , Teng Li , Bo Jiang ,
 Zhigang Lu, and Baoxu Liu

 Abstract—Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) pose escalat- interactions. S AURON E YES thus boasts heightened sensitivity
ing risks to large enterprises and institutions. While current and granular detection capabilities. Finally, S AURON E YES reconresearch has predominantly focused on data source analysis structs the attack chain at the node level and presents an
for identifying known attack patterns or anomalous behaviors, attack-chain that is more accessible for security analysis. Our
three critical challenges remain inadequately addressed: 1) APTs evaluations in real-world scenarios and simulated attack envidemonstrate sophisticated concealment capabilities, embedding ronments demonstrate that S AURON E YES achieves outstanding
malicious operations within legitimate business activities; 2) The accuracy, with an average detection rate of 99%.
sparse nature of APT attacks leads to low-frequency malicious
activities that prove exceptionally challenging to detect within Index Terms—Advanced persistent threats (APT) detection,
massive log datasets; 3) APTs employ multi-stage attack chains, graph neural network (GNN), provenance graph, intrusion detecwhereas existing solutions exhibit limitations in reconstructing tion system (IDS).
complete attack pathways to enable effective forensic analysis. In this paper, we address the detrimental effects of the
sparsity of malevolent interactions and attack intent camou- I. I NTRODUCTION
flaging on anomaly detection by introducing S AURON E YES, the
pioneering APT detection system tailored to resolve these challenges. S AURON E YES constructs audit logs into both knowledge
and interaction views, disentangling these to learn representa-
 A N ADVANCED Persistent Threat (APT) is a long-term,
 targeted cyberattack conducted by skilled attackers who
 stealthily infiltrate a system, often through phishing or by
tions through graph learning enhanced with an attention-based exploiting vulnerabilities [1]. Once they gain access, they
neighbor allocation mechanism. Additionally, we incorporate deploy advanced malware and backdoors to remain undeself-supervised contrastive learning to discern the subtle similarities and distinctions among disentangled samples, facilitating tected while moving through the network to gain control
a deeper understanding of the inherent structures within system [2]. APTs typically aim to steal sensitive data or disrupt
 operations, posing a severe threat to large organizations and
 Received 2 April 2025; revised 2 August 2025, 31 August 2025, government systems. Consequently, achieving full-cycle attack
and 23 September 2025; accepted 24 September 2025. Date of publication attribution has become an urgent need. However, unlike
6 October 2025; date of current version 6 November 2025. This work traditional attacks, APTs feature a multi-stage attack chain
was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China under Grant 2023YFC2206402; in part by the Strate- (e.g., reconnaissance, lateral movement, data exfiltration),
gic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences under making it difficult for conventional single-point event detection
Grant XDA0460100; in part by the Open Foundation of Key Labora- methods to establish a complete contextual relationship of
tory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education of China under Grant
KLCS20240206; in part by the Program of Key Laboratory of Network the attack. Additionally, APTs incorporate disguised benign
Assessment Technology; in part by Chinese Academy of Sciences; in part by behaviors within their attack chain, exhibiting a high degree
the Program of Beijing Key Laboratory of Network Security and Protection of stealth that renders detection through traditional feature-
Technology; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62272370; in part by the Natural Science Basic Research Program matching methods ineffective. Moreover, APTs have long
of Shaanxi under Grant 2025JC-JCQN-073; in part by the Young Elite dormancy periods and utilize low-frequency communication,
Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST under Grant 2022QNRC001; in causing traditional threshold-based anomaly detection models
part by the Qinchuangyuan Scientist + Engineer Team Program of Shaanxi
under Grant 2024QCY-KXJ-149; and in part by the Songshan Laboratory to fail. These characteristics of APTs present challenges that
under Grant 241110210200. The associate editor coordinating the review of render conventional intrusion detection systems ineffective, as
this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Ming Li. (Wei Qiao they struggle to address low-frequency and complex attack
and Weiheng Wu contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors:
Junrong Liu; Teng Li.) strategies, resulting in higher rates of false positives and
 Wei Qiao, Weiheng Wu, Song Liu, Zehui Wang, Junrong Liu, Bo Jiang, false negatives. Therefore, there is a need to propose a high-
Zhigang Lu, and Baoxu Liu are with the Institute of Information Engineering, accuracy APT detection solution that maintains a low false
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100045, China, and also with the
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, positive rate while consuming minimal resources without
Beijing 101408, China (e-mail: qiaowei@iie.ac.cn; wuweiheng@iie.ac.cn; compromising system performance. In response, the research
liusong@iie.ac.cn; wangzehui@iie.ac.cn; liujunrong@iie.ac.cn; jiangbo@ community has employed data provenance techniques for
iie.ac.cn; luzhigang@iie.ac.cn; liubaoxu@iie.ac.cn).
 Yebo Feng is with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 executing APT detection [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10],
(e-mail: yebo.feng@ntu.edu.sg). [11], [12], [13]. These techniques transform system audit logs
 Teng Li is with the School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an into provenance graphs, utilizing rich contextual information
710126, China, and also with the Songshan Laboratory, Zhengzhou 450018,
China (e-mail: litengxidian@gmail.com). for fine-grained causal analysis to detect intrusions and deduce
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3618381 security vulnerabilities. Existing research partially relies on
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS 11745

Rule-based methods [14], [15], [16], which employ typical cally addresses APT characteristics through three innovations:
or specific attack patterns to construct rules and match audit 1) A graph disentanglement algorithm that isolates interactive
records with known attack rules. However, this approach noise in multi-dimensional entity attributes while revealing
heavily depends on prior knowledge and is costly to develop latent behavioral intentions; 2) A multi-view contrastive learnin environments with frequent new variations, making it chal- ing mechanism applied to the disentangled graph, which
lenging to detect common zero-day issues in APT scenarios. enhances discriminative feature learning through dynamic
Alternatively, some studies utilize Statistics-based methods positive/negative sampling, effectively reducing false positives
[17], [18], [19] to detect threats by mapping the rarity of ele- while amplifying subtle attack patterns; 3) During attack
ments from various sources in provenance graphs, quantifying detection, malicious interaction scores are used to distinguish
the tendency for attacks. The limitation of this approach is between benign and malicious entities, and critical intents
its focus only on direct connections (low-order information) (attributes and relationships) among infected entities are prewithin the graphs, which leads to overlooking a vast amount served to intuitively reconstruct attack scenarios, thereby
of deeper intents hidden in complex system entity interactions. providing hierarchical forensic evidence for security analysts.
Most recent research has shifted towards Learning-based SauronEyes comprises four collaborative modules for
methods [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. These methods efficient anomalous edge detection and attack chain reconleverage various deep learning techniques to model APT struction: (1) Graph Construction constructs an Interaction
behaviors or patterns, classify anomalous samples, and detect Knowledge Graph (KG) capturing entity attributes (IP, paths,
deviations, enabling the detection of unknown attacks. parent-child relationships) and a Graph (IG) reflecting entity
 Traditional non-learning methods (e.g., rule-based match- interactions (processes, files, sockets), initializing aspect
ing, statistical analysis) exhibit inherent limitations in mod- embeddings through gate units coupled with specific aspects.
eling complex entity relationships and dynamic behavioral (2) View Disentanglement employs an attention-based neighpatterns due to reliance on predefined knowledge bases’ bor allocation mechanism into path-aware GNNs for KG
completeness. While large language models enhance con- disentanglement, while integrating an focused lightweight
textual reasoning via chain-of-thought mechanisms, their GCN (LightGCN) to disentangle IG. (3) Contrastive Learndesign paradigms fundamentally misalign with APT attribution ing enhances representation learning through intra-view and
requirements. Large models’ data/compute demands clash inter-view contrastive mechanisms, mitigating data sparsity.
with scarce APT samples and dynamic threats, while their (4) Threat Detection & Attack Reconstruction predicts edge
opacity hinders pinpointing initial breaches and lateral move- maliciousness via multi-aspect fusion, constructs compact
ments, causing dual failures in path inference and forensic summary graphs by considering overlapping attack behaviors
clarity. In contrast, graph neural network (GNN)-based prove- across events.
nance frameworks model network entities as heterogeneous We have implemented S AURON E YES and evaluated its
provenance graph structures that explicitly preserve attack effectiveness and efficiency on the DARPA Transparent Compropagation topology and temporal-causal dependencies. This puting (TC) E3 dataset [20], StreamSpot dataset [21] and the
approach achieves optimal balance across detection accuracy, Unicorn Wget dataset [6]. The DARPA dataset includes realresource efficiency, and explainability. world attacks, while the StreamSpot and Unicorn dataset can
 While provenance graph-based graph learning methods have simulate attacks in a controlled environment. Experimental
achieved promising results, they still face inherent challenges results show that S AURON E YES can efficiently capture real
in handling APT attacks: 1) Camouflage: Attackers construct attack intents and distinguish between benign and malicious
semantically coherent pseudo-normal contexts by blending system entity interactions with high precision and recall rates.
malicious operations with massive benign behaviors (e.g., Moreover, S AURON E YES matches or exceeds the performance
masquerading as legitimate process invocations or routine of state-of-the-art detection methods. Finally, S AURON E YES
file access), causing traditional anomaly detection models accurately reconstructs attack chains.
to suffer from feature confusion; 2) Low-frequency: APT In summary, we make the following contributions:
events exhibit extremely low signal-to-noise ratios, with malicious fragments (often < 0.01%) concealed in long-term • We propose S AURON E YES, an APT detection method
TB-scale operation logs—the extreme sparsity allows normal suitable for environments with high sparsity of malicious
high-frequency nodes to dominate graph neural networks’ interactions, capable of detecting deep attack intents in
neighborhood aggregation, while existing loss functions strug- massive log data. It also constructs an attack chain that
gle to capture long-tailed malicious patterns under class is easier to analyze.
imbalance ratios exceeding 104 : 1; 3) Multi-stage: APT • We capture deep attack intentions by disentangling the
attacks follow multi-phase tactics spanning hundreds of enti- camouflaged graphs and model system entity interaction
ties and dozens of stages, yet current methods relying on tendencies through disentangled representation learning,
fixed-hop subgraph sampling (e.g., 3-hop truncation) fail to thus preventing the detection model from being misled
model cross-stage long-range dependencies, ultimately hinder- by surface intent-induced representations.
ing complete attack graph reconstruction. • We introduce a novel self-supervised contrastive learning
 To address these challenges, we propose S AURON E YES, an framework that learns disentangled representations of
advanced APT detection framework integrating graph disen- system entities from knowledge views and interaction
tanglement algorithms and contrastive learning. It systemati- views and enhances inter-view and intra-view compar-
11746 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
 O BSTACLES T HAT L IMIT THE P ERFORMANCE OF P ROVENANCE -BASED
 APT D ETECTION M ODELS . I NDICATE T HAT T HEY C AN S OLVE OR
 H AVE T HIS A BILITY, W HILE ◦ I NDICATE THE O PPOSITE

Fig. 1. Abstract diagram sourced from DARPA E3-CADETS, depicting a
backdoor attack activity.

 isons, providing an effective solution for the high sparsity
 of malicious entities in real-world log data.
 • We conduct extensive experimental evaluations on widely
 used datasets, demonstrating the high effectivenes.

 II. BACKGROUND & M OTIVATION C. Challenge to Existing Solutions
 In this section, we use APT attacks from DARPA [20] to Previous studies on threat detection have demonstrated
illustrate the challenges in existing threat detection solutions. remarkable performance in the field of APT detection.
 Nevertheless, persistent challenges hinder the effectiveness
A. Motivating Example of provenance-based detection models when deployed in
 As shown in Fig. 1, this is a real Nginx backdoor attack from increasingly complex real-world environments. These critical
the DARPA Transparent Computing Engagement 3 [20]. The limitations, which will be elaborated in subsequent sections,
attacker 81.49.200.166 launched two cyber attacks against are systematically summarized in TABLE I.
the CADETS system by exploiting an Nginx backdoor. During 1) Rule-Based Methods: Rule-based detection frameworks
the initial attack, the perpetrator successfully connected to [14], [15], [16] incorporate expert knowledge to construct
the vulnerable Nginx server running on CADETS. Through attack-matching patterns through known attack reports and
shell commands, they downloaded a malicious payload to the meticulously designed attack chain scoring mechanisms based
/tmp/vUgefal directory and successfully escalated privileges on ATT&CK. While this expert-driven approach effectively
for the vUgefal process to root level. After exfiltrating reduces false positive rates, the excessive reliance on manual
sensitive information, the attacker attempted to infect the sshd expertise results in slow pattern updates when confronting
process with the malicious payload, which ultimately caused sophisticated APT attack vectors and evolving cyberspace
a system crash before completion. Subsequently, the attacker landscapes, ultimately leading to significant detection latency
initiated a second assault by creating the malicious process in rule-based methodologies.
XIM and establishing a persistent test process designed to 2) Statistics-Based Methods: Statistical-based approaches
maintain long-term connectivity while conducting port scan- [17], [18], [19] detect anomalies by calculating occurrence
ning operations across the local network (128.5.12.*:*). probabilities of system behaviors and assigning anomaly
 scores based on their rarity (operating under the assumption
B. Attack Intent Camouflaging that rare entities are more likely to be malicious). However,
 Intent refers to the normal interactive behaviors of system these shallow statistical measurements fail to capture the
entities themselves, as well as the objectives of malicious genuine intent behind system behaviors. As demonstrated in
behaviors orchestrated by APT attackers [22], [23]. Attack our motivating example (Fig. 1), the test process conduct-
Intent Camouflaging describes a critical detection challenge ing multiple port scans across different IP addresses would
where an attacker deliberately mixes malicious operations with be misclassified as benign due to its high frequency, while
a large volume of legitimate, benign system activities. By overlooking its critical association with the malicious Nginx
embedding malicious behavior within normal workflows, the entity. Moreover, initial low-frequency benign activities like
attacker’s hostile intent becomes mixed with routine opera- file writes by python often trigger false positives. These
tional intents, effectively camouflaging the attack. This tactic limitations originate from conventional statistical approaches’
makes it exceptionally difficult to discern the true purpose failure to holistically capture entity attributes and interaction
behind a series of actions. For instance, a single process might semantics in provenance graphs.
execute both legitimate and malicious tasks simultaneously, 3) Learning-Based Methods: Deep learning-based APT
which obscures its overall intent from traditional detection detection leverages large-scale system behavioral data
systems. The Nginx backdoor attack in the DARPA dataset for model training, yet faces fundamental constraints.
serves as a concrete example of Attack Intent Camouflaging. KAIROS [13] adopts graph neural network encoder-decoder
QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS 11747

Fig. 2. The framework of S AURON E YES consists of: i) generating initial embeddings from knowledge graphs and interaction graphs; ii) dual-view disentangling
by LightGCN and Path-aware GNN respectively; iii) contrastive learning within and between views and iv) threat detection and attack chain reconstruction.

architectures for attack chain reconstruction. UNICORN [6] behaviors; and (3) providing complete alert graphs with conconstructs contextual provenance graphs for stealthy attack textualized relationships to streamline security analysts’ alert
detection but suffers from coarse-grained alerting. SHADE- verification and attack investigation processes.
WATCHER [12] reformulates APT detection as entity preference prediction via bipartite graph modeling, lacking full-chain IV. OVERVIEW
attack reconstruction. MAGIC [24] employs masked graph S AURON E YES is an innovative provenance-based APT
representation learning to abstract benign system patterns, detection scheme that utilizes graph disentangling algorithms
while THREATRACE [10] implements GraphSAGE-based and graph contrastive learning. It enables fine-grained identifientity aggregation for host-centric threat detection. Current cation of system anomalies in audit logs, providing a concise
approaches remain fundamentally constrained by severe data and complete attack chain. Fig. 2 illustrates the architecture
imbalance between benign logs and sparse APT patterns, with of S AURON E YES, which consists of four major components:
inadequate mitigation strategies exacerbating false positives. O1 Graph Construction and Initialization For the host
 logs of different systems, S AURON E YES models system
 behavior by focusing on the interactions between system enti-
 III. T HREAT M ODEL AND D ESIGN G OAL ties and the multiple information flows and attribute features of
A. Threat Model these entities. S AURON E YES extracts interaction relationships
 (e.g., Process → File) and entity attributes (e.g., Socket →
 We assume attackers infiltrate hosts via networks to steal IP segment) from the logs, which are then converted into two
data or manipulate devices, leaving reconstructable audit types of graph structures: knowledge graphs (KG) and intertraces. Aligned with prior models [6], [16], [25], [27], our TCB action graphs (IG). The system entity features are initialized
includes OS kernels and audit frameworks, excluding hardware as vector embeddings through element-wise gating units.
trojans/evasion attacks beyond kernel auditing [5], [28]. Audit O2 Disentangling Module once the initial embeddings
data integrity is ensured via tamper-resistant logging [29], [30]. are obtained, the disentangling module begins the process of
 disentangling the knowledge graph (KG) and the interaction
 graph (IG). For the KG, the module uses a path-aware GNN
B. Design Goal
 to encode the multi-faceted attribute information of individual
 S AURON E YES models audit logs to extract behavioral pat- system entities. An attention-based neighbor allocation mechaterns by disentangling entity attributes and relationship types, nism is employed for each aspect. For the IG, the disentangling
enabling precise identification of genuine behavioral intents module focuses on separating each system entity’s interactions
across diverse entity activities. The system aims to achieve with multiple entities (or aspects) and applies a lightweight
three key objectives for effective APT detection: (1) generating graph convo-lutional network (LightGCN) for aggregation.
edge-grained granular alerts from massive log volumes to Similarly, an attention-based mechanism is used to filter
ensure fine-grained threat visibility; (2) maintaining low false subsets of neighbors, aggregating more valuable neighbor
positives through intent disentanglement to isolate malicious attributes
11748 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 O3 Contrastive Learning Module After obtaining the TABLE II
disentangled entity feature embeddings, the contrastive learn- S UMMARY OF K EY N OTATIONS AND T ERMS
ing module applies within-view contrastive learning to the
embeddings of KG and IG. This module introduces random
noise into the embeddings to add perturbations for contrastive
enhancement. For any system entity within a view, a pair of
augmented embeddings under the same aspect is treated as
a positive pair, while representations from different aspects
form negative pairs. Once the positive and negative pairs
are determined, contrastive loss is calculated separately for
both views. Subsequently, the module performs contrastive
learning between the two views to align the system entity
representations within them.
 O4 Threat Detection and Reconstruction Leveraging
multi-view embeddings, S AURON E YES calculates intent prediction scores for interactions by combining inner products
across distinct intent dimensions of system entities. When an
anomaly score exceeds a predefined threshold, the interaction
is flagged as malicious and incorporated into the alert chain.
To generate compact attack summary graphs for analysts,
S AURON E YES employs overlapping community detection to
automatically aggregate discrete alerts into coherent attack
events, ensuring both interpretability and structural integrity
of reconstructed attack scenarios.

 V. D ESIGN
 In this section, we introduce S AURON E YES, whose purpose is to disentangle the knowledge graph and interaction
graph and extract deep-seated intentions, then use contrastive
learning to study the intrinsic structural information of entities,
ultimately detecting malicious interactions hidden among system entity interactions. TABLE II provides detailed definitions
of key concepts and parameters.
 TABLE III
 S YSTEM B EHAVIORS E XTRACTED F ROM AUDIT L OGS
A. Graph Construction and Initialization
 1) Graph Construction: SauronEyes extracts system entities including subjects (processes), objects (processes, files,
network flows, etc.), and attributes (IP addresses, commandline arguments) from audit logs (TABLE III). After we obtain
these four types of entities relationships, we will map the
necessary behavioral relationships into attribute relationships
between nodes in the KG graph to assist in building attribute partition ID embeddings into K chunks [31], we employ
edges. The knowledge graph is defined as a set of triples: element-wise self-gating units to regulate information flow
KG = {(e, r, v) | e ∈ E, r ∈ R, v ∈ V}, where E denotes system from ID embeddings to each aspect:
entities(including subject and object), R represents the relationship between entities and attribute values. Subsequently, we ee,k = fgate
 k
 (ee ) = ee σ(Wk ee + bk ), (1)
enrich the graph by embedding entity attributes and interaction
relationships. We abstract the interactions between system where ee is the ID embedding of entities e, ee,k is the initial
entity pairs with causal relationships into a unified interaction embedding of entities e for the k-th aspect, Wk ∈ Rd×d and
graph. Each interaction reflects a causal exchange between two bk ∈ Rd are learnable parameters, denotes element-wise
system entities within a specific timestamp. The interaction multiplication, and σ is the sigmoid function. Similarly, we
graph is formally defined as: IG = {(s, o) | s ∈ Subject, o ∈ initialize aspect-specific embeddings e s,k , eo,k , er,k and ev,k
Object}, where each pair (s, o) indicates that subject s has for subject s, object o, relations r and attribute values v,
interacted with object o. respectively.
 2) Embeddings Initialization: Prior to graph disentangling, The self-gating mechanism adaptively learns non-linear
we initialize multi-aspect embeddings for entities. Formally, gates to modulate ID embeddings across different aspects
we assume there are K distinct aspects. Unlike methods that at element-wise granularity through dimension re-weighting.
QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS 11749

This approach offers greater flexibility compared to naively in three interactions, where capturing both direct and transipartitioning embeddings into fixed chunks. tive collaboration patterns is critical. We obtain collaborative
 information by modeling these connections.
B. Disentangling Module We adopt LightGCN, which employs simple message passing and aggregation mechanisms without feature transforma-
 After constructing the audit logs into KG and IG, and
 tion or nonlinear activation, thereby improving computational
initializing the embeddings through gating units, we explore
 efficiency in graph structures constructed from real-world audit
the disentangling of the two views(KG and IG) in the disentanlogs. However, similar to KG disentanglement, we observe that
gling module. This process differentiates the various aspects
 for key nodes equivalent to “traffic hubs” (e.g., Nginx), they
between system entity interactions and system entity attributes,
 may engage in interactions across multiple distinct aspects.
aiming to obtain embeddings with clearer expressive power.
 Aggregating all neighbors under a single aspect during disen-
 1) Disentangling Knowledge Graph: The purpose of this
 tanglement is clearly suboptimal.
component is to learn disentangled knowledge-aware repre-
 For example, as previously mentioned, the relationships
sentations that distinguish various aspects of system entity
 and entities in the attack provenance aspect are the primary
attributes. For example, in the Knowledge Graph (KG), for
 causes of the Nginx server’s operations and associations with
the entity node Nginx, its connected node 200.36.109.214
 /tmp/vUgefal, while interactions from other aspects are not.
reflects IP information, /var/log/nginx-*.log indicates
 Therefore, we utilize an attention-based neighbor allocation
storage path information, and /etc/group represents the
 mechanism to refine the IG by inferring the importance of
Received objects of Nginx. Inspired by [32], we use a patheach interaction under different aspects. For the interaction
aware GNN to encode this information. The path-aware GNN
 (s, o) under the k-th aspect, its attention score is calculated as
aggregates L-hop neighborhood information through deep
aggregation while preserving path information (i.e., long-range exp(e>s,k xkg
 o,k )
connectivity). αk(s,o) = P kg
 . (5)
 >
 k0 ∈K exp(e s,k0 xo,k0 )
 However, in KG disentanglement tasks, we cannot aggregate
all neighbors because only a subset of neighbors is highly In the l-th layer at the k-th aspect, the aggregation result can
relevant to their corresponding aspects. For instance, the IP be represented as:
information 200.36.109.214 directly caused the compromise 1 X k (l)
of Nginx and is strongly correlated with the “attack source” e(l+1)
 s,k =ˇ ˇ α(s,o) eo,k ,
 ˇ ig ˇ
 ˇN s ˇ o∈Nsig
aspect, while /var/log/nginx-*.log and /etc/group are
weakly relevant. To better capture the affinity between target 1 X k (l)
 e(l+1)
 o,k =ˇ ˇ α(s,o) e s,k , (6)
entities and their neighbors, we choose similarity-based atten- ˇ ig ˇ
 ˇNo ˇ s∈Noig
tion with the assumption that the more similar entity node e
is to its neighbor v in the k-th aspect, and the relation is r, the where N sig and Noig represent sets of system entities s’s and
better the representation of node e in that aspect. The attention o’s neighbors in the interaction graph. Then representations at
score is represented as different layers are summed up as the collaborative represenexp(e>e,k (er,k ev,k )) tations of the k-th aspect, as follows:
 αk(e,r,v) = P . (2)
 >
 k0 ∈K exp(ee,k0 (er,k0 ev,k0 )) xig (0) (L)
 s,k = e s,k + · · · + e s,k , xig (0) (L)
 o,k = eo,k + · · · + eo,k , (7)
Then, the aggregation at the l-th layer of the k-th aspect can where where e(0) (0)
 s,k and eo,k represent the initial embeddings of
be represented as: system entities s and o at the k-th aspect.
 1 X
 e(l+1)
 e,k = ˇ ˇ αk(e,r,v) er,k e(l)
 v,k , (3)
 ˇ kg ˇ
 kg
 C. Contrastive Learning Module
 ˇNe ˇ (r,v)∈Ne
 Contrastive learning has enhanced representation learning
l specifically refers to the l-th convolutional layer of the GNN, by minimizing the distance between similar sample pairs
which is conceptually equivalent to the l-hop neighborhood and maximizing the distance between dissimilar sample pairs,
from the central node. Finally, we aggregate the represen- addressing the issue of data sparsity caused by the scarcity
tations from all layers to obtain the knowledge attribute of key samples. S AURON E YES does not require labels at all
representation at the k-th aspect: in the contrastive learning stage, but automatically generates
 xkg (0) (L) pseudo labels based on the structure of the data itself.
 e,k = ee,k + · · · + ee,k . (4)
 1) Embedding Augmentation: It has been demonstrated in
where e(0)
 e,k represent the initial embeddings of system entities [33] that, for graph contrastive learning, the key factor is
e at the k-th aspect. the contrastive loss (CL), rather than the augmentation of
 2) Disentangling Interaction Graph: The purpose of this the graph itself. Therefore, this component designs a rancomponent is to learn multi-aspect representations of system dom noise-based embedding augmentation method, adding
entity interactions. The Interaction Graph (IG) empha- perturbations to the node embeddings for contrastive learning.
sizes collaborative signals between entities. For instance, Specifically, noise is randomly added to the disentangled
in the interaction sequence Nginx → tmp/test (and → embeddings at the k-th aspect. We add noise to each embed-
/etc/passwd and → tmp/vUgefal), four entities participate ding in the opposite direction, i.e., the two augmented
11750 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

embeddings are slightly stretched in opposite directions and D. Threat Detection and Attack Reconstruction Module
slightly shifted, which is expected to improve the linear separa- 1) Threat Detection: After obtaining the contrastive loss
bility in the projection space. A set of augmented embeddings for disentangled representations on both the knowledge graph
for the k-th aspect can be represented as and interaction graph views, we proceed to threat prediction,
 (
 1
 e = e + (k1 erand k2 × η) sign(e) specifically categorizing system entity interactions into benign
 f (e) = 2 (8) and malicious interactions. Given any interaction (u,r,v) with
 e = e − (k2 erand k2 × η) sign(e)
 k-th dimension, we combine the embeddings (zu,k and zv,k )
where k · k2 represents L2 normalization, 1 erand and 2 erand are from both views and apply the inner product to represent the
random embeddings that are uniformly distributed on [0, 1). prediction score ŷk (u, v) for the interaction between system
By normalizing 1 erand and 2 erand , we can convert them into entities u and v being malicious. The specific formula is as
unit length in the projection space. We set a hyperparameter follows:
η to control the intensity of the embedding augmentation,
 z s,k = zig
 s,k , zo,k = zkg ig
 o,k ⊕ zo,k (13)
to prevent excessive noise from making the model unable to
differentiate between similar samples. ŷ (s, o) = (z s,k ) zo,k .
 k T
 (14)
 2) Intra-View Contrastive Learning: Our goal is to explore Considering that each interaction may be related to different
the weak dependencies between the disentangled represen- aspects differently, we adopt a careful fusion of prediction
tations. We aim to achieve comprehensive disentangling to scores from different aspects with βk(u,v) as the attention weight
obtain more information. We utilize contrastive learning to obtain the final result ŷ(u, v), as follows:
between the disentangled Kg and IG to perform independent
representation learning. The steps are as follows: First, we exp((h s ⊕ ho )T (z s,k ⊕ zo,k ))
 βk(s,o) = P (15)
define positive and negative sample pairs. For any embedding 0 exp((h s ⊕ ho )T (z s,k0 ⊕ zo,k0 ))
 Xk ∈K
in the view, we select a pair of augmented embeddings from ŷ(s, o) = βk(s,o) ŷk (s, o). (16)
the same aspect to form a positive pair and calculate their k∈K
self-similarity, then choose augmented embeddings from two
 Given the focus of the simple contrastive loss on the
different aspects to form a negative pair. We use the optimized
 intrinsic distribution structure of the sample space, we apply a
contrastive loss InfoNCE, which learns more unified entity
 multi-task learning strategy to jointly train the pairwise BPR
representations and implicitly alleviates popularity bias. The
 loss and the contrastive loss, in order to more comprehensively
contrastive loss for the disentangled Knowledge graph can be
 achieve system entity prediction. As shown below:
expressed as:
 1 X
 XX kg kg
 e s(zv,k ,zv,k )/τ LBPR = − ln S igmoid(ŷ(s,o) − ŷ(s0 ,o0 ) ), (17)
 Lkg |R|
 intra = − log P kg kg , (9) (s,o,s ,o )∈E
 0 0

 v∈E,V k∈K k0 ∈K e s(zv,k ,zv,k0 )/τ
 ŷ(s,o) and ŷ(s0 ,o0 ) are both prediction scores, where (s0 , o0 ) corwhere s(·) represents the calculation of cosine similarity, and responds to a different pair of nodes from (s, o), R represents
τ represents the temperature parameter. In a similar manner, the set of interactions sampled in each mini-batch.
we can derive the contrastive loss for the interaction graph as By combining intra-view and inter-view contrastive losses
follows: with BPR loss, we minimize the following objective function
 ig ig
 ig
 XX e s(zn,k ,zn,k )/τ to learn the model parameters:
 Lintra = − log P . (10)
 s(zig ig
 n,k ,zn,k0 )/τ
 n∈s,o k∈K k0 ∈K e L f inal = LBPR + λ1 Lintra + λ2 Linter + λ3 kΘk22 . (18)
The total intra-view contrastive loss is the sum of the two Here, θ represents the set of model parameters, λ1 and λ2
contrastive losses mentioned above: are hyperparameters controlling the weights of the intra-
 Lintra = Lkg ig view and inter-view contrastive losses, respectively, λ3 is the
 intra + Lintra . (11)
 hyperparameter controlling the L2 regularization term.
Through this learning, we achieve independent contrastive 2) Attack Reconstruction: In the process of intent dislearning within each of the two views. entangling and threat detection, S AURON E YES extracts
 3) Inter-View Contrastive Learning: We also aim to inves- comprehensive attack intents and behaviors. However, the
tigate the relationship between the KG and IG views. resulting anomaly graph remains a complex and large node
Specifically, our goal is to align the embeddings of IG and KG graph. To further reduce the burden on security analysts,
and perform contrastive learning between their representations. S AURON E YES implements attack chain construction. Unlike
For an entity in one view (e.g., Process, File, or Socket), we existing approaches that use the Louvain algorithm [7], [13],
extract the embeddings of the same entity learned in the other [34], we considered the phenomenon of overlapping commuview as a positive sample pair, and select the embeddings of nities in attack division. As shown in Fig. 4, when nodes
different entities from the other view as negative sample pairs. belong to multiple clusters simultaneously, communities in
The inter-view contrastive loss can be expressed as the network overlap, and some behaviors may contribute to
 kg ig different attack communities. The Louvain algorithm, based
 XX e s(zi,k ,zi,k )/τ
 Linter = − log P (12) on modularity partitioning, cannot detect this issue. We
 s(zkg ,zig )/τ kg ig
 i∈E k∈K i0 ∈E (e
 i0 ,k i,k + e s(zi,k ,zi0 ,k )/τ ) devised an overlapping community detection method based
QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS 11751

 VI. E VALUATION
 We assessed S AURON E YES from the following Seven
 perspectives:
 RQ1: How effective is S AURON E YES in detecting APTs
 compared to current state-of-the-art appraoches?
 RQ2: Are the key components in our S AURON E YES framework really improving the overall performance?
 RQ3: How do hyperparameters affect S AURON E YES’
 efficacy?
 RQ4: What is the performance overhead of S AURON E YES
 when handling large-scale data in real-world scenarios?
 RQ5: Can S AURON E YES accurately reconstruct attack
Fig. 3. An example shows the composition of knowledge graph and behavior from the original provenance graph?
interaction graph. It can be seen that knowledge graph has multi-faceted RQ6: How resilient is S AURON E YES to adversarial attacks?
attribute knowledge.
 RQ7: How is the generalization ability of S AURON E YES
 when confronting concept drift?

 A. Experimental Settings
 1) Datasets: S AURON E YES was evaluated using three
 authoritative open-source datasets: The StreamSpot dataset
 [1] employs six experimental scenarios (five benign, one
 drive-by download attack) to assess rapid attack detection.
 The Unicorn Wget dataset [2] contains 150 CamFlow logs
 Fig. 4. The Overlapping Phenomenon of Attack Clusters.
 (125 benign/25 covert supply-chain attacks) simulating killchain obfuscation tactics, challenging systems to discern
on Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) [35], which malicious patterns mimicking legitimate workflows. The
explicitly models the membership strength of each node to DARPA-E3 dataset [3] from real adversarial engagements
each community. We assign a non-negative latent factor to combines APT activities with benign operations in an entereach node-community pair, indicating the degree of the node’s prise network, reflecting Advanced Persistent Threats’ stealth
affiliation with the community. The probability of an edge characteristics. Their complementary designs – controlled
existing between a pair of nodes in the network is then experiments (StreamSpot/Unicorn) and operational realism
modeled as a function of their shared community affiliations. (DARPA-E3) – ensure comprehensive evaluation of detection
Based on the node affiliation model, community structures accuracy, anti-evasion robustness, and practical applicability.
are identified by maximizing the affiliation strength between 2) Metrics: (1) To evaluate SauronEyes’ anomaly detecnodes. tion capability, we use two evaluation metrics based on IDS
 To accomplish this, S AURON E YES extracts a subgraph G p ThreaTrace [10] and Unicorn [6]. We perform graph-level and
containing malicious activities (edges) from the interaction node-level anomaly detection on both system entity logs and
graph, where G p serves as the input graph for attack recon- batch logs. We use Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F1-score
struction. The community detection in B IG CLAM [35] is for evaluation. (2) To evaluate attack community overlap, we
performed by leveraging the affiliation strength Auv between use Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) to measure the
nodes u and v. similarity of community partitions and ensure the algorithm
 K
 X accurately reflects the true structure. The Jaccard similarity
 Auv = Fu · Fv = Fuk × Fvk (19) coefficient assesses node set overlap, while the F1 score
 k=1 measures precision and recall. This provides a comprehen-
Here, Fu and Fv are the community attribute vectors of nodes sive evaluation of S AURON E YES’ performance in identifying
u and v, respectively. By maximizing the affiliation strength communities and avoiding errors.
between node pairs while considering the actual connections in The Jaccard similarity coefficient is defined as:
the network, overlapping community partitioning is achieved. |U ∩ V|
The optimization function is: J(U, V) = (21)
 |U ∪ V|
 X  X
 log 1 − exp(−Auv ) − Auv . (20) where U represents the groundtruth community and V rep-
 (u,v)∈E (u,v)<E resents the detected partitioned community. NMI is defined
 To the best of our knowledge, S AURON E YES is the first as
 2 · MI(U, V)
to address the issue of overlapping attack communities. For N MI(U, V) = (22)
instance, Hercule [7] and Kairos [13] also utilize community H(U) + H(V)
detection but do not consider that attack nodes may simulta- where MI(U, V) is the mutual information and H(U), H(V)
neously belong to multiple anomalous behavior communities. are the entropies.
11752 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION R ESULTS B ETWEEN S AURON E YES AND
 OTHER S TATE - OF - THE - ART S OLUTIONS

 Fig. 5. ROC curves on all datasets.

 TABLE IV
 OVERVIEW OF THE ROW E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS

 3) Implementation: We implemented the S AURON E YES
prototype using Python 3.11. We used PyTorch [36] to implement the model. For the hyperparameters in S AURON E YES,
we set all embedding dimensions to 64, the learning rate
to 0.001, and the L2 regularization parameter to 0.0001.
We chose a batch size of 1024 for log detection in our separates malicious behaviors from benign activities at edge
experiments. We used the Adam [37] optimizer to opti- granularity, enhancing stealthy attack identification. For entitymize the model. While these hyperparameters might have level log in DARPA E3, Log2vec detects anomalies in logs
other potential choices, in Section VI-D, we discuss the within graphs using node embeddings and clustering methimpact of hyperparameter settings on the final performance of ods, aggregating information from node neighbors. However,
S AURON E YES. All experiments were performed on a server Log2vec’s nodes are logs rather than system entities, makrunning Ubuntu 22.04.5 LTS with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver ing it naturally inferior to provenance graph-based detection.
4208 CPU (14 cores, 14 threads, base frequency 2.10 GHz) DeepLog, being a log-level detector, cannot capture the conand 256 GB of RAM. textual information in system entity interactions, making it
 difficult to detect anomalies within these interactions. As
B. Detection Performance (RQ1) node-level detector, ThreaTrace and FLASH are comparable
 1) Detection Results: Experimental results demonstrate that to SauronEyes in all aspects, but is significantly inferior
S AURON E YES achieves robust performance across diverse to precision and F1-score in THEIA. Compared to the latoperational scenarios, with comprehensive evaluations con- est LLM-integrated prompt engineering solutions, although
ducted on both batch processing logs and entity-level system OMNISEC [38] incorporates expert knowledge to achieve
logs (TABLE V). Furthermore, the ROC curves presented in lower false positives, its recall rate is significantly lower than
Fig. 5 validate the model’s superior classification accuracy S AURON E YES. Its missed detections of attacks could make the
under varying operational conditions, confirming its adapt- system more vulnerable to being compromised by attackers.
ability and detection effectiveness in heterogeneous logging
environments. C. Ablation Study (RQ2)
 2) SauronEyes Vs. State-of-the-Art: In batch log analy- In this section, we discuss the effectiveness of individsis, S AURON E YES achieved near-perfect detection on the ual components in S AURON E YES and investigate whether
Streamspot dataset with simple attack patterns, while conven- removing or modifying these components impacts the final
tional graph-level baselines suffered notable degradation on performance. The performance results are shown in Fig. 7.
the complex, highly camouflaged attacks in Unicorn Wget. In Fig. 6, we select logs around the attack periods from
Though node-level methods like Threatrace maintained decent E3-CADETS and used t-SNE to plot 2D visualized node
accuracy, S AURON E YES reduced false positives significantly representations after different disentanglement scenarios in the
via edge-level intent-disentanglement detection. This approach ablation experiments of the disentanglement module.
QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS 11753

Fig. 6. 2D visualization of node representations on E3-CADETS using t-SNE. Red nodes indicate anomalous entities, while blue nodes indicate benign
entities.

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION R ESULTS B ETWEEN S AURON E YES
 ( ORIGINAL ) AND S AURON E YES ( ABLATION )

Fig. 7. Effects of Different Modules on the Detection Performance of
S AURON E YES.

 1) Removing Disentanglement: To validate the necessity of not only lost the self-supervised ability to capture the structural
disentanglement mechanisms, we conducted ablation studies relationships of system entities within themselves but also
by replacing key modules in the knowledge and interaction could not transfer information between the views.
views(see Fig. 7). For knowledge disentanglement, removing 3) Removing Multi-View: To study the significance of the
the module and substituting it with a Graph Convolutional respective disentangling operations and dual-view contrastive
Network (GCN) caused precision to drop to 75%. This phe- learning in dual views, we replaced the original S AURON E YES
nomenon suggests that GCN alone fails to deeply capture design with a combination of ‘PG construction + PG disthe intricate relationships among system calls, impeding the entanglement + contrastive learning + threat detection‘. The
model’s ability to uncover malicious behavioral logic and decoupling operation is modified to aggregate PG using
resulting in frequent false positives. For interaction disentan- LightGCN with a multi-attention mechanism, and contrastive
glement, replacing the module with a Multilayer Perceptron learning is to upsample positive and negative sample pairs
(MLP) led to a more pronounced degradation (67% precision), from different aspects of the same node on PG. As shown in
underscoring the critical role of disentangling dynamic inter- TABLE VI, the ablated version of SauronEyes has a significant
action patterns. When all decoupling modules were replaced performance degradation on various datasets, which reveals the
with the traditional scheme, the final model performance importance of multi-view decoupling and contrastive learning
significantly declined, with Precision at only 55%. This occurs in revealing the deep intentions of APT.
because GCN+MLP encoding fails to disentangle entities’
multifaceted intentions, allowing misleading signals to distort
their authentic behavioral patterns. D. Hyperparameter Impact on Performance (RQ3)
 2) Removing Contrastive Learning Module: We removed In this section, we independently modify specific hyperpathe contrastive loss component within and between views. rameters to reflect their impact on the detection of APTs by
From Fig. 7, it can be seen that removing this module also S AURON E YES and provide interpretable explanations for these
reduced detection performance. This is because the two views impacts. We selected StreamSpot at the batch log level (Fig. 8)
11754 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 8. Impact of different hyperparameters on detection performance on StreamSpot(Batch-level log).

 Fig. 9. Impact of Hyperparameter Variations on Detection Performance in DARPA E3-CADETS(Entity-level log).

and DARPA E3-CADETS at the system entity level (Fig. 9) TABLE VII
as the experimental subjects for hyperparameter analysis. C OMPUTATIONAL OVERHEAD P ROFILING
 1) Impact of Disentangling Dimension K: The disentangling dimension K concretely represents the degree of
disentangling of different aspects of a single system entity
in the two views. We analyzed the range [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. We
observe that increasing the disentangling dimensions can
enhance attack detection accuracy, as it allows S AURON E YES
to capture system entity interaction tendencies from a broader
perspective and more diverse aggregation levels. However,
excessively high K values result in too much dimension sep- E. Performance Overhead (RQ4)
aration, compromising the independence of each dimension’s
 S AURON E YES is designed to achieve detection with low
attributes of the system entities. We found that when K = 2,
 and reasonable overhead. We tested the time and peak
the model performs best across all datasets.
 memory overhead of S AURON E YES at different stages,
 2) Impact of Contrastive Loss Weights: The contrastive loss including (1)Graph Construction, (2)Training, and (3)Testweight parameters λ1 and λ2 control the impact of intra-view ing. We provide specific runtime performance overheads of
and inter-view contrastive learning on the final loss for the S AURON E YES on CADETS-E3. It is worth noting that, GPUs
knowledge view and the interaction view, respectively. We are generally lacking in real production environments, we
varied λ1 and λ2 within the range [0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1]. When cannot require large-scale hosts in the industry to use GPUs
λ1 = 0.01 and λ2 = 0.01, S AURON E YES performs optimally for threat detection, with CPU being the dominant resource
on each dataset. The reason is: excessively high contrastive when GPUs are unavailable, our experiments mainly focus on
learning losses may cause the model to focus too much on the CPU-based testing. During the graph construction phase, we
relative distances between samples, neglecting the main task measured the total time taken by S AURON E YES to construct
loss. Conversely, setting the contrastive learning loss weights a usable graph from the preprocessed dataset, as well as the
too low, meaning the contrastive learning loss occupies too memory changes before and after the process. In the training
small a proportion in the overall loss function. phase, we assessed the training overhead by measuring the
 3) Impact of Embedding Size: The embedding operation time required for S AURON E YES to generate the complete
maps node features to edge embeddings, specifically repre- model, and the peak memory usage during this process was
senting edges in a graph as low-dimensional vectors that recorded. In the final testing phase, we recorded the duration
retain the original graph structure and attribute information. of APT predictions made by the trained model on input system
From the results: As the embedding size increases, the entities, as well as the peak memory consumption.
model accuracy improves significantly and gradually stabilizes TABLE VII presents the complete performance overhead
(20 epochs for StreamSpot and 40 for CADETS), reaching of S AURON E YES. As shown, S AURON E YES has very low
near-perfect accuracy (close to 1.0). In both datasets, the model time overhead, and its memory overhead remains within the
with an embedding size of 64 performs best and has the highest range that can be tolerated by real-world threat detection
final accuracy. hosts. S AURON E YES shows significant advantages in practical
QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS 11755

 Fig. 10. Case Study: An Example of a Multi-Stage Complex Attack with Overlapping Attack Activities.

threat detection. For example, the dataset used for testing in
CADETS-E3 takes almost two days to collect and amounts
to approximately 4GB of log data, whereas S AURON E YES
completes the prediction in just 27 seconds. The training
overhead primarily stems from multiple rounds of iteration
over millions of nodes and edges: each round involves multilayer neighbor aggregation in the GNN and the computation
of a complex objective function comprising the BPR loss and
two types of contrastive losses (intra-view and cross-view). Fig. 11. Attack Reconstruction Performance of SauronEyes.

F. Attack Reconstruction (RQ5)
 The ultimate goal of S AURON E YES is to provide security address 156.251.67.239. The website hosted a form
analysts with a comprehensive and concise attack chain. In the asking for name, e-mail address, and password. In the
context of the attack chain, we believe that O 1 a single attack third step, the user unfortunately clicked on the link,
chain should encompass the entirety of an attack activity, entered the requested information, and submitted it.
O2 the attack behavior should effectively indicate the attack The results were sent back to www.fake.com, address
stages, thereby creating a directed flow of attack information, 10.207.125.7. The attacker now has access to victim’s
and O 3 this approach aims to expedite analyst feedback and e-mail account, including contact information for other
the handling of false positives (FP). company employees.
 We simulated multiple attacks by an adversar, completing a As illustrated in Fig. 10(b), overlapping attack communities
sophisticated APT campaign. This showcases S AURON E YES’ emerge when distinct attack activities share common entry
capability to segment and reconstruct different attack events, points, challenging the reconstruction framework in Section
ensuring the attack chain remains concise and complete. V-C.3. Conventional community detection methods (e.g., Lou-
Fig. 10(b) presents an overview of the attack scenario tracing, vain algorithm adopted by Kairos and Hercules) fail to
where the attacker initiated the campaign with a phishing resolve such overlaps, causing incomplete attack chain extracemail, leading to two distinct attack campaigns. tion in aggregated community assignments. S AURON E YES
 • In the first campaign depicted in Fig. 10(a), the attacker overcomes this limitation through overlapping community
 begins by crafting a simple message in a phishing detection, effectively distinguishing interdependent attack
 email, enticing the recipient to download a file from chains from shared entry points. This enables precise reconthe email. In the second step, once the recipient clicks struction of two distinct attack chains (Figs. 10(a)(c)) that
 on the Word document in the email, the attacker traditional approaches would erroneously merge.
 exploits CVE-2017-11882, triggering a stack overflow As shown in Fig. 11b, S AURON E YES demonstrates outin the EQNEDT32 module, which then initiates a reverse standing performance across various metrics, enabling a more
 TCP connection to the C&C server at IP address comprehensive reconstruction of attack chains. Additionally,
 10.207.125.63. In the third step, the attacker starts as illustrated in Fig. 11a, S AURON E YES significantly reduces
 performing port scans for internal reconnaissance and the number of items that investigators need to review through
 establishes a stealthy connection between the target host its attack reconstruction capabilities. This facilitates a more
 and the attacker. efficient and targeted attack analysis, allowing for precise
 • In the second campaign depicted in Fig. 10(c), the identification of attack stages, and simplifies the analysis of
 attacker embeds a phishing link within the Word doc- false positives and feedback mechanisms.
 ument attached to the initial phishing email. In the first Using DARPA detection examples, we demonstrate how
 step, the phishing email entices the recipient to download attack reconstruction significantly reduces security analysts’
 the file from the email. In the second step, the report.doc alert processing time. We illustrate this with both a false
 included a link to a website hosted at www.gov.cn, positive and a genuine attack alert. Fig. 12(a) shows a
11756 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE OF C ONCEPT D RIFT

 Fig. 12. Alert Generation Graph.

 decreases. This phenomenon has also been noted in FLASH
 [26]. This occurs because the continuous addition of benign
 nodes causes a shift in the node distribution learned by our
 model. This change leads to an increase in the anomaly score,
 which in turn helps to separate the camouflaged events from
 Fig. 13. Resilience Against Adversarial Attacks. the truly malicious ones.

malicious mail process conducting a port scan across H. Concept Drift (RQ7)
6000 ports. The massive number of raw alert nodes makes
 S AURON E YES is designed as a periodic training and nearit difficult for analysts to identify the core system event. The
 real-time detection system, rather than a pure real-time online
reconstructed attack graph in Figure 11 effectively reveals the
 learning system. However, adapting to environmental changes
event logic. Similarly, Fig. 12(b) depicts Wget communicating
 is an important challenge commonly faced by IDS, such
with multiple IPs for downloads. This behavior structurally
 as concept drift. To verify the concept drift robustness of
resembles malicious scanning, triggering a false positive alert.
 SauronEyes, we randomly generate edges in different time
Here again, hundreds of disconnected alert nodes obscure the
 periods of its training set, and add edge drift to the nodes
event context, while the structured visualization in Fig. 12
 in the target time window according to the timestamp. For
enables analysts to quickly identify and filter it. Attack chains
 example, we select time windows in CADETS with an interval
dramatically reduce the number of items analysts must review,
 of one hour as the benchmark to generate edge relationships.
as they are far fewer than individual anomaly nodes.
 To ensure that the randomly sampled interaction relationships
 meet the characteristics of sparse attacks, the randomly sam-
G. Robustness Against Adversarial Attacks (RQ6) pled edge relationships are only selected from common edge
 S AURON E YES is a provenance-based detection system. connections such as “read”, “open”, “close”, and “write”. We
Goyal [39] et al. noted that intrusion detection systems (IDS) use CADETS as the experimental target, calculate the KL
with graph-level granularity, such as Unicorn [6], StreamSpot divergence between the sampled new graph and the original
[21] and ProvDetector [27] are highly sensitive to “adversarial graph, and determine whether the new graph has produced
attacks”. These adversarial attacks initiate evasion attacks concept drift according to the criteria of [32]. Experiments are
by manipulating the distribution graph encoding, aiming to conducted on the new and old training sets and fixed test sets.
create misleading similarities between the node neighborhood The results are shown in TABLE VIII. The detection accuracy
distribution of the attack graph and that of the benign source and precision decrease slightly, proving that SauronEyes has
graph. To assess the robustness of S AURON E YES against obvious concept drift robustness. The current design in our
adversarial attacks, we modifyed the node neighborhood in paper does not include an online learning mechanism. In
the attack graph to mimic that in the benign source graph. practice, the most feasible way to adapt to environmental
 Fig. 13 shows the anomaly scores (min/avg/max, y-axis) changes and new threats is to periodically retrain the model
of attack nodes as benign edges (x-axis) are added. While with new log data.
some node scores decrease slightly with benign structures, they
remain above the detection threshold. Although a few nodes VII. R ELATED W ORK
evade detection, the stable average score ensures persistent
event alerts. S AURON E YES maintains robustness by leverag- A. Provenance Detection
ing a decoupling module to discern structural nuances and Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attacks exhibit prolonged
contrastive learning to amplify node similarity patterns. incubation periods, necessitating enterprises to maintain oper-
 It is worth mentioning that, after inserting more camouflage ational logs for over six months - a requirement that
events, the effectiveness of the adversarial attack surprisingly imposes significant storage overhead and highlights the
QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS 11757

critical challenge of provenance graph reduction and com- [2] A. Sharma, B. B. Gupta, A. K. Singh, and V. K. Saraswat,
pression. References [15] and [24] have proposed viable “Advanced persistent threats (APT): Evolution, anatomy, attribution and
 countermeasures,” J. Ambient Intell. Humanized Comput., vol. 14, no. 7,
solutions addressing both graph simplification and semantic pp. 9355–9381, Jul. 2023.
preservation. Furthermore, contemporary provenance detection [3] A. Gehani and D. Tariq, “SPADE: Support for provenance auditing
methodologies can be broadly categorized into three principal in distributed environments,” in Proc. ACM/IFIP/USENIX Int. Conf.
 Distrib. Syst. Platforms Open Distrib. Process., 2012, pp. 101–120.
approaches: statistical analysis [17], [18], [19], specification- [4] Y. Ji et al., “RAIN: Refinable attack investigation with on-demand
based detection [9], [11], [40], and learning-driven prediction inter-process information flow tracking,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
[6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [41], as comprehensively Comput. Commun. Secur., Dallas, TX, USA, Oct. 2017, pp. 377–390.
 [5] A. Bates, D. Tian, R. B. K. Butler, and T. Moyer, “Trustworthy wholediscussed in Section II. system provenance for the Linux kernel,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Secur.
 Symp. (SEC), Austin, TX, USA, Aug. 2015, pp. 319–334.
 [6] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “Unicorn:
B. Disentangled Representation Learning Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020.
 Disentangled representation learning aims to separate the [7] K. Pei et al., “HERCULE: Attack story reconstruction via community
underlying factors of data by embedding objects from multiple discovery on correlated log graph,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Comput.
perspectives [42], [43]. It has been applied to various fields Security Appl. (ACSAC), 2016, pp. 583–595.
 [8] Y. Shen, E. Mariconti, P.-A. Vervier, and G. Stringhini, “Tiresias:
such as text [44], image [45] and knowledge graph embedding Predicting security events through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
[46]. Efforts have also been made in disentangled representa- Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (CCS), 2018, pp. 592–605.
tion learning for predictive classification. DGCF [47] performs [9] A. Alsaheel et al., “Atlas: A sequence-based learning approach for attack
 investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.),
disentangled representation learning on embedded segmenta- 2021, pp. 3005–3022.
tion graph neural networks based on intent disentanglement. [10] S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based
 threats in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans.
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022.
C. Contrastive Learning [11] Z. Li, X. Cheng, L. Sun, J. Zhang, and B. Chen, “A hierarchical approach
 for advanced persistent threat detection with attention-based graph neural
 As an efficient self-supervised learning method, contrastive networks,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–14, May 2021.
learning (CL) has achieved significant advancements in com- [12] J. Zengy et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber
 threat analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
puter vision [48] and natural language processing [49]. The Privacy (SP), May 2022, pp. 489–506.
idea of contrastive learning is to pull positive samples together [13] Z. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
and push negative samples apart in the embedding space. using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy
 (SP), May 2024, pp. 3533–3551.
Researchers have found that applying contrastive learning to [14] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis
graph representation learning yields excellent performance. for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
Velickovic et al. [50] proposed Deep Graph Infomax (DGI) by Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2020, pp. 1172–1189.
 [15] N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction
maximizing the consistency between node representations and from COTS audit data,” in Proc. 26th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
graph representations in a local-global contrastive paradigm. Secur.), 2017, pp. 487–504.
 [16] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of
 VIII. C ONCLUSION suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP),
 May 2019, pp. 1137–1152.
 The escalating sophistication of APT attacks and the [17] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
dynamic evolution of network environments have rendered automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
 2019.
existing detection schemes inadequate for uncovering gen- [18] Y. Liu et al., “Towards a timely causality analysis for enterprise
uine attack patterns beneath adversaries’ complex activities. security,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018.
To address this challenge, we present S AURON E YES- an [19] W. U. Hassan et al., “This is why we can’t cache Nice
 things: Lightning-fast threat hunting using suspicion-based hierarchical
innovative APT detection system that employs graph disen- storage,” in Proc. Annu. Comput. Security Appl. Conf. (ACSAC), 2020,
tanglement algorithms and contrastive learning to effectively pp. 165–178.
decouple intricate interaction patterns within massive audit [20] (2020). Darpa Transparent Computing Program Engagement 3 Data
 Release. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparentlogs(Camouflage), while resolving the inherent issue of Computing
sparse malicious interactions(Low-frequency). Our solution [21] (2016). The Streamspot Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
further implements hierarchical attack-chain reconstruction to sbustreamspot/sbustreamspot-data
reveal comprehensive threat scenarios(Multi-stage). Extensive [22] H. Yue, T. Li, D. Wu, R. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Detecting
 APT attacks using an attack intent-driven and sequenceevaluations across multiple datasets and detection scenarios based learning approach,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024,
demonstrate that S AURON E YES achieves exceptional opera- Art. no. 103748.
tional performance, attaining an average detection accuracy of [23] H. Li et al., “MIRDETECTOR: Applying malicious intent representation
 for enhanced APT anomaly detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 157, Oct.
99%. These results significantly advance the state-of-the-art in 2025, Art. no. 104588.
APT detection capabilities. [24] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, “MAGIC:
 Detecting advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation
 learning,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2023,
 R EFERENCES pp. 5197–5214.
 [25] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan,
[1] E. J. Khaleefa and D. A. Abdulah, “Concept and difficulties of advanced “POIROT: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber
 persistent threats (apt): Survey,” Int. J. Nonlinear Anal. Appl., vol. 13, threat hunting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 no. 1, pp. 4037–4052, 2022. Nov. 2019, pp. 1795–1812.
11758 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[26] M. Ur Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. Ul Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive [39] A. Goyal, X. Han, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “Sometimes, you aren’t
 approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation what you do: Mimicry attacks against provenance graph host intrusion
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2024, detection systems,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023.
 pp. 3552–3570. [40] F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng, “Log2vec:
[27] Q. Wang et al., “You are what you do: Hunting stealthy malware via A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for detecting cyber
 data provenance analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., threats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Com-
 2020. mun. Secur., Nov. 2019, pp. 1777–1794.
[28] T. Pasquier et al., “Practical whole-system provenance capture,” in Proc. [41] G. Wang, N. Ivanov, B. Chen, Q. Wang, T. Nguyen, and Q. Yan, “Graph
 Symp. Cloud Comput., Sep. 2017, pp. 405–418. learning for interactive threat detection in heterogeneous smart home rule
[29] R. Paccagnella et al., “Custos: Practical tamper-evident auditing of data,” in Proc. ACM Manage. Data, 2023, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–27.
 operating systems using trusted execution,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. [42] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A
 Secur. Symp., 2020. review and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
[30] R. Paccagnella, K. Liao, D. Tian, and A. Bates, “Logging to the danger vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, Aug. 2013.
 zone: Race condition attacks and defenses on system audit frameworks,” [43] F. Locatello et al., “Challenging common assumptions in the unsuperin Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2020, vised learning of disentangled representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 pp. 1551–1574. Learn. (ICML), 2019, pp. 4114–4124.
[31] X. Wang, H. Jin, A. Zhang, X. He, T. Xu, and T.-S. Chua, “Disentangled [44] V. John, L. Mou, H. Bahuleyan, and O. Vechtomova, “Disentangled
 graph collaborative filtering,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. representation learning for non-parallel text style transfer,” in Proc. 57th
 Develop. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2020, pp. 1001–1010. Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2019, pp. 424–434.
[32] G. I. Webb, R. Hyde, H. Cao, H. L. Nguyen, and F. Petitjean, [45] X. Chen, Y. Duan, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, and
 “Characterizing concept drift,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 30, P. Abbeel, “InfoGAN: Interpretable representation learning by informano. 4, pp. 964–994, Jul. 2016. tion maximizing generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
[33] J. Yu, H. Yin, X. Xia, T. Chen, L. Cui, and Q. V. H. Nguyen, “Are Process. Syst., 2016.
 graph augmentations necessary?: Simple graph contrastive learning for [46] J. Wu et al., “DisenKGAT: Knowledge graph embedding with disentanrecommendation,” in Proc. 45th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. gled graph attention network,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 Inf. Retr., Jul. 2022, pp. 1294–1303. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 2140–2149.
[34] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast [47] X. Wang et al., “Learning intents behind interactions with knowlunfolding of communities in large networks,” J. Stat. Mech., Theory edge graph for recommendation,” in Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021,
 Exp., vol. 2008, no. 10, Oct. 2008, Art. no. P10008. pp. 878–887.
[35] J. Yang and J. Leskovec, “Overlapping community detection at scale: A [48] R. D. Hjelm et al., “Learning deep representations by mutual information
 nonnegative matrix factorization approach,” in Proc. 6th ACM Int. Conf. estimation and maximization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
 Web Search Data Mining, Feb. 2013, pp. 587–596. 2018.
[36] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep [49] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
 learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019. “Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
[37] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” compositionality,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 26,
 2014, arXiv:1412.6980. 2013, pp. 3111–3119.
[38] W. Cheng et al., “Omnisec: LLM-driven provenance-based intrusion [50] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Lió, Y. Bengio, and
 detection via retrieval-augmented behavior prompting,” Available SSRN R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. ICLR (Poster), 2018,
 J., 2025. p. 4.