Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Ad Hoc Networks
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/adhoc

SC-MLIDS: Fusion-based Machine Learning Framework for Intrusion
Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks
Hongwei Zhang a , Darshana Upadhyay a ,∗, Marzia Zaman b , Achin Jain c ,
Srinivas Sampalli a
a
 Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, B3H 4R2, NS, Canada
b Research and Development Department, Cistel Technology Inc., Ottawa, K2E 7V7, ON, Canada
c Research and Development Department, Norleaf Networks, Gatineau, J8Y 2V5, QC, Canada

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: This paper proposes the Server–Client Machine Learning Intrusion Detection System (SC-MLIDS), a novel
Wireless sensor networks fusion framework designed to enhance security in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), which are inherently
Machine learning vulnerable to various security threats due to their distributed nature and resource constraints. Traditional
Intrusion detection systems
 Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) often face challenges with high computational demands and privacy issues.
Ensemble learning
 SC-MLIDS addresses these problems by integrating Federated Learning (FL) with a multi-sensor fusion approach
Federated learning
Server–client models
 to implementing two layers of defence that operate independently of specific attack types. Moreover, this
Model aggregation framework leverages a server–client architecture to efficiently manage and process data from sensor nodes, sink
Network security nodes, and gateways within the network. The core innovation of SC-MLIDS lies in its dual model aggregation
Fusion algorithms algorithms at the gateway: one assesses model performance and weight, while the other uses majority voting
 to integrate predictions from both client and server models. As a result, this approach reduces redundant
 data transmissions and enhances detection accuracy, making it more effective than conventional methods
 in WSNs. Our proposed framework outperforms current state-of-the-art techniques, achieving F1-scores of
 99.78% and 98.80% for the two aggregation algorithms, namely, Weighted Score and Majority Voting. This
 validation demonstrates the effectiveness of SC-MLIDS in providing accurate intrusion detection and robust
 data management.

1. Introduction Traditionally, intrusion detection in WSNs has utilized methodologies such as ML-based systems, and hybrid approaches that combine
 The continuous advancement of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) anomaly detection with signature-based methods. These systems typand their associated technologies has led to widespread applications ically operate at the sensor node level or within clustered architecacross various industrial sectors, enhancing productivity through intures using various techniques, such as autonomous detection agents,
telligent monitoring and management [1,2]. However, the distributed
 predefined rules, or hierarchical models [5–8].
and resource-constrained nature of WSNs exposes them to numerous
 Despite these advancements, several research gaps persist. These invulnerabilities. Researchers have proposed various Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDSs) to identify suspicious activities, including both anomaly clude increased node workload, limited adaptability to complex attacks,
and misuse detection [3]. and inefficiencies in data management. For example, some methods
 The emergence of Machine Learning (ML) has significantly ex- rely on static detection rules that cannot dynamically adjust to new
panded the capabilities of IDSs by offering enhanced real-time detection threats, while others depend heavily on predefined signatures, reducing
features. ML-driven approaches have shown improved performance in their effectiveness against novel attacks. Many approaches are also condetecting network attacks through the integration of data from diverse strained by their architecture, failing to incorporate model ensembles or
sources, making them a central focus in network security research. address redundant data transmission. Furthermore, most existing ML-
ML enables the development of models trained on large-scale, multi- based IDSs are tailored to detect specific types of network attacks and
source datasets, facilitating accurate, automated, and adaptive risk
 rely on limited data sources, leading to constrained solutions. Given
assessment [4].

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: hongweizhang@dal.ca (H. Zhang), darshana@dal.ca (D. Upadhyay), marzia@cistel.com (M. Zaman), ajain@norleaf.ca (A. Jain),
srini@cs.dal.ca (S. Sampalli).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2025.103871
Received 18 October 2024; Received in revised form 22 February 2025; Accepted 12 April 2025
Available online 26 April 2025
1570-8705/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

Table 1
Comparison with our earlier work.
 Aspect Early Work (Hybrid ML-based IDS) [9] Current Work (SC-MLIDS) Key Improvement
 Architecture Standard WSN architecture with distributed Server–client architecture with federated Multi-layer coordination reduces computational
 intrusion detection learning and multi-sensor fusion integration burden on sensors; supports diverse WSN
 architectures
 Data Handling Analyzed sensing data (sensor level) and Integrates multi-sensor application-level data Supports diverse data sources and types
 network traffic (gateway level) and network traffic data for comprehensive (multimodal approach)
 detection
 Machine Random forest models trained separately for No restrictions on ML algorithms; supports Flexibility in model selection improves
 Learning sensor nodes and the gateway homogeneous/heterogeneous models for fusion adaptability to different scenarios
 Models
 Fusion Aggregation prediction algorithm for combining Improved aggregation algorithm and introduced Improved prediction accuracy and reliability
 Algorithms results voting algorithm to accommodate varying through algorithm improvement and addition
 demands
 Computational Distributed computation across sensors and the Server–client design offloads processing to the Minimizes redundant data transmission and
 Load gateway server; reduces sensor node workload improves energy efficiency
 Adaptability Limited to specific WSN architectures Structural adjustments allowed to align with Addresses practical deployment challenges
 any WSN architecture and application-specific across diverse geographic/environmental
 needs conditions
 Flexibility Fixed two-layer detection (sensor + gateway) Supports unlimited ML models and multimodal Accommodates evolving intrusion detection
 data fusion requirements and architecture extensions
 Performance Achieved 99% accuracy with high performance Enhanced accuracy and reliability through Balances high accuracy with real-world
 in standard metrics advanced fusion techniques practicality and scalability

the dynamic, multi-source nature of WSN environments, there is a and heterogeneous base models to ensemble. SC-MLIDS incorporates
pressing need for an adaptable and comprehensive IDS framework that an innovative voting algorithm to enhance the effectiveness of model
integrates data fusion across multiple sensors and processes. fusion, improving the accuracy and reliability of predictions. Further-
 In our earlier work [9], we introduced a hybrid ML-based IDS for more, its design allows for structural adjustments to align with different
WSNs, built upon the standard WSN architecture. To address resource WSN architectures and application-specific requirements, ensuring its
constraints, the intrusion detection process was distributed, with dif- adaptability across various scenarios. By implementing these enhanceferent types of data being analyzed at both the sensor level and the ments, SC-MLIDS achieves a high degree of flexibility, adaptability, and
gateway level. This approach improved accuracy and comprehensive- accuracy, addressing the complex and evolving demands of intrusion
ness in intrusion detection by optimizing the computation of prediction detection in WSNs.
results. In SC-MLIDS, the sink nodes of the WSN serve as clients to locally
 The IDS is designed to perform two-layer intrusion detection by train the models, while the gateway serves as a server to receive
identifying anomalies in sensing data at the sensor node level and model outputs from multiple clients and integrate the prediction results
network traffic anomalies at the gateway. We utilized random forests through two proposed aggregation prediction algorithms (Weighted
to train individual models for each of the three sink nodes and one Score and Majority Voting). In summary, the SC-MLIDS framework
gateway to facilitate intrusion detection. In our experiments, we present adopts a server–client architecture to manage and process data, sigthe results of each model and the aggregation prediction algorithm, nificantly reducing the computational burden on sensor nodes. Its
both before and after applying the IDS. The system achieved 99% dual-model aggregation algorithms improve detection accuracy while
accuracy along with high performance across the other three evaluation dynamically adapting to various attack types. By minimizing redundant
metrics. data transmissions and employing advanced evaluation and fusion
 However, this IDS has several limitations, particularly regarding techniques, SC-MLIDS provides a comprehensive, efficient, and highly
its practical applications. Over decades of development, WSNs have accurate solution for intrusion detection in WSNs.
been widely adopted across various fields, requiring deployment to be
tailored to specific application scenarios. Consequently, the architec- 1.1. Major contributions
ture of WSNs varies significantly depending on the field, application
context, and geographic environment. As a result, IDS research for The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
WSNs, including our earlier work, must address these challenges that
impede practical implementation. 1. We propose a fusion-based SC-MLIDS framework that integrates
 In this paper, we extend our previous research by introducing the server and client components corresponding to the gateway
concept of multimodality to overcome its limitations and meet the and sink nodes in WSNs. This framework employs a two-layer
diverse requirements of various WSN architectures and application validation process for both sensing and network traffic data.
scenarios. This enhancement significantly improves the practicality, By leveraging multi-source data fusion, we aim to provide exadaptability, and flexibility of the IDS, as summarized in Table 1. tensive and adaptable detection capabilities across diverse WSN
Specifically, we propose a novel fusion framework, the Server–Client environments.
Machine Learning Intrusion Detection System (SC-MLIDS), which inte- 2. We utilize two aggregation prediction algorithms in our progrates Federated Learning (FL) with multi-sensor fusion techniques. SC- posed framework, namely, the Weighted Score algorithm and the
MLIDS builds upon earlier work by introducing advancements in data Majority Voting algorithm. These algorithms enhance intrusion
types, detection models, fusion algorithms, and architectural design. detection by merging predictions from multiple ML models.
 SC-MLIDS supports the integration of diverse data sources, such as Specifically, the Weighted Score algorithm assesses model permulti-sensor application-level data and network traffic data, enabling formance based on metrics and weights, while the Majority
comprehensive intrusion detection. The framework leverages a mul- Voting algorithm combines predictions. Through this integration
timodal approach, and imposes no restrictions on the algorithms or at the gateway, we aim to ensure robust and accurate detection
the number of ML models utilized, accommodating both homogeneous by leveraging diverse model outputs.

 2
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 Fig. 1. WSNs architecture.

 3. We integrate application/sensor data and network traffic data to The microcontroller, acting as the CPU of the sensor node, controls
 generate a more diverse and realistic dataset. This combination all hardware components by running a micro-operating system [16,17].
 supports the development of more effective models using FL with It performs the collection and simple sensing data processing, then
 ensemble techniques. Through this approach, we aim to improve sends it to the sink node via the transceiver, or communicates with
 computational speed via distributed computing and enhance other sensor nodes [13].
 security by preventing the transfer of application data to the The sink node is the data collection unit [18], responsible for
 server. receiving and organizing the data sent from the wireless sensor nodes in
 4. We evaluate the proposed framework through simulation ex- the covered area. In WSN architectures, sink nodes often communicate
 periments, considering various performance metrics, namely, with the gateway or the Internet to upload data received from sensor
 Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-score, for the two aggrega- nodes [18,19]. However, in certain WSN configurations, the gateway
 tion algorithms to ensure effective assessment. Furthermore, we may be replaced by the sink node, allowing the sensor nodes to upload
 compare our results with current state-of-the-art techniques. data directly via the sink node [20]. Such arrangements enhance the
 efficiency of data transmission. In more extensive WSN architectures,
1.2. Outline of the paper which include a large number of sensor nodes, the deployment of multiple sink nodes can further enhance data collection efficiency [19,21].
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 By assigning each sink node responsibility for only a limited number
provides a comprehensive background and reviews related works. In
 of sensor nodes to communicate and process data, it is possible to
Section 3, we detail the design of the proposed framework and algoavoid issues such as network latency and throughput limitations that
rithms. Section 4 presents the dataset, implementation details, design of
 arise when a single sink node is overwhelmed by communications from
the experiment and results. Section 5 discusses the experimental results
 numerous sensor nodes [21].
and highlights the associated limitations. The paper concludes with
 The gateway receives the data generated by the sensor nodes, which
Section 6, which summarizes the key findings, emphasizes the main
 is transmitted via the sink node, and uploads it to the Internet [22].
contributions of our work, and outlines potential directions for future
 This process enables users to access, process, and analyze the data.
research.
 The superior hardware configuration of the gateway facilitates the
2. Background and related works implementation of functions that are not feasible with sensor nodes
 due to various limitations. An example of such a function is security
2.1. Wireless sensor networks solutions to counter network attacks in WSNs [23].
 Advances in technologies related to WSNs have led to their rapid
 Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are self-configuring networks that application across various industries. In the military field, WSNs can
contain many wireless sensor nodes [10,11]. These nodes are used for provide services such as data collection, communication, and battlefield
sensing and monitoring the environment in which they are deployed, surveillance [24]. In the healthcare sector, WSNs enable continuous
and for collecting data. The WSN architecture, as shown in Fig. 1, remote monitoring of the health statuses of patients without the conconsists of the following components, namely, sensor nodes, sink nodes straints of fixed locations, resulting in improved quality of healthcare
and the gateway [12]. services [25]. WSNs facilitate intelligence in the agricultural field
 Sensor nodes are tiny devices with low power consumption, inte- by monitoring farms, monitoring temperature changes, and managing
grated with sensors, microcontroller, transceiver, power supply, and irrigation systems, thereby increasing agricultural productivity while
operating system [13,14]. The sensor node senses and collects in- reducing costs [26]. In the smart home sector, WSNs provide users with
formation from the environment through various types of equipped enhanced home security through monitoring of temperature, smoke,
sensors. The required sensor types and data types vary depending on and gas leakages [27]. Additionally, WSNs offer cost-effective solutions
the application scenario. Common sensing data include temperature, to societal challenges, such as forest fire detection and air quality
humidity, pressure, light, and sound [15]. monitoring [28,29].

 3
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 WSNs are characterized by their small node size, low cost, and the 2.4. Ensemble learning
capacity for widespread deployment. However, these features also result in several limitations, including computational power, power con- Ensemble Learning (EL) is a predictive methodology combining
sumption, power supply, communication and sensing capabilities [30, multiple ML models. This approach involves training classifiers on the
31]. Consequently, these limitations pose multiple challenges for WSNs, same dataset using different algorithms, thereby generating different
particularly in network security. Common attacks on WSNs include De- models [47].
nial of Service (DoS) attacks, Sybil attacks, Blackhole/Sinkhole attacks, The ensemble model is expressed mathematically as follows:
Hello Flood attacks, and Wormhole attacks [32].
 1 ∑
 𝑀
 𝑓ensemble (𝑥) = 𝑓 (𝑥) (2)
 𝑀 𝑚=1 𝑚
2.2. Internet of things
 where 𝑓ensemble (𝑥) is the prediction of the ensemble model, 𝑀 is the
 Internet of Things (IoT) forms a network infrastructure with many number of individual models, and 𝑓𝑚 (𝑥) represents the prediction from
sensing, communication, network, and information processing devices the 𝑚𝑡ℎ model. Additionally, for classification, the ensemble approach
[33,34]. This infrastructure facilitates data exchange among devices, generally uses a weighted majority vote as depicted in Eq. (3):
between devices and servers, and between devices and the Inter- (𝑀 )
 ∑
net [35]. The fundamental technology of IoT is Radio Frequency Iden- 𝑦̂ = argmax𝑐 𝑤𝑚 ⋅ (𝑓𝑚 (𝑥) = 𝑐) (3)
tification (RFID), which allows devices embedded with RFID tags to 𝑚=1
be read through Near Field Communication (NFC) technology [34,36]. where 𝑦̂ is the final predicted class, 𝑤𝑚 is the weight assigned to the
This capability enables unique identification, tracking, and monitoring 𝑚𝑡ℎ model, and (𝑓𝑚 (𝑥) = 𝑐) is an indicator function that returns 1 if the
of the devices [33]. IoT has achieved significant advancement with 𝑚𝑡ℎ model predicts class 𝑐, and 0 otherwise.
the introduction of additional technologies such as WSNs, Machine- The primary objective is to synthesize a new model that integrates
to-Machine (M2M) communication, and low-power Personal Area Net- the strengths of distinct classification algorithms. This integration aims
works (PANs), thereby becoming more intelligent and interconnected to transcend the limitations inherent in relying on a single classification
[37]. IoT has found extensive applications across various sectors of algorithm, thereby enhancing the performance of predictions [48].
human society, including intelligent control and monitoring in industry The two aggregation prediction algorithms we propose are based on
and agriculture, smart cities, smart homes, and healthcare [38–40]. the concept of bagging in EL. The Weighted Score algorithm calculates
 the final prediction result by considering both the weights and per-
2.3. Federated learning formance metrics of individual models. The Majority Voting algorithm
 adopts a model grouping strategy that performs majority voting across
 Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed ML approach that involves the predictions of client models, and then combines the result with the
model training through the collaboration of multiple clients with a server-side prediction output.
server [41,42]. The process of FL is summarized in six steps [41–43]:
 2.5. Related works
 1. A generic initialization model is configured as the global model
 on the server. Traditional IDS for WSNs are classified into anomaly detection and
 2. This global model is then distributed to all clients. misuse detection [3]. Anomaly detection systems primarily focus on
 3. Clients use their local data to train the model, thus generating identifying anomalies in nodes, networks, and data within WSNs [49].
 customized local models. Misuse detection involves the detection of known attacks through the
 4. The parameters of the trained model, which differ from those of pre-configuration of attack signatures [3]. However, the evolution of
 the global model, are sent from the clients to the server. ML techniques has introduced more possibilities for IDS in WSNs. ML-
 5. Upon receiving these parameters, the server aggregates them based IDS for WSNs can effectively identify and filter anomalous data,
 using a strategy such as Federated Averaging (FedAvg), allowing thereby saving computational and network resources. Furthermore,
 for the updating of the global model. such systems can autonomously detect, learn from, and prevent various
 6. Repeat steps 4 and 5, with the updated global model’s param- network attacks and vulnerabilities, eliminating the need for human
 eters sent back to the clients for subsequent rounds of training. intervention [50].
 The cycle continues until the model converges. Current research in ML-based IDS for WSNs primarily concentrates
 on deploying specific ML algorithms for the identification and detection
 In FL, the aggregation of local models into a global model is formal- of particular types of network attacks. For example, studies [50,51] inized as follows. Let 𝜃𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 represent the global model parameters and troduce methods using ML algorithms such as the K-Nearest Neighbors
𝜃𝑖 denote the local model parameters of client 𝑖. The FedAvg algorithm (KNN), Decision Trees (DT), and Support Vector Machines (SVM), for
updates the global model as below: outlier detection and the identification of specific network attacks. Concurrently, the advancement of ML has promoted innovative approaches
 1 ∑
 𝑁
𝜃𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 ← 𝜃 (1) such as Boosting and Deep Learning (DL) based schemes. For instance,
 𝑁 𝑖=1 𝑖
 research in [52] investigates the comparison of three novel Boosting
where 𝑁 is the number of clients. Eq. (1) represents the aggregation of methods against three traditional ML techniques for detecting network
parameters of the local model to form the updated global model. attacks in WSNs. Additionally, [53] explores the use of Deep Neural
 FL is well-suited for IoT applications, due to its decentralized nature, Networks (DNN) to solve the limitations inherent in traditional ML,
data privacy protection, and resource conservation [44–46]. The rapid especially in response to imbalanced attacks.
expansion of IoT has led to an enormous volume of data generated by Given the potential constraints associated with single ML classifiers,
many IoT devices, presenting challenges related to data overload, data some studies have advocated for model ensemble strategies to enhance
security, and data privacy [44]. The distributed feature of FL elimi- detection capabilities. For example, [54] introduces an IDS scheme
nates the need for centralized data processing. Configuring numerous that integrates Random Forest (RF), Density-based Spatial Clustering
local clients alleviates computational burdens and avoids privacy and of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN), and Restricted Boltzmann Masecurity issues associated with data transmission. Therefore, FL offers chine (RBM). To enhance detection efficiency, certain methods, such
an effective and privacy-preserving solution for IoT environments. as the one proposed in [55], apply feature selection algorithms to filter

 4
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

Table 2
Summary of related works.
 Authors (Year) Methodology Research Gaps
 Yu and Tsai (2008) [58] ML-based IDS using autonomous IDAs on sensor Intrusion detection is implemented at the sensor node level, increases the
 nodes and base station fine-tuning mechanisms. workload of the node, alerts rely on user judgment, analysis of local features
 and adjacent node communications cannot cope with multiple attacks.
 Medhat et al. (2015) [5] DT-based IDS implemented at sensor nodes for Limited to detecting data anomalies at the sensor node level using DT with
 defining detection rules through feature selection. predefined rules, without supporting model selection and dynamic adjustment
 to deal with complex attacks.
 Maleh et al. (2015) [6] Hybrid IDS combining ML anomaly detection and Restricted WSN architecture, relies on predefined signatures, lacks detection
 signature-based detection in a clustered WSN. of application data, and does not support model ensemble and adjustment.
 Zhang et al. (2020) [7] Hierarchical IDS using MK-ELM for anomaly Relies on a single model, analyzes only application data, lacks network data
 detection in clustered WSN architecture. detection, does not support model selection and fusion, and cannot cope with
 complex attacks.
 Alruhaily and Ibrahim (2021) [8] Two-layer IDS using NB and RF classifiers for Limited by WSN architecture, model selection, and attack types, deploying
 network traffic classification and attack detection. models at the sensor node level increases the workload of the nodes, fails to
 reduce redundant data transfers in resource-constrained WSN environments,
 and fails to incorporate the benefits of different models.

key features. This approach is aimed at reducing the time required intrusion detection. This data is then forwarded to the management
for attack detection and ensuring efficient identification of attacks. node over the Internet. The management node’s intrusion detection
Additionally, research efforts have been directed towards developing module uses its Multi-Kernel ELM (MK-ELM) model to detect intrudetection methods for specific data types. The study in [56] focuses on sions. The results are then sent to an anomaly processing module for
detecting anomalies in sensing data, while [57] combines traditional further analysis and decision-making. Simulations demonstrate that
ML and DL techniques to identify malicious nodes through network their model achieves high-precision detection while reducing detectraffic classification. tion time. Alruhaily and Ibrahim [8] propose a two-layer ML defence
 The aforementioned studies represent the main research direction strategy for IDS in WSNs. At the sensor nodes layer, a Naive Bayes
of ML-based intrusion detection solutions for WSNs, offering valuable (NB) classifier makes an initial classification of packets as normal or
insights into WSN security. However, these researches mainly focus malicious. Malicious traffic is then analyzed in the cloud using an RF
on applying specific models or algorithms to address unique network multi-class classifier, which identifies specific attack types and guides
security challenges. There exists a notable gap in their consideration of corresponding defence mechanisms. Their approach efficiently utilizes
comprehensive network security issues in real-world WSN application network resources and demonstrates high accuracy in detecting normal
scenarios. The following key papers have made contributions to this traffic and four distinct attack types.
research area and provided crucial foundations and inspirations for our A review of prior research has highlighted the significant improve-
SC-MLIDS, as summarized in Table 2. ments made in hybrid ML-based IDSs for WSNs. However, some critical
 Yu and Tsai [58] propose an ML-based IDS for WSNs that ad- shortcomings are still present. Current research has focused on the use
dresses the limitations of detecting specific types of attacks. In their of specific ML algorithms or the combination of ML algorithms with
framework, each sensor node is equipped with an Intrusion Detection traditional IDS approaches (e.g., signature rules) to identify specific
Agent (IDA). These IDAs operate autonomously with two primary attack types. Additionally, these studies have notable limitations in
components: the Local Intrusion Detection Component (LIDC) and the terms of ML algorithm selection, model optimization, processing effi-
Packet-based Intrusion Detection Component (PIDC). The LIDC ana- ciency, resource consumption, and deployment adaptability in WSNs,
lyzes local features to determine if the host node is under attack, especially in dynamically changing network environments and diverse
while the PIDC monitors the communication activities of neighboring security threats. These gaps highlight the importance of the need for a
nodes identified as suspicious by the LIDC. Alerts from the IDAs are hybrid ML IDS framework that is not only highly flexible and adaptable
transmitted to and examined by users through the base station. When but also capable of transcending the limitations of attack types.
false alarms are detected, the base station fine-tunes and optimizes the Proposed approach & novelty: To address these gaps, this paper
model, enhancing its accuracy and reliability. This automated feature proposes the Server–Client Machine Learning Intrusion Detection Syssignificantly improves the IDS’s adaptability. Medhat et al. [5] devel- tem (SC-MLIDS) framework. The SC-MLIDS framework is designed
oped two DT-based algorithms for defining detection rules in WSNs. based on the data characteristics and architectural features of WSNs.
These algorithms target two configurations: base station-sink-sensor By implementing a two-layer detection mechanism, it aims to achieve
and sink-sensor architectures. In both setups, the IDS is implemented lightweight intrusion detection that is both highly accurate and effiat the sensor nodes level using supervised or unsupervised learning cient. The adoption of a server–client architecture not only ensures
algorithms to generate detection rules through feature selection. In- that the framework is highly adaptable and scalable but also allows the
trusion detection is achieved by applying DT classifiers that use these framework to flexibly adapt to dynamically changing network security
rules to detect anomalies in sensing data. These binary DT-based al- threats and requirements. In addition, the framework supports diverse
gorithms are notable for their high detection accuracy, achieved with algorithms and model adjustment, which can adapt to different model
fewer features and lower resource demands. Maleh et al. [6] propose combinations generated by diverse ML algorithms to meet different
an IDS that combines SVM-based anomaly detection with predefined WSN architectures and application requirements.
attack rule signatures, enhancing the system’s capability to identify
attacks or anomalies. Designed for a clustered WSN topology, it fea- 3. Proposed framework
tures dynamically elected cluster heads responsible for monitoring and
authenticating nodes. This hybrid approach leverages both ML anomaly 3.1. Framework design
detection and signature-based IDS, resulting in a lightweight, efficient,
and highly accurate solution. Zhang et al. [7] propose a hierarchical In large WSNs, multiple sink nodes are tasked with data collection
IDS using the Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) methodology. In their from assigned wireless sensor nodes. These networks use a gateway that
framework, the cluster head node preprocesses data collected by sensor serves as an intermediary between the sink nodes and the Internet.
nodes and sends it to the sink node for feature extraction relevant to This gateway’s primary functions include communication with each

 5
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 Fig. 2. Proposed SC-MLIDS framework.

sink node and the aggregation and processing of data. This described deployment and operation phase, which performs model preparation
architecture shares similarities with the global–local model structure in and intrusion detection, respectively.
FL, as applied within the IoT context. During the model training and evaluation phase, it is crucial to
 Therefore, this paper proposed a framework for WSNs, a hybrid ML prepare a dataset containing both sensing data and the corresponding
IDS with integrated server and client models, as shown in Fig. 2. In network traffic data. This dataset is used for training the ML models
the SC-MLIDS framework, both the client models from sink nodes and
 on both the clients and the server. The model training and evaluation
the server model from the gateway are used for intrusion detection.
 phase of SC-MLIDS is shown in Fig. 3(a) and can be summarized in
The gateway integrates two types of models: a server model based
 seven steps:
on network traffic data and multiple client models based on sensing
data. By implementing a two-layer detection mechanism, it aims to
 1. Distribute the split sensor dataset: Each client receives a
achieve lightweight intrusion detection that is both highly accurate and
efficient. The SC-MLIDS framework contains two primary components: portion of the split sensor dataset.
a server and multiple clients: 2. Train client models: In each client, a client model is trained
 using the assigned sensor dataset.
 • Client: Represents the sink nodes in the WSN. 3. Compress and encrypt client model files: After training, the
 • Client Model: This component is responsible for validating sens- client model files are compressed and encrypted for secure transing data. Such data are generated and transmitted by wireless mission.
 sensor nodes that are managed by the sink node. 4. Transmit client model files to the server: These compressed
 • Server: Represents the gateway in the WSN. and encrypted client model files are then sent to the server.
 • Server Model: This component is responsible for validating net- 5. Server reception and processing: Upon receipt, the server
 work traffic data. This network traffic is associated with the decompresses and decrypts all the client model files.
 sensing data that the gateway receives from the sink node. 6. Server model training: The server trains a server model using
 • Models Ensemble: The model fusion is performed by using the the network traffic dataset.
 two proposed aggregation algorithms to generate the prediction 7. Model ensemble: The server ensembles all the client and server
 of the intrusion or not.
 models using the aggregation prediction algorithms.
 • Client Data: The sensing data that collected by the sink node
 from its administered wireless sensor nodes and filtered by the
 The model deployment and operation phase of SC-MLIDS is shown
 client model.
 in Fig. 3(b) and can be summarized in six steps:
 • Dataset: The application/sensing data from the sensor nodes, and
 the network traffic data generated during data transmission, are
 1. Data collection by sensor nodes: These nodes actively sense
 used to train both the client and server models.
 environmental conditions, generating relevant sensing data.
 Based on the ML features, this framework can be divided into 2. Data transmission to sink nodes: The sensor nodes transmit
two phases: the model training and evaluation phase, and the model the sensing data to their affiliated sink nodes.

 6
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 Fig. 3. Phases of system deployment and operation.

 3. Data validation at sink nodes: Upon receipt, the sink nodes 2. Majority Voting Algorithm: This algorithm operates on a maemploy the integrated client model to validate the received jority voting principle, where the predictions made by each
 sensing data stream. model are collectively analyzed. The final prediction is then
 4. Sending data to the gateway: The sink nodes forward the determined based on the results that receive the majority votes
 validated sensing data stream, along with the corresponding among these models.
 network traffic data, to the gateway.
 Due to the flexibility of the proposed two aggregation prediction
 5. Gateway-level validation: The gateway applies model aggrealgorithms, models trained using a variety of classifiers can also be
 gation prediction algorithms, in conjunction with the client and
 aggregated effectively. This holds regardless of the type and numserver models, to conduct a final validation of both the sensing
 ber of classifiers employed. Additionally, the strategy of employing
 data and the corresponding network traffic data.
 a combination of diverse classifiers, based on specific WSN applica-
 6. Uploading server-validated data: Following validation, endtion scenarios and data characteristics, is also feasible and supported.
 users upload the server-validated data to the Internet for addi-
 These algorithms enhance the robustness and accuracy of the SC-MLIDS
 tional analysis and processing.
 framework by using the diverse strengths of the individual models
 involved. The use of both weighted score and majority voting provides
 The proposed SC-MLIDS framework is designed to implement twoa comprehensive approach to model prediction, ensuring more reliable
layer intrusion detection, targeting both the sink node and gateway
 and effective intrusion detection in WSNs.
levels. This approach is particularly applicable considering the inherent
 Considering that both algorithms perform the same task, it is crucial
vulnerabilities of WSN nodes to network attacks, largely due to their
 to choose a suitable algorithm. Therefore, it is necessary to examine
limited computational capacity for deploying robust intrusion-resistant
 their performance based on WSN application scenarios and special
mechanisms. Furthermore, the SC-MLIDS framework demonstrates flexrequirements and select the appropriate algorithm that best suits the
ibility in its applicability to small or simple WSNs. In such configuracurrent needs. This will ensure that the SC-MLIDS framework achieves
tions, the structure is simplified to include a server and a client. Here,
 optimal intrusion detection in different WSN environments.
the sensor node gathers sensing data and forwards it to the sink node
for initial validation. The sink node then transmits this validated data 3.2.1. Weighted score algorithm
to the gateway, where comprehensive validation of both the sensing Given the unique characteristics of WSNs, Precision emerges as a
data and network traffic data is conducted. The essential models for particularly crucial metric in assessing the performance of ML models
the aggregation prediction algorithms in this scenario include a client used for such networks. In WSNs, the authenticity and accuracy of
model and a server model. This simplified structure effectively main- data are crucial for subsequent data analysis processes. Consequently,
tains the two-layer intrusion detection characteristic of the SC-MLIDS ML models for WSN applications should prioritize minimizing false
framework, thereby ensuring robust security even in less complex WSN positives. This focus on Precision reflects the lower relative significance
configurations. of false negatives in this context.
 Precision is defined as the proportion of all samples predicted to
3.2. Aggregation prediction algorithms be positive that are actually positive. A higher Precision indicates
 that the model performs greater caution in its predictions, effectively
 The SC-MLIDS framework employs model aggregation methodolo- reducing the occurrence of false positives. Additionally, Recall or True
gies at the gateway level, similar to the bagging approach in EL. This Positive Rate (TPR) denotes the proportion of actual positive samples
process includes two aggregation prediction algorithms: correctly identified as positive by the model. The F1-score addresses
 potential imbalances within the dataset by harmonizing Precision and
 1. Weighted Score Algorithm: This algorithm combines the pre- Recall. This score is particularly relevant when dealing with unbaldiction results of each model based on their performance met- anced datasets. Therefore, while Precision remains a critical metric
 rics and assigned weights. The resulting scores are then con- for the performance evaluation of ML models in WSNs, the F1-score
 verted into binary classification results, ensuring holistic and also deserves consideration, especially in scenarios involving dataset
 comprehensive prediction results. imbalance.

 7
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 The weighted score algorithm proposed in this paper innovatively Let 𝑛 be the number of models. The aggregated prediction 𝐴𝑝 is then
integrates model performance metrics into the bagging methodology of calculated by normalizing the weighted sum of the predictions:
EL, designed specifically for the characteristics of WSNs. As presented ∑𝑛
 𝑤_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑖
in Algorithm 1, this algorithm synthesizes the final prediction results 𝐴𝑝 = ∑𝑛 𝑖=1 (6)
by considering a range of inputs. These inputs include the individual 𝑖=1 𝑖 ⋅ 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖
 𝑤
prediction results of each model, the Precision and F1-score of these Finally, a threshold 𝜃 (commonly 0.5 for binary classification) is
models, their respective weight shares, and the overall weight assigned applied to 𝐴𝑝 to obtain the final binary classification 𝑃weighted :
to each model. {
 1 if 𝐴𝑝 ≥ 𝜃
 𝑃weighted = (7)
 0 otherwise
Algorithm 1: Weighted Score Algorithm
 Input : 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠, 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑠, 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠, 𝑝_𝑤, 𝑓 _𝑤 In summary, the proposed weighted score algorithm offers a com-
 Output: 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 prehensive approach for scoring model performance and weights in
 1 𝑤_𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠 = [ ]
 WSNs. This is achieved by considering various factors: the individual
 2 for 𝑚 in 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑠 do
 prediction results of each model, the performance metrics of the mod-
 3 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ← 𝑚[0] × 𝑝_𝑤 + 𝑚[1] × 𝑓 _𝑤 els, the weights assigned to each model, and the assignment of weights
 4 𝑤_𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒) among these metrics. A notable aspect of this algorithm is that the
 final prediction tends to be more closely aligned with models assigned
 5 end for
 higher weights. Furthermore, if a model with a high weight also gives
 6 𝑤_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 = [ ]
 high-performance metrics, the algorithm’s predictions are possible to
 7 for 𝑖 ← 0 to length of 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 - 1 do
 closely mirror the metrics of that model. However, it is important to
 8 𝑤_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 ← 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠[𝑖] × 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠[𝑖] × 𝑤_𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠[𝑖]
 acknowledge that due to the aggregate nature of the predictions, there
 9 𝑤_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑤_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑)
 may be cases where the algorithm’s performance metrics are slightly
10 end for
 lower than those of the best-performing individual model.
11 𝑟𝑒𝑠 ← sum of 𝑤_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 / sum of (𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠 × 𝑤_𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠)
 The proposed weighted score algorithm is specifically designed
12 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 ← 0.5
 for WSNs. By incorporating both Precision and F1-score, along with
13 if 𝑟𝑒𝑠 ≥ 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 then
 their respective weights, the algorithm is highly applicable to WSN
14 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 ← 1 environments where minimizing false positives is a critical concern.
15 else
 Despite the applicability of this algorithm is not limited to WSNs. With
16 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 ← 0 appropriate modifications, such as the integration of additional model
17 end if
 metrics or alterations of Precision and F1-score, the algorithm can be
18 return 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠
 adapted to other application scenarios requiring model aggregation
 prediction.
 Therefore, in this paper, the algorithm has been optimized for WSNs
 In the proposed weighted score algorithm, the initial step involves to accommodate their specific characteristics and needs. As an indisrunning each client model and the server model to generate their pensable component of the SC-MLIDS framework, it presents a robust
respective independent predictions. Following this, the Precision and and effective method for model aggregation prediction, enhancing the
F1-score obtained during the testing phase of each model are provided. performance of two-layer IDSs in WSNs. This adaptability and precision
The weights are assigned to each model. These weights are represented emphasize the potential of the algorithm as an option in various model
as an array, with the condition that their cumulative sum equals 1. This aggregation scenarios.
array configuration is crucial as it reflects the relative importance and
performance of each model within the aggregation prediction process. 3.2.2. Majority voting algorithm
For instance, in the SC-MLIDS framework, the server model is typically Majority voting, a frequently employed method in EL, operates on
assigned a greater weight compared to client models. This is due to the principle of using predictions from multiple models, with the class
the server model being trained using network traffic data, which often receiving the majority of votes being selected as the final predictions.
makes it more critical in the overall predictive accuracy. Finally, the However, considering the specificities of the SC-MLIDS framework,
algorithm requires the assignment of weights to the Precision and F1- especially within the context of WSNs, a direct application of majority
score. The weight is determined based on the characteristics of the voting is not feasible and requires modification to align with the
dataset used to train the models. For example, the weights might be server–client architecture.
assigned as 0.6 and 0.4 for Precision and F1-score, respectively. This In WSNs applying the SC-MLIDS framework, the diversity of training
weighting approach allows for a balance between Precision and F1- sets and the limited data collection scope of individual client models at
score, ensuring that the aggregation prediction is not only accurate but each sink node may not fully cover the range of potential scenarios in
also sensitive to the dataset’s unique properties. After completing the data collection. Consequently, an aggregated prediction using the client
preparation of all required inputs, the weighted score for each model models from each sink node, combined with majority voting, yields
is calculated as a linear combination of its Precision and F1-score. more accurate predictions. In addition, the server model, trained on
 Let 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑓𝑖 represent the Precision and F1-score for the 𝑖𝑡ℎ model, a comprehensive network traffic dataset, tends to have superior perrespectively. The weighted score for each model is then given by: formance in detecting various network traffic. To accommodate these
 considerations, this paper proposed a modified approach of partial
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 = 𝑝𝑖 ⋅ 𝑝𝑤 + 𝑓𝑖 ⋅ 𝑓𝑤 (4) majority voting, as presented in Algorithm 2. In this algorithm, majority
 voting is primarily based on the prediction results of the client models,
where 𝑝𝑤 and 𝑓𝑤 are the coefficients associated with Precision and
 but the server model’s predictions carry a decisive weight and influence
F1-score.
 due to its comprehensive training and superior performance.
 Let 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑖 represent the array of binary predictions from the 𝑖𝑡ℎ In the proposed majority voting algorithm, each client and server
model, and 𝑤𝑖 be its assigned weight. The final weighted prediction model independently generates prediction results. Upon inputting the
𝑤_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑖 for each model are calculated as: prediction results from each model into the majority voting algorithm,
 the algorithm proceeds to compute the predictions made by each
𝑤_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑖 = 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑖 ⋅ 𝑤𝑖 ⋅ 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 (5)
 model. Since this algorithm primarily addresses binary classification

 8
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

Algorithm 2: Majority Voting Algorithm Here, 𝑝𝑛𝑖 is the prediction of the server model for the 𝑖𝑡ℎ sample. If the
 Input : 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 majority vote matches the server model’s prediction, it is taken as the
 Output: 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 final prediction; otherwise, the final prediction defaults to 1.
 1 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠 = [ ] Distinct from general majority voting and weighted majority voting
 2 for 𝑖 ← 0 to length of 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠[0] do approaches, the proposed majority voting algorithm uniquely assigns
 3 𝑟_𝑠𝑢𝑚 ← 0 a decisive voting weight to the model showing superior performance.
 4 for 𝑗 ← 0 to length of 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 - 1 do This customized approach aligns with the server–client structure inher-
 5 𝑟_𝑠𝑢𝑚 ← 𝑟_𝑠𝑢𝑚 + 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠[𝑗][𝑖] ent in the SC-MLIDS framework. It ensures that the predictions made
 6 end for by the client model are co-verified by the server model. The jointly
 7 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 ← 23 × (length of preds - 1) verified results from these two model types are then adopted as the
 8 if 𝑟_𝑠𝑢𝑚 ≥ 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 then final prediction results. This approach is particularly effective in WSNs,
 9 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒 ← 1 where it is crucial to minimize false positives in data.
10 else
 The proposed majority voting algorithm, as configured in this pa-
11 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒 ← 0
 per, is predisposed to yield results leaning toward the positive class.
12 end if
 This bias is intentional, deriving from the algorithm’s design where
13 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒)
 discrepancies between the two types of model predictions default to
14 end for
 the positive class, thereby reducing the occurrence of false positives.
15 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 = [ ]
16 for 𝑘 ← 0 to length of 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠 do
 However, this configuration is not rigid; the algorithm’s matching
17 if 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠[𝑘] = 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠[−1][𝑘] then conditions and majority voting thresholds can be customized to suit
18 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠[𝑘]) various application scenarios. For instance, adjusting the decisive role’s
19 else voting weight or altering the majority voting threshold can modify the
20 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(1) tolerance for the prediction result.
21 end if In conclusion, this paper has optimized the majority voting algo-
22 end for rithm to address the specific needs of WSNs, particularly their em-
23 return 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑠 phasis on minimizing false positives. As an integral part of the SC-
 MLIDS framework, this algorithm presents an additional secure and
 effective method for model aggregation prediction, demonstrating its
 adaptability and utility in diverse scenarios beyond WSNs.
models, the prediction results can be straightforwardly computed. For
instance, in the case of three client models, the summation of predictions for a specific sample could yield counts such as 0, 1, 2, or 3. These 3.3. Multimodality in the SC-MLIDS framework
numbers represent the frequency with which the sample is predicted as
the positive class (denoted as 1) across the three models.
 To account for potential errors and ensure robustness, the majority Our proposed SC-MLIDS framework integrates ensemble techniques
voting algorithm adopts a threshold for majority determination. Par- and multimodality to offer a high degree of flexibility and adaptability,
ticularly, a prediction result is considered a majority if it is indicated as illustrated in Fig. 4.
as a positive class in more than two-thirds of the client models. The As a data-driven Artificial Intelligence (AI) intrusion detection
majority voting results are then matched with the predictions made by framework, SC-MLIDS contains clusters of models based on two data
the server model. If there is a consensus between the majority voting
 types: application/sensing data and network data. The framework conresult and the server model’s prediction, this result is denoted as the
 sists of a client model cluster trained on application/sensing data and
final prediction. Otherwise, the algorithm defaults to recording the
 a server model cluster trained on network data. These model clusters
prediction as a positive class.
 For each prediction sample 𝑖, the algorithm sums up the predictions can be trained with either the same or different AI algorithms, allowing
from all models except the last one (server model). Let 𝑝𝑗𝑖 denote the for both homogeneous and heterogeneous model structures. In this
prediction of the 𝑗 𝑡ℎ model for the 𝑖𝑡ℎ sample. The sum 𝑠𝑖 for each context, homogeneous models refer to those where all models within
sample is given by: a cluster use the same AI algorithm (e.g. RF), while heterogeneous
 models involve different AI algorithms within the same cluster.
 ∑
 𝑛−1
𝑠𝑖 = 𝑝𝑗𝑖 (8) Within the SC-MLIDS architecture, multimodal combinations can
 𝑗=1 be classified into three categories: homogeneous–homogeneous, hetero
where 𝑛 is the total number of models, and 𝑛 − 1 represents all models geneous–heterogeneous, and homogeneous–heterogeneous. These catexcept the last one. egories represent various combinations of single or multiple AI algo-
 The algorithm then applies a threshold 𝜃 (generally two-thirds of rithms used across client and server model clusters. Once the model
the number of client models) to this sum to determine the majority clusters are constructed, they are fused into a hybrid model, and the
vote 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖 for each sample: final prediction is produced using one of two aggregation prediction
 {
 1 if 𝑠𝑖 ≥ 𝜃 algorithms proposed in this paper: the Weighted Score algorithm or the
𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖 = (9) Majority Voting algorithm.
 0 otherwise
 In scenarios where the two proposed algorithms may not fully meet
This reflects the rule that if more than two-thirds of models predict as specific application needs, other aggregation prediction algorithms can
1, the majority vote is 1; otherwise, it is 0.
 be selected or developed to generate the final predictions. By lever-
 The final prediction 𝑃voting for each sample is determined by comaging its ensemble and multimodal fusion techniques, the SC-MLIDS
paring the majority vote with the prediction of the server model:
 { framework offers flexible adaptation to WSNs of varying scales and ar-
 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖 if 𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖 = 𝑝𝑛𝑖 chitectures, providing a novel AI-driven solution for intrusion detection
𝑃voting = (10)
 1 otherwise in WSNs and opening up new research directions in this field.

 9
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 Fig. 4. Multimodality framework.

4. Experimental setup and results In this paper, the proposed framework contains a server and multiple clients. A dataset split that reflects this structure is required, beyond
4.1. Integration of datasets merely dividing into training and testing sets. To demonstrate and
 test the proposed framework, we use three clients as an example. The
 Due to the unique characteristics of the framework proposed in process of dataset splitting is illustrated in Fig. 5. Initially, the merged
this paper, specific requirements are set for the dataset to be used. dataset is divided into a training set and a testing set, with a ratio of
The dataset must be generated in a WSN scenario, including sensing 80% and 20%, respectively.
and network traffic data, and labeled according to network attacks. Considering that the merged dataset includes both sensing data and
However, finding relevant datasets for WSNs that meet these criteria network traffic data, it is essential to split the dataset in alignment
is challenging. Since the WSN is one of the fundamental technologies with the distinct functions of the server and the clients. Specifically,
supporting the IoT, and both involve wireless devices equipped with the server requires only network traffic data, while the clients need
sensors, selecting a suitable IoT dataset presents an optimal alternative. only sensing data. Therefore, the training set is further divided based
The TON_IoT [59] dataset contains data from IoT and Industrial IoT on data type, ensuring the label column is retained in both subsets. The
sensor devices, as well as operating system and network traffic data, obtained datasets are classified as the sensor dataset and the network
making it suitable for the validation of ML network security solutions dataset. The sensor dataset is evenly split among the three clients
for IoT, such as IDSs. for this experiment. Through these steps, four distinct datasets are
 In this paper, the IoT device sensing data and network traffic data generated: the network dataset for the server, and three sensor datasets
from the processed dataset are employed. The weather dataset within for the clients.
the IoT device sensing data, which closely aligns with the WSN scenario, is the only dataset used. Conversely, the network traffic dataset is 4.2. Implementation details
used in its entirety, as it is not categorized based on specific IoT devices.
 The IoT weather dataset collects weather sensing data including To demonstrate the practical viability of the proposed SC-MLIDS
temperature, pressure, and humidity between March 31 and April 27, framework, we have developed a Python-based simulation program to
2019, and is labeled as normal and seven attacks (Backdoor, Password, simulate the communication between sink nodes and the gateway in
DDoS, Injection, Ransomware, XSS, and Scanning). The dataset has WSNs. In our simulation, the SC-MLIDS framework’s functionality is
a total of 650,242 samples, 86%, amounting to 559,718 samples, showcased during both the deployment and operation phases of WSNs.
representing normal data, while the remaining 14% represents data The program executes model training, testing, and transmission during
affected by each of the seven types of attacks. the model training and evaluation phase. It manages sensing data
 The network traffic dataset is complex, containing network traffic collection, validation, transmission, file processing, and aggregated valfrom various devices. It consists of 21,978,631 samples and 46 fea- idation in the model deployment and operation phase. This program is
tures across 23 dataset files. The dataset is labeled as normal and partitioned into four modules: Utilities, Server, Client, and Aggregation
nine types of attacks (Scanning, DDoS, DoS, XSS, Password, Backdoor, Prediction. Each module’s code and functionality are elaborated as
Injection, Ransomware, and MITM), with only about 3.6% of the data follows:
(corresponding to 788,599 samples) being normal, and the remaining
21,190,031 samples representing various types of attack data. • Utility Module: This module is an auxiliary tool within the
 By merging the IoT weather dataset and the network traffic dataset simulation program. It contains a variety of functions, includbased on common features, and subsequently performing cleaning, ing importing and splitting datasets, outputting distributions of
encoding, scaling, and shuffling operations on the merged dataset, we dataset labels, generating model performance metrics, and creatobtained the final dataset. The generated dataset is presented in Table ing encryption keys.
3. It combines sensing data from the IoT weather dataset with network • Server Module: Designed to simulate the gateway’s role in a
connection activity and statistical activity data from the network traffic WSN, this module handles communication with clients. It mandataset. ages the reception of client messages, including metadata, ML

 10
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 Table 3
 Generated dataset.
 Index 0 1 2 3 4 ... 203 440
 temperature 0.9486 0.5170 0.9596 0.5819 0.5132 ... 0.9509
 pressure 0.6904 0.5001 0.4670 0.6743 0.7438 ... 0.4022
 humidity 0.2075 0.4147 0.4953 0.5789 0.7367 ... 0.6414
 src_port 0.8152 0.6586 0.8236 0.1202 0.8618 ... 0.7081
 dst_port 0.0068 0.0008 0.1603 0.6426 0.1233 ... 0.0012
 Proto 1 2 1 1 1 ... 1
 Service 9 3 0 0 0 ... 0
 Duration 0 0 0 0 0 ... 0
 src_bytes 0 0 0 0 0 ... 0
 dst_bytes 0 0 0 0 0 ... 0
 conn_state 4 10 0 0 0 ... 10
 src_pkts 0 0 0 0 0 ... 0
 src_ip_bytes 0 0 0 0 0 ... 0
 dst_pkts 0.0001 0 0 0 0 ... 0
 dst_ip_bytes 0.0001 0 0 0 0 ... 0
 target 1 0 0 1 1 ... 1

 Fig. 5. Dataset processing, integration and splitting.

 model files, and subsequent sensing and network traffic data. Ad- In our simulation program, Random Forest (RF) classifiers are uniditional functionalities include the decryption and decompression formly used at both the client and server levels. The choice of RF
 of model files and the training of the server model. is driven by their typically high accuracy, robust performance, and
 • Client Module: Simulating the sink node’s function in a WSN, this efficiency, particularly with unbalanced datasets and a multitude of
 module facilitates communication with the server. The client’s predictive variables [60–62]. Furthermore, their widespread support
 primary tasks include training the client model, compressing and across numerous open-source libraries facilitates ease of use and avoids
 encrypting the model, and then transmitting it to the server. the need for extensive parameter tuning. Given these advantages, the
 The module also handles the transmission of sensing data to the
 RF classifier is consistently used throughout our simulation.
 server. In scenarios involving multiple clients, the client module
 can be duplicated and modified with distinct client IDs to simulate However, it is critical to note that the SC-MLIDS framework and its
 various client entities. integrated model aggregation prediction algorithms are not restricted
 • Aggregation Prediction Module: This module implements the to this single classifier type. The framework is flexible, supporting the
 two aggregation prediction algorithms specifically designed for integration of various other classifiers depending on specific application
 the SC-MLIDS framework. Additionally, it includes a helper scenarios and data characteristics. Moreover, due to the adaptability
 method for integrating and generating the necessary inputs for of the proposed aggregation prediction algorithms, models developed
 these algorithms and for displaying the performance metrics of using diverse classifiers can be effectively aggregated, independent of
 the models. their type and quantity.

 11
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

4.3. Experimental setup a training set of roughly equivalent size, though variations in label
 distribution were observed. The model training time for all three clients
 The experimental phase was executed on a laptop equipped with an averaged just over 8 s. In contrast, the server, processing three times
Intel Core i9-13900H CPU and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Laptop the amount of data, completed its model training in merely 6.83 s. The
GPU. The laptop also features 32 GB of DDR5 memory and a 1 TB SSD, server model file, not being transmitted, was exempt from encryption
running Microsoft Windows 11 Home 64-bit. and compression procedures. The generated model files across the
 The core aim of our simulation program is to demonstrate client– clients were approximately 106 MB in size. Encryption of these files
server interaction when the SC-MLIDS framework is applied to a WSN was fast, ranging from 0.5654 to 0.7266 s, but resulting in a file size
environment. We use the collected sensing data to train the client model increase to about 142 MB. After compression, the model files were
at the client. At the server, we use network traffic data for training the approximately 107 MB, slightly larger than the original size, with
server model and implementing the model aggregation. To maintain compression times varying from 3.8393 to 5.2522 s for the clients.
data integrity and security throughout this process, the client models The transfer of the encrypted and compressed model files to the
are compressed and encrypted before their transmission to the server. server was executed with remarkable speed, showcasing the efficiency
To simulate local communication on the laptop, the host and port of the communication process. The consistency in the size of the files renumbers for both the client and server were uniformly set to ‘127.0.0.1’ ceived by the server compared to those sent by the clients confirmed the
and ‘8080’, respectively. integrity of the data during transmission. However, notable variations
 This experimental setup included one server and three clients. The were observed in the reception times. Specifically, Client 1 experienced
processed dataset was divided such that 80% was allocated as the a longer reception time of approximately 80 s, while Client 2 completed
training set and the remaining 20% as the testing set. Each client was the transfer the quickest, in about 65 s, and Client 3 fell in between
assigned one-third of the training set, while the server used the entirety with a duration of 76 s. The average transmission rate for all clients
of this set. exceeded 1 MB/s, with Client 2 achieving the highest rate at 1.66 MB/s.
 In terms of evaluation, each model’s performance was assessed using During the final phases of decompression and decryption, each client
metrics such as Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-score. Additionally, completed the task in approximately 1 s, further demonstrating the
we implemented the two proposed model aggregation prediction algo- framework’s effectiveness in secure model transmission.
rithms to merge the prediction results of these models. This approach For a preliminary evaluation of the energy consumption of the SCaimed to enhance the overall detection efficiency and accuracy, yield- MLIDS framework, we monitored and collected the energy consumption
ing comprehensive prediction results that are not solely dependent on data of RAM, CPU, and GPU during the experiments. The results are
a single model’s performance. summarized in Table 5. In the three-client experimental scenario, the
 The proposed weighted score algorithm is based on model perfor- total runtime of the simulation program is 266 s. The RAM and CPU
mance and weights, the weights assigned to the three client models usage range between 1.2% and 4.4%, indicating low overall power
were set uniformly at 0.2 each, while the server model was assigned a consumption. The RAM consumption is consistent across the three
higher weight of 0.4, reflecting its greater importance and performance. clients at 0.000037 kWh, while it is slightly higher for the server at
In terms of performance metrics, particular attention was given to the 0.000875 kWh. CPU energy consumption follows a similar trend, with
Precision and F1-score. The weight assigned to Precision was set at 0.6, clients consuming 0.000133 kWh and the server consuming 0.003129
while the F1-score was weighted at 0.4. This specific weighting strategy kWh. Additionally, the GPU power consumption is minimal, as the prowas adopted because we emphasized minimizing false positives in the gram primarily runs on the CPU. The total power consumption of the
model predictions. Additionally, it reflects a balanced trade-off in the simulated program is 0.004892 kWh, leading to an estimated carbon
model’s predictive accuracy, considering both the precision and the dioxide emission of 0.000192 kg. These simulation results demonstrate
holistic performance as represented by the F1-score. the high energy efficiency of SC-MLIDS and provide a reference for
 To support reproducibility, we provide a simplified version of our resource-constrained WSN scenarios in terms of application power
early experiments in our GitHub repository [63]. While the experiments consumption.
in this paper were conducted using an extended version of this code, We also conducted experiments using different combinations of
the repository will be updated to reflect subsequent improvements and classifiers, partial results are shown in Table 6. This included a selection
additional experiments. of popular classifiers such as RF, Logistic Regression (LR), Gradient
 Boosting (GB), and Support Vector Machine (SVM).
4.4. Results Despite using the same training sets, there was a marked difference
 in the file sizes of the models generated by the different classifiers.
 The proposed SC-MLIDS framework is characterized by two key soft- Client 1, using the RF classifier, produced a model file size similar to the
ware components: server–client communication and model aggregation previous round, approximately 108 MB. Client 2, using LR, generated
prediction algorithms. To facilitate a comprehensive evaluation of the a significantly smaller model file of only 2 KB. Client 3, using GB,
SC-MLIDS framework, our experimental design was separated into two produced a model file of 188 KB. The server model trained using SVM,
distinct parts, corresponding to the two software components. resulted in a file size of only 1.39 MB. These results highlight that the
 choice of classifier not only impacts the size of the resulting model file
4.4.1. Server–client communication but also influences the efficiency of transmission, thereby affecting the
 In our experimental evaluation of the SC-MLIDS framework, we overall performance.
simulated and analyzed the communication process between the server
and three clients using a developed simulation program. 4.4.2. Aggregation prediction algorithms
 Table 4 systematically presents and summarizes this process. Each To thoroughly evaluate the model aggregation prediction algoclient model is trained using sensing data, then encrypted and com- rithms within the proposed SC-MLIDS framework, we initially assessed
pressed before being sent to the server. The server, upon receiving these the independent performance of each model. This assessment involved
model files, proceeds to decompress and decrypt them. Subsequently, deriving metrics such as Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-score.
the server model is trained using network traffic data. To ensure As shown in Fig. 6(a), the performance metrics of the RF-based
uniformity across the experiment, all models uniformly employed the models reveal their high effectiveness. The three client models consis-
RF classifier. tently show performance metrics slightly above 0.93 across Accuracy,
 For this local transmission simulation, clients were configured with Precision, Recall, and F1-score. This consistency indicates their robust
loopback addresses but with distinct ports. Each client was assigned capability in accurate prediction. The close alignment of all four metrics

 12
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

 Table 4
 Model training and transmission results (random forests).
 Metric Server Client 1 Client 2 Client 3
 Label distribution 98809, 63943 32980, 21270 32884, 21366 32931, 21319
 Model training time (s) 6.8305 8.9069 8.3103 8.1050
 Model file size (MB) 18.7705 106.4463 106.6699 106.2451
 Encrypted size (MB) N/A 141.9277 142.2266 141.6600
 Encryption time (s) N/A 0.7266 0.5947 0.5654
 Compressed size (MB) N/A 107.5145 107.7409 107.3119
 Compression time (s) N/A 5.2522 3.8984 3.8393
 Sending time (s) N/A 0.0100 0.0080 0.0080
 Received file size (MB) N/A 107.5145 107.7409 107.3119
 Receiving time (s) N/A 80.2155 64.8709 76.1133
 Average rate (MB/s) N/A 1.3403 1.6609 1.4099
 Decompression & Decryption time (s) N/A 1.1003 0.8955 1.1386

 Table 5
 Energy consumption analysis.
 Metric Client 1 Client 2 Client 3 Server Total
 CPU usage 1.80% 4.40% 3.20% 2.40% –
 Memory usage 2.30% 2.10% 2.10% 1.20% –
 RAM energy (kWh) 0.000037 0.000038 0.000037 0.000875 0.000987
 CPU energy (kWh) 0.000133 0.000136 0.000133 0.003129 0.003531
 GPU energy (kWh) 0.000012 0.000015 0.000012 0.000334 0.000373
 RAM power (W) 11.8989 11.8989 11.8989 11.8989 –
 CPU power (W) 42.5 42.5 42.5 42.5 –
 GPU power (W) 3.7535 4.8117 3.7656 4.4316 –
 CO2 emission (kg) 0.000007 0.000007 0.000007 0.000171 0.000192
 Total energy (kWh) 0.000183 0.000190 0.000182 0.004337 0.004892
 Execution time (s) 0.030843 0.039218 0.025392 265.868227 265.9637

 Table 6
 Model training results using different classifiers.
 Metric Server Client 1 Client 2 Client 3
 Classifier Support vector machine Random forest Logistic regression Gradient boosting
 Label distribution 98809, 63943 32980, 21270 32884, 21366 32931, 21319
 Training time (s) 90.806 8.622 0.206 4.672
 File size (MB) 1.3936 108.0674 0.0020 0.1836

 Fig. 6. Comparison of random forest and multiple classifiers with and without SC-MLIDS.

for each model suggests a well-balanced proficiency in identifying both However, the reliance on a single model type is insufficient in the
positive and negative classes. The server model demonstrates nearly SC-MLIDS framework, which integrates server and client models, each
perfect scores in all metrics, exceeding 0.99, reflecting its superior validating different data types. Hence, we implemented two model
predictive ability. aggregation prediction algorithms to yield balanced and comprehensive

 13
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

prediction results. Fig. 6(a) also presents the results of the weighted process: first by the client model at the sink node and then by the
score algorithm, a scoring algorithm based on model performance and synthesized verification at the gateway. This implementation of the
weights. The weights for the three client models and the server model aggregation prediction algorithms results in significantly enhanced acwere set at 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, and 0.4, respectively, reflecting the server curacy of intrusion detection. Although the algorithm’s performance
model’s higher performance and importance. The Precision weight was metrics did not achieve a perfect model level, the comprehensive nature
set at 0.6 and the F1-score weight was set at 0.4. This weighting strat- of the prediction approach employed ensures more reliable results.
egy was adopted because we emphasized minimizing false positives We have examined several state-of-the-art studies, and Table 7
and achieving balanced predictions. The weighted score algorithm com- compares the performance of the ML IDS schemes proposed in these
bines the models to yield predictions that are tested on the testing set studies with the performance of our own. All of these studies utilize
with all four metrics at approximately 0.9867. Similarly, the majority the TON_IoT dataset, with some relying on telemetry data, others on
voting algorithm performs robustly, exceeding 0.97 in all metrics, with network data, and some, like our study, using a combination of both
a slightly higher Precision. While both algorithms slightly lag behind telemetry and network data. The performance metrics of these studies,
the best-performing server model (by about 1% and 2%), they offer along with the metrics of the two aggregation algorithms from our
a more comprehensive intrusion detection capability, reflecting the study, are presented in the table.
integrated predictive power that individual models lack. Among these studies, the performance of [68] is the most compa-
 In the next phase of our experiment, we continued to evaluate rable to ours, with slightly lower Accuracy and Recall but marginally
algorithm performance by simulating the operation phase of the SC- higher Precision and F1-score. The performance of [66] also stands out,
MLIDS framework. Specifically, we simulated a sink node collecting achieving 0.9949 across all four metrics, which is lower than the perdata from its managed sensor nodes, validating it using the client model formance of our Weighted Score algorithm (0.9978) but slightly higher
at the sink node, and then forwarding it to the gateway for aggregation than our Majority Voting algorithm (0.9876). While our Weighted
prediction. For this experiment, we used a balanced subset of the testing Score algorithm outperforms all other studies across all four metrics,
set, giving an example of Client 1, randomly selecting 10,000 samples the Majority Voting algorithm still surpasses many of the studies.
each from positive and negative classes. Client 1 predicted 9739 sam- To verify the generalizability of the SC-MLIDS framework, we conples as positive and discarded them. Of the 10,261 samples predicted ducted experiments on four widely used WSN datasets: WSN-DS [72],
as negative and sent to the gateway, 9451 were true negatives, and 810 SensorNetGuard [73], LWSNDR [74], and WSNBFSF [75]. The rewere false negatives. sults are summarized in Table 8. Since these datasets contain either
 Fig. 6(b) details the results of the aggregation prediction performed network traffic data or sensor data, they do not fully cover all funcat the gateway. As expected, when data is validated by Client 1 with tional modules of SC-MLIDS. Specifically, WSN-DS, SensorNetGuard,
further filtering and validation, we observe normal Accuracy and Recall and WSNBFSF focus on WSN network intrusion detection and contain
metrics of 0.92, with lower Precision and F1-score. The other two client network traffic data. We evaluated these three datasets on the servermodels gave slightly higher metrics, around 0.94. The performance of side model, achieving performance exceeding 0.98 across all four key
the aggregation prediction algorithms gave significant improvement evaluation metrics, with some metrics reaching 1.00. LWSNDR is a
when the SC-MLIDS framework was applied. Compared to previous sensor dataset containing temperature and humidity data collected
testing, both algorithms showed improvements in all four metrics, by multiple sensors. We selected three sensor datasets as clients and
by 1.12% and 1.68%, respectively. The weighted score algorithm’s applied our aggregation prediction algorithms for performance evaluperformance was identical to the best-performing server model, with ation. The results showed 1.00 performance across all four evaluation
all four metrics exceeding 0.99. metrics, conforming the framework’s effectiveness in processing sensor
 In our further experiment with the proposed SC-MLIDS framework, data. These findings demonstrate that our proposed framework (SCwe explored using various classifiers for generating models on the MLIDS) generalizes well across different WSN datasets, reinforcing its
example of three clients, as shown in Fig. 6(c). The classifiers de- applicability to diverse real-world scenarios.
ployed were RF for Client 1, LR for Client 2, and GB for Client 3, In conclusion, despite the strong performance of several other apwhile the server model was trained using the SVM algorithm. Client proaches, our SC-MLIDS framework, with its novel model fusion ap-
1 maintained the same performance metrics as the previous experi- proach, achieves superior results in terms of Accuracy, Precision, Rement due to the continued use of the RF classifier. The other two call, and F1-score. The Weighted Score algorithm, in particular, offers
clients, however, showed poorer performance, with all metrics ranging a significant advantage and provides a great advantage in the field of
between 0.53 and 0.73. In contrast, the server model demonstrated intrusion detection.
the highest performance, achieving an accuracy and other metrics as
high as 0.97. When these models were merged using the two aggrega- 5. Discussion
tion prediction algorithms, the synthesized prediction results for both
algorithms were approximately 0.96 and 0.94 across all four metrics, In our study, we conducted experiments to validate the efficacy
respectively. Although these results were slightly lower than the best- of the proposed SC-MLIDS framework, focusing on its server–client
performing server model, the aggregation achieved high accuracy in communication simulation and aggregation prediction algorithms. The
predictions, effectively harmonizing the individual models with varied simulation program of the SC-MLIDS framework consisted of two main
performances. phases: model training and evaluation phase, model deployment and
 Fig. 6(d) presents the results of the simulation runs for the SC- operation phase.
MLIDS framework using Client 1 as an example. After filtering the During the model training and evaluation phase, the program showsensing data, the metrics showed varying degrees of improvement when cased processes such as client model training, client–server communipredicted by each model. The most notable improvement was observed cation, server model training, and model aggregation prediction. These
in Client 2, exceeding 20%. This improvement also positively impacted experiments provided insights into resource consumption, highlighting
the performance of the model aggregation prediction algorithms, with potential additional consumption in model training and transmission.
both algorithms improving each metric by more than 1% compared to We noted that for simple sensing tasks, employing simpler algorithms
individual tests. like DT or LR could lead to significant resource savings.
 These experiments collectively demonstrate the performance of the In the model deployment and operation phase, the client model was
SC-MLIDS framework and its aggregation prediction algorithms from used for initial data filtering, and discarding malicious data to reduce
multiple angles. When operating a WSN under the SC-MLIDS frame- resource consumption. Model aggregation at the gateway merged client
work, data forwarded to the gateway experiences a two-layer validation and server models, with the gateway managing the task effectively.

 14
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

Table 7
Comparison with state-of-the-art techniques.
 Paper Dataset Proposed framework Models Accuracy Precision Recall F1-score
 [64] Telemetry Ensemble model XGBoost 0.9878 0.9788 0.9896 0.9840
 [65] Telemetry ML IDS Stacking & Voting 0.9864 0.9866 0.9860 0.9861
 [66] Network ML-based IoT IDS Stacking 0.9949 0.9949 0.9949 0.9949
 [67] Network SATIDS LSTM 0.9656 0.973 0.9740 0.9735
 [68] Network BiGRU-CNN-based IDS CNN + GRU 0.9971 0.9989 0.9905 0.9985
 [69] Both IoT IDS DNN 0.9298 0.9408 0.9298 0.9308
 [70] Network Optimized DL IDS DL 0.9926 0.9918 0.9922 0.9920
 [71] Telemetry Optimized LSTM LSTM 0.6800 0.7300 0.6800 0.6300
 Hybrid (Weighted Score) 0.9978 0.9978 0.9978 0.9978
 Our Work Both SC-MLIDS
 Hybrid (Majority Voting) 0.9876 0.9893 0.9876 0.9880

Table 8
Performance assessment on additional WSN datasets.
 Dataset Features Samples Network data Sensor data Accuracy Precision Recall F1-score
 TON_IoT 16 203,440 3 3 0.9978 0.9978 0.9978 0.9978
 WSN-DS 19 374,661 3 7 0.9972 0.9870 0.9832 0.9851
 SensorNetGuard 21 10,000 3 7 0.9990 1.0000 0.9798 0.9898
 LWSNDR 5 14,421 7 3 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000
 WSNBFSF 18 312,106 3 7 0.9999 1.0000 0.9996 0.9998

Our experiments indicated that the SC-MLIDS framework stayed within simplified client models at sink nodes and a more complex server model
WSN resource limitations, affirming its alignment with the need for at the gateway. This approach balances low resource consumption with
lightweight WSN solutions. enhanced detection accuracy, effectively addressing the challenges of
 The gateway’s role is critical in SC-MLIDS, aggregating predictions multi-source data integration. We validated the framework through
from client and server models to generate final detection results. This comprehensive experiments, evaluating the performance of individual
aggregation is facilitated by two algorithms: Weighted Score and Ma- models and the fusion capabilities of our two proposed aggregation
jority Voting. The weighted score algorithm combines Precision and prediction algorithms.
F1-score with weights based on model importance or task complex- The proposed aggregation prediction algorithms, Weighted Score
ity, addressing false positives in WSNs. The majority voting relies on and Majority Voting, are tailored to enhance prediction reliability
collective client model voting, matched with server model results for through effective multi-source data fusion. These algorithms address
reliability. WSN-specific characteristics, such as data features and transmission
 Since both algorithms perform model aggregation, one of them constraints, achieving efficient intrusion detection with a low false
should be considered or dynamically selected depending on the WSN positive rate. Through our experiments, the proposed two model fusion
application scenario and the performance. Testing revealed that the methods demonstrated superior performance across Accuracy, Preciserver model, benefiting from a complete training set, outperformed sion, Recall, and F1-score. Specifically, the Weighted Score algorithm
client models slightly. However, both algorithms still achieved excel- achieved 0.9978 in all four metrics, while the Majority Voting algolent performance metrics, meeting or exceeding 0.99. Their adaptability rithm consistently surpassed 0.9876. When compared to models from
makes them effective even with underperforming models or complex current state-of-the-art research, the Weighted Score algorithm outtasks. performs all others, and the Majority Voting algorithm also surpasses
 The SC-MLIDS framework aligns with the typical three-layer ar- many existing approaches. Experimental results highlight the algochitecture of WSNs, providing intrusion detection at sink node and rithms’ proficiency in integrating diverse model predictions, ensuring
gateway levels. This design flexibility allows adaptation to varying comprehensive detection across varied performance levels and mini-
WSN architectures, offering an innovative security solution. More- mizing reliance on any single model. This fusion approach significantly
over, the framework efficiently utilizes computational and network contributes to the robustness of the SC-MLIDS framework.
resources, meeting the WSN’s need for lightweight solutions. The SC-MLIDS framework’s design and implementation highlight
 The proposed SC-MLIDS framework has several limitations. Firstly, its effectiveness in multi-source and multi-process data fusion, offering
the TON_IoT dataset used may not fully reflect real-world WSN scenar- adaptability for diverse attack types and flexibility in ML algorithm
ios due to the absence of suitable WSN datasets containing both sensing selection. This makes SC-MLIDS a significant advancement in WSN seand network traffic data. Our method of merging these data types based curity, providing a robust and scalable solution for intrusion detection.
on matching timestamps and labels could introduce errors and biases. The framework not only demonstrates high efficiency and accuracy but
Secondly, our simulations might not accurately replicate real-world also leads the way for future research into integrating advanced ML
WSN deployments, potentially missing complexities that could arise fusion techniques in WSN security. The results underscore SC-MLIDS’s
in practical applications. Lastly, the current model aggregation predic- potential to enhance intrusion detection methodologies and inspire
tion algorithms do not adequately address the impact of low-precision further exploration in the field.
models, which could reduce intrusion detection confidence. Future work should focus on dataset collection, algorithm selection,
 model selection algorithm for ensemble, and deployment strategy. De-
6. Conclusion and future work ploying real WSNs to collect actual sensing and network traffic data will
 enhance the framework’s accuracy and relevance. Conducting various
 The SC-MLIDS proposed in this paper presents an advanced hybrid attacks on these networks will provide a broader range of scenarios,
ML framework for intrusion detection in WSNs that leverages multi- improving model robustness. Experimenting with different ML algosource data fusion. By integrating data from multiple sensor nodes and rithms is crucial, with simpler algorithms for client models and more
network layers, SC-MLIDS minimizes data transmission while ensuring sophisticated ones for server models. Enhancing model aggregation
high-precision detection. Designed with WSN architectural specifics prediction algorithms with dynamic weight assignment based on model
in mind, SC-MLIDS employs a two-layer detection approach, utilizing performance or replacing underperforming models will improve system

 15
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

performance. Additionally, we plan to develop a WSN simulator that [10] F. Gaojuan, W. Ruchuan, H. Haiping, S. Lijuan, X. Fu, Performance analysis for
supports creating local models for embedded devices and ensemble intrusion target detection in wireless sensor networks, Chin. J. Electron. 20 (4)
 (2011) 725–729.
models for gateway servers. This simulator will provide practical data
 [11] W. Wang, H. Huang, Q. Li, F. He, C. Sha, Generalized intrusion detection
during the model validation phase, serving as a reference for real appli- mechanism for empowered intruders in wireless sensor networks, IEEE Access
cations. Following simulation and hardware experiments, we intend to 8 (2020) 25170–25183.
deploy the framework in a real-world WSN to evaluate its performance [12] D.-f. Ye, L.-l. Min, W. Wang, Design and implementation of wireless sensor
in real scenarios. These improvements would enable the framework to network gateway based on environmental monitoring, in: 2009 International
 Conference on Environmental Science and Information Application Technology,
better adapt to increasingly complex network attack threats, ensuring
 Vol. 2, IEEE, 2009, pp. 289–292.
more robust and responsive intrusion detection. [13] M. Kocakulak, I. Butun, An overview of Wireless Sensor Networks towards
 internet of things, in: 2017 IEEE 7th Annual Computing and Communication
CRediT authorship contribution statement Workshop and Conference, CCWC, Ieee, 2017, pp. 1–6.
 [14] J. Yick, B. Mukherjee, D. Ghosal, Wireless sensor network survey, Comput. Netw.
 52 (12) (2008) 2292–2330.
 Hongwei Zhang: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, [15] K. Bagadi, R. Cv, K. Sathish, An overview of localization techniques in un-
Methodology, Software, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, derwater wireless sensor networks, in: 2022 Third International Conference on
Resources, Conceptualization. Darshana Upadhyay: Writing – review Intelligent Computing Instrumentation and Control Technologies, ICICICT, IEEE,
& editing, Visualization, Validation. Marzia Zaman: Writing – review 2022, pp. 1687–1692.
 [16] H. Guo, K.-S. Low, H.-A. Nguyen, Optimizing the localization of a wireless
& editing, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investisensor network in real time based on a low-cost microcontroller, IEEE Trans.
gation, Conceptualization. Achin Jain: Writing – review & editing. Ind. Electron. 58 (3) (2009) 741–749.
Srinivas Sampalli: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project [17] A. Khalifeh, F. Mazunga, A. Nechibvute, B.M. Nyambo, Microcontroller unitadministration, Methodology, Investigation. based wireless sensor network nodes: A review, Sensors 22 (22) (2022)
 8937.
 [18] Y. Gu, F. Ren, Y. Ji, J. Li, The evolution of sink mobility management in wireless
Declaration of competing interest
 sensor networks: A survey, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 18 (1) (2015) 507–524.
 [19] I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, E. Cayirci, A survey on sensor
 The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela- networks, IEEE Commun. Mag. 40 (8) (2002) 102–114.
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: [20] A. Ali, Y. Ming, S. Chakraborty, S. Iram, A comprehensive survey on real-time
Darshana Upadhyay reports was provided by Natural Sciences and applications of WSN, Futur. Internet 9 (4) (2017) 77.
 [21] C. Buratti, A. Conti, D. Dardari, R. Verdone, An overview on wireless sensor
Engineering Research Council of Canada. If there are other authors, networks technology and evolution, Sensors 9 (9) (2009) 6869–6896.
they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or [22] L.d.T. Steenkamp, S. Kaplan, R.H. Wilkinson, Wireless sensor network gateway,
personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work in: AFRICON 2009, IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–6.
reported in this paper. [23] J. Kim, D. Choi, Esgate: Secure embedded gateway system for a wireless sensor
 network, in: 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Consumer Electronics, IEEE,
 2008, pp. 1–4.
Acknowledgments [24] M.A. Hussain, K. kyung Sup, et al., WSN research activities for military
 application, in: 2009 11th International Conference on Advanced Communication
 The authors gratefully acknowledge the support in part by the Technology, Vol. 1, IEEE, 2009, pp. 271–274.
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and in- [25] P.-C. Hii, W.-Y. Chung, A comprehensive ubiquitous healthcare solution on an
 Android™ mobile device, Sensors 11 (7) (2011) 6799–6815.
dustry partners Norleaf Networks and Cistel Technology Inc., through
 [26] D.D.K. Rathinam, D. Surendran, A. Shilpa, A.S. Grace, J. Sherin, Modern
a Collaborative Research Grant. agriculture using wireless sensor network (WSN), in: 2019 5th International
 Conference on Advanced Computing & Communication Systems, ICACCS, IEEE,
Data availability 2019, pp. 515–519.
 [27] R.S. Ransing, M. Rajput, Smart home for elderly care, based on wireless sensor
 network, in: 2015 International Conference on Nascent Technologies in the
 Data will be made available on request.
 Engineering Field, ICNTE, IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–5.
 [28] S. Mansour, N. Nasser, L. Karim, A. Ali, Wireless sensor network-based air quality
 monitoring system, in: 2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking
References and Communications, ICNC, IEEE, 2014, pp. 545–550.
 [29] J. Zhang, W. Li, N. Han, J. Kan, Forest fire detection system based on a ZigBee
 [1] A. Flammini, P. Ferrari, D. Marioli, E. Sisinni, A. Taroni, Wired and wireless wireless sensor network, Front. For. China 3 (2008) 369–374.
 sensor networks for industrial applications, Microelectron. J. 40 (9) (2009) [30] J. Ben-Othman, B. Yahya, Energy efficient and QoS based routing protocol for
 1322–1336. wireless sensor networks, J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. 70 (8) (2010) 849–857.
 [2] M.N. Mowla, N. Mowla, A.S. Shah, K. Rabie, T. Shongwe, Internet of things and [31] M.A.M. Vieira, C.N. Coelho, D.j. da Silva, J.M. da Mata, Survey on wireless
 wireless sensor networks for smart agriculture applications-a survey, IEEE Access sensor network devices, in: EFTA 2003. 2003 IEEE Conference on Emerging
 (2023). Technologies and Factory Automation. Proceedings (Cat. No. 03TH8696), Vol.
 [3] O. Can, O.K. Sahingoz, A survey of intrusion detection systems in wireless sensor 1, IEEE, 2003, pp. 537–544.
 networks, in: 2015 6th International Conference on Modeling, Simulation, and [32] A.-S.K. Pathan, H.-W. Lee, C.S. Hong, Security in wireless sensor networks: issues
 Applied Optimization, ICMSAO, IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6. and challenges, in: 2006 8th International Conference Advanced Communication
 [4] P. Mishra, V. Varadharajan, U. Tupakula, E.S. Pilli, A detailed investigation Technology, Vol. 2, IEEE, 2006, pp. 6–pp.
 and analysis of using machine learning techniques for intrusion detection, IEEE [33] L. Da Xu, W. He, S. Li, Internet of things in industries: A survey, IEEE Trans.
 Commun. Surv. Tutor. 21 (1) (2018) 686–728. Ind. Inform. 10 (4) (2014) 2233–2243.
 [5] K. Medhat, R.A. Ramadan, I. Talkhan, Distributed intrusion detection system [34] S. Li, L.D. Xu, S. Zhao, The internet of things: a survey, Inf. Syst. Front. 17
 for wireless sensor networks, in: 2015 9th International Conference on Next (2015) 243–259.
 Generation Mobile Applications, Services and Technologies, IEEE, 2015, pp. [35] K.M. Sadique, R. Rahmani, P. Johannesson, Towards security on internet of
 234–239. things: applications and challenges in technology, Procedia Comput. Sci. 141
 [6] Y. Maleh, A. Ezzati, Y. Qasmaoui, M. Mbida, A global hybrid intrusion de- (2018) 199–206.
 tection system for wireless sensor networks, Procedia Comput. Sci. 52 (2015) [36] L. Tan, N. Wang, Future internet: The internet of things, in: 2010 3rd Interna-
 1047–1052. tional Conference on Advanced Computer Theory and Engineering, ICACTE, Vol.
 [7] W. Zhang, D. Han, K.-C. Li, F.I. Massetto, Wireless sensor network intrusion 5, IEEE, 2010, pp. V5–376.
 detection system based on MK-ELM, Soft Comput. 24 (2020) 12361–12374. [37] B.B. Gupta, M. Quamara, An overview of Internet of Things (IoT): Architectural
 [8] N.M. Alruhaily, D.M. Ibrahim, A multi-layer machine learning-based intrusion aspects, challenges, and protocols, Concurr. Comput.: Pr. Exp. 32 (21) (2020)
 detection system for wireless sensor networks, Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. e4946.
 12 (4) (2021). [38] P. Asghari, A.M. Rahmani, H.H.S. Javadi, Internet of Things applications: A
 [9] H. Zhang, M. Zaman, A. Jain, S. Sampalli, A hybrid machine learning intrusion systematic review, Comput. Netw. 148 (2019) 241–261.
 detection system for wireless sensor networks, in: 2024 International Wireless [39] X. Li, R. Lu, X. Liang, X. Shen, J. Chen, X. Lin, Smart community: an internet
 Communications and Mobile Computing, IWCMC, IEEE, 2024, pp. 830–835. of things application, IEEE Commun. Mag. 49 (11) (2011) 68–75.

 16
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

[40] Y. Yuehong, Y. Zeng, X. Chen, Y. Fan, The internet of things in healthcare: An [68] K. Kethineni, G. Pradeepini, Intrusion detection in internet of things-based smart
 overview, J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 1 (2016) 3–13. farming using hybrid deep learning framework, Clust. Comput. 27 (2) (2024)
[41] L. Li, Y. Fan, M. Tse, K.-Y. Lin, A review of applications in federated learning, 1719–1732.
 Comput. Ind. Eng. 149 (2020) 106854. [69] Z. Cao, Z. Zhao, W. Shang, S. Ai, S. Shen, Using the ToN-IoT dataset to develop
[42] D.C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P.N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, H.V. Poor, Federated a new intrusion detection system for industrial IoT devices, Multimedia Tools
 learning for internet of things: A comprehensive survey, IEEE Commun. Surv. Appl. (2024) 1–29.
 Tutor. 23 (3) (2021) 1622–1658. [70] D.S. Mary, L.J.S. Dhas, A. Deepa, M.A. Chaurasia, C.J.J. Sheela, Network intru-
[43] S. Banabilah, M. Aloqaily, E. Alsayed, N. Malik, Y. Jararweh, Federated learn- sion detection: An optimized deep learning approach using big data analytics,
 ing review: Fundamentals, enabling technologies, and future applications, Inf. Expert Syst. Appl. 251 (2024) 123919.
 Process. Manage. 59 (6) (2022) 103061. [71] Q. Jiao, L. Mhamdi, Deep learning based intrusion detection for IoT networks, in:
[44] L.U. Khan, W. Saad, Z. Han, E. Hossain, C.S. Hong, Federated learning for 2024 Global Information Infrastructure and Networking Symposium, GIIS, IEEE,
 internet of things: Recent advances, taxonomy, and open challenges, IEEE 2024, pp. 1–6.
 Commun. Surv. Tutor. 23 (3) (2021) 1759–1799. [72] I. Almomani, B. Al-Kasasbeh, M. Al-Akhras, WSN-DS: a dataset for intrusion
[45] J. Liu, J. Huang, Y. Zhou, X. Li, S. Ji, H. Xiong, D. Dou, From distributed machine detection systems in wireless sensor networks, J. Sensors 2016 (1) (2016)
 learning to federated learning: A survey, Knowl. Inf. Syst. 64 (4) (2022) 885–917. 4731953.
[46] S. Niknam, H.S. Dhillon, J.H. Reed, Federated learning for wireless communi- [73] K.M. Dr Karthick Raghunath, K.S. Dr Arvind, SensorNetGuard: A dataset for
 cations: Motivation, opportunities, and challenges, IEEE Commun. Mag. 58 (6) identifying malicious sensor nodes, 2023.
 (2020) 46–51. [74] S. Suthaharan, M. Alzahrani, S. Rajasegarar, C. Leckie, M. Palaniswami, Labelled
[47] T.N. Rincy, R. Gupta, Ensemble learning techniques and its efficiency in machine data collection for anomaly detection in wireless sensor networks, in: 2010 Sixth
 learning: A survey, in: 2nd International Conference on Data, Engineering and International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information
 Applications, IDEA, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6. Processing, IEEE, 2010, pp. 269–274.
[48] I.D. Mienye, Y. Sun, A survey of ensemble learning: Concepts, algorithms, [75] M. Dener, C. Okur, S. Al, A. Orman, Wsn-bfsf: A new dataset for attacks detection
 applications, and prospects, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 99129–99149. in wireless sensor networks, IEEE Internet Things J. (2023).
[49] R. Jurdak, X.R. Wang, O. Obst, P. Valencia, Wireless sensor network anomalies:
 Diagnosis and detection strategies, in: Intelligence-Based Systems Engineering,
 Springer, 2011, pp. 309–325. Hongwei Zhang received the Bachelor of Computer Science with Honors in 2022 and
[50] M.A. Alsheikh, S. Lin, D. Niyato, H.-P. Tan, Machine learning in wireless sensor the Master of Computer Science in 2024 from Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
 networks: Algorithms, strategies, and applications, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in Computer Science at the same institution. During
 16 (4) (2014) 1996–2018. his master’s program, he developed a two-layer intrusion detection system framework
[51] M. Mamdouh, M.A. Elrukhsi, A. Khattab, Securing the internet of things and for wireless sensor networks based on hybrid machine learning techniques. He has
 wireless sensor networks via machine learning: A survey, in: 2018 International worked as a Research Assistant in the Emerging Wireless Technologies Lab at Dalhousie
 Conference on Computer and Applications, ICCA, IEEE, 2018, pp. 215–218. University, where his research has focused on network security issues in Wireless Sensor
[52] S. Ismail, T.T. Khoei, R. Marsh, N. Kaabouch, A comparative study of machine Networks, Internet of Things, and Blockchain technologies.
 learning models for cyber-attacks detection in wireless sensor networks, in: 2021
 IEEE 12th Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics & Mobile Communication
 Conference, UEMCON, IEEE, 2021, pp. 0313–0318. Darshana Upadhyay holds an adjunct faculty position at Dalhousie University where
[53] V. Gowdhaman, R. Dhanapal, An intrusion detection system for wireless sensor she co-supervises both graduate and undergraduate students in Dr. Sampalli’s MYTech
 networks using deep neural network, Soft Comput. (2021) 1–9. lab. She received her Ph.D. degree from the Faculty of Computer Science at Dalhousie
[54] S. Otoum, B. Kantarci, H.T. Mouftah, A novel ensemble method for ad- University, Canada. She holds a master’s degree in computer science from Nirma
 vanced intrusion detection in wireless sensor networks, in: Icc 2020-2020 Ieee University, India, where she also served as an assistant professor. During her graduate
 International Conference on Communications, Icc, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6. studies, she was awarded the Gold Medal for securing the first position. Darshana’s
[55] S. Umamaheshwari, S.A. Kumar, S. Sasikala, Towards building robust intrusion primary research focuses on network and information security, algorithm conceptualdetection system in wireless sensor networks using machine learning and feature ization, hardware design in the field of embedded systems, vulnerability assessments,
 selection, in: 2021 International Conference on Advancements in Electrical, and intrusion detection and prevention techniques for IoT/SCADA-based systems. She is
 Electronics, Communication, Computing and Automation, ICAECA, IEEE, 2021, the co-recipient of the Indo-Canadian Shastri research grant in the field of secure mobile
 pp. 1–6. communication. Additionally, she was selected as one of Canada’s 2020 Emerging
[56] R. Ul Islam, M.S. Hossain, K. Andersson, A novel anomaly detection algorithm Thought Leaders by the Women in International Security - CANADA. Furthermore,
 for sensor data under uncertainty, Soft Comput. 22 (5) (2018) 1623–1639. she has received the 2021 Citizenship Award and the 2022 Leadership Award from the
[57] P. Gulganwa, S. Jain, EES-WCA: energy efficient and secure weighted clustering Faculty of Computer Science at Dalhousie University.
 for WSN using machine learning approach, Int. J. Inf. Technol. 14 (1) (2022)
 135–144.
 Marzia Zaman received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer
[58] Z. Yu, J.J. Tsai, A framework of machine learning based intrusion detection
 engineering from the Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada,
 for wireless sensor networks, in: 2008 IEEE International Conference on Sensor
 in 1993 and 1996, respectively. In 1990, she joined the Nortel Networks, Ottawa, ON,
 Networks, Ubiquitous, and Trustworthy Computing, Sutc 2008, IEEE, 2008, pp.
 Canada, where she joined the Software Engineering Analysis Lab and later joined the
 272–279.
 Optera Packet Core project as a Software Developer. In addition, she has many years
[59] T.M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, F.T. Den Hartog, ToN_IoT:
 of industry experience as a Researcher and Software Designer with Accelight Networks,
 The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardization of features and attack
 Excelocity, Sanstream Technology, and Cistel Technology, Ottawa, ON, Canada. Since
 types in IoT network intrusion data sets, IEEE Internet Things J. 9 (1) (2021)
 2009, she has been with the Centre for Energy and Power Electronics Research, Queen’s
 485–496.
 University, Canada and one of its industry collaborators, Cistel Technology, on multiple
[60] L. Breiman, Random forests, Mach. Learn. 45 (2001) 5–32.
 power engineering projects. Her research interests include renewable energy, wireless
[61] A. More, D.P. Rana, Review of random forest classification techniques to resolve
 communication, IoT, cyber security, machine learning, and software engineering.
 data imbalance, in: 2017 1st International Conference on Intelligent Systems and
 Information Management, ICISIM, IEEE, 2017, pp. 72–78.
[62] J.L. Speiser, M.E. Miller, J. Tooze, E. Ip, A comparison of random forest variable Achin Jain is a highly accomplished professional with over two decades of experience
 selection methods for classification prediction modeling, Expert Syst. Appl. 134 in the field of computer science and engineering. Holding a Bachelor of Engineering
 (2019) 93–101. in Computer Science and Engineering from Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University, India, and a
[63] H. Zhang, Sc-mlids, GitHub Repository, (2024) https://github.com/Hongwei- Master of Science in Computer Science from the University of Ottawa, Canada, Achin
 Z/SC-MLIDS, Accessed: 2025-04-13. has built a strong foundation in both theory and practice. His career journey includes
[64] J.B. Awotunde, S.O. Folorunso, A.L. Imoize, J.O. Odunuga, C.-C. Lee, C.-T. Li, significant roles such as senior software engineer at Norleaf Networks and Nortel,
 D.-T. Do, An ensemble tree-based model for intrusion detection in industrial where he specialized in optical networks, and principal architect at Ciena, where
 internet of things networks, Appl. Sci. 13 (4) (2023) 2479. he led initiatives in optical networking technologies. Later, as a technical leader at
[65] Y. Alotaibi, M. Ilyas, Ensemble-learning framework for intrusion detection to Cisco, Achin made substantial contributions in layer 2/3 technologies like BGP, MPLS,
 enhance internet of things’ devices security, Sensors 23 (12) (2023) 5568. and Segment Routing. Currently, as a senior research scientist at Norleaf Networks,
[66] G. Guo, X. Pan, H. Liu, F. Li, L. Pei, K. Hu, An IoT intrusion detection system he continues to leverage his extensive knowledge and expertise in areas such as ad
 based on TON IoT network dataset, in: 2023 IEEE 13th Annual Computing and hoc routing, intrusion detection systems, machine learning, and artificial intelligence,
 Communication Workshop and Conference, CCWC, IEEE, 2023, pp. 0333–0338. contributing to the forefront of network innovation. Achin’s research interests lie
[67] R.A. Elsayed, R.A. Hamada, M.I. Abdalla, S.A. Elsaid, Securing IoT and SDN in exploring innovative solutions in network routing, security, and the application
 systems using deep-learning based automatic intrusion detection, Ain Shams Eng. of machine learning and artificial intelligence in network optimization and threat
 J. 14 (10) (2023) 102211. detection.

 17
H. Zhang et al. Ad Hoc Networks 175 (2025) 103871

Srinivas Sampalli (Member, IEEE) received the Bachelor of Engineering degree from He is the recipient of the Dalhousie Faculty of Science Teaching Excellence Award, the
Bangalore University, Bangalore, India and the Ph.D. degree from the Indian Institute of Dalhousie Alumni Association Teaching Award, the Association of Atlantic Universities’
Science, Bangalore, India, and is currently a Professor and National 3M Teaching Fellow Distinguished Teacher Award, a teaching award instituted in his name by the students
in the Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada. He has within his Faculty, and the 3M National Teaching Fellowship, Canada’s most prestigious
led numerous industry-driven research projects on Internet of Things, wireless security, teaching acknowledgment. Since September 2016, he holds the honorary position of the
vulnerability analysis, intrusion detection and prevention, and applications of emerging Vice President (Canada), of the International Federation of National Teaching Fellows,
wireless technologies in healthcare. He currently oversees and runs the Emerging a Consortium of National Teaching Award winners from around the world.
Wireless Technologies Lab and has supervised over 150 graduate students in his career.
His primary joy is in inspiring and motivating students with his enthusiastic teaching.

 18