1012 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 Scalable Large Model for Unlabeled Anomaly
 Detection With Trio-Attention U-Transformer
 and Manifold-Learning Siamese Discriminator
 Muyan Yao , Member, IEEE, Dan Tao , Member, IEEE, Peng Qi , Member, IEEE,
 and Ruipeng Gao , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—To identify pattern deviations in large-scale industrial
infrastructures, anomaly detection is crucial yet challenging. Previous research has not adequately addressed the characteristics
and deployment considerations in these complex scenarios. In this
paper, we present InoU, a scalable anomaly detection framework
to process unlabeled multivariate time-series data. We incorporate
a VAE filter to ease impacts from noisy components in training materials. We propose a scalable trio-attention U-Transformer to construct the typical representation of high-dimensional streams and
produce pseudo labels that enable the later training process. The Fig. 1. Challenges of deploying anomaly detection in industrial scenarios.
ultra perception and intra-/ inter-flow attention mechanisms are
delicately designed to aggregate information from different flows
with variable granularities while keeping a global view of the data.
Its nested structure helps to maintain high efficiency even when the events in the target data, provides a new viewpoint to address
model is scaled down. We introduce a Siamese discriminator that this need [6], [7], [8], thus attracting widespread attention.
projects target data into manifolds, and collates discrepancies at the
embedding level. This paradigm elevates detection performance
 Most existing solutions [9], [10], [11], [12], [13] use data
far beyond segment-wise error comparison in prior works. We normalization and windowing techniques to pre-process the
apply contrastive and adversarial learning techniques to optimize data, and deploy generative models to extract patterns and remanifold projection and detection performance when processing construct the target data. The criteria for identifying anomalies
unseen samples. Extensive experiments on five large-scale datasets are usually based on the segment-wise reconstruction error
demonstrate the effectiveness of InoU with an average F1-Score
improvement of 5.58%, significantly outperforming the state-ofof the normalized data. Seemingly promising, these solutions
the-art. face challenges (Fig. 1) caused by a series of factors in actual
 industrial deployment, including the massive volume and variety
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, service and system of on-site data, the heterogeneity in different devices, and the
management, self-supervised, Siamese network, Transformer,
contrastive, manifold learning. imbalanced hardware resources in different configurations.
 First, the insufficient consideration of discrepancy analysis
 in prior works contributes to the potential neglects of anoma-
 I. INTRODUCTION lies. Differences in high-dimensional data easily become subtle
 HE massive deployment of sensors, actuators, and other after segment-wise averaging, which is a common practice of
T assets in industrial scenarios has formed an increasingly
complex network architecture [1], [2], enabling a series of
 error calculation. Moreover, the data normalization that transforms data with variable ranges to a uniform scale, potentially
automated and intelligent operations [3], [4]. The deployments, contributes to overlooking fluctuations in channels with more
in turn, pose pressing urges for their maintenance [5]. Anomaly dynamic ranges.
detection, which identifies unusual or unexpected patterns or Second, the choice of window length and the inadequate availability of labeled data further cause barriers in actual industrial
 practice. Longer windows dilute the presence of data points that
 Received 6 August 2023; revised 27 December 2024; accepted 18 January deviate from the norm, while shorter windows fail to capture
2025. Date of publication 30 January 2025; date of current version 10 April 2025.
This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China sufficient contextual information over time. Moreover, the labelunder Grant 62472023, Grant 62402027 and Grant 62072029, and in part by ing process in industrial scenarios is costly and labor-intensive,
the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing Municipality under Grant L221003. while the model tuning process in a self-supervised manner has
(Corresponding author: Dan Tao.)
 Muyan Yao, Dan Tao, and Peng Qi are with the School of Electronic and not yet been fully explored.
Information Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100040, China Lastly, the resources in industrial scenarios are usually im-
(e-mail: muyanyao@bjtu.edu.cn; dtao@bjtu.edu.cn; pengqi1@bjtu.edu.cn). balanced, posing challenges to the scalability of models to be
 Ruipeng Gao is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100040, China (e-mail: rpgao@bjtu.edu.cn). deployed. While Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC) of-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2025.3536306 fers a potential solution for near-source model inference, its
 1939-1374 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
YAO et al.: SCALABLE LARGE MODEL FOR UNLABELED ANOMALY DETECTION 1013

computational capabilities are inherently limited. Resources on introduce contrastive and adversarial learning to optimize
clouds are usually more abundant, but remote deployment is the projection of manifold and further elevate the anomaly
not acceptable for latency-sensitive applications. These charac- detection performance.
teristics of a typical industrial environment determine that the r We evaluate InoU on five large-scale datasets from realanomaly detection framework should maintain adaptability and world industrial applications. InoU achieves an overall
scalability. F1-Score of 0.9168, outperforming the latest state-of-
 To address these challenges, we redesign an anomaly de- the-art. Extensive experiments validate its scalability and
tection pipeline that best fits industrial needs, and propose effectiveness.
a scalable framework InoU that incorporates a trio-attention The rest of this paper is organized in the following ways.
U-Transformer and a manifold-learning Siamese discriminator Section II introduces the underlying methodology, and we furunder a unified yet flexible architecture with tunable parameters ther present the design details of InoU in Section III. In Secranging from approximately 100 million to 6 billion, depending tion IV, we discuss the settings and results of the extensive
on the specific configuration and data source. During the design experiments. Section V briefly reviews recent research on multiof its architecture, we adopt a complementary rationale, where variate time series anomaly detection. Finally, we conclude this
the unified structure utilizes generative models to extract typical work in Section VI.
patterns and reconstruct data, while leveraging discriminative
models for manifold projection and discrepancy analysis. II. METHODOLOGY
 Adapting to the data properties under industrial setups, we
decouple the VAE (Variational Autoencoder) model from direct In this section, we provide the necessary information to help
 readers comprehend the motivation and highlight the design of
involvement in the anomaly detection task, but to filter irregularities and noise from the raw training materials. In this way, InoU.
we bypass the risk of the VAE model being biased or improperly Data Pre-processing: In industrial setups, the deployed assets
 produce multivariate time series streams as they perform destrained, and offset the impacts of noise and anomalies without
the need for human intervention. ignated tasks. These multivariate data are usually sampled at a
 To learn the embeddings of normal data while maintain- fixed or variable frequency to record metrics in various industrial
 processes. Due to the properties of these processes behind the
ing a high level of scalability, we propose a trio-attention U-
Transformer. The ultra perception and intra-/ inter-flow attention streams, there may be significant differences in the numerical
mechanisms within each flow assist information aggregation in ranges of different channels.1
 The data stream is denoted as x=
variable granularities without losing a high-level perspective of
the complex industrial data. The U-shaped nested structure also {x(1) , x(2) , x(3) , . . . , x(N ) }, x ∈ RN ×M , where N represents
 the total number of time steps, and M is the total number of
helps the model maintain high efficiency even when the model
is scaled down. features. Each one of its components x(t) (1 ≤ t ≤ N ) is a
 Furthermore, we devise a contrastive manifold-learning 1 × M vector. A max-min scaler is then deployed to normalize
 x, and use a sliding window with length L = 128 to segment
Siamese discriminator to cope with the challenge of anomaly
overlooking in conventional numerical error comparison based the scaled time series data into slices. For example, we use
works while processing high-dimensional industrial data. Fur- x(t−L+1:t) ∈ RL×M to denote a recording sequence that starts
 at time t − L + 1 and ends at time t.
thermore, we design a contrastive manifold-learning Siamese
discriminator to address the limitation of conventional numerical Considering that a data segment is the minimal unit that
error comparison methods, which often encounter the challenge the deep learning network consumes, we use xt to represent
 x(t−L+1:t) for a clear description in later parts of the paper. We
of anomaly overlooking when processing high-dimensional inalso use x to represent the pre-processed dataset in instances
dustrial data. This structure projects the observed and reconwhere the dataset is mentioned, e.g., in the equations of the
structed sequences into the manifold through a shared backbone,
 model optimization, but without the need to specify a specific
and adaptively collates their discrepancies at the embedding
 timestep.
level. We introduce techniques from contrastive and adversarial
 Anomaly Detection: Most prior anomaly detection works
learning to the duet outputs from the Siamese backbones to
 are built based on numerical error comparison. They rely on
optimize the manifold projection approach and achieve a more
 generative models to reconstruct data. Then, they calculate the
constructed latent space.
 deviation between the observed and the reconstructed values and
 The contributions of this work are summarized here.
 r We present the anomaly detection framework InoU, in- determine if the sequences are anomalous based on the numerical
 corporating a trio-attention scalable U-Transformer recon- segment-wise error. This criterion is based on the assumption
 that anomalies will have a more significant reconstruction error
 structor and a manifold-learning Siamese discriminator
 in a unified architecture. This design inspects embedding than normal data. However, there are a few things to note in
 discrepancies in a fine-grained manner while maintaining actual practice:
 high scalability.
 r We design a refined data processing pipeline to offset
 1 By using the term “channel,” we refer to the univariate recordings in the multithe impacts of noise and anomalies in the raw train- variate time series data, with the intention to emphasize their physical meanings.
 ing materials and adapt to industrial properties. We also This word may be used interchangeably with “feature” in the following parts.
1014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

Fig. 2. Capture of temporal dependencies in segmented data. Orange se- Fig. 3. Fluctuations in a high dynamic channel become less salient after
quences are anomalous. normalization, leading to potential overlooks of anomalies.

 1) Segment length and limitations in dependency capture: As
stated, the operation of reconstruction and error calculation are
all based on the length L that segments the original data stream.
A longer length captures more temporal information but, on the
other hand, dilutes fluctuations during the error calculation along
the time axis (Fig. 2(a)). Meanwhile, a shorter length magnifies
these fluctuations, but the limited temporal dependency that is
captured may be insufficient to identify contextual or collective
anomalies (Fig. 2(b)).
 2) Data normalization and deviation assessment: Data normalization is an essential step in data preprocessing, ensuring
that each channel is represented on a comparable scale. This Fig. 4. Overall framework of InoU.
technique helps neural networks to converge effectively, but it
may also weaken the dynamics of each channel in the original
data (Fig. 3(a)). Based on the filtered training material, the U-Transformer
 Under the principle of normalization, channels with high is guided to extract the dependencies and reconstruct the data.
dynamic ranges will be processed with larger scaling factors. During this step, the U-Transformer captures the essential rep-
As such, fluctuations and irregularities in these channels become resentations of normal data, so their reconstructions can be done
less salient after normalization, leading to potential neglect of with high fidelity. However, the anomalies are less presented in
anomalies (Fig. 3(b)). Besides, it can also be observed that the the training materials, resulting in more significant reconstrucchannels in these streams may have diverse physical meanings. tion deviations. Driven by this principle, the U-Transformer is
This information is directly discarded since the error calculation employed in two tasks: reconstructing the incoming sequences
treats all channels equally. for further discrepancy analysis, and generating pseudo labels
 for the rest of the training process.
 III. DESIGN OF INOU Utilizing contrastive learning techniques, the Siamese Discriminator is trained with two primary objectives: achieving
A. Framework Overview high anomaly detection performance, and creating a manifold
 Fig. 4 shows the overall structure of InoU. This framework projection methodology that effectively metrics related to discomprises two major parts: offline training and online detection. crepancies even for samples that are unseen in historical record-
 Offline Training: During the training process, an efficient VAE ings. The adversarial learning technique is further applied with
(Variational Autoencoder) is trained on the unlabeled, noisy a small learning rate, which optimizes embedding distributions
training materials. When this VAE model converges, it is again by adjusting the manifold.
reused in the data pre-process pipeline. In this way, it serves as Online Detection: To identify anomalies in the data stream,
a filter that offsets the noisy and anomalous components in the the target samples are processed and reconstructed by the
training materials without the need for human intervention. U-Transformer. Then, the Siamese Discriminator parallelly
YAO et al.: SCALABLE LARGE MODEL FOR UNLABELED ANOMALY DETECTION 1015

 Recurrent Unit layer, which bridges temporal dependencies. The
 operations of a GRU layer are presented as follows.
   
 rt = σ W r · h  t−1 |xh (3)
 t
   
 ut = σ W u · h  t−1 |xh (4)
 t
   
 ht = tanh W h · r t  h  t−1 |xh (5)
 t

  t−1 + ut  ht
  t = (1 − ut )  h
 h (6)
 t
 [μt , δ t ] = h (7)
 where r t , ut are the reset and update gate, [·] is the concatenation
 operation, and  is the Hadamard product. Besides, σ(·) and
Fig. 5. The VAE model is used as a filter in the data processing pipeline. tanh represent the sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent activation
 functions.
 Based on the latent embeddings μt and δ t , the decoder genexamines the observed and reconstructed sample pairs, and erates the reconstructed sample x̄t by performing symmetrical
compares their discrepancies at the embedding level. The final operations as compared to the encoder.
inspection results are thus generated.
 xzt = GRU (Rep (μt , δ t )) (8)
B. VAE Driven Filtering of Unlabeled Training Material x̄t = ReLU (Conv1DT (xzt , k3, s2)) × 3 (9)
 Many prior works utilize VAE as the generative model to Here, the term Rep denotes the reparameterize process. The
extract typical patterns from unlabeled training materials. How- arguments of Conv1DT (transposed 1D convolution) are similar
ever, some researchers [13], [14], [15], [16] have also pointed to those of Conv1D, consisting of (input, kernel_size, stride).
out that the VAE model based anomaly detection solutions To optimize the parameters of this VAE filter model, we deploy
may encounter performance issues when confronted with high a Kullback-Leibler divergence based loss:
noise levels, which is common in industrial setups. Besides,
VAE models can also be biased in real-world events for several Lf lt = Eqφ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] − KL [qφ (z|x)pθ (z)] (10)
reasons [17]. This is due to the dilemma that the VAE model is Based on the trained VAE filter model, the error set E of the
trained to reconstruct the majority of training materials, but to unlabeled training set Dtrain,raw is calculated as:
what extent the data fitting should reach remains a challenging
 L
question. 1
 To bypass this issue, we design a novel data processing et = x(i) − x̄(i) 22 (11)
 L i=1
pipeline (Fig. 5(a)) that decouples the VAE model from direct
involvement in the anomaly detection task. The VAE model is E = {et | 1 ≤ t ≤ N } (12)
employed to filter the training materials, rather than to reconstruct them. The underlying rationale of this design is intuitive. where  · 2 is the L2 Norm, and L is the length of the window
Since the unlabeled training materials exhibit significant imbal- used to segment the data (Section II). x̄(i) is the i-th time step
ances, skewness, and noise in industrial scenarios, we deploy the inside the sequence being processed, in this case, the x̄t .
VAE model as a filter to process the raw unlabeled training set A threshold κ for the filtering process is then determined based
Dtrain,raw . This way, we form the filtered training set Dtrain,f lt on the distribution of E. By applying the filter, a filtered training
to ease impacts from the noisy and anomalous components. set Dtrain,f lt is generated.
Details of this pipeline are as follows. xt ∈ Dtrain,f lt , if et ≤ κ (13)
 The VAE model (Fig. 5(b)) used for the processing pipeline
mainly consists of two parts: the encoder and the decoder. The C. Trio-Attention U-Transformer for Representation Bridging
encoder in this VAE model interprets the input xt into extracted and Data Reconstruction
data descriptions xht , which are then used to generate the latent
embeddings μt and δ t . Overview: Enlightened by advancements in U-Net [18], [19]
 and transformer [20], we design a trio-attention U-Transformer
 xht = ReLU (Conv1D (xt , k3, s2)) × 3 (1) structure (Fig. 6) that is optimized for multivariate time series
   representation bridging and reconstruction while keeping out-
 μt , δ t = GRU xht (2)
 standing scalability.
 Here, we use Conv1D to denote the 1D convolution oper- The U-Transformer is employed to construct the typical
ation, whose arguments are (input, kernel_size, stride), re- representations from the filtered training set Dtrain,f lt . Since
spectively. ReLU is the Rectified Linear Unit activation function the learned patterns are derived from the filtered data, the Uthat introduces non-linearity to the model. GRU is the Gate Transformer is expected to amplify discrepancies between the
1016 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 output of the i-th head in the multi-head attention mechanism,
 which is calculated as follows:
  
 (i) (i)
 ρ1 = Att W (i) (i)
 q xin_lef t , W k xin_1 , W v xin_1 (15)
 (i) (i) (i)
 where W q , W k , and W v are the query, key, and value
 weights for the i-th head, respectively. Att is the dot-product
 attention mechanism:
  
 Att(q, k, v) = Softmax qkT v (16)
 In the second tier, the information fusion focuses on aggregating information from different flows. This step helps the
Fig. 6. The structure of the trio-attention U-Transformer. U-Transformer capture significant patterns at different granularities without losing a global perspective on the data stream.

 xultra_p = [xin_lef t , xsc_1 , xsc_2 , · · · xsc_ω ] (17)
 Intra-Flow Attention Driven Feature Map Contraction and
 Expansion: To guide the model to generate representations that
 are more informative, we use this technique to further process the
 output from the ultra perception shortcut attention mechanism.
 The specific process of this operation varies depending on
 the location of the flow. Two main paths form the universal
Fig. 7. The two-tier information flow aggregation in each block of the U- data flow in the U-Transformer: the contraction path and the
Transformer. expansion path. The former bridges complex dependencies by
 compressing the incoming sequences. Meanwhile, the latter
input and output when anomalies occur. To achieve this goal, weaves the information coming from various flows, and fuses
we weave a delicate structure (Fig. 6) with multiple tricks for them adaptively. In this way, the U-Transformer is able to keep
information extraction and aggregation. a high level of scalability while extracting the most significant
 Ultra Perception Shortcut Attention Driven Two-Tier Infor- patterns from the data.
mation Flow Aggregation: One key feature of the nested struc- On the contraction path, the aggregated flow xultra_p is
ture in U-Transformer is the long shortcut connections that allow processed by two cascaded 1D convolutional (Conv1D) layers:
information to flow between different levels of the network. To
 xif = Conv1D+S(Conv1D+S(xultra_p , k3, s1), k3, s2) (18)
enhance the aggregation of information from shallower or deeper
levels that is processed with different granularity, we design a Here, Conv1D+S denotes the Conv1D operation with SeLU
two-tier information flow aggregation mechanism that is based (Scaled Exponential Linear Unit) activation. Then, a follow-up
on the ultra perception shortcut attention technique (Fig. 7). multi-head attention module is applied to the output xif for
 For clarity in notation, we use xin_lef t for the output of the fine-grained dependency extraction.
horizontal left block of the current block where this attention  
 (1) (2) (i) (H)
mechanism is applied. Similarly, we use xin_o to denote the xis_f mc = LN ρic , ρic , . . . , ρic , . . . , ρic (19)
output of blocks that are connected to the current block through
 (i)
shortcut connections, where o in the subscript indicates their where H is the total number of attention heads. ρic is the output
sequence number. We denote the total number of these shortcut of the i-th head in the multi-head attention mechanism to process
connected blocks as ω. the information in xif (18):
 In detail, the ultra perception aggregation mechanism func-  
 (i) (i)
tions in a two-tier manner. In the first tier, the fusion of in- ρic = Att W (i) (i)
 q xif , W k xif , W v xif (20)
formation flow performs in a block-to-block way. During this
 On the expansion path, the resolution of the feature map
process, the remote information from the shortcut connected
 gradually gets restored through the cascaded transposed 1D
blocks is compared and aggregated with the information from
 convolutional (Conv1DT) layers.
the horizontal left block. Take the fusion between xin_lef t and
xin_1 as an example. xif = Conv1DT+S (Conv1DT+S (xultra_p , k3, s2) , k3, s1)
   (21)
 (1) (2) (i) (H)
 xsc_1 = LN ρ1 , ρ1 , . . . , ρ1 , . . . , ρ1 (14) Here, Conv1DT+S denotes the Conv1DT operation with SeLU
 activation. This operation is also followed by a multi-head
 Here, LN denotes the layer normalization operation that attention module:
helps to stabilize the training process, [·] is the concatenation  
 (i) (i)
 (i)
operation, and H is the total number of attention heads. ρ1 is the ρie = Att W (i) (i)
 q xif , W k xif , W v xif
YAO et al.: SCALABLE LARGE MODEL FOR UNLABELED ANOMALY DETECTION 1017

 Fig. 9. The structure of the Siamese discriminator.

 Here,  · 2 is the L2 Norm. To help the intermediate layers of the
 U-Transformer converge effectively and perform in an aligned
 way, we further impose a deep supervision loss to the output
 node set:
 Luds = η0 Lu0_a + η1 Lu0_1 + η2 Lu0_2
Fig. 8. The alignment and aggregation of output flows in the U-Transformer.
 + η3 Lu0_3 + η4 Lu0_4 (28)
   where η0 − η4 are the seasoning weights. Lu0_a denotes the
 (1) (2) (i) (H)
 xis_f me = LN ρie , ρie , . . . , ρie , . . . , ρie (22) similarity loss applied to the aggregated output in (26).

 Inter-Flow Attention Driven Output Alignment and Aggrega- D. Siamese Discriminator for Embedding Level Discrepancy
tion: Owing to the unique architecture, the U-Transformer model Analysis
demonstrates the capability to extract patterns at various levels
of granularity while maintaining excellent scalability. However, Overview: As discussed in Section II, most prior works use
in actual practice, the effective regulation and alignment of the segment-wise numerical reconstruction error to identify anomaoutput nodes are crucial for ensuring the model’s performance. lies. This scheme is less effective for industrial data, especially
To address this challenge, we propose an inter-flow attention the one featuring high dimensionality and high levels of noise
driven output alignment and aggregation mechanism (Fig. 8). and anomalies. To tackle this unique challenge in industrial sce-
 For clear descriptions, we denote the output nodes, i.e., the narios, we design a Siamese discriminator (Fig. 9) that projects
nodes on the top level of the U-Transformer that generate recon- the observed and reconstructed sequences into manifold space,
struction results, as O 0_1 to O 0_4 . Take the aggregation between and adaptively collates their discrepancies at the embedding
O 0_4 and O 0_1 as an example, the output alignment happens as level. As such, InoU gains the ability to inspect even the most
follows: subtle inconsistencies between the observed and reconstructed
   sequences, which is crucial for improving anomaly detection
 (1) (2) (i) (H)
 ρ4,1 = LN ρ4,1 , ρ4,1 , . . . , ρ4,1 , . . . , ρ4,1 (23) performance in industrial settings.
 Manifold Projection: To project the target sequences into the
where the calculation of the output from different heads is
 abstract manifold, we design a Siamese backbone that processes
performed as follows:
   the observed and the reconstructed sequences with a shared set
 (i) (i)
 ρ4,1 = Att W (i) (i)
 q O 0_4 , W k O 0_1 , W v O 0_1 (24) of parameters in parallel. We define an elementary block in the
 Siamese backbone as follows:
 A more general aggregation that forms the fused output is
 xse1 = Conv1D+S(xin , k3, s1)
then conducted:
 xse2 = Res1D(xse1 )
 ρoaa = O 0_4 ⊕ ρ4,3 ⊕ ρ4,2 ⊕ ρ4,1 (25)
 xse3 = BN(MP(xse2 , 2)) (29)
Here, ⊕ denotes the in-place addition operation. Finally, the
  is obtained by applying a mapping
reconstruction result x Here, xin is the input of this elementary block, BN is the batch
operation: normalization operation, and MP is the max pooling operation.
 Res1D denotes the 1D residual module, which operates as:
  = Conv1D+S (ρoaa , k1, s1)
 x (26)
 xse2 = xse1 ⊕ Conv1D+S(xse1 , k3, s1) × 3 (30)
 Deep Supervision Guided Model Training: Since its introduction, deep supervision has been widely explored for improving Based on the elementary block (“Elem” in later parts) dethe performance of various downstream tasks [21], [22], [23]. scribed in (29)–(30), we further form the backbone of the
We adapt this technique to the U-Transformer structure to regu- Siamese discriminator. Since the primary function of this backlate the convergence of the intermediate layers. Take the output bone is to extract and expose the most salient features for
from the output node O 0_4 for example, we impose a similarity subsequent discrepancy analyses, its architecture needs to be
loss to guide its output: carefully crafted to balance feature extraction efficiency and the
 N ability to capture both low-level and high-level embeddings. To
 Lu0_4 = xt − O 0_4 22 (27) satisfy this need, we design two distinct output structures for
 t=1 different purposes: the representation output R that generates
1018 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

the projected manifold of the incoming sequence, and the projection head P that has a relatively deeper structure, and is used
to regulate the convergence.
 The representation output is generated as:
 R = Elem(xin ) × 4 (31)
 Whereas the projection head is further formed through:
 xsp1 = Elem(R)
 xsp2 = [GRUf (xsp1 ), GRUb (xsp1 )]
 Fig. 10. Training workflow of the Siamese discriminator.
 P = BN(Conv1D+S(xsp2 , k3, s1)) (32)
Here, GRUf and GRUb represent the forward and backward
calculations in a Bidirectional GRU module. The inference results are generated through:
 Inference on Anomalies: The employment of this Siamese
architecture enables us to implement the downstream task of lt = Softmax(xra ) (38)
discrepancy comparison in an efficient yet robust way. By ap- where lt is the inference result for the input pair xt and xt.
plying a shared set of parameters, i.e., the Siamese backbone, Training Workflow: To form an informative manifold space
the target sequences are thus projected into an abstract manifold and ensure the full expression of metrics related to discrepancies,
space that reveals pivotal metric information. Based on the we design a contrastive learning based training workflow for the
projected manifolds, numerical inconsistencies of the concerned Siamese discriminator. As depicted in Fig. 10, this workflow
sequences that used to be subtle or less noticeable become much comprises two stages: self-supervised contrastive learning and
more pronounced during the embeddings level discrepancy task-oriented fine-tuning.
comparison. In this way, the overall performance of anomaly 1) Self-supervised contrastive learning: In this part, the
detection is enhanced, particularly in industrial scenarios. Siamese discriminator is trained on unlabeled data in a self-
 To describe this process, we notate a random normal sequence supervised manner. The U-Transformer is first trained on the
as xn , and a random anomalous one as xa . As the convergence filtered training set Dtrain,f lt . Then, we use the U-Transformer
of the U-Transformer happens on the filtered training material to process the raw training set Dtrain,raw , and calculate its error
Dtrain,f lt , the reconstruction deviation of xa will be signifi- set E. The error set is then used to calculate the threshold κ as
cantly larger. Then we can have: stated in Section III-B, and thereafter generate the pseudo label
 Sim (R(xa ), R(
 xa )) → 0 (33) set Ipsd . With Dtrain,raw and Ipsd , we use the output from the
 projection head in the Siamese discriminator to form the loss for
where Sim is the calculation of cousin similarity: matched pairs:
 αT β xt ))
 Dis = 1 − Sim (P(xt ), P(
 Sim(α, β) = (34)
 τ1 αβ
 Lcmatch = Dis × (1 − yt,psd ) (39)
in which  ·  is the L1 Norm, and τ1 is a coefficient to adjust
this calculation. On the other hand, representations for a set of where yt,psd is the pseudo label of xt .
normal sequences result in a higher similarity: Similarly, for the mismatched pairs, we have:

 Sim (R(xn ), R (
 xn )) → 1 (35) xt )) × yt,psd
 Lcmismatch = Sim (P(xt ), P ( (40)

 Based on the properties of R, we cascade a discriminator By integrating the two components as in (39)–(40), we form
to implement the anomaly detection task. Since the Siamese the contrastive loss for the Siamese backbone:
backbone processes both the observed sequence and the recon- Lcsum = τ2 Lcmatch + τ3 Lcmismatch (41)
structed one with a shared set of parameters, the discrepancies
between the two sequences are thus reflected in the embeddings where τ2 and τ3 are the seasoning weights.
generated by the R. The output of the backbone is concatenated 2) Task-oriented fine-tuning: Apart from the contrastive regas Rcct
 t : ulation being applied to the Siamese backbone, we utilize other
 techniques to assist in the formation of the manifold. Consider-
 Rcct xt )]
 t = [R(xt ), R( (36)
 ing that in some industrial scenarios, a limited amount of labeled
 Then, several blocks are employed for metric analysis: data may be available, a binary cross entropy loss is applied:
 N
 xma1 = BN(Conv1D+S(Rcct
 t , k3, s2)) 1
 Ldbce = − [yt · log(p(yt ))
 xma2 = BN(Conv1D+S(xma1 , k3, s1)) N t=1

 xra = Conv1D(Flatten(xma2 ), k1, s1) (37) + (1 − yt ) · log(1 − p(yt ))] (42)
YAO et al.: SCALABLE LARGE MODEL FOR UNLABELED ANOMALY DETECTION 1019

Here, yt is the ground-truth label of the limited dataset. Besides,
a center loss [24] is also employed to enhance the inter-class
sparsity:
 N
 1
 Ldctr = R(xt ) − cyt 22 (43)
 N t=1

where cyt is the cluster for xt in the feature space. Based on (42)–
(43), the following sum loss is formed to optimize the Siamese
discriminator:
 Fig. 11. Anomaly cause visualization.
 Ldsum = Ldbce + Ldctr (44)
 However, scenarios with no available human labeled re-
 TABLE I
sources are also common in industrial applications. To address DATASET PROPERTIES
this situation, the ground-truth labels yt can be replaced with the
pseudo labels yt,psd . This workaround also effectively supports
the training of InoU, as it is validated later in Section IV-D.

E. Manifold Adjusting Via Adversarial Learning
 In industrial scenarios, on-site data usually contain a considerable proportion of noise and anomaly components. Besides,
historical recordings may not cover all cases in actual deployment. To enhance InoU’s ability to spot historically unobserved
samples and to improve the Siamese discriminator’s capacity
for metric expression in the manifold space, we introduce an
adversarial learning based manifold adjusting scheme.
 With the two primary components, i.e., U-Transformer and scenarios. These datasets are widely used in many other anomaly
the Siamese discriminator, being integrated under the unified detection works.
framework, InoU naturally fits the concept of an adversarial 1) SMD [10]: This dataset contains KPI (Key Performance
architecture. Driven by this finding, the following adversarial Indicator) recordings from a computing center of a cloud service
loss is applied: provider.
 Ladv 2-3) SWaT [25] & WADI [25]: The Secure Water Treatment
 sum = min Lds + min Lsum
 u d
 MU-Tran MSiamese (SWaT) and the Water Distribution (WADI) are two datasets that
 + max min τ2 Lcmatch record the operation status of attacked water treatment systems.
 MU-Tran MSiamese 4-5) SMAP [26] & MSL [26]: The Soil Moisture Active Pas-
 + min τ3 Lcmismatch (45) sive (SMAP) and the Curiosity Rover on Mars (MSL) datasets
 MSiamese contain telemetry recordings from spacecrafts.
 To ensure that the minor yet stable alternation to the learned The properties of these datasets are listed in Table I.
parameters, the adversarial loss is applied with a small learning Metrics: We use the metric set as in other works to rerate. The effects of this adversarial pipeline are validated and flect a concerned system’s overall anomaly detection perforillustrated in Section IV-H. mance: Precision, Recall, and F1-Score. Their calculations are
 as follows: Precision = TP+FP
 TP
 , Recall = TP+FN
 TP
 , and F1-Score =
 2×Precision×Recall
F. Anomaly Cause Localization Precision + Recall .
 In the middle of an undesirable event, localization of anomaly
cause assists engineers in identifying the most probable origin
 B. Baselines and the Test Environment
of the incident. As such, the process to re-gain control of the
case can be expedited. To realize this goal, we analyze the inter- Baselines: We compare the performance of InoU with
mediate vector xra in the Siamese discriminator (37), and infer state-of-the-art works: VAE-LSTM [9], OmniAnomaly [10],
their contribution to the formation of an anomalous event. The USAD [11], InterFusion [12], CAE-M [13], AMSL [15],
visualization in Fig. 11 is presented on an anomalous sample. TranAD [27], and AnoTran [28]. We also employ a classical
 algorithm, Isolation Forest, for performance comparison, though
 IV. EVALUATION not involve it in the discussions.
 Environment: We use a workstation to conduct the evaluation.
A. Datasets and Metrics
 Its main configurations are listed in Table II.
 Dataset: We incorporate five large-scale industrial datasets Parameters: Table III lists the parameters used to train InoU.
to evaluate the performance of InoU under different industrial The arguments are left as the default if not otherwise specified.
1020 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 TABLE II compared to these baselines, enabling engineers to identify and
 TESTBED CONFIGURATION
 address potential issues promptly.
 We continue discussing the effectiveness of our design in InoU
 in the following sections.

 D. Validation of InoU When Strictly Unsupervised
 InoU is designed to utilize unlabeled industrial datasets to
 the greatest extent. By developing a training pipeline that incorporates a VAE filter, contrastive / adversarial learning, and
 TABLE III task-oriented fine-tuning, the robustness of InoU gets improved.
 PARAMETERS In this section, we use ablation studies to discuss the potential
 impacts caused by the materials used in the fine-tuning process
 of the Siamese discriminator. Three cases are introduced in this
 experiment:
 1) Best Baseline: the results of the best baseline, namely
 AnoTran [28].
 2) Strictly Unsupervised: the calculation of (42) relies only
 on the pseudo label set Ipsd that the U-Transformer produces. In this case, no human labeled resource is involved.
 3) Fine-tuned: the original training workflow as introduced
C. Performance and Analysis in Section III-D.
 In this ablation study, we select three industrial datasets cover-
 In this section, we compare the anomaly detection perforing low, medium, and high numbers of features to obtain a more
mance of InoU with the baselines. During this experiment, all
 generalizable conclusion. The experiment results are presented
results are the average of three randomized trials. The overall
 in Table V.
performance results are presented in Table IV.
 As suggested by the data, a slight performance drop can be
 It can be observed that InoU outperforms the baselines on
 observed when InoU is trained on a fully unlabeled dataset.
every dataset in terms of F1-Score. On these large, real-world,
 It is clear that the effectiveness of the strict unsupervised
industrial datasets, InoU gets the best average F1-Score of
 manner shows connections with characteristics of the dataset
0.9168, with an increment of 5.58% compared to the state-ofbeing processed. In the case of strictly unsupervised manner,
the-art. Among these results, several findings should be noted.
 high-dimensional dataset, e.g., WADI, may experience a more
All baselines’ performance slightly drops on the WADI dataset,
 brutal performance impact than those with fewer features, such
possibly due to its low anomaly portion and high dimension.
 as SWaT and SMAP. This finding indicates that expert domain
InoU, however, achieves a boost in F1-Score of 28.20% on
 knowledge and human-labeled materials continue to play a sigthis dataset. This finding echoes the observations on the SWaT
 nificant role in enhancing the performance of anomaly detection
and MSL datasets, which are characterized by their high dimensystems.
sionality. The utilization of the Siamese discriminator in InoU
 However, it is worth noting that InoU, when trained strictly
also yields significant improvements in F1-Score on the two
 unsupervised, still beats the best baseline on these datasets, with
datasets: the SWaT dataset with 51 features and the MSL dataset
 an increment in the average F1-Score of 5.40%. This is to say,
with 55 features. Respectively, InoU achieves a performance
 though removing limited labeled data from the training mateimprovement in F1-Score by 3.08% and 2.53% on these two
 rials when fine-tuning the Siamese discriminator may lead to a
datasets.
 slight performance impact, InoU still provides a competitive and
 Moreover, our proposed work InoU demonstrates significant
 robust performance for the anomaly detection task in industrial
performance improvement, even on datasets where the state-ofenvironments.
the-art models already perform well. On the SMD and SMAP
datasets, InoU achieves a substantial increase in the F1-Score
 E. Ablation Study on Critical Components
by 1.08% and 1.64%, respectively. These results validate the
effectiveness of InoU across various datasets, highlighting its Under the framework of InoU, many critical components are
robust performance in industrial anomaly detection. designed to work seamlessly and function effectively. In this
 Apart from the results suggested by the F1-Score, we can also section, we design an ablation study to assess their impacts on
observe the robustness of InoU from other aspects. It is clear the overall performance of InoU. The concerned components
from Table IV, InoU achieves the best recall performance on include:
SMD, SWaT, SMAP, and MSL, and its recall is the second-best on 1) deep supervision in the U-Transformer (28);
WADI. A higher recall is crucial in industrial applications, as it 2) implementation of the recurrent layers in Siamese
represents the ability to accurately detect all anomalous samples discriminator (32);
without missing any. The improvement in recall indicates a 3) the filter in the data pre-processing workflow
notable reduction in the number of undetected anomaly samples (Section III-B);
YAO et al.: SCALABLE LARGE MODEL FOR UNLABELED ANOMALY DETECTION 1021

 TABLE IV
 ANOMALY DETECTION PERFORMANCE. MP: MEAN PRECISION, MR: MEAN RECALL, MF1: MEAN F1-SCORE

 TABLE V
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON IN A STRICTLY UNSUPERVISED MANNER

 Fig. 12. Ablation study on the effects of critical components.

 To finish these experiments, the following configurations are
deployed correspondingly: C3-SR (Spectral Residual), and C3-VAE (our original version
 C1) we deactivate deep supervision on nodes O 0_1 to O 0_3 that enables the VAE filter).
(C1-NS), keep deep supervision on nodes O 0_3 and O 0_4 (C1- We provide the results in Fig. 12. Listed below are the key
HS), and compare these two variants with the fully activated findings:
deep supervision in InoU (C1-DS). Effects of the deep supervision: The removal of deep super-
 C2) we compare two other variants of recurrent structure, i.e., vision results in noticeable differences in performance on the
RNN (Recurrent Neural Network) and LSTM (Long Short-Term tested datasets. For the C1-HS, the drop of F1-Score is less
Memory) with the GRU module used in our work. These variants significant on SMD (4.74%) than on SMAP (6.76%). On the
are marked as C2-RNN, C2-LSTM, and C2-UM, respectively. other hand, the C1-NS variant performs better on SMAP with a
 C3) we use the Spectral Residual technique to replace the drop of 13.94%, milder than the one on SMD (15.82%). As the
VAE filter in our data processing pipeline. Results are noted as results reflect, it is straightforward that deep supervision helps
1022 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

Fig. 13. Performance and computation overhead of different variants of the
U-Transformer. Solid line: F1-Score; Dashed line: Parameter amount.

regulate the update of parameters in the intermediate layers and
gains a better performance.
 Effects of the recurrent module: The results across the datasets
indicate that GRU in our model is more efficient than its two
variants in bridging temporal connections. This finding is intuitive for the following reasons. As discussed in [29], the RNNs Fig. 14. Performance across different anomaly portions.
suffer from gradient problems, potentially limiting their ability
to capture long-term dependencies. Due to the trio-gate design,
the LSTM network is computationally heavy, which may lead O 0_3 provides a more efficient solution (25% parameter amount
to difficulties converging on noisy materials. These factors may with 98% performance). As for O 0_2 , its parameter amount is
contribute to the performance limitations of these two variants. comparable to O 0_1 , but comes up with a 4% to 14% increment
 Effects of the filter module: Industrial data usually contain in F1-Score.
noise and anomalous samples, whereas human labeling is la- To summarize, the nested structure built in U-Transformer
borious and time-consuming. To elevate anomaly detection enables the model to sense and capture multi-scale context
performance in such scenarios, we introduce an efficient VAE information from different levels. Thus, it is possible to adjust
filter in the data pre-processing pipeline to offset the impacts the overall computation overhead by altering the flow through
of noised and anomalous samples. Though Spectral Residual which data are passed. By doing so, the model can be adapted
offers a solution for data cleaning, its insufficient utilization of to various deployment scenarios, while maintaining a high level
contextual information can result in a performance drop when of anomaly detection performance.
processing complex industrial data.
 G. Impacts of Anomaly Portion
F. Scalability of the U-Transformer
 The datasets used for experiments exhibit a noticeable imbal-
 The U-Transformer in the InoU framework is designed with a ance, with anomalies being substantially underrepresented comnested structure, enabling this structure to capture multi-scale in- pared to normal samples. This disparity reflects the real-world
formation while maintaining excellent scalability and efficiency. scenario where anomalies are typically rare events. However, it
To evaluate the scalability of the U-Transformer, we conduct is important to note that the frequency of anomalies can fluctuate
experiments to assess its performance under different trimming considerably in industrial environments due to the diverse and
settings. To be specific, we capture the output from O 0_1 to often unpredictable operational conditions of on-site equipment
O 0_4 , and connect these outputs to the Siamese discriminator and processes.
for the task of anomaly detection. The performance of trimmed To assess the robustness of InoU across varying levels of
versions of the U-Transformer is compared with that of the anomaly percentages, we conduct experiments on two reprefull-size model. We present the corresponding results in Fig. 13. sentative datasets, namely the SWaT and SMAP. The test set
 It is straightforward that, the original, full-sized model that is varied to include different proportions of anomalies, ranging
outputs from O 0_4 achieves the best anomaly detection results from 1% to 30%. Specifically, we evaluate performance at seven
on the tested dataset. However, this output flow also incurs distinct anomaly levels: 1%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, and
the heaviest computation overhead, as it activates most of the 30% anomalies. Precision, Recall, and F1-Score results of this
parameters in the U-Transformer. On the contrary, O 0_1 is the experiment are presented in Fig. 14.
most computation-efficient flow in the nested structure. From In general, InoU maintains a high availability of anomaly
these figures, we can observe a parameter reduction of up to detection across different anomaly portions. At the extremely
97% with a general 10% - 20% performance drop. For the low anomaly percentage (1%), a decrease can be observed in
two intermediate output nodes O 0_2 and O 0_3 , a more flexible the performance of InoU on both datasets. On the SWaT dataset,
solution can be achieved between computation cost and perfor- the F1-Score drops to 0.9001 when the anomaly percentage is
mance, addressing the needs for varied deployment targets. The set to 1%. The decrease in SMAP is less pronounced, with the
YAO et al.: SCALABLE LARGE MODEL FOR UNLABELED ANOMALY DETECTION 1023

 Siamese discriminator and consequently enhances the detection
 performance.
 For comparison, when only trained with cross entropy, the
 distribution of embeddings in the manifold appears more intermingled. As depicted in the lower dimension, the representation
 of samples, both normal and anomalous ones, are sparsely
 distributed in the manifold space. Consequently, the distinction
 between these two classes becomes blurred, which may compromise the detection performance when encountering unobserved
 or ambiguous anomalous samples if the samples are projected
 into overlapping regions.
 On the other hand, the condensation is improved with the help
 of contrastive learning. This technique encourages the projection
 of samples to be clustered and informative. As a result, the
 compact localization of both normal and abnormal samples
 is achieved, thereby improving the clarity of the distribution
 characteristics.
Fig. 15. Visualization of the Manifold Space of the Projection Head in the In addition, the adversarial tuning further optimizes the man-
Siamese Discriminator. Blue points: representations of normal samples; Red ifold space of the Siamese discriminator. This process adjusts
points: representations of anomalies. the distribution of the embeddings, so that the clusters become
 more pronounced and distinguishable. In this way, the separation between normal and anomalous samples is more distinct,
 which in turn enhances the detection capabilities of the Siamese
F1-Score keeping at a relatively high level of 0.9467. However, discriminator.
in other cases, the anomaly detection performance of InoU
remains stable. For anomaly percentages from 5% to 30%, the
F1-Score of InoU on the two datasets is consistently high, fluc- V. RELATED WORK
tuating around 0.94 and 0.98 on SWaT and SMAP, respectively. The advancement of the industry has brought a surge in the
This finding suggests that InoU is capable of maintaining a scale of deployed assets. To ensure the smooth of their operation
robust anomaly detection performance across a wide range of and reduce the cost of downtime, the reliability of these systems
anomaly percentages. Even under extreme conditions, where the has become a critical concern.
anomaly percentage is as low as 1%, InoU still delivers a robust Some works deploy their models near the deployed assets
performance. to get a reduced response time. Work [30] uses statistics Mahalanobis distances as the metrics for early-stage fault diagnosis. Researchers [31] introduce clustering and k-means for
H. Impacts of Contrastive and Adversarial Learning
 fast anomaly filtering. However, performing anomaly detection
Techniques locally on the device is challenging due to limited power and
 We incorporate contrastive learning as a crucial part of the computation capacity. They then have to rely on a slim model or
training of Siamese discriminator (Section III-D). Besides, ad- simple rules, resulting in spaces for performance improvement.
versarial learning is employed to further optimize the distribu- Other works embrace deep learning techniques in their worktion of the manifold space and improve the expression of metrics flow to get more robust results. Kim et al. [32] discuss the
related to discrepancies. In this section, we use experiments to possibility of using CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) for
compare the manifold space of the Siamese discriminator under feature extraction in anomaly detection. Canizo et al. [33]
different training settings. further adopt CNN and RNN (Recurrent Neural Network) as
 Specifically, we visualize the manifold of the projection head the backbone, using a classification-based workflow to achieve
P of the Siamese discriminator (as described in (32)) on the anomaly detection. However, discriminant models are prone
SMAP dataset using the t-SNE algorithm. During this compari- to overfit when the dataset is not properly balanced, which
son, three typical cases are considered: is common in this scenario. Consequently, their performance
 1) Only With Cross Entropy. Train the Siamese discriminator gets worse in the presence of unobserved anomalous sequences.
 using only (42). Considering this, researchers are shifting to generative models,
 2) Cross Entropy + Contrastive. Train the Siamese discrimi- i.e., AE (Autoencoder) and VAE (Variational Autoencoder).
 nator using both (41) and (44). Luo et al. [34] propose an AE based anomaly detection ap-
 3) After Adversarial Tuning. Train the Siamese discriminator proach for WSN (Wireless Sensor Network) that compares the
 using both (41) and (44). Then, fine-tune the manifold with observed and predicted sequences from sensors. Researchers
 (45). in [9] combine VAE and LSTM to capture long-time depen-
 We can observe from Fig. 15 that the employment of the dencies in time series, so that short and long-period anomalies
proposed training protocol optimizes the manifold space of the can be spotted. Su et al. [10] use planar normalizing to process
1024 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 18, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

the stochastic variables in VAEs, and Li et al. [12] incorporate perspective of the data. Furthermore, we design a Siamese
inter-metric and temporal embeddings to improve its anomaly discriminator that projects data into the manifold space, and
detection performance on multivariate time series. VAEs provide adaptively collates discrepancies at the embedding level. We also
a new perspective to reconstruct data, but their utilization is not introduce contrastive and adversarial learning to fine-tune the
straightforward. Being an unsupervised model, this model can projection of manifold and boost the overall anomaly detection
hardly be trained when the distribution of the dataset is skewed. performance of InoU in industrial scenarios. Extensive experi-
Besides, the design of VAEs needs careful consideration to avoid ments on five large-scale industrial datasets suggest significant
under-fit or over-fit problems [35]. performance improvements.
 Targeting the model over-expression problem, there are For future work, we propose investigating other deep learning
mainly two directions to rectify the reconstruction process. Some methodologies, i.e., graph learning and meta learning, to enworks incorporate memory modules to address the model over- hance the construction of dependencies. We also plan to explore
expression problem [13], [15]. On the other hand, some works potential solutions for optimizing the training overheads.
deploy an adversarial training protocol to force the decoder to
learn a more robust representation translation approach [11]. REFERENCES
Despite their designs, these solutions do not explicitly solve the [1] G. Wu, H. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. Shen, and S. Yu, “Mean-field
problem of fine-grained discrepancy analysis, and training such game-based task-offloaded load balance for industrial mobile edge comstructures is also challenging. puting systems using software-defined networking,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
 Comput., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 13773–13786, Dec. 2024.
 There are other endeavors to enhance the bridging and con- [2] Y. Zhang et al., “Privacy-preserving and fairness-aware federated learning
struction of dependencies in complex multivariate time series for critical infrastructure protection and resilience,” in Proc. ACM Web
data. Inspired by the advancements in graph learning [36], [37], Conf., 2024, pp. 2986–2997.
 [3] X. Zhang et al., “Cost-effective hybrid computation offloading in satellite-
[38], [39], GNNs (Graph Neural Network), or more broadly, terrestrial integrated networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 22,
graph structures, are applied to enhance the overall perfor- pp. 36786–36800, Nov. 2024.
mance. In Wu et al. [8], the authors investigate the applica- [4] D. G. Pivoto, L. F. de Almeida, R. da Rosa Righi, J. J. Rodrigues,
 A. B. Lugli, and A. M. Alberti, “Cyber-physical systems architectures
tion of GNN (Graph Neural Network) in IoT anomaly detec- for industrial Internet of Things applications in industry 4.0: A literature
tion. Chen et al. [40] apply supervised contrastive learning review,” J. Manuf. Syst., vol. 58, pp. 176–192, 2021.
to the graph structure, so that the potential anomalous nodes [5] S. Yu, O. Jin, Y. Shen, G. Wu, S. Yu, and S. Shen, “Availability evaluation
 of industrial Internet of Things under malware propagation: An extended
are identified and separated. Researchers in [41] use graphs reliability block diagram approach based on stochastic games,” IEEE
to project subsequences of original data into embeddings and Trans. Rel., early access, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TR.2024.3434593.
compare the characteristics. Ding et al. [42] use three graphs [6] B. Peng et al., “An intelligent fault diagnosis method for rotating machinery based on data fusion and deep residual neural network,” Appl. Intell.,
with inner-modal and inter-modal attentions to extract node vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 3051–3065, 2022.
dependencies in multi-modal IoT streams. Tuli et al. [27] involve [7] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
a transformer in anomaly detection for better data interpreta- structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection
 in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, Jun. 2022.
tion. Xu et al. [28] further deploy the concept of transformer [8] Y. Wu, H.-N. Dai, and H. Tang, “Graph neural networks for anomaly
and adjacent-concentration to calculate association discrepancy. detection in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,
Yang et al. [43] propose a method to examine the correlation no. 12, pp. 9214–9231, Jun. 2022.
 [9] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
of representations in the latent space for anomaly detection. “Anomaly detection for time series using VAE-LSTM hybrid model,”
Despite the advancements in model design, these solutions face in Proc. 2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2020,
the challenge of huge overhead and scalability, and thus, may pp. 4322–4326.
 [10] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
not be suitable for deployment in an industrial environment. detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
Besides, most of these works depend on numerical discrepancies network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
to identify anomalies, which may not be robust enough for Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 [11] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
complex industrial data. “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
 Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 pp. 3395–3404.
 VI. CONCLUSION [12] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation
 using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. 27th
 In this paper, we propose InoU as a scalable solution to ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230.
the challenges in prior anomaly detection works. To enable [13] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
the self-supervised training protocol and combat impacts from Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
noise components in training materials, a VAE filter is employed [14] H.-Z. Feng, K. Kong, M. Chen, T. Zhang, M. Zhu, and W. Chen, “SHOTin the processing pipeline of the target unlabeled data. We VAE: Semi-supervised deep generative models with label-aware ELBO
 approximations,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 7413–7421.
then develop a trio-attention U-Transformer model to capture [15] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory networks
intricate patterns and contextual information while maintain- with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE
ing outstanding scalability and efficiency. The ultra percep- Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–12080, Dec. 2023.
 [16] H. Gao, B. Qiu, R. J. D. Barroso, W. Hussain, Y. Xu, and X. Wang,
tion and intra-/ inter-flow attention based information aggrega- “TSMAE: A novel anomaly detection approach for Internet of Things time
tion enables the model to bridge dependencies across different series data using memory-augmented autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
levels with variable granularities, but without losing a global Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2978–2990, Sep./Oct. 2023.
YAO et al.: SCALABLE LARGE MODEL FOR UNLABELED ANOMALY DETECTION 1025

[17] K. Deshpande, N. S. Punn, S. K. Sonbhadra, and S. Agarwal, “Anomaly [41] P. Boniol and T. Palpanas, “Series2graph: Graph-based subsequence
 detection in surveillance videos using transformer based attention model,” anomaly detection for time series,” Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 13, no. 12,
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process., 2022, pp. 199–211. pp. 1821–1834, Jul. 2020.
[18] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks [42] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial–temporal
 for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Med. Image graph attention network for time series anomaly detection,” Inf. Fusion,
 Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2015, pp. 234–241. vol. 89, pp. 527–536, 2023.
[19] Z. Zhou, M. M. R. Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, and J. Liang, “UNet: [43] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “Dcdetector: Dual atten-
 Redesigning skip connections to exploit multiscale features in image tion contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly detection,”
 segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1856–1867, in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York,
 Jun. 2020. NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[20] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[21] C. Li, M. Z. Zia, Q.-H. Tran, X. Yu, G. D. Hager, and M. Chandraker, “Deep
 supervision with intermediate concepts,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
 Intell., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 1828–1843, Aug. 2019.
[22] Y. Liu, M.-M. Cheng, D.-P. Fan, L. Zhang, J.-W. Bian, and D. Tao,
 “Semantic edge detection with diverse deep supervision,” Int. J. Comput. Muyan Yao (Member, IEEE) received the BS de-
 Vis., vol. 130, no. 1, pp. 179–198, 2022. gree from the School of Electronic and Information
[23] Y. Sun, D. Dai, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Xu, and C. Lian, “MSCA-Net: Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing,
 Multi-scale contextual attention network for skin lesion segmentation,” China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the
 Pattern Recognit., vol. 139, 2023, Art. no. 109524. PhD degree. His research interests include ubiquitous
[24] Y. Wen, K. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “A discriminative feature learning computing and representation learning.
 approach for deep face recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 2016, pp. 499–515.
[25] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
 research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. 11th
 Int. Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur., Paris, France, 2017, pp. 88–99.
[26] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[27] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer Dan Tao (Member, IEEE) received the BS and MS
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. degrees from Jilin University, China, in 2001 and
 VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022. 2004, and the PhD degree from the Beijing University
[28] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time of Posts and Telecommunications, China, in 2007.
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. She was a visiting scholar with the Illinois Institute
 Learn. Representations, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ of Technology, Chicago, IL, USA, from 2010 to
 forum?id=LzQQ89U1qm_ 2011. She is currently a professor with the School
[29] A. H. Ribeiro, K. Tiels, L. A. Aguirre, and T. Schön, “Beyond explod- of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beijing
 ing and vanishing gradients: Analysing RNN training using attractors Jiaotong University, China. Her research interests
 and smoothness,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2020, include wireless networks, Internet of Things, and
 pp. 2370–2380. mobile computing.
[30] H. Ji, “Statistics Mahalanobis distance for incipient sensor fault detection
 and diagnosis,” Chem. Eng. Sci., vol. 230, 2021, Art. no. 116233.
[31] H. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Guo, J. Wang, G. Li, and L. Shen, “Sensor fault
 detection and diagnosis for a water source heat pump air-conditioning
 system based on PCA and preprocessed by combined clustering,” Appl.
 Thermal Eng., vol. 160, 2019, Art. no. 114098.
[32] T. Kim, S. C. Suh, H. Kim, J. Kim, and J. Kim, “An encoding technique for Peng Qi (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
 CNN-based network anomaly detection,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE Int. Conf. from the School of Computer Science, Beijing Uni-
 Big Data, 2018, pp. 2960–2965. versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
[33] M. Canizo, I. Triguero, A. Conde, and E. Onieva, “Multi-head CNN– China, in 2022. He is currently with the School
 RNN for multi-time series anomaly detection: An industrial case study,” of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beijing
 Neurocomputing, vol. 363, pp. 246–260, 2019. Jiaotong University, Beijing. His research interests
[34] T. Luo and S. G. Nagarajan, “Distributed anomaly detection using au- include data analysis, IoT, recommendation systems,
 toencoder neural networks in wsn for IoT,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE Int. Conf. and LLM.
 Commun., 2018, pp. 1–6.
[35] D. S. Tan, Y.-C. Chen, T. P.-C. Chen, and W.-C. Chen, “TrustMAE: A
 noise-resilient defect classification framework using memory-augmented
 auto-encoders with trust regions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF winter Conf. Appl.
 Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 276–285.
[36] M. Li et al., “Guest editorial: Deep neural networks for graphs: Theory,
 models, algorithms, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4367–4372, 2024. Ruipeng Gao (Member, IEEE) received the BS
[37] L. Bai et al., “HAQJSK: Hierarchical-aligned quantum Jensen-Shannon degree from the Beijing University of Posts and
 kernels for graph classification,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, Telecommunications, China, in 2010, and the PhD
 no. 11, pp. 6370–6384, Nov. 2024. degree from Peking University, China, in 2016. He
[38] C. Huang, M. Li, F. Cao, H. Fujita, Z. Li, and X. Wu, “Are graph con- was a visiting scholar with Purdue University, USA,
 volutional networks with random weights feasible?,” IEEE Trans. Pattern from 2018 to 2019. He is currently a professor with
 Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 2751–2768, Mar. 2023. the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology,
[39] K. Huang et al., “How universal polynomial bases enhance spectral Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing. His research
 graph neural networks: Heterophily, over-smoothing, and over-squashing,” interests include mobile computing and applications,
 2024, arXiv:2405.12474. Internet of Things, and intelligent transportation
[40] B. Chen et al., “GCCAD: Graph contrastive coding for anomaly detection,” systems.
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8037–8051, Aug. 2023.