15248 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 SecureBERT and LLAMA 2 Empowered Control
Area Network Intrusion Detection and Classification
 Xuemei Li , Student Member, IEEE, and Huirong Fu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Numerous studies have proved their effective Based on technology implementation, four primary methodstrength in detecting Control Area Network (CAN) attacks. In the ologies for CAN intrusion detection have been identified,
realm of understanding the human semantic space, transformer- visualized in Figure 1 [2]. These methodologies are proficient
based models have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness. Leveraging pre-trained transformers has become a common strategy in detecting CAN intrusion attacks but do not possess the
in various language-related tasks, enabling these models to inherent capability to collect and analyze log data. The first is
grasp human semantics more comprehensively. To delve into fingerprint-based, which involves the detection of anomalies
the adaptability evaluation on pre-trained models for CAN through clock-based or voltage measurements. The second,
intrusion detection, we have developed three distinct models: performed at the message level, is parameter monitoring-based
CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT and CAN-LLAMA2. Notably,
our CAN-LLAMA2 model surpasses the state-of-the-art models and comprises techniques such as frequency-based, whitelistby achieving an exceptional performance 0.999993 in terms of based, or remote frame-based analysis. The third operates at
Balanced Accuracy (BA), Precision (PREC), Detection Rate (DR), the data-flow level and is grounded in information theory,
F1 score, and a remarkably low false alarm rate of 3.10e-6. employing entropy analysis or hamming distance measure-
Impressively, the false alarm rate is 52 times smaller than that ments. The fourth takes advantage of Machine Learning (ML)
of the leading model, MTH-IDS (Multitiered Hybrid Intrusion
Detection System). Our study underscores the promise of employ- techniques at a functional level. ML methodologies have
ing a Large Language Model as the foundational model, while undergone extensive evaluation in the context of CAN intruincorporating adapters for other cybersecurity-related tasks and sion detection, with a focus on Recurrent Neural Networks
maintaining the model’s inherent language-related capabilities. (RNNs), Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), and Artificial Neural
 Index Terms—Transformer, CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT, Networks (ANNs). Additionally, ML models like Decision
CAN-LLAMA2, vehicle cybersecurity. Tree (DT)-based or Hidden Markov Model (HMM)-based
 models have found application in this domain.
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 The primary limitation of existing implementations in CAN

V EHICLE CAN constitutes a standardized communication
 protocol extensively employed within the automotive
industry. It serves as a primary communication interface
 intrusion detection is their dependence on supplementary
 access, such as physical layer interactions, preprocessing of
 CAN messages, extraction of corresponding features, and creconnecting the vehicle gateway, Electronic Control Units ation of intricate rules and work flows within software, which
(ECUs), and various other control components integral to leads to numerous additional requirements for effective CAN
vehicular operations. For an Intrusion Detection System (IDS), intrusion detection, while limiting the capacity to identify
monitoring the CAN messages between ECUs to enable a unknown and novel attacks. To address these constraints, Cho
comprehensive understanding of the communication processes and Shin [3] developed Viden, a novel approach that entails
and the identification of anomalous messages are essential. The fingerprinting ECUs based on their corresponding voltage
United Nations Regulation WP.29 R155 [1] has articulated measurements. Viden acquires precise voltage measurements
a new mandate, rendering it obligatory for all new vehicles directly from the message transmitters and subsequently promanufactured within the European Union to adhere to this cesses this data to construct accurate voltage profiles and
regulation, effective from July 2024. This regulation enforces fingerprints. The method is primarily applicable to physical
all vehicles to possess the capability to detect and respond to layer attacks. Furthermore, frequency-based techniques adopt
potential cybersecurity attacks. Moreover, there is a requisite a different perspective by focusing on periodic traffic, rooted
for the systematic collection of log data to facilitate the identi- in the observation that frequencies tend to increase when
fication of cyber attacks and to support forensic investigations. malevolent adversaries engage in spoofing or Denial of Service
Therefore, an adaptable and multifaceted solution capable of (DoS) attacks [4]. On the other side, CAN IDS using the
meeting both demands becomes imperative. traditional ML models such as Decision Trees (DTs), Random
 Received 14 November 2023; revised 22 June 2024, 17 December 2024,
 Forests (RFs), and Neural Networks, require preprocess CAN
20 April 2025, and 18 June 2025; accepted 21 July 2025. Date of publication message and perform feature engineering to train the model
13 August 2025; date of current version 21 October 2025. This work was in order to perform classification.
supported in part by U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant 2146280, Transformer models have garnered recognition for the
Grant 2327944, and Grant 2349663. The Associate Editor for this article was
H. H. Song. (Corresponding author: Xuemei Li.) remarkable proficiency in grasping human semantics and
 The authors are with the Department of Computer Science and handling various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks.
Engineering, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309 USA (e-mail:
xuemeili@oakland.edu).
 They possess the capacity to accept textual input and generate
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3596915 output directly. Their remarkable capabilities have been well-
 1524-9050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LI AND FU: SecureBERT AND LLAMA 2 EMPOWERED CAN INTRUSION DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 15249

Fig. 1. Taxonomy of Intrusion Detection Methods in In-Vehicle Networks (IVNs), categorized by underlying technology implementation: fingerprint-based,
parameter monitoring-based, data-flow-based, and machine learning-based approaches. This classification highlights the diversity in detection strategies, each
targeting different layers of the CAN communication stack [2].

demonstrated in the realms of computer vision and NLP tasks. 2) We design and demonstrate detailed architectures of the
The first introduce of the transformer model can be attributed proposed three models and discuss how to train them to
to Vaswani et al. [5]. Its architecture comprises an encoder detect and classify CAN attacks.
and decoder structure. This design replaced the traditional 3) We develop and construct the proposed CAN-C-BERT,
recurrent-based models’ recurrent layer with a multi-head CAN-SecureBERT and CAN-LLAMA2 models by inteself-attention layer, leading to substantial improvements in grating pre-trained models with classification heads and
performance, particularly in translation tasks. training the proposed models with pre-balanced CAN
 There are a couple of motivations for our study to inte- dataset.
grate transformer models. First, transformer models can be 4) We conduct empirical study of the proposed modpre-trained on extensive unlabeled datasets. This pre-training els and compare them with the state-of-the-art model
can significantly enhance model performance during transfer MTH-IDS [12]. The experimental study shows that
learning [6]. This technique is commonly referred to as domain our proposed CAN-LLAMA2 model demonstrates the
adaptation, which falls under transductive transfer learning. It highest performance and CAN-SecureBERT secures the
is specialized to address challenges arising from a substantial second-highest position.
volume of unlabeled source data for training and limited In particular, our work has unique innovations which yield
unlabeled target data [7]. This strategy has demonstrated significant results, including:
its efficacy by achieving state-of-the-art results in various
common NLP benchmarks, as evidenced in literature [8]. The 1) Utilization of CAN Message Logs: Our proposed CANempirical robustness of this strategy extends across diverse C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT and CAN-LLAMA2 models
domains, including computer vision, audio, and text processing possess the unique ability to directly employ CAN mestasks. sage logs for intrusion detection and attack classification.
 This paper endeavors to adapt pre-trained transformer-based This approach eliminates the need for traditional data
models for the purpose of detecting CAN attacks. Leveraging preprocessing, as the models can directly analyze the
the inherent capabilities of transformers has the potential to raw data.
markedly enhance efficiency and streamline the architecture 2) Superior Performance with Limited Data and
of an IDS for vehicular CAN attacks. Transformers offer Enhanced Generalization with Larger Data: Our
a range of advantages, the first being their ability to learn proposed CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT and CANintrinsic relationships through position encoding and a multi- LLAMA2 models have achieved superior performance
head self-attention mechanism. The second advantage is that while training only 10% of the data, while other state-oftransformers can learn meaningful representations from CAN art models ([13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20],
message logs without the need for extensive data preprocessing [21]) require a larger dataset to achieve a performance
or feature extraction. level similar to ours. We found more training data used
 In this study, Our Primary Contributions are summarized will contribute to model performance improvement but
as follows: the improvement magnitude gradually reduce as training
 data increases. Furthermore, our models trained with
 1) We propose CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT and more extensive datasets exhibit improved generalization
 CAN-LLAMA2 models to detect and classify various and outperform their counterparts trained with smaller
 CAN attacks by adapting pre-trained transformer-based dataset.
 models, namely BERT [9], SecureBERT [10], and 3) Better Model Performance with More Complex
 LLAMA 2 [11]. Model Architecture: By comparing the performance
15250 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 of CAN-C-BERT and CAN-SecureBERT, we do not any CAN ID associated with a normal message. Their
 observe a significant performance difference. This sug- model achieved F1-scores ranging from 0.81 to 0.99 for
 gests that a transformer pre-trained with cybersecurity different types of attacks. However, their approach heavily
 domain knowledge does not necessarily improve the relied on the probability distribution of normal message CAN
 capability to detect attacks. Model ability to capture IDs, rendering it incapable of detecting injected message
 attack patterns depends on the complexity of the model attacks that employ similar CAN IDs as normal messages.
 architecture. Furthermore, their model exhibited an F1 score below 0.9
 4) LoRA Utilization in CAN-LLAMA2: Leveraging the for fuzzy and malfunction attacks. Another limitation of
 Low-Rank Adaption (LoRA) [22] technique for training their approach is its binary classification nature, necessitat-
 CAN-LLAMA2 resulted in a modification of only 0.57% ing the development of an additional anomaly classification
 of the model’s parameters. This demonstrates that the model.
 majority of the original LLAMA 2 model parameters Aghaei et al. introduced SecureBERT in their study [10],
 remain unchanged. Consequently, the CAN-LLAMA2 presenting a cybersecurity language model designed to capture
 model retains its versatility and can be employed for text connotations within cybersecurity-related texts, such as
 various language-related tasks. For instance, the Vehicle Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI). SecureBERT is constructed
 Security Operations Center (VSOC) team can capitalize upon a pre-trained Roberta model, featuring a custom tokon this model and adapt it for diverse downstream tasks enizer that incorporates the original Roberta model token
 by fine-tuning the pre-trained model and integrating dictionary with cybersecurity domain tokens. This model was
 adapter heads. trained on an extensive corpus of cybersecurity text and was
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec- assessed using standard MLM methods. SecureBERT serves
tion II presents an extensive literature review. Section III as a valuable pre-trained model imbued with domain-specific
conducts a comparative analysis of the model architectures, knowledge in the cybersecurity field, which we utilize in our
highlighting the distinctions between CAN-C-BERT, CAN research to develop CAN-SecureBERT.
SecureBERT, and CAN-LLAMA2. Section IV outlines the In a separate effort, Touvron et al. from Meta GENAI
key techniques employed for fine-tuning pre-trained mod- unveiled LLAMA 2 [11], a novel family of pre-trained and
els. Section V furnishes in-depth information regarding the fine-tuned models with scales ranging from 7 billion to 70
datasets and the training equipment employed in our research. billion parameters. The models were constructed based on the
Section VI showcases our experimental results, addresses our conventional transformer model as introduced in [5]. LLAMA
research questions, and offers a performance comparison of 2 models incorporate pre-normalization using RMSNorm,
our proposed models with state-of-the-art models. Finally, employ the SwiGLU activation function, implement rotary
Sections VII and VIII conclude and delineate future work. positional embeddings, and feature grouped query attention.
 These models were trained using preprocessed data amounting
 II. R ELATED W ORKS to 2000 billion tokens, thereby encapsulating a substantial
 In this section, we identify the most current research endeav- wealth of knowledge in comparison to SecureBERT. In our
ors that employ transformer-based models for CAN attack study, we will use LLAMA 2 to develop CAN-LLAMA2.
detection. We aim to provide a comprehensive overview of Khandelwal and Shreejith [25] proposed an FPGA-based
the latest findings and also assess the inherent limitations of IDS framework for Electronic Control Units (ECUs), achievthese relevant studies. ing 99% detection accuracy while significantly reducing
 Nwafor et al. proposed a language-based intrusion detection energy consumption and inference latency. Their work
model utilizing BERT [23]. They first trained the BERT provides a strong benchmark for resource-efficient IDS deploymodel to comprehend the semantics within CAN messages. ment, particularly in embedded automotive environments.
Subsequently, they fine-tuned the model for CAN message Similarly, Huan et al. [26] introduced a lightweight deep
classification. The training procedure entailed 64% of the learning model utilizing a T-shaped temporal windowing
data, while 20% of the data was allocated for validation, and strategy, enabling a favorable trade-off between detection
the remaining 16% was dedicated to testing. Their model performance and computational overhead. Their architecture
achieved close to 100% accuracy, precision, Recall, and F1 is well-suited for real-time deployment in low-resource enviscore. However, the specific details of their performance were ronments.
not reported. Together, these works highlight the growing diversity of
 In a related study, Natasha et al. introduced the “CAN- scalable IDS designs, spanning from high-performance LLM-
BERT” model [24]. Their primary objective was to design based models to lightweight, hardware-friendly solutions.
an anomaly detection model and frame the CAN message Such perspectives are critical in shaping adaptable IDS frameclassification as a binary classification problem, differentiating works for heterogeneous automotive platforms.
between normal and abnormal messages. They adopted the Consequently, as indicated by the above literature review,
BERT model and trained it using standard CAN messages, there is an absence of prior research endeavors that have
incorporating Masked Language Model (MLM) techniques. previously employed SecureBERT and LLAMA 2 for the
Subsequently, the model predicted the probability distribution purpose of CAN intrusion detection and classification. Therefor each CAN ID in randomly masked testing sequences. fore, our research aims to fill a significant gap in this
Their approach classified messages as abnormal if they lacked domain.
LI AND FU: SecureBERT AND LLAMA 2 EMPOWERED CAN INTRUSION DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 15251

 TABLE I
 P RE -T RAINED M ODEL C OMPARISON

 III. M ODEL A RCHITECTURE
 In this section, we present a comprehensive overview
of transformer architecture and the model architectures of
our proposed CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT and CAN-
LLAMA2 models. We build our proposed model on top
of pre-trained transformer models BERT, SecureBERT and
LLAMA 2. The interpretability of how each of the proposed
models generates the decision-making process for CAN attack
detection and classification will be described and discussed.
The overview to compare them is listed in Table I.

A. Transformer
 The Transformer deep learning architecture, first proposed
by Google in 2017, has served as the base model for numerous
NLP LLMs, including BERT, GPT, and LLAMA 2. Figure 2
illustrates the model architecture, as presented in [5], comprising an encoding and a decoding phases. The transformation
process comprises 6-stack encoders and decoders, respectively. It is akin to “Transformers” components disassemble
and subsequent reassemble process. Each stack process was
subdivided into eight blocks based on different initial values.
Each block possesses a “transformation manual”, recording
component weights and mutual relationships.
 Each encoder consists of two core components: a multihead self-attention mechanism and a feed-forward neural
network. Input embeddings are generated via tokenization,
with positional encodings added to retain token order. These
embeddings pass through the multi-head self-attention layer,
which performs eight parallel computations using the Key (K),
Query (Q), and Value (V) vectors to capture relationships
between tokens. The attention output is then processed by Fig. 2. Overview of the Transformer model architecture, as introduced in
a feed-forward layer. Both layers are enhanced with residual [5], featuring stacked encoder and decoder layers with self-attention and feedforward modules. The figure highlights key components such as multi-head
connections and layer normalization for stability and improved attention, positional encoding, and masked decoding, which together enable
learning. effective sequence modeling in natural language processing tasks. [5].
 The decoder mirrors the encoder’s structure but introduces
key differences. It includes masked multi-head attention to
prevent tokens from attending to future positions—an essen- the error between predictions and actual values, thus achieving
tial feature for autoregressive tasks. Additionally, it applies optimal learning outcomes.
attention over the encoder’s output using Ks and Vs from the
encoder and Qs from the decoder. The result is passed through
a softmax function, which selects the most probable next token B. CAN-C-BERT
in the sequence. BERT, which stands for Bidirectional Encoder Represen-
 The training methodology of the Transformer network tations from Transformers, is an “Encoder-only” transformer
adheres to the gradient descent algorithm, leveraging back- introduced by Google in 2018. It undergoes training on largepropagation to adjust model parameter weights by minimizing scale datasets, and its robust pre-training enables fine-tuning
15252 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 3. Illustration of the BERT pre-training process, which includes Masked Language Modeling (MLM) and Next Sentence Prediction (NSP). These tasks
enable the model to learn deep bidirectional representations of text by predicting masked tokens and understanding sentence relationships using large-scale
unlabeled corpora [9].

Fig. 4. Architecture of the CAN-C-BERT model, consisting of a pre-trained BERT base encoder with 12 transformer layers and a classification head. The
red highlighted region shows the fine-tuning phase used for CAN intrusion detection, adapting BERT’s language representations to the classification of CAN
bus messages.

for various downstream tasks, highlighting its versatility and English Wikipedia. The BERT pre-training process is shown in
effectiveness in natural language understanding. Figure 3.
 BERT models are designed to generate deep bidirectional The model architecture of CAN-C-BERT model are
representations from unlabeled text by considering both left depicted in Figures 4. We name this fine-tuned intrusion
and right context across all layers. After pre-training, a classification model “CAN-C-BERT”. The “C” in the middle
BERT model can be fine-tuned for various downstream tasks, of “CAN” and “BERT” is short for “Classification”. The archisuch as sequence classification, by adding a single additional tecture of the CAN-C-BERT model is particularly emphasized
output layer. In this study, we employ BERT base version within the red Fine-tuning box. It incorporates a pre-trained
model, which has been pre-trained on the BookCorpus dataset BERT base version model and a classification head. The pre-
[27]. This dataset comprises 11,038 unpublished books and trained BERT base version model has 12 layers of transformer
LI AND FU: SecureBERT AND LLAMA 2 EMPOWERED CAN INTRUSION DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 15253

Fig. 5. CAN-C-BERT Embedding Input Structure: The BERT model combines Tokenization Embedding (1, n, 768) and Position Embedding (1, n, 768)
through summation to obtain an input Embedding (1, n, 768) for the model.

encoder blocks totaling 110 million model parameters. The consists of a pre-trained SecureBERT model and a classificlassification head is implemented as a fully connected neural cation head, which is embodied by a fully connected neural
network. network. SecureBERT leverages the architecture of a pre-
 The first step to obtain CAN-C-BERT model is the pre- trained RoBERTa-base model, featuring 12 hidden transformer
training process. The pre-training process establishes the and attention layers, in addition to one input layer. This adapfoundational understanding of grammar and context, known as tation involves fine-tuning the RoBERTa-base model utilizing
language representation. This process is characterized by its a substantial dataset of 98,411 cybersecurity-related textual
key feature—the utilization of unsupervised corpora, including elements (equivalent to 1 billion tokens). The model integrates
consecutive sentences. The CAN-C-BERT embedding input a customized tokenizer based on the original RoBERTa tokstructure is shown in Figure 5. The positional encoding infor- enizer, effectively expanding the overall vocabulary to 50,265.
mation is added after segment embedding and tokenization This tailored tokenizer enhances the model’s proficiency in
embedding. BERT employs two primary training strategies: extracting cybersecurity-related tokens from textual corpora.
MLM and Next Sentence Prediction (NSP). In MLM, each Like its name, SecureBERT compounds Security and BERT.
sentence masks some parts of its words, and predicting the The model’s efficacy is further augmented by introducing
masked words based on the context of bidirectionality, inspired noise into the token weights of the vocabulary during the
by human cloze tests. After transformation, the embedding training phase.
output is obtained, and the output “T N” represents the The model architecture of CAN-SecureBERT is the same
prediction of the masked word. In NSP, the original input is as CAN-C-BERT. It incorporates a pre-trained SecureBERT
modified to include a special token ([CLS]) at the beginning, model and a classification head. The pre-trained Securewith sentence separation indicated by the [SEP] token. BERT model has 12 transformer blocks totaling 123 million
 The second step involved is the fine-tuning process. The model parameters. The classification head is implemented as
fine-tuning process involves additional training tailored to a fully connected neural network. It is incorporated after the
specific tasks. A BERT base model consists of 12 layers of embedding vector of the classification token [CLS] is derived
transformer encoder blocks, 768 hidden layers, and 12 self- from the SecureBERT model. It comprises a fully connected
attention heads. To train a BERT-based model for sequence neural networks including a hidden layer, an output layer,
classification tasks, a classification head is integrated into and a softmax activation layer. The [CLS] embedding vector
the embedding vector of the classification task token [CLS] passes through the hidden layer and then connects to the
derived from the BERT model. The [CLS] token summarize output layer. The output from the output layer is passed into
the sentence and represents the output of the last layer for a softmax activation layer to obtain the probability vector.
subsequent classification. The classification head shown in The class with the highest probability is the final predicted
Figure 4 comprises fully connected neural networks, featuring output.
a hidden layer, an output layer, and a softmax activation
layer. The [CLS] embedding vector passes through the hidden
 D. CAN-LLAMA2
layer and connects to the subsequent output layer. The output
from the output layer is then processed through a softmax LLAMA2, the second iteration of the LLAMA series, repreactivation layer to generate the probability vector. The class sents a collection of generative text models that are pre-trained
with the highest probability is subsequently considered the and fine-tuned. It was officially introduced on July 18, 2023,
final predicted output. as a collaborative initiative between Meta and Microsoft. The
 For CAN attack detection and classification, the process LLAMA 2 models, developed and launched by Meta, are
initiates with the tokenization of the CAN messages. These available in three distinct sizes with parameter counts of 7
tokens are then input into the pre-trained BERT model, and billion, 13 billion, and 70 billion. These models were trained
the output embedding for the [CLS] token becomes the input on an extensive dataset comprising 2 trillion tokens sourced
for the classification head. During training, the cross-entropy from various outlets such as web pages (CommonCrawl),
loss is computed by comparing the predicted labels to the open-source repository code (GitHub), Wikipedia content (in
actual ground truth labels. 20 different languages), public domain books, Latex source
 code (from scientific papers on ArXiv), and questions and
 answers from Stack Exchange. The dataset curation involved
C. CAN-SecureBERT meticulous removal of websites containing personal data and
 The process using CAN-SecureBERT to classify CAN mes- the up-sampling of samples from reliable sources, as detailed
sages mirrors the approach employed by CAN-C-BERT. It in [11].
15254 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 6. Architecture of the CAN-LLAMA 2 fine-tuning model, which integrates a pre-trained LLAMA 2 decoder-based language model (7B parameters, 32
transformer blocks) with a classification head for CAN attack detection. The classification head processes the [EOS] token embedding to predict attack types
via a fully connected network followed by softmax activation. This framework adapts LLAMA 2’s generative capabilities for token-level classification in
automotive intrusion detection tasks.

 token embedding will be extracted by pre-trained LLAMA 2
 model. The resulting output embedding of the last token is
 then forwarded to the classification head. During the training
 process, the cross-entropy loss is calculated by comparing the
 predicted labels with the actual ground truth labels.

 IV. F INE -T UNING P ROCESS
 In this section, we explain the fine-tuning process with the
 aid of mathematical expressions. The main steps comprise
Fig. 7. Hyperparameter importance of CAN-LLAMA2. the acquisition of class tokens from the pre-trained model,
 the application of the classification head to acquire the class
 probability vector, the computation of the loss function, and
 The model architecture of the CAN-LLAMA2 model is the weight optimization procedure through the utilization of
depicted in Figure 7. CAN-LLAMA2 model consists of a the AdamW algorithm. Additionally, we introduce methodolopre-trained LLAMA 2 model and the classification head. The gies that enhance the efficiency of parameter-based fine-tuning,
pre-trained LLAMA 2 model utilized in this study is a half- facilitating the fine-tuning of the LLAMA2 model.
precision model. It has 32 transformer decoder blocks totaling
7 billion model parameters. The classification head is implemented as a fully connected neural network. A. Fine-Tuning CAN-C-BERT and CAN-SecureBERT
 For training the pre-trained LLAMA 2 model for CAN Initially, the individual raw CAN message is tokenized. This
attack detection and classification tasks, a classification head is process involves dividing the input sequence into subword
integrated into the embedding vector of the last token ([EOS]) tokens using the tokenizer associated with the transformer
(End of the Sentence)derived from the LLAMA 2 model. model. Let X symbolize the tokenized input sequence. Further,
This classification head includes a fully connected neural let model denote the transformer model, where θ corresponds
network with a hidden layer, an output layer, and a softmax to the model’s parameters. The output, denoted as Z can be
activation layer. The [EOS] embedding vector traverses the formulated as shown in Equation (1).
hidden layer and connects to the output layer. The output from
 Z = model(X, θ) (1)
the output layer undergoes a softmax activation to generate
the probability vector. The final predicted output corresponds Atop the transformer model, a classification head is incorto attack type with the highest probability. For CAN attack porated to carry out sequence classification. This classification
detection and classification, the initial step involves tokenizing head is composed of a hidden layer, an output layer and
the CAN messages using the LLAMA 2 tokenizer. The last subsequently followed by a softmax activation function. Let
LI AND FU: SecureBERT AND LLAMA 2 EMPOWERED CAN INTRUSION DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 15255

W denote the weight matrix of the linear layer, b signify the the forward pass of the model, incorporating the low-rank
bias vector, and C represent the total number of classes. The approximation.
calculated predicted class probabilities P j for each class j are L f ine−tune = L(θU , θV ) = L( f (UV, X), Y) (6)
calculated as expressed in Equation (2).
 Throughout the process of updating the model, the paramee(W j ·Z+b j ) ters θU and θV are adjusted using the AdamW optimization
 P j = PC (2)
 (Wk ·Z+bk )
 k=1 e algorithm. This update is conducted to minimize the fine-
 In this study, the chosen loss function is cross-entropy loss, tuning loss denoted as L f ine−tune .
utilized to measure the difference between the predicted probabilities and the actual ground truth labels. Let yi j represent an C. Benefits of Fine-Tuning
indicator variable, which takes the value of 1 if the true label There are 3 main benefits: transfer learning, better initialfor CAN message i corresponds to class j, and 0 otherwise. The ization, reduced overfitting. Fine-tuning follows the concept of
cross-entropy loss for an individual CAN message, denoted as transfer learning, where knowledge gained while solving one
Li , can be defined as depicted in Equation (3). problem is applied to a different task. Comparing with random
 C
 initialization, the model has learned useful patterns from pre-
 Li = −
 X
 yi j log(P j ) (3) training dataset and it helps the model converge faster and
 j=1
 potentially to a better local minimum. Fine-tuning involves a
 smaller dataset comparing with the pre-training dataset. This
 The aggregate loss, denoted as L, for a mini-batch of size means only small amount model parameters will be changed.
N is computed as the average of the individual losses Li . It The general features learned during pre-training, which can
can be represented as shown in Equation (4). reduce overfitting on the smaller dataset.
 N In the weight space and the optimization landscape. fine-
 1 X
 L= Li (4) tuning modifies the pre-trained weights to better suit the new
 N
 i=1 task. It allows the model to find a local minimum that minimize
 To mitigate the risk of overfitting, the optimization algo- the loss for the specific task. It keeps the majority model
rithm employed in this study is AdamW, as presented in parameters and data pattern captured during pre-training. This
[28]. AdamW is an adaptation of the Adam optimizer with can be viewed as minimizing the following objective function
the inclusion of weight decay regularization. It facilitates the during fine-tuning:
adjustment of the model’s parameters θ to minimize the loss Ltotal = λLpt + (1 − λ)Lft (7)
function L.
 where Lpt is the loss from pre-training. Lft is the loss from
 fine-tuning. λ is a weighting factor balancing the influence of
B. Fine-Tuning CAN-LLAMA2 pre-training and fine-tuning losses.
 LLAMA2, with its 7 billion parameters and half-precision,
requires 14GB of GPU RAM for its operation. To facilitate V. P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS
training and inference while working with constrained com- In this section, we present the metrics selected for perputational resources, the study applies a technique known as formance benchmark. We select metrics that can handle
LoRA from the parameter-efficient fine-tuning library [28] to imbalanced dataset and have a direct impact to end users.
fine-tune CAN-LLAMA2. The performance evaluation of the proposed CAN-C-BERT,
 LoRA involves the approximation of the model’s weight CAN-SecureBERT, and CAN-LLAMA2 models relies on a set
matrices through lower-rank matrices. This approximation of key metrics, including Balanced Accuracy (BA), Precision
significantly reduces the number of parameters that need to be (PREC), Detection Rate (DR) or Recall, False Alarm Rate
retrained from a pre-trained model. Let W denote the weight (FAR), F1 score, and Model Parameter Size. The mathematical
matrix of a specific layer within the pre-trained model. It can expressions for these metrics can be derived from [30], as
be represented as W ∈ Rm∗n , where m signifies the number represented in Equations (8)- (11), where TP stands for True
of output neurons in the layer, and n represents the number Positive, TN signifies True Negative, FP represents False
of input neurons. The weight matrix W can be approximated Positive, and FN denotes False Negative.
by utilizing two lower-rank matrices, U and V, as shown in Given the inherent characteristics of the hacking dataset,
Equation (5). In this equation, U ∈ Rm∗r and V ∈ Rr∗n , with r it exhibits a significant imbalance, featuring notably fewer
being the desired rank. The selection of the hyperparameter r instances of attack data in comparison to normal data. As
is guided by the balance between accuracy and the degree of a result, the conventional accuracy metric can be misleading
compression. in such a scenario. To address this, BA is employed, which
 W = UV (5) represents the mean accuracy of individual class predictions.
 BA offers a more reliable measure of model performance,
 The primary goal is to modify the parameters of the lowparticularly suited for datasets characterized by an imbalanced
rank matrices U and V to minimize the cross-entropy loss,
 class distribution.
as demonstrated in Equation (6), where L denotes the task- C
specific loss function. In this context, θU and θV signify the BA =
 1X T Pi
 (8)
parameters corresponding to U and V, while f represents C T Pi + FNi
 i=1
15256 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 The PREC measures the accuracy of positive predictions TABLE II
generated by a model. C AR H ACKING DATASET
 TP
 PREC = (9)
 T P + FP
 The DR, commonly known as Recall, assesses the proportion of TP predictions relative to the entirety of actual positive
cases.
 TP
 DR = (10)
 T P + FN TABLE III
 The FAR quantifies the proportion of FP predictions relative C AN -T RAIN - AND -T EST DATASET
to the entire set of actual negative cases. This metric holds significant importance, particularly in the context of an IDS. For
instance, a model with a FAR of 1e-3 may be deemed exceptional performance in the majority of ML tasks. However, in
the case of IDS, the practical implications become apparent.
Consider the scenario where millions of CAN messages are
generated daily by a multitude of vehicles. To illustrate, let us
assume a daily volume of 10 million messages. With a FAR ID and DATA values. This injection was carried out at
of 1e-3, the number of false alarm messages would amount intervals of 0.5 milliseconds, including messages with
to 10,000. Managing and triaging such a volume on a daily randomized CAN ID and data values.
basis becomes operationally impractical for a VSOC team. 3) RPM/Gear Attack: The RPM/Gear attack revolves
 FP around the injection of messages associated with specific
 FAR = (11) CAN IDs pertinent to RPM and Gear information.
 FP + T N
 Messages related to RPM and Gear were introduced at
 The F1 score represents the harmonic mean of PREC
 intervals of 1 millisecond.
and DR or Recall. This metric furnishes a balanced and
comprehensive measure of a model’s performance. These attacks were executed by introducing messages into
 the CAN network, aiming to replicate real-world scenarios and
 2 · PREC · DR
 F1 = (12) behaviors within the Hyundai YF Sonata. An overview of the
 PREC + DR Car Hacking dataset is presented in Table II.
 Imbalanced dataset is used to evaluate the model’s perfor- The second dataset is the can-train-and-test dataset [31]. It
mance in real world scenario. Per attack type performance in contains controller area network (CAN) traffic collected from 2
terms of BA, DR, FAR, F1 is reported to show and compare OEMs and 4 different vehicle types including the 2017 Subaru
model performance for major and minor attack types. Forester, the 2016 Chevrolet Silverado, the 2011 Chevrolet
 Traverse, and the 2011 Chevrolet Impala. The format of dataset
 VI. DATASETS fileds and labels are converted to be consistent with Car
 In this study, we employed 2 datasets to perform experi- Hacking Dataset. For attack types, we keep only BENIGN,
ments to evaluate the performance of proposed models. The DoS, Fuzzy, RPM and Gear to be able to compare it with CAR
first is the Car Hacking Dataset, which was gathered from Hacking Dataset. An overview of can-train-and-test dataset is
Hyundai’s YF Sonata and made available by Song et al. presented in Table III.
[13]. This dataset encompasses three distinct categories of
attacks, namely, DoS attacks, Fuzzy attacks, and Spoofing VII. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
attacks. These datasets were curated by capturing CAN traffic In this section, we present how to process the dataset
through the On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD-II) port of a real to train and evaluate our proposed models. We show the
vehicle while simulated message attacks were actively being experimental setup, hyperparameters employed, as well as
executed. The data attributes within the dataset encompass model complexity. Subsequently, we delve into a comprethe following fields: Timestamp, CAN ID, Data Length Code hensive discussion of the experimental results and emphasize
(DLC), DATA[0], DATA [1], DATA [2], DATA [3], DATA [4], noteworthy observations.
DATA [5], DATA [6], DATA [7], and Flag. Further insights
into each attack type, as detailed in [13], are outlined as
follows: A. Fine-Tuning Hyperparameters
 1) DoS Attack: The DoS attack involves the injection We partitioned the Car Hacking Dataset into a 70% training
 of high-priority CAN messages, exemplified by the dataset and a 30% test dataset. In practical applications,
 ‘0×000’ CAN ID packet, at brief intervals. Specifically, collecting data from vehicles is often a challenging endeavor.
 these ‘0 × 000’ CAN ID messages were injected every It is crucial to explore how the quantity of training data affects
 0.3 milliseconds. model performance. Therefore, our proposed models were
 2) Fuzzy Attack: The Fuzzy attack entails the injection of trained and validated using subsets amounting to 1% and 10%
 messages featuring spoofed, randomly generated CAN of the training dataset, which were randomly selected from
LI AND FU: SecureBERT AND LLAMA 2 EMPOWERED CAN INTRUSION DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 15257

 TABLE IV
 M ODEL S IZE

the entire dataset. The random selection process maintained
a balanced representation of data, with the normal data comprising a ratio ten times smaller than other attack-type data.
For instance, when the selected attack types amounted to 1%,
the normal dataset selected was 0.1%, ensuring a balanced
distribution of normal and attack-type data. Subsequently, the
selected dataset was further divided into a 70% training portion
and a 30% validation portion. The entire 30% test dataset from
the Car Hacking dataset was reserved to evaluate the trained
and validated models.
 The hardware used for training in this study possesses
the following specifications: AMD Ryzen 9 5900X 12-Core
Processor with a clock speed of 3.70 GHz, 128GB of RAM,
and two Nvidia RTX 3090 GPUs, each equipped with 24GB
of VRAM and interconnected using the Nvidia SLI bridge. Fig. 8. Train Loss Comparison between CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT,
 and CAN-LLAMA2 with 1%, 5% and 10% Training Data.
 For the training hyperparameters, we define a search
space as following for each parameter. lora r is from
1 to 64. lora alpha is 1 to 128, lora dropout is during training. Notably, when employing a 1 percent training
0.0 to 0.5. gradient accumulation steps is 1 to 8. dataset, the training times for these models are approximately
learning rate is 1e-6 to 1e-4. weight decay is 1e- 4 and 5 minutes, respectively. In contrast, training the CAN-
6 to 1e-2. per device train batch size is 4, 8, 16. LLAMA2 model requires considerably more time, with a
per device eval batch size is 16, 32, 64. The hyperpa- training duration of 118 minutes. However, it is important to
rameter space is then sampled with Tree-structured Parzen note that the inference speed of CAN-LLAMA2 is approxi-
Estimator (TPE) sampler which is a type of bayesian opti- mately eight times slower than the other two models. This
mization with objective to minimize train and validation loss. difference is primarily attributed to computational resource
For the batch size, we also consider the max size that can be limitations, given that CAN-LLAMA2 concludes 7 billion
handled by our hardware efficiently.An example of hyperpa- parameters. After implementing LoRA, it becomes possible to
rameter importance for CAN-LLAMA2 is shown in Figure 7. fine-tune approximately 40 million parameters from the linear
 The identical settings are applied to both CAN-C-BERT layers of the model. Nevertheless, it is worth emphasizing
and CAN-SecureBERT. These models utilize a training batch that the computational demands of CAN-LLAMA2 in terms
size of 4 and a validation batch size of 32. The learning rate of matrix multiplications, activations, and other mathematical
is set at 5e-5, while the weight decay is configured at 0.01. operations are significantly higher than those of the other two
As for CAN-LLAMA2, the training batch size is set to 4, the models. Furthermore, due to restrictions related to GPU memvalidation batch size is 16, and a gradient accumulation step ory size, CAN-LLAMA2 can only accommodate a maximum
of 4 is implemented. The learning rate for CAN-LLAMA2 is batch size of 16 CAN messages for validation. This limitation
established at 3e-5, and the weight decay is fixed at 0.01. not only affects memory access times but also gives rise to
Moreover, to facilitate the training of CAN-LLAMA2 while memory bottlenecks.
accommodating limited computational resources, the model Another noteworthy observation is that only 0.57% of
parameters are loaded in 4-bit precision. LoRA, as discussed the parameters are altered in the CAN-LLAMA2 model
in Section IV, is incorporated into the training pipeline. during fine-tuning. This implies that the majority of the
Specifically, the LoRA attention dimension is set to 16, the original LLAMA2 model’s parameters remain unchanged.
alpha parameter for LoRA scaling is established at 64, a Consequently, CAN-LLAMA2 can be repurposed for other
dropout probability of 0.1 is applied to LoRA layers, and the language-related tasks. The VSOC team can utilize the same
bias is maintained at a value of 0. All three models are trained model and undertake various downstream tasks by fine-tuning
for a total of 10 epochs. pre-trained models and incorporating adapter heads.

B. Model Complexity C. Results
 Table IV presents a comparative analysis of fine-tuned In this section, we conduct a thorough analysis of our
model sizes and parameters. Both CAN-C-BERT and CAN- results to address our research questions and gain insights
SecureBERT offer the ability to fine-tune all their parameters into the performance of our proposed models against the
15258 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE V
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

 TABLE VI
 ATTACK C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE - C AR H ACKING DATASET - CAN-C-BERT

 TABLE VII
 ATTACK C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE - C AR H ACKING DATASET - CAN-S ECUREBERT

 TABLE VIII
 ATTACK C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE - C AR H ACKING DATASET - CAN-L LAMA 2

 TABLE IX
 ATTACK C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE - C AN -T RAIN - AND -T EST DATASET - CAN-C-BERT

2 datasets selected. The validation results for Car Hacking detail performance per attack type classification is shown in
Dataset, including training loss, validation loss, BA, PREC, Table IX, X and XI.
DR, and F1 score, are visualized in Figures 8–13. The detailed 1) Test Directly Without Fine-Tuning: To understand the
performance per attack type classification is shown in Tables benefits of fine-tuning using our proposed models with added
VI, VII, VIII. To evaluate the generalization capability of the classification heads, we perform tests to directly use preproposed models against various vehicle types and OEMs, the trained models with added classification heads but without
LI AND FU: SecureBERT AND LLAMA 2 EMPOWERED CAN INTRUSION DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 15259

 TABLE X
 ATTACK C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE - C AN -T RAIN - AND -T EST DATASET - C AN -S ECUREBERT

 TABLE XI
 ATTACK C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE - C AN -T RAIN - AND -T EST DATASET - CAN-L LAMA 2

 Fig. 11. Precision Comparison between CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT,
 and CAN-LLAMA2 with 1%, 5% and 10% Training Data.

Fig. 9. Validation Loss Comparison between CAN-C-BERT, CAN-
SecureBERT, and CAN-LLAMA2 with 1%, 5% and 10% Training Data.

 which indicates that CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT, and
 CAN-LLAMA2 all converge within ten epochs. Figure 8 clearly
 illustrates that the models trained with 10% of the data
 converge more swiftly than those trained with only 1% of
 the data. All six training losses are close to 0, indicating that
 they have all converged. However, for validation loss from
 Figure 9, the models trained with 10% data have loss close
 to 0, which are much less than the models trained with 1%
 data. This indicates that models trained with 10% exhibit more
 accurately. The validation loss is close to 0. It means these
 models can perform effectively on the unseen data within the
 validation dataset.
Fig. 10. Balanced Accuracy Comparison between CAN-C-BERT, CAN- 3) Balanced Accuracy, Precision, Detection Rate and F1
SecureBERT, and CAN-LLAMA2 with 1%, 5% and 10% Training Data. Score: The BA, PREC, DR, and F1 score are plotted in
 Figure 10 to 13. All 6 models have achieved close to the
 value 1 result for these metrics. It indicates all models are
fine-tuning. We then use these models to predict using test very accurate. From the plots of model performance using 1%
datasets. We observe that all models made random predictions training data in Figures 10- 13, we can observe CAN-LLAMA2
for all CAN message instances. This finding indicates that exhibits superior early-stage performance and converges to the
large pre-trained models can not be directly used to classify value of 1.0 more rapidly compared to the other two models.
vehicle CAN attacks. Fine-tuning has to be performed for the The models trained with 10% data perform better than the
models to learn the attack data patterns. models trained with 1% and 5% data for all metrics. Among all
 2) Training Loss and Validation Loss: Training loss and six models, CAN-LLAMA2 trained with 10% data performs the
validation loss result are shown in Figure 8 and 9. All models best. CAN-SecureBERT trained with 10% data is the second
have training and validation loss close to 0 within 10 epochs, best among all metrics.
15260 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 12. Detection Rate Comparison between CAN-C-BERT, CAN-
SecureBERT, and CAN-LLAMA2 with 1%, 5% and 10% Training Data.

 Fig. 14. Shap values of input can message token for each of message type.

 using can-train-and-test dataset [29]. Here, we present the
 results when training using 1% of the dataset and test it
 on the validation dataset. We found our proposed models
 have good generalization capability against the CAN messages
 generated from mixed OEMs and vehicle types. As shown in
 Tables IX, X, and XI, all models achieve 100% performance
 for DoS, Gear Spoofing, and RPM spoofing attacks. However,
 all models make some few incoorect predictions for Fuzzy
Fig. 13. F1 Score Comparison between CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT, attacks. CAN-LLAMA2 performance is the best overall. This
and CAN-LLAMA2 with 1%, 5% and 10% Training Data. finding is consistent with what we find when test on Car
 Hacking Dataset.
 Table V provides a comprehensive summary of the models’
performance after testing, with a comparison to state-of-the- D. Model Prediction Explanation
art models. CAN-LLAMA2, trained with 10% of the data, In this study, SHAP values (SHapley Additive Explanations)
outperforms all other state-of-the-art models, achieving BA, [32] are used to explain the output of the proposed models
PREC, DR, and F1 scores of 0.999993, with a FAR of by attributing the prediction to each input CAN message.
3.1e-6. This remarkable performance implies that, with a SHAP values, derived from cooperative game theory, provide
dataset of 10 million CAN messages, only 31 messages are a fair distribution of each feature’s contribution to the overall
expected to be false alarms. The second-best model is CAN- prediction, making the model more interpretable. This helps us
SecureBERT, also trained with 10% of the data. In this understand how specific fields in the CAN message influence
case, there are 35 expected false alarms for 10 million CAN the classification of normal versus attack messages. Fig. 14
messages. Both models significantly outperform MTH-IDS shows the SHAP values of example CAN messages. The blue
and CAN-C-BERT, thereby reducing the workload for VSOC highlights indicate that the tokens contribute positively to the
team during the triage process. These findings underscore prediction result, while the red highlights indicate a negative
the effectiveness of a more complex model with pre-trained contribution. The darker the color, the greater the impact of
knowledge for vehicle network intrusion detection, surpassing the token on the prediction.
an IDS designed with a combination of multiple models and For a normal message, the model primarily relies on the
algorithms. It demonstrates that a single base model, with pattern of DLC and data1 to data4. In this context, the value of
fine-tuned parameter sets or adapters, can handle multiple data3 being “00” has the largest negative effect on the model’s
downstream tasks. classification of the message as normal, while data1 has the
 The detailed model performance for the classification of largest positive effect. These data fields often represent regular
each attack type is listed in Tables VI, VII, and VIII. operational parameters in a vehicle, such as sensor readings
CAN-SecureBERT and CAN-LLAMA2 both achieve 100% or control signals. For a DoS attack, the model analyzes the
performance for DoS, Gear Spoofing, and RPM spoofing CAN ID, DLC, and data1 to data8. DoS attacks typically aim
attacks. However, both models make some few incorrect to overwhelm the bus with a high volume of messages, so the
predictions for Fuzzy attacks, which involve the injection of CAN ID often has the largest positive effect, while data8 exerts
randomly spoofed messages. a large negative effect, potentially indicating the presence of
 4) Result When Testing With Various Vehicle Types: We an anomaly or malformed data in the message. Fuzzy attacks,
follow the same process to fine-tune our proposed models which introduce irregularities in data values to confuse the
LI AND FU: SecureBERT AND LLAMA 2 EMPOWERED CAN INTRUSION DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 15261

 CAN message patterns. The increased number of model layers
 in CAN-LLAMA2 facilitates more efficient information sharing
 across layers due to its larger parameter size, contributing to
 its faster convergence.
 The model with more pre-trained knowledge from transformer models perform better compared to models with less
 pre-trained knowledge. LLAMA2 is pre-trained on a larger
 dataset compared to BERT and SecureBERT. To capture
 more pre-trained knowledge, LLAMA2 has 54 times more
 parameters than BERT and SecureBERT. However, only
 40 million parameters are allowed to be fine-tuned after
Fig. 15. Top 10 contributing tokens among all can messages.
 applying LoRa, with the remaining parameters being frozen.
 Despite the reduced number of fine-tuned parameters, CANsystem, are mainly detected through the timestamp, CAN ID, LLAMA2 outperforms CAN-C-BERT and CAN-SecureBERT.
DLC, and data1 to data2. The timestamp and data1 have the This observation indicates that a larger transformer-based
largest impact on the prediction, as these fields are crucial model, trained on an extensive dataset, can enhance CAN
for detecting slight anomalies in message timing or values classification performance.
that could indicate fuzzing attempts. For spoof gear messages, CAN-LLAMA2 can capture more DoS and Fuzzy attack
the prediction relies on data1 and data4, where data1 has the messages than other proposed models. LLAMA 2’s signifilargest positive effect and data4 the largest negative effect. cantly larger parameter count (e.g., 7B) enables it to learn
These data fields are likely involved in controlling or reporting more expressive and nuanced feature representations from
the vehicle’s gear position, which is commonly spoofed in the tokenized CAN messages. This is particularly beneficial
attacks targeting system integrity. Spoof RPM messages are for detecting subtle irregularities introduced by attacks like
influenced by data2, data3, and data7, where data7 has the Fuzzy injection or the atypical message frequency seen in
largest positive effect, while data2 and data3 have the largest DoS attacks. LLAMA 2 pretraining covers a wide range of
negative effects. These fields are related to vehicle speed or structured, semi-structured, and code-like data. This diverse
RPM readings, which are often spoofed in attacks to mislead exposure enhances its ability to generalize to domain-specific
the vehicle’s control systems. Fig. 15 shows the top 10 tokens message formats, such as those found in CAN traffic, even
with the highest SHAP values across all message types are: when fine-tuned on relatively small labeled datasets.Unlike
00, E, 39, FF, F, 3, 8, 4, 0, and 2. These hexadecimal values encoder-only models (e.g., SecureBERT), LLAMA 2 uses a
represent common patterns or anomalies in the data fields that decoder-based architecture that generates outputs token-bycorrespond to specific attack signatures. token. Even though classification is performed per message,
 this architecture tends to be more sensitive to fine-grained variations in token sequences, making it effective for identifying
E. Discussions malformed or anomalous payloads characteristic of DoS and
 1) Model Performance Comparison: Based on the above Fuzzy attacks. The self-attention mechanisms in LLAMA 2
results, there is a significant difference about the changing can capture complex relationships between tokens within a
trends of the training loss and the validation loss from Figure 8 single message. This enhances its capability to detect internal
and 9. This difference indicates that the models trained with inconsistencies or deviations that often go unnoticed in smaller
a larger dataset tend to generalize more effectively than those models like SecureBERT.
trained with a smaller dataset. This conclusion is substantiated CAN-SecureBERT uses SecureBERT which is primarily
by the analysis of other model performance metrics, where the trained with cybersecurity-focused data. While it exhibits
models trained with 10% of the data consistently outperform slightly worse performance than CAN-LLAMA2, it outpertheir 5% and 1% data counterparts. The more training data forms CAN-C-BERT. However, SecureBERT has a parameter
used will contribute to model performance improvement but size that is 20% larger than CAN-C-BERT. Consequently,
the improvement magnitude gradually reduce as training data it remains uncertain whether the performance difference can
increases. be attributed to the pre-trained domain knowledge or the
 All proposed models achieve exceptional performance in increased number of parameters in the model.
CAN message log classification. These models operate directly 2) Model Scalability and Unknown Attack Detection: All
on raw, text-based CAN messages, and their performance proposed models have millions of parameters, as shown in
metrics all exceed 0.99, as shown in Figures 10- 13. This Table IV. To achieve higher inference speeds, a dedicated
feature indicates that transformer-based models can directly graphics processing unit (GPU) is required on the device or
classify CAN message logs without the need for feature vehicle. These constraints limit the feasibility of deploying the
engineering and data preprocessing. proposed models in vehicles. To overcome these challenges,
 When looking at the model performance with 1% data from a hybrid intrusion detection system-based architecture [14]
Figure 10 to 13, CAN-LLAMA2 converges faster than the rest can be utilized. This architecture consists of two layers:
of models with 1% data. This indicates that larger models, such an unknown attack or anomaly detection layer deployed on
as CAN-LLAMA2, have a better capability to capture complex the vehicle and a classification layer hosted on an edge or
15262 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

cloud server. The proposed model can be implemented at and enhance inference speed of the proposed CAN-LLAMA2
the edge or cloud server to classify abnormal CAN mes- model. Furthermore, we plan to enhance the system’s robustsages. The edge and cloud servers can be horizontally scaled, ness by evaluating the models under various adversarial attack
ensuring optimal scalability and accommodating varying com- scenarios. Specifically, we aim to test the models’ resilience to
putational demands. This design allows for the deployment both input-level perturbation attacks and protocol-level adverof a lightweight, vehicle-based model to detect abnormal sarial manipulations that mimic realistic CAN attack strategies
CAN messages. The study in [14] proposed an autoencoder- on in-vehicle networks. The results of these evaluations will
based model to detect unknown attack types as abnormal inform the design of more secure and resilient CAN intrusion
messages. The proposed models deployed on edge and cloud detection models.
servers focus on classifying abnormal messages received from
vehicles. Their performance can be monitored and retrained ACKNOWLEDGMENT
continuously to maintain high accuracy.
 Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
 3) Data Privacy and Security: The proposed models use
 tions expressed in this work are those of the author(s) and
CAN messages as input without the need to access vehicle
 do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
or user related information. The data transmission between
 Foundation.
vehicle and OEM cloud server need to be protected. We
propose the following techniques for this purpose. First, all
CAN data can be anonymized to prevent leakage of senstivie R EFERENCES
or personally identifiable information. Common techniques [1] UN Regulation, no. 155—CyberSecurity and CyberSecurity
such as field masking or data tokenization can be applied Management System. Accessed: Oct. 30, 2023. [Online]. Available:
 https://unece.org/transport/documents/2021/03/standards/un-regulationto use name, address, VINs or geolocation. Secondly, the no-155-cyber-security-and-cyber-security
data transmissions can be secured using industry-standard [2] W. Wu et al., “A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks,”
protocols such as TLS (Transport Layer Security) with data IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919–933, Mar. 2020.
 [3] K.-T. Cho and K. G. Shin, “Viden: Attacker identification on in-vehicle
in transit encrypted, Mutual TLS (mTLS) with requirement networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct.
to authenticate both client and server endpoints. Lastly, it’s 2017, pp. 1109–1123.
critical to ensure the data transmission architecture meets [4] H. M. Song, H. R. Kim, and H. K. Kim, “Intrusion detection system
 based on the analysis of time intervals of CAN messages for in-vehicle
UNECE WP.29 for vehicle cybersecurity. This regulation network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2016, pp. 63–68.
enforces secure communication channels, risk management for [5] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
external interfaces and threat detection and response includes Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
 [6] N. Shirish Keskar, B. McCann, L. R. Varshney, C. Xiong, and R. Socher,
logging, monitoring, and alerting for suspicious data behavior. “CTRL: A conditional transformer language model for controllable
 generation,” 2019, arXiv:1909.05858.
 [7] S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Wang, and H. Song, “A decade survey of transfer learn-
 VIII. C ONCLUSION ing (2010–2020),” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 151–166,
 Oct. 2020.
 In this study, we propose a novel approach for CAN [8] C. Raffel et al., “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a
intrusion detection and attack classification by fine-tuning unified text-to-text transformer,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1,
pre-trained transformer-based models. Three distinct mod- pp. 5485–5551, 2020.
 [9] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
els, namely CAN-C-BERT, CAN-SecureBERT, and CAN- of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
LLAMA2 have been developed. Our proposed models can arXiv:1810.04805.
directly use CAN message logs and eliminate the need to per- [10] E. Aghaei, X. Niu, W. Shadid, and E. Al-Shaer, “SecureBERT: A
 domain-specific language model for cybersecurity,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
form data preprocessing. After trained by using pre-balanced Secur. Privacy Commun. Syst. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022,
CAN dataset, their performances have been compared against pp. 39–56.
state-of-the-art models. CAN-LLAMA2 exhibits the highest [11] H. Touvron et al., “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat
 models,” 2023, arXiv:2307.09288.
level of performance, surpassing all empirical state-of-the-art [12] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
IDS systems. CAN-SecureBERT stands as the second-best intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
model for performance and the best model for inference Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
 [13] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
speed. The leading model, CAN-LLAMA2, achieves outstand- detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
ing results with a BA, PREC, DR, and F1 score of 0.999993, vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
accompanied by an impressively low FAR of 3.1e-6. This FAR [14] X. Li and H. Fu, “A hybrid ensemble multilayer-perceptron-based
 intrusion detection system for vehicle networks,” in Proc. Int. Inst.
is approximately 52 times better than that of MTH-IDS, clearly Cognit. Informat. Cognit. Comput., Apr. 2023, pp. 1–16.
outperforming all other state-of-the-art models. Overall, our [15] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
study advances the field of CAN IDS, offering insights into detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
model design, performance, and adaptability for cybersecurity Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 [16] T. P. Nguyen, H. Nam, and D. Kim, “Transformer-based attention
applications. network for in-vehicle intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
 pp. 55389–55403, 2023.
 [17] A. Alshammari, M. Zohdy, D. Debnath, and G. Corser, “Classification
 F UTURE W ORKS approach for intrusion detection in vehicle systems,” Wireless Eng.
 Technol., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 79–94, 2018.
 One of the key limitations of our research is the com- [18] V. S. Barletta, D. Caivano, A. Nannavecchia, and M. Scalera, “A
putational resource constraints. In our forthcoming research, Kohonen SOM architecture for intrusion detection on in-vehicle comwe will explore methods to further reduce the model size munication networks,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 15, p. 5062, Jul. 2020.
LI AND FU: SecureBERT AND LLAMA 2 EMPOWERED CAN INTRUSION DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 15263

[19] H. Olufowobi, C. Young, J. Zambreno, and G. Bloom, “SAIDuCANT: Xuemei Li (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 Specification-based automotive intrusion detection using controller area Master of Science degree in computer science from
 network (CAN) timing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 2, Oakland University, USA, in 2021. She is currently
 pp. 1484–1494, Feb. 2020. pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of
[20] S. F. Lokman, A. T. Othman, M. H. Abu Bakar, and R. Razuwan, Computer Science and Engineering, Oakland Uni-
 “Stacked sparse autoencodersbased outlier discovery for in-vehicle versity. Her research interests lie at the intersection
 controller area network (CAN),” Int. J. Eng. Technol., vol. 7, no. 4, of artificial intelligence and cybersecurity, with a
 pp. 375–380, 2018. particular emphasis on connected vehicles, finan-
[21] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, cial fraud detection, machine learning, and large
 and A. Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder language models. She is especially focused on develarchitecture for discovering anomalous events from intelligent trans- oping interpretable and privacy-aware AI systems.
 portation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, Her recent work explores prompt engineering, fine-tuning of LLMs, and
 pp. 4507–4518, Jul. 2021. reinforcement learning to enhance real-time decision-making in high-stakes
[22] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,” domains, such as finance and intelligent transportation.
 2021, arXiv:2106.09685.
[23] E. Nwafor and H. Olufowobi, “CANBERT: A language-based intrusion
 detection model for in-vehicle networks,” in Proc. 21st IEEE Int. Conf.
 Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), Dec. 2022, pp. 294–299.
[24] N. Alkhatib, M. Mushtaq, H. Ghauch, and J.-L. Danger, “CAN-BERT do
 it? Controller area network intrusion detection system based on BERT
 language model,” in Proc. IEEE/ACS 19th Int. Conf. Comput. Syst. Appl.
 (AICCSA), Dec. 2022, pp. 1–8.
[25] S. Khandelwal and S. Shreejith, “A lightweight FPGA-based IDS-
 ECU architecture for automotive CAN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Field-
 Programmable Technol. (ICFPT), Dec. 2022, pp. 1–9, doi: 10.1109/
 ICFPT56656.2022.9974508.
[26] S. Huan et al., “T-shaped CAN feature integration with lightweight deep
 learning model for in-vehicle network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 21183–21196, Dec. 2024, doi:
 10.1109/TITS.2024.3478371.
[27] Y. Zhu et al., “Aligning books and movies: Towards story-like visual Huirong Fu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 explanations by watching movies and reading books,” in Proc. IEEE Ph.D. degree from Nanyang Technological Univer-
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 19–27. sity, Singapore, in 2000. She is a Distinguished
[28] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,” Professor with the Department of Computer Sci-
 2017, arXiv:1711.05101. ence and Engineering, Oakland University (OU),
[29] S. Mangrulkar. (2022). PEFT: State-of-the-art Parameter-Efficient Fine- Rochester, MI, USA, where she has led research in
 Tuning Methods. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/huggingface/ cybersecurity, trust management, and privacy since
 peft joining as an Assistant Professor in 2005. Previously,
[30] F. Salo, M. Injadat, A. Bou Nassif, and A. Essex, “Data mining with she was an Assistant Professor at North Dakota
 big data in intrusion detection systems: A systematic literature review,” State University for three years and a Post-Doctoral
 2020, arXiv:2005.12267. Research Associate at Rice University for two years.
[31] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Can-train-and-test: A curated CAN dataset for She was as the Principal Investigator on more than 20 federally funded
 automotive intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024, projects. She is the Founding Director of the OU Center for Cybersecurity and
 Art. no. 103777. led the university’s designation as a National Center of Academic Excellence
[32] S. M. Lundberg and S. I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model in Cyber Defense (NCAE-C). She has authored more than 100 peer-reviewed
 predictions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–10. publications.