9610 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Securing Federated Learning Against Extreme
 Model Poisoning Attacks via Multidimensional
 Time Series Anomaly Detection on Local Updates
 Edoardo Gabrielli , Dimitri Belli , Zoe Matrullo, Vittorio Miori , and Gabriele Tolomei

 Abstract—Current defense mechanisms against model poison- it sends the resulting local model to the server;1 (iii) the
ing attacks in federated learning (FL) systems have proven server updates the global model by computing an aggregation
effective up to a certain threshold of malicious clients (e.g., function, usually the average (FedAvg), on the local models
25% to 50%). In this work, we introduce FLANDERS, a
novel pre-aggregation filter for FL that is resilient to large- received from clients. This process goes on until the global
scale model poisoning attacks, i.e., when malicious clients far model converges.
exceed legitimate participants. FLANDERS treats the sequence Although its advantages over standard ML, FL also raises
of local models sent by clients in each FL round as a matrix- security concerns [3]. Here, we focus on untargeted model
valued time series. Then, it identifies malicious client updates as poisoning attacks [4], where an adversary attempts to tweak
outliers in this time series by comparing actual observations with
estimates generated by a matrix autoregressive forecasting model the global model weights by directly perturbing the local
maintained by the server. Experiments conducted in several model’s parameters of some infected clients before these are
non-iid FL setups show that FLANDERS significantly improves sent to the central server for aggregation. In doing so, the
robustness across a wide spectrum of attacks when paired with adversary aims to jeopardize the global model indiscriminately
standard and robust aggregation methods. at inference time. Such model poisoning attacks severely
 Index Terms—Federated learning, robustness, model poisoning impact standard FedAvg; therefore, more robust aggregation
attacks, deep learning, anomaly detection, security. functions must be designed to secure FL systems.
 Unfortunately, existing defense mechanisms either rely on
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 simple heuristics (e.g., Trimmed Mean and FedMedian by
R ECENTLY, federated learning (FL) has emerged as the
 leading paradigm for training distributed, large-scale, and
privacy-preserving machine learning (ML) systems [1], [2].
 [5]) or need strong and unrealistic assumptions to work
 effectively (e.g., foreknowledge or estimation of the number of
 malicious clients in the FL system, as for Krum/Multi-Krum
The core idea of FL is to allow multiple edge clients to
 [6] and Bulyan [7], which, however, cannot exceed a fixed
collaboratively train a shared, global model without disclosing
 threshold). Furthermore, outlier detection methods using Ktheir local private training data. A typical FL round involves
 means clustering [8] or spectral analysis like DnC [9] do not
the following steps: (i) the server randomly picks some clients
 directly consider the temporal evolution of local model updates
and sends them the current, global model; (ii) each selected
 received. Finally, strategies like FLTrust [10] require the server
client locally trains its model with its own private data; then,
 to collect its own dataset and act as a proper client, thereby
 Received 27 November 2024; revised 18 May 2025 and 24 July 2025; altering the standard FL protocol.
accepted 5 September 2025. Date of current version 17 September 2025. This work introduces a novel pre-aggregation filter robust
This work was supported in part by Age-IT (PE8—“Conseguenze e to untargeted model poisoning attacks. Notably, this filter (i)
Sfide dell’Invecchiamento”) and SEcurity and RIghts in the CyberSpace
(SERICS) through the National Recovery and Resilience Plan funded by operates without requiring prior knowledge or constraints on
European Union NextGenerationEU under Grant PE00000014, in part by the number of malicious clients and (ii) inherently integrates
the Hybrid Prediction and Explanation with Knowledge Graphs—HyperKG temporal dependencies. The FL server can employ this filfunded by Italian Ministry of University and Research through the Progetti di Rilevante Interesse Nazionale (PRIN) 2022 Program under Grant ter as a preprocessing step before applying any aggregation
2022Y34XNM, and in part by GHOST—Protecting User Privacy from function, be it standard like FedAvg or robust like Krum or
Community Detection in Social Networks funded by the Sapienza University Bulyan. Specifically, we formulate the problem of identifying
of Rome—“Progetti di Ricerca Grandi” under Grant RG124190FD55EB57.
The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approv- corrupted updates as a multidimensional (i.e., matrix-valued)
ing it for publication was Prof. Shuo Wang. (Corresponding author: time series anomaly detection task. The key idea is that legit-
Edoardo Gabrielli.) imate local updates, resulting from well-calibrated iterative
 Edoardo Gabrielli is with the Department of Computer, Control and
Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy procedures like stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with an
(e-mail: edoardo.gabrielli@uniroma1.it). appropriate learning rate, show higher predictability compared
 Dimitri Belli and Vittorio Miori are with the National Research Council, to malicious updates. This hypothesis stems from the fact that
56124 Pisa, Italy.
 Zoe Matrullo is with the Department of Statistics, Ludwig Maximilian the sequence of gradients (thus, model parameters) observed
University of Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany.
 Gabriele Tolomei is with the Department of Computer Science, Sapienza
University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy. 1 Whenever we refer to global/local model, we mean global/local model
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3608671 parameters.
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS 9611

 PK
during legitimate training exhibit regular patterns, as validated Since it must hold that c=1 pc = 1,Ptwo possible settings are:
 K
in Section IV-B. pc = 1/K or pc = nc /n, where n = c=1 nc .
 Inspired by the matrix autoregressive (MAR) framework for The generic federated round at each time t is decomposed
multidimensional time series forecasting [11], we propose the into the following steps and iteratively performed until con-
FLANDERS (Federated Learning meets ANomaly DEtection vergence, i.e., for each t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }:
for a Robust and Secure) filter. The main advantages of (i) S randomly selects a subset of clients C (t) ⊆ C, so that
FLANDERS over existing strategies like FLDetector [12] are 1 ≤ |C (t) | ≤ K, and sends them the current, global model
its resilience to large-scale attacks, where 50% or more FL θ(t) . At t = 1, θ(1) is randomly initalized.
participants are hostile, and the capability of working under (ii) Each selected client c ∈ C (t) trains its local model θ(t) c
realistic non-iid scenarios. We attribute such a capability to on its own private data Dc by optimizing the following
two key factors: (i) FLANDERS works without knowing a objective, starting from θ(t) :
priori the ratio of corrupted clients, and (ii) it embodies
temporal dependencies between intra- and inter-client updates, c = argminθ(t) Lc (θ ; Dc ).
 θ(t) (t)
 (1)
quickly recognizing local model drifts caused by evil players. The value of θ(t)
 c is computed via gradient-based methods
Below, we summarize our main contributions: (e.g., stochastic gradient descent) and sent to S .
 (i) We provide empirical evidence that the sequence of (iii) S computes θ(t+1) = φ({θ(t) (t)
 c m| c ∈ C }) as the updated
 models sent by legitimate clients is more predictable global model, where φ : R P7→ R is an aggregation
 d d
 than those of malicious participants performing untar- function; for example, φ = m1 c∈C (t) θ(t)
 c , i.e., FedAvg or
 geted model poisoning attacks. alike [13].
 (ii) We introduce FLANDERS, the first pre-aggregation
 filter for FL robust to untargeted model poisoning based
 B. The Attack Model: Federated Aggregation Under Model
 on multidimensional time series anomaly detection.
 Poisoning
 (iii) We integrate FLANDERS into Flower,2,3 a popular FL
 simulation framework for reproducibility. The most straightforward aggregation function φ the server
 (iv) We show that FLANDERS improves the robustness can implement is FedAvg, which computes the global model
 of the existing aggregation methods under multiple as the average of the local model weights received from
 settings: different datasets, client’s data distribution clients. FedAvg is effective when all the FL participants behave
 (non-iid), models, and attack scenarios. honestly [2], [14], [15]. Instead, this work assumes that an
 (v) We publicly release all the implementation code of attacker controls a fraction b = dr ∗ Ke, r ∈ [0, 1] of the K
 FLANDERS along with our experiments.4 clients, i.e., 0 ≤ b ≤ K, known as malicious. This is in contrast
 The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Sec- to previous works, where r < 0.5. Below, we describe our
tion II covers background and preliminaries. In Section III, attack model.
we discuss related work. Section IV and Section V describe 1) Attacker’s Goal: Inspired by many studies on poisoning
the problem formulation and the method proposed. Section VI attacks against ML [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22],
gathers experimental results. Finally, we conclude in Sec- we consider the attacker’s goal is to jeopardize the jointly
tion VIII. learned global model indiscriminately at inference time with
 any test example. Such attacks are known as untargeted [23],
 II. BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES as opposed to targeted poisoning attacks, where instead, the
 goal is to induce prediction errors only for some specific test
A. Federated Learning inputs (e.g., via so-called backdoor triggers as shown by [24]).
 We consider a typical supervised learning task under a 2) Attacker’s Capability: Like Sybil attacks to distributed
standard FL setting, which consists of a central server S and systems [25], the attacker can inject b fake clients into the
a set of distributed clients C, such that |C| = K. Each client FL system or compromise b honest clients. The attacker
c ∈ C has its own private training set Dc , namely the set of its can arbitrarily manipulate the local models sent by malicious
nc local labeled examples, i.e., Dc = {xc,i , yc,i }ni=1
 c
 . clients to the server S . More formally, let x ∈ C be one of the b
 The goal of FL is to train a global predictive model corrupted clients selected by the server on the generic t-th FL
whose architecture and parameters θ∗ ∈ Rd are shared round; it first computes its legitimate local model θ(t) x without
 PK clients by solving θ = argminθ L(θ) =
 ∗ (t)
across all modifying its private data D x ; then it finds θ̌ x by applying a
argminθ c=1 pc Lc (θ; Dc ), where Lc is the local objec- post hoc perturbation ε ∈ Rd to θ(t)
 (t)
 x . For example, θ̌ x = θ x +ε,
 (t)
tive function for client c. Usually, this is defined as the where ε ∼ N (µ, Σ) is a Gaussian noise vector. More advanced
empirical risk calculated over the training set Dc sam- attack strategies have been designed, as discussed in Section
pled
 Pnfrom the client’s local data distribution: Lc (θ; Dc ) = VI-B.
 1
nc
 c
 i=1 `(θ; (xc,i , yc,i )), where ` is an instance-level loss, e.g., 3) Attacker’s Knowledge: We assume the attacker knows
cross-entropy (classification) or squared error (regression). its controlled clients’ code, local training datasets, and local
Each pc ≥ 0 specifies the relative contribution of each client. models. Moreover, we consider the worst-case scenario, where
 2 https://flower.dev/ the attacker is omniscient, i.e., it has full knowledge of the
 3 https://github.com/adap/flower/tree/main/baselines/flanders parameters sent by honest parties. This allows the attacker to
 4 https://anonymous.4open.science/r/flanders exp-7EEB crafting malicious local models that are close to legitimate
9612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

ones, thus increasing the probability of being chosen by the E. FedMedian [5]
server for the aggregation. The central server sorts the j-th parameters received from
 4) Attacker’s Behavior: In each FL round, the attacker, all the m local models and takes the median of those as the
similar to the server, randomly selects b clients to corrupt out value of the j-th parameter of the global model. This process
of the K available. Any of these b malicious clients that happen is applied for all the model parameters, i.e., ∀ j ∈ {1, . . . , d}.
to be among those selected by the server will poison their
local models using one of the strategies outlined in Section
 F. Trimmed Mean [29]
VI-B. Note that, unlike earlier studies, we do not assume that
malicious clients are chosen in the initial round and remain This rule computes a model as FedMedian does, and then
constant throughout the training. We argue that this approach is it averages the k nearest parameters to the median. If b clients
more realistic, as legitimate clients can be compromised at any are compromised at most, this aggregation rule achieves an
point in actual deployments. Therefore, an effective defense in order-optimal error rate when b ≤ m2 − 1.
FL should ideally exclude these clients as soon as they submit
their first malicious model. G. Krum [6]
 This category of untargeted model poisoning attacks has It selects one of the m local models received from the
been extensively explored in previous works [4], [6], [23]. It clients, which is most similar to all other models, as the
has been shown that including updates even from a single global model. The rationale behind this approach is that even
malicious client can wildly disrupt the global model if the if the chosen local model is poisoned, its influence would be
server runs standard FedAvg [5], [6]. restricted because it resembles other local models, potentially
 from benign clients. A variant called Multi-Krum mixes Krum
 III. R ELATED W ORK
 with standard FedAvg.
 FL is vulnerable to untargeted model poisoning attacks during model aggregation, where malicious clients can manipulate
 H. Bulyan [7]
updates to compromise the global model. Existing attacks
employ diverse strategies, ranging from noise injection to Since a single component can largely impact the Euclidean
sophisticated optimization techniques. These approaches rep- distance between two high-dimensional vectors, Krum may
resent key threats in FL. lose effectiveness in complex, high-dimensional parameter
 spaces due to the influence of a few abnormal local model
A. Gaussian Noise Attack weights. Bulyan iteratively applies Krum to select α local
 This attack randomly crafts the local models on the com- models and aggregates them with a Trimmed Mean variant
promised clients. Specifically, the attacker samples a random to mitigate this issue.
value from a Gaussian distribution ε ∼ N (0, σ2 ) and sums
it to all the d learned parameters. We refer to this attack as I. DnC [9]
GAUSS. This robust aggregation uses spectral analysis to detect and
 filter outliers as proposed by [30]. Similarly, DnC computes
B. “A Little Is Enough” Attack [26] the principal component of the set of local updates sent by
 This attack shifts the aggregation gradient by carefully clients. Then, it projects each local update onto this principal
crafting malicious values that deviate from the correct ones component. Finally, it removes a constant fraction of the
as far as possible. We call this attack LIE. submitted model updates with the largest projections.

C. Optimization-based Attack [23] J. FLDetector [31]
 This attack is framed as an optimization task, aiming This method is the closest to our approach. It filters out
to maximize the distance between the poisoned aggregated malicious clients by measuring their consistency across N
gradient and the aggregated gradient under no attack. By using rounds using an approximation of the integrated Hessian
a halving search, one can obtain a crafted malicious gradient. to compute the suspicious scores for all clients. However,
We refer to this attack as OPT. unlike our method, FLDetector struggles with large numbers of
 malicious clients, and cannot work with highly heterogeneous
D. AGR Attack Series [9]
 data.
 This improves the optimization program above by introducing perturbation vectors and scaling factors. Then, three IV. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
instances are proposed: AGR-tailored, AGR-agnostic Min-
 A. Time Series of Local Models
Max, and Min-Sum, which maximize the deviation between
benign and malicious gradients. In this work, we experiment At the end of each FL round t, the central server S collects
with AGR Min-Max, which we call AGR-MM. the updated local models {θ(t) c }c∈C (t) sent by the subset of
 Below, we describe the most popular defenses against selected clients.5 Without loss of generality, we assume that the
model poisoning attacks on FL systems, which will serve 5 A similar reasoning would apply if clients sent their local displacement
as the baselines for our comparison. A more comprehensive vectors u(t) (t)
 c = θc − θ
 (t)
 or local gradients ∇L(t)
 c rather than local model
discussion is in [27] and [28]. parameters θ(t)
 c .
GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS 9613

number of clients picked at each round is constant and fixed,
i.e., |C (t) | = m, ∀t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }. Hence, the server arranges
the local models received at round t into a d × m matrix
Θt = [θ(t) 1 , . . . , θc , . . . , θm ], whose c-th column corresponds
 (t) (t)

to the d-dimensional vector of updated parameters θ(t) c sent
by client c. However, the subset of selected clients may be
 0
different at each FL round, i.e., C (t) , C (t ) for t , t0 , although
we have assumed their size (m) is the same. More generally,
to track the local models sent by all clients chosen across
1 ≤ w ≤ T rounds,Swe can extend each Θt into a d × h
matrix, where h = | wt=1 C (t) |, such that m ≤ h ≤ K, with K
being the total number of clients. Notice that h = m when
w = 1, whereas h = K if the server selects all K clients at
least once over the w rounds considered. At every round t, Θt
contains m columns corresponding to the local models sent Fig. 1. Empirical distributions of average TDMI computed between each
 pair of consecutive local models sent by the legitimate client i(θ(t) (t+1)
 i , θi )
by the clients actually selected for that round. In contrast, the
 and the malicious client j(θ(t)
 j , θ (t+1)
 j ), when this runs one of the four attacks
remaining h − m “fictitious” columns refer to the unselected considered in this work, namely GAUSS, LIE, OPT, and AGR-MM.
clients. We fill these columns with the current global model at
FL round t, i.e., θ(t) , as if this were sent by the h−m unselected where p(·) is the probability density function and t0 = t + δ. If
clients. Note that this strategy is neutral and will not impact (t)
 each realization θc,k in the vector θ(t)
 c is independent from each
the aggregated global model computed by the server for the other, we can compute the average TDMI as follows [32]:
next round (t + 1), as this is calculated only from the updates " d #
received by the m clients previously selected. (t) (t0 )
  1 X (t) (t0 )
 Avg TDMI(θc , θc ) = TDMI(θc,k , θc,k ) ,
 
 (3)
 d
 k=1
B. Predictability of Local Models Evolution: Legitimate vs. (t) (t0 )
Malicious Clients where TDMI(θc,k , θc,k )calculates TDMI for the univariate
 (·)
 case. Indeed, the d model parameters θc,k should reasonably
 We claim that legitimate local updates show higher prebe independent. Under this assumption, the joint probability
dictability compared to malicious updates. This hypothesis
 density function of the parameters factors into a product of
stems from the fact that the sequence of gradients (hence,
 individual probability density functions, forming a product
model parameters) observed during legitimate training should
 measure on d-dimensional Euclidean space. Thus, according
exhibit “regular” patterns until convergence.
 to Fubini’s theorem [33], the integral of each parameter will
 To demonstrate this behavior, we consider two clients
 be independent of the others because the parameters are
i, j ∈ C. Client i is assumed to be a legitimate participant, while
 independent.
client j acts maliciously. Both are selected by the server over
 To mimic the behavior of a hypothetical optimal FLANa sequence of consecutive T FL rounds to train a global model
 DERS filter, and therefore avoid the propagation of poisoned
on the MNIST dataset. Therefore, we examine the local models
 local models sent by client j across the T rounds, we assume
sent to the server at each round t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } by clients i and
 that, at each round t, the global model from which both clients
 j. Specifically, these are d-dimensional vectors of real-valued
 start their local training process is polished from any malicious
parameters θi(t) , θ(t) d (t) (t)
 j ∈ R , such that θi = (θi,1 , . . . , θi,d ) and
 (t)
 (t) (t) (t) updates received at the previous round t−1. Next, we calculate
θ j = (θ j,1 , . . . , θ j,d ), respectively. Next, we calculate the aver- the average time-delayed mutual information (TDMI)0 for each
age time-delayed mutual information (TDMI)0 for each pair of pair of observed local models (θ(t) (t0 ) (t) (t )
 (t0 ) i , θi ) and (θ j , θ j ) across
observed local models (θ(t) (t) (t )
 i , θi ) and (θ j , θ j ) across T = 50 T = 50 rounds, where t0 > t, for both client i and j. Firstly,
rounds, where δ > 0, for both client i and j. This analysis we consider the special case where t0 = t + 1 and compute
aims to discern the time-dependent nonlinear correlation and the average TDMI between each pair of consecutive local
the level of predictability between observations. We expect models sent by the legitimate client and the malicious client,
the TDMI calculated between pairs of models sent by the when this runs one of the four attacks considered in this
legitimate client i to be higher than that computed between work, namely GAUSS, LIE, OPT, and AGR-MM presented in
pairs sent by the malicious client j. Thus, the temporal Section VI-B. In Figure 1, we plot the empirical distributions
sequence of local models observed from client i is more of the observed average TDMI for the legitimate and malicious
 (t) (t)
predictable than that of client j. Let θ(t) c = (θc,1 , . . . , θc,d ) denote clients.To validate our claim that legitimate models are more
the local model sent by the generic FL client c ∈ C as an predictable than malicious ones, we compute the mean of the
instance of a d-dimensional vector-valued process. We define empirical distributions for the legitimate and malicious client,
 0
TDMI(θc(t) , θ(tc ) ) as follows: atk
 θ̄i and θ¯j , respectively, where atk = {GAUSS, LIE, OPT,
 Z
 (t0 ) (t0 ) AGR-MM}. Then, we run a one-tailed t-test against the null
 TDMI(θ(t) , θ ) = c , θc )
 p(θ(t) atk
 c c
 hypothesis H0 : θ̄i = θ¯j , where the alternative hypothesis
 atk
 p(θ(t) (t0 ) 
 c , θc ) is Ha : θ̄i > θ¯j . The results of these statistical tests are
 
 (t0 )
 × log (t) (t0 ) c dθc ,
 dθ(t) (2) illustrated in Table I, showing that, in all four cases, there is
 p(θc )p(θc )
9614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
 atk
O NE -TAILED t-T EST AGAINST THE N ULL H YPOTHESIS H0 : θ̄i = θ¯j .
 E ACH C ELL C ONTAINS THE p-VALUE FOR THE S TATISTICAL T EST
 C ORRESPONDING TO A S PECIFIC ATTACK . I N A LL F OUR C ASES ,
 T HERE I S E NOUGH E VIDENCE TO R EJECT THE N ULL H YPOTH -
 ESIS AT A C ONFIDENCE L EVEL α = 0.01 (p-VALUE  0.01)

enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis at a confidence
level α = 0.01.

C. Poisoned Local Models as Matrix-Based Time Series
Outliers
 We, therefore, formulate our problem as a multidimensional Fig. 2. Overview of FLANDERS.
time series anomaly detection task. At a high level, we want
to equip the central server with an anomaly scoring function client. Finally, the anomaly score is undefined (⊥) for any
that estimates the degree of each client picked at the current client not selected for round t.
round being malicious, i.e., its anomaly score, based on the The server will thus rank all the m selected clients according
historical observations of model updates seen so far from the to their anomaly scores (e.g., from the lowest to the highest).
clients selected. Such a score will be used to restrict the set of Several strategies can be adopted to choose which model
trustworthy candidate clients for the downstream aggregation updates should be aggregated in preparation for the next round,
method. Note that unselected clients will not contribute to the i.e., to restrict from the initial set C (t) to another (possibly
aggregation; thus, there is no need to compute their anomaly smaller) set C∗(t) ⊆ C (t) of trusted clients. For example, S
score even if they were marked as suspicious in some previous may consider only the model updates received from the toprounds. On the other hand, we must design a fallback strategy k clients (1 ≤ k ≤ m) with the smallest anomaly score,
for “cold start” clients – i.e., FL participants who send their i.e., C∗(t) = {c ∈ C (t) | s(t) c ≤ s(t) (t)
 k }, where sk indicates
local updates for the first time or have not been selected in the k-th smallest anomaly score at round t. Alternatively,
any of the previous rounds considered – whether honest or the raw anomaly scores computed by the server can be
malicious. converted into well-calibrated probability estimates. Here, the
 More formally, let Θ̂t = f (Θt−w:t−1 ; Ω̂) be the matrix of server sets a threshold ρ ∈ [0, 1] and aggregates the weights
local model updates predicted by the central server S at the only of those clients whose anomaly score is below ρ, i.e.,
generic FL round t. The forecasting model f depends on a C∗(t) = {c ∈ C (t) | s(t)
 c ≤ ρ}. In the former case, the number
set of parameters Ω̂ estimated using the past w model updates of considered clients (k) is bound apriori,6 whereas the latter
observed, i.e., Θt−w:t−1 , where 1 ≤ w ≤ t − 1. Also, the server does not put any constraint on the size of final candidates
sees the actual matrix Θt . |C∗(t) |. Eventually, S will compute the updated global model
 The anomaly score s(t) c ∈ R of the generic client c at round θ(t+1) = φ({θ(t) (t)
 c | c ∈ C∗ }), where φ is any aggregation function,
t can thus be defined as follows: e.g., FedAvg, Bulyan, or any other strategy.
 8
 (t) (t) Below, we describe how we use the matrix autoregressive
 <δ(θc , θ̂c ), if c ∈ C ∧ ∃ j ∈ {1..w} s.t. c ∈ C
 ˆ (t) (t− j)
 (MAR) framework proposed by [11] to implement our multidisc = δ(θ , θc ), if c ∈ C ∧ @ j ∈ {1..w} s.t. c ∈ C (t− j)
 (t) (t) (t) (t)
 mensional time series forecasting model f , hence the anomaly
 ⊥, if c < C (t) .
 ˆ
 :
 score.
 (4)
The first condition refers to a client selected for round t, V. P ROPOSED M ETHOD : F LANDERS
which also appeared at least once in the history. In this case, δ
measures the distance between the observed vector of weights In Figure 2, we depict how FLANDERS computes the
sent to the server (θ(t) anomaly score vector s(t) at the generic FL round t. Specific ) and the predicted vector of weights
 (t) cally, the server S uses its current MAR(1) forecasting model
(θ̂c ) output by the forecasting model f . The second condition,
 f whose best parameters Ω̂ = { Â, B̂} are estimated from l
instead, occurs when a client is selected for the first time at
 previous historical observations of local models received in the
round t or does not appear in the previous w historical matrices
 previous rounds t − l, . . . , t − 1. It applies f to the previously
of observations used to generate predictions. Here, due to the
 observed matrix Θt−1 to get the next predicted matrix of local
cold start problem, we cannot rely on f and, therefore, the
most sensible strategy is to compute the distance between the 6 This may not be true if anomaly scores are not unique; in that case, we

current global model and the local update received by the new can simply enforce |C∗(t) | = k.
GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS 9615

models Θ̂t , i.e., Θ̂t = f (Θt−1 ; Ω̂) = ÂΘt−1 B̂. Then, it compares = ||Θt − f (Θt−1 ; Ω)||
 e 2F
this predicted matrix Θ̂t with the actual matrix of local updates = ||Θt − e
 AΘt−1 eB||2F
received Θt . The final anomaly score vector is calculated by
 = `(e B; Θt ),
 A, e (6)
measuring the distance δ between each column of those two
matrices, according to Eq. 5. where || · ||F indicates the Frobenius norm of a matrix. More
 It is worth remarking that, in general, only some clients generally, if we have access to l > 0 historical matrix
are selected at every round. In particular, if a client cnew – observations, we can compute the overall loss function below:
whether it is honest or malicious – is selected by the server
 l−1
for the first time at round t, the MAR forecasting model f X
 L(e B; Θt , l) =
 A, e `(e B; Θt− j ).
 A, e (7)
will not be able to make any prediction for it due to a cold
 j=0
start problem (i.e., the predicted matrix Θ̂t will not contain a
column corresponding to cnew ). In such a case, we must adopt Notice that l here affects only the size of the training set not
a fallback strategy. Without any historical information for a the order of the autoregressive model. In other words, the
client, the most sensible thing to do is to compute the distance forecasting model f will still be MAR(1) and not MAR(l),
δ between the local model update it sent and the current global i.e., the matrix of local updates at time t (Θt ) depends only on
model. the previously observed matrix at time step t − 1 (Θt−1 ).
 In Section V-A we formally introduce MAR along with Eventually, the best estimates Â and B̂ can be found as the
how the training works. Then, in Section V-B we explain solutions to the following objective:
how MAR is integrated into the server and how we calculate
 Ω̂ = Â, B̂
the anomaly score vector s(t) . In Section V-C we illustrate a
 = arg min eA,eB L(e B; Θt , l)
 ˚
step-by-step example, in Section V-D we provide the entire A, e
 8 9
pseudocode of FLANDERS, and finally Section V-E contains <Xl−1 =
the computational complexity analysis. = arg min eA,eB ||Θt− j − e B||2F .
 AΘt− j−1 e (8)
 : ;
 j=0
A. Matrix Autoregressive Model (MAR)
 A closed-form solution to find Â can be computed by taking
 We assume the temporal evolution of the local models sent
 the partial derivative of the loss w.r.t. A, setting it to 0, and
by FL clients at each round is captured by a matrix autoresolving it for A. In other words, we search for Â = A, such
gressive model (MAR). In its most generic form, MAR(w) is
 that:
a w-order autoregressive model defined as follows: ∂L( A, B; Θt , l)
 = 0. (9)
 Θt = A1 Θt−1 B1 + · · · + Aw Θt−w Bw + Et , (5) ∂A
 Using Eq. (7) and Eq. (6), the left-hand side of Eq. (9) can
where Θt is the d × h matrix of observations at time t,
 be rewritten as follows:
Ω = { Ai , Bi }wi=1 are d × d and h × h autoregressive coefficient Pl−1
 ∂L( A, B; Θt , l) ∂ j=0 ||Θt− j − AΘt− j−1 B||F
 2
matrices, and Et is a d × h white noise matrix. Notice that
 = =
we drop the assumption made in Section IV-B about the ∂A ∂A
independence of parameters; in fact, the left matrix A reflects l−1
 X
row-wise interactions, and the right matrix B captures column- = −2 (Θt− j − AΘt− j−1 BT )BΘTt−1
wise dependencies. This work assumes the temporal evolution j=0
 0 1
of the local models sent by clients at each FL round exhibits  Xl−1
a bilinear structure captured by a matrix autoregressive model = −2 @ Θt− j BΘTt− j−1 A
of order 1, i.e., a Markovian forecasting model denoted by j=0
MAR(1) and defined as follows: 0
 l−1
 1
 
 X
 Θt = AΘt−1 B + Et , − A@ Θt− j−1 BT BΘTt− j−1 A . (10)
 j=0
where Et is a white noise matrix, i.e., its entries are iid normal
with zero-mean and constant variance. To approximate such If we set Eq. (10) to 0 and solve it for A, we find:
a behavior, we consider a parametric forecasting model f , in 20
 l−1
 1
the form: − 2 4@
 X
 Θt− j BΘTt− j−1 A
 et = f (Θt−1 ; Ω)
 Θ e =e AΘt−1 e B ≈ Θt , j=0
where Θet is the predicted matrix of observations at time t 0 13
 Xl−1
according to f when parametrized by coefficient matrices −A @ Θt− j−1 BT BΘTt− j−1 A5 = 0.
e = {e
Ω B}. Thus, the key question is how to estimate the
 A, e j=0
best model f , namely the best coefficient matrices Ω̂ = { Â, B̂}.
For starters, we define an instance-level loss function that By applying basic algebraic rules, the closed-form solution
measures the cost of approximating the true (yet unknown) for A is: P 
 l−1
 j=0 Θt− j BΘt− j−1
 T
data generation process with our model f as follows:
 A = P . (11)
 l−1
 `(Ω; j=0 Θt− j−1 B BΘt− j−1
 e Θt ) = ||Θt − Θ
 et ||2F T T
9616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 If we apply the same reasoning, we can also find a closed- employing a higher order MAR(w) model with w > 1 would
form solution to compute B̂. That is, we take the partial require extending each observed matrix to d × h (m < h ≤ K),
derivative of the loss w.r.t. B, set it to 0, and solve it for as detailed in Section IV-A. This is to track the local updates
B: sent by selected clients across multiple historical rounds.
 ∂L(A, B; Θt , l)
 = 0. (12) 2) Anomaly Score Computation: At the generic FL round
 ∂B t > 1, we compute the anomaly score using the estimated MAR
Eventually, we obtain the following: forecasting model as follows. Let Θt be the matrix of observed
 P
 l−1
  weights. This matrix may contain one or more corrupted local
 j=0 Θt− j AΘt− j−1
 T
 models from malicious clients. Then, we compute the m-
 B = P . (13)
 l−1
 Θ T
 A T
 AΘ dimensional anomaly score vector s(t) , where s(t) [c] = s(t) c ,
 t− j−1
 j=0 t− j−1
 as in (4). A critical choice concerns the function δ used to
We now have two closed-form solutions; one for A (see Eq. measure the distance between the observed vector of weights
(11)) and one for B (see Eq. (13)). sent by each selected client and the vector of weights predicted
 However, the solution to A involves B, and the solution to by MAR. In this work, we set δ(u, v) = ||u − v||22 , where || · ||22
B involves A. In other words, we must know B to compute is the squared L2 -norm. In this work, we set δ = || · ||2 as L2 -
A and vice versa. norm; other functions can also be used (e.g., cosine distance).
 We can use the standard Alternating Least Squares (ALS) Choosing the best δ is outside the scope of this work, and we
algorithm ([34]) to solve such a problem. leave it to future study.
 The fundamental idea is to iteratively update the least According to one of the filtering strategies discussed in
squares closed-form solution of each variable alternately, keep- Section IV-C, we retain only the k clients with the smallest
ing the other fixed. At the generic i-th iteration, we compute: anomaly scores. The remaining m − k clients are considered
 malicious; thus, they are discarded and do not contribute to the
 P
 l−1
  aggregation run by the server as if they were never selected.
 j=0 Θt− j B Θt− j−1
 (i) T
 At the next round t + 1, we may want to refresh our estima-
 A(i+1) = P ;
 l−1 tion of the MAR model, i.e., to update the coefficient matrices
 j=0 Θt− j−1 (B ) B Θt− j−1
 (i) T (i) T
 P  Â and B̂. We do so by considering the latest observed Θt and
 l−1
 j=0 Θt− j A Θt− j−1
 T (i+1) the other l − 1 previous matrices of local updates, using the
 B(i+1) = P . same sliding window of size l. Since the observed matrix Θt
 l−1
 j=0 Θt− j−1 ( A Θt− j−1
 T (i+1) T (i+1)
 ) A contains m−k potentially malicious clients, we cannot use it asis. Otherwise, if any of the spotted malicious clients is selected
ALS repeats the two steps above until some convergence crite- again at round t + 1, we may alter the estimation of Â and
rion is met, e.g., after a specific number of iterations N or when B̂ with possibly corrupted matrix columns. To overcome this
the distance between the values of the variables computed problem, we replace the original Θt with Θ0t before, feeding
in two consecutive iterations is smaller than a given positive it to train the new MAR model. Specifically, Θ0t is obtained
threshold, i.e., d( A(i+1) − A(i) ) < ε and d(B(i+1) − B(i) ) < ε, from Θt by substituting the m − k anomalous columns either
where d(·) is any suitable matrix distance function and ε ∈ R>0 . with the parameter vectors from the same clients observed
Eventually, if A(∞) and B(∞) are the parameters of the MAR at time t − 1, which are supposed to be still legitimate or
model upon convergence, we set Â = A(∞) and B̂ = B(∞) as the current global model. The advantage of this solution is
the best coefficient matrices. twofold. On the one hand, a client labeled as malicious at FL
 round t would likely still be considered so at t + 1 if it keeps
B. MAR-Based Anomaly Score perturbing its local weights, thus improving robustness. On the
 Our approach consists of two primary steps: (i) MAR other hand, our solution allows malicious clients to alternate
estimation and (ii) anomaly score computation. legitimate behaviors without being banned, speeding up model
 1) MAR Estimation: At the first FL round (t = 1), the convergence. Notice that the two considerations above might
server sends the initial global model θ(1) to the set of m not be valid if we updated the MAR model using the original,
selected clients C (1) and collects from them the d×m matrix of partially corrupted Θt . Indeed, in the first case, the distance
updated models Θ1 . Hence, it computes the new global model between two successive poisoned models by the same client
 c | c ∈ C }), where φ = Krum or any other existing
θ(2) = φ({θ(1) (1) would reasonably be small. So, the client’s anomaly score
robust aggregation heuristic. For any other FL round t > 1, the will likely drop to non-alarming values, thereby increasing
server can use the past l > 0 historical observations Θt−l:t−1 the number of false negatives. In the second case, the distance
to estimate the best MAR coefficients Ω̂ = { Â, B̂} according between a corrupted and a legitimate model would likely be
to (8). In general, 1 ≤ l ≤ t − 1; however, if we assume l large. Thus, a malicious client will maintain its anomaly score
fixed at each round, the server will consider Θmax(1,t−l):t−1 past high even if it acts honestly, impacting the number of false
observations. Again, independently of the value of l, MAR will positives.
learn to predict the current matrix of weights only from the previously observed matrix. Therefore, each matrix used for train- C. A Step-by-Step Example
ing {Θt− j−1 }l−1
 j=0 has the same size d × m, as it contains exclu- To better clarify how FLANDERS works, consider the
sively the m updates received at the round t − j − 1. Of course, following practical example.
GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS 9617

 Suppose an FL system consists of a centralized server aggregation at the server’s end. Hence, FedAvg can now safely
and 10 clients c1 , . . . , c10 ; furthermore, at each round, 4 be used; more generally, the server can restart running FedAvg
of those clients are randomly chosen for training. At the from t = 2 on, i.e., once FLANDERS can compute valid
very first round (t = 1), let C (1) = {c2 , c3 , c7 , c9 } be the anomaly scores. The server can now compute the updated
 (2) (2)
set of 4 clients selected by the server. Hence, the server global model as θ(3) = φ({θ(2) c | c ∈ C∗ }), where C∗ ⊂ C
 (2)

sends the current global model θ(1) ∈ Rd to each of those contains the clients with the k smallest anomaly scores. For
clients and collects the d × 4 matrix of updated local models instance, if k = 2 and C∗(2) = {c1 , c9 }, θ(3) = 1/2 ∗ (θ(2) (2)
 1 + θ9 ).
Θ1 = [θ(1) (1) (1) (1)
 2 , θ3 , θ7 , θ9 ]. Therefore, it computes the new At the next round (t = 3), FLANDERS can use the previous
global model θ(2) = φ({θ(1) (1)
 c | c ∈ C }). Notice that, at this stage, two observations Θ1 and Θ2 to refine the estimation of the
no anomaly score can be computed as FLANDERS cannot best MAR coefficients, again solving Eq. (8).7 However,
take advantage of any historical observations of local model Θ2 cannot be fed as-is to re-train MAR since one of its
updates. As such, if one (or more) selected clients in the very components – i.e., the local model θ(2) 3 sent by client c3 – has
first round are malicious, plain FedAvg may not detect those. been flagged as malicious. Otherwise, the resulting updated
To overcome this problem, FLANDERS should be paired with MAR coefficients could be unreliable due to the propagation
one of the existing robust aggregation heuristics at t = 1. For of local poisoned models.
example, φ = {Trimmed Mean, Krum, Bulyan}. To overcome this problem, FLANDERS replaces the local
 At the next round (t = 2), FLANDERS can start using model marked as suspicious θ(2) 3 with either one of the
past observations (i.e., only Θ1 ) to estimate the best MAR previously observed models from the same client that is
coefficients Ω̂ = { Â, B̂} according to Eq. (8) above. Suppose supposedly legitimate or the current global model. Since, in
C (2) = {c1 , c3 , c6 , c9 } is the set of 4 clients selected by the this example, we assume c3 has been malicious from the first
server at the second round. Let Θ2 = [θ(2) (2) (2) (2)
 1 , θ3 , θ6 , θ9 ] be round, we use the latter approach. Specifically, we change
the local models sent by the clients to the server. Moreover, Θ2 with Θ02 = [θ(2) (2) (2) (2)
 1 , θ , θ6 , θ9 ], where θ
 (2)
 substitutes
 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
Θ̂2 = f (Θ1 ; Ω̂) = [θ̂2 , θ̂3 , θ̂7 , θ̂9 ] are the local models θ3 . As discussed at the end of Section V-B, this fix allows
predicted by MAR, using the previous set of observations. FLANDERS to work even when a malicious client is picked
 It is worth noting that C (1) ∩ C (2) = {c3 , c9 }; the other two for two or more rounds consecutively.
 (3) (3) (3) (3)
clients, c1 and c6 , are considered “cold-start” since they are We can now compute Θ̂3 = f (Θ02 ; Ω̂) = [θ̂1 , θ̂3 , θ̂6 , θ̂9 ]
selected for the first time or, in any case, they do not appear using the updated MAR, leveraging the previous set of
in the historical observations used by MAR for predictions amended observations. Let C (3) = {c2 , c3 , c4 , c5 } denote the set
(i.e., in the previous w = 1 matrices). Thus, we calculate the of clients selected at round 3 and Θ3 = [θ(3) (3) (3) (3)
 2 , θ3 , θ4 , θ5 ] be
following anomaly scores, according to Eq. 5: the local models sent by the clients to the server. Thus, C (2) ∩
 (2) (2) C (3) = {c3 }. The remaining three clients – c2 , c4 , and c5 – are
 • s(2) (2) (2) (2)
 3 = δ(θ3 , θ̂3 ) and s9 = δ(θ9 , θ̂9 ), i.e., we measure treated as “cold-start.” Specifically, c4 and c5 are selected for
 the distance between the models actually sent by c3
 the first time, while c2 , even though previously selected in the
 and c9 and those predicted by MAR using the previous
 first round, was not chosen at the previous round (2). As c2 was
 observations (first condition);
 not part of the historical observations used by MAR(1) to make
 • s(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2)
 1 = δ(θ , θ1 ) and s6 = δ(θ , θ6 ), i.e., we measure predictions, we need to treat it as if it were a cold-start client.
 the distance between the models actually sent by c1 and
 Therefore, anomaly scores are updated as follows:
 c6 and the current global model at time t = 2, as those (3) (3)
 clients were never picked before (second condition); • s(3)
 3 = δ(θ3 , θ̂3 ), i.e., we measure the distance between
 • s(2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) the models actually sent by c3 and those predicted by
 2 = s4 = s5 = s7 = s8 = s10 =⊥, i.e., these clients
 were not selected at round t = 2, and therefore they will MAR using the previous observations (first condition);
 not contribute to computing the new global model θ(3) • s(3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3)
 2 = δ(θ , θ2 ), s4 = δ(θ , θ4 ), and s5 = δ(θ , θ5 )
 (3) (3)

 anyway (third condition). i.e., we measure the distance between the models actually
 sent by c2 , c4 , and c5 and the current global model at
Let us assume that c3 is a malicious client controlled by an time t = 3, as those clients were never picked before or
attacker. Moreover, suppose that this client started sending poi- did not appear in the previous observations used to make
soned models since the very first round, i.e., θ(1)3 was already predictions (second condition);
corrupted. In such a case, it is evident that if we had used plain • s(3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3)
 1 = s6 = s7 = s8 = s9 = s10 =⊥, i.e., these clients
FedAvg at t = 1, this would have likely polluted the global were not selected at round t = 3, and therefore they will
model θ(2) and, therefore, FLANDERS might fail to recognize not contribute to computing the new global model θ(4)
this as a malicious client due to a relatively low anomaly anyway (third condition).
score s(2)
 3 . As stated before, the consequences of this edge Generally, the process above continues until the global model
situation in which one or more malicious clients are picked at converges.
the beginning of the FL training can be mitigated by replacing
FedAvg with one of the robust aggregation strategies available D. FLANDERS’ Pseudocode
in the literature, such as Trimmed Mean, Krum, or Bulyan.
 We present the pseudocode of a hypothetical FL server
 However, suppose c3 is correctly spotted as malicious at
 that integrates FLANDERS into the model aggregation stage.
the end of round t = 2 due to its high anomaly score
s(2) (2)
 3 . Therefore, c3 (actually, θ3 ) will be discarded from the
 7 In general, FLANDERS uses l past observations Θ
 max(1,t−l):t−1 .
9618 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 1 FLANDERS-Server Algorithm 3 ColdStart

 i-th m × m matrix8 B̂ costs O(m3 ) + O(d2 m). Thus, a single
 iteration costs O(d3 ) + O(dm2 ) + O(m3 ) + O(d2 m), namely
 O(d3 ) or O(m3 ),9 depending what term dominates between
 d (the number of weights) and m (the number of clients).
 ALS performs the two steps above for N iterations (e.g., in
 this work, we set N = 100). Second, the computation of
 the anomaly score costs O(md) as it measures the distance
 between observed and predicted local updates from all the
 m selected clients. Third, every time the MAR model is
 refreshed, we need to rerun ALS; in the worst-case scenario,
 we might want to re-estimate Â and B̂ at every single FL
 round.
Algorithm 2 FLANDERS-Filter
 It is worth noticing that performing ALS directly on high
 dimensional parameter space (d) in standard FL settings with
 loads of clients (m) may be unfeasible (e.g., when d and
 m range from 106 to 109 ). To keep the computational cost
 tractable (and limit the impact of the curse of dimensionality),
 in our experiments, where d  m, we reduce dimensionality
 via random sampling on the parameter space, as proposed by
 [9]. Specifically, we sample a fixed subset of d̃ < d model
 parameters for ALS, with d̃ set to 500. We adopt a taskagnostic approach, keeping this number constant across all
 experiments to ensure a fair comparison and demonstrate the
 general applicability of our method without task-specific tuning. The choice of 500 is not a critical hyperparameter, as our
 results are robust across a range of values; our ablation study
 in Section VI-D (see Table XIV) shows that FLANDERS’
 detection performance remains perfect even when reducing
 the number of sampled parameters to as low as 100. While
 we use random sampling for simplicity, neural networks often
The main server-side loop is shown in Algorithm 1, whereas exhibit correlated parameters, more sophisticated solutions
Algorithm 2 details the computation of anomaly scores, which may remove all parameters that show obvious dependency
is at the heart of the FLANDERS filter. from other ones.

 VI. E XPERIMENTS
E. Computational Complexity Analysis A. Experimental Setup
 To train our MAR forecasting model, we first need to run 1) Datasets, Tasks, and FL Models: We consider four pubthe ALS algorithm, which estimates the coefficient matrices Â lic datasets for image classification: MNIST, Fashion-MNIST,
and B̂. ALS iteratively performs two steps to compute Â and 8 It is worth remarking that, using MAR(1), h = m and thus B̂ has size m
B̂, respectively. At the generic i-th iteration, computing the i-th × m.
d ×d matrix Â costs O(d3 )+O(dm2 ); similarly, computing the 9 O(d 2.376 ) or O(m2.376 ) using the Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm [35].
GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS 9619

 TABLE II
 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP : DATASETS , TASKS , AND FL M ODELS C ONSIDERED

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 D ESCRIPTION OF H YPERPARAMETERS M AIN P ROPERTIES OF O UR FL E NVIRONMENT S IMULATED ON F LOWER

CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100. All datasets are randomly shuffled
and partitioned into two disjoint sets: 80% is used for training We run our experiments on a machine equipped with an
and 20% for testing. We train a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) AMD Ryzen 9, 64 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA 4090 GPU
on MNIST and Fashion-MNIST and a Convolutional Neural with 24 GB VRAM.
Network (CNN) on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 (MobileNet 2) FL Simulation Environment: To simulate a realistic
[36]). All models are trained by minimizing cross-entropy loss. FL environment, we integrate FLANDERS into Flower [42].
 In Table II, we report the full details of our experimental Moreover, we implement in Flower any defense baseline
setup concerning the datasets used, their associated tasks, and considered that the framework does not natively provide. In
the models (along with their hyperparameters) trained on the Table IV we synthetically report the hyperparameters.
simulated FL environment, i.e., Flower.10 Table III shows the We set the number K of FL clients to 100, and we assume
description of the hyperparameters. that the server selects all these clients in every FL round (m =
 The MLP for the MNIST dataset is a 2-layer fully con- K). We suppose the attack starts at t = 1; then, we monitor
nected feed-forward neural network, whereas the MLP for the performance of the global model until t = T = 50. Recall
the Fashion-MNIST dataset is a 4-layer fully connected feed- that we select the malicious clients randomly across all the
forward neural network. Both MLPs are trained by minimizing participating ones; this implies that a single client can alternate
multiclass cross-entropy loss using Adam optimizer with batch between legitimate and malicious behavior over successive FL
size equal to 32 [40]. The CNN used for CIFAR-10 is a 6- rounds.
layer convolutional neural network, while the CNN used for 3) Non-IID Local Training Data: We simulate non-iid
CIFAR-100 is the well-known MobileNet architecture [36]. clients’ training data distributions following [43]. We assume
Both CNNs are trained by minimizing multiclass cross-entropy every client training example is drawn independently with
loss via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with batch size class labels following a categorical distribution over N classes
equal to 32 [41]. parameterized by a vector q such that qi ≥ 0, i ∈ [1, . . . , N] and
 At each FL round, every client performs one training epoch ||q||1 = 1. To synthesize a population of non-identical clients,
of Adam/SGD, which corresponds to the number of iterations we draw q ∼ Dir(αD , p) from a Dirichlet distribution, where
needed to “see” all the training instances once, when divided p characterizes a prior class distribution over N classes, and
into batches of size 32. In any case, the updated local model αD > 0 is a concentration parameter controlling the identicalis sent to the central server for aggregation. ness among clients. With αD → ∞, all clients have identical
 label distributions; on the other extreme, with αD → 0, each
 client holds examples from only one class chosen at random.
 10 https://flower.dev/ In our experiments, we set αD = 0.5.
9620 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE V
K EY PARAMETER S ETTINGS FOR E ACH ATTACK S TRATEGY C ONSIDERED

 Fig. 3. FedAvg with FLANDERS (left) vs. “vanilla” FedAvg (right). Accuracy
 of the global model in each FL round under all attack strategies on the MNIST
B. Attacks dataset, with 80% of malicious clients. Attack starts at round t = 3.
 We assess the robustness of FLANDERS under the attacks
introduced in III. For each attack, we vary the number b = dr ∗
me, r ∈ [0, 1] of malicious clients, where r = {0, 0.2, 0.6, 0.8}.
Ultimately, we analyze an attacker’s performance embedded
with a MAR model.
 Below, we describe the critical parameters for each attack
considered, which are also summarized in Table V.
 1) GAUSS: This attack has only one parameter: the mag- Fig. 4. Accuracy vs. total training time (in seconds) of FedAvg and Bulyan
nitude σ of the perturbation to apply. We set σ = 10 for all compared with their corresponding versions with FLANDERS as a filter for
 the MNIST (left) and CIFAR-10 (right) datasets.
the experiments.
 2) LIE: This method has no parameters to set.
 3) OPT: The parameter τ represents the minimum value FLDetector fails to distinguish malicious updates from
that λ can assume. Below this threshold, the halving search legitimate ones because (i) the anomaly score is based on
stops. As suggested by the authors, we set τ = 10−5 . approximating a single Hessian matrix that must be close to
 4) AGR-MM: In addition to the threshold τ, AGR-MM uses all legitimate clients, making it inadequate for highly non-iid
the perturbation vectors ∇ p in combination with the scaling settings, where malicious updates can be similar to legitimate
coefficient γ to optimize. We set τ = 10−5 and ∇ p = {std}, ones; and (ii) the suspicious scores are computed as the
which is the vector obtained by computing the parameters’ average normalized Euclidean distance of the past iterations.
inverse of the standard deviation. For Krum, we set ∇ p = {uv}, Although this is coherent and works well with a threat model
which is the inverse unit vector perturbation. where the malicious clients are always the same across all
 rounds, FLANDERS does not make such an assumption,
 making FLDetector unable to recognize malicious updates
C. Evaluation arriving for the first time from an ex-legitimate client.
 We evaluate four key aspects of FLANDERS. Firstly, 2) Aggregation Robustness Lift: We proceed to evaluate the
we test its ability to detect malicious clients against the enhancement that FLANDERS provides to the robustness of
best-competing filtering strategy, FLDetector. Secondly, we the global model. Specifically, we measure the best accuracy
measure the accuracy improvement of the global model when of the global model under several attack strengths using all
FLANDERS is paired with “vanilla” FedAvg and the most the baselines without and with FLANDERS as a pre-filtering
popular robust aggregation baselines: FedMedian, Trimmed strategy. Table X shows that FLANDERS keeps high accuracy
Mean, Multi-Krum, Bulyan, DnC. Thirdly, we analyze the for the best global model under extreme attacks (r = 0.8) when
cost-benefit trade-off of FLANDERS. Lastly, we test the used before every aggregation method, including Multi-Krum
robustness of our method against adaptive attacks. and Bulyan, which would otherwise be inapplicable in such
 1) Malicious Detection Accuracy: Table VI shows the strong attack scenarios.
precision (P) and recall (R) of FLDetector and FLANDERS In Figure 3 we compare the accuracy of the global model
in filtering out malicious clients across different datasets and when using FLANDERS (left) and when using FedAvg (right)
attacks, with r = 0.2 (20% evil participants in the FL sys- across the whole FL training process. The left figure shows
tems). Remarkably, FLANDERS successfully detects all and how the evolution of the accuracy over multiple rounds
only malicious clients across every attack setting except for remains stable and similar to the one without any attack
OPT, outperforming its main competitor, FLDetector. This is (dashed line), while on the right the accuracy drops irremedifurther confirmed by Table VII, which shows that our method ably.
generally provides much higher protection than FLDetector 3) Cost-Benefit Analysis: Obviously, the robustness guarwhen combined with standard FedAvg. anteed by FLANDERS under extreme attack scenarios comes
 Better results are observed for extreme attack settings with costs, especially due to the MAR estimation stage.
(r = 0.8) in Tables VIII, and IX, where OPT maximizes the Fig. 4 depicts two scatter plots for the MNIST and CIFAR-10
distance between the legitimate models and the malicious ones datasets, focusing on a specific attack scenario (AGR-MM).
by erroneously thinking that the high number of its controlled Each data point on a scatter plot represents a method under
clients pierces through the aggregation functions. one of two attack strengths considered (r = 0.2 and r = 0.6).
GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS 9621

 TABLE VI
Precision (P) AND Recall (R) OF FLD ETECTOR AND FLANDERS IN D ETECTING M ALICIOUS C LIENTS ACROSS VARIOUS DATASETS AND ATTACKS
 (r = 0.2; T = 50 ROUNDS )

 TABLE VII
 ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING F EDAVG W ITH FLD ETECTOR AND FLANDERS (r = 0.2)

 TABLE VIII
Precision (P) AND Recall (R) OF FLD ETECTOR AND FLANDERS IN D ETECTING M ALICIOUS C LIENTS ACROSS VARIOUS DATASETS AND ATTACKS
 (r = 0.8; T = 50 ROUNDS )

 TABLE IX
 ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING F EDAVG W ITH FLD ETECTOR AND FLANDERS (r = 0.8)

 TABLE X
 ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING A LL THE BASELINE AGGREGATIONS W ITHOUT AND W ITH FLANDERS (r = 0.8)

These data points are specified by two coordinates: the overall Overall, the take-home message is as follows. In scenarios
training time on the x-axis and the maximum accuracy of with low attack strength (r = 0.2), Bulyan demonstrates supethe global model obtained after T = 50 FL rounds on the rior accuracy, while FLANDERS + FedAvg offers comparable
y-axis. performance with notably shorter training times. However,
9622 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE XI
ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING F EDAVG AND M ULTI -K RUM ,
 W ITH AND W ITHOUT FLANDERS, U NDER THE non-omniscient A DAP -
 TIVE ATTACK

 TABLE XII
ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING F EDAVG AND M ULTI -K RUM ,
 W ITH AND W ITHOUT FLANDERS, U NDER THE omniscient A DAPTIVE
 ATTACK

 Fig. 5. Evolution of anomaly scores of legitimate clients and malicious ones
 (r = 0.3) using the Euclidean distance over time (K = 10; r = 0.3; T = 50
 rounds).
as the attack strength increases (r = 0.6), Bulyan becomes
impractical, FedAvg alone proves ineffective, and FLANDERS where FedAvg and Multi-Krum alone perform better than
emerges as the optimal choice for achieving the best accuracy when coupled with FLANDERS. This is caused by the fact
vs. cost trade-off. that the attacker, knowing which are the parameters analyzed
 4) Robustness Against Adaptive Attacks: In this section, by MAR server-side, crafts parameters that are very close
we further validate the robustness of FLANDERS against to the predictions of MAR causing the anomaly score to be
adaptive attacks. We consider a scenario where malicious smaller than the one of a legitimately learned parameter. When
clients are aware that the FL server uses our method as a using FedAvg, instead, the impact of corrupted parameters is
pre-aggregation filter. Specifically, we focus on two levels of mitigated by averaging a larger number of legitimate models
knowledge. The first scenario assumes that malicious clients and because the corrupted models’ parameter values are not
tentatively guess the subset of parameters (d) e used by the FL too different, unlike in methods like OPT. On the other hand,
server to estimate the MAR forecasting model. We refer to Multi-Krum selects parameters with more nearby neighbors,
this setting as non-omniscient. The second, more challenging and with only b = 5 corrupted clients, legitimate models likely
as well as unrealistic scenario assumes that malicious clients still have more and closer neighbors, effectively defending
know exactly which parameters are used by the FL server. against our adaptive attack.
We call this second scenario omniscient. Obviously, the latter
penalizes FLANDERS way more than the former.
 Specifically, we perform our experiments over T = 20 D. Ablation Study
rounds with m = 20 clients, of which r = 0.2 (b = 5) are 1) Distance Functions: As discussed in Section V-B, we
malicious. The attacker constructs a matrix M = b×deusing the set δ to be the Euclidean distance throughout the work.
local models generated by the corrupted clients. This matrix In this section, we analyze the impact of this choice and
 u·v
M is then passed as input to the same forecasting model, substitute it with the Cosine distance (1 − ||u||·||v|| ). First, in
MAR, that the server uses to determine the legitimacy of Figure 5 and Figure 6 we show the evolution of anomaly
local models. The attacker, instead, substitutes the legitimate scores of legitimate clients and malicious ones using the
parameters with those estimated by MAR, exploiting the fact Euclidean/Cosine distance over time (we remind here that the
that these estimations do not perform like a legitimate local lower the anomaly score is, the better). Anomaly scores are
model. This substitution ultimately hurts the accuracy of the collapsed into two groups by averaging the anomaly scores of
global model once the parameters are aggregated. legitimate clients and, separately, the ones of the attackers. To
 As introduced above, we first assume that the attacker is evaluate the performance of the distance function we highlight
non-omniscient, meaning it does not know which parameters how large the area between the blue and the red lines is.
the server has selected for the MAR estimation. Instead, the Clearly, a larger area suggests that the chosen δ better separates
attacker selects the last layer of the neural network as d.
 e After- the legit models from the malicious ones. By comparing the
ward, we consider an omniscient attacker who knows exactly two figures, it is evident that the Cosine distance struggles to
which are the parameters selected by the server. In Table XI, distinguish the models, especially in CIFAR-10 and under the
we show the results of the non-omniscient scenario, where OPT attack over all datasets.
FLANDERS + Multi-Krum outperforms all other baselines 2) Random Choice of Parameters: In Section V-E we have
on all three datasets. Table XII, on the other hand, refers to assumed to select d̃ = 500 parameters at random to reduce the
the omniscient scenario and demonstrates a different pattern, computation to estimate Â. Naturally, this is a simplification
GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS 9623

 TABLE XIII
AVERAGE A NOMALY S CORES OF L EGITIMATE M ODELS (L) VS . M ALICIOUS M ODELS (M) OVER A LL ROUNDS U SING THE E UCLIDEAN D ISTANCE AND
 THE C OSINE D ISTANCE (r = 0.3; T = 50 ROUNDS )

 TABLE XIV VII. L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
Precision (P) AND Recall (R) OF FLANDERS IN D ETECTING M ALICIOUS
 C LIENTS ACROSS VARIOUS ATTACKS AND VALUES OF d̃ (r = 0.8; T =
 A. Efficiency/Feasibility
 50 ROUNDS ) As we discussed in Section V-E, FLANDERS may suffer
 from a high computational cost that could limit its deployment in practice. This concern holds particularly true for
 cross-device FL configurations encompassing millions of edge
 devices. Conversely, the impact on cross-silo FL scenarios
 would be notably less pronounced. However, as we have
 introduced FLANDERS as a versatile and robust aggregation approach applicable to diverse FL setups (cross-silo and
 cross-device), there are implementation techniques available
 to mitigate its complexity. For instance, methods like random
 parameter sampling [9] can be employed, and we have already
 incorporated them. Still, we plan to enhance the scalability of
 FLANDERS further in future work. For example, we could
 replace the standard matrix inversion algorithm with the more
 efficient Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm [35] and find the
 optimal frequency for re-estimating FLANDERS’ parameters,
 instead of performing it during each FL round.

 B. Cross-Device Setting
 The cross-device setting (thousands to millions of clients)
 penalizes FLANDERS, as the server cannot select them all,
 and the probability of choosing the same client in consecutive
 rounds is low. However, FLANDERS is more appropriate in
 cross-silo FL (tens to hundreds of clients) than in cross-device
 settings. In fact, large attacks involving more than 50% of
 clients are less feasible when the total number of participants
Fig. 6. Evolution of anomaly scores of legitimate clients and malicious ones
(r = 0.3) using the Cosine distance over time (K = 10; r = 0.3; T = 50
 grows to the order of thousands [44]. In such cases, since
rounds). selected clients have little or no history, FLANDERS computes
 distances between local updates and the last global model,
 turning it into a heuristic similar to (Multi-)Krum. Thus,
and one should use different methods based on the real setup FLANDERS will be comparable to any other heuristic.
scenario, carefully weighing all pros and cons. For example,
the authors of FLDetector reduce the server’s computational
burden by estimating a single Hessian matrix and comparing VIII. C ONCLUSION
it with all local models, but this reduces its performance in We introduced FLANDERS, a novel FL filter robust to
non-iid scenarios. extreme untargeted model poisoning attacks, i.e., when mali-
 Intuitively, because we deal with untargeted model poison- cious clients far exceed legitimate participants. FLANDERS
ing attacks, anomalies on maliciously crafted local models serves as a pre-processing step before applying aggreshould be present on all parameters, so the value of d̃ is not gation rules, enhancing robustness across diverse hostile
crucial. However, we have run experiments on a varying num- settings.
ber of d̃ to verify that our results are not spoiled by the choice FLANDERS treats the sequence of local model updates sent
of this parameter. Indeed, as shown in Table XIV, decreasing by clients in each FL round as a matrix-valued time series.
the number of selected parameters does not influence the Then, it identifies malicious client updates as outliers in this
performance of FLANDERS in our experimental setup. time series using a matrix autoregressive forecasting model.
9624 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Experiments conducted in several non-iid FL setups demon- [20] B. Li, Y. Wang, A. Singh, and Y. Vorobeychik, “Data poisoning attacks
strated that existing (secure) aggregation methods further on factorization-based collaborative filtering,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2016,
 pp. 1885–1893. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
improve their robustness when paired with FLANDERS. paper/2016/hash/83fa5a432ae55c253d0e60dbfa716723-Abstract.html
Moreover, FLANDERS allows these methods to operate even [21] G. Yang, N. Z. Gong, and Y. Cai, “Fake co-visitation injection attacks
under extremely severe attack scenarios thanks to its ability to recommender systems,” in Proc. NDSS, 2017. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss2017/ndss-2017-programme/faketo accurately filter out every malicious client before the co-visitation-injection-attacks-recommender-systems/
aggregation process takes place. [22] M. Jagielski, A. Oprea, B. Biggio, C. Liu, C. Nita-Rotaru, and B. Li,
 In the future, we will address the primary limitations of this “Manipulating machine learning: Poisoning attacks and countermeasures
 for regression learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May
work, as discussed in Section VII, and extend the capability 2018, pp. 19–35.
of FLANDERS to defend against targeted attacks. [23] S. Lu, R. Li, X. Chen, and Y. Ma, “Defense against local model
 poisoning attacks to Byzantine-robust federated learning,” Frontiers
 Comput. Sci., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1605–1622, Dec. 2022.
 R EFERENCES [24] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov,
 “How to backdoor federated learning,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2018,
[1] B. McMahan and D. Ramage, “Federated learning: Collaborative pp. 2938–2948.
 machine learning without centralized training data,” Int. J. Eng. Technol. [25] J. R. Douceur, “The Sybil attack,” in Proc. IPTPS, 2002, pp. 251–260,
 Manage. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 355–359, Sep. 2017. doi: 10.1007/3-540-45748-8 24.
[2] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas, [26] M. Baruch, G. Baruch, and Y. Goldberg, “A little is enough: Cir-
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized cumventing defenses for distributed learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019,
 data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282. pp. 8632–8642. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
[3] G. Costa, F. Pinelli, S. Soderi, and G. Tolomei, “Turning feder- paper/2019/hash/ec1c59141046cd1866bbbcdfb6ae31d4-Abstract.html
 ated learning systems into covert channels,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, [27] J. Shi, W. Wan, S. Hu, J. Lu, and L. Yu Zhang, “Challenges and
 pp. 130642–130656, 2022. approaches for mitigating Byzantine attacks in federated learning,” 2021,
[4] A. N. Bhagoji, S. Chakraborty, P. P. Mittal, and S. Calp, “Analyzing arXiv:2112.14468.
 federated learning through an adversarial lens,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. [28] N. Rodrı́guez-Barroso, D. Jiménez-López, M. V. Luzón, F. Herrera, and
 Mach. Learn., May 2019, pp. 634–643. E. Martı́nez-Cámara, “Survey on federated learning threats: Concepts,
[5] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust dis- taxonomy on attacks and defences, experimental study and challenges,”
 tributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 148–173, Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://
 Mach. Learn., Jul. 2018, pp. 5650–5659. [Online]. Available: https:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253522001439
 proceedings.mlr.press/v80/yin18a.html [29] C. Xie, O. Koyejo, and I. Gupta, “Generalized Byzantine-tolerant SGD,”
[6] P. Blanchard, E. M. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine 2018, arXiv:1802.10116.
 learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” in Proc. [30] I. Diakonikolas, G. Kamath, D. M. Kane, J. Li, A. Moitra, and
 NIPS, 2017, pp. 118–128. A. Stewart, “Being robust (in high dimensions) can be practical,” in
[7] E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and S. Rouault, “The hidden vulner- Proc. ICML, 2017, pp. 999–1008.
 ability of distributed learning in Byzantium,” in Proc. ICML, J. G. Dy [31] Z. Zhang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “FLDetector: Defending fedand A. Krause, Eds., 2018, pp. 3518–3527. [Online]. Available: http:// erated learning against model poisoning attacks via detecting malicious
 proceedings.mlr.press/v80/mhamdi18a.html clients,” in Proc. KDD, 2022, pp. 2545–2555.
[8] S. Shen, S. Tople, and P. Saxena, “AUROR: Defending against poisoning [32] D. J. Albers and G. Hripcsak, “Using time-delayed mutual information
 attacks in collaborative deep learning systems,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. to discover and interpret temporal correlation structure in complex
 Conf. Comput. Secur. Appl., 2016, pp. 508–519. populations,” Chaos, Interdiscipl. J. Nonlinear Sci., vol. 22, no. 1, Mar.
[9] V. Shejwalkar and A. Houmansadr, “Manipulating the Byzantine: Opti- 2012.
 mizing model poisoning attacks and defenses for federated learning,” in [33] P. Billingsley, Probability and Measure. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley,
 Proc. NDSS, 2021. 2017.
[10] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Zhenqiang Gong, “FLTrust: [34] Y. Koren, R. Bell, and C. Volinsky, “Matrix factorization techniques
 Byzantine-robust federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” 2020, for recommender systems,” Computer, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 30–37, Aug.
 arXiv:2012.13995. 2009, doi: 10.1109/MC.2009.263.
[11] R. Chen, H. Xiao, and D. Yang, “Autoregressive models for matrix- [35] D. Coppersmith and S. Winograd, “Matrix multiplication via arithvalued time series,” J. Econometrics, vol. 222, no. 1, pp. 539–560, May metic progressions,” J. Symbolic Comput., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 251–280,
 2021. Mar. 1990. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
[12] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph article/pii/S0747717108800132
 attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. [36] A. G. Howard et al., “MobileNets: Efficient convolutional neural net-
 2020, pp. 841–850. works for mobile vision applications,” 2017, arXiv:1704.04861.
[13] Y. Lu and L. Fan, “An efficient and robust aggregation algorithm for [37] (1998). MNIST Dataset. [Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/
 learning federated CNN,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Signal Process. Mach. mnist/
 Learn., Oct. 2020, pp. 1–7. [38] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf. (2017). Fashion-MNIST: A
[14] J. Dean et al., “Large scale distributed deep networks,” in Proc. 25th Novel Image Dataset for Benchmarking Machine Learning Algorithms.
 Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2012, pp. 1223–1231. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist
[15] J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtšrik, A. T. Suresh, and [39] (2009). CIFAR-10/CIFAR-100 Datasets. [Online]. Available: https://
 D. Bacon, “Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication www.cs.toronto.edu/ kriz/cifar.html
 efficiency,” 2016, arXiv:1610.05492. [40] S. Li, E. C. H. Ngai, F. Ye, L. Ju, T. Zhang, and T. Voigt, “Blades: A
[16] B. I. P. Rubinstein et al., “ANTIDOTE: Understanding and defend- unified benchmark suite for Byzantine attacks and defenses in federated
 ing against poisoning of anomaly detectors,” in Proc. 9th ACM learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 9th Int. Conf. Internet-of-Things Design
 SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., Nov. 2009, pp. 1–14, doi: 10.1145/ Implement. (IoTDI), May 2024, pp. 158–169.
 1644893.1644895. [41] (2023). Training a Classifier. [Online]. Available: https://pytorch.org/
[17] B. Biggio, B. Nelson, and P. Laskov, “Poisoning attacks against support tutorials/beginner/blitz/cifar10 tutorial.html
 vector machines,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2012, [42] D. J. Beutel et al., “Flower: A friendly federated learning research
 pp. 1467–1474. [Online]. Available: http://icml.cc/2012/papers/880.pdf framework,” 2020, arXiv:2007.14390.
[18] B. Biggio, L. Didaci, G. Fumera, and F. Roli, “Poisoning attacks [43] T.-M. H. Hsu, H. Qi, and M. Brown, “Measuring the effects of nonto compromise face templates,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Biometrics (ICB), identical data distribution for federated visual classification,” 2019,
 Madrid, Spain, Jun. 2013, pp. 1–7, doi: 10.1109/ICB.2013.6613006. arXiv:1909.06335.
[19] X. Huang, B. Biggio, G. Brown, G. Fumera, C. Eckert, and F. Roli, “Is [44] V. Shejwalkar, A. Houmansadr, P. Kairouz, and D. Ramage, “Back to the
 feature selection secure against training data poisoning,” in Proc. ICML, drawing board: A critical evaluation of poisoning attacks on production
 2018, pp. 1689–1698. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/ federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2022,
 v37/xiao15.html pp. 1354–1371. [Online]. Available: https://par.nsf.gov/biblio/10355494