This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

 Securing Intelligent Transportation Systems: A
 Dual-Framework Approach for Privacy Protection
 and Cybersecurity Using Generative AI
 Muhammad Attique Khan , Member, IEEE, Areej Alasiry , Mehrez Marzougui , Isa Bayhan ,
 Siva Sarana Kuna, G. Siva Nageswara Rao, Shabbab Ali Algamdi , and Haya Aldossary , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Integrating Generative AI (GenAI) into Intelligent Index Terms— GenAI, privacy protection, security protocols,
Transportation Systems (ITS) raises both enormous opportunities cyber threats, intelligent transportation system.
and major worries, especially in the areas of privacy and
cybersecurity, which are already at the forefront of these developments. Developing and implementing robust security measures I. I NTRODUCTION
to secure sensitive data and address new cyber threats is of
utmost importance, especially with the growing dependence on
AI technology in transportation networks. This article looks at
GenAI and how it may improve ITS intelligence and efficiency
 S EVERAL advantages and disadvantages, especially concerning privacy and cybersecurity, come with the growing
 use of GenAI in ITS [1]. The security risks posed by
while addressing the risks of using it a lot. It delves into the
 GenAI are substantial, including data breaches, adversarial
difficulties of protecting AI-driven systems against hostile assaults
(AI-MA), particularly emphasizing transportation infrastructure assaults, and unlawful system manipulation [2], even though
security, intrusion detection, and data privacy. The research it offers several advantages, such as better traffic optimization,
stresses the significance of modern encryption methods, real- predictive analytics, and timely decision-making. Cyberattime monitoring threats, and adaptive security frameworks to tacks such as deepfake attacks on traffic monitoring, illegal
ensure ITS are secure and resilient. In addition, it delves into
 data access, and AI-driven malware are a major concern
how transportation systems are affected by ever-changing cyber
threats, offering proactive security solutions to combat these for AI-driven ITS [3]. Intelligent and adaptive cybersecurity
dangers and strengthen ITS. This paper’s overarching goal is solutions are necessary because traditional security solutions
to lay out a course of action for integrating GenAI into ITS in cannot handle these new threats [4]. Strong encryption and
a way that strikes a good balance between fostering innovation privacy-preserving methods are top priorities since ITS is
and ensuring privacy and security via thorough analysis. The
proposed AI-MA model achieves a high threat detection accuracy
 based on vast quantities of sensitive data, such as data passed
of 96.2%, a privacy protection score of 91.8%, a computa- between vehicles and everything else, users’ locations, and
tional efficiency of 92.9%, a resilience score of 97.8%, and a automatic decision-making output [5]. Real-time detection
network reliability ratio of 92.6% compared to other existing of cyber-attacks is another challenge, with current solutions
models. unable to differentiate between usual system behavior and
 advanced attacks with artificial intelligence (AI) [6]. The
 Received 22 March 2025; revised 1 May 2025 and 2 June 2025; non-traditional and decentralized security mechanisms result
accepted 16 July 2025. This work was supported by the Deanship of Research from the decentralized environment of modern transport sysand Graduate Studies at King Khalid University through Large Research
Project under Grant RGP2/471/46. The Associate Editor for this article was tems [7]. The development of GenAI in ITS without a robust
S. Rani. (Corresponding author: Muhammad Attique Khan.) cybersecurity system poses the threat of catastrophic failures,
 Muhammad Attique Khan is with the Department of Artificial Intelligence, undermined user protection, and deep-rooted system disrup-
Prince Mohammad Bin Fahd University, Dhahran 34754, Saudi Arabia
(e-mail: mkhan3@pmu.edu.sa). tions [4]. To alleviate these issues, this study conceptualizes a
 Areej Alasiry and Mehrez Marzougui are with the College of Com- two-framework framework for protecting privacy and systems
puter Science, King Khalid University, Abha 61413, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: within ITS environments against evolving cyber threats [5].
areej.alasiry@kku.edu.sa; mhrez@kku.edu.sa).
 Isa Bayhan is with the Tourist Guiding Department, Bolu Abant Izzet Baysal The solution includes adaptive security mechanisms, time-
University at Golkoy, 14030 Bolu, Türkiye (e-mail: isa.bayhan@gmail.com). based threat monitoring, and advanced encryption techniques.
 Siva Sarana Kuna resides in Holly Springs, NC 27540 USA (e-mail: Various techniques have been employed to enhance privacy
ssk0315515865@gmail.com).
 G. Siva Nageswara Rao is with the Department of Computer Science and cybersecurity in ITS; however, these techniques are not
and Engineering, Koneru Lakshmaiah Education Foundation, Vaddeswaram, sufficient to handle emerging threats fueled by AI [6]. Security
Andhra Pradesh 522302, India (e-mail: sivanags@kluniversity.in). of data transmission within ITS is based on conventional
 Shabbab Ali Algamdi is with the Department of Software Engineering,
College of Computer Science and Engineering, Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz encryption techniques such as Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
University, Al-Kharj 16278, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: s.algamdi@psau.edu.sa). and Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) [8]. Real-time
 Haya Aldossary is with the Department of Computer Science, College of processing and quantum computing threats are needed more
Science and Humanities, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Jubail
31961, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: Healdossary@iau.edu.sa). than they can manage [9]. Most organizations install intrusion
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3591007 detection systems (IDS) to track suspicious network traffic,
 1558-0016 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

and they can employ either a signature-based or anomaly- encryption mechanisms like AES and PKI are computationally
based method [10]. However, these systems are not always intensive and non-real-time flexible. False alarms and deterioeffective in detecting malicious AI-driven software; thus, rated responses are caused by intrusion detection systems not
reactions are slow [5]. Research on blockchain technology being able to distinguish between malicious and benign AIhas been aimed at improving the security of vehicle-to- generated abnormalities. Blockchain-based security systems
everything (V2X) communications through more secure data guarantee data integrity but are expensive to process and have
transmission [6]. While blockchain enhances transparency poor scalability. Provide system reliability, privacy protection,
and trust, it suffers from scalability issues and high com- and data integrity to improve the framework. This strategy
putational overhead and is not appropriate for application provides a great way to foster overall transportation security
in ITS systems based on real-time data [11]. Decentralized by fusing necessary protection with innovation. Organizations
AI-based security protocols are now achievable with the advent can improve their security posture, manage and lower cyberseof federated learning, reducing the centralized data storage curity risks, and stay in compliance with applicable legislation
requirement [10]. However, its effectiveness is hampered by by using security frameworks, which are defined rules and
challenges such as model poisoning attacks and resource best practices. The decentralized and dynamic nature of ITS
constraints in edge devices [12]. is a threat to the ever-evolving cyber world. Public trust
 In addition, privacy-preserving techniques try to protect is lost, users are compromised, and transportation systems
user data, e.g., homomorphic encryption and differential are impaired by cyberattacks when it has no dynamic and
privacy. Still, these techniques often introduce trade-offs intelligent security system.
between computation efficiency and security. A problem
with such approaches is that they cannot switch to address C. Contribution
the continuously evolving cyber threats impacting ITS. For To solve the privacy and cybersecurity challenges of ITS,
resilience, this paper presents a responsive, dual-architecture this research proposes a double-framework approach that
solution with better encryption, real-time threat monitor- utilizes Generative AI. Some of the proposed frameworks
ing, and self-adjusting cybersecurity protocols. This method include:
attempts to solve this study’s drawbacks. • Generative AI is utilized to identify anomalies and
 counter adversarial attacks on ITS networks in real-time.
A. Motivation • Advanced encryption techniques are applied to ensure
 The proliferation of ITS has transformed modern-day data integrity while allowing computing efficiency.
mobility. ITS allows autonomous decision-making, real-time • A security model based on AI-MA should be created to
traffic management, and forecasting analytics. Improved ITS learn how to counter new threats as they emerge.
performance and capability are potential gains in applying • Secure data sharing with minimal risk of exposure
Generative AI (GenAI). However, a serious security and through federated learning and differentiated privacy.
privacy risk lies with this advance. ITS reliability and security The research paper’s structure is laid out in this section,
are heavily under threat by cyber threats such as AI-based including the following: Section II focuses on integrating
malware, deepfake assaults against monitoring infrastructure, security measures into ITS. The Section III of this dissertation
and data leakages by unauthorized access. Centralized secu- delves into the topic of AI-driven systems and how they protect
rity architectures, signature-based intrusion detection, and against malicious attacks (AI-MA). Section IV provides an
conventional encryption cannot keep up with the speed of in-depth examination, a review of related approaches, and an
these sophisticated assaults. Consequently, an advanced and interpretation of the results and their significance. This study’s
adaptable cybersecurity infrastructure capable of detecting and findings are discussed in detail in Section V.
countering attacks driven by artificial intelligence is necessary
for ITS privacy protection. An important risk for AI-driven II. L ITERATURE S URVEY
ITS is cyberattacks including malware, illicit data access, and The quick advances in ITS have raised critical cybersecurity
deepfake attacks on traffic monitoring. Because traditional issues, and powerful defense systems are needed to cope with
cybersecurity solutions are unable to manage these emerging emerging threats. Various cybersecurity approaches have been
threats, intelligent and adaptive cybersecurity solutions are developed to enhance ITS security, each with advantages and
required. The approach employs AI-driven intrusion detection limitations.
systems (IDS) to monitor unusual or malicious behavior and
self-adjust security protocols to change encryption and firewall A. Cybersecurity Measures in ITS: Strengths and Limitations
settings in reaction to real-time threats. Improve the resilience of Existing Approaches
of ITS against cyber threats with real-time threat monitoring The suggested Multicriteria Decision-Making (MCDM)-
and fast incident response capabilities. These features help Based Cybersecurity Metrics Evaluation approach by
identify assaults early, isolate affected systems, and reduce Bhol et al. [13] employs five critical metrics to quantify
their effects. cybersecurity strength. Permits the methodical evaluation of
 security efficacy—Trickiness in determining the best weights
B. Problem Statement for criteria. Improving decision-making using MCDM
 ITS ’ current security systems have limitations despite AI necessitates careful metric selection for reliable cybersecurity
and cyber security advancements. Despite their effectiveness, evaluation.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KHAN et al.: SECURING INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS: A DUAL-FRAMEWORK APPROACH 3

 The Cybersecurity-Integrated Machine Learning (CIML) TABLE I
Framework, developed by Wazid et al. [14], improves secu- C OMPARISON OF C YBERSECURITY M EASURES
rity and can identify zero-day attacks. its benefits lower
the need for human involvement. Negative aspects adversely
affected by hostile assaults. Inference Strong protections
against ever-changing threats are necessary for CIML to boost
cybersecurity efficiency.

B. AI-Driven Threats in ITS: Challenges in Securing
Intelligent Systems
 Chaudhary suggested Cybersecurity Awareness Evaluation
Metrics (CSA-EM) [1] to assess cybersecurity awareness
programs fully. Ensures complete, reproducible measurement.
No standards for measurement exist. While CSA-EM enhances
program performance, it must be developed further before it
can be applied more extensively.
 Machine learning-based cybersecurity risk detection (ML-
CRD) is a method that analyzes cyber threats, as suggested by
Shaukat et al. [2]. ML-CRD improves cybersecurity, though it
requires optimization to function optimally.

C. Advancing ITS Security: The Role of Generative AI in
Privacy Protection and Cybersecurity
 Pollini proposed a Human Factors-Based Cybersecurity
Framework (HF-CF) [3], incorporating user behavior into CIS.
HF-CF enhances cybersecurity by finding a middle ground
between technological and people-focused strategies.
 Cyber hazards can be measured using the Decision-
Analysis-Based Cybersecurity Framework (DAB-CF) proposed by Ganin et al. [4]. Decisions are made subjectively.
DAB-CF improves the management of cybersecurity risks in depend on AI-based solutions to control growing cyber risks,
an organized and transparent manner. and it is crucial to apply thorough security policies. Generative
 A comparison of cybersecurity measures with existing stud- AI (GenAI) can potentially improve traffic estimates on both
ies is made in Table I. large and small scales via its capacity to analyze and forecast
 Although existing methodologies adequately illuminate the massive volumes of real-time data. To improve dynamic traffic
means of protecting ITS, they possess limitations such as management and eliminate bottlenecks, GenAI can examine
high computational intensity, conflicts in compliance, and citywide traffic patterns, weather, and events on a macro scale,
dependence on personal judgment. The AI-driven systems allowing it to forecast congestion and optimize traffic flow over
Against Malicious Attacks (AI-MA) approach outshines other vast regions.
approaches using advanced generative AI technologies for Fig. 1 shows the dual framework security concept to
adaptive threat recognition and reaction. AI-MA enhances enhance protection against ITS cyberattacks. Privacy proteccybersecurity effectiveness by stopping threats in real-time tion and cybersecurity are the two main components of the
with reduced human intervention. In addition, it enables framework, which rests under one security layer. Privacy is
methods that protect privacy, such as synthetic data produc- protected through federated learning, encryption, and data
tion, which lessens the need for raw personal data. Negative anonymization. These three methods protect sensitive transaspects include, but are not limited to, the following: increased portation information from being released to the public [16].
complexity of systems, which increases the attack surface; An approach ensures that GenAI, which is utilized in ITS,
the possibility of adversarial attacks generated by GenAI that eliminates information abuse while keeping data privacy and
could fool perception and decision-making systems; and an cybersecurity integrity in transportation systems [17].
amplified risk to privacy if synthetic outputs unintentionally
 h ′′
 i h ′′
 i
reconstruct sensitive information. Using GenAI, bad actors can ∂ p f = C x a + nr ∗ V x a − m j + yr s − ki ′
  
 (1)
create believable phishing, spoofing, or data poisoning attacks
against ITS systems. Including adaptive security parameters including real-time
 h ′′
 i
 threat mitigation (V x a − m j ), safeguarding measures
 III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD h i
 ′′
 Though Generative AI (GenAI) in ITS has advantages, data (∂ p f ), and detection of intrusion signals (C x a + nr ),
privacy and cybersecurity are at risk. Transportation systems Equation (1) illustrates the dynamic interaction between
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 Fig. 2 illustrates how GenAI can assist in estimating traffic
 with macro and micro-scale studies. Macroscale forecasting highlights region road segment-oriented traffic conditions
 favoring prominent transportation planning and congestion
 alleviation. GenAI offers detailed micro-scale analysis concerning human- and vehicle-oriented behavior. Vehicle-related
 prediction enhances traffic flow management and road safety
 by analyzing vehicle trajectory and accident risk. Human
 forecasting is the backbone of pedestrian safety and adaptive traffic management and emphasizes individual mobility
 and behavior patterns. By employing actual-time, fact-based
 insights based on aggregating these predictive factors, the
 method proposed improves ITS [18]. It diminishes traffic
 congestion and enhances overall transportation efficiency by
 enabling proactive decision-making. A comprehensive framework for maximizing urban mobility and safeguarding ITS
 against emerging threats is offered by macro and micro-scale
Fig. 1. Dual framework security model for ITS. traffic forecasting. The demands of the populace must be met
 by a comprehensive mobility plan that prioritizes public and
 non-motorized transportation above private automobiles as a
 means of successfully combining land use and transportation
 planning.
 h ′′
 i h ′′
 i
 τ f t = Ev a + mk ∗ cs a + kd + y e − wq ′
  
 (4)
 h ′′
 i
 Incorporating safeguarding validation (Ev a + mk ), cyber-
 (y e − wq ′ ), and flexible threat mitigation
  
 security
 h power i
 ′′
 (cs a + kd ) Equation (4) establishes the security factor of
 confidence (τ f t) in ITS. This suggested a dual-framework
 strategy by measuring the contribution to improving real-time
 threat mitigating and secure communications.
 h ′′
 i h ′′
 i
Fig. 2. Generative AI-Based Traffic Prediction Model. τ p x = C x a + nr ∗ ew a + br + t r − bw ′
  
 (5)

 Integrating safeguarding weight (τ p x), network assessconfidentiality (yr ) and security issues ( s − ki ′ ) in ITS.
   h i
 ′′
 ment of risk (C x a + nr ), and threat impact mitigating
 h ′′
 i
 (ew a + br ), Equation (5) reflects the privacy endurance
 h ′′
 i
 R f g = tr a + nr + ew q + mz ′ ∗ v a − hr ′
    
 (2)
 factor (t r − bw′ ) in ITS. This quantifies how generative AI
  

Equation (2) describes the resilience measure (R f g) of ITS to improves data privacy while mitigating real-time cyber risks.
 h robustness
assess system by combining real-time threat recog- h ′′
 i h ′′
 i
 τa qm = vx a + slo ∗ vd s + ny + cx s − ui ′
 i  
 ′′
nition (tr a + nr ), data encryption weight (v a − hr ′ ),
   (6)
and adaptive protection response (ew q + mz ′ ).
  
 Integrating the loads of systemh optimization
 i (τa qm), vul-
 ′′
 h ′′
 i h ′′
 i nerability identification (vx a + slo ), and illegal access
 ∂a r = b f r + xk − V a − m ju ∗ h e − tu ′
  
 (3) h ′′
 i
 countermeasures (vd s + ny ), Equation (6) describes the
 adaptive privacy factor (cx s − ui ′ ) in ITS. The Equation
 h ′′
 i  
By balancing threat effect (b f r + xk ), privacy-preserving
 h ′′
 i provides dynamic threat response and system resilience, guardata encryption (V a − m ju ), and changing safety anteeing safety and confidentiality protection in ITS. ITS has
responses (h e − tu ′ ), Equation (3) describes the adaptive
  
 integrated cutting-edge technology to improve transportation
risk component (∂a r ) in ITS. The ITS coordinator of com- safety, efficiency, and sustainability, and their broad adoption
munication flows is the nerve center that controls the flow of has transformed contemporary transportation. ITS optimizes
information between cars and traffic control systems, allowing traffic flow, reduces congestion, and minimizes delays by
for a precise and rapid reaction to any dangers that can be using real-time data collected from sensors, cameras, and GPS
recognized. Vehicle and roadside sensors instantly notify a systems to manage dynamic traffic. There has been a marked
centralized traffic management system of any danger, such as improvement in traffic safety thanks to adaptive traffic signal
an accident or blockage. systems that react in real-time to traffic circumstances.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KHAN et al.: SECURING INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS: A DUAL-FRAMEWORK APPROACH 5

Algorithm 1 AI-Powered Intrusion Detection System
(AI-IDS) for ITS
 def ai_intrusion_detection(anomaly_score, threshold):
 if anomaly_score > threshold:
 print(“ALERT: Potential intrusion detected! Initiating
countermeasures. . . ”)
 block_suspicious_ip()
 alert_security_team()
 else:
 print(“System secure. No intrusion detected.”)
 def block_suspicious_ip():
 print(“Blocking the suspicious IP address. . . ”)
 def alert_security_team():
 print(“Notifying security team for further investigation. . . ”)
 anomaly_score = 0.85
 threshold = 0.75
 ai_intrusion_detection(anomaly_score, threshold)

 This Algorithm 1 monitors network traffic using an
AI-derived anomaly score. If the score exceeds a set threshold,
it triggers alerts, blocks suspicious IP addresses, and notifies
the security team. Otherwise, it indicates a secure system. This Fig. 3. Security challenges and solutions in GenAI-Driven ITS.
proactive approach effectively enhances real-time threat detection and rapid response in intelligent transportation networks.
By lowering system availability, tampering with traffic control the reliability of ITS using traffic management methods,
algorithms, and exposing crucial infrastructure to manipulation illegal control, or data leakage. By utilizing advanced security
or disruption, evolving cyber threats like APTs, coordinated protocols employed by the system, such hazards are minimized
botnet attacks, data spoofing, and AI-generated adversarial through strong encryption techniques, machine learning-based
examples directly affect the reliability and security of trans- anomaly detection, and real-time attack detection [20].
portation networks. System performance metrics, encrypted
 h ′′
 i h ′′
 i
 τv x = kt d + nx − j a − xk ′ ∗ vx a + sp
  
 (7)
communication logs, and intrusion attempts are used to evaluate the efficacy of security. GenAI for threat detection, privacy Incorporating the network of things threat
  detection (τv x)
protection, and resilience assessment is trained and validated policy on security enforcement ( j a − xk ′ ), and the method
 
using this dataset. Real-time traffic data, cyber threat logs, and h ′′
 i
 protection measures (kt d + nx ), Equation (7) establishes
ITS anomaly detection records are all included in the analytical h i
 ′′
dataset. The ever-changing nature of these dangers makes it the vulnerability mitigating factor (vx a + sp ) in ITS.
more likely that linked ITS components fail one after the This suggested dual-framework strategy as it quantifies how
other, damages trust models, and makes sensor data less reli- generative AI helps to lower data privacy violations.
able. These measures include using blockchain-based identity h ′′
 i h ′′
 i ′′
management for decentralized authentication, monitoring dis- ∂v s = vx a + sx ∗ r e w + n ji + vd (8)
tributed edge nodes without centralized vulnerabilities through h i
 ′′
federated learning models for real-time anomaly detection, Equation (8) integrates system resilience (vx a + sx ),
applying moving target defense (MTD) techniques to random- ′′

ize system configurations and limit attack surface exposure h encryption
 instantaneous data
 ′′
 i (vd ), along with vulnerability
continuously, and enforcing dynamic encryption key rotation assessment (r e w + n ji ), thereby modeling the security
synchronized with network state changes to minimize the versatility factor (∂v s) in ITS. This is consistent with the
window of exploitation. suggested dual-framework strategy: generative AI improves
 Fig. 3 identifies the safety issues created by GenAI entering adaptive security mechanisms to fight developing cyber
ITS and the recommended actions to mitigate these risks [19]. threats.
 h i h i
GenAI is primarily accountable for traffic forecasting and ′′ ′′
 ∀z q = tr k − s j y + r e w + naw ∗ n o − p ′
  
 (9)
autonomous vehicle driving, with increased efficiency and
decision-making. Proactive decision-making is made possible, Equation (9) integrates
 h ithreat reduction (∀z q), immediate
 ′′
which reduces traffic congestion and improves overall trans- encryption (tr k − s j y ), and network anomaly identifiportation efficiency. Traffic forecasting at both the macro and h ′′
 i
micro scales offer a comprehensive framework for maximizing cation (r e w + naw ), thereby representing the universal
 security positive reinforcement take n o − p ′ ) in ITS.
  
urban mobility and safeguarding ITS against emerging threats.
Its usage does have its downfalls, as autonomous vehicle This suggested dual-framework approach by generative AI
systems and predictive models can be leveraged in adversarial improves proactive security systems to reduce cyber threats
attacks under the control of AI. These attacks can compromise and defend privacy.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. Cooperative Collision Avoidance in ITS.

 Fig. 4 shows a cooperative collision avoidance strategy to improve traffic safety with ITS technologies. The Fig. 5. Block diagram secure communication in intelligent transportation
approach combines economy, management, technology, and systems.
constituents, making it possible to make real-time decisions
with minimal mistakes [21]. Using ITS technologies, an avoidance strategy can increase traffic safety. The strategy integrates helps the Equation enable a proactive, powered by AI security
constituents, technology, management, and economy to enable policy to guarantee robust data protection.
real-time decision-making with few errors. To detect and h i h i
 ′′ ′′
reduce potential problems, the coordinated strategy makes use τl c = tr s + nc ∗ x z a + br + r e s − ja ′
  
 (12)
of data from several sources. Sensors and the required degree
of communication are provided by infrastructure components. Integrating i risk mitigation (τ h l c), ′′system fragility
However, the optimal and efficient management of computah ′′
 i
 (tr s + nc ), and encryption (x z a + br ), Equation (12)
tional and network resources assures perfect data processing.
 establishes the cyber endurance factor (r e s − ja ′ ) in ITS.
  
Data processing perfection is ensured by the effective and
efficient use of network and computational resources. The This is consistent with the suggested dual-framework strategy:
communication flow coordinator makes it possible for cars AI preserves privacy while enhancing security mechanisms
and traffic control systems to react precisely to hazards that against new risks.
are identified. Furthermore, raising awareness means alerting Fig. 5 focuses on protecting ITS, thus filling gaps in the
autonomous cars to potential dangers and obstructions on the communication networks. Cyberattacks that include spoofing,
road. In addition, increasing awareness indicates notifying eavesdropping, jamming, compromising Vehicle-to- Vehicle
self-driving vehicles of possible risks and road obstacles. The (V2V), Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I), Vehicle-to- Pedestrian
combined use of GenAI and cooperative collision avoidance (V2P), and Vehicle-to- Network (V2N). The figure illustrates
systems creates powerful and safe ITS that reduces road acci- probable attack sites, such as a spoofer altering V2V comdents and enhances transportation efficiency through predictive munication, an eavesdropper assembling V2I information, and
analytics and adaptive response technologies. a jammer disrupting railway signals [22]. A scalable security
 h ′′
 i h ′′
 i architecture and robust encryption ensure secure data transport
 ∂l cx = a + jv ∗ yt s + nmk + r s − az ′
  
 (10) and defense against new threats. To increase our systems’
 resistance to attacks, we use AI-based anomaly detection and
 h including
By h resilience
 i adaptive threat response (∂l cx), system
 ′′ ′′
 i secure authentication methods. These security methods pro-
( a + jv ), and anomaly mitigating (yt s + nmk ), vide data integrity, privacy protection, and system reliability
Equation (10) describes the latent cyber-risk factor in GenAI-based ITS, strengthening the architecture.
(r s − az ′ ) in ITS. This generative AI improves
 
 Secure authentication techniques and AI-based anomaly
cybersecurity protections while preserving privacy protection. detection are employed to boost the robustness of our sysh ′′
 i h ′′
 i ′′ tems to attacks [23]. In GenAI-based ITS, these security
 nz! = F nS + σ ϵ − πβ τ σ + yr w ∗ µϑc (11) techniques deliver data integrity, privacy safeguarding, and
 system dependability, thus enhancing the framework. Such
Incorporating method sensitivity (nz!), security data
 h ′′
 i an approach offers an excellent way of combining required
encryption (F nS + σ ϵ ), and response to threats security with creativity to promote overall transport security.
 h ′′
 i
(πβ τ σ + yr w ), Equation (11) predicts the advanced h ′′
 i h ′′
 i ′′
 ′′ τ µx a = jr vπ + ba − σ ϑ ′ εγ + baw + π σ τ (13)
cybersecurity risk factor (µϑc ). Integrating these factors
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KHAN et al.: SECURING INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS: A DUAL-FRAMEWORK APPROACH 7

Algorithm 2 Secure AI-Driven Communication in ITS TABLE II
 def secure_data_transmission(is_encrypted, sender_verified): S IMULATION AND E NVIRONMENT TABLE
 if is_encrypted:
 if sender_verified:
 print(“Data transmission secure. Proceeding with
communication.”)
 else:
 print(“WARNING: Unverified sender! Blocking
communication.”)
 block_unverified_sender()
 else:
 print(“ERROR: Data not encrypted! Enforcing encryption
protocols. . . ”)
 enforce_encryption()
 def block_unverified_sender():
 print(“Blocking data packets from unverified sender. . . ”)
 def enforce_encryption():
 print(“Applying end-to
 -end encryption to secure transmission. . . ”)
 is_encrypted = True
 sender_verified = False
 secure_data_transmission(is_encrypted, sender_verified)

 h ′′
 i
integrating real-time threat identification (σ ϑ ′ εγ + baw ),
 h i By incorporating advanced encryption techniques, real-time
 ′′
system encryption ( jr vπ + ba ), and adaptive risk mitiga- threat monitoring, and adaptive security frameworks, ITS is
tion (τ µx a), Equation (13) describes the advanced protection strengthened in terms of safety and resilience. Lightweight
 ′′
adaptability take (πσ τ ) in ITS. This is consistent with elliptic curve cryptography and post-quantum algorithms are
the suggested dual-framework strategy as it underlines how two examples of advanced encryption methods that safeguard
generative AI improves confidentiality adaptive actions. vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) and vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V)
 h i h i communications against manipulation and eavesdropping
 ′′ ′′ ′′
 ∀c q = tr ∂ + baw ∗ tr θ δ + bnr + µρ (14) while preserving low latency. AI-based intrusion detection
 h i systems can detect and isolate real-time abnormalities by
 ′′
By combining dynamic threat identification (tr θ δ + bnr ), analyzing sensor data, network traffic, and behavioral patterns,
 h ′′
 i preventing cascading failures. Adaptive security frameworks
adaptive risk management (tr ∂ + baw ), and anomaly
 adapt defensive mechanisms depending on changing threat
detection (∀c q), Equation (14) describes the whole security landscapes by incorporating continuous learning, behavior
 ′′
factor (µρ ) in ITS. This suggested a dual-framework strategy analytics, and context-aware risk assessment.
by measuring how generative AI improves ITS proactive
protection systems monitoring. IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
 Security and performance in ITS require cyber threat mith ′′
 i h ′′
 i ′′
 Rz x = kp ℵs + yr ∗ C a − nr + δγ t ∗ vx ′′ (15)
 igation, computational efficiency, resilience, reliability, and
Integrating the privacy protection. GenAI enhances real-time threat detection,
 h identification of threats (Rz x), system safeanomaly detection, and secure data sharing.
 ′′
 i h ′′
 i
guarding (kp ℵs + yr ), and risk-mitigating (C a − nr ),
 The analytical dataset [15] includes real-time traffic data,
 ′′
Equation (15) describes the security endurance factor (δγ t ∗ cyber threat logs, and ITS anomaly detection records. Secuvx ′′ ) in ITS. The Equation provides adaptive defenses, rity effectiveness is assessed using encrypted communication
strengthening AI-driven transit systems’ cybersecurity and records, intrusion attempts, and system performance indiresilience [24]. cators. The dataset trains and validates GenAI for threat
 Algorithm 2 secures AI-driven communication in ITS by detection, privacy protection, and resilience evaluation.
verifying encryption and sender authenticity. This function In the above table II, the simulation environment uses
verifies the sender’s identity and determines if the data NS-3, Python (TensorFlow, PyTorch), and MATLAB on a
is encrypted. To safeguard AI-driven ITS, this article sug- GPU-accelerated HPC cluster. It tests the safety of ITS against
gests a security architecture that includes adaptive security a variety of cyber threats utilizing methods such as AES-256
mechanisms, better encryption, and real-time threat moni- encryption, blockchain authentication, and intrusion detection
toring [25]. By utilizing the system’s sophisticated security systems based on GenAI. To achieve the necessary level
procedures, such risks are reduced by real-time attack detec- of connectivity and sensor integration in ITS, infrastructure
tion, machine learning-based anomaly detection, and robust components like Roadside Units (RSUs), On-Board Units
encryption approaches. By protecting transport systems against (OBUs), centralized Traffic Management Centers (TMCs),
cybercrime, these protocols secure data transfer and ITS edge computing nodes, and Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) comoperations. munication modules are utilized. OBUs handle vehicle-specific
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 Fig. 7. (a) Cyber threat incidents in its over time.
Fig. 6. Privacy protection effectiveness analysis.

 TABLE III
 C YBER T HREATS IN ITS (2018–2025)

 Fig. 8. Cyber threat detection and mitigation analysis.
sensing and local decision-making, while RSUs provide
vehicle-to-infrastructure connectivity and collect environmenransomware cases have increased significantly, emphasizing
tal data. Edge nodes reduce latency for real-time answers by
 the growing risks of evolving cyber threats. The data highprocessing data closer to the source.
 lights the urgent need for improved cybersecurity measures
 From the above fig. 6, ITS with GenAI enhances efficiency
 in ITS.
at the expense of privacy. Real-time threat monitoring, strong
 AI-powered security systems are essential for defending
encryption, and adaptive security models maintain privacy.
 against changing cyberattacks in ITS. GenAI-based IDS
AI-MA offers real-time anomaly detection and response and
 enhance anomaly detection through real-time identification
works well in identifying emerging cyber threats. Model
 of malicious patterns. From the above fig. 7, predictive
updates are necessary because of adversarial attacks. IDS
 threat analysis is enhanced by AI-MA algorithms, while
and GenAI identify unwanted attempts at access to enhance
 blockchain-based authentication secures data. MFA and endcybersecurity resiliency.
 h i h i h ′′ i to-end encryption minimize illegal access.
 ′′ ′′
 ∂ f r = ∂∀ a + br ∗ ∝ +vr e + ∀Xa πρ (16) h ′′
 i h ′′
 i ′′
 ℵz e = π θ ω + ut ∗ V x µ + baq + σ ωl (17)
 h ′′
 i
Integrating adaptive precautions (∂∀ a + br ), threat mit- Integrating encryption
 h i measures (ℵz e), resilient system
 ′′
 resilience (πθ ω + ut ), along with real-time detection of
 h ′′
 i
igation ( ∝ +vr e ), and safeguarding privacy encryp- h i
 ′′
tion (∂ f r ), Equation
 h (16)i describes the dynamic risk threats (V x µ + baq ), Equation (17) describes the security
 ′′
component (+∀Xa πρ ) in ITS. Data privacy and ′′
 improving factor (σ ωl ) in ITS. This dual-framework strategy
cybersecurity are actively controlled, strengthening the secu- uses generative AI to improve adaptive analysis of cyber threat
rity regarding AI-driven analysis of privacy protection detection and mitigation.
effectiveness.
 B. Efficiency of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) in ITS
A. Cyber Threat Incidents in ITS Over Time Objective: Compares detection rates of different security
 Objective: Illustrates the increasing frequency of cyber approaches, including Traditional IDS, AI-powered IDS, and
threats targeting ITS from 2018 to 2025 (projected). GenAI-Enhanced IDS.
 Fig. 6(a) and Table III show the rise in cyber threats Fig. 7(a) and Table IV compares Traditional IDS, AItargeting ITS from 2018 to 2025. AI-powered attacks and Powered IDS, and GenAI-Enhanced IDS. GenAI-based IDS
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KHAN et al.: SECURING INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS: A DUAL-FRAMEWORK APPROACH 9

 TABLE IV
 IDS E FFICIENCY C OMPARISON (%)

 Fig. 10. Computational efficiency.

 complexity and parallel processing enhance performance,
 making ITS security frameworks efficient and scalable without
 compromising system responsiveness.
 h ′′
 i h ′′
 i
 a4 τ = π + vr ∗ ew ϵ + naw + ut π − nc′
  
 (18)

Fig. 9. (a) Efficiency of intrusion detection systems (IDS) in ITS.
 Integrating
 h ′′
 i threat mitigation (a4 τ ), encryption weight
 ( π + vr ), and adaptive mitigating measures
 h ′′
 i
 (ew ϵ + naw , Equation (18) describes the general
outperforms others, achieving the highest detection accuracy
 security factor (ut π − nc′ ) in ITS. These components
  
(95%) with the lowest false positive rate (3%) and the
 of AI-enhanced security solutions are designed to provide
fastest response time (100ms). The results emphasize intestrong safeguards and resilience in analyzing computational
grating AI-driven security solutions to protect ITS from cyber
 efficiency. Various measures have enhanced ITS cybersecurity
threats.
 and privacy. Data confidentiality is ensured by using
 One way to make ITS more resilient is to use the responencryption methods such as lightweight cryptography, which
sive dual-architecture method, which combines two important
 allows for safe connection between infrastructure and cars.
levels of security. Secure data transmission among cars, infras-
 Blockchain technology is used for transparent transaction
tructure, and control centers is the primary goal of the first
 records and decentralized authentication to lessen the impact
layer, which employs sophisticated cryptographic algorithms
 of potential failure points. Because sensitive information
like elliptic curve or quantum-resistant encryption. Because
 is never shared, federated learning allows dispersed data
of this, it can be certain that your critical data will stay
 processing for anomaly detection while maintaining privacy.
private and untouchable. As a second layer, self-adjusting
 Intrusion detection systems (IDS) powered by AI constantly
Sensitive data must be protected using a multi-layered security
 watch for any signs of intrusion, while access control
strategy that includes technological, procedural, and physical
 techniques like role-based authentication ensure that only
safeguards. A defined cybersecurity policy, frequent backups,
 authorized users can access the system. To further ensure the
strong access controls, data encryption, and security awareness
 security of personally identifiable information while data is
training are all part of this. Security procedures apply safety
 being analyzed, models are trained, data is anonymized, and
operations instructions in conjunction with security policies,
 synthetic data is generated.
regulations, and recommendations. cybersecurity protocols
 From the above fig. 9, the resilience of ITS against cyberdynamically alter security measures in response to changing
 attacks is assessed. GenAI improves resilience by learning
threat environments. These procedures enhance the system’s
 from changing attack patterns and mitigating threats. AI-MAresponsiveness to novel, unanticipated dangers using machine
 driven anomaly detection and blockchain data integrity layers
learning models that study assault trends and make real-time
 strengthen the system. Enhancing incident response tactics and
adjustments to security systems.
 self-healing mechanisms can boost ITS resilience, ensuring
 From the above Fig. 8, ITS security demands computasecurity and operational continuity in dynamic transportation
tional power for real-time threat detection and mitigation.
 contexts.
GenAI streamlines pattern recognition and anomaly detec- h i h i
 ′′ ′′
 T s = ∝ +bx + ∀z ∂ + yr e ∗ σ ϵγ a − s ′
  
tion to minimize false positives and accelerate calculation. (19)
Edge computing minimizes latency by processing near data
sources, increasing reaction times. Lightweight encryption Integrating
 h the iresponse to threats (T s), adaptive
 h mitigati
 ′′ ′′
methods balance security and processing power, ensuring ing ( ∝ +bx ), and system resilience (+∀z ∂ + yr e ),
seamless ITS operations. AI-MA models need effective Equation (19) describes the security protection factor
 (σ ϵγ a − s ′ ) in ITS. This suggested a dual-framework strat-
  
resource management and hardware acceleration because
they have high computational requirements. Algorithmic egy using generative AI to improve resilience analysis.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 Fig. 13. Reliability of transportation networks.

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF E XISTING W ITH P ROPOSED M ETHOD

Fig. 11. Resilience analysis.

 TABLE V
 E NCRYPTION E FFECTIVENESS M ETRICS

 transportation networks include unconventional and decentralized security mechanisms, such as blockchain-based identity
 management, allowing for trustworthy peer-to-peer identification independent of any governing body.
 From fig. 10, transportation networks must be reliable
 against cyberattacks for uninterrupted operations. GenAIdriven security frameworks improve reliability by providing
 predictive threat analysis, real-time anomaly detection, and
 automated incident response. Secure data transfer and adaptive
 encryption decrease risks and minimize system disturbances.
 However, network congestion, latency, and computational
 resource requirements are concerns. Network resilience is
 improved via redundancy protocols, blockchain for secure
 transactions, and self-healing techniques. Strong cybersecurity safeguards ITS from dangers and maintains trust and
 efficiency.
 h ′′
 i
 j x a − r ′ = 1m ∀′ + te ∗ vx µa + tw
    
Fig. 12. (a) Encryption techniques on data privacy in ITS. (20)
 Equation (20) integrates ′ the weaknesses of the system (vx),
 threat growth (= 1m ),
 
C. Impact of Encryption Techniques on Data Privacy in ITS ∀ + te and adaptive defensive mechanisms ( j x a − r ′ ), thereby modeling the security answer
 
 Objective: Evaluate the effectiveness of AES-256, Homo- h ′′
 i
morphic Encryption (HE), and Blockchain-based Encryption factor ( µa + tw ). This strategy is based on cybersecurity
in securing ITS communications. defensive flexibility in analyzing the reliability of transporta-
 Fig. 9(a) and Table V evaluate AES-256, Homomorphic tion networks.
Encryption, and Blockchain-Based Encryption in securing In Table VI, this comparison shows how the AI-MA security
ITS data. Blockchain-based encryption provides the highest framework is far better than the old techniques in terms of
security (98/100) and data breach reduction (90%) with mod- security, efficiency, and resilience.
erate processing overhead (15%). The results suggest that Findings indicate that AI-MA security frameworks based on
advanced encryption methods enhance data privacy while GenAI augment ITS security by detecting real-time anomaminimizing computational costs in ITS environments. Modern lies, predicting threats, and responding automatically. Privacy,
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KHAN et al.: SECURING INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS: A DUAL-FRAMEWORK APPROACH 11

system adaptation, and computational demand continue to V. C ONCLUSION
be significant barriers. Edge computing and parallel process-
 GenAI can revolutionize ITS; however, additional security
ing enhance efficiency, whereas self-healing mechanisms and
 concerns must be addressed. Adaptive security models, realredundancy techniques enhance robustness. Ensuring trust,
 time threat detection, and sophisticated encryption techniques
reliability, and uninterrupted ITS functionality in evolving
 are necessary to combat AI-driven cyber threats. It has tackled
contexts calls for safe, scalable, and efficient cybersecurity
 data privacy, intrusion detection, and secure communicasolutions.
 tion, among other important issues. Addressing these issues
 Data privacy, effective intrusion detection, and secure
 involves striking an equilibrium between protective measures
communication are the biggest challenges when protecting
 and technological advancement. Privacy-preserving techniques
AI-driven transportation infrastructure systems against malithat enable effective data analysis without disclosing percious assaults (AI-MA). Data aggregation sites are appealing
 sonally identifying information include data anonymization,
targets for inference and extraction attacks, leading to privacy
 differential privacy, and synthetic data creation. While AIconcerns. These points gather and analyze sensitive real-time
 powered real-time intrusion detection systems assist in
information, including vehicle positions, user identities, and
 identifying and removing such threats, ellipsocurl cryptogbehavioral patterns. As malicious actors use intricate evasion
 raphy and other cutting-edge encryption technologies aid to
strategies, adversarial instances, and zero-day attacks to exploit
 safeguard communication lines. The proposed AI-MA model
weaknesses in AI models, intrusion detection systems are
 achieves a high threat detection accuracy of 96.2%, a privacy
becoming more difficult to detect.
 protection score of 91.8%, a computational efficiency of
 Using Generative AI (GenAI) in ITS systems can lead to
 92.9%, a resilience score of 97.8%, and a network reliability
problems like adversarial input generation, model drift from
 ratio of 92.6% compared to other existing models. Using
using synthetic data for training, vulnerability to injection
 pre-trained AI models known to be biased and fragile is a
attacks, and more opportunities for reverse engineering to
 research limitation. Shifts in processing costs and policy issues
exploit the models. An adversary with malicious intent can
 are two examples associated with real-life implementation that
use GenAI-driven decision models to cause erroneous sensor
 need further investigation. The barriers mentioned above must
data interpretation, dangerous routing, or misclassify vehicle
 be removed for intelligent transport networks to be effective
actions. If synthetic data distributions differ from real-world
 in further deployments.
traffic patterns, model drift might negatively affect the operational effectiveness of continuous learning processes driven
by GenAI. Hackers can disrupt traffic flow optimization and R EFERENCES
incident prediction by manipulating real-time GenAI results
 [1] S. Chaudhary, V. Gkioulos, and S. Katsikas, “Developing metrics to
via quick injection. assess the effectiveness of cybersecurity awareness program,” J. Cyber-
 First, transportation systems must adhere to several national security, vol. 8, no. 1, Jan. 2022, Art. no. tyac006.
and international regulations about data privacy, cybersecurity, [2] K. Shaukat et al., “Performance comparison and current challenges of
 using machine learning techniques in cybersecurity,” Energies, vol. 13,
and traffic management to fulfill regulatory requirements. no. 10, p. 2509, May 2020.
Data processing, encryption, and accountability are heavily [3] A. Pollini et al., “Leveraging human factors in cybersecurity: An
regulated areas; as a result, system changes can be delayed, integrated methodological approach,” Cognition, Technol. Work, vol. 24,
or AI models can become less flexible. The swift implemen- no. 2, pp. 371–390, May 2022.
 [4] A. A. Ganin et al., “Multicriteria decision framework for cybersetation of cutting-edge security measures can be slowed down curity risk assessment and management,” Risk Anal., vol. 40, no. 1,
by the time and effort needed to comply with these rules. pp. 183–199, Jan. 2020.
Secondly, there is yet another major obstacle in the form [5] M. Ahsan, K. E. Nygard, R. Gomes, M. M. Chowdhury, N. Rifat, and
 J. F. Connolly, “Cybersecurity threats and their mitigation approaches
of computational limitations. Threat detection and privacy using machine learning—A review,” J. Cybersecurity Privacy, vol. 2,
protection using AI-powered approaches have much potential, no. 3, pp. 527–555, Jul. 2022.
but in contexts with limited resources, the computational [6] M. K. Hasan, A. A. Habib, Z. Shukur, F. Ibrahim, S. Islam,
demands of these methods might be too much for the cur- and M. A. Razzaque, “Review on cyber-physical and cyber-security
 system in smart grid: Standards, protocols, constraints, and recrent infrastructure to handle. In some deployment situations, ommendations,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 209, Jan. 2023,
the computer capacity needed to interpret massive volumes Art. no. 103540.
of data in real-time from sensors, cars, and traffic control [7] A. Torok, Z. Szalay, and B. Saghi, “New aspects of integrity
 levels in automotive industry-cybersecurity of automated vehicles,”
systems could not be readily accessible. This might lead to IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 383–391,
less efficient response times, especially in highly populated Jan. 2022.
areas with massive traffic data. Finally, thieves are always [8] S. Safavat and D. B. Rawat, “On the elliptic curve cryptography for
 privacy-aware secure ACO-AODV routing in intent-based Internet of
looking for new ways to exploit weaknesses; thus, hostile Vehicles for smart cities,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22,
attacks are something to be worried about. Emerging attack no. 8, pp. 5050–5059, Aug. 2021.
vectors, such as zero-day vulnerabilities or complex denial- [9] M. Alloghani, D. Al-Jumeily, A. Hussain, J. Mustafina, T. Baker, and
 A. J. Aljaaf, “Implementation of machine learning and data mining
of-service assaults, can evade current protections, regardless to improve cybersecurity and limit vulnerabilities to cyber attacks,” in
of how advanced AI security mechanisms are. Due to the Nature-Inspired Computation in Data Mining and Machine Learning.
ever-changing nature of these attacks, ITS security solutions Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 47–76.
 [10] H. Kayan, M. Nunes, O. Rana, P. Burnap, and C. Perera, “Cybersecurity
must be flexible and regularly upgraded to tackle emerging of industrial cyber-physical systems: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vulnerabilities. vol. 54, no. 11s, pp. 1–35, Jan. 2022.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[11] J. Petit and G. Le Lann, “Next generation vehicles, safety, and [19] H. Khalid, S. J. Hashim, F. Hashim, W. A. M. Al-Jawher,
 cybersecurity—The CMX framework,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., M. A. Chaudhary, and H. H. M. Altarturi, “RAVEN: Robust anonymous
 vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1333–1345, Feb. 2024. vehicular end-to-end encryption and efficient mutual authentication for
[12] A. Yaseen, “The role of machine learning in network anomaly detection post-quantum intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 for cybersecurity,” Sage Sci. Rev. Appl. Mach. Learn., vol. 6, no. 8, Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 17574–17586, Nov. 2024.
 pp. 16–34, 2023. [20] R. Ejjami, “The digital evolution strategies for overcoming cybersecurity
[13] S. Gupta Bhol, J. Mohanty, and P. Kumar Pattnaik, “Taxonomy of cyber and adoption challenges in French SMEs,” Int. J. Multidisciplinary Res.,
 security metrics to measure strength of cyber security,” Mater. Today, vol. 6, no. 3, May 2024.
 Proc., vol. 80, pp. 2274–2279, Jan. 2023. [21] A. Chhabra, R. Saha, and M. Conti, “PITCOR: Privacy-assured
[14] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, V. Chamola, and Y. Park, “Uniting cyber security time-controlled revocation in blockchain transactions,” in Proc.
 and machine learning: Advantages, challenges and future research,” ICT 6th Int. Conf. Blockchain Comput. Appl. (BCCA), Nov. 2024,
 Exp., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 313–321, Sep. 2022. pp. 141–148.
[15] Edge-IIoTset Cyber Security Dataset of IoT & IIoT. Accessed: [22] M. Khodayari, M. Akbari, and P. Foroudi, “The sharing economy: A
 Feb. 7, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ systematic literature review and research agenda,” Int. J. Consum. Stud.,
 mohamedamineferrag/edgeiiotset-cyber-security-dataset-of-iot-iiot vol. 49, no. 1, Jan. 2025.
[16] Y. Zhang et al., “Privacy protection for open sharing of psychiatric and [23] L. Caldwell, Cybersecurity As a Human Right: A Reformulation of the
 behavioral research data: Ethical considerations and recommendations,” Theoretical Framework of Securitization Theory. Scottsdale, AZ, USA:
 Alpha Psychiatry, vol. 26, no. 1, p. 38759, 2025. Northcentral University, 2022.
[17] S. Shirvani, Y. Baseri, and A. Ghorbani, “Evaluation framework for [24] C. Tran, F. Fioretto, and P. Van Hentenryck, “Differentially private and
 electric vehicle security risk assessment,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. fair deep learning: A Lagrangian dual approach,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 Syst., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 33–56, Jan. 2024. Artif. Intell., May 2021, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 9932–9939.
[18] H. Hufron, S. Fikri, S. Hadi, I. Shulga, and A. S. Wibowo, “Digital [25] E. Pacheco, “Older adults’ safety and security online: A post-pandemic
 platform power play: Indonesian and European union law perspective,” exploration of attitudes and behaviors,” 2024, arXiv:2403.
 Lex Scientia Law Rev., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 707–742, Nov. 2024. 09208.