IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025 8271

 Self-Calibrated CLIP for Training-Free
 Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
 Sule Bai , Yong Liu , Yifei Han, Haoji Zhang , Yansong Tang , Member, IEEE, Jie Zhou , Fellow, IEEE,
 and Jiwen Lu , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Recent advancements in pre-trained vision-language
models like CLIP, have enabled the task of open-vocabulary
segmentation. CLIP demonstrates impressive zero-shot capabilities in various downstream tasks that require holistic image
understanding. However, due to the image-level contrastive
learning and fully global feature interaction, ViT-based CLIP
struggles to capture local details, resulting in poor performance in
segmentation tasks. Our analysis of ViT-based CLIP reveals that
anomaly tokens emerge during the forward process, attracting
disproportionate attention from normal patch tokens and thereby
diminishing spatial awareness. To address this issue, we propose
Self-Calibrated CLIP (SC-CLIP), a training-free method that
calibrates CLIP to generate finer representations while preserving its original generalization ability—without introducing
new parameters or relying on additional backbones. Specifically, we mitigate the negative impact of anomaly tokens from
two complementary perspectives. First, we explicitly identify
the anomaly tokens and replace them based on local context. Fig. 1. Left: Vanilla CLIP produces a noisy segmentation map, while
Second, we reduce their influence on normal tokens by enhancing our Self-Calibrated CLIP (SC-CLIP) generates a much clearer and finer
feature discriminability and attention correlation, leveraging the result. Right: Performance comparison of the open-vocabulary segmentation
inherent semantic consistency within CLIP’s mid-level features. methods, where our SC-CLIP achieves the best results across all benchmarks.
In addition, we introduce a two-pass strategy that effectively
integrates multi-level features to enrich local details under the
training-free setting. Together, these strategies enhance CLIP’s arbitrary categories based on the textual inputs, overcoming the
feature representations with improved granularity and semantic limitations of predefined category sets. To achieve this, models
coherence. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of must generalize beyond the training data. Vision-language
SC-CLIP, achieving state-of-the-art results across all datasets
and surpassing previous methods by 9.5%. Notably, SC-CLIP pretrained models such as CLIP [1], demonstrate remarkable
boosts the performance of vanilla CLIP ViT-L/14 by 6.8 times. zero-shot capabilities by leveraging large-scale image-text
Furthermore, we discuss our method’s applicability to other pairs, effectively fulfilling these requirements. However, the
vision–language models and tasks for a comprehensive evaluation. image-level pre-training strategy and fully global feature inter-
Our source code is available at https://github.com/SuleBai/SC- actions of ViT-based CLIP leads to an excessive emphasis
CLIP
 on global context, neglecting local and fine-grained details
 Index Terms—Open-vocabulary segmentation, training-free. essential for dense prediction tasks. Consequently, directly
 applying ViT-based CLIP to segmentation tasks yields poor
 I. I NTRODUCTION performance. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the segmentation result generated by patch-text cosine similarity exhibits
O PEN-VOCABULARY Segmentation (OVS) is an emerging task in computer vision that aims to segment considerable noise. CLIP ViT-B/16 achieves only 8.9% mIoU
 on the COCO-Object dataset [2], significantly lagging behind
 Received 10 July 2025; revised 9 October 2025 and 20 November its ability on image-level recognition.
2025; accepted 27 November 2025. Date of publication 10 December
2025; date of current version 16 December 2025. This work was sup- To address ViT-based CLIP’s limitations in capturing local
ported in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant details, recent studies have proposed various modifications to
CJGJZD20220517142402006 and in part by the National Natural Science its last layer. One line of research [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8],
Foundation of China under Grant 62206153. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Deng-Ping [9], [10] introduces correlative attention, replacing the original
Fan. (Sule Bai and Yong Liu contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding QK> attention with alternatives like KK> , to enhance focus
author: Yansong Tang.) on relevant regions. But these methods still operate on the
 Sule Bai, Yong Liu, Yifei Han, Haoji Zhang, and Yansong Tang are
with Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shen- global and noisy inputs, hindering their effectiveness. Another
zhen 518055, China (e-mail: bsl23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; tang.yansong@sz. approach [11], [12] incorporates additional backbones [13],
tsinghua.edu.cn). [14], [15] like DINO [13] to provide richer spatial details.
 Jie Zhou and Jiwen Lu are with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. Despite performance gains, they fail to fully exploit CLIP’s
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2025.3639996 semantic knowledge and impose extra computational costs. In
 1941-0042 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
8272 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 as shown in Figure 4. In order to retain the rich semantics
 of deep features and the spatial consistency of mid-level
 features, we utilize the latter to adaptively aggregate deep
 features, while simultaneously enhancing attention correlation.
 This self-adjusting approach improves the overall semantic
 coherence. Furthermore, we explore how to effectively leverage multi-level feature fusion under the training-free setting
 and propose a two-pass strategy to enhance the capture of
 details at different scales. The key insights lie in ensuring
 feature compatibility across layers through alignment with
 CLIP’s final layer, and preserving the integrity of the lastlayer features to maintain strong cross-modal correspondence.
Fig. 2. Anomaly tokens in CLIP. In (a), we visualize the attention maps of Experimental results demonstrate that SC-CLIP achieves
various selected patches (marked by F), which all exhibit excessive focus remarkable performance, establishing new state-of-the-art
on the same regions (indicated by the orange dashed circle). And this region results across eight datasets, as shown in Figure 1. Our
aligns with the outliers identified in the PCA analysis shown in (b).
 approach significantly outperforms previous methods by 9.5%
 on CLIP ViT-B/16. Notably, SC-CLIP boosts the performance
fact, both strategies overlook the underlying causes of CLIP’s of vanilla CLIP ViT-L/14 by 6.8 times, without the need for
global focus, preventing them from fundamentally resolving additional parameters, data, or backbones.
the issue of diminished spatial awareness in CLIP. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
 Motivated by these limitations, we begin with an in-depth • We propose SC-CLIP, a training-free method designed to
analysis of CLIP. As indicated by the orange dashed circles enhance CLIP’s dense feature representation, effectively
in Figure 2 (a), we observe that different patch tokens con- addressing the uniform attention activations and feature
sistently exhibit high activation regions within their attention homogenization caused by the anomaly tokens.
map. These regions attract excessive attention from other • We mitigate the negative effects of anomaly tokens from
normal patches, distracting their focus away from local and two perspectives. First, we explicitly address the anomaly
relevant areas. To further investigate, we perform PCA [16] tokens based on local context. Second, we reduce their
on the patch-level features from CLIP’s last layer and project impact on normal tokens by enhancing feature discrimthem into a 2D space, as shown in Figure 2 (b), revealing inability and attention correlation, leveraging the spatial
these over-attended tokens significantly differ from the normal consistency inherent in CLIP’s mid-level features.
ones (including the [CLS] token). Thus, we refer to them as • Our approach sets new state-of-the-art results across popanomaly tokens. We attribute CLIP’s disadvantage in dense ular benchmarks. And we conduct extensive experiments
prediction tasks to the emergence of anomaly tokens, which to validate the effectiveness of our method.
leads to uniform attention activations across locations. This
disrupts the attention’s ideal ability to extract relevant seman- II. R ELATED W ORK
tics, resulting in feature homogenization that diminishes local This section focuses on two interrelated areas: visionawareness and further exacerbates noise in the feature maps. language pretrained models and open-vocabulary segmen-
 Building on this analysis, we propose enhancing CLIP’s tation. We highlight significant advancements and ongoing
feature representation by weakening the influence of anomaly challenges, providing a critical overview that identifies gaps in
tokens. To this end, we introduce Self-Calibrated CLIP (SC- current research and proposes directions for future exploration.
CLIP), a training-free approach that leverages CLIP’s inherent
properties for effective calibration, strengthening its perception
on local and relevant regions. A. Vision-Language Pretrained Models
 Specifically, we address the negative impact of anomaly Vision-language models [1], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]
tokens from two perspectives. On the one hand, we propose pretrained on large-scale web data, represented by CLIP [1],
directly resolving these anomaly tokens. To identify them, we employ contrastive learning to align images with associated
apply the Local Outlier Factor (LOF) algorithm [17], a method captions. These models have demonstrated remarkable zerofor detecting outliers. Once located, we replace these anomaly shot capabilities across various downstream tasks that require
tokens with values interpolated from their spatial neighbors, comprehensive image understanding, such as visual question
considering that spatially close regions often share similar answering and image-text retrival [23], [24], [25]. However,
semantics. This not only serves as a regularization to prevent CLIP’s image-level pre-training, which relies on the [CLS]
inappropriate attention focus but also reassigns meaningful token to represent the whole image, causes the model to excessemantic information to the anomaly tokens, aligning them sively focus on the global features at the expense of local and
with the local context. On the other hand, to relieve the fine-grained details. This limitation hinders its performance in
feature homogenization problem caused by anomaly tokens, dense prediction tasks which require pixel-level understanding.
we propose a self-adjusting strategy to enhance feature dis- To address this, our work focuses on effectively adapting CLIP
criminability and attention correlation. We observe that the for segmentation task while preserving its original knowledge
mid-layers’ features of CLIP exhibit good semantic coherence, and cross-modal alignment capabilities.
BAI et al.: SELF-CALIBRATED CLIP FOR TRAINING-FREE OPEN-VOCABULARY SEGMENTATION 8273

Fig. 3. Resolving the Anomaly Tokens. (a) Illustration of the resolving process. We plot the feature map using the mean value of each token. After locating
the anomaly tokens (the center of red square), we replace them with the interpolated values obtained from their neighboring regions. (b) Effect on the attention
map. We highlight the changes on attention map for a normal token (F), and an anomaly token (N).

 QK> attention with the combination of QQ> and KK> attention, to enhance correlation. GEM [5] proposes generalized
 self-self attention and a set of regularizations. ClearCLIP
 [7] identifies the primary source of noise stems from the
 residual connections, and proposes to remove it. CLIPTrase
 [10] notices the [CLS] token may disrupt the patch correlations
 and proposes using self-self attention along with clustering and
 denoising for post-processing. Other works leverage additional
 vision models like DINO [13] and SAM [14] for providing
 fine-grained spatial details. For example, CLIP-DINOiser [12]
 refines feature maps using the affinity learned from DINO’s
 feature correspondence, while ProxyCLIP [11] applies them to
 adjust attention weights. In contrast, our approach improves
 semantic coherence by exploiting CLIP’s internal properties
 and explicitly resolving the negative impact of anomaly tokens.

 III. M ETHOD
 In this section, we begin with an overview of CLIP and
Fig. 4. Top: Visualization of patch similarities shows that CLIP’s last-layer
 its dense inference pipeline. We then present SC-CLIP, our
features perform poorly, but its mid-level features exhibit semantic consistency training-free approach designed to enhance CLIP’s dense repcomparable to DINO. Bottom Left: ROC curve analysis further supports this resentation. We address anomaly tokens from two perspectives.
observation, with our SC-CLIP showing superior semantic coherence. Bottom
Right: Detailed ROC analysis of our method.
 First, we directly identify these tokens and replace them
 based on local context. Next, to mitigate their influence on
 normal tokens, we leverage mid-level features with stronger
B. Open-Vocabulary Segmentation spatial consistency to guide the adaptive aggregation of deep
 The open-vocabulary segmentation (OVS) task [26] focuses features and enhance the attention correlation. Furthermore,
on segmenting images with arbitrary text queries by leveraging we propose a two-pass strategy to effectively integrate multithe zero-shot capabilities of vision-language models [1], [18]. level features and enrich spatial details.
This task has broad potential applications across many visionrelated tasks [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35]. A. Preliminaries
Existing works can be broadly classified into three categories:
fully-supervised, weakly-supervised and training-free. Fully- CLIP ViT model encodes an input image into a token
supervised methods [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42], sequence X = [xcls , x1 , . . . , xN ], where xcls is the [CLS] token
[43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], [49], [50], [51] require fine- and the others represent dense visual features, comprising N
tuning on pixel-level annotated datasets. Weakly-supervised patch tokens. The CLIP model includes multiple layers, with
approaches [52], [53], [54], [55], [56], [57], [58], [59] reduce each layer l processing the input X(l−1) as follows:
reliance on dense annotations by using image-text pair to guide Zl = SA(LN(X(l−1) )) + X(l−1) (1)
region grouping. Training-free methods [3], [4], [5], [6], [8],
 X = FFN(LN(Z )) + Z
 l l l
 (2)
[9], [10], [11], [12], [60], [61], [62], [63] directly use CLIP for
segmentation by making minimal adjustments to the model’s where SA, FFN and LN denote self-attention module, feedarchitecture without additional training. forward network, and layer normalization, respectively.
 Our approach needs no training and falls into the third For dense inference, the visual features are aligned with C
category. Recent methods have discovered that CLIP’s final- categories to produce the patch-text similarity map of dimenlayer exhibits poor spatial consistency and proposed various sions N × C. And the final segmentation result is obtained by
modifications. For instance, SCLIP [4] replaces the original applying argmax operation to this similarity map.
8274 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 Our method is training-free and modifies only the last reducing attention on relevant local areas, and 2) anomaly
layer of the CLIP visual encoder while keeping the other tokens focus on prominent objects and other anomaly tokens.
layers unchanged to prevent model collapse. For clarity and After resolving the anomaly tokens via interpolation, normal
consistency in notation, we denote X penul and Xlast as the tokens refocus on relevant local regions, while the updated
penultimate and last feature representations, respectively. anomaly tokens also shift attention to appropriate areas.

B. Resolving the Anomaly Tokens C. Self-Adjusting for Semantic Coherence
 We attribute CLIP’s limitations in dense prediction tasks to After resolving the anomaly tokens, the model reduces focus
the presence of anomaly tokens within its features, which devi- on them in the last layer’s attention. However, a challenge
ate significantly from normal tokens. These anomaly tokens still remains: anomaly tokens have already caused substantial
cause other tokens to disproportionately focus on them in deep disruption to other normal tokens in the previous layers,
layers, leading to identical attention activation, which under- diminishing their local awareness.
mines attention’s capacity to extract semantically coherent To alleviate this influence and further enhance feature disregions. Since attention mechanism [64], [65] manages spatial criminability and attention correlation, we seek to restore the
arrangements, this pattern intensifies noise in the feature map, spatial structure among normal tokens. Some existing methods
ultimately degrading performance. Studies [66], [67] suggest [11], [12] address this by introducing backbones with strong
that pretrained models like CLIP may identify redundant spatial coherence, such as DINO [13] and SAM [14], to
tokens and use them to gather global information, thereby provide fine-grained details. While effective, these approaches
expediting processing. However, these tokens lack semantics, rely on additional backbones and incur extra computational
conveying minimal information about their original positions. costs during training and inference.
Existing methods do not explicitly address the anomaly tokens This motivates us to explore whether such semantic coheror the impact they cause to other normal tokens. ence can be uncovered within CLIP itself. We begin by
 To address the negative impact of anomaly tokens, we visualizing patch similarities, as shown in Figure 4 (top),
propose an intuitive approach to directly resolve them in X penul where we observe the CLIP’s last layer performs poorly as
before the last layer, as illustrated in Figure 3 (a). First, it expected. However, its mid-layer exhibits stronger semantic
is essential to identify the anomaly tokens. As previously coherence, comparable to that of DINO. To further validate
analyzed in Figure 2, they exhibit a clear distinction from this observation, we quantitatively evaluate all features of
other tokens. To detect these anomalies, we employ the Local CLIP using ROC curve analysis. Specifically, we use 2000
Outlier Factor (LOF) algorithm [17], a widely used method for images from the ADE20K validation set [68]. For each
anomaly detection. LOF identifies outliers by measuring the image, we extract patch-level features at each layer l and
local density deviation of a data point relative to its neighbors. compute their cosine similarity to construct the similarity map
 l l
Specifically, it computes the local reachability density and Simil ∈ RN×N , defined as Simil = kXXl kkX ·X
 l k . This similarity

assigns a high LOF score to points with significantly lower map serves as a binary classifier to indicate whether two
density than their neighbors, indicating potential anomalies. patches belong to the same category, with patches of the
Besides, we implement the PyTorch-based LOF algorithm to same category labeled as 1 and otherwise 0. Each patch’s
enhance the computational efficiency. category is determined by majority voting on pixel labels in
 Once the anomalies are located, we replace them with the the segmentation map. A higher area under the curve (AUC) in
values interpolated from their 3×3 neighboring regions, based ROC analysis reflects better semantic consistency. As shown
on the assumption that features in spatially adjacent regions are in Figure 4 (bottom left), CLIP’s mid-layer features exhibit
generally similar. Specifically, we apply a 3 × 3 convolution strong spatial coherence (AUC=0.76), closely matching DINO
kernel with the center set to 0. And if neighboring regions (AUC=0.77). However, CLIP’s last-layer features perform
contain any other anomaly tokens, they are explicitly excluded much worse (AUC=0.66).
from the interpolation. The operation’s formula is provided The OVS task requires spatially coherent cross-modal alignbelow, where X̃ penul denotes the feature after operation and A ment. CLIP’s last feature Xlast offers rich semantics but lacks
is the set of anomaly tokens. coherence, while its mid-level features Xmid exhibit strong
 P1 P1 penul
 spatial consistency but are semantically limited. Inspired by
 penul i=−1 j=−1 wi, j · X(x+i,y+ j) [12], we propose feature aggregation to effectively combine
 X̃(x,y) = P1 P1 , ∀(x, y) ∈ A
 the strengths of both. As illustrated in Figure 5 (a), we
 i=−1 j=−1 wi, j
 ( leverage Simimid to adaptively aggregate Xdeep , generating new
 0, if (x + i, y + j) ∈ A features X̂deep by combining semantically similar patches with
 wi, j = (3)
 1, otherwise weighted contributions based on their similarity. This process
 can be formulated as follows:
 We believe that eliminating anomaly tokens offers two key
 N
benefits. First, it acts as a form of regularization for the X
attention. Second, it reassigns semantic information to these X̂deep
 p = Norm(Simimid deep
 (p, q) ) · Xq (4)
 q=1
anomaly tokens, aligning them with the local context. As
shown in the Figure 3 (b), the vanilla attention in CLIP has two The Norm function normalizes the sum to 1. The aggregated
issues: 1) normal tokens excessively focus on anomaly tokens, features X̂deep show better results than the original Xdeep .
BAI et al.: SELF-CALIBRATED CLIP FOR TRAINING-FREE OPEN-VOCABULARY SEGMENTATION 8275

Fig. 5. Illustration of the self-adjusting strategy. (a) We use the similarity map from CLIP’s mid layer to adaptively aggregate deep features by combining
semantically similar patches, producing clearer results. The second row provides a detailed process for the selected patch F. (b) We apply the similarity map
to enhance attention, broadening and refining the activation regions.

 Moreover, we find that the self-self attention (e.g, KK> parameter space of the last layer Pfor alignment.
  Notably, the
attention) proposed in the previous works [4], [5], [6], [7] similarity between Xlast and L i∈M X i
 increases to 0.983,
exhibit insufficient attention activations. Therefore, we further where L denotes the last layer. This indicates that the last
incorporate the similarity map Simimid to augment the attention layer can effectively realign the aggregated multi-level features
operation, as detailed in the following formula. As shown in to match the original last-layer representation, without any
Figure 5 (b), the attention regions now display more extensive fine-tuning.O.2 Preserving the integrity of Xlast is critical for
and accurate activations. maintaining cross-modal alignment, as it directly corresponds
 to the text embeddings.
 attention score = softmax(KK> ) + softmax(Simimid ) (5)
 Based on these insights, we propose a two-pass strategy,
 Feature aggregation and attention enhancement constitute where CLIP’s final layer is explicitly employed for alignment.
the self-adjusting strategy, which significantly improves the This strategy involves two forward passes—one with the origisemantic coherence, increasing the AUC to 0.80, as shown in nal X penul and another with multi-level features, formulated as:
 L(X penul ) + L i
 P
Figure 4 (bottom right). This demonstrates that the inherent i∈M X .Ablation experiments validate that
consistency within CLIP’s mid-level features can be effectively this design enriches the representation with complementary
leveraged for adjustment. multi-level information while preserving CLIP’s cross-modal
 alignment capability.

D. Two-Pass Strategy IV. E XPERIMENT
 Motivated by the effectiveness of multi-level feature aggre- A. Experimental Setup
gation in enriching details for dense prediction tasks [6], 1) Datasets and Metric: We conduct comprehensive eval-
[69], [70], [71], [72], we explore the potential of leverag- uations on eight commonly used benchmark datasets, which
ing CLIP’s multi-level features in a training-free manner. A are grouped into two categories: 1) with a background class,
straightforwardP way is to directly sum features from different including PASCAL VOC (VOC21) [73], PASCAL Context
layers:Xlast + i∈M Xi , where M denotes a set of mid- (Context) [74], and COCO Object (COCO-Obj) [2]; 2) without
level features (e.g., layers 4 to 9). However, CLIP exhibits a background class, including PASCAL VOC20 (VOC20)
significant discrepancies across different layers. Specifically, [73], Cityscapes (City) [75], PASCAL Context59 (Context59)
the similarity between Xlast and i
 P
 i∈M X is merely 0.094, [74], ADE20K (ADE) [68], and COCOStuff (COCO-Stf) [2].
and directly summing them severely disrupts CLIP’s cross- And we evaluate results with the standard mean-intersectionmodal alignment capability. To address this issue, we note over-union (mIoU) as the metric.
that different blocks of the ViT-based CLIP encoder capture 2) Implementation Details: In our experiments, we utilize
complementary visual patterns, from local and structural cues the CLIP [1] with ViT-B/16 and ViT-L/14 architectures. And
in mid-level layers to more global and semantic information our code implementation is built on the MMSegmentation.
in deeper layers. The final visual layer is the only component After deriving the similarity map Simimid from mid-level
whose output is directly contrasted with text embeddings dur- features, we apply thresholding following previous works [12],
ing CLIP pre-training, and we therefore assume it effectively [77]. Specifically, values below the threshold β are set to
acts as an alignment head that maps these visual represen- zero to strengthen feature correlation. And we set β to 0.4.
tations into the joint image–text embedding space. Based on For the evaluation protocol, we adopt the sliding window
these observations, we derive two key principles for training- inference strategy from SCLIP [4]: input images are resized
 feature fusion O.
free P 1 Ensuring the compatibility between Xlast to have a short side of 336 (560 for Cityscapes [75] due to its
 i
and i∈M X is crucial. This can be achieved by leveraging the higher resolution), and the slide inference is conducted with a
8276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF O UR A PPROACH W ITH OTHER M ETHODS ON E IGHT S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION B ENCHMARKS . F OR A FAIR
 C OMPARISON , W E R EPRODUCE A LL M ETHODS F OLLOWING THE E VALUATION P ROTOCOL IN S ECTION IV-A, C ONSIDERING THE D IFFERENT
 S ETTINGS U SED BY E ACH M ETHOD . CLIP-DINO ISER† D ENOTES O UR R EPRODUCED R ESULTS U SING O PENAI’ S P RETRAINED W EIGHTS .
 W E R EPORT P ROXY CLIP * R ESULTS U SING I TS DINO-B/16 VARIANT

224 × 224 window and a 112 × 112 stride. No post-processing TABLE II
strategies are applied. Across all datasets, we use the standard E XPERIMENTS ON THE MESS B ENCHMARK [78]
ImageNet prompts [1] combined with their category names to
construct text descriptions. For all the hyper-parameters, we
keep consistent across all datasets without separate tuning.
 For datasets with the background class (Pascal VOC and
COCO-Object), we adhere to the evaluation protocol outlined
in previous works [4], [8], [11], [63]. Since the “background” method boosts its performance by threefold on the ViT-B/16
class is overly broad for CLIP and thus challenging to classify, and by 6.8 times on the ViT-L/14.
it is represented by a set of stuff categories such as “sky, river, In contrast to ProxyCLIP [11], which relies on the DINOsea, . . . ”, which do not overlap with other target classes. And B/16 [13] backbone to provide attention weights, our method
this pipeline is consistent with prior studies. does not depend on any auxiliary backbone yet achieves
 superior results. This highlights the inherent properties of
 CLIP can be effectively leveraged to calibrate itself, thereby
B. Main Results enhancing its feature representation.
 To ensure a fair comparison, we strictly follow the eval- The MESS benchmark [78] includes a wide range of
uation protocol specified in the Section IV-A to reproduce domain-specific datasets spanning fields such as earth monitorall methods. For CLIP-DINOiser [12], we retrain the model ing, medical sciences, engineering, agriculture, and biology. It
using the OpenAI’s pretrained weights. Table I presents the serves as a robust evaluation tool for assessing the generalizacomparison of all methods, where our SC-CLIP achieves an tion capability. We conduct experiments on datasets from each
average mIoU of 43.9% on CLIP ViT-B/16, setting a new domain within the MESS benchmark, and as shown in Table II,
state-of-the-art results across eight benchmarks with a notable our SC-CLIP consistently outperforms CLIP-DINOiser [12]
9.5% improvement over previous methods. Furthermore, our and ProxyCLIP [11], showing superior generalization ability.
method demonstrates robustness across different backbones,
achieving optimal performance on CLIP ViT-L/14, improving
the results by 3.5% average mIoU. C. Ablation Study
 The vanilla CLIP achieves only a 14.4% and 6.6% mIoU on In this section, we conduct comprehensive ablation experi-
ViT-B/16 and ViT-L/14 respectively, demonstrating its limita- ments to validate the effectiveness of our method. All ablations
tions in capturing fine-grained spatial details. Our training-free are performed on the CLIP ViT-B/16 backbone. We use SCLIP
BAI et al.: SELF-CALIBRATED CLIP FOR TRAINING-FREE OPEN-VOCABULARY SEGMENTATION 8277

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE P ROPOSED S TRATEGIES A BLATION S TUDY ON R ESOLVING THE A NOMALY T OKENS

[4] as our baseline, which modifies the attention mechanism
in the final layer by replacing the original QK> attention with
QQ> + KK> attention, to enhance correlations. Additionally,
we remove the residual connections and feed-forward network
(FFN) following [7], [11].
 1) Analysis of Various Strategies: In Table III, we incrementally incorporate each strategy to highlight its contribution.
First, by resolving the anomaly tokens (denoted by AnomRes),
our method achieves a 1.2% mIoU improvement, effectively
addressing the issues brought by anomaly tokens, as discussed
in Section III-B. Next, we apply the self-adjusting strategy proposed in Section III-C, which leverages the spatial consistency
within CLIP’s mid-level features to enhance attention correlation (denoted by AttnEnh), leading to a 0.9% improvement.
By adaptively aggregating deep features (FeatAgg), we obtain
a further 0.8% gain in mIoU. Finally, the two-pass strategy
(TwoPass) in Section III-D provides a 1.6% boost in mIoU.
Collectively, these strategies contribute to a substantial 12.3% TABLE V
improvement over the baseline. Besides, we conduct a detailed R EMOVING A NOMALIES F ROM D IFFERENT L AYERS
ROC curve analysis as shown in Figure 4 (bottom right). SC-
CLIP achieves an AUC of 0.81, surpassing the baseline by
17.4% and significantly enhancing the semantic coherence.
 2) Resolving the Anomaly Tokens: To thoroughly investigate the configurations for resolving anomaly tokens, we experiments based on the local neighborhood assumption,
conduct a series of ablation studies. These studies examine the employing bilinear, nearest-neighbor, median (using the
impact of varying the number of anomaly tokens, the choice median value of neighboring pixels), weighted (assigning
of different anomaly detection methods, various interpolation weights based on distance), and mean interpolation. The
strategies, and different neighborhood sizes. The results are results show that mean interpolation achieves the best persummarized in Table IV, where the first row reports the formance, and thus we adopt it as our final choice.
baseline results for all four groups of experiments. (d) Different neighborhood sizes: As shown in Table IV (d),
 (a) The number of anomaly tokens: As we use the LOF we compare different neighborhood sizes for mean interpolaalgorithm to identify the anomaly tokens, we need to adjust tion. The results show that the 3 × 3 neighborhood performs
the contamination hyperparameter to control the number of better than larger ones. We hypothesize that larger neighbordetected anomalies. We explore the optimal number of tokens hoods inevitably incorporate more irrelevant regions during
to resolve, as shown in Table IV (a). As the number increases the interpolation process, which tends to over-smooth features
from 1 to 10, performance gradually improves. However, and blur semantics across object boundaries.
further increasing this number to 15 yields no additional gains. In addition, we also test the removal of anomaly tokens
Therefore, we adopt the removal of 10 tokens (about 5% of starting from different layers on the VOC21 dataset in Table V.
the ViT-B/16 token sequence) in our method. The results show that the modification is only effective when
 (b) Various anomaly detection methods: We investigate removing from the last layer; otherwise, performance drops
alternative anomaly detection methods to the adopted LOF significantly. This is because the training-free setting relies on
algorithm, including Isolation Forest, DBSCAN, and One- the feature modeling of earlier CLIP layers, and improvements
Class SVM. As shown in Table IV (b), all methods lead to stem from modifying only the final layer. To further support
improvements, with LOF algorithm achieving the best results. this point, we apply self-self attention [3], [4], [7] (widely
 (c) Various interpolation methods: We explore various validated) to different layers. Results show that it is effective
interpolation methods in Table IV (c). After identifying the only when applied to the last layer; otherwise, it also drasanomaly tokens, we first try replacing them with the CLS tically degrades performance due to feature space disruption.
token or the mean of the normal tokens, but these strate- This suggests that the observed degradation is not caused by
gies do not lead to performance gains. We then conduct LOF’s inability to identify anomaly tokens in other layers.
8278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
 A BLATION S TUDY OF THE ATTENTION E NHANCEMENT A BLATION S TUDY OF THE F EATURE AGGREGATION

 TABLE VIII
 A BLATION S TUDY OF THE β FOR F EATURE AGGREGATION

Fig. 6. Visualization of shallower and deeper mid-layer patch similarity. F
denotes the selected token. localized activations can preserve intricate spatial information.
 And our method is robust to different combinations, with
 3) Self-adjusting Strategy: To comprehensively evaluate the (8, 3) also achieving an mIoU of 39.7. Furthermore, we
effectiveness of the self-adjusting strategy, we conduct ablation compare our approach with DINO, following prior studies
studies on both attention enhancement and feature aggregation. [12], [77], [79]. When applied to Xlast , DINO shows superior
 Table VI presents the ablation study on attention enhance- performance, showing its fine-grained details; however, our
ment, which can be regarded as a more detailed analysis approach achieves comparable results when both pre- and
of the “+AttnEnh” entry in Table III. All experiments are post-adjustments are applied, fully unlocking CLIP’s potential
conducted with anomaly tokens resolved (i.e., under the without relying on additional backbones.
“+AnomRes” setting in Table III). We first evaluate different In addition, as mentioned in Section IV-A, we apply threshforms of correlative attention (O 1 to O4 in Table VI), and olding to Simimid , setting values below the threshold β to zero.
find that these variants achieve comparable performance. We To analyze the effect of the β parameter, we experiment with
then examine using only Simimid (O) 5 and its integration with different β values using 4th-layer features to adjust Xlast (row 8
correlative attention. The results show that this integration (Eq. of Table VII). The results in Table VIII indicate that β should
(5)) consistently outperforms either component alone, demon- not be too large, as this would cause Simi to activate only
strating the effectiveness of attention enhancement. Among for itself. Conversely, if β is too small, all tokens would be
them, enhancing KK> (O+ 4 O)
 5 achieves the best overall activated in Simi, leading to feature homogenization. Overall,
performance. β should be set to a moderate value like 0.4.
 And in Table VII, we conduct a comprehensive analysis of 4) Two-pass Strategy: We conduct ablation study of
the feature aggregation. We find that adjusting both X penul and the multi-level fusion strategy in Table IX with following
Xlast is essential, serving as the pre- and post-adjustment for approaches. O1 baseline: L(X ) OP
 penul 2
 direct sum: L(X
 penul
 )+
 O
 i 3 penul i
 O
 P
the last layer. Experiments indicate that using deeper mid- i∈M X one pass: L
  X + i∈M X 4 two pass:
 L(X penul ) + L i
 P
layers (e.g, 9) for pre-adjustment and shallower mid-layer i∈M X . Here, L is the last layer, and M
(e.g, 4) for post-adjustment yields the optimal results, cor- is the multi-level features. The results align with our analysis
responding to (9, 4) in the table, achieving an average 39.8% in Section III-D, validating two key principles: (1) using the
mIoU, a 6% improvement over the baseline. As illustrated last layer for alignment: comparison between O 2 and O4 reveals

in Figure 6, the shallower mid-layers exhibit more localized that O4 aligns the multi-level features using the parameter space

activations, while deeper mid-layers provide broader activa- of the last layer, which improves feature compatibility and
tions. Based on this, we hypothesize that deeper layers are leads to a significant performance boost. (2) maintaining the
well-suited for pre-adjustment due to their broader activations, integrity of the last feature: comparison between O 3 and O 4

which help aggregate more regions and enable the attention indicates that O 3 weakens the original last feature, resulting in

mechanism capture more coherent semantics. On the other a performance drop. Additionally, we compare our approach
side, shallower layers are ideal for post-adjustment, as their with the dual-path strategy proposed in CLIPSurgery [6],
BAI et al.: SELF-CALIBRATED CLIP FOR TRAINING-FREE OPEN-VOCABULARY SEGMENTATION 8279

 TABLE IX
 A BLATION S TUDY OF THE T WO -PASS S TRATEGY

 TABLE X
 S ELECTED L AYERS OF THE T WO -PASS S TRATEGY

 TABLE XI
 E FFICIENCY C OMPARISON OF T RAINING -F REE M ETHODS

 Fig. 7. Detailed analysis of other ViT-based backbones.

 TABLE XII
 G ENERALIZATION TO OTHER V I T-BASED BACKBONES

where each layer of the image encoder in the new path is
modified to self-self attention, and the outputs of the new
path are directly aggregated. This can be formulated as: dual
path: L(X penul ) + i∈M Xinew , where Xinew is the feature from
 P
the new path. This strategy can be regarded as an enhanced D. Discussion
version of O.2 However, in comparison, our method achieves
superior results while avoiding the additional computational In this section, we provide a broader discussion on
overhead introduced by the new path. the applicability and generalization of our method. We
 To analyze the impact of selected layers in multi-level begin by evaluating its applicability to different ViT-based
fusion, we report the average mIoU across eight datasets in vision–language models, assessing the consistency and robust-
Table X, indicating that our method is robust to the choice of ness of our approach across models that vary in training data
selected layers, as different combinations yield similar results. and strategies. We then turn to ResNet-based CLIP models
The notation 4–10 in the table denotes fusing all features from to examine whether the anomaly token issue also arises in
layer 4 to 10, which achieves the best 43.9% mIoU, surpassing non-ViT architectures. Finally, we explore the potential of
the baseline (w/o) by 1.5% mIoU. our approach in open-vocabulary 3D perception tasks, demon-
 5) Efficiency Comparison: As shown in Table XI, we strating its applicability to more complex scenarios. Together,
compare the efficiency of different methods on the COCO- these analyses provide a more comprehensive validation for
Object dataset [2] using an NVIDIA V100 GPU. Compared our method.
to the previous state-of-the-art method, ProxyCLIP [11], our 1) Different ViT-based Vision–Language Models: To further
SC-CLIP eliminates the need for additional backbones, leading examine the generalization of our method, we evaluate it on
to a significant improvement in efficiency. Specifically, the several ViT-based vision–language models, which all adopt
FPS increases from 3.9 to 6.5, and the FLOPs are reduced image–text contrastive pretraining but differ in certain aspects.
from 34.4G to 17.5G. We also provide a detailed breakdown Specifically, MetaCLIP [22] and OpenCLIP (pretrained on
of the computational cost for each component. By default, LAION) [80] vary in the pretraining data, while BLIP [20]
the LOF algorithm is implemented with NumPy, which is and SigLIP [21] introduce alternative training paradigms or
computationally inefficient. As discussed in Section III-B, we architectures. For each model, we adopt the same configure-implement LOF using PyTorch, resulting in a substantial rations as those used for CLIP in Section IV-A. As shown
inference speed-up. In particular, the FPS improves from 6.3 in Table XII, our method consistently improves performance
to 7.6, while maintaining functional consistency. across all cases, showing its generalization to diverse models.
8280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 Fig. 8. Qualitative results of improvement analysis, where each strategy is progressively added to demonstrate its effect.

 TABLE XIII
 R ESOLVING A NOMALIES IN R ES N ET-BASED CLIP

 Fig. 9. PCA analysis of the ResNet-based CLIP.

 TABLE XIV
 To further explain why our method generalizes well across P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON O PEN -
different models, we provide analyses in Figure 7 (better VOCABULARY 3D S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION
viewed when zoomed in). In Figure 7 (a), using the image
from Figure 3 for illustration, the attention maps of four
different selected patch tokens (marked by F) show that different tokens all exhibit excessive focus on the same regions,
corresponding to anomaly tokens highlighted by the orange
dashed circles. In Figure 7 (b), PCA analysis of patch-level
features reveals these anomaly tokens as clear outliers, further
confirming their presence across all models. In Figure 7 (c),
ROC curves comparing mid-layer and last-layer features show
that mid-layer features consistently achieve higher AUC values
across all models, indicating stronger discriminative ability.
Building on this observation, our method explicitly addresses
anomaly tokens and leverages mid-layer spatial consistency,
leading to consistent relative AUC improvements, with gains 3) Open-vocabulary 3D perception tasks: Open-vocabulary
of 19.1% for MetaCLIP, 18.8% for OpenCLIP, 21.2% for 3D perception has recently gained increasing attention, aim-
BLIP, and 12.5% for SigLIP. Overall, these results explain ing to extend vision–language models to tasks such as 3D
the root of our method’s generalization ability: by tackling instance segmentation and object detection, with representhe consistently observed anomaly token issue and enhancing tative approaches including OpenMask3D [81], OpenIns3D
local correspondence, it achieves robust improvements across [82], Coda [83], and INHA [84]. To further validate the
diverse ViT-based vision–language models. applicability of SC-CLIP in 3D scenarios, we investigate
 2) ResNet-based CLIP Models: We further examine the open-vocabulary 3D semantic segmentation task using
ResNet-based CLIP variants (ResNet-50, ResNet-101, and OpenScene [85]. In this setting, the model is required to
ResNet-50×4) to investigate whether the anomaly token issue perform per-point classification, which strongly relies on dense
also exists beyond ViT architectures. As shown in the PCA feature representations and naturally aligns with the design of
visualizations in Figure 9, the feature distributions of ResNet SC-CLIP. Specifically, we employ the image feature fusion
variants are tightly clustered within a narrow range (e.g., method (corresponding to the “2D fusion” setting in their
[−3, 3]). In contrast, ViT-based models (Figure 7 (b)) exhibit paper), which enables a direct evaluation of the visual encoder
clear outliers, with x-axis values reaching as high as 100–1000. without additional training. Experiments on the ScanNet [86]
Quantitative results in Table XIII further confirm this obser- validation set and the Matterport3D [87] test set, as reported in
vation: resolving anomaly tokens (denoted as “+AnomRes”) Table XIV, show that SC-CLIP achieves the best performance
leads to negligible changes in average performance. These among all training-free methods. The remaining performance
findings indicate that ResNet-based CLIP does not suffer from gap compared with training-based methods such as LSeg
the anomaly token issue. We hypothesize that this is due to [46] and OpenSeg [37] can be largely attributed to their
the strong local inductive bias of convolutional architectures, additional supervised training of both the image encoder and
which prevents the extreme outliers that often arise in ViT- decoder. Overall, these results demonstrate that SC-CLIP not
based models. only advances open-vocabulary 2D segmentation, but also
BAI et al.: SELF-CALIBRATED CLIP FOR TRAINING-FREE OPEN-VOCABULARY SEGMENTATION 8281

Fig. 10. Qualitative Results of Open-Vocabulary Segmentation. We compare our method with CLIP [1], MaskCLIP [3], SCLIP [4] and ClearCLIP [7], all
without post-processing. Our SC-CLIP produces much clearer and more accurate results.

generalizes effectively to 3D scenarios, thereby further vali- demonstrate that SC-CLIP (last column) consistently produces
dating its versatility and applicability. more precise and higher-quality outcomes compared to the
 other methods, showing robustness across different visual
E. Visualization contexts. In contrast, CLIP’s results are considerably noisy
 and suffer from a homogeneity effect (e.g, in the second row,
 In Figure 8, we present a qualitative improvement analysis the entire image is labeled as “dog”). Previous approaches
which clearly illustrates the progressive improvements intro- such as SCLIP and ClearCLIP focused only on modifying the
duced by each strategy and highlights the overall contributions attention computation, without explicitly resolving anomaly
of our method. Compared to the baseline result, resolving the tokens or enhancing local correspondence, which makes their
anomaly token effectively removes the noise in the lower part results still suboptimal. By directly addressing these issues,
of the image (d vs. c). Further applying the self-adjusting our method achieves more semantically consistent outputs with
strategy enhances local correspondence and leads to better sharper boundaries and finer structural details.
overall coherence, as can be observed in the upper region of
the result (e vs. d). Finally, incorporating the two-pass strategy
provides richer details, such as a more complete structure of F. Failure Case Analysis
the bicycle frame and the seat (f vs. e). We further analyze the failure cases of our method, as
 Beyond the improvement analysis, we further provide a illustrated in Figure 11. Our motivation is to enhance CLIP’s
qualitative comparison across different representative meth- local correspondence in a training-free manner; however, the
ods in Figure 10, including CLIP [1], MaskCLIP [3], approach is inherently bounded by CLIP’s representational
SCLIP [4], ClearCLIP [7], and our SC-CLIP. The results capacity. Specifically, the limitations manifest in two aspects:
8282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

 [2] H. Caesar, J. Uijlings, and V. Ferrari, “COCO-stuff: Thing and stuff
 classes in context,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 Jun. 2024, pp. 1209–1218.
 [3] C. Zhou, C. C. Loy, and B. Dai, “Extract free dense labels from CLIP,”
 in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 696–712.
 [4] F. Wang, J. Mei, and A. Yuille, “SCLIP: Rethinking self-attention for
 dense vision-language inference,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 2023, pp. 315–332.
 [5] W. Bousselham, F. Petersen, V. Ferrari, and H. Kuehne, “Grounding
 everything: Emerging localization properties in vision-language
 transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 3828–3837.
 [6] Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Duan, J. Zhang, and X. Li, “A closer look at
 the explainability of contrastive language-image pre-training,” 2023,
 arXiv:2304.05653.
 [7] M. Lan, Z. Chen, Y. Ke, X. Wang, L. Feng, and W. Zhang,
 “ClearCLIP: Decomposing CLIP representations for dense vision-
 Fig. 11. Failure case analysis in textual and visual aspects. language inference,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024,
 pp. 143–160.
 [8] S. Hajimiri, I. B. Ayed, and J. Dolz, “Pay attention to your neighbours:
(1) Textual aspect. As shown in Figure 11 (a), when using Training-free open-vocabulary semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE
generic input prompts such as “Tree” or “Person”, the segmen- Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., Feb. 2025, pp. 5061–5071.
tation results are suboptimal, producing vague or incomplete [9] D. Kang and M. Cho, “In defense of lazy visual grounding for openmasks. In contrast, more specific and descriptive inputs like vocabulary semantic segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 2024, pp. 143–164.
“Tree With Snow” or “Skiing Person” lead to significantly [10] T. Shao, Z. Tian, H. Zhao, and J. Su, “Explore the potential of CLIP
improved results. This phenomenon suggests that for CLIP- for training-free open vocabulary semantic segmentation,” in Proc. Eur.
based models, using more specific and descriptive inputs leads Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 139–156.
 [11] M. Lan, C. Chen, Y. Ke, X. Wang, L. Feng, and W. Zhang, “Proxyclip:
to better results; (2) Visual aspect. The limited resolution and Proxy attention improves clip for open-vocabulary segmentation,” in
training paradigm of the CLIP image encoder make it difficult Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 70–88.
to accurately represent small objects or boundary regions in [12] M. Wysoczańska, O. Siméoni, M. Ramamonjisoa, A. Bursuc,
 T. P. Trzcinski, and P. Pérez, “CLIP-DINOiser: Teaching CLIP a few
complex scenes. As shown in Figure 11 (b), such limitations DINO tricks for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation,” in Proc. Eur.
result in coarse boundaries (e.g., the contour of the car on the Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023, pp. 320–337.
left) and recognition errors (e.g., failing to detect the distant [13] M. Caron et al., “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision
 transformers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021,
traffic sign). These failure cases provide a more comprehensive pp. 9630–9640.
perspective on the applicability and limitations of our method. [14] A. Kirillov et al., “Segment anything,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 V. C ONCLUSION Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
 [15] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer,
 In this paper, we present Self-Calibrated CLIP (SC-CLIP), “High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proc.
a training-free approach designed to enhance the open- IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
 pp. 10674–10685.
vocabulary segmentation performance of CLIP. We observe
 [16] S. Wold, K. H. Esbensen, and P. Geladi, “Principal component analysis,”
that anomaly tokens induce uniform attention patterns and Wiley Interdiscipl. Reviews, Comput. Statist., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 433–459,
feature homogenization, which compromise spatial represen- 2010.
tation. To address this, we mitigate their adverse effects from [17] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying density-based local outliers,” ACM SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2,
two complementary perspectives. First, we explicitly identify pp. 93–104, Jun. 2000.
anomaly tokens and replace them based on local context. Sec- [18] C. Jia et al., “Scaling up visual and vision-language representation
ond, we reduce their influence on normal tokens by enhancing learning with noisy text supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 2021, pp. 4904–4916.
feature discriminability and attention correlation, leveraging [19] J. Yu, Z. Wang, V. K. Vasudevan, L. Yeung, M. Seyedhosseini,
the intrinsic semantic consistency embedded in CLIP’s mid- and Y. Wu, “CoCa: Contrastive captioners are image-text foundation
level features. Together with a two-pass strategy, SC-CLIP models,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2022, 2022. [Online]. Available:
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ee277P3AYC
achieves state-of-the-art performance without requiring addi- [20] J. Li, D. Li, C. Xiong, and S. C. H. Hoi, “BLIP: Bootstrapping languagetional data, parameters, or backbones. These results demon- image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and
strate that the inherent capabilities of CLIP can be effectively generation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 12888–12900.
leveraged to calibrate itself and produce semantically coherent [21] X. Zhai, B. Mustafa, A. Kolesnikov, and L. Beyer, “Sigmoid loss for
 language image pre-training,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
representations. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 11975–11986.
 The motivation of this work is to enhance the dense feature [22] X. Hu et al., “Demystifying CLIP data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
representation of CLIP while preserving its original capabil- Represent., 2023.
 [23] A. U. Khan, H. Kuehne, C. Gan, N. D. V. Lobo, and M. Shah, “Weakly
ities in a training-free manner. For future work, we believe supervised grounding for VQA in vision-language transformers,” in
that to fundamentally improve the model, modifications to the Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 652–670.
architecture and training strategy are necessary. Naturally, this [24] A. Mishra, K. Alahari, and C. V. Jawahar, “Image retrieval using textual
 cues,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2013, pp. 3040–3047.
would necessitate retraining the model from scratch, along [25] S. Antol et al., “VQA: Visual question answering,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
with substantial computational resources and large-scale data. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2015, pp. 2425–2433.
 [26] J. Wu et al., “Towards open vocabulary learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
 R EFERENCES Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 5092–5113, Jul. 2024.
[1] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natu- [27] C. Zhang et al., “OccNeRF: Advancing 3D occupancy prediction
 ral language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, in LiDAR-free environments,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 34,
 pp. 8748–8763. pp. 3096–3107, 2025.
BAI et al.: SELF-CALIBRATED CLIP FOR TRAINING-FREE OPEN-VOCABULARY SEGMENTATION 8283

[28] Y. Xu, M. Zhang, X. Yang, and C. Xu, “Exploring multi-modal con- [52] J. Mukhoti et al., “Open vocabulary semantic segmentation with patch
 textual knowledge for open-vocabulary object detection,” IEEE Trans. aligned contrastive learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 6253–6267, 2024. Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 19413–19423.
[29] J. Wu, X. Li, X. Li, H. Ding, Y. Tong, and D. Tao, “Towards robust [53] P. Ren et al., “ViewCo: Discovering text-supervised segmentation masks
 referring image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, via multi-view semantic consistency,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Reprepp. 1782–1794, 2022. sent., 2023.
[30] Y. He, W. Chen, S. Wang, T. Liu, and M. Wang, “Recalling unknowns [54] J. Cha, J. Mun, and B. Roh, “Learning to generate text-grounded mask
 without losing precision: An effective solution to large model-guided for open-world semantic segmentation from only image-text pairs,” in
 open world object detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 34, Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022.
 pp. 729–742, 2025. [55] J. Xu et al., “GroupViT: Semantic segmentation emerges from text
[31] H. Yuan, X. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, K. Chen, and C. C. Loy, “Open- supervision,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun.
 vocabulary SAM: Segment and recognize twenty-thousand classes 2022, pp. 18113–18123.
 interactively,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 419–437. [56] H. Luo, J. L. Bao, Y. Wu, X. He, and T. Li, “SegCLIP: Patch aggregation
[32] Y. Liu, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Yang, and Y. Tang, “Universal with learnable centers for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation,” in
 segmentation at arbitrary granularity with language instruction,” in Proc. Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 23033–23044.
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, pp. 3459–3469. [57] J. Xu et al., “Learning open-vocabulary semantic segmentation models
[33] Y. Sun, Q. Chen, J. Wang, J. Wang, and Z. Li, “Exploring effective from natural language supervision,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
 factors for improving visual in-context learning,” IEEE Trans. Image Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023.
 Process., vol. 34, pp. 2147–2160, 2025. [58] W. He, S. Jamonnak, L. Gou, and L. Ren, “CLIP-s4: Language-guided
[34] X. Li et al., “Transformer-based visual segmentation: A survey,” IEEE self-supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Com-
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 10138–10163, put. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 11207–11216.
 Dec. 2024. [59] T. Chen, Y. Yao, X. Huang, Z. Li, L. Nie, and J. Tang, “Spatial structure
[35] W. Zhao, Y. Rao, Y. Tang, J. Zhou, and J. Lu, “VideoABC: A real- constraints for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans.
 world video dataset for abductive visual reasoning,” IEEE Trans. Image Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 1136–1148, 2024.
 Process., vol. 31, pp. 6048–6061, 2022. [60] L. Barsellotti, R. Amoroso, M. Cornia, L. Baraldi, and R. Cucchiara,
[36] J. Wang et al., “Diffusion model is secretly a training-free open “Training-free open-vocabulary segmentation with offline diffusionvocabulary semantic segmenter,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 34, augmented prototype generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 pp. 1895–1907, 2025. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 3689–3698.
[37] G. Ghiasi, X. Gu, Y. Cui, and T.-Y. Lin, “Scaling open-vocabulary image [61] M. Wysoczańska, M. Ramamonjisoa, T. Trzciński, and O. Siméoni,
 segmentation with image-level labels,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., “CLIP-DIY: CLIP dense inference yields open-vocabulary semantic
 2021, pp. 540–557. segmentation for-free,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput.
[38] M. Xu et al., “A simple baseline for open-vocabulary semantic seg- Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 1392–1402.
 mentation with pre-trained vision-language model,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. [62] Y. Lin et al., “TagCLIP: A local-to-global framework to enhance open-
 Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 736–753. vocabulary multi-label classification of CLIP without training,” in Proc.
[39] J. Ding, N. Xue, G.-S. Xia, and D. Dai, “Decoupling zero-shot semantic AAAI, vol. 38, 2024, pp. 3513–3521.
 segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. [63] S. Sun, R. Li, P. Torr, X. Gu, and S. Li, “CLIP as RNN: Seg-
 2022, pp. 11573–11582. ment countless visual concepts without training endeavor,” in Proc.
[40] F. Liang et al., “Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with mask- IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
 adapted CLIP,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. pp. 13171–13182.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 7061–7070. [64] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
[41] Y. Liu, S. Bai, G. Li, Y. Wang, and Y. Tang, “Open-vocabulary seg- Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2025, pp. 5998–6008.
 mentation with semantic-assisted calibration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [65] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 3491–3500. for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
[42] M. Xu, Z. Zhang, F. Wei, H. Hu, and X. Bai, “Side adapter network 2020.
 for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [66] T. Darcet, M. Oquab, J. Mairal, and P. Bojanowski, “Vision transformers
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 2945–2954. need registers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023.
[43] K. Han et al., “Global knowledge calibration for fast open-vocabulary [67] G. Xiao, Y. Tian, B. Chen, S. Han, and M. Lewis, “Efficient streaming
 segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, language models with attention sinks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 pp. 797–807. Represent., 2023.
[44] Q. Yu, J. He, X. Deng, X. Shen, and L.-C. Chen, “Convolutions die hard: [68] B. Zhou, H. Zhao, X. Puig, S. Fidler, A. Barriuso, and A. Torralba,
 Open-vocabulary segmentation with single frozen convolutional CLIP,” “Scene parsing through ADE20K dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 32215–32234. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 5122–5130.
[45] B. Xie, J. Cao, J. Xie, F. S. Khan, and Y. Pang, “SED: A sim- [69] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
 ple encoder–decoder for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation,” “Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 936–944.
 pp. 3426–3436. [70] Y. Li, Z. Li, Q. Zeng, Q. Hou, and M. Cheng, “Cascade-
[46] B. Li, K. Q. Weinberger, S. Belongie, V. Koltun, and R. Ranftl, CLIP: Cascaded vision-language embeddings alignment for zero-shot
 “Language-driven semantic segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. semantic segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024,
 Represent., 2022. pp. 28243–28258.
[47] S. Cho, H. Shin, S. Hong, A. Arnab, P. H. Seo, and S. Kim, “CAT-SEG: [71] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and P. Luo,
 Cost aggregation for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation,” in Proc. “SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, with transformers,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2021,
 pp. 4113–4123. pp. 12077–12090.
[48] X. Xu, T. Xiong, Z. Ding, and Z. Tu, “MasQCLIP for open-vocabulary [72] M.-H. Guo, C.-Z. Lu, Q. Hou, Z. Liu, M. Cheng, and S. Hu, “SegNeXt:
 universal image segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Rethinking convolutional attention design for semantic segmentation,”
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 887–898. in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 1140–1156.
[49] J. Oin et al., “FreeSeg: Unified, universal and open-vocabulary image [73] M. Everingham and J. Winn, “The Pascal visual object classes challenge
 segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2012 (voc2012) development kit,” Pattern Anal. Stat. Model. Comput.
 2023, pp. 19446–19455. Learn., Tech. Rep, vol. 2007, nos. 1–45, p. 5, 2012.
[50] H. Zhou et al., “Rethinking evaluation metrics of open-vocabulary [74] R. Mottaghi et al., “The role of context for object detection and semantic
 segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 47, no. 8, segmentation in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 pp. 6780–6796, Aug. 2025. Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 891–898.
[51] X. Li et al., “OMG-seg: Is one model good enough for all [75] M. Cordts et al., “The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene
 segmentation?,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog- understanding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 nit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 27948–27959. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 3213–3223.
8284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2025

[76] G. Shin, W. Xie, and S. Albanie, “ReCo: Retrieve and co-segment for Haoji Zhang received the B.S. degree in mathematzero-shot transfer,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2022, ics and physics from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
 pp. 33754–33767. China, where he is currently pursuing the M.S.
[77] Y. Wang, X. Shen, S. X. Hu, Y. Yuan, J. L. Crowley, and D. Vaufreydaz, degree in data science and information technol-
 “Self-supervised transformers for unsupervised object discovery using ogy with Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
 normalized cut,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., School. His research interests include computer
 Jun. 2022, pp. 14543–14553. vision and deep learning.
[78] B. Blumenstiel, J. Jakubik, H. Kühne, and M. Vössing, “What a MESS:
 Multi-domain evaluation of zero-shot semantic segmentation,” in Proc.
 Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 73299–73311.
[79] O. Siméoni et al., “Localizing objects with self-supervised transformers
 and no labels,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2021, p. 310.
[80] M. Cherti et al., “Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive languageimage learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 Jun. 2022, pp. 2818–2829. Yansong Tang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
[81] A. Takmaz, E. Fedele, R. W. Sumner, M. Pollefeys, F. Tombari, and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Automaand F. Engelmann, “OpenMask3D: Open-vocabulary 3D instance tion, Tsinghua University, in 2015 and 2020,
 segmentation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2023, respectively. From 2020 to 2022, he was a Postpp. 68367–68390. doctoral Fellow with the Department of Engineering
[82] Z. Huang, X. Wu, X. Chen, H. Zhao, L. Zhu, and J. Lasenby, Science, University of Oxford. He is currently
 “OpenIns3D: Snap and lookup for 3D open-vocabulary instance a tenure-track Associate Professor with Shenzhen
 segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023, pp. 169–185. International Graduate School, Tsinghua University.
[83] Y. Cao, Y. Zeng, H. Xu, and D. Xu, “CoDA: Collaborative novel In recent years, he has authored more than 40 papers
 box discovery and cross-modal alignment for open-vocabulary 3D in top peer-reviewed journals and conferences, such
 object detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 2023, as T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND
 pp. 71862–71873. M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE, T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING, and
[84] P. Jiao, N. Zhao, J. Chen, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Unlocking textual and CVPR. His research interests include computer vision, pattern recognition,
 visual wisdom: Open-vocabulary 3D object detection enhanced by and video processing.
 comprehensive guidance from text and image,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 376–392.
[85] S. Peng, K. Genova, C. Jiang, A. Tagliasacchi, M. Pollefeys, and
 T. Funkhouser, “OpenScene: 3D scene understanding with open
 vocabularies,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 815–824. Jie Zhou (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. and
[86] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, and M.S. degrees from the Department of Mathematics,
 M. Nießner, “ScanNet: Richly-annotated 3D reconstructions of indoor Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 1990 and 1992,
 scenes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the Institute
 Jul. 2017, pp. 5828–5839. of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence,
[87] A. L. S. Chang et al., “Matterport3D: Learning from RGB-D data in Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
 indoor environments,” in Proc. 3DV, 2017, pp. 667–676. Wuhan, China, in 1995. From 1995 to 1997, he
 was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Department of
 Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
 Sule Bai received the B.Eng. degree from Bei- where he has been a Full Professor since 2003. In
 jing University of Posts and Telecommunications, recent years, he has authored more than 300 papers
 China, in 2023. He is currently pursuing the in peer-reviewed journals and conferences. Among them, more than 100
 master’s degree with Shenzhen International Grad- papers have been published in top journals and conferences, such as IEEE
 uate School, Tsinghua University. His research T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE,
 interests include computer vision and fine-grained IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING, and CVPR. His research
 visual understanding. interests include computer vision, pattern recognition, and image processing.
 He is an IAPR Fellow. He was a recipient of the National Outstanding
 Youth Foundation of China Award. He is also an Associate Editor of IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE
 and two other journals.

 Yong Liu received the B.Eng. degree from Shandong University in 2020. He is currently pursuing
 the Ph.D. degree with Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University. His
 current research interests include fine-grained video Jiwen Lu (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
 understanding and multimodal understanding. degree in mechanical engineering and the M.Eng.
 degree in electrical engineering from Xi’an University of Technology, Xi’an, China, in 2003 and
 2006, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
 engineering from Nanyang Technological University,
 Singapore, in 2012. From 2011 to 2015, he was
 with the Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore. In November 2015, he joined the Department
 Yifei Han received the B.Sc. degree from the of Automation, Tsinghua University, where he is
 Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua currently a Full Professor and the Deputy Chair.
 University, in 2023, where he is currently pursu- His current research interests include computer vision, pattern recognition,
 ing the master’s degree with Tsinghua Shenzhen multimedia computing, and intelligent robotics. He is an IAPR Fellow. He was
 International Graduate School. His research interests a recipient of the National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young
 include embodied intelligence, 3D reconstruction, Scholar. He serves as the Co-Editor-in-Chief for Pattern Recognition Letters
 and 3D perception. and an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING,
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOL -
 OGY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON B IOMETRICS , B EHAVIOR , AND I DENTITY
 S CIENCE, and Pattern Recognition.