7632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

 Self-Supervised Adaptation Method to Concept Drift
 for Network Intrusion Detection
 Shuo Yang , Xinran Zheng, Jinze Li , Jinfeng Xu , Xinchen Zhang ,
 and Edith C. H. Ngai , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The deployment of learning-based models to detect In today’s interconnected digital landscape, the relentless evomalicious activities in network traffic flows is significantly chal- lution of cyber threats [13] demands robust intrusion detection
lenged by concept drift. With evolving attack technology and dy- systems capable of adapting to the ever-changing nature of
namic attack behaviors, the underlying data distribution of recently
arrived traffic flows deviates from historical empirical distributions concept drift. Concept drift refers to the phenomenon in which
over time. Existing approaches depend on a significant amount the statistical properties of monitored data change over time [14],
of labeled drifting samples to facilitate the deep model to handle [15], posing significant challenges to intrusion detection systems
concept drift, which faces labor-intensive manual labeling and the that rely on static models [16], [17]. Failure to adapt to concept
risk of label noise. In this paper, we propose ReCDA, a Concept drift may have severe consequences, including increased false
Drift Adaptation method with Representation enhancement, which
consists of a self-supervised representation enhancement stage positives or missed intrusions [18], [19], potentially resulting in
and a weakly-supervised classifier tuning stage. Specifically, in compromised systems and sensitive data breaches [20].
the initial stage, ReCDA introduces drift-aware perturbation and Traditional ensemble techniques [21], [22] for addressing
representation alignment to facilitate the model in acquiring robust concept drift in intrusion detection have limitations in adaptabilrepresentations from drift-aware and drift-invariant perspectives. ity and robustness. These approaches often struggle to keep pace
In the subsequent stage, a meticulously crafted instructive sampling
strategy and a robust representation constraint encourage the with the dynamic and complex nature of modern attacks, since
model to learn discriminative knowledge about benign and mali- they fail to capture the nuanced patterns and subtle changes that
cious activities during fine-tuning, thereby enhancing performance occur over time [23]. To bridge this gap, concept drift adaptation
further. We conduct comprehensive offline and online evaluations through incremental learning or continuous learning [24], [25],
on several benchmark datasets under varying degrees of concept [26], [27] shows promise by introducing new knowledge into the
drift. The experiment results demonstrate the superior adaptability
and robustness of the proposed method. classifier to reduce the cumulative prediction error. Although
 these approaches can bring some performance improvement,
 Index Terms—Intrusion detection, network security, concept they come at the cost of increased manual labeling. Some existdrift.
 ing work [26], [28], [29] used pseudo-labels to update the model,
 which is more vulnerable to label noise and hence susceptible
 I. INTRODUCTION
 to drastic performance deterioration by self-poisoning [30].
 ETWORK Intrusion Detection (NID) plays an essential
N role in ensuring security by continuously identifying and
discarding suspicious activities in network traffic [2], [3]. Deep
 Consequently, there is an urgent need for novel and effective
 concept drift adaptation techniques to enhance the robustness
 and reliability of intrusion detection systems.
Learning (DL) has emerged as a promising approach for in- In this paper, to address the aforementioned challenges, we
trusion detection due to its capability to learn complex repre- proposed ReCDA:1 a self-supervised concept drift adaptation
sentations from raw traffic flows [4], [5], [6]. In recent years, method with representation enhancement. Different from exist-
DL-based intrusion detection systems have demonstrated state- ing work [17], [26], [28], we leverage the inherent characteristics
of-the-art performance [7], [8] and have found wide applications of collected traffic flows to guide the model in extracting both
in diverse domains [9], [10], [11], [12]. drift-aware and drift-invariant representations, thus circumventing labor-intensive manual labeling and the risk of noisy la-
 Received 13 September 2024; revised 9 August 2025; accepted 11 August bels. Technically, we initially employ perturbation techniques
2025. Date of publication 14 August 2025; date of current version 4 November
2025. This work was supported in part by the Hong Kong UGC General Research to generate the drift view of the original traffic flows, inspired
Fund under Grant 17203320 and Grant 17209822 and in part by the project by the observation that changes in local features contribute to
grants from the HKU-SCF FinTech Academy. An earlier version of this paper concept drift. As illustrated in Fig. 1, discrepancies between
was presented in part at the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2024) [DOI: 10.1145/3637528.3672007]. attack variants are often manifested in the feature distribution.
(Corresponding author: Edith C. H. Ngai.) Subsequently, the original flow and its perturbed version are
 Shuo Yang, Jinze Li, Jinfeng Xu, Xinchen Zhang, and Edith C. H. Ngai fed into a shared encoder network optimized by contrastive loss
are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China (e-mail: shuoyang.ee@gmail.com; to align the representations. This allows us to acquire a robust
chngai@eee.hku.hk). feature extractor capable of narrowing the gap between historical
 Xinran Zheng is with Shenzhen International Graduate School and Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100190, China.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3599321 1 https://github.com/kalendsyang/ReCDA.git

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ADAPTATION METHOD TO CONCEPT DRIFT FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7633

Fig. 1. Feature distribution of DoS and fuzzers attacks.

and drift traffic flows while maintaining the separability of
instances. To impart discriminative knowledge about benign
and malicious activities, we sample some instructive instances
from the historical dataset. Given the robustness of the representations obtained in the representation enhancement stage, we
utilize consistency regularization to constrain the expansion of Fig. 2. Concept drift adaptation diagram.
the representation space, thus mitigating the risk of overfitting
historical distribution. Through the above process, the model can
obtain a representation that is both conscious of concept drift and online network intrusion detection method. It employs an ensemresilient to it, thereby improving the classification performance ble of autoencoders to collectively distinguish between benign
and robustness of the model in concept drift scenarios. and malicious traffic patterns. Fu et al. [35] utilized frequency
 The contributions of this paper are as follows: domain features to develop a real-time machine learning-based
 r We propose an advanced concept drift adaptation method malicious traffic detection system that ensures high detection
 with representation enhancement. Our method bene- accuracy and throughput.
 fits from the representations with drift-aware and drift- As the complexity of network environments continues to
 invariant, thereby enhancing the performance of the in- increase, robust and reliable intrusion detection methods have
 trusion detection model. garnered considerable attention. Wang et al. [39] proposed an
 r We provide a novel perspective on concept drift adaptation adversarial sample detection method based on manifold and dethrough feature perturbation. To the best of our knowl- cision boundaries to deal with adversarial sample attacks. Houda
 edge, it is the first self-supervised concept drift adaptation et al. [40] leverages Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)
 method designed for network intrusion detection, circum- techniques and Blockchain to secure federated learning-based
 venting labor-intensive manual labeling and the risk of IDS in the IoT networks. Considering the increase in attack
 label noise. variants and the blurring of the boundary between malicious and
 r We highlight the mild and insufficient nature of existing benign activity, Yue et al. [37] designed heuristic contrastive
 evaluations of concept drift adaptation methods, which tasks to mine semantic relationships among samples. Diallo
 have only been tested under limited degrees of drift. In et al. [38] utilized cluster centers to expand the features of
 contrast, we propose a more rigorous evaluation setting. a given dataset, which improved the robustness and the genr We conduct extensive offline experiments on several in- eralization abilities of detection models. Despite the superior
 trusion detection datasets under varying degrees of con- performance of these approaches, they rely on the assumption of
 cept drift. The experiment results demonstrate the superior data stationarity in a static intrusion detection environment [41].
 adaptability and robustness of the proposed method. Consequently, they cannot be applied in dynamic environments
 r We further conduct online experiments on the latest bench- experiencing concept drift.
 mark concept drift dataset. The experiment results demonstrate that ReCDA can significantly alleviate the decline in B. Concept Drift Adaptation
 model performance caused by concept drift.
 As shown in Fig. 2, concept drift refers to the changes in
 the statistical properties of data features over time [14], which
 II. RELATED WORK can lead to a gradual decline in the performance of models that
 were well-trained on historical data. To address this challenge,
A. Network Intrusion Detection concept drift detection and adaptation techniques are required.
 Network intrusion detection is a potent technology for de- Concept drift detection aims to identify when concept drift
tecting and responding to malicious and unauthorized activi- occurs in the data. The detection methods typically monitor the
ties within networks. Recently, numerous learning-based meth- model’s performance [42] or track the statistical properties of the
ods [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37], [38] have been incoming data [17], [43], [44]. When significant deviations from
proposed to safeguard networks against advanced attacks. Qiu the expected behavior are observed, it indicates the presence of
et al. [32] observed entangled distributions of flow features and concept drift. For example, CADE [17] uses contrastive learning
proposed a two-step feature disentanglement approach along to map the data samples into a low-dimensional space and learns
with a dynamic graph diffusion scheme to identify various a distance function to measure dissimilarity between samples,
attacks. Mirsky et al. [34] introduced Kitsune, an unsupervised which presented satisfactory detection performance in security

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

applications. After concept drift is detected, adaptation strategies TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF REPRESENTATIVE RELATED WORKS
need to be employed to update the model and mitigate its impact,
which is crucial to improving model robustness.
 The goal of concept drift adaptation is to make models resilient to evolving data distributions. There are two primary approaches to handling this challenge: incremental learning [24],
[45], [46] and ensemble learning [21], [23], [47], [48]. Ensemble
learning combines multiple base learners to construct an ensemble model that offers better generalization. However, these
methods are still based on detecting known patterns and may fail
 detector to reduce the impact of concept drift or as a plug-andto capture the nuanced patterns and subtle changes that occur
 play module within existing continuous learning frameworks
over time. In contrast, incremental learning methods address
 to enhance intrusion detection performance. ReCDA provides
concept drift by retraining or altering the model to accommodate
 a robust and efficient solution for adapting to evolving attack
both drift data and historical data. For example, Chen et al. [24]
 strategies without the need for extensive manual labeling.
proposed a continual learning method to combat the concept
drift problem of Android malware classifiers, which applies
similarity-based uncertainty to select new samples for analysts III. METHODOLOGY
to label and retrain the classifier. Han et al. [49] performed
hypothesis testing on the model’s output distribution to detect A. Preliminaries
significant changes in the data distribution and selected influen- 1) Notation: In the sequel, we use uppercase and lowercase
tial samples for manual labeling, enabling adaptation to drift. It letters to denote matrices and vectors, respectively. Besides, |D|
is important to note that their method is specifically designed represents the total number of elements in set D.
to address normality drift (changes in benign samples) and does 2) Problem Definition: Let x ∈ Rd be a network traffic flow
not consider the evolution of attacks, which limits its practical comprising d attributes or dimensions. Consider xh ∈ Rd and
applicability in real-world intrusion detection scenarios. xr ∈ Rd represent previously and recently collected samples,
 Despite their effectiveness, these methods often rely on man- respectively. y ∈ R2 : {0, 1} is the corresponding binary label
ual labeling, which can be very expensive in security applica- of x (i.e., benign or malicious). Given a labeled historical dataset
tions. To alleviate this, Andresini et al. [26] proposed the use Dh = {(xh1 , y1h ), (xh2 , y2h ), . . ., (xh|Dh | , y|D h
 )}, an unlabeled reh|
of the nearest centroid neighbor strategy to generate pseudo- cent dataset D = {x1 , x2 , . . ., x|Dr | }, and a test dataset Dt =
 r r r r
labels, achieving satisfactory performance in network intrusion
detection. However, their approach is highly dependent on ac- {(xt1 , y1t ), (xt2 , y2t ), . . ., (xt|Dt | , y|D
 t
 t|
 )}. Let P (xh ) and P (xr )
curate clustering of drifted samples and is vulnerable to label represent distributions of Dh and Dr , respectively, and Dt shares
noise and self-poisoning of pseudo-labels [30]. Zhao et al. [50] a similar distribution with Dh ∪ Dr . Under the concept drift
transformed the known/new category identification problem into problem setting [14], Dr is considered to drift from Dh , which
multiple independent one-class learning tasks, using ensemble means P (xh ) = P (xr ), resulting in the well-trained model on
clustering for label assignment, facilitating incremental updates Dh failing to generalize on Dt . Due to the difference between the
to intrusion detection models. However, maintaining multiple two distributions, the goal of concept drift adaptation is to learn a
one-class classifiers requires significant resources, and as the statistical model M(θ) : Rd → R2 using all the given data in Dh
 |Dt |
number of categories increases, the difficulty of expanding also and Dr to minimize the prediction error i=1 |ŷit − yit |, where
grows. In recent years, self-supervised learning has emerged as a ŷit is the predicted label of the ith test instance by the model
promising alternative for concept drift adaptation, particularly in M(θ), and yit is the corresponding ground truth. M(θ) can be
domains where labeled data is scarce or expensive to obtain. For expressed as f ◦ g, where f is a feature extractor mapping input
example, self-supervised concept drift adaptation methods have x to its latent representation and g coherently generates binary
been successfully applied in object detection [51], [52], time- predictions based on the representation.
series modeling [53], and IoT malware detection [44]. However, 3) Problem Scope: In this paper, we primarily focus on conthese methods often involve domain-specific processing and cept drift driven by data drift, which refers to the changes in the
augmentation techniques, which may not be directly suitable underlying distribution of data over time [14]. Specifically, as
for network traffic. attack techniques evolve, the characteristics of network traffic
 To bridge these gaps, we propose ReCDA, a self-supervised flows change, leading to a deviation between the distribution
concept drift adaptation method with representation enhance- of historical data and recent traffic. We examine how this drift
ment. A comparison of representative related works is shown in affects the performance of intrusion detection models typically
Table I. Unlike existing approaches [17], [26], [50], we leverage trained on historical data. As illustrated in Fig. 2, this drift often
the inherent characteristics of network traffic flows to guide the results in a decline in model performance, a phenomenon known
model in extracting both drift-aware and drift-invariant represen- as model drift [15]. Existing methods often rely on manual labeltations. This allows ReCDA to circumvent the need for labor- ing, which is costly and time-consuming, especially in security
intensive manual labeling and the risk of noisy labels. ReCDA applications. Therefore, we aim to propose a method capable of
is highly flexible, functioning either as an independent intrusion adapting to concept drift without the need for extensive manual

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ADAPTATION METHOD TO CONCEPT DRIFT FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7635

Fig. 3. The overview of proposed ReCDA.

labeling, offering an efficient solution to the challenges posed a key observation: for traffic flows, distribution drift corresponds
by data drift in network security. to feature drift in the original space, wherein local changes in
 4) Architecture Overview: We illustrate the proposed feature values drive distribution drift. Therefore, we expect that
ReCDA in Fig. 3, which is a robust concept drift adaptation the model can perceive changes in the features of unlabeled drift
method with representation enhancement for concept drift with- flows and capture the relationship between the historical traffic
out relying on any manual labeling in a network environment flows and them.
subject to the continuous emergence of attack variants. ReCDA To implement this idea, we propose a drift-aware perturbation
consists of two primary stages: method that involves randomly sampling the marginal distribu-
 (a) Self-supervised representation enhancement: During this tion of features in the drift sample and perturbing the historical
stage, carefully designed drift-aware perturbation and represen- sample with a certain probability. Unlike common perturbation
tation alignment modules are employed to map traffic flows methods such as adding random noise [55], [56] or replacing
from the original space to the latent space, ensuring drift-aware features with meaningless values [37], [57], [58], our approach
and drift-invariant. Here’s a detailed explanation of these two aims to maintain semantic retention of features while introproperties: ducing randomness to encourage the model to perceive feature
 r Drift-aware: ReCDA can integrate information from both changes in unlabeled drift flows and capture their correlation
 the historical and drift traffic flows, allowing it to adjust its with the original flow samples.
 representation accordingly. As shown in Fig. 3, a mask vector m = [m1 , m2 , . . ., md ]T is
 r Drift-invariant: ReCDA remains stable and unaffected by generated, where the vector elements mk ∈ {0, 1}, k ∈ [1, d] are
 changes in underlying data distribution, thus ensuring ro- extracted from a Bernoulli distribution with a certain probability
 bustness to concept drift. σ. Subsequently, a sample xhi from the historical dataset and the
 (b) Weakly-supervised classifier tuning: During this stage, we mask vector are used jointly as inputs. Drift-aware perturbation
propose an instructive sample selection module and a classifier samples are generated as follows:
fine-tuning module based on representation constraint to efficiently incorporate discriminative knowledge into the model,
 x̃i = m  xri + (1 − m)  xhi . (1)
further enhancing predictive robustness under concept drift scenarios. More technical details are described as follows.
 Using (1), x̃i can be obtained by sampling the feature’s
 marginal distribution of the drift sample. The process bridges
B. Drift-Aware Perturbation the gap between xh and xr , allowing for the smooth elimination
 According to the problem definition, concept drift refers to of the distribution discrepancies under the control of σ. The
distribution shifting between the historical dataset and the recent parameter σ can be considered a perturbed rate that regulates the
dataset. While the intuitive would be to minimize the prediction degree of fusion between the two distributions. The generated
error by narrowing the gap between the distributions of the samples gain awareness of drift while retaining the semantic
historical and drifted data, estimating the distribution of drifted information of the original flow. The randomness introduced
samples is challenging in practice due to constantly emerging by the perturbation increases the diversity of the traffic views,
attack variants and the risk of model collapse [54] caused by which indicates that our method can better simulate feature drift
strict distribution consistency. Our proposed method is based on in real concept drift scenarios.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7636 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

C. Representation Alignment drift can generally be attributed to the classifier’s challenge
 in effectively detecting attacks based on the representations
 Following perturbation, we obtain the drift-aware perspective
x̃i of the selected original sample xhi . After that, we aim for the generated by the feature extractor. Specifically, the features of recently arrived malicious samples drift, exhibiting confusion with
model to map drift samples and historical samples to adjacent
 benign samples. Distinguishing these samples in the original
latent subspaces and learn representations invariant to drift. To
achieve this goal, we employ the encoder network as a feature space is challenging because they correspond to similar feature
 values and are usually assigned to the same category. Hence,
extractor and utilize contrastive learning [59] to encourage the
 our intuition is to select labeled historical samples located at
representation of x̃i and xhi to be close. Specifically, for each
historical sample xi in a mini-batch B, we generate its perturbed the potential decision boundary, as their representations contain richer category-discriminative knowledge. To facilitate the
view x̃i using (1). Then we feed them to the encoder network
f , and the resulting outputs are passed to a projection head h to model in capturing the generalized difference between benign
obtain the corresponding latent representations zi = h ◦ f (xi ) and malicious activities under the guidance of such a sub-dataset,
 h
 we introduce the instructive matrix G ∈ R|D |×2 for determining
and z̃i = h ◦ f (x̃i ). The contrastive loss can be expressed as:
   the selection of samples. It is defined as follows:
 exp (zi · z̃i /τ )
 Lra (xi ) = − log |B| , (2) sim(xhi , x̄rj |ȳj )
 Gi,j = . (4)
 j=1 exp (zi · z̃j /τ ) sim(f (xhi ), f (x̄rj )|ȳj ) + 
where τ > 0 is the temperature parameter. Minimizing (2) en-
 Here, sim(·) represents the distance measurement function,
sures that zi becomes closer to z̃i and be farther from z̃j for
 with the cosine distance being used due to its effectiveness in
i = j, thereby yielding a more generalized representation with
 measuring the similarity between high-dimensional vectors. x̄rj
drift-aware and drift-invariant. Thus, the parameter optimization
 denotes clustering centroids of samples belonging to the cateof the encoder in the representation enhancement stage can be
 gory ȳj in the original space. Specifically, binary clustering is
formalized as follows:
 performed on the unlabeled recent dataset to obtain the clustering
 θf∗ = min [Lra (xi |θf )] , (3) centroids involved in the distance calculation, which accelerates
 θf
 computation and reduces storage requirements. Additionally, an
where θf∗ denote updated parameters of encoder network f . extra small value  is added to the denominator for numerical
 stability.
D. Instructive Sampling Strategy According to (4), higher instructive metrics indicate more influential samples in constructing the decision boundary. Hence,
 In the preceding stage, although we obtained a drift-robust
 the top-δ historical samples will be selected to participate in the
feature extractor, its direct utilization for detecting malicious acconstrained classifier tuning phase.
tivities within the network is impeded by a crucial limitation—it
lacks knowledge in distinguishing between benign and malicious network activities. To address this limitation and facilitate E. Constrained Classifier Tuning
the attainment of a robust classifier, we consider using labeled To train a classifier for network intrusion detection, we intesamples from the historical dataset to fine-tune both the feature grate a classification head g to the encoder network f , which
extractor and classifier. This refinement injects discriminative takes the output of f as the input and predicts the label of the
knowledge into the model, enhancing its ability to discern instance. During the classifier tuning stage, we expect that the
between benign and malicious network activities. However, robust feature extractor that has been generated will not lose the
incorporating a large number of labeled samples from Dh during valuable knowledge that has been gained. Therefore, we confine-tuning tends to exacerbate the risk of overfitting to the strain the variation of the representation for subsequent learning
historical distribution P (xh ), consequently yielding a vanilla to maintain the effectiveness of the robust feature extractor. The
classifier that inadequately recognizes drifting traffic flows. consistency regularization loss is defined as:
To mitigate this issue, we advocate for the selective use of  2
instructive historical instances as the source of discriminative Lcr (xi ) = f (xi |θf ) − f (xi |θf∗ ) . (5)
knowledge. Here, we introduce the instructive sampling strategy, Lcr aims to encourage the tuned feature extractor f (θf∗ ) to
delineated by the following two principles: return a similar output distribution learned during the represenr Instructive samples should be distant from drift samples in
 tation enhancement stage. In addition, we employ cross-entropy
 original space. loss to guide the classifier in acquiring category-discriminative
 r Instructive samples should resemble the representation of
 knowledge. Let Lce (xi , yi ) represent the supervised loss; the
 the drift sample in latent space. optimization of the feature extractor and classifier in the fine-
 The original space encompasses samples directly extracted tuning stage are formalized as follows:
from the dataset, while the latent space denotes the embedding
space of the feature extractor output. These principles guide the θg∗ , θf∗ = min [Lce (xi , yi |θg , θf ) + λLcr (xi |θf )] . (6)
 θg ,θf
selection process, ensuring that the chosen instructive samples
possess characteristics conducive to model training and drift Here, θg∗ denotes updated parameters of classifier g, and λ
adaptation. The degradation of the model caused by concept is a balanced coefficient to control the regularization strength.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ADAPTATION METHOD TO CONCEPT DRIFT FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7637

 TABLE II
 Algorithm 1: Algorithm of ReCDA. THE STATISTICS OF UNSW-NB15 DATASET
 Input: historical dataset Dh , recent dataset Dr , batch size
 |B|, perturbation rate σ, temperature τ , constant ,
 coefficient λ, encoder network f , projection head h,
 classifier g.
 Output: encoder network f and classifier g
 1: let d be the dimension of input samples.
 2: let θ and θ∗ be model parameters before and after one
 iteration.
 |B|
 3: for sampled mini-batch {xhi }i=1 ⊆ Dh do
 4: for i = 1, . . ., |B| do
 5: generate m ∈ Rd where mk ∈ [0, 1] and
 p(mk = 1) = σ.
 6: sample xri from Dr .
 7: let x̃i = m  xri + (1 − m)  xhi .
 aligned with concept evolution [60] (i.e., the emergence of a
 8: let zi = h ◦ f (xhi ), z̃i = h ◦ f (x̃i ).
 new sub-class) rather than concept drift, which typically involves
 9: end for |B|
 1 exp(zi ·z̃i /τ ) changes in the distribution of known classes. Nevertheless, since
 10: let Lra := − |B| i=1 log( |B| ).
 j=1 exp(zi ·z̃j /τ ) our system is designed for binary classification (benign vs. ma-
 11: update f and h to minimize Lra . licious), the introduction of a new attack type within the broader
 12: end for “malicious” class effectively results in a shift of the underlying
 13: cluster Dr to get centroids ȳ ∈ [0, 1]. data distribution from the model’s perspective. Therefore, we
 h sim(xh ,x̄r |ȳj )
 14: generate G ∈ R|D |×2 , Gi,j = sim(f (xh ),f
 i j
 (x̄r )|ȳ )+
 . include such scenarios under the umbrella of concept drift to
 i j j
 comprehensively evaluate model adaptivity and robustness. To
 15: select top-n samples from Dh according G to generate
 address the limitations of previous evaluation protocols, we adsub-dataset Dsub
 h
 .
 |B|
 vocate for a more rigorous approach by simultaneously consider-
 16: for sampled mini-batch {xhi }i=1 ⊆ Dsub
 h
 do ing multiple attack categories as drift data, thereby substantially
 1
  |B|
 17: let Lcr := |B| i=1 f (xi |θf ) − f (xi |θf∗ ) 2 . intensifying the concept drift (or evolution) encountered by the
 18: update f and g to minimize Lce + λLcr . model. Additionally, evaluating model stability across varying
 19: end for degrees of drift is challenging when using a non-uniform test
 dataset. To ensure a fair evaluation, we propose adhering to the
 original dataset partition or adopting a fixed training and test
By optimizing (6), the model obtains category-discriminative set split method. We employ two widely used network intrusion
knowledge while preserving the drift awareness and drift invari- detection datasets to simulate realistic drift scenarios for offline
ance representation obtained during the representation enhance- evaluation. The details are as follows.
ment stage. This results in a generalized model capable of robust UNSW-NB15 dataset: The raw network packets of the
concept drift adaptation. The algorithm of ReCDA is shown in UNSW-NB15 dataset [61] were collected by the IXIA Per-
Algorithm 1. fectStorm tool in the Cyber Range Lab at the University of
 New South Wales (UNSW), Australia. The dataset is designed
 IV. EXPERIMENTS to simulate real-world network traffic and includes a diverse
 range of network traffic features, encompassing both benign
 This section outlines evaluation settings, which provide a
 and nine malicious activities, namely, DoS, Exploits, Fuzzers,
more challenging evaluation compared with common settings.
 Generic, Reconnaissance, Analysis, Backdoors, Worms, and
Following the settings, we conduct extensive comparative ex-
 Shellcode. For reliable evaluation, we maintain the original
periments to analyze the effectiveness and robustness of the
 dataset split: 175,341 training data instances and 82,332 testing
proposed concept drift adaptation method against existing apdata instances, in which the test set contains all nine types of
proaches.
 attacks. Given that the drift of the less prevalent attack categories
 has minimal impact on the evaluation, we merge the four attacks
A. Evaluation Setting denoted as “Others”, the statistics of categories in the training
 1) Offline Evaluation: Previous studies [17], [43], [44] pre- and test datasets are shown in Table II. Additionally, each data
dominantly conducted experiments under the one-vs-rest set- point consists of 44 features. We apply a commonly used feature
ting, wherein only one type of attack is deemed as drift. However, engineering method, where categorical features are represented
we observe that this evaluation approach is conservative and using label encoding and numerical features are scaled by zoften yields an overly optimistic assessment of performance. score normalization.
Furthermore, it is important to note that scenarios where a previ- To evaluate our method, we iteratively select samples from
ously unseen attack type is introduced during evaluation—such different sets of malicious categories to serve as drift data. In this
as in some of our defined drift cases—are technically more way, we split the original training set into various combinations

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7638 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE III
 THE STATISTICS OF CICIDS-2017 DATASET

 Fig. 4. Optimal transport dataset distance for UNSW-NB15 dataset and
of historical dataset Dh and recent dataset Dr , with Dh being CICIDS-2017 dataset.
labeled and Dr unlabeled. Here, we define the drift index to
quantify the degree of drift:
  
 C#i : i = |L Dh ∪ Dr − L(Dh )|, (7)

where L(Dh ) and L(Dr ) represent the number of categories
in the historical dataset and recent dataset, respectively. For
example, C#2 indicates that the Dh comprises four categories of
malicious activity, while the remaining two types appear in the
 6!
Dr . For any i, there are C6i = i!(6−i)! data partitioning cases,
which can be viewed as a combination problem. For better
comparison, the reported results in the sequel are averaged across
all data partitioning cases.
 CICIDS-2017 dataset: The CICIDS-2017 dataset, developed Fig. 5. The statistics of kyoto-2006+ dataset.
by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC) at the University of New Brunswick, is a comprehensive and widely used
benchmark dataset for network intrusion detection research.
Following the recommendation in INSOMINA [26], we use the
refined version of CICIDS-2017 [62] and the statistics of the
dataset are shown in Table III. The new version reconstructed
or relabelled 20 percent of the original traffic traces to rectify Fig. 6. The splits over kyoto-2006+ dataset for online evaluation.
issues related to traffic generation, flow construction, feature
extraction, and labeling. Consequently, the dataset comprises
2,524,767 timestamped flows and 72 features, covering 5 days into the evaluation. For example, the distribution of flows coland encompassing 15 malicious categories, including brute force lected on Wednesday in the CICIDS-2017 dataset exhibits more
attacks, Heartbleed, botnet communication, DoS and DDoS significant differences compared to other days, posing a greater
variants, infiltration, and web-related threats. challenge for adapting to concept drift in the case of T@1.
 CICIDS-2017 provides timestamps for traffic flows so we can 2) Online Evaluation: In this section, we take ReCDA as
obtain drift data more consistently with real-world scenarios. a plug-and-play representation extraction module and evaluate
Initially, we partition each day’s data into the training and test its performance in the online environment through the continsets with a ratio of 8:2. The entire traffic flow sequence in the uous learning framework. The model will be updated as time
training set can be formalized as D = (Xt , Yt ) : t = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, passes. Considering the data volume limitations of UNSWwhere Xt represent the traffic trace collected in the tth day, Yt NB15 and CICIDS-2017, we introduce the refined Kyoto-2006+
is the corresponding label of Xt . Then we divide the D into the dataset [64] recently released for concept drift evaluation. The
historical dataset Dh = (X1 , Y1 ), . . ., (Xi+1 , Yi+1 ) and recent statistics of the dataset are shown in Fig. 5.
dataset Dr = (Xi+2 , Yi+2 ), . . ., (X5 , Y5 ). Time-based splitting Kyoto-2006+ dataset: The Kyoto-2006+ dataset is built on 10
implies that the recent dataset contains sample features absent years of real traffic data (Nov. 2006 - Dec. 2015), captured by
from the historical dataset, thus inducing concept drift. Accord- a system of 348 honeypots in 5 sub-networks inside the Kyoto
ingly, the drift index can be defined as T@i, where for t > i + 1, University. The original version includes 2 categorical features
the label of traffic instance is not available in the training phase. and 12 numerical features, with naturally occurring changes over
 We use the Optimal Transport Dataset Distance (OTDD) [63] time (e.g., users modifying their behavior patterns, and software
to explore the distribution differences over categories or times- updates). Dragoi et al. [64] conducted a thorough analysis from
tamps. OTDD is a geometric method for calculating distances multiple angles and refined it to develop models that generalize
between probability distributions to compare datasets. For better better and are more robust to drifts in data.
illustration, a min-max scale is applied to the calculated distance As shown in Fig. 6, we apply a chronology-based evaluation
matrix. As depicted in Fig. 4, whether the dataset is split over protocol for building historical and recent splits that can highcategories or timestamps, it introduces varying degrees of drift light the temporal evolution of data. The split settings follow the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ADAPTATION METHOD TO CONCEPT DRIFT FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7639

suggestion of [64] and consider the overall distribution distances against outliers and the generalization abilities of detection
between years. The historical dataset Dh is extracted from the models. We followed their disclosed implementation, i.e., feedfirst period, and the test will show the expected performance forward networks are employed.
when there is no distribution shift between the training and test CADE [17] is a representative method for adapting to concept
datasets Dt . Each year after 2010 will be regarded as the recently drift by labeling the detected drifting samples. Specifically,
arrived dataset Dr , and some flows will be separated as a test CADE maps the data samples into a low-dimensional space and
dataset for independent evaluation. A larger year indicates a learns a distance function to measure dissimilarity between samgreater degree of drift, and therefore a more significant expected ples. To ensure a fair comparison, we followed their disclosure
decline in performance. setting and adapted the implementation to binary classification.
 In summary, under our evaluation protocol, the entire dataset It should be noted that CADE is primarily designed for drift
is divided into a historical dataset, denoted as Dh , and a recently detection, so we calculate the union of correct drift detection
arrived dataset, Dr , following the specific partitioning strategies and correct classification to evaluate its performance. In other
outlined in the previous section. The historical dataset is labeled, words, for a drift sample, as long as CADE can detect its drift,
while the recently arrived dataset remains unlabeled. During the even if the classification result is wrong, it still contributes to
representation enhancement stage, both Dh and Dr are utilized final accuracy.
for self-supervised training of the encoder, with the recently INSOMNIA [26] is a semi-supervised intrusion detector that
arrived dataset serving as the source of perturbations. For each updates the base model as network traffic characteristics are
mini-batch of historical data with a batch size of B, we randomly affected by concept drift. They also consider the cost of labeling,
select B samples from Dr as sources of perturbation. Conse- so in the model update phase, they use Nearest Centroid (NC)-
quently, the number of perturbed samples in each mini-batch based strategies to generate pseudo-labels for drift adaptation.
matches the number of original historical samples, ensuring con- It is worth noting that our focus is on robust concept drift
sistency in representation alignment for each historical instance adaptation methods aimed at achieving good generalization on
and its perturbed view. In the classifier tuning stage, the model drift traffic flows, rather than continuous incremental learning.
has access to the labels of the historical dataset Dh , enabling it to Therefore, the base model of INSOMNIA is well trained on
incorporate discriminative knowledge effectively. For the testing Dh , and Dr is provided to INSOMNIA for model update at
phase, we implement different strategies for offline and online once.
evaluations. In offline evaluation, all settings utilize the same TRIDENT [50] is a unified framework designed for both contest dataset to ensure comparability. In online evaluation, the cept drift detection and adaptation. It transforms the fine-grained
test dataset is derived from traffic collected over the most recent classification problem of intrusion detection into multiple indeyear for each dataset split, allowing us to evaluate performance pendent one-class learning tasks, using Extreme Value Theory to
in real-world scenarios. determine boundary thresholds. When new classes emerge, the
 framework employs an incremental learning strategy, utilizing
 ensemble clustering to identify unknown traffic and adapting
B. Experimental Setup to concept drift through the lateral expansion of classifiers. In
 We present the experimental setup in this subsection, in- our experiment, we evaluated TRIDENT(AE) and performed
cluding baseline methods, evaluation metrics, and parameter incremental updates using Dr .
settings. 2) Evaluation Metrics: We use Accuracy and F1-score to
 1) Baseline Methods: We compare the proposed method evaluate the performance of the proposed method and its comagainst three common machine learning methods: Logistic Re- petitors. Accuracy measures the overall correctness of the model,
gression (LR), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) [65], and Decision while the F1-score provides a balanced assessment of both preci-
Tree (DT) [66]. We also include the latest method [36], [37], sion and recall, calculated as F 1 − score = 2×precision×recall
 precision+recall .
[38] for network traffic classification and two state-of-the-art These metrics offer a comprehensive evaluation of the model’s
concept drift adaptation methods [17], [26] for network intrusion ability to correctly identify both positive and negative classes,
detection. Here is a brief introduction to them. particularly in the presence of imbalanced data.
 LEXNet [36] is a lightweight, efficient, and explainable con- 3) Parameter Settings: In the representation enhancement
volutional neural network designed for network traffic classifi- stage, we use two fully connected layers as the feature extractor,
cation. It relies on a new residual block and prototype layer and followed by a linear head consisting of a fully connected layer.
shows superior performance on a commercial-grade dataset. The hidden layer size is set to 16 and 64 for offline evaluation
 CLEID [37] is an intrusion detection framework based on con- and online evaluation, respectively. In the classifier tuning stage,
trastive learning, which utilizes a heuristic method to construct we initialize a single fully connected layer as a classifier to
sample pairs based on random masking effectively. Semantic perform binary classification, i.e., distinguish between benign
relationships among different samples are extracted to enhance and malicious traffic, which has the same input dimension as the
the robustness of the model. output of the feature extractor. Both stages are trained with Adam
 ACID [38] is a classifier-agnostic and highly effective intru- optimizer using the initial learning rate of 0.0001 and batch size
sion detection system. It introduces supervised adaptive clus- of 128. The representation model and classifier model are trained
tering techniques to learn cluster centers that can be used as for 100 epochs and 50 epochs, respectively. All experiments are
extensions of the input features, which improves the robustness run on NVIDIA 4090 GPUs for fair comparisons.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7640 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE IV
 COMPARISONS ON UNSW-NB15 DATASET

C. Offline Experiment Results TABLE V
 COMPARISONS ON CICIDS-2017 DATASET
 In this section, we first compare the overall performance of
ReCDA with other baselines and evaluate the robustness of
the model to drift adaptation under varying degrees of drift.
Subsequently, we delve into a more detailed investigation under
a fixed drift index.
 1) Overall Evaluation: In Table IV, we report the experimental results on the UNSW-NB15 dataset. As described in
Section IV-A1, for drift index C#i, we iteratively considered i
type(s) of attacks among the 6 malicious categories as drift data.
The results presented are the averages and standard deviations
under all category combinations. From the results in Table IV,
it is evident that our method exhibits excellent adaptability
and stability in handling concept drift across different degrees
of drift. Particularly in the case of extreme drift (C#5), our
method maintains an accuracy that is 7% higher than that of
the sub-optimal method. samples, and the performance of the model is easily affected
 For all considered machine learning models and LEXNet, we by the label noise, which leads to the phenomenon of selfobserve performance degradation as the degree of drift increases, poisoning. TRIDENT also employs clustering for label assignemphasizing the inability of these intrusion detection models to ment, but it utilizes different parameters and integrates the results
cope with changes in data distribution resulting from concept to achieve relatively stable outcomes. This approach reduces
drift. For example, the accuracy of LEXNet drops from 0.86 the risk of self-poisoning to some extent. However, the overall
at C#1 to 0.63 at C#5, performing even worse than LR. This performance of the method is not well due to the lack of comindicates that while the elaborated DL-based model fits the parative information between classes in the one-class classifiers.
historical dataset well, it struggles to generalize in concept drift In comparison to other methods, ReCDA demonstrates greater
scenarios. Regarding ACID and CLEID designed to improve resilience to increasing degrees of drift, with ReCDA exhibiting
the generalization ability of intrusion detectors, the results show an accuracy 10% and 7% higher than that of CADE at C#3 and
their limited drift adaptability, which is vulnerable under more C#5, respectively.
rigorous evaluation settings. In practical applications, dynamic changes in network envi-
 C#1 is widely used as the benchmark setting for concept ronments and user behaviors lead to concept drift in traffic flows,
drift, i.e., only a type of attack is unknown in the training which subsequently deteriorates the performance of intrusion
phase. However, we have found that this setting tends to give detection systems over time. To evaluate the adaptability of
an illusion of high performance, as the performance deteriorates models to this drift, we partitioned the CICIDS-2017 dataset
rapidly with an increase in the degree of drift. For example, based on timestamps. As shown in the experimental results
INSOMNIA reaches a competitive accuracy of 0.88 at C#1 in Table V, ReCDA achieves superior performance across all
but suffers from significant performance degradation by 6% scenarios. In contrast, TRIDENT exhibits poor performance in
and 18% when shifted to C#3 and C#5, accompanied by a this setting. The simultaneous input of both benign and malisteep increase in standard deviation. Recall that INSOMNIA cious traffic complicates the classifier updates and adaptation
applies NC-based strategies to generate pseudo-labels for drift processes, as they must handle both types of samples within the
adaptation. The experiment results show that the estimation of new categories affected by normality drift [49]. While CADE
pseudo-label is impractical when lack of sufficient neighbor closely approximates the performance of our method at T@2 and

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ADAPTATION METHOD TO CONCEPT DRIFT FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7641

 TABLE VI
 ONLINE EVALUATION ON KYOTO-2006+ DATASET

 D. Online Experiment Results
 In this section, we first evaluate three common classifiers in
 online settings and then consider ReCDA as a plug-and-play
 module to assess its enhancement effect on simple classifiers.
 From the results shown in Table VI, the following observations
 and conclusions can be drawn.
 r In the online evaluation settings, the performance of simple
 classifiers shows a declining trend over time. From 2009
 (no drift) to 2015, the detection accuracy of LR, KNN,
Fig. 7. The detailed results at C#2 on UNSW-NB15 dataset. and DT decreased by 21.9%, 26.0%, and 26.4%, respectively. This indicates that models fitted on historical data
 distributions struggle to generalize to recently arriving data
T@3, it is important to note that, as mentioned in Section IV-B1, distributions.
we have adopted a tolerant measure for CADE. r For each classifier, the integration of ReCDA significantly
 Additionally, for T@1, the performances of DT and LEXNet alleviates the issue of performance decline. As an efficient
are approximately equivalent to random guessing, with 0.511 representation enhancement method, ReCDA enables drift
and 0.508 of accuracy, respectively. Despite having parameters adaptation without requiring labels for the recently arriving
and complexity that far exceed baseline models like LR or KNN, traffic, allowing the model to maintain robust performance
LEXNet, as an intrusion detector, exhibits extremely poor gener- even in the fourth year (with only a 2.5% performance drop
alization performance on concept drift data. When the distribu- for LR and KNN).
tion in the historical dataset is uncorrelated with that in the drift r We observe that the enhancement effect of ReCDA on
dataset, the model tends to learn specific biases from the histori- a tree-based model is not as pronounced as that on LR
cal dataset, making generalization and adaptation to concept drift and KNN. It could be attributed to ReCDA mapping highchallenging. dimensional raw features to a lower-dimensional space,
 Overall, the experimental results reveal the rapid degradation where the embedded features may not provide sufficient
of traditional models as the degree of drift increases, under- information gain. Therefore, the tree-based model may not
scoring their unreliability. Furthermore, these experiments also be deep enough to capture the complexity of the data.
highlight the issues of the current concept drift adaptation meth- Furthermore, we plotted the confusion matrices of various
ods and demonstrate the robustness of our proposed approach methods to evaluate the performance gains of ReCDA across
under varying degrees of drift. different classifiers. As illustrated in Fig. 8, where 0 represents
 2) Detailed Evaluation: We take a closer look at the de- benign traffic and 1 denotes malicious traffic. It is evident
tailed performance at C#2 on the UNSW-NB15 dataset. The from Fig. 8(a)–(c) that classifiers fitted to historical patterns
results depicted in Fig. 7 reveal that various combinations of struggled to detect recently arrived malicious traffic in 2012,
malicious activities exert different degrees of impact on the leading to increased false negative rates. In contrast, classifiers
intrusion detection model, a phenomenon linked to the similarity updated under the guidance of ReCDA effectively adapted to the
of their feature distributions. As shown in Fig. 4(a), certain concept drift, resulting in a significant improvement in classitypes of attacks exhibit similar distances, enabling the model fication performance. Therefore, we can conclude that ReCDA
to generalize effectively to other categories even when labels enhances the resilience of various classifiers against concept
for one category are unavailable during training. Nevertheless, drift.
our method consistently achieves high accuracy and outperforms
the other methods across all cases. Moreover, the area occupied
by ReCDA is notably smaller than that of its competitors, indi- V. FURTHER ANALYSIS
cating that our method exhibits consistency at various degrees In this section, we conduct further analysis of ReCDA at T@2
of drift. This superior property shows that ReCDA has strong and C#1, where Generic attack in UNSW-NB15 is regarded as
adaptability and robustness. drift.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7642 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE IX
 THE INFLUENCE OF δ AND λ ON CICIDS-2017 DATASET

 TABLE X
 ABLATION STUDY OF RECDA

Fig. 8. Confusion matrix at 2012 on KYOTO-2006+ dataset.

 TABLE VII
 THE INFLUENCE OF PERTURBATION RATE
 awareness of drift data, whereas a smaller δ may not furnish the
 classifier with sufficient discriminative insights. Selection of λ is
 dataset-dependent; for example, UNSW-NB15 favors a smaller
 value (λ = 0.5), whereas CICIDS-2017 shows preference for a
 larger one (λ = 0.8).
 TABLE VIII
 THE INFLUENCE OF δ AND λ ON UNSW-NB15 DATASET
 B. Ablation Study
 In this section, we conduct an ablation study to analyze the
 performance gain of each component in ReCDA by removing them gradually. RA, IS, and CT are the abbreviations of
 representation alignment, instructive sampling, and constrained
 tuning, respectively. The results are shown in Table X.
 The results consistently demonstrate that ReCDA outperforms its variants. Each component in ReCDA contributes to
A. Parameter Study enhancing the predictive model’s performance, with the optimal
 We investigate the influence of hyperparameters by varying performance achieved when they collaborate in our unified
their values. Our experiment approach involves fixing one pa- framework. We note that the removal of CT leads to a more sigrameter while altering the other. nificant performance drop in the CICIDS-2017 dataset compared
 1) The Influence of σ: To assess the impact of perturbation to the UNSW-NB15 dataset. This difference can be attributed
rate σ, we followed the settings outlined in Section IV-B3, except to the more severe data shift in CICIDS-2017, resulting in the
for employing a frozen encoder during the classifier tuning feature extractor and predictive model being prone to overfitting
stage. We vary σ from 0.3 to 0.8. As shown in Table VII, the historical traffic flows while losing awareness of the drift flows.
optimal performance on UNSW-NB15 dataset is attained when This observation aligns with the findings in Section V-A2. In
σ = 0.6, while for CICIDS-2017 dataset, the value is σ = 0.7. addition, we observe that the proposed representation align-
σ serves as the control parameter determining the fusion degree ment significantly enhances the deep representations, and the
of historical and drift samples, where the contrastive loss eval- following instructive sampling strategy further improves the
uates the similarity between the original flow and its perturbed classification performance, which justifies our claims.
version. Therefore, excessively large values of σ may destroy
the semantics of traffic flows, whereas overly small values may C. Complexity Analysis
lead to insufficient awareness of concept drift. The time complexity of ReCDA can be analyzed by consid-
 2) The Influence of δ and λ: The classifier tuning stage ering each of its key stages: Representation Enhancement and
includes two hyper-parameters, the instructive sample selection Classifier Tuning. In the first stage, drift-aware perturbation is
rate δ, and a factor λ to regulate the regularization strength. applied to each sample individually, with a time complexity of
 We respectively tune the two hyper-parameters in a range of O(nh · d). where nh is the number of historical samples and d is
δ ∈ {25%, 50%, 75%, 100%} and λ ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0}. The the feature dimension. To align the representations of the original
results are illustrated in Tables VIII and IX. According to the and perturbed data, the algorithm calculates pairwise similarresults, the accuracy fluctuates with the change of δ. A large ities, which has a time complexity of O(n2h · d). In practice,
δ may lead to overfitting on the historical dataset, diminishing mini-batch training reduces this cost to approximately linear

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ADAPTATION METHOD TO CONCEPT DRIFT FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7643

Fig. 9. t-SNE visualizations on UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS-2017 dataset. We sample part of the traffic flows from Dh and Dr , denoted H- and R-, respectively.
(a) We visualize the samples in the original space. (b) We train a 3-layer MLP as a baseline. (c) We directly generate the representation using the feature extractor
of ReCDA. (d) We use the entire ReCDA.

with respect to the batch size. In the second stage, Instructive
Sampling involves clustering the recent samples Dr , which has a
time complexity of O(nr · d), where nr is the number of drifted
samples. The algorithm then computes similarity, with a complexity of O(nh · d), and selects the most instructive samples
using fast sorting, which has a time complexity of O(nh lognh ).
Finally, Constrained Classifier Tuning involves fine-tuning the
model with a linear classifier. The time complexity for this step
is O(nh · d). Fig. 10. The practical time and storage overhead at C#1.
 Combining all these stages, the overall time complexity of
the entire ReCDA algorithm is: O(n2h · d + nr · d + nh lognh ).
It is important to note that Instructive Sampling is an offline CICIDS-2017 datasets perfectly but struggles with R-Attack.
operation, and ReCDA can perform online updates at a reduced Recall that our method maps historical data and drift data from
complexity with a mini-batch training strategy. Therefore, the the separated original distribution to a unified latent distribution
complexity for drift adaptation will primarily depend on the size through drift-aware perturbation and representation alignment.
of the mini-batches used during training and feature dimension, Columns (c) and (d) demonstrate that H-Attack and R-Attack
resulting in a reduced complexity of O(nb · d), where nb is the instances are notably closer in the enhanced representation of
mini-batch size. ReCDA compared to columns (a) and (b), indicating the drift-
 We measured the practical time and storage costs of the aware of our approach. Furthermore, our proposed instructive
algorithm under the C#1 setting and compared them with other sampling strategy selects those representative instances near
methods, as shown in Fig. 10. Since each algorithm performs a the fuzzy boundary to provide the classifier with discriminadifferent number of iterations for drift adaptation, the time cost tive knowledge, facilitating the construction of a drift-robust
is measured as the time required per epoch. From the results, it is decision boundary.
evident that ReCDA has a moderate time cost, similar to CADE,
while its storage cost is the lowest. In contrast, TRIDENT incurs
significant time and storage costs due to the maintenance of VI. LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORK
multiple one-class classifiers and the use of complex likelihood While ReCDA demonstrates promising adaptability and roestimation to update the thresholds. bustness to concept drift in network intrusion detection, it is important to acknowledge several limitations of its current design
 and inspire future research.
D. Visualization The current implementation of ReCDA adopts a binary clas-
 We employ the t-SNE technique [67] to visualize original sification setting, distinguishing between benign and malicious
space and latent space. The visualization results on UNSW- traffic. As a result, ReCDA cannot provide fine-grained iden-
NB15 and CICIDS-2017 datasets are presented in Fig. 9. It is tification of specific attack types. This stands in contrast to
observed that both benign and attack flows in recent arrivals certain multiclass or hierarchical methods, such as TRIDENT,
deviate from the original data distribution, making the decision which are capable of further classifying the exact category of
boundary of a well-trained model on the historical dataset that is malicious activity. However, as noted in prior work, multichallenging to generalize to drifting data. For example, column class systems often incur significantly higher detection latency
(b) shows the baseline can fit H-Benign and H-Attack on the and computational overhead due to the need to maintain and

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7644 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

update multiple class-specific models—especially in dynamic [9] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban
environments where new attack variants frequently emerge. The IDS: An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT
 edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897,
binary setting may limit the system’s utility in scenarios that re- Aug. 2020.
quire detailed attack attribution and tailored response strategies. [10] A. Derhab, M. Belaoued, I. Mohiuddin, F. Kurniawan, and M. K. Khan,
For example, distinguishing between different types of attack “Histogram-based intrusion detection and filtering framework for secure
 and safe in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
vectors can be critical for forensic analysis or for deploying no. 3, pp. 2366–2379, Mar. 2022.
automated countermeasures. Additionally, although ReCDA is [11] S.-Y. Kuo, F.-H. Tseng, and Y.-H. Chou, “Metaverse intrusion detection of
designed to be label-efficient and robust to concept drift, its wormhole attacks based on a novel statistical mechanism,” Future Gener.
 Comput. Syst., vol. 143, pp. 179–190, 2023.
performance may still be affected by extreme distribution shifts [12] S. Yang, X. Zheng, Z. Xu, and X. Wang, “A lightweight approach for
or by previously unseen attack types that are completely different network intrusion detection based on self-knowledge distillation,” in Proc.
from the historical data. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2023, pp. 3000–3005.
 [13] N. Kaloudi and J. Li, “The AI-based cyber threat landscape: A survey,”
 For future work, we plan to extend ReCDA to support mul- ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 2020.
ticlass classification, enabling it to not only detect whether [14] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under
traffic is malicious but also to identify the specific attack type. concept drift: A review,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 12,
 pp. 2346–2363, Dec. 2019.
We believe that introducing such fine-grained detection, while [15] F. Bayram, B. S. Ahmed, and A. Kassler, “From concept drift to model
maintaining efficiency and adaptability, will further enhance the degradation: An overview on performance-aware drift detectors,” Knowl.-
practical value of our approach. Based Syst., vol. 245, 2022, Art. no. 108632.
 [16] O. A. Wahab, “Intrusion detection in the IoT under data and concept drifts:
 Online deep learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 20,
 VII. CONCLUSION pp. 19706–19716, Oct. 2022.
 [17] L. Yang et al., “{CADE}: Detecting and explaining concept drift samples
 The paper introduces ReCDA, a novel method aimed at ad- for security applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021,
 pp. 2327–2344.
dressing the challenges of concept drift adaptation in network [18] F. Barbero, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, and L. Cavallaro, “Transcending
intrusion detection. ReCDA incorporates drift-aware perturba- transcend: Revisiting malware classification in the presence of concept
tion and self-supervised representation alignment to facilitate the drift,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 805–823.
 [19] X. Zheng, S. Yang, E. C. Ngai, S. Jana, and L. Cavallaro, “Learning
learning of robust representations that are both drift-aware and temporal invariance in android malware detectors,” 2025, arXiv:2502.
drift-invariant. This approach avoids labor-intensive manual la- 05098.
beling and mitigates the risk of label noise. Additionally, ReCDA [20] X. Shu, D. Yao, and E. Bertino, “Privacy-preserving detection of sensitive
 data exposure,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1092–
integrates an instructive sampling strategy that is meticulously 1103, May 2015.
designed to enhance the classifier’s discriminatory capabilities [21] L. L. Minku and X. Yao, “DDD: A new ensemble approach for dealing with
between benign and malicious activities, leveraging the robust concept drift,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 619–633,
 Apr. 2011.
representations extracted. To comprehensively evaluate ReCDA, [22] L. Yang, D. M. Manias, and A. Shami, “PWPAE: An ensemble framework
we surpassed conventional settings, devising a more realistic for concept drift adaptation in IoT data streams,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE Glob.
and challenging evaluation scenario. The experimental findings Commun. Conf., 2021, pp. 01–06.
 [23] X. Wang, “Enidrift: A fast and adaptive ensemble system for network
underscore the superior adaptability and robustness exhibited by intrusion detection under real-world drift,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Comput.
ReCDA, positioning it as a promising candidate for addressing Secur. Appl. Conf., 2022, pp. 785–798.
concept drift in network intrusion detection. [24] Y. Chen, Z. Ding, and D. Wagner, “Continuous learning for android
 malware detection,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp., 2023,
 pp. 1127–1144.
 REFERENCES [25] S. Yoon, Y. Lee, J.-G. Lee, and B. S. Lee, “Adaptive model pooling for
 online deep anomaly detection from a complex evolving data stream,”
 [1] S. Yang, X. Zheng, J. Li, J. Xu, X. Wang, and E. C. Ngai, “ReCDA: in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022,
 Concept drift adaptation with representation enhancement for network pp. 2347–2357.
 intrusion detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. [26] G. Andresini, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, C. Loglisci, A. Appice, and
 Data Mining, 2024, pp. 3818–3828. L. Cavallaro, “Insomnia: Towards concept-drift robustness in network
 [2] D. Chou and M. Jiang, “A survey on data-driven network intrusion detec- intrusion detection,” in Proc. 14th ACM workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
 tion,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 1–36, 2021. 2021, pp. 111–122.
 [3] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion [27] Y. Yang, D.-W. Zhou, D.-C. Zhan, H. Xiong, and Y. Jiang, “Adaptive
 detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics deep models for incremental learning: Considering capacity scalability
 Secur., vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020. and sustainability,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
 [4] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches Data Mining, 2019, pp. 74–82.
 for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and [28] Z. Kan, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, and L. Cavallaro, “Investigating labelopen issues,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 189, 2020, Art. no. 105124. less drift adaptation for malware detection,” in Proc. 14th ACM Workshop
 [5] S. Yang, X. Zheng, J. Li, J. Xu, and E. C. H. Ngai, “Multi-scale contrastive Artif. Intell. Secur., 2021, pp. 123–134.
 attention representation learning for encrypted traffic classification,” in [29] K. Xu, Y. Li, R. Deng, K. Chen, and J. Xu, “DroidEvolver: Self-evolving
 Proc. 33 rd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2024, pp. 4173–4177. android malware detection system,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur.
 [6] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic classification Privacy, 2019, pp. 47–62.
 in diverse network environments with TCP-Aware traffic augmentation,” in [30] N. Karim, N. C. Mithun, A. Rajvanshi, H.-P. Chiu, S. Samarasek-
 Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., Anaheim, CA, USA, 2023, pp. 625–642. era, and N. Rahnavard, “C-SFDA: A curriculum learning aided
 [7] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “E- self-training framework for efficient source free domain adaptation,”
 Graphsage: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system for in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023,
 IoT,” in Proc. NOMS IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2022, pp. 24120–24131.
 pp. 1–9. [31] X. Zheng, S. Yang, and X. Wang, “SF-IDS: An imbalanced semi-
 [8] Z. Ding et al., “MF-NET: Multi-frequency intrusion detection network for supervised learning framework for fine-grained intrusion detection,” in
 internet traffic data,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 146, 2024, Art. no. 109999. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2023, pp. 2988–2993.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
YANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ADAPTATION METHOD TO CONCEPT DRIFT FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7645

[32] C. Qiu et al., “3D-IDS: Doubly disentangled dynamic intrusion detection,” [55] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “Manda: On adversarial
 in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2023, example detection for network intrusion detection system,” in Proc. IEEE
 pp. 1965–1977. Conf. Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10.
[33] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN: Generative [56] D. Han et al., “Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of machine
 adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for network intrusion learning-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 1156–1167, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2632–2647, Aug. 2021.
 2024. [57] J. Gu and S. Lu, “An effective intrusion detection approach using SVM
[34] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensem- with naïve bayes feature embedding,” Comput. Secur., vol. 103, 2021,
 ble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Netw. Art. no. 102158.
 Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15. [58] H. Yan et al., “Automatic evasion of machine learning-based network
[35] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. 2021 ACM SIGSAC vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 153–167, Jan./Feb. 2024.
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3431–3446. [59] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
[36] K. Fauvel, F. Chen, and D. Rossi, “A lightweight, efficient and explainable- contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv: 1807.03748.
 by-design convolutional neural network for internet traffic classification,” [60] A. Haque, L. Khan, M. Baron, B. Thuraisingham, and C. Aggarwal,
 in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2023, “Efficient handling of concept drift and concept evolution over stream
 pp. 4013–4023. data,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2016, pp. 481–492.
[37] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning [61] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
 no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, Dec. 2022. Proc. 2015 Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
[38] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic [62] G. Engelen, V. Rimmer, and W. Joosen, “Troubleshooting an intrusion
 classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2021-IEEE detection dataset: The cicids2017 case study,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE Secur.
 Conf. Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10. Privacy Workshops, 2021, pp. 7–12.
[39] N. Wang et al., “MANDA: On adversarial example detection for network [63] D. Alvarez-Melis and N. Fusi, “Geometric dataset distances via optimal
 intrusion detection system,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., transport,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 21428–21439.
 vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1139–1153, Mar./Apr. 2023. [64] M. Dragoi, E. Burceanu, E. Haller, A. Manolache, and F. Brad, “Anoshift:
[40] Z. Abou El Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Securing fed- A distribution shift benchmark for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
 erated learning through blockchain and explainable ai for robust intrusion Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 32854–32867.
 detection in iot networks,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. [65] C. A. De Souza, C. B. Westphall, R. B. Machado, J. B. M. Sobral, and
 Workshops, 2023, pp. 1–6. G. D. S. Vieira, “Hybrid approach to intrusion detection in fog-based IoT
[41] D. J. Kalita, V. P. Singh, and V. Kumar, “A novel adaptive optimization environments,” Comput. Netw., vol. 180, 2020, Art. no. 107417.
 framework for svm hyper-parameters tuning in non-stationary environ- [66] M. H. L. Louk and B. A. Tama, “Dual-IDS: A bagging-based gradient
 ment: A case study on intrusion detection system,” Expert Syst. Appl., boosting decision tree model for network anomaly intrusion detection
 vol. 213, 2023, Art. no. 119189. system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 213, 2023, Art. no. 119030.
[42] F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, R. Jordaney, J. Kinder, and L. Cavallaro, [67] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using T-SNE,” J.
 “{TESSERACT}: Eliminating experimental bias in malware classifica- Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
 tion across space and time,” in Proc. 28th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2019,
 pp. 729–746.
[43] A. Kuppa and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Learn to adapt: Robust drift detection in
 security domain,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 102, 2022, Art. no. 108239. Shuo Yang received the BEng degree from Sichuan
[44] M. Dib, S. Torabi, E. Bou-Harb, N. Bouguila, and C. Assi, “EvolIoT: A University, in 2020, and the MEng degree from Tsself-supervised contrastive learning framework for detecting and charac- inghua University, in 2023. He is currently working
 terizing evolving iot malware variants,” in Proc ACM Asia Conf. Comput. toward the PhD degree with the Department of Elec-
 Commun. Secur., 2022, pp. 452–466. trical and Electronic Engineering, The University of
[45] J. He, R. Mao, Z. Shao, and F. Zhu, “Incremental learning in online Hong Kong. His research interests include cybersescenario,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, curity, machine learning, and trustworthy artificial
 pp. 13926–13935. intelligence.
[46] Y. Wu, E. Dobriban, and S. Davidson, “Deltagrad: Rapid retraining
 of machine learning models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
 pp. 10355–10366.
[47] A. Liu, J. Lu, and G. Zhang, “Diverse instance-weighting ensemble based
 Xinran Zheng received the BS degree in electronic
 on region drift disagreement for concept drift adaptation,” IEEE Trans.
 information science and technology from Sichuan
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 293–307, Jan. 2021. University and the master’s degree in electronic in-
[48] B. Halder, K. A. Hasan, T. Amagasa, and M. M. Ahmed, “Autonomic
 formation from Tsinghua University. Her research
 active learning strategy using cluster-based ensemble classifier for concept
 interests include machine learning for cybersecurity
 drifts in imbalanced data stream,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 231, 2023, and robustness.
 Art. no. 120578.
[49] D. Han et al., “Anomaly detection in the open world: Normality shift
 detection, explanation, and adaptation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.
 Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18.
[50] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A universal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic detection,” in
 Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
[51] B. K. Isaac-Medina, Y. F. A. Gaus, N. Bhowmik, and T. P. Breckon, Jinze Li received the BS degree from the Dalian
 “Towards open-world object-based anomaly detection via self-supervised
 University of Technology, Dalian, China, in 2020,
 outlier synthesis,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 196–214.
 and the MS degree from the University of Chinese
[52] Z. Zhang and M. Hoai, “Object detection with self-supervised scene
 Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2023. He
 adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., is currently working toward the PhD degree with
 2023, pp. 21589–21599.
 The University of Hong Kong. His research interests
[53] K. Xu, L. Chen, and S. Wang, “Coral: Concept drift representation learning
 include LLM efficient generation, federated learning,
 for co-evolving time-series,” 2025, arXiv:2501.01480.
 and multimodal machine learning.
[54] A. Bardes, J. Ponce, and Y. LeCun, “Vicreg: Variance-invariancecovariance regularization for self-supervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–12.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7646 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2025

 Jinfeng Xu received the BS degree in software en- Edith C. H. Ngai (Senior Member, IEEE) Edith C.
 gineering from Beijing University of Technology, H. Ngai is currently an Associate Professor in the
 Beijing, China, in 2023 and the BS degree in computer Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineerscience from University College Dublin, Dublin, Ire- ing, The University of Hong Kong. Before joining
 land, in 2023. He is currently working toward the HKU in 2020, she was an Associate Professor in
 PhD degree with the University of Hong Kong, Hong the Department of Information Technology, Uppsala
 Kong SAR, China. His research interests include rec- University, Sweden. Her research interests include
 ommender system, multimodal learning, and graph Internet of Things, edge intelligence, and smart cities.
 learning. She was a VINNMER Fellow (2009) awarded by
 Swedish Governmental Research Funding Agency
 VINNOVA. Her co-authored papers received a Best
 Paper Award in QShine 2023, Best Paper Runner-Up Awards in ACM BuidSys
 2024, ACM/IEEE IPSN 2013, and ACM/IEEE IWQoS 2010. She was an
 Area Editor of IEEE Internet of Things Journal from 2020 to 2022. She is
 currently an Associate Editor in IEEE Transactions of Mobile Computing, IEEE
 Transactions of Industrial Informatics, IEEE Network, Ad Hoc Networks, and
 Xinchen Zhang received the BE degree in automa- Computer Networks. She has served as a program chair in IEEE GreenCom
 tion from the Harbin Institute of Technology. She is 2022, IEEE/ACM IWQoS 2024, and IEEE CloudCom 2025. She received a
 currently working toward the PhD degree with the Meta Policy Research Award in Asia Pacific in 2022. She was selected as one of
 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the N 2 Women Stars in Computer Networking and Communications in 2022.
 The University of Hong Kong. Her research interests She was a distinguished Lecturer in IEEE Communication Society in 2023-2024.
 include Internet of Things security, particularly in the She is a Senior Member of ACM.
 area of network intrusion detection.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 01:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.