4252 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 Self-Supervised and Interpretable Anomaly
 Detection Using Network Transformers
 Daniel L. Marino , Member, IEEE, Chathurika S. Wickramasinghe , Member, IEEE,
 Craig Rieger , Senior Member, IEEE, and Milos Manic , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Machine learning and deep neural networks building effective and resilient critical infrastructures is a pri-
(DNNs) have been proposed as a tool to identify anomalies mary concern for many entities, including government, industry,
in computer network communications. However, due the academia, and the research community [3], [4].
obfuscated nature of off-the-shelf machine learning models, their output often does not provide enough information The integration of information and communication technoloto isolate the source of the anomaly to take corrective mea- gies (ICTs) into industrial control systems (ICSs) has been
sures. In this article, we introduce the network transformer driven by the desire for increased efficiency and connectivity [5].
(NeT), a DNN model for anomaly detection that incorpo- ICTs are essential for ensuring the effective operation of critical
rates the graph structure of the communication network in
 infrastructure systems. However, their adoption also introduces
order to improve interpretability. The presented approach
has the following advantages: first, enhanced interpretabil- vulnerabilities that can be exploited by cyber-criminals, jeopity by incorporating the graph structure of computer net- ardizing security, and resilience [6]. In critical infrastructure
works; second, provides a hierarchical set of features that environments, sensitive information and data flow continuously
enables analysis at different levels of granularity; second, through various subsystems, necessitating robust protection
self-supervised training that does not require labeled data. against unauthorized and malicious access. Ensuring the security
The NeT model was evaluated on a set of anomalous scenarios executed in a real industrial control system. The pre- of these networks is crucial to prevent potential threats and
sented approach successfully identified the anomalies, the maintain the integrity of critical operations.
devices affected, and the specific connections causing the Network traffic monitoring is fundamental for ensuring the
anomalies, providing a data-driven hierarchical approach to security and reliability of critical infrastructures. This technolanalyze the behavior of a cyber network. ogy is crucial for protecting systems that depend on ICTs. A key
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, cybersecurity, inter- aspect of resilient network traffic monitoring involves the timely
pretable machine learning, self-supervised learning, trans- identification of abnormal behaviors, which enables engineers
formers. to take preventative measures and avert potential catastrophic
 I. INTRODUCTION failures [7]. Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) has
 emerged as a prominent approach for anomaly detection in
 RITICAL infrastructures, such as critical manufacturing,
C transportation systems, healthcare and public health systems, defense systems, and financial systems, play a vital role
 critical infrastructure environments [7], [8]. By leveraging ML
 algorithms, organizations can enhance their ability to detect and
 respond to irregularities in network traffic, thereby strengthening
in the United States. Failures, delays, or incapacitation of these the overall security and operational stability of their critical
infrastructures can have debilitating effects on various areas, systems.
including national health, public safety and security, stable This article presents a novel network anomaly detection
energy supply, and economic stability [1], [2]. Consequently, approach—the network transformer (NeT)—an ML model that
 uses graph representations to improve the interpretability of
 Received 30 August 2024; revised 13 November 2024; accepted 9 anomaly detection in network traffic monitoring. The presented
January 2025. Date of publication 27 February 2025; date of current model allows the identification of anomalies in the network at
version 21 April 2025. This work was supported in part by the Department of Energy through the U.S. DOE Idaho Operations Office under
 the global level. It also generates a series of hierarchical features
Contract DE-AC07-05ID14517, in part by the Resilient Control and In- (device-level and connection-level) that allow the identification
strumentation Systems (ReCIS) Program of Idaho National Laboratory, of devices affected by the anomalies and the connections reand in part by the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative, an investment in
the advancement of cyber R&D, innovation and workforce development.
 sponsible for the anomalies. The interpretable component uses
Paper no. TII-24-4368. (Corresponding author: Daniel L. Marino.) these device-level and device-level features to help with local-
 Daniel L. Marino, Chathurika S. Wickramasinghe, and Milos Manic are izing impacted devices and connections during a system attack,
with the Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23284 USA
(e-mail: marinodl@vcu.edu; brahmanacsw@vcu.edu; misko@ieee.org).
 providing a better understanding of the detected anomaly at a
 Craig Rieger, retired, was with the Idaho National Laboratory, Idaho global level. The approach leverages self-supervised learning to
Falls, ID 83415 USA. He resides in Pocatello, ID 83201 USA (e-mail: train the model using unlabeled data. A multiprocessing pipeline
crieger@ieee.org).
 For more information about CCI, visit cyberinitiative.org.
 is presented as a prototype for scalability to large datasets.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3534443 Contributions of this article are as follows.

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS 4253

 1) Graph packet dissection method for extracting hierarchi- In this study, our approach uses transformer neural networks
 cal features (global level, device level, and connection (TNNs) as the backbone for our model. The choice of TNNs
 level). is motivated by their advanced capabilities in sequence mod-
 2) Self-supervised NeT model for detecting network anoma- eling tasks. TNNs are currently regarded as state-of-the-art ML
 lies at the global level. models for sequence, language, and image processing [22], [23],
 3) Interpretable components that use device level and con- [24], [25]. They offer significant advantages over traditional neunection level features for providing a better understanding ral networks, particularly in terms of efficiency and scalability,
 of the detected anomalies. due to their ability to process input data in parallel [26]. TNNs
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II excel in capturing complex temporal and spatial dependencies,
presents the background and related work. Section III describes which enhances their capability to extract features representing
the proposed NeT approach. Section IV presents the experimen- normal system behavior, a critical aspect for effective anomaly
tal evaluation. Finally, Section V concludes this article. detection.
 This article considers three unsupervised ML model baselines for anomaly detection: one-class support vector machines
 II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK (OCSVMs), local outlier factors (LOFs), and autoencoders
 Anomaly detection involves identifying patterns in data that (AEs). These models are chosen due to their widespread use
deviate from the expected behavior of a system [9]. It can in unsupervised anomaly detection [27]. Our intention is to
be approached in various ways, including out-of-distribution demonstrate how the presented NeT approach can be effecdetection, outlier detection, and novelty detection [10], [11]. tively integrated with existing anomaly detection techniques,
While many existing ML approaches effectively detect abnor- improving performance and interpretability beyond that of the
mal behaviors in cyber-physical systems [12], [13], they often original algorithms. The use of other supervised anomaly detecsuffer from a lack of interpretability. These approaches typically tion algorithms, such as variants of SVM, XGBoost, decision
only indicate the presence of an anomaly without providing trees, and convolutional neural networks [8], [28], which require
additional information about its source or cause. This limitation labeled data, is beyond the scope of this work. The necessity
is particularly problematic in monitoring applications, where for extensive labeling demands domain expertise, and it is
understanding the root of the problem is crucial for effective re- often a time-consuming and expensive task. This is especially
sponse and corrective measures. Many off-the-shelf ML models relevant in industrial applications of anomaly detection, where
used for anomaly detection are designed as obfuscated, making anomalous data is scarce and difficult to collect [29], [30], [31].
their internal workings opaque to users [14]. The scarcity of abnormal labeled data underscores the value of
 To address the obfuscated nature of ML models, researchers self-supervised and unsupervised methods, which are the focus
have explored the field of explainable AI (XAI) [15]. XAI aims of our article.
to make the decision-making processes of ML models more In addition, this study employs t-distributed stochastic neightransparent and understandable [16]. Techniques such as local bor embedding (t-SNE) to visualize deviations between abnorinterpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) and SHapley mal and normal system behaviors. t-SNE [32] is a dimension-
Additive exPlanations (SHAP) [17], [18] are commonly used to ality reduction technique that maps high-dimensional data to
provide local explanations for individual predictions made by a lower dimensional space while preserving local similarities.
complex models like transformers. In addition, incorporating By converting high-dimensional distances into probabilities,
domain knowledge into the inductive bias of ML algorithms can t-SNE excels in capturing nonlinear relationships, surpassing
also enhance interpretability by guiding the model’s learning traditional methods such as principal component analysis and
process in a way that aligns with known principles in the specific multidimensional scaling [33], [34]. Its effectiveness in visuapplication domain [19]. alizing neural network embeddings and clustering results has
 Despite these advancements, many approaches still struggle been well-documented, making it a valuable tool in ML appliwith the challenge of effectively incorporating and utilizing cations [35].
data structure, which can obscure exploratory analysis and limit
interpretability. To address this issue, designing methods that
not only detect anomalies but also support exploratory analysis III. INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION: NET
is crucial. Preserving the graph structure of the problem can sig- In order to create an interpretable model for anomaly detecnificantly improve interpretability and diagnosis by providing a tion, we design an approach that leverages the graph structure
clearer representation of the relationships between entities [15]. of computer networks. As shown in Fig. 1, the idea is to have
Graph-based approaches offer several advantages over tradi- an abstract model of the problem that is shared by the human
tional methods, as they enable computation over discrete entities and the ML model. The abstract model in this case is the graph
and their relationships, which is essential for understanding representation of the computer network being monitored. By
complex systems and diagnosing issues effectively. Graph neural embedding this abstract model into the ML approach, we are
networks have emerged as a promising tool in this context, able to leverage our understanding of the system as a graph in
offering a flexible way to embed relational inductive bias into order to extract useful information about the anomalies detected
ML models. Recent research highlights their application in in the system.
learning the structure of relationships in time-series sensor data Fig. 2 shows the overview of the presented NeT approach.
and identifying anomalous edges in dynamic graphs [20], [21]. The approach consists of the following:
4254 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 TABLE I
 PACKET FEATURES WHEN USING TCP DISSECTION

Fig. 1. Graph models as abstract representations for interpretable ML.

 1) a packet dissector that groups packages by their respective TABLE II
 PACKET FEATURES WHEN USING RAW BYTES
 source and destination addresses;
 2) an embedded representation obtained using a TNN;
 3) an aggregator that extracts a series of hierarchical network
 features that represent the communication graph.
 The features extracted by the NeT model are fed to anomaly
detection algorithms to identify anomalies at different levels of
granularity. The approach uses the IP address of the devices in the
network to represent the nodes in a graph. Packets communicated
between devices represent the edges of the graph. The hierarchical network features are ultimately used for anomaly detection. GRU models whose inherently sequential nature precludes par-
These hierarchical features include global features representing allelization [26]. We use a modified version of the transformer
the entire graph, node features representing each node, and edge model presented in [26], which was originally used to train
features representing individual connections. The approach uses language models. Like a sentence is composed of a sequence
TNNs [26], which are currently the state-of-the-art ML model of words, the edges in our network are composed of a sequence
for sequence modeling tasks. The following sections expand the of packets. Thus, we use the transformer to encode the list of
description of each of the aforementioned components. packets pk in each edge to a latent representation z(i,j) .
 The transformer model used in this work is trained using a selfsupervised learning approach [36]. The transformer is trained to
A. Graph Packet Dissection predict the next n packets (unobserved) given the sequence of
 The approach starts by dissecting packet windows in order past k packets (observed). As shown in Fig. 3, the transformer
to identify the source and destination addresses. Packets are consists of an encoder–decoder network. The encoder network
grouped by their respective source-destination pairs. A graph is encodes the input packets into a set of embedded representations
constructed where each node represents an IP address. Edges that are used by the decoder to predict a series of future packets.
consist of the list of packets communicated between nodes. This approach allows us to leverage unlabeled data as the input–
Each packet is dissected in order to create an initial feature output packet sequence can be extracted by dividing unlabeled
representation that is suitable for an ML model. We consider two packet windows into two. Once the transformer is trained, we
sets of features: transmission control protocol (TCP) features use the encoder network to extract packet features zn from the
and raw byte features. TCP features are presented in Table I. edges of the graph Section III-A.
Raw byte features are presented in Table II. As shown in Fig. 3, the model is composed of the following
 four types of layers.
 1) Linear: Applies an affine transformation f (x) = W x + b
B. Embedded Packet Representations, Transformer, and
 of the input using a weight matrix W and a bias vector b.
Self-Supervised Training 2) Feedforward: Applies an nonlinear transformation using
 The TNN model is presented in Fig. 3. We use the trans- stacked layers f (x) = σ(W x + b) where σ is an activaformer as it is the current state-of-the-art model for sequence tion function. We use the ReLU activation function.
modeling. The transformer uses attention layers that allow cap- 3) Add and norm: This layer adds a residual connection
turing long-range dependencies directly. Attention layers also followed by layer normalization.
improve the efficiency of the training algorithm as sequences 4) Multihead attention: This layer consists of several scaled
can be processed in parallel; this is in contrast to LSTM and dot-product attention models that evaluate the input in
MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS 4255

Fig. 2. Overview of the NeT. (a) Graph packet dissection. (b) Embedded representation. (c) Hierarchical network features.

 Fig. 4. Hierarchical graph features of the NeT model.

 is learned when training the transformer model. The position
 encoding in Fig. 3 uses the sine and cosine functions presented
 in [26].
 The loss function in Fig. 3 is used to evaluate the performance
 of the transformer network to predict the future window of
 packets. As shown in Tables I and II, the packets are represented
 by a series of binary, categorical, and numerical values. We use
 this distinction to evaluate the loss depending on the type of
 predicted value. Numerical values use a quadratic loss, while
 binary and categorical values use a cross-entropy loss.

 C. Hierarchical Graph Features
Fig. 3. Transformer model and self-supervised training. Fig. 4 shows the set of hierarchical graph features of the NeT
 model. These include global, node, and edge features. These
 parallel. The scaled dot-product attention is a function features characterize the computer network at different levels of
 that performs an evaluation of a query matrix (Q) over a granularity. NeT hierarchical features are computed on packet
 series of key (K) value (V ) matrices windows, which are lists of packets obtained during a specified
   time window (30 s in this article). To compute NeT features, first
 QK T
 Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √ V each packet feature zn is encoded using the encoder from the
 dz transformer model (see Fig. 3). Edge features e(i,k) are computed
 where dz is the dimension of the encoded feature rep- by summing the list of encoded packets zn transferred between
 resentations, which is specified when instantiating the nodes i and k. Node features vk are obtained by summing the
 transformer model. edge features e(i,k) attached to the node k. Global features u are
 Fig. 3 shows W 0, which is a vector used at the beginning obtained by summing all edge features in the graph.
of the target sequence to shift the position of the packets on The graph features represent the computer network in a given
the right. Shifting the input to the right allows the decoder to time window. They represent the network in different layers of
predict the next packet given the series of previously predicted abstraction, using a format that is easy to interpret and exploit
symbols, making the transformer model autoregressive [26]. In in order to extract information. We train anomaly detection
our implementation, the vector W 0 is a trainable parameter that algorithms for each level of abstraction (global, nodes, edges)
4256 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Fig. 5. Data preprocessing pipeline.

in order to detect anomalies and extract information in different
levels of granularity. The algorithms are trained using only data
collected during the normal operation of the system. In this
article, we consider three anomaly detection algorithms: LOF,
OCSVM, and AEs.
 Global features provide the highest level of abstraction by
representing the entire network for a given window of packets.
Global features provide a way to identify anomalies effectively
without dealing directly with individual nodes or connections.
This serves as the first indication of anomalous behavior that
considers the network as a whole.
 Node features are used to characterize the behavior of individual devices. They provide the next level of abstraction after Fig. 6. ICS testbed used to collect data.
global features. After an anomaly is detected with the global
features, node features are used to identify the devices involved representations are then managed by Tensorflow-Datasets, a
in the anomalous event. Edge features provide the next level library that creates a cache of the preprocessed values in order
of abstraction after node features. Edge features allow us to to be consumed efficiently when training the NeT. The training
identify exactly which connections are exhibiting anomalous uses stochastic gradient descent, more specifically the adaptive
behavior. Even when we are using a complex DNN transformer moment estimation (ADAM) algorithm, which scales to very
model, the hierarchical graph features provide a structure that is large datasets. Once the NeT is trained, the features can be used
easy to understand. This structure can be exploited in order to for downstream ML operations without retraining the model.
extract information such as devices and connections involved in The preprocessing pipeline in this work was implemented using
an anomaly. Python multiprocessing library, but the same approach can be
 horizontally scaled with libraries such as Hadoop or Spark.
D. Scalability
 IV. EXPERIMENTS
 Network packet data is often characterized by a very high
 This section presents the experimental analysis of the NeT. We
volume of samples. Attacks such as network scans and DOS
 used packet data captured from a real ICS system to evaluate the
often flood the computer network with a high volume of packets.
 performance of the presented NeT approach. The performance
As a result, ML algorithms need to be designed in order to
 was evaluated on an anomaly detection task, which included
handle large quantities of data. Performing the graph packet
 the detection of a set of attack scenarios. We also evaluated
dissection and training of the NeT required the development of
 the ability of NeT to provide an indication of devices and
a multiprocessing pipeline in order to scale to these types of
 connections related to a detected anomaly.
datasets.
 Fig. 5 shows the developed multiprocessing pipeline used
to train the NeT. The pipeline preprocesses a series of packet A. Data Collection and Processing
capture files (PCAP) into a series of features formatted as The presented approach was evaluated using a dataset of
tensors (multidimensional arrays), ready to be consumed by packet captures collected in an ICS. The data were provided
Tensorflow. The first stage consists of extracting windows of by Idaho National Laboratory. The ICS network is presented in
consecutive raw packets using a rolling window. In our case, Fig. 6. The network is composed of two attack computers, two
we used a window of 30 s, but this can be tuned depending protection relays, one power quality meter, one real-time auon the application. The second processing stage consists of tomation controller (RTAC), one satellite synchronized network
TCP/user datagram protocol (UDP) dissection, which groups clock, and one SCADA PC. All devices are connected using
packets by the source-destination IP address. The third process- two network switches. The RTAC is using the DNP3 protocol to
ing stage extracts features according to Tables I and II. These communicate with the relays, the meter, and the SCADA PC. A
features are grouped using the source-destination address and sniffer is connected to a SPAN port in the switch. The SPAN port
then packaged in a tensor representation. These tensor feature forwards all the packet data passing through the switch to the
MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS 4257

sniffer, which stores the data in PCAP files for later analysis. In
total, the collected data consisted of 6.036.046 packets. The data
are processed first by performing packet dissection. A rolling
window is used to analyze sections of the data, extracting a
series of manually engineered features to be used as inputs to ML
anomaly detection systems. The normal behavior of the system
is learned by ML algorithms such that any behaviors that are
different from previously seen data are flagged as anomalies.
 For experimental evaluation, the following five types of scenarios were considered.
 1) Normal scenario: Consisted of normal operation of the
 system without any cyber disturbance/attack executed.
 2) Flood attack: Consisted of a flood of packets using hpin3
 command with random source IP address. The attack is
 launched from the PC1 attack device. The attack targets
 Relays 1 and 2.
 3) Scan attack: Consisted of a network scan using nmap.
 The attack was launched from the PC1 attack device. The
 attack targets Relays 1 and 2. Two attacks were launched. Fig. 7. Global features visualized using the T-SNE algorithm.
 The first attack was an nmap OS fingerprint scan. The
 second attack was a TCP SYN port scan.
 4) Failed authentication: Consisted of an unauthorized user anomaly detection algorithms, but it considered a series of handwho attempted to access remote devices and failed to get engineering statistical features found in the literature [12], [37].
 access after three attempts. The scenario was launched These features were computed across packet windows of 30 s.
 from PC2 and targeted Relays 1 and 2 through ssh and NeT refers to the NeT using the TCP features from Table I. NeTB
 telnet. After three unsuccessful login attempts, the relays refers to the NeT using the raw bytes features from Table II. NeT
 pulsed a series of alarms that were communicated through and NeTB report anomalies detected using packet windows of
 DNP3. 30 s as well. The AE model used the reconstruction error to
 5) Setting change: An unauthorized user that successfully identify anomalies [37]. In this article, we executed attacks at
 accessed Relays 1 and 2 from PC2 and made changes in the global level by executing attacks using PC1 and PC2. Thus,
 the settings of each device. The setting change scenario the anomaly detection performance was also calculated at the
 included changes to the following configurations: current global level.
 transformer ratio, phase instantaneous overcurrent level, The presented global level performance was evaluated using
 and relay trip equations. When the user logs into the the false positive rate (FPR) and anomaly detection rate (ADR).
 device, the relay pulses an alarm, which is communicated Results were measured using 5-fold cross-validation, where
 through DNP3 to the RTAC device. After the setting normal scenario data is split 80% for training and 20% for
 change is executed, the relay pulses another alarm, which testing. Data from attack scenarios were only used for perforis also communicated through DNP3. mance evaluation. The FPR measures the rate of anomalies for
 For experimental evaluation, the normal scenario data were normal scenarios. The ADR measures the rate of anomalies
divided into 80% for training and 20% for testing. Only data during attack scenarios. FPR is the percentage of incorrectly
from the normal scenario were used to train the models. Thus, identified abnormal communication windows given a normal
training did not require labeling. The remaining 20% of the communication duration. ADR is the percentage of correctly
normal scenario data was used for evaluation, more specifically identified abnormal communication windows over all the abnorto measure the false positive ratio. All other four scenarios mal communication windows. We report ADR measured across
were considered abnormal. None of the abnormal scenario data all scenarios and for each attack scenario separately. Values
was used for training the models. The abnormal scenario data of FPR closer to zero and high values of ADR indicate better
was only used for evaluation, more specifically to measure the anomaly detection performance. It is worth clarifying that the
anomaly detection ratio. The following sections present the ADR may not necessarily be one, as the anomalous scenarios
results and analysis of our experiments. contain a mix of normal and abnormal data [37].
 1) Behavior Characterization Analysis: We used NeT global
 features to characterize the behavior of the entire network, as
B. Global Level described in Section III-C. Fig. 7 shows a visualization of the
 As described in Section III-C, global features characterize NeT global features. The visualization was obtained with the
the behavior of the entire network. As mentioned before, LOF, T-SNE algorithm. The figure shows each anomaly scenario
OCSVM, and AEs models were used for comparing the global (red) along with data from normal operations (blue). The figure
level performance. These anomaly detection algorithms run on provides a visual reference of the difference between each
top of the NeT global features. The baseline used the same three scenario compared to the normal behavior of the system. We
4258 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 TABLE III
 FPR AND ADR FOR NET MODEL

observed that features from flood and scan scenarios are significantly different from normal behavior. Failed authentication
and setting change showed more subtle differences from normal
data. This behavior follows our expectations as flood and scan
attacks had a larger impact on the network as both introduced a
large volume of packets. This visual representation of the global
features served as an initial understanding of the data, providing
a tool to understand the similarity between different scenarios.
 2) Anomaly Detection Analysis: When looking at the results
presented in Table III, among baselines, AE provided the lowest
FPR while achieving comparable ADR performance. NeTB
and NeT provided slightly better FPR with higher ADR when
compared with the baseline. We observed a higher ADR for
flood and scan scenarios using NeTB and NeT models. However, the baseline provided a slightly better performance on
failed authentication and setting change scenarios. NeT-AE and
Baseline-AE provided comparable results for failed authentication, with NeTB-AE providing the lowest performance. For
 Fig. 8. Anomalies in each device detected with NeT node features.
setting change, NeTB-AE and baseline AE provided comparable (a) Flood. (b) Scan. (c) Failed Auth. (d) Setting Change.
results, with NeT-AE having the lowest performance in this
scenario. The baseline and the NT models had specific features
indicating activity on ssh and telnet, which helps to explain
 change were launched by PC2. Fig. 8 shows the anomalies
why they performed better in the failed authentication scenario.
 per-device detected using NeT Node features. The figure shows
On the other hand, setting change was characterized by larger
 the number of anomalies per device for each attack scenario.
payloads than failed authentication, which helps to explain the
 1) Analysis of Flood Attack: Flood attack shows a high
better performance of NeTB as it included the raw 512 B of the
 anomaly rate for PC1 [see Fig. 8(a)], which confirms the correct
payload.
 origin of flood attacks.
 Table III shows that the presented NeT and NeTB models
 2) Analysis of Scan Attack: Scan attack also shows a high
provide comparable or better performance in anomaly detection
 anomaly rate for PC1 [see Fig. 8(b)], confirming the correct
than the baseline. Furthermore, the baseline does not have mechorigin.
anisms to explore which devices and connections are involved in
 3) Analysis of Failed Authentication Attack: During failed
the anomalies. The following experiments show the capability
 authentication attacks, PC2 shows a high anomaly rate confirmof NeT to provide an indication of devices affected and anomaing the origin of the attack [see Fig. 8(c)].
lous connections using the node and edge features. Given the
 4) Analysis of Settings Change Attack: Setting changes
superior performance of AE compared to LOF and OCSVM,
 show a high anomaly rate in PC2, confirming the accurate
the subsequent sections utilize AE for all experiments.
 identification of the attack origin [see Fig. 8(d)].
 5) Identification of Targeted Devices: A key observation
C. Node Level from Fig. 8 is the high anomaly ratio for Relays 1 and 2, which
 Node features were used to characterize the behavior of each were the devices targeted by the attacker. This highlights the
device in the network, as described in Section III-C. These effectiveness of the presented approach in detecting the specific
features were used to identify the devices affected in each attack devices under attack.
scenario. As described in Section IV-A, flood and scan attacks 6) Overall Analysis: The experiments in this section showed
were launched by PC1 while failed authentication and setting that our approach was able to recognize which PC launched
MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS 4259

 This is thanks to the graph structure we have embedded in
 our methodology. Concretely, our experiments demonstrated the
 proposed approach has the following main advantages.
 1) Enhance interpretability by incorporating the graph
 structure of computer networks: The equivalence between
 the ML model graph representation and the actual device
 network communication allows experts to effectively use
 the model to obtain detailed information, such as the
 origin of an attack, the devices affected, and the signatures
 of different attack types. This information is important
 for users to identify the root causes of anomalies and
 implement corrective actions. In addition, it provides a
 shared understanding of the problem between humans and
 the ML model, which can serve as a bridge to enhance
 human trust in the ML model outputs.
 2) Provide a hierarchical set of features that enables analysis at different levels of granularity: The approach integrates multiple layers of abstraction, including global,
 node, and edge feature representations. This facilitates
 straightforward backtracking and analysis of model pre-
Fig. 9. Anomalous connections detected with NeT edge features. dictions across different levels of detail.
(a) Flood. (b) Scan. (c) Failed Auth. (d) Setting Change.
 3) Self-supervised training that does not require labeled
 data: Industrial settings produce large volumes of unthe attack in each attack scenario. In addition, Fig. 8 shows a labeled data during normal operation. In most cases, it
high number of anomalies for the RTAC device during failed is unpractical, costly, time-consuming, and sometimes
authentication and setting change. Although the RTAC device impossible to obtain and label abnormal data. Using the
was not targeted by the cyber attacks, the relays communicate presented self-supervised approach, the NeT model can
with the RTAC whenever there is a failed authentication or a be trained using only data from normal operation, without
setting change. This communication used the DNP3 protocol as the need to acquire and label abnormal data.
described in Section IV-A. A key insight from this observation For the experiments, we chose global-level FPR and ADR
is that the presented approach not only identified the attacker metrics to provide a clear and fair comparison across the differand target devices but also captured the broader impacts or side ent anomaly detection algorithms presented. The attacks were
effects of the attack, highlighting its ability to detect indirect executed at a global level only. Therefore, the scope of the
consequences in addition to direct interactions. experimental setup was to identify attacks at a global level. We
 did not provide these metrics at a node and connection level
D. Edge Level because this would require modifying the baseline algorithms we
 use for comparison, which was outside the scope of the presented
 We used NeT Edge features to characterize each connection
 work. The purpose of presenting node-level and connectionbetween devices in the network, as described in Section III-C.
 level anomalous record count in Figs. 8 and 9 was to support our
By running anomaly detection on the edge features, we were
 contribution—Enhanced interpretability by incorporating the
able to identify the connections responsible for an anomaly.
 graph structure of computer networks—demonstrating how NeT
Fig. 9 shows the results of anomalous connections obtained by
 edge and node features were used to extract information about
analyzing the edge features. The figure shows that the presented
 devices and connections involved in each anomalous scenario.
approach was able to identify the connections responsible for
the anomalies.
 1) Analysis on Flood and Scan Attacks: For the flood [see V. CONCLUSION
Fig. 9(a)] and scan scenarios [see Fig. 9(b)], we observed that
 This article presented the NeT, an ML model that uses graph-
NeT successfully reported the anomalous connections between
 based representations to incorporate the structure of a monitored
the attacker (PC1) and the relays.
 computer network. The presented model uses self-supervised
 2) Analysis on Failed Authentication and Setting Change
 learning in order to train the model without the need for labeled
Attacks: For failed authentication [see Fig. 9(c)] and setting
 data. NeT provides an approach to extract a series of hierarchical
change [see Fig. 9(d)], the presented approach was able to
 graph features for down-stream ML analysis. In this article,
identify the anomalous connections, which in this case involved
 we demonstrated the use of the extracted hierarchical features
PC2 and both relays.
 for anomaly detection. NeT successfully identified anomalies
 in an ICS network while being able to report devices affected
E. Overall Analysis and Discussion
 and connections compromised, demonstrating its ability for
 Figs. 7–9 demonstrate how the proposed approach enables enhanced interpretability by facilitating the extraction of more
the extraction of information from multiple abstraction layers. detailed information about the anomalies.
4260 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 The presented approach provided an end-to-end differentiable [14] O. Arreche, T. R. Guntur, J. W. Roberts, and M. Abdallah, “E-XAI:
model for analyzing network packet data, starting from po- Evaluating black-box explainable AI frameworks for network intrusion
 detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 23954–23988, 2024.
tentially raw byte values up to a global representation of the [15] D. Gunning and D. Aha, “DARPA’s explainable artificial intelligence
network graph. Although we used a complex DNN transformer, (XAI) program,” AI Mag., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 44–58, 2019.
the hierarchical design of the approach allows to backtrack [16] R. Dwivedi et al., “Explainable AI (XAI): Core ideas, techniques, and
 solutions,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–33, 2023.
and analyze the predictions of the model in different levels of [17] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should I trust you?
granularity. In the experimental evaluation, we demonstrated Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD
this analysis starting from a global representation followed by Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
 [18] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
an analysis of individual nodes and connections. The presented predictions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, vol. 30,
analysis demonstrates how the graph structure can be exploited pp. 4765–4774. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/7062-ato not only identify anomalies but extract useful information of unified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions.pdf
 [19] D. L. Marino and M. Manic, “Physics enhanced data-driven models with
what devices the anomaly is affecting and which connections are variational Gaussian processes,” IEEE Open J. Ind. Electron. Soc., vol. 2,
responsible for the anomaly. Because the transformer encoder pp. 252–265, 2021.
processes potential raw binary data, the approach can be used as [20] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in
 multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35,
a unified end-to-end methodology for network traffic monitoring no. 5, pp. 4027–4035.
that goes from a global view up to individual bytes. Future work [21] L. Cai et al., “Structural temporal graph neural networks for anomaly
will explore the use of existing explainable algorithms such detection in dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 Manage., 2021, pp. 3747–3756.
as LIME or SHAP to provide explanations at the packet and [22] J. Song, K. Kim, J. Oh, and S. Cho, “Memto: Memory-guided transformer
possibly byte level. for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., vol. 36, pp. 57947–57963, 2024.
 [23] J. Lu et al., “Unified-IO 2: Scaling autoregressive multimodal models with
 REFERENCES vision language audio and action,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, pp. 26439–26455.
 [1] X. Li, C. Xie, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, and H. Yu, “Anomaly detection algo- [24] M. Dehghani et al., “Scaling vision transformers to 22 billion parameters,”
 rithm of industrial Internet of Things data platform based on deep learn- in Proc. 40th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jul. 2023, pp. 7480–7512. [Online].
 ing,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1037–1048, Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/dehghani23a.html
 Sep. 2024. [25] C. Ryali et al., “Hiera: A hierarchical vision transformer without the bells-
 [2] P. Mishra, A. Vidyarthi, and P. Siano, “Guest editorial: Security and privacy and-whistles,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 29441–29454.
 for cloud-assisted Internet of Things (IoT) and smart grid,” IEEE Trans. [26] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv.
 Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 4966–4968, Jul. 2022. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, vol. 30, pp. 6000–6010. [On-
 [3] A. Tabassum, S. Chinthavali, L. Chen, and A. Prakash, “Data mining line]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
 critical infrastructure systems: Models and tools,” IEEE Intell. Infor- 3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
 mat. Bull., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 31–38, Dec. 2018. [Online]. Available: [27] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The
 https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1503981 MVTec anomaly detection dataset: A comprehensive real-world dataset
 [4] J. Zhu, Y. Yuan, F.-Y. Wang, and G. Wang, “Federated control: for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 4,
 A trustable control framework for large-scale cyber-physical sys- pp. 1038–1059, 2021.
 tems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7986–7994, [28] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
 May 2024. autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
 [5] D. L. Marino, C. S. Wickramasinghe, V. K. Singh, J. Gentle, C. Rieger, and Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 665–674.
 M. Manic, “The virtualized cyber-physical testbed for machine learning [29] Y. An, K. Zhang, Y. Chai, Z. Zhu, and Q. Liu, “Gaussian mixture
 anomaly detection: A wind powered grid case study,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, variational-based transformer domain adaptation fault diagnosis method
 pp. 159475–159494, 2021. and its application in bearing fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 [6] B. Vaagensmith et al., “Review of design elements within power vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 615–625, Jan. 2024.
 infrastructure cyber-physical test beds as threat analysis environments,” [30] X. Yang, T. Ye, X. Yuan, W. Zhu, X. Mei, and F. Zhou, “A novel data
 Energies, vol. 14, no. 5, 2021, Art. no. 1409. [Online]. Available: https: augmentation method based on denoising diffusion probabilistic model
 //www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/5/1409 for fault diagnosis under imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 [7] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM enhanced vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7820–7831, May 2024.
 anomaly detection for industrial big data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., [31] Y. Wu, Z. Feng, J. Liang, Q. Liu, and D. Sun, “Fault diagnosis algorithm
 vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021. of beam pumping unit based on transfer learning and DenseNet model,”
 [8] C. S. Wickramasinghe, D. L. Marino, K. Amarasinghe, and M. Manic, Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 21, 2022, Art. no. 11091. [Online]. Available: https:
 “Generalization of deep learning for cyber-physical system security: A //www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/12/21/11091
 survey,” in Proc. IEEE 44th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc., 2018, [32] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J. Mach.
 pp. 745–751. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
 [9] Y. K. Saheed, O. H. Abdulganiyu, and T. A. Tchakoucht, “A novel hybrid [33] V. Marx, “Seeing data as t-SNE and UMAP do,” Nature Methods, vol. 21,
 ensemble learning for anomaly detection in industrial sensor networks pp. 930–933, 2024.
 and SCADA systems for smart city infrastructures,” J. King Saud Univ.- [34] X. Liu, X. Qu, X. Xie, S. Li, Y. Bao, and L. Zhao, “Predicting alloy-
 Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 35, no. 5, 2023, Art. no. 101532. ing element yield in converter steelmaking using t-SNE-WOA-LSTM,”
[10] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on Processes, vol. 12, no. 5, 2024, Art. no. 974. [Online]. Available: https:
 outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, //www.mdpi.com/2227-9717/12/5/974
 no. 3, pp. 1–33, Apr. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/ [35] A. Bibal, V. Delchevalerie, and B. Frénay, “DT-SNE: T-SNE discrete
 3444690 visualizations as decision tree structures,” Neurocomputing, vol. 529,
[11] X. Du, Z. Fang, I. Diakonikolas, and Y. Li, “How does unlabeled data pp. 101–112, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
 provably help out-of-distribution detection?,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. science/article/pii/S0925231223001054
 Learn. Representations, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ [36] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
 forum?id=jlEjB8MVGa Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
[12] D. L. Marino et al., “Cyber and physical anomaly detection in smart-grids,” [37] D. L. Marino, C. S. Wickramasinghe, B. Tsouvalas, C. Rieger, and
 in Proc. Resilience Week (RWS), 2019, vol. 1, pp. 187–193. M. Manic, “Data-driven correlation of cyber and physical anoma-
[13] Z. Zhao, C. Xu, and B. Li, “A LSTM-based anomaly detection model for lies for holistic system health monitoring,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 log analysis,” J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 93, no. 7, pp. 745–751, 2021. pp. 163138–163150, 2021.
MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS 4261

 Daniel L. Marino (Member, IEEE) received the Milos Manic (Fellow, IEEE) received the
 B.Eng. degree in automation engineering from Dipl.Ing. and M.S. degrees in electrical engi-
 La Salle University, Bogotá, Colombia, in 2015 neering and computer science from the Uniand the Ph.D. degree in engineering from Vir- versity of Niš, Niš, Serbia, in 1991 and 1997,
 ginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
 USA, in 2021. science fron the University of Idaho, in 2003.
 He is currently an Applied Scientist with Ama- He is currently a Professor with the Comzon.com, Seattle, WA, USA. He has more than puter Science Department, the Director of VCU
 eight years of research and development ex- Cybersecurity Center, Virginia Commonwealth
 perience, collaborating with U.S. DOE National University, Richmond, VA, USA, and the Di-
 Labs, universities, and industry. He has au- rector of Commonwealth Center for Advanced
thored more than 27 articles in peer reviewed journals and conferences. Computing. He has completed more than 50 research grants in AI/ML
His research interests include stochastic modeling, deep learning, and in cyber and energy and intelligent controls. He authored more than 200
explainable AI with applications in cyber-physical systems, cybersecu- refereed articles, holds several U.S. patents.
rity, energy, and robotics. Dr. Manic was the recipient of the 2018 R&D 100 Award for Autonomic Intelligent Cyber Sensor (AICS). He is an inductee of the
 U.S. National Academy of Inventors (S/M 2023/2019) and a Fellow of
 Commonwealth Cyber Initiative (specialty in AI & Cybersecurity). He
 is an IEEE IES President (2024–2025). He was also a recipient of
 Chathurika S. Wickramasinghe (Member, IEEE IES 2019 Anthony J. Hornfeck Service Award, 2012 J. David Irwin
 IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree in computer Early Career Award, 2017 IEM Best Paper Award, an Associate Editor
 science from the University of Peradeniya, Per- for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, Open Journal of
 adeniya, Sri Lanka, in 2016 and the Doctoral Industrial Electronics Society, and Senior Life AdCom member. He was
 degree in engineering from Virginia Common- Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS,
 wealth University, Richmond, VA, USA, in 2022. was a founding chair of IEEE Industrial Electronics Society Technical
 She is currently a Principle Data Scientist with Committee on Resilience and Security in Industry, and was a general
 Capital One, McLean, VA, USA. Her research chair of IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology 2023,
 interests include machine learning, anomaly de- IEEE International Conference on Human System Interaction 2019, and
 tection, human behavior segmentation, neural IEEE IECON 2018.
 networks, and explainable AI.

 Craig Rieger (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the B.S. and M.S. degrees in chemical engineering from Montana State University, Bozeman,
 MT, USA, in 1983 and 1985, respectively, and
 the Ph.D. degree in engineering and applied
 science from Idaho State University, Pocatello,
 ID, USA, in 2008.
 He is currently the Managing Director and
 Consultant with TRECS Consulting. He was the
 Chief Control Systems Research Engineer and
 a Directorate Fellow with the Idaho National
Laboratory (INL), Idaho Falls, ID, USA, pioneering interdisciplinary research in next-generation resilient control systems. He has also organized and chaired 14 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) technically cosponsored symposia and one National Science
Foundation workshop in this new research area. He has authored more
than 75 peer-reviewed publications. His doctoral coursework and dissertation focused on measurements and control, with specific application to
intelligent, supervisory ventilation controls for critical infrastructure. He
has also been a supervisor and technical lead for control-systems engineering groups having design, configuration management and security
responsibilities for several INL nuclear facilities and various controlsystem architectures.
 Dr. Rieger is a senior member of IEEE with 20 years of software and
hardware-design experience for process control-system upgrades and
new installations.