2170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 Self-Supervised Anomaly Detection
 With Neural Transformations
 Chen Qiu , Marius Kloft , Senior Member, IEEE, Stephan Mandt , Member, IEEE, and Maja Rudolph

 Abstract—Data augmentation plays a critical role in [82] or using representations learned using these views [15] for
self-supervised learning, including anomaly detection. While downstream anomaly detection tasks [74], [75].
hand-crafted transformations such as image rotations can achieve Unfortunately, for data other than images, such as time series,
impressive performance on image data, effective transformations
of non-image data are lacking. In this work, we study learning such tabular data, graphs, or text, it is much less well known which
transformations for end-to-end anomaly detection on arbitrary transformations are useful, and it is hard to design these transfordata. We find that a contrastive loss–which encourages learning mations manually. This paper studies self-supervised anomaly
diverse data transformations while preserving the relevant detection for general data types. We develop Neural Transformasemantic content of the data–is more suitable than previously tion Learning for Anomaly Detection (NeuTraL AD): a simple
proposed losses for transformation learning, a fact that we prove
theoretically and empirically. We demonstrate that anomaly end-to-end procedure for anomaly detection with learnable
detection using neural transformation learning can achieve transformations. Instead of manually designing data transforstate-of-the-art results for time series data, tabular data, text data mations to construct auxiliary prediction tasks that can be used
and graph data. Furthermore, our approach can make image for anomaly detection, we derive a single objective function
anomaly detection more interpretable by learning transformations for jointly learning useful data transformations and anomaly
at different levels of abstraction.
 scoring. As detailed below, the idea is to learn a variety of trans-
 Index Terms—Deep anomaly detection, self-supervised anomaly formations such that the transformed samples share semantic
detection, self-supervised learning, neural transformations. information with their original form while different views are
 easily distinguishable.
 I. INTRODUCTION NeuTraL AD has only two components: a fixed set of learnable transformations and an encoder model. Both elements are
 ANY recent advances in anomaly detection rely on the
M paradigm of data augmentation. In the self-supervised
setting, especially for image data, predefined transformations
 jointly trained on a noise-free Deterministic Contrastive Loss
 (DCL) designed to learn faithful transformations. Our DCL is
 different from other contrastive losses in representation learnsuch as rotations, reflections, and cropping are used to generate ing [8], [15], [28], [50], [56] and image anomaly detection [74],
varying views of the data. This idea has led to strong anomaly [75], all of which use negative samples from a noise distribution.
detectors based on either transformation prediction [25], [31], In contrast, our approach constructs other learnable transformations as negative samples and leads to a non-stochastic objective
 Received 10 January 2024; revised 31 October 2024; accepted 12 December that neither needs any additional regularization nor adversarial
2024. Date of publication 18 December 2024; date of current version 5 February
2025. The work of Stephan Mandt was supported in part by the National Science training [76] and can be directly used as the anomaly score.
Foundation (NSF) under Grant IIS-2047418 and Grant IIS-2007719, in part In Section II we describe NeuTraL AD and DCL, a novel
by NSF LEAP Center, in part by the Department of Energy under Grant DE- objective for learning diverse and semantically meaningful
SC0022331, in part by IARPA WRIVA program, in part by Hasso Plattner
Research Center, UCI, in part by Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, and in part by gifts transformations. We also establish the connections between
from Qualcomm and Disney. The work of Marius Kloft was supported in part by NeuTraL AD and popular alternative deep anomaly detection
Carl-Zeiss Foundation, in part by DFG under Grant KL 2698/2-1 and Grant KL method, specifically deep One-Class Classification (OCC). We
2698/5-1, in part by BMBF under Grant 03-B0770E and Grant 01-S21010C, and
in part by the DFG research unit under Grant 5359 (BU 4042/2-1, KL 2698/6-1, show that NeuTraL AD generalizes deep OCC and has several
and KL 2698/7-1). Recommended for acceptance by Y. Yu. (Corresponding advantages thanks to the learnable transformations.
authors: Chen Qiu; Maja Rudolph.) Our approach leads to a new state-of-the-art in deep anomaly
 Chen Qiu is with the Bosch Center for AI, Pittsburgh, PA 15222 USA (e-mail:
chen.qiu@us.bosch.com). detection. For time series and tabular data, NeuTraL AD signif-
 Marius Kloft is with the Department of Computer Science at RPTU icantly improves the anomaly detection accuracy. For example,
Kaiserslautern-Landau, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany (e-mail: kloft@ on an epilepsy time series dataset, we raised the state-of-the-art
cs.uni-kl.de).
 Stephan Mandt is with the Department of Computer Science and Statistics, from an AUC of 82.6% to 92.6% (+10%). On an arrhyth-
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697 USA (e-mail: mandt@uci.edu). mia tabular dataset, we raised the F1-score by 3.7 percentage
 Maja Rudolph is with the Bosch Center for AI, Pittsburgh, PA 15222 USA, points. In the case of anomaly detection on text, we raised the
and also with the University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706 USA (e-mail:
maja.rudolph@wisc.edu). state-of-the-art (no outlier exposure) from an AUC of 93.4% to
 The code is available at https://github.com/boschresearch/NeuTraL-AD.git. 94.7% (+1.3%) on the Reuters dataset. For graph-level anomaly
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at detection, we raised the bar in terms of AUC by 7.5 percentage
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3519543, provided by the authors.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3519543 points averaged over six datasets from various domains. In terms

 © 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
QIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NEURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 2171

of images, NeuTraL AD generalizes self-supervised anomaly TABLE I
 MAIN NOTATIONS USED IN THE ALGORITHM
detection to image features and achieves comparable results to
the state-of-the-art method.
 We begin by presenting NeuTraL AD in Section II. We then
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method with comprehensive experiments in Section III Finally, we discuss related work
in Section IV and conclude the paper in Section V.
 Our previous work, Qiu et al. [60], introduced NeuTraL AD
for deep anomaly detection beyond images, focusing primarily
on time series and tabular data. In that study, we proposed using
a fixed set of learnable transformations and an encoder model,
jointly trained with a noise-free contrastive loss. The approach
was limited in its application to specific data types and did not
fully explore the potential of the model formulation.
 In this paper, we extend NeuTraL AD in several key ways:
 r Generalized Model Formulation: We broaden the model by
 exploring various similarity functions in the loss, showing
 that deep one-class classification is a special case of our
 framework. The threshold τa is calibrated for the specific application (e.g.,
 r Extension to New Data Modalities: We expand Neuusing a labeled validation set). A data-driven anomaly detec-
 TraL AD to handle images, text, and graphs, demonstrating tion algorithm relies on an unlabeled training dataset D =
 its versatility and effectiveness across different domains. {x1 , . . . , xN } ⊂ X to learn a score function. Here we consider
 r Comprehensive Theoretical and Empirical Analysis: We
 a self-supervised approach.
 provide a detailed analysis of the DCL, including theo- Self-supervised methods typically learn a feature extractor
 retical justification and empirical studies that balance the and representations by solving auxiliary tasks. The tasks are typobjectives of aligning with original data embeddings while ically formulated by defining a training loss. In self-supervised
 encouraging diversity among transformed views. anomaly detection [25], task performance (i.e., the loss function
 r Extensive Experiments and Ablation Studies: We conduct
 used during training) is directly used as the score function. For
 comprehensive experiments and ablation studies that offer example, in Golan and El-Yaniv [25] and Wang et al. [82] image
 deeper insights into the model’s effectiveness and robust- transformations such as rotations, blurring, and cropping are
 ness across various datasets and data types including time applied to input images. The learning task consists of predicting
 series, tabular data, images, text, and graphs. which transformation has been applied given a transformed
 These advancements represent significant contributions be- input image. This task is formalized in a loss function (e.g.,
yond our earlier work, offering a more comprehensive under- cross-entropy of prediction). During training, the loss will destanding and broader applicability of NeuTraL AD. crease on most training examples. Due to the principle of inlier
 priority [82] and assuming that most training examples are
 II. ALGORITHM AND METHODOLOGY normal inliers, training will promote the model to generalize
 We develop neural transformation learning for anomaly detec- better to held-out inliers than anomalies. The loss on a held-out
tion (NeuTraL AD), a deep anomaly detection method based on example can therefore be used as the anomaly score.
contrastive learning for general data types. It is a simple pipeline Our approach also follows the principles of self-supervised
with two components: a set of learnable transformations and a anomaly detection. We next develop the NeuTraL AD training
loss function. The transformations are trained jointly on a DCL. task which defines our approach.
The objective has two purposes. During training, it is optimized
to find the parameters of the transformations. During testing, it is B. Methodology
also used to score each sample as either an inlier or an anomaly.
We now describe our approach in detail. NeuTraL AD learns an anomaly detector which contains
 K + 1 transformations T := {T0 , T1 , . . ., TK }. Each transfor-
A. Preliminaries mation is a parameterized function (e.g., a neural network)
 Tk (·; θk ) : X → Z that maps samples into an embedding space
 The essence of an anomaly detection algorithm is to produce Z. We sometimes drop the parameter dependence for brevity,
a score function s(x) : X → R, which measures the degree of Tk (·; θk ) ≡ Tk (·). These embeddings include one reference
abnormality of each sample in the data space X . The score func- embedding T0 (x) and K transformed embeddings Tk (x) for
tion is used during test time to detect anomalies by evaluating k = 1, . . . , K. We assume that all transformations are learnable,
whether the score is above a threshold τa , i.e., they can be modeled by any parameterized function whose
 
 1, if s(x) ≥ τa meaning x abnormal , parameters θk are accessible to gradient-based optimization. A
 ŷ = (1) schematic of NeuTraL AD is in Fig. 1. Each sample is trans-
 0, otherwise meaning x normal . formed by a set of learnable transformations and then embedded
2172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Fig. 1. NeuTraL AD is an end-to-end procedure for self-supervised anomaly detection with learnable neural transformations Tk (·) : X → Z. Each sample is
transformed by a set of learned transformations and then embedded into a semantic space. The neural transformations are trained jointly on a contrastive objective
(3), which is also used to score anomalies.

into a semantic space such that (1) all transformed embeddings are computed by minimizing (3) on the training samples as
preserve some semantic information about the input sample, ∗
while (2) all transformations remain distinct from another. As θ0,...,K
follows, we motivate NeuTraL AD’s loss function and its usage N 
  K
 h(Tk (xi ), T0 (xi ))
in anomaly scoring. = argmin − log  . (4)
 1) Loss Function: A key ingredient of NeuTraL AD is a θ0,...,K i=1 k=1 Tl ∈T \{Tk } h(Tk (xi ), Tl (xi ))
new loss function that we call “Deterministic Contrastive Loss”
 This training objective leads to neural transformations that pro-
(DCL), explained below. This loss is constructed such as to
 duce diverse views of each sample. Next, we describe how it is
encourage the transformations to learn salient features of the
 used to detect anomalies.
training data (which is assumed to belong to the normal class).
 3) Score Function: One advantage of our approach over
The DCL encourages each transformed embedding to be similar
 other methods is that our loss function is also our anomaly score.
to the reference embedding while encouraging it to be dissimilar
 We define an anomaly score s(x) as
from other transformed embeddings of the same sample. We
define the similarity function of two embeddings a, b ∈ Z as s(x) := l(x). (5)
 h(a, b) = exp(sim(a, b)/τ ), sim(a, b) := a b/ab, (2)T
 By minimizing the DCL (3), we minimize the score for training
where τ denotes a temperature parameter. Unless mentioned examples (inliers). The transformations learn to highlight salient
otherwise, we work with cosine similarity as sim(a, b). By features of the data such that a low loss can be achieved. After
plugging K + 1 transformations and averaging over all data training, samples from the normal class have a low anomaly
samples, DCL is defined using the similarity function h as score, while anomalies are handled less well by the model and
 thus have a high score. The higher the anomaly score, the more
 1 
 N
 likely that a sample is an anomaly. Unlike most other contrastive
 L= l(xi ) with
 N i=1 losses in representation learning [15], [28] and image anomaly
 detection [74], [75], the “negative samples” are not drawn from a
 
 K
 h(Tk (x), T0 (x)) noise distribution (e.g., other samples in the minibatch) but conl(x) := − log  . (3) structed deterministically from x in our loss and score function.
 k=1 Tl ∈T \{Tk } h(Tk (x), Tl (x))
 Dependence on the minibatch for negative samples would need
Intuitively, the term in the nominator pulls the transformed to be accounted for at test time. Drawing negative samples from
embeddings close to the reference embedding. This encourages the test data is biased, and using the training data is infeasible
the transformed embeddings to preserve relevant semantic infor- in practice. In contrast, the deterministic nature of (5) makes it
mation of the reference embedding. The denominator pushes all a simple choice for anomaly detection.
transformed embeddings away from each other, thereby encour- This concludes the proposed method NeuTraL AD, an endaging diverse transformations. We empirically demonstrate that to-end procedure for transformation learning and anomaly dethe DCL manages to balance these two competing objectives tection. The detailed training process and test process of Neuin an ablation in Section III-B4. A detailed explanation on the TraL AD are in Algorithm 1. We stress that it is simple and
trade-off between the loss terms can be found in Appendix A.4, effective without the need of any additional regularization.
available online. Qiu et al. [60] provide several theoretical arguments why
 2) Optimization: The parameters of all transformations NeuTraL AD is better suited for transformation learning than
θ0,...,K are optimized jointly with stochastic gradient descent or alternative loss functions. The theorems in Qiu et al. [60] which
 ∗
its variants (e.g., Adam [38]). The optimal parameters θ0,...,K are included with proofs in Appendix A, available online state
QIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NEURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 2173

 Algorithm 1: Algorithm of NeuTraL AD. After rearranging the loss terms, its connection to deep OCC
 becomes apparent. LMOCC ties together K OCC-type losses and
 a regularization term. Instead of a fixed center c, the one-class
 terms now have datapoint-dependent centers T0 (xi ). There are
 multiple embeddings Tk (xi ) of each data point, and the regularizer log Zk,i prevents all embeddings from being the same.
 For K = 1 and removing log Zk,i (or sending τ → 0), LMOCC
 is equivalent to LOCC when T0 (x) is replaced by a constant,
 independent of xi .
 Discussion. We empirically find that LMOCC is more powerful
 than LOCC (see Section III), which could be explained as follows.
 First, compared to deep OCC, NeuTraL AD learns to extract
 multiple, different features for anomaly detection (as opposed
 to only one feature) by including multiple learnable views. All
 extracted features are enforced to be diverse by the regularization
 term. Second, T0 (x) serves as a datapoint-dependent center.
that optimizing certain existing losses for self-supervised learn- Compared with the fixed center c in LOCC , T0 (x) is more flexible
ing w.r.t. the transformations leads to trivial edge-cases, while since it can be optimized jointly with the other parameters.
these edge-cases are not optimal under the DCL objective. It T0 (x) is also more informative since it preserves instance-level
follows, that the DCL does not produce these trivial edge cases information beyond the common factors of variation in the
and is suited for transformation learning and anomaly detection. dataset at large. Interestingly, the DCL does not couple any data
Next, we describe how it relates to one-class classification. points explicitly, while LOCC couples the data points by pulling
 them to a shared center c. NeuTraL AD seeks to find “intrinsic”
C. Connection to One-Class Classification features within learnable views that characterize the normality of
 One of the most influential deep anomaly detection methods is data. By measuring the similarity of each view/feature with the
deep OCC due to its simplicity and applicability to various types reference embedding T0 (x), NeuTraL AD detects the anomalies.
of data [26], [44], [64]. Below we explore how NeuTraL AD is Next, we present an empirical study on five application doconnected to deep OCC. We show that NeuTraL AD can be mains to show the benefit of NeuTraL AD over state-of-the-art
interpreted as a generalization of deep OCC. We also discuss (deep) anomaly detection methods.
why NeuTraL AD is more powerful and more flexible than deep
OCC.
 The main idea of deep OCC [64] is to use a parametrized III. APPLICATIONS
function (e.g., neural network) T (·) : X → Z to map input data
into a latent space Z. Every input datum xi is mapped as close NeuTraL AD is applicable to many application domains: it can
as possible to the same point c ∈ Z termed “the center”. The be used to detect abnormal time series, it is applicable to anomaly
loss function, also used for scoring anomalies, is detection on tabular data, and it can be applied to graphs. The
 advantages of NeuTraL AD include that it outperforms other
 1 
 N
 deep anomaly detection methods (as our experimental results in
 LOCC := ||T (xi ) − c||22 . (6)
 N i=1 this section will show) and that it does not require hand-crafted
 data augmentation schemes for specialized domains. Since the
The center has to be fixed in advance to avoid a trivial solu- neural transformations are learned together with the other archition [64] and is typically set to the mean of the embeddings tecture components, they automatically lead to an appropriate
obtained by an initial forward pass. data augmentation scheme. In fact, since the transformations do
 We can specialize DCL so that it has a similar form to LOCC . To not need to be hand-crafted, they can even be applied to data
this end, we set the similarity function to the negative squared representations that are not easily accessible to human intuition,
euclidean distance, sim(a, b) := −||a − b||22 . This results in a such as image features that are extracted from an image using
multi-view generalization of deep OCC involving multiple map- a pretrained neural network, or to word embeddings from a
pings Tk (·) : X → Z, language model. This allows us to use NeuTraL AD to also
 τ 
 N K perform anomaly detection on images and on text.
 exp(−||Tk (xi ) − T0 (xi )||22 /τ )
 LMOCC := − log In this section, we present the following applications of Neu-
 N i=1 Zk,i
 k=1 TraL AD:
 1) Section III-B: Time-series anomaly detection. We evaluate
 1 
 N K
 = ||Tk (xi ) − T0 (xi )||22 + τ log Zk,i , NeuTraL AD on identifying whole abnormal sequences.
 N i=1 We find that it can effectively find anomalies in audio
 k=1
  signals, health care signals, as well as motion signals.
 where Zk,i = exp(−||Tk (xi ) − Tl (xi )||22 /τ ). (7) 2) Section III-C: Anomaly detection on visual data. We study
 Tl ∈T \{Tk } NeuTraL AD on raw images and image features.
2174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 3) Section III-D: Anomaly detection on tabular data. We time series but equally important in practice. For example, one
 find that NeuTraL AD is the most effective method for might want to detect abnormal sound or find production quality
 detecting anomalies in four different datasets from the issues by detecting abnormal sensor measurements recorded
 medical and cyber security domains. over the duration of producing a batch. Other applications
 4) Section III-E: Anomaly detection on text. We build Neu- include sports and health monitoring; e.g., finding abnormal
 TraL AD on word embeddings to detect whole abnormal movement patterns during sports can be indicative of fatigue
 sentences in the Reuters dataset. or injury.
 5) Section III-F: Graph-level anomaly detection. We assess We first present the datasets and baselines used to study Neuhow well NeuTraL AD detects whole abnormal graphs in TraL AD. We then present the implementation details and finally
 six datasets from bioinformatics, molecular, and social- describe the empirical results. We find that NeuTraL AD learns
 networks domains. meaningful and diverse transformations and detects anomalous
 For each application, we specify the choice of the neural time series successfully.
transformations Tk (·) and the similarity function sim(a, b) in- 1) Datasets and Baselines. Time Series Datasets: We select
cluded in the DCL. We present an extensive empirical evaluation datasets from various domains. The datasets come from the UEA
in comparison with other successful approaches for anomaly multivariate time series classification archive1 [7]. We evaluate
detection and discuss the results and their implications. NeuTraL AD on them with both one-vs-rest setting and n-vs-rest
 setting.
A. Evaluation Protocol r Spoken Arabic Digits (SAD): Sound of ten Arabic digits,
 spoken by 88 speakers. The samples are stored as 13 Mel
 An anomaly detection method is useful if it is good at de-
 Frequency Cepstral Coefficients. We select sequences with
tecting anomalies in unseen test data. To test this, we follow
 the length between 20 and 50 and get a dataset of 7824
the standard evaluation protocol for anomaly detection in the
 samples. The sequences that are shorter than 50 are zero
literature e.g., [1], [4], [9], [18], [25], [31], [37], [58], [64], [65],
 padded to have the length of 50.
[74], [75], [80]. Since in many domains it is hard to find labeled r Naval Air Training and Operating Procedures Standardtest sets for anomaly detection, a common approach for setting
 ization (NATOPS): The data is from a motion detection
up an evaluation pipeline is to repurpose classification datasets.
 competition of various movement patterns used to control
We consider two such evaluation protocols: the standard ‘one-vsplanes in naval air training. The data has six classes of
rest’ and the more challenging ‘n-vs-rest’ evaluation protocol.
 distinct actions. The dataset has 360 samples, each being
Both settings turn a classification dataset into a quantifiable
 a sequence of x, y, z coordinates for eight body parts of
anomaly detection benchmark.
 length 51.
 a) One-vs-Rest: This evaluation setup has been used in r Character Trajectories (CT): The data consists of 2858
virtually all recent papers on deep anomaly detection published
 character samples from 20 classes. Each instance is a
at top-tier venues e.g., [1], [4], [9], [18], [25], [31], [37], [58],
 3-dimensional pen tip velocity trajectory. The data is trun-
[64], [65], [74], [75], [80]. For ‘one-vs.-rest’, the dataset is split
 cated to the length of the shortest, which is 182.
by the N class labels, creating N one-class classification task, in r Epilepsy (EPSY): The data was generated with healthy
each of which one class is considered normal, and only samples
 participants simulating four different activities: walking,
drawn from this class are used as training data. All other classes
 running, sawing with a saw, and seizure mimicking whilst
are considered abnormal. The test and validation sets contain
 seated. The dataset has 275 samples, each being a 3-
samples from all classes including the normal class. The samples
 dimensional sequence of length 203.
from the other classes should be detected as anomalies. By r Racket Sports (RS): The data is a record of university stuiterating over the classes and changing which class is considered
 dents playing badminton or squash. The data records the x,
normal, we obtain N separate anomaly detection tasks for
 y, z coordinates for both the gyroscope and accelerometer.
evaluation.
 Sport and stroke types separate the data into four classes.
 b) N-vs-rest: An alternative evaluation protocol we also
 The dataset has 303 samples, each being a 6-dimensional
consider follows the insight that it is more realistic in practice
 sequence with a length of 30.
that the “normal distribution” is more diverse than a single
 Time Series Baselines: We study NeuTraL AD in comparison
class (i.e., it is more realistic that it contains multiple classes,
 to unsupervised and self-supervised anomaly detection methods.
Deecke et al. [2], [19]). So we also evaluate methods on the
 They include three anomaly detection baselines: The One-Class
more challenging n-vs.-rest protocol, where n classes (for 1 <
 Support Vector Machine (OCSVM) [48], Isolation Forest (IF)
n < N ) are treated as normal, and the remaining classes provide
 [43], a tree-based model which aims to isolate anomalies, and
the anomalies in the test and validation set. By increasing the
 Local Outlier Factor (LOF) [11], which uses density estimation
variability of what is considered normal data, anomaly detection
 with K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN).
becomes more challenging.

B. Anomaly Detection on Time Series
 1 We selected datasets on which supervised multi-class classification methods
 Our goal is to detect abnormal time series on a whole-sequence achieve strong results [68]. Only datasets with separable classes can be repurlevel. This is a different set-up than anomaly detection within posed for anomaly detection.
QIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NEURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 2175

 Next, we include two deep anomaly detection methods, Deep TABLE II
 AVERAGE AUCS (%) WITH STANDARD DEVIATION FOR ONE-VS-REST
Support Vector Data Description (deep SVDD) [64], which fits ANOMALY DETECTION ON TIME SERIES DATASETS
a one-class classification in the feature space of a neural net,
and Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture Model (DAGMM)
[93], which estimates the density in the latent space of an
autoencoder. We also include two baselines specifically designed for time series data: The RNN-Based Model  (RNN)
directly models the data distribution p(x1:T ) = p(xt |x<t )
and uses the log-likelihood as the anomaly score. LSTM-Based
Encoder-Decoder (LSTM-ED) [47] is an encoder-decoder
time series model where the anomaly score is based on the
reconstruction error.
 Finally, We choose two self-supervised baselines, which are
technically also deep anomaly detection methods, deep support vector data description (deep SVDD) [9] is a distancebased classification method based on random affine transformations. Golan and El-Yaniv [25] is a softmax-based classification
method based on hand-crafted transformations, which show impressive performance on images. We adopt their pipeline to time
series here by crafting specific time series transformations (fixed
Ts). Their implementation details are provided in Appendix A,
available online.
 2) Neural Transformation Learning on Time Series: We consider a dataset of time series x ∈ Rd×l , where d is the data
dimension and l is the time series length. T0 is modeled by
a composition of an identity transformation and an encoder
f . The transformations Tk with k ∈ {1, . . . , K} are modeled Fig. 2. 3D visualizations (projected using PCA) of different views in the data
 space and the embedding space of the encoder. The original samples (blue) from
by composing transformation functions φk with the shared en- the SAD dataset and the different views created by the neural transformations
coder f . We consider two parametrizations of the transformation (one color per transformation type) cluster in the data space [Fig. 2(a) and (c)]
function φk : residual φk (x) := Mk (x) + x with Mk (x) ∈ Rd , and in the embedding space [Fig. 2(b) and (d)]. The crisp separation of the
 different transformations of held-out inliers [Fig. 2(b)] in contrast to the overlap
and multiplicative φk (x) := Mk (x) x with Mk (x) ∈ (0, 1)d . between transformed anomalies [Fig. 2(d)] visualizes how NeuTraL AD is able
Both Mk and the encoder f are modeled by convolutional neural to detect anomalies.
networks. In the embedding space, we define the similarity
function as the cosine similarity sim(a, b) := aT b/ab.
 Implementation Details: Mk is a neural network that consists the value of learning transformations with NeuTraL AD vs using
of one 1d convolutional layer on the bottom, a stack of three hand-crafted transformations. The results confirm that designing
residual blocks of 1d convolutional layers with affine-free in- the transformations only succeeds sometimes, whereas with
stance normalization layers and ReLU activations, as well as NeuTraL AD we can learn the appropriate transformations. The
one 1d convolutional layer on the top. All bias terms in the learned transformations also give NeuTraL AD a competitive
network are fixed as zero. The network of the encoder f consists advantage over the other self-supervised baseline GOAD which
of several residual blocks of 1d convolutional layers with a uses random affine transformations. The performance of the
hidden dimension of 32, as well as one final linear layer to extract traditional anomaly detection baselines hints at the difficulty
the embeddings. The number of residual blocks depends on the of each anomaly detection task; the traditional methods perform
data dimension. Specifically, we use four residual blocks in the well on SAD and CT, but perform worse than the deep learning
encoder for RS, five residual blocks for SAD and NATOPS, based methods on other data.
seven residual blocks for CT and Epilepsy (EPSY). The output What does NeuTraL AD learn? For visualization purposes,
dimensions of the encoders are 32 for SAD, 128 for EPSY, and we train NeuTraL AD with the learnable transformations on
64 for others. On all time series datasets, we set the number of the SAD data. Fig. 2 shows the structure in the data space
transformations K = 11. X and the embedding space of the encoder Z after training.
 3) Empirical Results: The results of NeuTraL AD in com- Held-out data samples (blue) are transformed by each of the
parison to the baselines on time series datasets from various learned transformations with the multiplicative transformation
fields are reported in Table II. NeuTraL AD raises the detection function φk (x) = Mk (x) x to produce K = 4 different views
accuracy in terms of AUC by 7.2% on average. NeuTraL AD of each sample (the transformations are color-coded by the other
outperforms all shallow baselines in all experiments and outper- colors). Projection to three principal components with PCA
forms the deep learning baselines in 4 out of 5 experiments. Only allows for visualization in 3D. In Fig. 2(a) and (c), we can
on the RS data, it is outperformed by transformation prediction see that the transformations already cluster together in the data
with fixed transformations, which we designed to understand space, but with the help of the encoder, the different views of
2176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 TABLE III
 AVERAGE AUCS (%) WITH STANDARD DEVIATION FOR n-VS-REST
 (n = N − 1) ANOMALY DETECTION ON TIME SERIES DATASETS

Fig. 3. Heat maps of four learned masks M1:4 for SAD spectrograms. The
dark horizontal lines indicate where M1 and M2 mask out frequency bands
almost entirely, while the bright spot in the middle left part of M4 indicates that
this mask brings the intermediate frequencies in the first half of the recording
into focus. NeuTraL AD learns dissimilar transformations.

 We include quantitative results for n = N − 1 under the nvs-rest setting for all time series datasets, where only one class
 is considered abnormal, and the remaining N − 1 classes are
 normal. As shown in Table III, NeuTraL AD raises the detection
 AUC by 7.9% on average and outperforms other deep learning
 methods on 4 out of 5 datasets. On RS, it is just outperformed
 by transformation prediction with hand-crafted transformations.
 The traditional method LOF performs better than deep learning
 methods on CT and SAD.
 4) Ablation Study on DCL Loss Terms: We investigate in
 an ablation study how the DCL manages the trade-off between
Fig. 4. AUCs of n-vs-all experiments on time series datasets SAD and
NATOPS with error bars. NeuTraL AD (ours) outperforms all baselines on
 semantics and diversity discussed in Section II-B1 (for a detailed
NATOPS and all deep learning baselines on SAD. LOF, a method based on discussion see also Appendix A.4, available online). This ablak-nearest neighbors, outperforms NeuTraL AD, when n > 3 on SAD. Neu- tion also demonstrates empirically that when it comes to learning
TraL AD is more robust to the variability of inliers than deep learning baselines.
 transformations for anomaly detection, the DCL is better suited
 than the contrastive loss or the classification loss. To study
 the trade-off between semantics and diversity we introduce a
inliers are separated from each other (Fig. 2(b)). In comparison, hyperparameter β to adjust the relative importance of the two
the anomalies and their transformations are less structured in Z terms in the DCL:
(Fig. 2(d)), visually explaining why they incur a higher anomaly
score and can be detected as anomalies. lk (x) = − log h(Tk (x), T0 (x))
 The learned masks M1:4 (x) of one inlier x are visualized 
 + β log h (Tk (x), Tl (x)) .
in Fig. 3. We can see that the four masks are dissimilar from
 Tl ∈T \{Tk }
each other and have learned to focus on different aspects of
the spectrogram. The masks take values between 0 and 1, with In our default DCL (β = 1), the weight between the two obdark areas corresponding to values close to 0 that are zeroed out jectives is balanced. To analyze the effect of this weighting, we
by the masks, while light colors correspond to the areas of the perform an ablation study with β = 0.1 and β = 10. A lower β
spectrogram that are not masked out. Interestingly, in M1 , M2 , (e.g., 0.1) reduces the emphasis on the diversity objective, while
and M3 , we can see ‘black lines’ where they mask out entire a higher β (e.g., 10) reduces the emphasis on aligning with the
frequency bands at least for part of the sequence. In contrast, original data.
M4 has a bright spot in the middle left part of the spectrogram; To evaluate these objectives, we introduce the following metrics:
 r Semantics 1 K h(Tk (x), T0 (x)):2 This score meait creates views that focus on the content of the intermediate
frequencies in the first half of the recording. K k=1
 How do the methods cope with an increased variability of sures how similar the transformed embeddings are to the
inliers? To study this empirically, we increase the number of K data.
 embedding of the original 
 r Diversity 1 1
classes n considered to be inliers. We test all methods on SAD K(K−1) k=1 Tl ∈T \{Tk ,T0 } h(Tk (x),Tl (x)) ,
and NATOPS under the n-vs-rest setting with varying n consec- which measures the dissimilarity between the transformed
utive classes. From Fig. 4 we can observe that the performance embeddings. A higher score indicates greater diversity
of all methods drops as the number of classes included in the among the transformations.
normal data increases. This shows that the increased variance in
 r Semantics × Diversity: a product of semantics and dithe nominal data makes the task more challenging. NeuTraL AD versity scores evaluates the balance between the two
outperforms all baselines on NATOPS and all deep-learning objectives. A high product value indicates that both obbaselines on SAD. It is interesting that LOF, a method based on jectives are well balanced.
KNN, performs better than our method (and all other baselines)
on SAD when n is larger than three. 2 h(·) is the exponential function of the cosine similarity
QIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NEURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 2177

 TABLE IV
 AN ABLATION STUDY COMPARING THE CONTRASTIVE LOSS, THE CLASSIFICATION LOSS, AND THE DCL WITH VARIOUS WEIGHTS BETWEEN THE TWO LOG
 TERMS IN THE LOSS ON LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONS FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

 We fit this loss to the arabic digits in the SAD data. As shown in features obtained from existing pretrained feature extractors. For
Table IV, our default DCL (β = 1) achieves the highest product both variants, we define the similarity function as the cosine simof the semantics and diversity scores, indicating the best balance ilarity sim(a, b) := aT b/ab, set the temperature τ = 0.1.
between these objectives. In contrast, the contrastive loss learns T0 is modeled by a composition of an identity transformation
transformations (with a semantics score of exp(1) = 2.72 and and an encoder f . The transformation Tk with k ∈ {1, . . . , K}
a diversity score of exp(−1) = 0.37) that are perfectly aligned is modeled by a composition of a transformation function φk
with the original data but sacrifices diversity, the classification and the shared encoder f .
loss learns transformations that are diverse but share much less Neural Transformation Learning on Raw Images (NeuTral-I):
relevant information with original data than others. Similarly, the We consider a dataset of images x. The transformation function
DCL (β = 0.1) achieves a higher semantics score but sacrifices is parametrized multiplicatively as φk (x) = x Mk (x), where
diversity, the DCL (β = 10) achieves a higher diversity score Mk (x) is an attention mask (with values between 0 and 1) and
but compromises on semantics. This empirical result aligns the multiplication is applied element-wise. Mk is modeled by
with our theoretical analysis, confirming that the default DCL a residual convolutional neural network with affine-free batch
(β = 1) best balances the objectives of aligning with the original normalization layers and a final sigmoid activation. All bias
data while maintaining diversity among transformed views, terms in the network are fixed as zero. We set the number
ultimately resulting in superior anomaly detection performance. of neural transformations K = 15 for all image datasets. As
 in Bergman and Hoshen [9], we use a ResNet architecture as
C. Anomaly Detection for Image Data the encoder f . Its output dimension is 64, and its parameters
 Anomaly detection on images is important for many machine are learned together with the parameters of the transformation
learning applications and has received a lot of attention in the functions.
last few years. Recent work [10], [63], [74] employs shallow Neural Transformation Learning on Image Features
anomaly detectors (KNN or OCSVM) upon the image features (NeuTral-F): We process images with a pretrained model and
obtained from a pretrained model often achieving better detec- obtain a dataset of image features x as in Bergman et al.
tion accuracy than self-supervised anomaly detection on raw [10]. We consider two parametrizations of the transformation
images. This raises the question of how to apply self-supervised function: forward φk (x) := Mk (x) and multiplicative φk (x) :=
anomaly detection to image features which might lead to an ad- Mk (x) x. Mk (x) is computed by three bias-free linear layers
ditional performance boost. However, applying self-supervised with affine-free batch normalization layers and ReLU activaanomaly detection methods (such as Golan and El-Yaniv [9], tions. A sigmoid activation is applied on the final layer of Mk
[25], [82]) to image features is difficult since all of them rely when using the multiplicative parametrization. We set the numon hand-crafted data augmentations designed for raw images. ber of neural transformations K = 15. The encoder f is modeled
Hand-crafting transformations requires intuition about image by two linear layers with an intermediate ReLU activation. The
invariances (e.g., humans still recognize dogs in rotated images output dimension of the encoder is 256.
of dogs). These intuitions do not readily generalize to image 2) Anomaly Detection Experiments. Anomaly detection
features. In contrast, NeuTraL AD learns transformations and datasets: We study three image datasets, F-MINST, CIFAR-10,
hence requires no intuition, enabling a direct deployment on and CIFAR-100, which are commonly used in prior works e.g.,
image features. [10], [25], [63], [64], [74]. For CIFAR-100, we use 20 super-
 In this Section, we first present how to apply neural trans- class labels in the experiments. On F-MNIST, we study the
formations to raw images and image features. We then show one-vs-rest setting. On the more challenging datasets, CIFAR-10
that when applying NeuTraL AD on image features, we and CIFAR-100, we consider both the one-vs-rest setting and
learn meaningful and semantically diverse transformations and n-vs-rest setting with n = N − 1.
achieve competitive anomaly detection accuracy. We finally Anomaly detection baselines: We compare NeuTraL AD with
compare NeuTraL AD to strong baselines on large-scale out- modern baselines based on different techniques. We include
of-distribution benchmarks. one deep anomaly detection baseline, deep SVDD [64], which
 1) Neural Transformation Learning for Image Data: Neu- learns a compact boundary in the embedding space to detect
TraL AD learns data-dependent transformations automatically. anomalies. As self-supervised baselines, we include Geometric-
Therefore, we can apply neural transformations to raw images or Transformation Classification (GEOM) [25] which designs an
2178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 TABLE V
 AVERAGE AUCS (%) WITH STANDARD DEVIATIONS ON IMAGE DATASETS

auxiliary transformation classification task for anomaly detec- by seeking an image that best matches the source representation, and CSI which relies on contrastive learning. We also tion [46]. From the resulting images shown in the first row
include three baselines, which build anomaly detectors upon of Fig. 5, we can see that the transformations disrupt differimage features. They are Distribution-Augmented Contrastive ent local regions and textures of the image but preserve the
Learning (Contra-DA) [74], which proposed to use traditional global shape of the object. The learned local disruptions preanomaly detectors (e.g., OCSVM) on features from an encoder serve global semantics and vary, thereby satisfying the diversity
pretrained with a contrastive loss, Deep Nearest-Neighbors requirement.
(DN2) [10] using a KNN based detector on features from a Furthermore, we analyze the semantic information contained
ResNet pretrained on ImageNet, and a state-of-the-art method in the transformed features by checking the class prediction of
PANDA [63], which improves over DN2 by finetuning the a downstream classifier trained on the raw features and ground
pretrained ResNet. truth class labels. In the second row of Fig. 5 we can see that the
 Empirical results: The results on image datasets with the predictions given transformed features (blue) perfectly match
one-vs-rest setting are reported in Table V, where the results of the predictions given the raw features (orange).3 This confirms
baselines are taken from the original papers. When neural trans- the claim that the learned transformations manipulate the image
formations are applied to raw images, NeuTraL-I performs better without changing the global semantics as encoded by the class
than deep SVDD but worse than GEOM using hand-crafted label.
transformations. It turns out that learning good transformations How do the methods cope with an increased variability
from the noisy raw images is still hard, and the learned trans- of inliers? To study this, we consider the n-vs-rest setting
formations are not competitive with transformations selected by with n = N − 1. As shown in Table VII, NeuTraL-F (with
human experts. One reason for the poor performance on raw im- forward parametrization of the transformations) outperforms
ages could be the learned transformations affect mostly low-level baselines on CIFAR-10 but performs worse than DN2 on
features and do not interact with higher-level semantic features, CIFAR-100. This is consistent with the results on time seas would be desired for a strong self-supervision task. This ries in Table III, where the KNN-based methods (DN2 in vimotivates applying NeuTraL AD to pretrained image features. sion and LOF in sequences) have an advantage in anomaly
 NeuTraL-F outperforms DN2 that uses the same pretrained detection when the normal distribution contains multiple
feature extractor, and all baselines that have no access to a modes.
feature extractor pretrained on ImageNet. PANDA outperforms 3) Out-of-Distribution (OOD) Experiments. OOD datasets:
NeuTraL-F using the same pretrained feature extractor but also We follow the experiment setup of Li et al. [40] and test the
requires a careful finetuning of the large ResNet model and methods on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet-30. When
has a risk of performance degradation caused by catastrophic assuming CIFAR-10 is in distribution, we consider CIFAR-100,
forgetting [63]. Additional stronger results of NeuTraL-F using SVHN, and LSUN as OOD datasets. For CIFAR-100, OOD
the other pretrained feature extractor are provided in Appendix samples are from CIFAR-10, SVHN, and LSUN. For ImageNet-
B, available online. Moreover, using PANDA at test-time is 30, OOD samples are from Stanford Dogs, Places365, Oxford
expensive; the KNN-based detection is slower than the forward- Flowers, Oxford Pets, Food101, Caltech256, and Describable
pass of the other methods in Table V and it requires storing Textures Dataset (DTD).
the training data for test time. Our method achieves the highest OOD baselines: We compare NeuTraL AD with four recent
performance among all methods that do not suffer from this strong OOD baselines. They are three contrastive learning-based
drawback. When using PANDA with a more efficient distance methods including SupContrast [35], CSI [75], SSD+ [71], and
for detection, the results will be 2% lower (e.g., CIFAR-10: from MOOD [40] which uses representations from a masked image
96.2% to 94.2%) [63] and then outperformed by NeuTraL-F model pretrained and finetuned on ImageNet.
(95.3%). It is very hard even for human experts to design good Empirical rqesults: We evaluate NeuTraL-F for OOD detransformations on the feature vectors, while NeuTraL AD can tection following the setup in Li et al. [40] and report the
learn them from data automatically. NeuTraL AD offers a con- results in Table VI. NeuTraL-F is equipped with the image
venient way to do self-supervised learning on the image features features from the finetuned masked image modeling models in
to utilize the powerful existing pretrained models continuously MOOD [40]. As shown in Table VI, NeuTraL-F improves over
being developed and improved by the community. the SOTA baseline MOOD on both CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100.
 What do the transformed features look like?
 For an interpretable visualization of the transformed features
learned by NeuTraL-F, we invert them back to the image space 3 The transformed features have not been used to train the classifier.
QIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NEURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 2179

Fig. 5. Visualization and semantics checking examples from CIFAR-10. By inverting the original and transformed image features, we visualize the features in
the image space in the first row. In the second row, we plot their class prediction results from a downstream classifier. The transformed features are diverse and still
preserve the semantic information.

 TABLE VI
 AUCS (%) FOR MULTI-CLASS OOD DETECTION ON CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, IMAGENET-30

 TABLE VII work [9], [93] and follow their choice of datasets as well as
 AVERAGE AUCS (%) WITH STANDARD DEVIATIONS ON CIFAR-10 AND
 CIFAR-100 UNDER n-VS-REST SETTING WITH n = N − 1
 their precedent of reporting results in terms of F1-scores. The
 datasets include the small-scale medical datasets Arrhythmia
 and Thyroid as well as the large-scale cyber intrusion detection datasets KDD and KDDRev. We follow the configuration
 of Bergman and Hoshen [9] to train all models on half of the
 normal data and test on the rest of the normal data as well as
NeuTraL-F also achieves decent and comparable results on the the anomalies.
large-scale ImageNet-30 benchmark. r Arrhythmia: A cardiology dataset from the UCI repository
 contains 274 continuous and 5 categorical attributes.
D. Anomaly Detection on Tabular Data r Thyroid: A medical dataset from the UCI repository con-
 Tabular data is another important application area of anomaly tains attributes related to hyperthyroid diagnosis.
detection. For example, many types of health data come in
 r KDD: KDDCUP99 10 percent dataset from the UCI repostabular form. To unleash the power of self-supervised anomaly itory contains 34 continuous and 7 categorical attributes.
detection for these domains, Bergman and Hoshen [9] suggest
 r KDDRev: It is derived from the KDDCUP99 10 percent
using random affine transformation. Here we study the benefit of dataset. The non-attack samples are considered normal,
learning the transformations on tabular data with NeuTraL AD. and attack samples are considered abnormal.
In this Section, we first present the datasets and baselines we On these 4 datasets we use the same preprocessing steps
use. We then present specific architecture choices and imple- as Bergman and Hoshen [9].
mentation details and finally describe the empirical results. We Tabular Baselines: We compare NeuTraL AD to shallow
find that NeuTraL AD raises the detection accuracy by 2.9% on anomaly detection baselines, including OCSVM [48], IF [43],
average in terms of F1-score. and LOF [11], and to the deep anomaly detection methods deep
 1) Datasets and Baselines: Tabular Datasets. We base our SVDD [64], DAGMM [93], GOAD [9], and Deep Robust Oneempirical study of tabular anomaly detection on previous Class Classification (DROCC) [26]. The results of OCSVM,
2180 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 TABLE VIII anomalous content on the web. Here we present NeuTraL AD
F1-SCORES (%) WITH STANDARD DEVIATION FOR ANOMALY DETECTION ON
TABULAR DATASETS (CHOICE OF F1-SCORE CONSISTENT WITH PRIOR WORK)
 for text and compare it with recent approaches for sentence-level
 anomaly detection.
 NeuTraL AD on text uses a pre-trained language model to
 preprocess the text. To create different views of each sentence,
 neural transformations are then applied to the list of word
 embeddings comprising each sentence. Below, we describe how
 the individual word embeddings are transformed and how an
 attention mechanism is used to aggregate word embeddings
 to create the different views of each sentence needed for the
 NeuTraL AD loss.
LOF, DAGMM, and GOAD are from Bergman and Hoshen [9]. 1) Datasets and Baselines. Text Datasets: We study Neu-
We obtained the results for deep SVDD and DROCC using the TraL AD on the Reuters-21578 dataset, which is commonly
code with the respective publications. used in previous text anomaly detection work [34], [48], [66].
 2) Neural Transformation Learning on Tabular Data: We We used the same pre-processing as in Ruff et al. [66], including
consider a dataset of tabular data x ∈ Rd . T0 is modeled by lowercasing, removing stopwords, and tokenization. As in Ruff
a composition of an identity transformation and an encoder f . et al. [66], we select seven classes that have exactly one label.
The transformations Tk with k ∈ {1, . . . , K} are modeled by a They are earn, acq, crude, trade, money-fx, interest, and ship.
composition of a transformation function φk and the shared en- We evaluate NeuTraL AD on them with the one-vs-rest setting.
coder f . We consider two parametrizations of the transformation Text Baselines: The text anomaly detection baselines include
function φk : residual φk (x) := Mk (x) + x with Mk (x) ∈ Rd , deep SVDD [64], which aim to encompass normal data within
and multiplicative φk (x) := Mk (x) x with Mk (x) ∈ (0, 1)d . a hypersphere in the embedding space, and Multi-Modal Deep
Mk and the encoder f are both modeled by feed-forward neural Support Vector Data Description (mSVDD) [34] which extends
networks. In the embedding space, we define the similarity the idea of deep SVDD to multiple hyperspheres. Further,
function as the cosine similarity sim(a, b) := aT b/ab. the baselines include Deep Multi-Sphere Support Vector Data
 Implementation Details: The neural network of Mk consists Description (DMSVDD) [23], a hard version of mSVDD, and
of two bias-free linear layers with an intermediate ReLU acti- Context Vector Data Description (CVDD) [66], which augments
vation. When using the multiplicative parametrization, it has deep SVDD for text with multiple attention heads to reflect that
a sigmoid activation on the final layer. We use the residual there are multiple normal semantic contexts for each word. All
parametrization for the neural transformations on Thyroid and baselines are built upon the same word embeddings. Specifically,
Arrhythmia, and use the multiplicative parametrization on KD- all embeddings are extracted using GloVe 6B [57].
DCUP, and KDDCUP-Rev. The neural network of the encoder 2) Neural Transformation Learning on Text: NeuTraL AD
f consists of five bias-free linear layers with ReLU activations. on text uses a pretrained language model to preprocess the text.
The output dimensions of the encoder are 24 for Thyroid and To create different views of each sentence, neural transforma-
32 for the other datasets. We set the number of neural trans- tions are then applied to the list of word embeddings comprising
formations K = 11 and the temperature τ = 0.1 on all tabular each sentence. Below, we describe how the individual word
datasets. embeddings are transformed and how an attention mechanism
 3) Empirical Results: In line with prior work, we use the is used afterwards to aggregate the word embeddings to create
averaged F1-score (%) with standard deviation as the evalua- the different views of each sentence needed for its loss.
tion metric and report the results in Table VIII. The results of As in previous work [23], [34], [66], we preprocess the data
OCSVM, LOF, DAGMM, and GOAD are taken from [9]. For with a language model such that each sentence x is represented
deep SVDD and DROCC, we run their official implementations by a sequence of word embeddings x = [e1 , . . . , el ] ∈ Rd×l .
and report the results. NeuTraL AD outperforms all baselines The length l of the sentences is variable from sentence to
on all tabular datasets. In particular, NeuTraL AD raises the sentence. T0 is modeled by a composition of an identity trans-
F1-score on Arrhythmia by 3.7% and on Thyroid by 2.4%. formation and an encoder f . The transformation Tk with k ∈
Compared with the self-supervised baseline GOAD with random {1, . . . , K} is modeled by a composition of a transformation
affine transformations, the neural transformations learned from function φk and the shared encoder f . The transformation funcdata lead to better detection accuracy. In addition, we find that tion φk is applied to the individual word embeddings, producing
NeuTraL AD needs fewer transformations than GOAD. On the the transformed embeddings,
medical datasets, for example, GOAD uses 256 transforma- xk = φk (x) = Mk (x) x,
tions, while NeuTraL AD achieves superior performance with
only 11 transformations. where Mk is a feed-forward neural network with a final sigmoid
 activation. It is applied to each embedding in the sentence separately, i.e., Mk (x) = [Mk (e1 ), . . . , Mk (el )] ∈ (0, 1)d×l . After
E. Anomaly Detection on Text
 element-wise multiplication with the word embeddings, we have
 There are many beneficial applications of anomaly detection the transformed embedding xk = [Mk (e1 ) e1 , . . . , Mk (el )
on text such as detecting spam emails, fake tweets, or other el ] ∈ Rd×l . The embeddings are aggregated using attention
QIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NEURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 2181

 TABLE IX In a financial network, for example, with nodes representing
 AVERAGE AUCS (%) WITH STANDARD DEVIATIONS ON REUTERS DATASETS
 individuals, businesses, and banks and the edges representing
 transactions, it might be difficult to detect all criminal activity by
 looking at individual nodes and edges. By using tools for graphlevel anomaly detection, we might be able to detect an entire
 criminal network rather than suspicious individual entities. In
 alternative healthcare applications, one might be interested in
 detecting novel (anomalous) molecules whose atoms and bonds
 are nodes and edges in the molecular graphs. Thus, while every
 atom may be known, the molecule might be novel as a whole.
 TABLE X This, and many other applications, can profit from automated
 EXAMPLE OF WORDS WITH LARGE ATTENTION WEIGHTS FOR EACH CLASS methods for detecting abnormal graphs.
 For applying self-supervised methods to graph-level anomaly
 detection, good graph transformations are required. You et
 al. [87] observe that different graph datasets require different
 transformation types. For example, edge perturbation benefits
 representation learning on social networks but hurts the quality of representations of molecules learned from biochemical
 graph data. Here NeuTraL AD has a conceptual advantage; the
A(x) ∈ (0, 1)l and are then encoded. In summary,
 appropriate transformations are directly learned from the data.
 f (xk ) = g(xk A(x)) We demonstrate that this advantage makes neural transfor-
     mation learning a useful tool for graph-level anomaly detecwith A(x) = sigmoid tanh xT W1 W2 , (8) tion, significantly outperforming existing methods. We use it
where W1 and W1 are learnable weights, and g is a feed- to analyze graphs from various important domains, including
forward neural network that maps the aggregated embeddings bioinformatics, molecular data, and social networks.
to a low dimensional embedding space.4 In this embedding 1) Datasets and Baselines. Graph Datasets: We study Neuspace, we define the similarity function as the cosine similarity TraL AD on six graph classification datasets that are representasim(a, b) := aT b/ab. tive of three domains. They are two bioinformatics datasets: DD
 Implementation Details: For Mk we use a neural network of and PROTEINS, two molecular datasets: NCI1 and AIDS, and
three bias-free linear layers of units [300,300,300] with ReLU two datasets of social networks: IMDB-BINARY and REDDITactivations and affine-free batch normalization layers and a BINARY. In IMDB-BINARY, node attributes are derived by
sigmoid activation on the top. W1 and W1 have the shapes encoding the degree of each node in a one-hot vector. In
of [300,300] and [300,1]. For g we use a neural network of REDDIT-BINARY, node attributes are set to a constant. All
three bias-free linear layers of units [300,100,100] with ReLU datasets are made available by Morris et al. [51].
activations. We set the number of transformations K = 10 and Following the one-vs-rest evaluation setup, we create N
the temperature τ = 0.1. experimental variants for each dataset (N is the number of
 3) Empirical Results: The anomaly detection results in terms classes). We use 10-fold cross-validation to estimate the model
of average AUC (%) with standard deviation are reported in performance. In each fold, 10% of the training set is held-out
Table IX. NeuTraL AD achieves the best detection accuracy for validation. Results are reported in terms of average AUC
on 6 of 7 experimental variants. On average, NeuTraL AD (%) with standard deviation averaged over 10 folds and over all
outperforms all baselines by at least 1.3% in terms of AUC. experimental variants.
In Table X, we record the three most relevant words (in terms of In addition, all methods are evaluated in terms of their
highest attention weight A(x)) for each class. We can see that the susceptibility to performance flip. Zhao and Akoglu [90] coined
attention mechanism of NeuTraL AD learns to highlight words the term “performance flip” for anomaly detection benchmarks
with similar semantic content. derived from binary classification datasets. An effective graphlevel anomaly detection method should not suffer from the
F. Graph-Level Anomaly Detection performance flip issue.
 Definition 1. (Performance flip [90]:) A model suffers from
 Graphs offer a powerful representation for many types of performance flip on an anomaly detection benchmark derived
structured data, including chemical processes, molecules, finan- from a classification dataset if it performs worse than random
cial or social networks. There is much work focused on the task on at least one experimental variant.
of detecting anomalous nodes and edges within a graph [5]. Graph Baselines: To build a comprehensive benchmark for
However, in many applications, it is much more relevant to ask graph-level anomaly detection, we include both graph Neural
whether an entire graph is abnormal. Network (GNN)-based methods and non-GNN-based methods
 as baselines. Two GNN-based baselines are One-Class Graph
 4 For the untransformed x, (8) becomes f (x) = g(xA(x)). Isomorphism Network (OCGIN) [90], extending the idea of deep
2182 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 TABLE XI
 AVERAGE AUCS (%) WITH STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR GRAPH-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION ON SIX DATASETS FROM THREE DOMAINS

SVDD to graph-level anomaly detection, and Graph Transfor- 3) Empirical Results: The anomaly detection results in terms
mation Prediction (GTP), a self-supervised detection baseline of average AUC (%) with standard deviation are reported in
proposed by us based on graph transformation prediction (see Table XI. We can see that NeuTraL AD outperforms all baselines
details in Appendix B, available online). on all datasets and raises the detection accuracy in terms of
 Four non-GNN-based methods are two-stage detection meth- AUC by 7.5% on average. NeuTraL AD improves over the
ods using different feature extractors and a downstream OCSVM previous deep method OCGIN, which is an extension of deep
[48] for anomaly detection. Two of them use unsupervised SVDD on graph-level anomaly detection, by 15.4% on avergraph embedding methods, Graph-to-Vector (Graph2Vec) [52] age. We can empirically conclude that NeuTraL AD is more
or Family of Graph Spectral Distances (FGSD) [79], to extract sensitive to anomalies than OCGIN since it extracts features
graph-level representations. The other two make use of graph from different views. The results with performance flip are
kernels (Weisfeiler-Leman Subtree Kernel (WLK) [73] or Prop- marked with a ∗ (it is preferable for a method not to suffer
agation Kernel (PK) [53]), which measure the similarity between from performance flip). We can see that all baselines suffer
graphs. Details are in Appendix B, available online. from the performance flip issue, while NeuTraL AD is the only
 2) Neural Transformation Learning on Graphs: We consider model without performance flip on any of the datasets. We
a dataset of attributed graphs x. For graph data, the neural provide the detailed results on both experimental variants of
transformations Tk are parameterized by GNNs. Each neural bioinformatic and molecular datasets in Appendix C, available
transformation Tk is an individual GNN, which transforms the online.
graph and maps it to the embedding space.
 Since graphs have varying sizes, the number of nodes can be
an informative feature for distinguishing graphs and detecting IV. RELATED WORK
abnormal ones. By using an appropriate GNN architecture for Here we relate NeuTraL AD to existing work in deep anomaly
the neural transformations, we can introduce a correlation be- detection, self-supervised learning, and the more specific contween the norm of embeddings and graph size. To ensure that this trastive representation learning.
information is not lost, we use the negative euclidean distance Deep Anomaly Detection: Recently, there has been a rapidly
as the similarity function sim(a, b) := −a − b2 for the DCL.5 growing interest in developing deep-learning approaches for
The resulting multi-view deep OCC loss (7) is a special case anomaly detection [67]. While deep learning—by removing the
of the DCL. In Section II-C, we discuss how it is related to burden of manual feature engineering for complex problems—
deep OCC. The results reported support the arguments that our has brought about tremendous technological advances, its apmethod is more informative and more flexible than deep OCC. plication to anomaly detection is rather recent. Related work on
 Implementation Details: We use Graph Isomorphism Net- deep anomaly detection includes deep autoencoder variants [16],
works (GINs) [85] as Tk to extract graph-level representations. [59], [91], deep OCC [22], [65], [66], multi-sphere OCC [23],
The network has 4 GIN layers, each of which includes two [34], [66], [84], deep generative models [18], [69], and outlier
bias-free linear layers with an intermediate ReLU activation. exposure [30], [39], [61].
On datasets from molecular and social-networks domains, graph Self-supervised anomaly detection has led to drastic improvenormalization [12] is applied after each GIN layer. A readout ments in detection accuracy [25], [31], [74], [75], [82]. For
function modeled by two bias-free linear layers with an interme- images, Golan and El-Yaniv [25] and and Wang et al. [82]
diate ReLU activation and an add pooling layer is applied on each augment images and learn to predict which transformation has
layer to get the graph-level representation on each hierarchical been applied. After training, the resulting classifier is used
level. As in Xu et al. [86], the final graph-level representation for anomaly detection. An alternative approach is to train a
of dimension 128 is obtained by concatenating all layer-wise model with a contrastive loss to tell if two views are of the
graph-level representations. None of the transformations use same original image. This leads to strong representations [15],
biases, except the network T0 , which adds a trainable bias term which can be used for anomaly detection [74], [75]. For time
to the final graph-level representations. On all graph datasets, series anomaly detection, Zhou et al. [36], [81], [92] combine
we set the number of transformations K = 5. autoencoder-based methods or deep OCC with contrastive learning based on hand-crafted data augmentations. Following the
 5 The cosine similarity only considers angles between embeddings, thereby work of Qiu et al. [60], several recent studies [13], [14], [54],
ignoring the information encoded in their norm. [70] integrate contrastive learning with neural transformations
QIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NEURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 2183

on times series. In the domain of tabular anomaly detection, V. CONCLUSION
Bergman and Hoshen [9] design an auxiliary classification tasks
 We propose NeuTraL AD, a self-supervised anomaly detecusing random affine transformations, while ICL [72], a contem- tion method with learnable transformations. The key ingredient
poraneous work of NeuTraL AD, proposes contrasting two comis a novel training objective based on a DCL, which encourages
plementary subsets of the tabular data. For graph-level anomaly
 the learned transformations to be diverse and semantically meandetection, Luo et al. [45] employ contrastive learning with two ingful. This unleashes the power of self-supervised anomaly
perturbed graph encoders, while Ai et al. [3] design two types
 detection to various data types. We show that NeuTraL AD genof topology augmentations for graph-level contrastive learning.
 eralizes deep OCC, leading to a more powerful and more flexible
Unlike all prior works, NeuTraL AD learns transformations that anomaly detection method thanks to the learnable transformaare effective for self-supervised anomaly detection on various
 tions. Our extensive empirical study finds that NeuTraL AD as
data types. a unified anomaly detection method improves over many strong
 Self-Supervised Learning: Self-supervised learning typically baselines on various non-image data types, including time series,
relies on data augmentation for auxiliary tasks [20], [24],
 tabular data, text data, and graphs, and achieves competitive
[49], [55], [88]. The networks trained on these auxiliary tasks results on images.
(e.g., patch prediction [20], solving jigsaw-puzzles [55], crosschannel prediction [88], or rotation prediction [24]) are used
as feature extractors for downstream tasks. While many of these ACKNOWLEDGMENT
methods are developed for images, Misra et al. [49] propose tem- The Bosch Group is carbon neutral. Administration, manuporal order verification as an auxiliary task for self-supervised facturing and research activities do no longer leave a carbon
learning of time series representations. footprint. This also includes GPU clusters on which the experi-
 Contrastive Representation Learning: Many recent self- ments have been performed.
supervised methods have relied on the InfoMax principle [32],
[42]. These methods are trained on the task to maximize the Mu- REFERENCES
tual Information (MI) between the data and their context [56] or
 [1] D. Abati, A. Porrello, S. Calderara, and R. Cucchiara, “Latent space
between different “views” of the data [6]. Computing the mutual autoregression for novelty detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
information in these settings is often intractable, and various Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 481–490.
approximation schemes and bounds have been introduced [78]. [2] F. Ahmed and A. Courville, “Detecting semantic anomalies,” in Proc.
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 3154–3162.
By using noise contrastive estimation [27], [28] to bound MI, [3] X. Ai et al., “Graph anomaly detection at group level: A topology pattern
Oord et al. [56] bridge the gap between contrastive losses for enhanced unsupervised approach,” 2023, arXiv:2308.01063.
MI-based representation learning and the use of contrastive [4] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly: Semisupervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. Asian
losses in discriminative methods for representation learning [6], Conf. Comput. Vis., Springer, 2018, pp. 622–637.
[15], [21], [29], [50]. We also use a contrastive loss. But while [5] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection
the contrastive loss of Chen et al. [15] (which is used for anomaly and description: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 290, no. 3,
 pp. 626–688, 2015.
detection of images in Sohn et al. [74], [75],) contrast two [6] P. Bachman, R. D. Hjelm, and W. Buchwalter, “Learning representaviews of the same sample with views of other samples in the tions by maximizing mutual information across views,” 2019, arXiv:
minibatch, NeuTraL AD is tasked with determining the original 1906.00910.
 [7] A. Bagnall et al., “The UEA multivariate time series classification archive,”
version of a sample from different views of the same sample. 2018, arXiv: 1811.00075.
The dependence on only a single sample is advantageous for [8] R. Bamler and S. Mandt, “Extreme classification via adversarial softmax
scoring anomalies at test time and enables us to learn the data approximation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020.
 [9] L. Bergman and Y. Hoshen, “Classification-based anomaly detection for
transformations. general data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020.
 Learning Data Augmentation Schemes: The idea of learning [10] L. Bergman, N. Cohen, and Y. Hoshen, “Deep nearest neighbor anomaly
data augmentation schemes is not new. “AutoAugmentation” detection,” 2020, arXiv: 2002.10445.
 [11] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LoF: Identifying
has usually relied on composing hand-crafted data augmenta- density-based local outliers,” in Proc. 2000 ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf.
tions [17], [33], [41], [62], [89]. Tran et al. [77] learn Bayesian Manage. Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
augmentation schemes for neural networks, and Wong and [12] T. Cai, S. Luo, K. Xu, D. He, T.-Y. Liu, and L. Wang, “GraphNorm:
 A principled approach to accelerating graph neural network training,” in
Kolter [83] learn perturbation sets for adversarial robustness. Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 1204–1215.
Though their setting and approach are different, our work is [13] J. Chen, M. Feng, and T. S. Wirjanto, “Harnessing contrastive learning
most closely related to Tamkin et al. [76], who study how to and neural transformation for time series anomaly detection,” Available at
 SSRN 4757427, 2024.
generate views for representation learning in the framework [14] K. Chen, M. Feng, and T. S. Wirjanto, “Time-series anomaly detection via
of Chen et al. [15]. They parametrize their “viewmakers” as contextual discriminative contrastive learning,” 2023, arXiv:2304.07898.
residual perturbations, which are trained adversarially to avoid [15] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
trivial solutions where the views share no semantic information Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
with the original sample. [16] X. Chen and E. Konukoglu, “Unsupervised detection of lesions in brain
 NeuTraL AD falls into the area of deep, self-supervised MRI using constrained adversarial auto-encoders,” in Proc. MIDL Conf.
 Book, 2018.
anomaly detection, with the core novelty of learning the trans- [17] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, D. Mane, V. Vasudevan, and Q. V. Le, “AutoAugformations so that we can effectively use them for anomaly ment: Learning augmentation strategies from data,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
detection on general data types. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 113–123.
2184 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

[18] L. Deecke, R. Vandermeulen, L. Ruff, S. Mandt, and M. Kloft, “Image [44] P. Liznerski, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, B. J. Franks, M. Kloft, and K.
 anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Joint R. Muller, “Explainable deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, Springer, 2018, Learn. Representations, 2020.
 pp. 3–17. [45] X. Luo et al., “Deep graph level anomaly detection with contrastive
[19] L. Deecke, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, and H. Bilen, “Transfer-based learning,” Sci. Rep., vol. 120, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 19867.
 semantic anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, [46] A. Mahendran and A. Vedaldi, “Understanding deep image representations
 pp. 2546–2558. by inverting them,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
[20] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. A. Efros, “Unsupervised visual represen- 2015, pp. 5188–5196.
 tation learning by context prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. [47] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G.
 Vis., 2015, pp. 1422–1430. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detec-
[21] A. Dosovitskiy, P. Fischer, J. T. Springenberg, M. Riedmiller, and T. Brox, tion,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148.
 “Discriminative unsupervised feature learning with exemplar convolu- [48] L. M. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class SVMs for document classifitional neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 380, cation,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 20, pp. 139–154, 2001.
 no. 9, pp. 1734–1747, Sep., 2016. [49] I. Misra, C. L. Zitnick, and M. Hebert, “Shuffle and learn: Unsupervised
[22] S. M. Erfani, S. Rajasegarar, S. Karunasekera, and C. Leckie, “High- learning using temporal order verification,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
 dimensional and large-scale anomaly detection using a linear one-class Vis., Springer, 2016, pp. 527–544.
 SVM with deep learning,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 58, pp. 121–134, 2016. [50] A. Mnih and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Learning word embeddings efficiently
[23] Z. Ghafoori and C. Leckie, “Deep multi-sphere support vector data descrip- with noise-contrastive estimation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 tion,” in Proc. 2020 SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 109–117. 2013, pp. 2265–2273.
[24] S. Gidaris, P. Singh, and N. Komodakis, “Unsupervised representation [51] C. Morris, N. M. Kriege, F. Bause, K. Kersting, P. Mutzel, and M.
 learning by predicting image rotations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Repre- Neumann, “Tudataset: A collection of benchmark datasets for learning
 sentations, 2018. with graphs,” in Proc. Workshop Graph Representation Learn. Beyond,
[25] I. Golan and R. El-Yaniv, “Deep anomaly detection using geometric trans- 2020. URL www.graphlearning.io
 formations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 9758–9769. [52] A. Narayanan, M. Chandramohan, R. Venkatesan, L. Chen, Y. Liu, and
[26] S. Goyal, A. Raghunathan, M. Jain, H. V. Simhadri, and P. Jain, “DROCC: S. Jaiswal, “graph2vec: Learning distributed representations of graphs,”
 Deep robust one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, arXiv: 1707.05005.
 2020, pp. 3711–3721. [53] M. Neumann, R. Garnett, C. Bauckhage, and K. Kersting, “Propagation
[27] M. Gutmann and A. Hyvärinen, “Noise-contrastive estimation: A new Kernels: Efficient graph Kernels from propagated information,” Mach.
 estimation principle for unnormalized statistical models,” in Proc. 13th Learn., vol. 1020, no. 2, pp. 209–245, 2016.
 Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2010, pp. 297–304. [54] H. C. V. Ngu and K. M. Lee, “CL-TAD: A contrastive-learning-based
[28] M. U. Gutmann and A. Hyvärinen, “Noise-contrastive estimation of unnor- method for time series anomaly detection,” Appl. Sci., vol. 130, no. 21,
 malized statistical models, with applications to natural image statistics,” 2023, Art. no. 11938.
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 130, no. 2, pp. 307–361 2012. [55] M. Noroozi and P. Favaro, “Unsupervised learning of visual represen-
[29] R. Hadsell, S. Chopra, and Y. LeCun, “Dimensionality reduction by tations by solving jigsaw puzzles,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 learning an invariant mapping,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Springer, 2016, pp. 69–84.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2006, pp. 1735–1742. [56] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
[30] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, and T. Dietterich, “Deep anomaly detec- contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv: 1807.03748.
 tion with outlier exposure,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, [57] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors for
 2018. word representation,” in Proc. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.,
[31] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, S. Kadavath, and D. Song, “Using self- 2014, pp. 1532–1543. URL http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D14-1162
 supervised learning can improve model robustness and uncertainty,” in [58] P. Perera, R. Nallapati, and B. Xiang, “OCGAN: One-class nov-
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 15663–15674. elty detection using GANs with constrained latent representa-
[32] R. D. Hjelm et al., “Learning deep representations by mutual information tions,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
 estimation and maximization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, pp. 2898–2906.
 2018. [59] E. Principi, F. Vesperini, S. Squartini, and F. Piazza, “Acoustic novelty
[33] D. Ho, E. Liang, X. Chen, I. Stoica, and P. Abbeel, “Population based detection with adversarial autoencoders,” in Proc. 2017 Int. Joint Conf.
 augmentation: Efficient learning of augmentation policy schedules,” in Neural Netw., 2017, pp. 3324–3330.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 2731–2741. [60] C. Qiu, T. Pfrommer, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Neural
[34] C. Hu, Y. Feng, H. Kamigaito, H. Takamura, and M. Okumura, “One-class transformation learning for deep anomaly detection beyond images,” in
 text classification with multi-modal deep support vector data description,” Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8703–8714.
 in Proc. 16th Conf. Eur. Chapter Assoc. Comput., 2021, pp. 3378–3390. [61] C. Qiu, A. Li, M. Kloft, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Latent outlier
[35] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural exposure for anomaly detection with contaminated data,” in Proc. Int.
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 18661–18673. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 18153–18167.
[36] H. Kim, S. Kim, S. Min, and B. Lee, “Contrastive time-series anomaly [62] A. J. Ratner, H. R. Ehrenberg, Z. Hussain, J. Dunnmon, and C. Ré, “Learndetection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 5053–5065, ing to compose domain-specific transformations for data augmentation,”
 Oct. 2024. in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 3239–3249.
[37] K. H. Kim et al., “RaPP: Novelty detection with reconstruction along [63] T. Reiss, N. Cohen, L. Bergman, and Y. Hoshen, “Panda: Adaptprojection pathway,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019. ing pretrained features for anomaly detection and segmentation,”
[38] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021,
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2015. pp. 2806–2814.
[39] A. Li, C. Qiu, M. Kloft, P. Smyth, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Deep [64] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 anomaly detection under labeling budget constraints,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
 Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 19882–19910. [65] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
[40] J. Li, P. Chen, Z. He, S. Yu, S. Liu, and J. Jia, “Rethinking out-of- Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019.
 distribution (OOD) detection: Masked image modeling is all you need,” in [66] L. Ruff, Y. Zemlyanskiy, R. Vandermeulen, T. Schnake, and M. Kloft,
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 11578– “Self-attentive, multi-context one-class classification for unsupervised
 11589. anomaly detection on text,” in Proc. 57th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
[41] S. Lim, I. Kim, T. Kim, C. Kim, and S. Kim, “Fast autoaugment,” in Linguistics, 2019, pp. 4061–4071.
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, [67] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly detection,”
 pp. 6665–6675. in Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021.
[42] R. Linsker, “Self-organization in a perceptual network,” Computer, [68] A. P. Ruiz, M. Flynn, J. Large, M. Middlehurst, and A. Bagnall, “The great
 vol. 210, no. 3, pp. 105–117 1988. multivariate time series classification bake off: A review and experimental
[43] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE evaluation of recent algorithmic advances,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov.,
 Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422. vol. 35, pp. 1–49, 2020.
QIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NEURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 2185

[69] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and G. Langs, Chen Qiu received the master’s degree in electri-
 “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks to cal engineering from the University of Erlangen–
 guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process. Med. Imag., 2017, Nuremberg and the PhD degree in computer science
 pp. 146–157. from RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau, Germany, where
[70] T. Schneider et al., “Detecting anomalies within time series using local he was supervised by Marius Kloft. He is a research
 neural transformations,” 2022, arXiv:2202.03944. scientist with Bosch Research, USA, where he devel-
[71] V. Sehwag, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal, “SSD: A unified framework for self- ops machine learning and deep learning models for
 supervised outlier detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, autonomous intelligent systems. His research focuses
 2020. on anomaly detection, generative models, and prompt
[72] T. Shenkar and L. Wolf, “Anomaly detection for tabular data with internal learning for foundation models. Additionally, he was
 contrastive learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022. co-advised by Stephan Mandt and Maja Rudolph
[73] N. Shervashidze, P. Schweitzer, E. J. Van Leeuwen, K. Mehlhorn, and K. during his tenure as a researcher with Bosch Research, Germany.
 M. Borgwardt, “Weisfeiler-Lehman graph Kernels,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
 vol. 120, no. 9, pp. 2539–2561, 2011. Marius Kloft (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
[74] K. Sohn, C.-L. Li, J. Yoon, M. Jin, and T. Pfister, “Learning and evaluating master’s degree in mathematics from the University
 representations for deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. of Marburg with a thesis in algebraic geometry, in
 Representations, 2021. 2006. He is a professor of computer science with
[75] J. Tack, S. Mo, J. Jeong, and J. Shin, “CSI: Novelty detection via contrastive RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau, Germany. Previously,
 learning on distributionally shifted instances,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural he was an adjunct faculty member of the University of
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 11839–11852. Southern California (09/2018-03/2019), an assistant
[76] A. Tamkin, M. Wu, and N. Goodman, “Viewmaker networks: Learning professor with HU Berlin (2014-2017) and a joint
 views for unsupervised representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. postdoctoral fellow (2012-2014) with the Courant
 Representations, 2021. Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Memorial
[77] T. Tran, T. Pham, G. Carneiro, L. Palmer, and I. Reid, “A Bayesian data Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, working
 augmentation approach for learning deep models,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. with Mehryar Mohri, Corinna Cortes, and Gunnar Rätsch. From 2007-2011,
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 2794–2803. he was a PhD student in the machine learning program of TU Berlin, headed
[78] M. Tschannen, J. Djolonga, P. K. Rubenstein, S. Gelly, and M. Lucic, “On by Klaus-Robert Müller. He was co-advised by Gilles Blanchard and Peter L.
 mutual information maximization for representation learning,” in Proc. Bartlett, whose learning theory group with UC Berkeley he visited from 10/2009
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019. to 10/2010.
[79] S. Verma and Z.-L. Zhang, “Hunt for the unique, stable, sparse and fast
 feature learning on graphs,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., 2017, pp. 87–97. Stephan Mandt (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
[80] J. Wang, S. Sun, and Y. Yu, “Multivariate triangular quantile maps degree in theoretical physics from the University of
 for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, Cologne, where he received the German National
 pp. 5060–5071. Merit Scholarship. He is an associate professor of
[81] R. Wang et al., “Deep contrastive one-class time series anomaly detection,” computer science and statistics with the University of
 in Proc. 2023 SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2023, pp. 694–702. California, Irvine. His research centers on deep gen-
[82] S. Wang et al., “Effective end-to-end unsupervised outlier detection via erative modeling, uncertainty quantification, neural
 inlier priority of discriminative network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. data compression, and AI for science. Previously, he
 Syst., 2019, pp. 5962–5975. led the machine learning group with Disney Research
[83] E. Wong and J. Z. Kolter, “Learning perturbation sets for robust machine in Pittsburgh and Los Angeles and held postdoctoral
 learning,” 2020, arXiv: 2007.08450. positions with Princeton and Columbia University. He
[84] Y. Xiao et al., “Multi-sphere support vector data description for outliers is furthermore a recipient of the NSF CAREER Award, the UCI ICS Mid-Career
 detection on multi-distribution data,” in Proc. 2009 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Excellence in Research Award, the German Research Foundation’s Mercator
 Mining Workshops, 2009, pp. 82–87. Fellowship, a Kavli Fellow of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, a member
[85] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph neural of the ELLIS Society, and a former visiting Researcher with Google Brain. His
 networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2018. research is currently supported by NSF, DARPA, IARPA, DOE, Disney, Intel,
[86] K. Xu, C. Li, Y. Tian, T. Sonobe, K.-I. Kawarabayashi, and S. Jegelka, and Qualcomm. Dr, Mandt is an action editor of the Journal of Machine Learning
 “Representation learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks,” Research and Transaction on Machine Learning Research, held tutorials with
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 5453–5462. NeurIPS, AAAI, and UAI, and regularly serves as (Senior) area chair for
[87] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive NeurIPS, ICML, AAAI, and ICLR. He currently serves as program chair for
 learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., AISTATS 2024 and general chair for AISTATS 2025.
 2020, pp. 5812–5823.
[88] R. Zhang, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Split-brain autoencoders: Unsuper- Maja Rudolph received the BS degree in mathevised learning by cross-channel prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. matics from MIT and the PhD degree in computer
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 1058–1067. science from Columbia University, where she worked
[89] X. Zhang, Q. Wang, J. Zhang, and Z. Zhong, “Adversarial autoaugment,” with David Blei. She is a research professor with the
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019. Data Science Institute of the University of Wisconsin-
[90] L. Zhao and L. Akoglu, “On using classification datasets to evaluate graph Madison, where she works in the areas of probabilistic
 outlier detection: Peculiar observations and new insights,” Big Data, Mary machine learning and generative AI. In addition to
 Ann Liebert, Inc., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 151–180, 2023. her academic, Dr. Rudolph is a lead research scien-
[91] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep tist at Bosch, where she addresses machine learning
 autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. research questions derived from engineering applica-
 Data Mining, 2017, pp. 665–674. tions, and has contributed to the fields of anomaly
[92] H. Zhou, K. Yu, X. Zhang, G. Wu, and A. Yazidi, “Contrastive autoencoder detection and hybrid modeling.
 for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” Inf. Sci., vol. 610,
 pp. 266–280, 2022.
[93] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 2018.