IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 3, MARCH 2025 2161

 Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation From
 Videos via Adaptive Reconstruction Constraints
 Xinchen Ye , Member, IEEE, Yuxiang Ou, Biao Wu, Rui Xu , Member, IEEE, and Haojie Li

 Abstract— To estimate depth maps from monocular videos in such as virtual reality [1], scene reconstruction [2] and
a self-supervised way, existing methods simultaneously predict autonomous driving [3]. Despite the success of supervised
the pose changes between adjacent frames and the depth maps methods [4], [5], [6], they are hindered by the need of
of each frame, and then reconstruct the forward or backward
frames using them, thereby casting depth estimation as a frame time-consuming and labor-intensive ground truth annotareconstruction problem. The corresponding reconstruction loss, tion. As an alternative, existing video-based self-supervised
which serves as a key supervision signal for training the whole methods [7], [8], [9] casts depth estimation as a frame
network, can adversely affect the depth estimation accuracy if it reconstruction problem. They simultaneously predict the pose
is not properly established. In this paper, we propose a novel self- changes between two adjacent frames (called source frame and
supervised monocular depth estimation method from videos via
adaptive reconstruction constraints, i.e., designing the loss func- target frame respectively) and the depth map of target frame,
tions by establishing more accurate reconstruction constraints. and then reconstruct the source frame on the target view using
Specifically, we first propose a pose-adaptive reconstruction the predicted pose and depth information. The photometric
loss to adaptively select the optimal pose parameterizations reconstruction loss, which measures the consistency between
that yield the minimum reconstruction errors, reducing the the reconstructed frame and the original target frame, serves as
impact of inaccurate posture on frame reconstruction. Then,
we propose a region-sensitive reconstruction loss that fully a key supervision for evaluating the quality of depth estimation
utilizes the pretrained image reconstruction model to adaptively and guiding the training of the whole network. However,
identify the poorly reconstructed regions and characterize the when this loss is not effectively established, it can potentially
deviation of these regions on feature space. Finally, we addi- lead to detrimental effects and hinder the accuracy of depth
tionally construct a multi-frame depth estimation network and estimation.
design a reconstruction-guided bidirectional distillation loss to
adaptively adjust the direction of distillation between networks Therefore, some current methods focus on improving
of multi-frame and monocular depth estimation based on their the reconstruction loss from the following aspects: 1) uticurrent reconstruction quality, which encourages them to learn lizing feature-level reconstruction loss [10], [11] which
from each other and benefits the core task of monocular leverages image features extracted from an additional predepth estimation. With our proposed losses, we achieve superior
 trained image reconstruction auto-encoder model to strengthen
performance in comparison with state-of-the-art methods on
benchmark datasets. the pixel fidelity in textureless areas; 2) identifying and
 excluding occluded areas using masking [12], [13], [14],
 Index Terms— Unsupervised, depth estimation, monocular,
adaptive reconstruction, video.
 or employing minimum reprojection of adjacent frames [7] to
 mitigate the photometric inconsistencies caused by occlusions;
 3) developing regularization for brightness [15], [16], [17] to
 I. I NTRODUCTION address illumination inconsistencies between adjacent frames.
 By modifying the reconstruction loss, the above methods can

M ONOCULAR depth estimation is a fundamental
 and critical computer vision task that estimates the
pixel-wise depth information from 2D images. Results from
 improve the accuracy of depth estimation to some extent,
 but many problems are still ignored when designing the
 reconstruction loss.
accurate depth estimation can facilitate various applications First, based on our observations of real-world driving scenarios, vehicles (or cameras) predominantly travel in straight
 Received 16 August 2024; revised 10 October 2024; accepted 2 November
2024. Date of publication 6 November 2024; date of current version 7 March
 trajectories, with turns occurring primarily at lane changes
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science or intersections. This observation is further corroborated by
Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62376053, Grant 61976038, and an analysis of the KITTI dataset, as depicted in Figure 1,
Grant 61932020. This article was recommended by Associate Editor S. He.
(Corresponding author: Haojie Li.)
 which highlights the imbalanced nature of rotation and trans-
 Xinchen Ye, Yuxiang Ou, Biao Wu, and Rui Xu are with the DUT-RU lation in real-world scenarios, making it difficult for previous
International School of Information Science and Engineering, Dalian Uni- methods to simultaneously focus on the estimation of both
versity of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China, and also with the
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning
 rotation and translation in the pose network. It is worth
Province, Dalian 116024, China. noting that rotation is highly non-linear and often more dif-
 Haojie Li is with the College of Computer Science and Engineering, ficult to estimate than translation. As a result, this limitation
Shandong University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266590, China
(e-mail: hjli@sdust.edu.cn).
 has a significant negative impact on the reconstruction loss,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3492201 which in turn affects the performance of depth estimation.
 1051-8215 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2162 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 reconstruction. Instead of directly outputting a single 6-DoF
 pose vector, we propose to decompose the pose network
 into three parallel branches, each dedicated to independently
 estimating pure translation, pure rotation and full 6-DoF pose
 components. Upon this, we adaptively select the optimal pose
 parameterizations that yield the minimum reconstruction errors
 to establish the reconstruction loss, which can efficiently
 utilize the complementary information provided by differ-
Fig. 1. Statistical results on the KITTI odometry dataset [19] consisting of ent pose estimators. Second, we propose a region-sensitive
11 sequences. We use the ground truth poses to analyze the rotation between reconstruction loss that fully utilizes the pretrained image
consecutive frames. To facilitate the interpretation, we convert the rotation
matrices to Euler angles and examine the relative rotation angles to investigate
 reconstruction auto-encoder model to adaptively identify the
the proportion of the rotations that exceed a certain angle threshold. The table poorly reconstructed regions on feature space. We first apply
specifically shows the percentages of rotation angles exceeding 0.5◦ , 0.75◦ , the warping and reconstruction selection on source frame to
1◦ , and 1.25◦ in sequences 01, 03, and 05 (left), and the overall trajectory
plot for sequence 08 (right).
 obtain a reconstructed frame, then form the loss by computing
 the difference between features of both reconstructed and
 target frames extracted from the pretrained model. Thus, the
Second, although the feature-level reconstruction loss [11] can model can easily recognize the poorly reconstructed regions in
explicitly constrain each pixel to be discriminative in feature the reconstructed frame as an anomaly, and provide significant
space, it does not fully exploit the capability of the pretrained deviated features than those of target frame, forcing the netimage reconstruction auto-encoder model to emphasize on work to optimize these regions by back-propagating a greater
the feature inconsistency caused by poor frame reconstruction loss caused by feature inconsistency. Finally, we additionally
in self-supervised depth estimation. From the perspective of construct a multi-frame depth estimation network as a teacher
anomaly detection [18], the auto-encoder model pretrained and design a reconstruction-guided bidirectional distillation
on original target frames can obviously reconstruct a target loss to adaptively adjust the direction of distillation between
frame better than an abnormal frame.1 Thus, introducing such networks of multi-frame and monocular depth estimation
reconstruction deviations from the pretrained auto-encoder based on their current reconstruction quality. This encourages
model into the loss design can better identify the poorly them to learn from each other in an iterative collaborative
reconstructed regions in the abnormal frame and properly training and benefits the core task of monocular depth estimaguide the training of the depth estimation network. tion.
 In addition, the monocular depth estimation network only Through designing reasonable loss functions and imposacquires limited information because of the single-frame input, ing more accurate reconstruction constraints into the losses,
which fails to fully exploit temporal information from adja- our method achieves superior performance of self-supervised
cent frames. Recent methods [20], [21], [22] have attempted monocular depth estimation in comparison with state-of-theto address this issue by constructing a teacher network to art methods on benchmark datasets. Besides, our improvement
take more associative data (e.g., stereo images) as input focuses on the loss design and is suitable for assembly on
to infer depth maps. The teacher provides more accurate any backbone network, which would not increase the runtime
depth information to effectively transfer knowledge to the of depth estimation during testing. To summarize, our main
monocular depth estimation network (student) through uni- contributions are listed as follows:
 • We propose a pose-adaptive reconstruction loss to adapdirectional distillation. However, these methods ignore the
 tively select the optimal pose parameterizations that yield
fact that the teacher also has errors in depth estimation and
 the minimum reconstruction errors to establish the reconis even less accurate than student in some areas. Note that,
 struction loss, reducing the impact of inaccurate posture
monocular depth estimation relies mainly on the understanding
 on frame reconstruction.
of appearance and semantic knowledge within features, which
 • We propose a region-sensitive reconstruction loss that
can better handle occluded regions and avoid unreliable depth
 fully utilizes the pretrained image reconstruction model
estimation issues that often arise in multi-view (temporal or
 to adaptively identify the poorly reconstructed regions as
stereo) depth estimation. Therefore, it is necessary to design
 anomaly and characterize the feature deviation of these
mutual learning strategies to promote learning from respective
 regions on feature space.
strengths (multi-view vs. monocular) and ultimately facilitate
 • We propose a reconstruction-guided bidirectional distillathe task of monocular depth estimation.
 tion loss to adaptively adjust the direction of distillation
 To address the aforementioned problems, our core idea is
 based on the reconstruction quality, encouraging both
to design the loss functions by establishing more accurate
 networks of multi-frame and monocular depth estimation
adaptive reconstruction constraints, thus properly guiding
 to learn from each other.
the training of monocular depth estimation. As shown in
Fig. 2, we first propose a pose-adaptive reconstruction loss II. R ELATED W ORKS
to mitigate the impact of inaccurate pose estimation on frame
 A. Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
 1 In our scenario, an abnormal frame refer to the source frame synthesized We divide self-supervised depth estimation methods into
on the target view using inaccurate estimation of pose and depth information. two categories according to the supervisory signal. The first
YE et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED MONOCULAR DEPTH ESTIMATION FROM VIDEOS 2163

Fig. 2. Overview of our whole framework for self-supervised monocular depth estimation. Given a target frame and its adjacent source frame from a video,
the goal is to predict a depth map from the target frame by a trainable backbone network. We highlight our contributions of three loss functions with different
color rectangles. Through proper guidance of the proposed losses, the backbone network can be well trained.

category uses monocular sequences exclusively, while the recursive estimation and adaptive refinement to get more
second category uses additional auxiliary information such as precise depth inference from stereo pairs, and then condensed
stereo images, stereo videos, or semantics. the depth information into a monocular network. Further, many
 For the first category, SfM learner [23] first jointly learned methods [7], [27], [28] employed stereo videos for training,
monocular depth and ego-motion from monocular videos in which combines monocular sequence with stereo data as selfa self-supervised way. However, such techniques still struggle supervision signals. Besides, some works utilize semantic
with inferior depth estimation results when comparing with information to help depth estimation. Jung et al. [29] proposed
supervised methods because the photometric loss that plays a metric learning method that makes use of semantics-guided
a crucial role in the entire training process fails to establish local geometry to optimize intermediate depth representations.
effectively in cases such as occlusion and textureless areas. Li et al. [30] proposed a semantic-aware spatial feature mod-
Numerous works are therefore suggested to address these ulation scheme to relate depth distributions to the semantic
limitations. Monodepth2 [7] leveraged masks to eliminate category information.
relatively static pixels and manages occlusion issues with In this paper, we focus on the task of video-based monocminimal reprojection of adjacent frames. In order to estab- ular depth estimation that uses only monocular sequences as
lish effective supervision on textureless regions, feature-level supervision. Compared with stereo images/videos, monocular
reconstruction loss [10], [11] is applied to strengthen the pixel sequences are easier to obtain and apply in practical situations.
fidelity in textureless areas. Besides, some works also focus However, methods based on monocular sequences need to
on the improvement of network architecture. For example, bridge the relationship between adjacent frames by addition-
Bae et al. [24] proposed a CNN-Transformer hybrid network ally estimating the camera ego-motion, which makes the task
with multi-level feature aggregation to complement the shape of depth estimation more difficult. Therefore, part of our work
bias and spatial locality bias to improve the performance and focuses on designing reasonable pose decomposition network
generalization of depth estimation. and pose-adaptive reconstruction loss to mitigate the impact
 For the second category, Garg et al. [25] first proposed to of inaccurate pose estimation on depth estimation.
estimate stereo correspondences by minimizing a photometric
loss between the left input image and the warped right image. B. Anomaly Detection
Godard et al. [26] used consistency between the left and Anomaly detection establishes on the fundamental assumpright views as a new constraint for training, reconstructing tion that anomalous regions cannot be accurately reconstructed
both the left and right views and calculating consistency to as they deviate from the learned normal patterns in training
produce more accurate predictions. Ye et al. [20] utilized samples. These methods leverage generative models [31] to
2164 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

establish pixel-level anomaly scores based on the pixel-wise ps in the source view of Is by:
reconstruction error. Alternative approaches [18] address
 ps ∼ K Pt→s Dt ( pt )K −1 pt (1)
anomaly detection as an inpainting problem, where patches
from images are randomly masked and then predicted through where ∼ represents the homogeneous equivalence. With
the network. Thus, the pixel-wise reconstruction error can Eq.(1), we can recover the target frame It from Is by:
be computed as anomaly scores. Besides, embedding-based
anomaly detection methods [32], [33] mainly project features Iˆt = Is W(Dt , Pt→s , K ) , (2)
into a compressed space and measure the distance between where · is a differentiable bilinear interpolation [38] and
embedding vectors of normal training images and test exam- W(·, ·, ·) is the warping operation corresponding to Eq. (1).
ples. Among these methods, pre-trained deep neural networks Following [7], the training loss is the photometric reconare commonly used for feature extraction. struction errors between the target frame It and the recon-
 Inspired by the embedding-based anomaly detection, structed frame Iˆt . based on the L1 and SSIM metrics, which
we propose a region-sensitive feature-level reconstruction loss is defined as:
that fully utilizes an image reconstruction model pretrained  
only on normal frames to identify the poorly reconstructed 1 − SSIM Iˆt , It
regions in abnormal frames and characterize the feature devi- L p ( Iˆt , It ) = α + (1 − α) Iˆt − It , (3)
 2
ation of these regions on feature space.
 where α is set to 0.85. Also, a smoothness loss [7] is added
 to encourage the predicted depth map to be smooth, which is
C. Knowledge Distillation computed as follows:
 Knowledge distillation, which is first proposed in [34] for L s = |∂x Dt | e−|∂x It | + ∂ y Dt e−|∂ y It | (4)
condensing a large network into a smaller model, has garnered
various interests recently [35]. Extensive works of monocu- Besides, we employ the minimum photometric error, autolar depth estimation also utilize the distillation technique to masking and multi-scale depth loss techniques introduced
transfer knowledge from a sophisticated teacher network to a in [7] to reduce the negative impact of occlusion and stationary
naive student network [20], [21], [36], [37]. Pilzer et al. [21] objects, thus further improving the performance of baseline.
distilled the reconstruction difference between the original and
re-synthesized input images to the student network through the B. Network Architecture
computation of cycle inconsistency. Liu et al. [36] trained a Our framework is based on the above self-supervised
stereo depth estimation network (teacher) to generate pseudo paradigm which contains a backbone monocular depth estidepth labels, then leverage the generated labels as supervision mation network φd and a pose network φ p . Upon this,
to distill more accurate depth information into the monocular we novelly design three loss functions by establishing adaptive
network (student). Ye et al. [20] developed the recursive stereo reconstruction constraints, thus properly guiding the training
distillation method to iteratively transfer depth information of whole network. Specifically, as shown in Fig.2, we first
from a stereo network to a monocular network. Different propose a pose-adaptive reconstruction loss to mitigate the
from [20] and [36], Petrovai and Nedevschi [37] constructed impact of inaccurate pose estimation on frame reconstruction.
their teacher network by taking three consecutive frames as Instead of directly outputting a single 6-DoF pose vector,
input instead of stereo images. we introduce a pose decomposition network to independently
 In general, teacher networks take more useful information as estimate pure translation and pure rotation, together with the
input (e.g., cycle inconsistency, stereo image, temporal frames) 6-DoF pose vector. Through warping, we obtain a set of
and generate more accurate results than those of students reconstructed frames based on different poses and adaptively
that takes only single image as input. Through distillation, select an optimal one corresponding to the minimum reconperformances of monocular depth estimation can be obviously struction errors from the reconstructed frames through the
improved. However, the above methods ignore the fact that reconstruction selection module. Upon this, the photometric
the teacher also has errors in depth estimation. Upon this, reconstruction loss L p can be established by computing the
we design a bidirectional distillation loss to promote mutual difference between the target frame and the selected frame.
learning from respective strengths of both networks and ulti- Second, we propose a region-sensitive reconstruction loss
mately facilitate the task of monocular depth estimation. that fully utilizes the pretrained encoder of an image reconstruction model to adaptively identify the poorly reconstructed
 III. M ETHODS regions on feature space. We send the selected frame and
 the target frame into the encoder to extract their respective
A. Preliminaries feature maps and form the loss by computing the difference
 Given a target frame It and its adjacent source frame between them. Note that, the encoder pretrained on original
Is ∈ {It−1 , It+1 } from a video, the goal is to predict a depth frames can provide significant deviated features of poorly
map Dt from It by a trainable network φd . Let K be the reconstructed regions (regarded as anomaly) in reconstructed
known camera intrinsic matrix and Pt→s be the relative pose frames compared to those of target (original) frames, forcing
between It and Is obtained by a trainable pose network φ p , the network to optimize these regions by back-propagating a
each point pt in It can be warped into the corresponding pixel greater loss caused by feature inconsistency.
YE et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED MONOCULAR DEPTH ESTIMATION FROM VIDEOS 2165

 TABLE I D. Region-Sensitive Reconstruction Loss
 L IST OF S YMBOLS AND N OTATIONS
 In [11], the authors proposed to utilize feature-level reconstruction loss to strengthen the pixel fidelity and discriminant
 in textureless areas on feature space. However, they just
 leverage the pretrained image reconstruction model (shown
 in Fig. 2) as a feature extractor, but ignore the potential
 capabilities of the model to identify the poorly reconstructed
 frames as anomaly, which motivate us to go a step further.
 Unlike [11] that directly extracts features of original source
 and target frames from the pretrained model and then applies
 warping operation to align source features to the target view
 for the convenience of per-pixel loss computation, we invert
 the entire process. That is, we first apply the pipeline of
 Finally, we additionally construct a teacher depth estimation warping and reconstruction selection on source frame and
 ∗
network with adjacent multiple frames as input, which enables then extract features of both the selected frame Iˆti and
the network to better model the temporal information. Upon the target frames It from the pretrained model. Since the
this, we design a reconstruction-guided bidirectional distil- model is trained on normal original frames, it cannot easily
lation loss to adaptively adjust the direction of distillation reconstruct the abnormal regions (caused by wrong depth
 ∗
between the student and teacher networks. Once obtaining information in the warping) in Iˆti and provide significant
the selected frames from reconstruction selection of both deviated features than those of target frame It . Upon this,
networks, we compute the distillation direction mask by com- we obtain our region-sensitive reconstruction loss, which is
paring their reconstruction qualities through the reconstruction defined as follows:
evaluation module and adaptively steer the distillation direc- ∗
 L r = φe ( Iˆti ) − φe (It ) (6)
tion, which can encourage both networks to learn from each 1
other in an iterative collaborative training and benefits the where φe is the pretrained encoder of an image reconstruction
student. The symbols and notations used are summarized in model that is obtained similar to the way introduced in [11].
Table I.
 E. Reconstruction-Guided Bidirectional Distillation Loss
C. Pose Decomposition & Pose-Adaptive Reconstruction Loss The teacher network has the same architecture with the
 To accurately predict the pose transformation, we design student network except for its input that contains the target
a pose decomposition network, which contains three parallel frame and two adjacent source frames {It−1 , It , It+1 }, which
branches to independently predict pure translation Tt→s ∈ can better capture the geometric structure of the scene and
T(3), pure rotation Rt→s ∈ SO(3) and full 6-DoF pose Pt→s ∈ help train the student. However, it is important to note that in
SE(3). According to Eq.(1) and Eq.(2), we generate a set scenarios with occlusions and moving objects, depth estimaof reconstructed frames { Iˆti , i ∈ (T(3), SO(3), SE(3), T(3) + tion results from the teacher are often unreliable. Therefore,
SO(3))} by considering four pose transformation cases, i.e., the key idea to promote collaborative learning between both
Tt→s , Rt→s , Pt→s and the combined pose Tt→s + Rt→s . networks is to ensure that only relatively accurate knowledge
 Then, in the reconstruction selection module, we subtract Iˆti is distilled from the teacher to the student, and vice versa,
from the target frame Iˆt and generate reconstruction errors for which motivate us to design the bidirectional distillation loss.
each Iˆti through the photometric reconstruction loss L ip ( Iˆti , It ) Specifically, assume that we frozen the teacher network and
shown in Eq.(3). By comparing these error values and selecting train the student network in the current training stage, we can
the one with the minimum reconstruction error, we obtain the obtain respective reconstructed frames Iˆttea , Iˆtstu and their
 corresponding photometric reconstruction errors L tea p , Lp
 stu
optimal pose parameterizations:
 2
 from the reconstruction selection module. According to the
 i ∗ = arg min L ip (5) pixel-wise comparison between L tea p and L p , a mask τ is
 stu
 i
 generated to determine whether the depth information of each
 Upon this, we can finally select the reconstruction frame pixel should be distilled from the teacher to the student:
 ∗ ∗
Iˆti and its corresponding reconstruction loss L ip to form our
pose-adaptive reconstruction loss. During back propagation for p (k) > L p (k)]
 τ (k) = [L stu tea
 (7)
current iteration of training, we only update the i ∗ -th branch Thus, the distillation loss can be defined as:
to make itself to be more specialized in estimating its own
 L d = τ ◦ Dt − Dttea 1
 
pose transformation. When the combined pose Tt→s + Rt→s (8)
is chosen to be optimal, both translation and rotation branches Here, Dttea represents the estimated depth map by the teacher
will be updated. Through our improvement, the complemen- and ‘◦’ denotes element-wise multiplication. It indicates that
tary information provided by different pose estimators can be we only use the depth pixels of the teacher to supervise the
efficiently utilized to mitigate the impact of inaccurate pose
estimation on reconstruction loss. 2 The superscript of i ∗ is omitted for easy presentation.
2166 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

student when their corresponding reconstruction errors are frames, it cannot be used for training, and thus we only test
smaller than those of student. the generalization on Make3D through the well-trained KITTI
 After the student is trained, we frozen it and train the teacher model. Besides, we also test the adaptability of our method
in the next training stage by an iterative fashion with the same on NYU v2 dataset [50], a rotation-dominant indoor dataset.
distillation strategy introduced above, which can be defined as: In NYU v2, we use the officially provided 654 densely labeled
 images for testing, and the rest sequences for training.
 d = (1 − τ ) ◦ Dt − Dt
 L tea tea
 
 1
 (9)
 Implementation Details: The framework mainly contains
 four parts, i.e., student and teacher networks for depth esti-
F. Total Loss mation, pose network in pose decomposition, and the encoder
 The training process mainly consists of three stages. pretrained from an image reconstruction model. For depth
At beginning, we train the student network in a fully estimation, we use the network architecture that replaced the
self-supervised manner and the loss function incorporates original ResNet-based depth encoder in Monodepth2 [7] with
 ∗
three components, i.e., pose-adaptive reconstruction loss L ip , HRNet-18 [51] as our backbone for both student and teacher,
region-sensitive reconstruction loss L f and the smoothness but adjust the number of channels for multiple frame inputs
loss L s , which can be written as: through an 1 × 1 convolution to adapt to the teacher network.
 ∗ For pose estimation, we use the generic pose network proposed
 L stu = λs L s + λ f L f + µL ip (10) in [7] as our backbone, which employs ResNet-18 [52] as
where λs and λ f are the weighting factors that control the the encoder. For the pretrained encoder, we employ the same
importance of each loss. µ refers to the mask proposed in [7]. method in [11] to construct an image reconstruction auto-
Similarly, the teacher network is trained from scratch with the encoder model, and use its encoder as a frozen module to
same loss of L stu . extract features for computing the feature-level reconstruction
 Then, we fine-tune the teacher with the help of student. The loss.
depth map of teacher network is adaptively supervised by that During the training process, we initially train the student
of the student. As shown in Eq.(7) and Eq.(9), we compute the network and teacher network from scratch until they conmask τ and distill the knowledge from student to teacher with verge. Subsequently, we fine-tune the teacher network through
L tea
 d . For the reconstruction losses, we also introduce the mask
 selective distillation, utilizing the fixed student network as a
τ and revise the losses to avoid conflicts with the distillation reference. Then, we leverage the more capable teacher network
loss: to assist the training of student network by fixing the teacher
 and training the student until it converges again. The number
 p = (1 − τ ) · L p + τ · L p
 L tea stu tea
 (11) of iterations in collaborative training is set to 2 according to
 f = (1 − τ ) · L f + τ · L f
 L tea stu tea
 (12) our experimental verification. We set the batch size as 10 and
 stu represent the reconstruction loss of the adopt the Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, and
where L stu
 p , Lf ϵ = 10−4 . We set the initial learning rate as 10−4 for the first
student network while L tea tea are for the teacher. Conp , Lf 15 epochs and then 10−5 for fine-tuning the remainder. For the
sequently, the loss for training the teacher network is: adjustment parameters, λs , λ f , and λd are respectively set to
 10−3 , 10−3 , and 1 according to experimental verification. The
 f + µL p + λd L d
 L tea = λs L s + λ f L tea tea tea
 (13)
 whole training process is shown in Algorithm 1. We adopt the
where µ, λs and λ f are hyper-parameters similar to those used measures used in [39] for quantitative evaluation.
in L stu . λd is the weighting factors of distillation.
 Finally, we freeze the teacher and use it to guide the training
of the student. The loss function in this stage is similar to the A. Performance Comparison
loss function L tea used for training the teacher network, and 1) Quantitative Result: Table II shows the comparison
we omit it for saving the space. Note that, the above training results with state-of-the-art methods. Note that, all the compipeline can be iteratively conducted between the teacher and pared methods use monocular images as input in testing
student until the convergence. phase. For fair comparison, we only compare with methods
 that exclusively using monocular videos (M) as supervi-
 IV. E XPERIMENTS sion, and without any additional data incorporated. As a
 Training Dataset: We evaluate the proposed method on result, our method exceeds other methods including the
KITTI [19] and Make3D [49] datasets. KITTI dataset [19] transformer-based ones (i.e., MonoFormer and Lite-Monocomprises monocular sequences and corresponding 3D laser 8M), especially on the Sq Rel indicator, where it attains a
scans of outdoor scenes captured by imaging equipment 5% increase over the runner-up, proving its effectiveness.
mounted on a moving vehicle. For training purposes, we adopt 2) Qualitative Result: Fig. 3 shows the qualitative results
the dataset split proposed by [39]. After eliminating static of our depth predictions. Compared to other self-supervised
frames using a pre-processing step recommended by [23], methods, our method can recover the details of thin objects
we are left with 39,810 monocular frame triplets for training and the fine structures of objects (highlighted by the red
and 4,424 frame triplets for testing. Make3D [49] consists boxes in the figure), and achieve the lowest RMSE values
of 400 images as training set and 134 images as testing set. on each given example. For instance, in the first column, our
Since Make3D only includes RGB-D pairs without adjacent method can recover the depth of the billboards and fence posts,
YE et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED MONOCULAR DEPTH ESTIMATION FROM VIDEOS 2167

 TABLE II
R ESULTS ON KITTI DATASET U SING THE E IGEN S PLIT [39]. A LL M ETHODS A RE T RAINED BY U SING M ONOCULAR V IDEOS W ITH N O A DDITIONAL
 DATA I NCORPORATED . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED W ITH B OLD -FACE W HILE S ECOND B EST O NES W ITH U NDERLINE R ESPECTIVELY

Algorithm 1 Depth Estimation Process to recognize the wall on the left side of image. In the sixth
 Input: Monocular video frames {It } column, it is clear that our method provide the most accurate
 Output: Estimated depth maps {Dt } depth prediction, both in terms of object perception and RMSE
 Model Training: numerical results.
 Phase 1: Student Training
 for each frame It in each training epoch do
 1. Estimate depth map Dtstu using φdstu B. Ablation Study
 2. Estimate poses Tt→s , Rt→s , Pt→s using φ p 1) The Full Pipeline: In this section, we analyze the
 3. Generate reconstructed frames { Iˆti } for different poses performance of our method by studying the influence of
 transformations three losses we have proposed on the final depth prediction.
 4. Compute photometric reconstruction losses {L ip } for We compared the performances with and without our proeach Iˆti posed losses and reported the results in Table IV. At the
 5. Select optimal pose i ∗ = arg mini L ip starting point, the first row gives our baseline that replaced
 ∗
 6. Compute pose-adaptive reconstruction loss L ip using the original ResNet-based depth encoder in Monodepth2 [7]
 ∗ with HRNet-18 [51], and the same self-supervision pipeline
 Iˆti
 introduced in the Sec. III-A. Upon this, we replace the
 7. Compute region-sensitive reconstruction loss L r
 pose network [7] with our pose decomposition module and
 8. Update φdstu using total loss L stu
 corresponding pose-adaptive reconstruction loss (the second
 end for
 row), and the performance of depth estimation is obviously
 Phase 2: Teacher Training
 improved, especially on Sq Rel and RMSE metrics (15.5%
 Freeze student network φdstu
 and 4.8% improvement respectively). Similarly, introducing
 for each frame It in each training epoch do
 the region-sensitive reconstruction loss solely (the third row)
 1. Estimate depth map Dttea using φdtea
 can also bring an obvious improvement against the baseline.
 2. Compute photometric reconstruction errors L stu p and
 tea Going a step further, introducing both of them into the baseline
 L p through pose-adaptive reconstruction loss
 (the fourth row) can push the performance to a new upper
 3. Generate mask τ by comparing L stu p and L p
 tea
 tea bound. Finally, when further using the bidirectional distillation
 4. Compute distillation loss L d for teacher network: to encourage a mutual learning from both teacher and student
 L tea
 d networks (the last row), the ultimate superior performance is
 5. Compute region-sensitive reconstruction loss L r achieved. Through the ablation study, each proposed loss can
 6. Update φdtea using total loss L tea present its contribution to the performance of depth estimation.
 end for Next, we give some detailed analysis through visual and
 Phase 3: Iterative Updating numerical results to further demonstrate the effectiveness of
 Swap roles of student and teacher networks and repeat our proposed losses:
 Phase 2
 2) Pose-Adaptive Reconstruction Loss: Fig. 4 shows the
 Model Testing:
 error maps of reconstructed images against groundtruth target
 Use the trained student network φdstu to estimate depth
 images without and with pose decomposition module and
 maps Dt for test frames It
 pose-adaptive reconstruction loss. It is obvious that, under
 the condition that the depth estimation network remains
 unchanged, training with the loss will make the reconstruction
while other methods predict inaccurate depths or wrong shape. error smaller (highlighted by the red rectangles). Since the
In third column, Monodepth2, HR-Depth, and Lite-Mono fail displacement of the foreground between two frames will be
2168 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

Fig. 3. Qualitative comparison with other methods on KITTI dataset: (a) Monodepth2 [7], (b) HR-Depth [42], (c) DIFFNet [28], (d) Lite-Mono-8M [46],
(e) Ours. Regions of red rectangles in predicted depth maps present obvious visual differences among these methods. Besides, error maps (red for higher
errors while blue for lower errors) against groudtruths and their corresponding RMSE values are given for better presentation.

 TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY OF THE P ROPOSED P OSE -A DAPTIVE R ECONSTRUCTION L OSS (PAR), R EGION -S ENSITIVE R ECONSTRUCTION L OSS (RSR), AND
 R ECONSTRUCTION -G UIDED B IDIRECTIONAL D ISTILLATION L OSS (RGBD) ON KITTI DATASET

 TABLE IV
 Q UANTITATIVE R ESULT OF THE P OSE E STIMATION R ESULT ON KITTI
 O DOMETRY DATASET

Fig. 4. Qualitative ablation study of the proposed pose-adaptive reconstruction loss. Error maps (red for higher errors while blue for lower errors) of
reconstructed images (b) without and (c) with pose-adaptive reconstruction
loss against groundtruth target images are shown.

relatively large, inaccurate pose estimation will cause wrong baseline (without our proposed pose modules). As shown in
re-reprojection, resulting in larger reconstruction error, espe- Table IV, absolute trajectory error (ATE), relative translation
cially around the fine structures of foreground objects. This error (RTE), and relative rotation error (RRE) are given.
also proves that our pose estimation is more accurate and Please note that ATE is calculated following the approach in
avoids interference to the depth estimation network, which SfMLearner [23], while RTE and RRE are computed based
indirectly helps improve the performance of depth estimation. on SC-Depth [54]. RTE is the average translational root mean
 Moreover, we test the effectiveness of our pose decom- square error (RMSE) drift in percentage on length from 100,
position network on the KITTI odometry dataset against the 200, . . . , 800m, while RRE is the average rotation RMSE
YE et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED MONOCULAR DEPTH ESTIMATION FROM VIDEOS 2169

 TABLE V
 A BLATION S TUDY OF THE P ROPOSED R EGION -S ENSITIVE R ECONSTRUCTION L OSS AGAINST THE F EATURE M ETRIC L OSS [11]

 TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDY OF THE P ROPOSED B IDIRECTIONAL D ISTILLATION L OSS . ‘T EACHER _I NITIAL’ AND ‘S TUDENT _I NITIAL’ R EPRESENT THE
 C ONVERGED R ESULTS W HEN T RAINING F ROM S CRATCH W ITHOUT B IDIRECTIONAL D ISTILLATION , W HILE ‘T EACHER _E ND ’ AND
 ‘S TUDENT _E ND ’ A RE THE C ONVERGED R ESULTS W ITH D ISTILLATION

 Fig. 6. Statistical results on indoor dataset [57]. We use the ground truth poses
 to analyze the rotation between consecutive frames. The table specifically
 shows the percentages of rotation angles exceeding 0.5o , 0.75o , 1o , and 1.25o
 in sequences 0000, 0001, and 0699 (left), and the overall trajectory plot for
 sequence 0000 (right).

Fig. 5. Qualitative ablation study of the proposed region-sensitive reconstruction loss (RSR) and bidirectional distillation loss (BD) on KITTI dataset. understanding of objects and sensitivity to anomalies, our
(a) Target images, (b) Baseline, (c) Baseline + [11], (d) Baseline + RSR, method performs better in recovering objects with large color
(e) Ours.
 differences (the first column) or fine structures (the second and
 third columns).
 4) Reconstruction-Guided Bidirectional Distillation Loss:
drift (◦ /100m) on length from 100, 200, . . . , 800m. The ATE Table VI shows the performance comparison between teacher
is a measure of global consistency between two trajectories, and student networks at the independent training stage
comparing absolute distances between ground truth and pre- (training from scratch) and collaborative training stage with
dicted poses at each point in time. On sequence 09, our ATE bidirectional distillation. At beginning, the performance of the
is 0.007 compared to the baseline of 0.020, while on sequence teacher is better than that of the student owing to incorporate
10, our ATE is 0.005 compared to the baseline of 0.014. more associative data (e.g., stereo images) as input. Through
Additionally, since our method separately estimates multiple collaborative learning with our proposed reconstruction-guided
pose combinations and selects the optimal result from them, bidirectional distillation loss, the student and the teacher can
there is an improvement in performance on both translation learn from each other to further enhance their performance,
and rotation metrics against other compared methods. and ultimately achieve comparable results. Due to slightly dif-
 3) Region-Sensitive Reconstruction Loss: As stated in ferent parameter settings or other loss function settings, their
Sec.III-D, our region-sensitive reconstruction loss can be performance will inevitably have some fluctuations, resulting
regarded as an improved version of feature-level loss based on in situations similar to those in the table. However, their
the work [11]. Although the processing flow is only different in performances are generally similar. Fig. 5 (e) also demonstrate
the order of viewpoint synthesis and feature extraction, it has its effectiveness. With bidirectional distillation, the recovered
completely different meanings. Reference [11] just leverages details are more accurate, such as the smoothness of the car
the pre-trained encoder as a pure feature extractor, but we in the first example and the structure of the sticks in last two
excavate the potential capabilities of the model to identify examples.
the poorly reconstructed frames as anomaly. Table V verifies
our effectiveness. For fair comparison, both methods are introduced into the same baseline (also the first row of Table III) C. Adaptability and Generalization
and we achieve better performance. Fig. 5 additionally shows First, we validate the adaptability of our proposed
the visual results. Focusing on the comparison between (c) method on NYU v2 dataset, which features challenging
and (d), thanks to the pre-trained model’s holistic semantic rotation-dominant indoor scenes. As shown in Figure 6, unlike
2170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

 TABLE VII
 A DAPTABILITY ON NYU V 2 DATASET [50]

 TABLE VIII
 M ODEL S IZE , RUNTIME , AND P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON M AKE 3D DATASET

 Fig. 8. Qualitative comparison on Make3D dataset: (a) Color image, (b) Monodepth2 [7], (c) HR-Depth [42], (d) DIFFNet [28], (e) Lite-Mono-8M [46],
 (f) Ours. Regions of red rectangles in predicted depth maps present obvious
 visual differences among these methods.

 Next, we test the cross-dataset generalization ability and
 apply our model trained on KITTI to Make3D dataset.
Fig. 7. Qualitative comparison on NYU v2 dataset: (a) Color image, We compare with other methods among which their models are
(b) Bian et al. (Baseline) [54], (c) Ours, (d) groundtruth. available and can be tested on Makes3D directly. As shown
 in Table VIII, we achieve the best performance in all metrics, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed method
 in cross-dataset generalization. Fig. 8 shows the qualitative
outdoor scenes where vehicles mainly move straight and only
 results. In contrast, our method can recover fine structures of
turn at lane changes or intersections, the pose variations in
 objects and provide more reasonable depth values.
indoor scenes are more complex, and the opposite situation
occurs: the proportion of rotations is much higher than that of
straight movements. However, this also represents a form of D. Runtime
imbalance between rotation and translation data. Our proposed As shown in Table VIII, our core improvement focuses on
method is also applicable to this situation. The experiments in the loss design and is suitable for assembly on any backbone
Table VII can validate this. We use a recent self-supervised network, which would not increase the runtime of depth
depth estimation network [54] which is also applied to indoor estimation during testing. The running time mainly depends
scenes, as our baseline. With our proposed pose-adaptive on the size of backbone depth network. Monodepth2 adopts
reconstruction module, we achieve better performance against the simplest ResNet-18 as the backbone network and presents
the Baseline network, and outperform other methods that also the fast runtime (32ms). Utilizing similar backbone, the case
test on NYU v2 dataset. Fig. 7 shows the visual comparison. ‘Ours (RestNet-18)’ has the same model size and runtime as
Our method infers more accurate depth values and sharper Monodepth2 but achieves obvious performance improvement.
depth edges than the Baseline. Similar result is concluded on DIFFNet backbone (HRNet-18).
YE et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED MONOCULAR DEPTH ESTIMATION FROM VIDEOS 2171

 V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS [18] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
 block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 This paper proposes three novel self-supervised losses via Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13576–13586.
adaptive reconstruction constraints, including pose-adaptive [19] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets robotics:
 The KITTI dataset,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1231–1237,
reconstruction loss, region-sensitive reconstruction loss, and 2013.
bidirectional distillation loss. We achieve superior performance [20] X. Ye, X. Fan, M. Zhang, R. Xu, and W. Zhong, “Unsupervised
compared with other state-of-the-art methods. monocular depth estimation via recursive stereo distillation,” IEEE
 Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 4492–4504, 2021.
 For future directions, we aim to address the failure of [21] A. Pilzer, S. Lathuilière, N. Sebe, and E. Ricci, “Refine and distill:
photometric loss in adverse conditions such as nighttime. Exploiting cycle-inconsistency and knowledge distillation for unsuper-
We will investigate the use of alternative loss functions and vised monocular depth estimation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 9768–9777.
data augmentation techniques that can enhance the model’s [22] Z. Liu, R. Li, S. Shao, X. Wu, and W. Chen, “Self-supervised monocular
performance under low-light conditions. depth estimation with self-reference distillation and disparity offset
 refinement,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 12,
 p. 1, 2023.
 R EFERENCES [23] T. Zhou, M. Brown, N. Snavely, and D. G. Lowe, “Unsupervised
 learning of depth and ego-motion from video,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 [1] D.-Y. Nam and J.-K. Han, “An efficient algorithm for generating Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 1851–1858.
 harmonized stereoscopic 360◦ VR images,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. [24] J. Bae, S. Moon, and S. Im, “Deep digging into the generalization of
 Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 4864–4882, Dec. 2021. self-supervised monocular depth estimation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 187–196.
 [2] C. Li et al., “Hybrid-MVS: Robust multi-view reconstruction with hybrid
 optimization of visual and depth cues,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video [25] R. Garg, B. G. V. Kumar, G. Carneiro, and I. Reid, “Unsupervised CNN
 Technol., vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 7630–7644, Mar. 2023. for single view depth estimation: Geometry to the rescue,” in Proc. Eur.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2016, pp. 740–756.
 [3] C. Tao, J. Cao, C. Wang, Z. Zhang, and Z. Gao, “Pseudo-mono for
 [26] C. Godard, O. M. Aodha, and G. J. Brostow, “Unsupervised monocular
 monocular 3D object detection in autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans.
 depth estimation with left-right consistency,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 8, p. 1, 2023.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 270–279.
 [4] M. Song, S. Lim, and W. Kim, “Monocular depth estimation using [27] J. Watson, M. Firman, G. Brostow, and D. Turmukhambetov, “Self-
 Laplacian pyramid-based depth residuals,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. supervised monocular depth hints,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 4381–4393, Nov. 2021. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 2162–2171.
 [5] Y. Cao, T. Zhao, K. Xian, C. Shen, Z. Cao, and S. Xu, “Monocular depth [28] H. Zhou, D. Greenwood, and S. Taylor, “Self-supervised monocular
 estimation with augmented ordinal depth relationships,” IEEE Trans. depth estimation with internal feature fusion,” in Proc. BMVC, 2021,
 Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 2674–2682, Aug. 2020. p. 378.
 [6] S. F. Bhat, I. Alhashim, and P. Wonka, “AdaBins: Depth estimation using [29] H. Jung, E. Park, and S. Yoo, “Fine-grained semantics-aware repreadaptive bins,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., sentation enhancement for self-supervised monocular depth estimation,”
 Jan. 2021, pp. 4009–4018. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
 [7] C. Godard, O. M. Aodha, M. Firman, and G. Brostow, “Digging into pp. 12642–12652.
 self-supervised monocular depth estimation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. [30] R. Li et al., “Learning depth via leveraging semantics: Self-supervised
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 3828–3838. monocular depth estimation with both implicit and explicit semantic
 [8] R. Li, P. Ji, Y. Xu, and B. Bhanu, “MonoIndoor++: Towards better guidance,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 137, May 2023, Art. no. 109297.
 practice of self-supervised monocular depth estimation for indoor envi- [31] D. Zimmerer, F. Isensee, J. Petersen, S. Kohl, and K. Maier-Hein,
 ronments,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 2, “Unsupervised anomaly localization using variational auto-encoders,” in
 pp. 830–846, Feb. 2023. Proc. MICCAI. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 289–297.
 [9] S. Chen, Z. Pu, X. Fan, and B. Zou, “Fixing defect of photometric loss [32] O. Rippel, P. Mertens, and D. Merhof, “Modeling the distribution of
 for self-supervised monocular depth estimation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits normal data in pre-trained deep features for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1328–1338, Mar. 2022. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 6726–6733.
[10] H. Zhan, R. Garg, C. S. Weerasekera, K. Li, H. Agarwal, and I. M. Reid, [33] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and
 “Unsupervised learning of monocular depth estimation and visual P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in
 odometry with deep feature reconstruction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 340–349. pp. 14318–14328.
[11] C. Shu, K. Yu, Z. Duan, and K. Yang, “Feature-metric loss for self- [34] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 supervised learning of depth and egomotion,” in Proc. ECCV. Cham, network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
 Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 572–588. [35] M. Phuong and C. Lampert, “Distillation-based training for multi-exit
 architectures,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
[12] K. Zhou et al., “DevNet: Self-supervised monocular depth learning
 Oct. 2019, pp. 1355–1364.
 via density volume construction,” in Proc. ECCV. Cham, Switzerland:
 [36] H. Liu, J. Yuan, C. Wang, and J. Chen, “Pseudo supervised
 Springer, 2022, pp. 125–142.
 monocular depth estimation with teacher-student network,” 2021,
[13] Z. Zhou and Q. Dong, “Learning occlusion-aware coarse-to-fine depth arXiv:2110.11545.
 map for self-supervised monocular depth estimation,” in Proc. 30th ACM [37] A. Petrovai and S. Nedevschi, “Exploiting pseudo labels in a
 Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 6386–6395. self-supervised learning framework for improved monocular depth esti-
[14] G. Wang, J. Zhong, S. Zhao, W. Wu, Z. Liu, and H. Wang, “3D mation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 hierarchical refinement and augmentation for unsupervised learning of (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 1568–1578.
 depth and pose from monocular video,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video [38] M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Spa-
 Technol., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 1776–1786, Apr. 2023. tial transformer networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
[15] W. Miled, J.-C. Pesquet, and M. Parent, “A convex optimization vol. 28, Dec. 2015, pp. 2017–2025.
 approach for depth estimation under illumination variation,” IEEE Trans. [39] D. Eigen, C. Puhrsch, and R. Fergus, “Depth map prediction from a
 Image Process., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 813–830, Apr. 2009. single image using a multi-scale deep network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
[16] C. Chaux, M. El-Gheche, J. Farah, J.-C. Pesquet, and Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 27, 2014, pp. 2366–2374.
 B. Pesquet-Popescu, “A parallel proximal splitting method for [40] J. Zhou, Y. Wang, K. Qin, and W. Zeng, “Unsupervised high-resolution
 disparity estimation from multicomponent images under illumination depth learning from videos with dual networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 variation,” J. Math. Imag. Vis., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 167–178, Nov. 2013. Comput. Vis., Nov. 2019, pp. 6872–6881.
[17] N. Yang, L. von Stumberg, R. Wang, and D. Cremers, “D3VO: Deep [41] V. Guizilini, R. Ambrus, S. Pillai, A. Raventos, and A. Gaidon,
 depth, deep pose and deep uncertainty for monocular visual odometry,” “3D packing for self-supervised monocular depth estimation,” in Proc.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
 Jun. 2020, pp. 1278–1289. pp. 2485–2494.
2172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 35, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

[42] X. Lyu et al., “HR-Depth: High resolution self-supervised monocular Yuxiang Ou received the B.S. degree in software
 depth estimation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no. 3, engineering from Dalian University of Technology,
 2021, pp. 2294–2301. Dalian, Liaoning, China, in 2022, where he is
[43] J. Yan, H. Zhao, P. Bu, and Y. Jin, “Channel-wise attention-based currently pursuing the M.S. degree. His research
 network for self-supervised monocular depth estimation,” in Proc. Int. interests include depth estimation and computer
 Conf. 3D Vis. (3DV), Dec. 2021, pp. 464–473. vision.
[44] T.-W. Hui, “RM-depth: Unsupervised learning of recurrent monocular
 depth in dynamic scenes,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 1665–1674.
[45] W. Han, J. Yin, X. Jin, X. Dai, and J. Shen, “BRNet: Exploring comprehensive features for monocular depth estimation,” in Proc. 17th Eur.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Oct. 2022,
 pp. 586–602.
[46] N. Zhang, F. Nex, G. Vosselman, and N. Kerle, “Lite-Mono:
 A lightweight CNN and transformer architecture for self-supervised
 monocular depth estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 18537–18546.
[47] L. Sun, J.-W. Bian, H. Zhan, W. Yin, I. Reid, and C. Shen,
 “SC-DepthV3: Robust self-supervised monocular depth estimation for Biao Wu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
 dynamic scenes,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 1, software engineering from Dalian University of
 pp. 497–508, Jan. 2024. Technology, Dalian, Liaoning, China, in 2020 and
[48] M. Xiong, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, T. Zhang, and H. Xiong, “Monocular 2023, respectively. His research interests include
 depth estimation using self-supervised learning with more effective depth estimation and computer vision.
 geometric constraints,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 128, Feb. 2024,
 Art. no. 107489.
[49] A. Saxena, S. H. Chung, and A. Y. Ng, “3-D depth reconstruction from
 a single still image,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 53–69,
 2008.
[50] N. Silberman, D. Hoiem, P. Kohli, and R. Fergus, “Indoor segmentation
 and support inference from RGBD images,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
 Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2012, pp. 746–760.
[51] J. Wang et al., “Deep high-resolution representation learning for visual
 recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 10,
 pp. 3349–3364, Oct. 2020.
[52] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. Rui Xu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
[53] T. Shen et al., “Beyond photometric loss for self-supervised ego-motion from the Graduate School of Science and Engineerestimation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2019, ing, Ritsumeikan University, Japan, in 2007. He was
 pp. 6359–6365. with the Digital Technology Research Center, Sanyo
[54] J.-W. Bian et al., “Unsupervised scale-consistent depth learning from Electric Company Ltd., Japan, from 2008 to 2010.
 video,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 9, pp. 2548–2564, Sep. 2021. He was a Senior Researcher with Yamaguchi Univer-
[55] J. Zhou, Y. Wang, K. Qin, and W. Zeng, “Moving indoor: Unsupervised sity and Ritsumeikan University from 2010 to 2015.
 video depth learning in challenging environments,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Since December 2015, he has been an Associate
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8617–8626. Professor with Dalian University of Technology. His
[56] W. Zhao, S. Liu, Y. Shu, and Y.-J. Liu, “Towards better generalization: research interests include intelligent computing in
 Joint depth-pose learning without PoseNet,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. medical images and computer vision.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9148–9158.
[57] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, and
 M. Nießner, “ScanNet: Richly-annotated 3D reconstructions of indoor
 scenes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Jul. 2017, pp. 2432–2443.

 Xinchen Ye (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. Haojie Li received the B.E. degree from Nankai
 and Ph.D. degrees from Tianjin University, Tianjin, University, Tianjin, in 1996, and the Ph.D. degree
 China, in 2012 and 2016, respectively. He was with from the Institute of Computing Technology,
 the Signal Processing Laboratory, EPFL, Lausanne, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, in 2007.
 Switzerland, in 2015, under the grant of the Swiss He is currently a Professor with the College of Com-
 Federal Government. Since 2016, he has been a Fac- puter Science and Engineering, Shandong University
 ulty Member with Dalian University of Technology, of Science and Technology. His research interests
 Dalian, Liaoning, China, where he is currently an include social media computing and multimedia
 Associate Professor. His current research interests information retrieval.
 include image/video processing and 3D imaging.