IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025 2675

 Self-Supervised Random Forest on Transformed
 Distribution for Anomaly Detection
Jiabin Liu , Huadong Wang , Hanyuan Hang, Shumin Ma , Xin Shen , and Yong Shi , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Anomaly detection, the task of differentiating I. I NTRODUCTION
abnormal data points from normal ones, presents a significant
challenge in the realm of machine learning. Numerous strategies
have been proposed to tackle this task, with classification-based
methods, specifically those utilizing a self-supervised approach via
 D EEP learning, with its demonstrated efficacy in a plethora
 of domains, heavily depends on the availability of largescale, high-quality, and accurately labeled data to effectively
random affine transformations (RATs), demonstrating remark- train deep neural networks. However, due to privacy and
able performance on both image and non-image data. However,
 security issues, it is usually difficult to obtain trustworthy
these methods encounter a notable bottleneck, the overlap of
constructed labeled datasets across categories, which hampers the ground-truth labels in practice [1], [2]. For instance, in the
subsequent classifiers’ ability to detect anomalies. Consequently, field of cybersecurity, identification of novel, unknown attacks
the creation of an effective data distribution becomes the pivotal is frequently hampered due to the absence of patterns or
factor for success. In this article, we introduce a model called signatures of these attacks, which are essential for a super-
“self-supervised forest (sForest),” which leverages the random
 vised classifier. Similar problems arise in industrial detection,
Fourier transform (RFT) and random orthogonal rotations to
craft a controlled data distribution. Our model utilizes the wherein we often find ourselves unable to anticipate all possi-
RFT to map input data into a new feature space. With this ble fault situations. This shortage of labeled data considerably
transformed data, we create a self-labeled training dataset using impedes the process of supervised learning.
random orthogonal rotations. We theoretically prove that the Anomaly detection, also referred to as outlier detection,
data distribution formulated by our methodology is more stable
 fault detection, or novelty detection, emerges as a solution to
compared to one derived from RATs. We then use the self-labeled
dataset in a random forest (RF) classifier to distinguish between the challenges previously discussed. The key concept involves
normal and anomalous data points. Comprehensive experiments training exclusively with “normal” samples and identifying
conducted on both real and artificial datasets illustrate that “abnormal” samples within the test dataset. This is accomsForest outperforms other anomaly detection methods, including plished by labeling all test samples as either normal or
distance-based, kernel-based, forest-based, and network-based
 anomalous. Researchers have successfully designed effective
benchmarks.
 anomaly detection techniques applicable across a myriad of
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, data distribution, random fields. For instance, within the realm of computer vision, the
forest (RF) classifier, random Fourier transform (RFT), random
orthogonal rotations, self-supervised learning.
 techniques have been applied to identify abnormal trajectories
 and moving objects [3], [4], [5], [6]. Within the finance sector,
 Manuscript received 7 October 2022; revised 1 February 2023, 24 August anomaly detection plays a crucial role in fraud detection [7],
2023, and 22 October 2023; accepted 22 December 2023. Date of publication 23 January 2024; date of current version 6 February 2025. This [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. Moreover, in healthcare and medicine,
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation the technique proves useful for monitoring and addressing
of China under Grant 62306036, Grant 62306159, Grant 72231010, and abnormalities within medical records [13]. For a more com-
Grant 71932008. The work of Shumin Ma was supported in part by the
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research and prehensive understanding of this topic, readers are encouraged
Application for Data Science (IRADS) under Grant 2022B1212010006 and to refer to the surveys in [14] and [15].
Grant R0400001-22, in part by the Guangdong Higher Education Upgrading Self-supervised learning has recently emerged as a promis-
Plan under Project UIC-R0400024-21, and in part by the Beijing Normal
University-Hong Kong Baptist University United International College (UIC) ing approach, demonstrating an impressive capability to
under Grant UICR0700019-22. (Corresponding author: Huadong Wang.) generate better feature representations. Techniques widely
 Jiabin Liu is with the School of Information and Electronics, Beijing employed in self-supervised learning for image data encom-
Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China, and also with the Laboratory
of Electromagnetic Space Cognition and Intelligent Control, Beijing 100191, pass geometric transformations [16], [17], [18], patching [19],
China. [20], and color permutations [21], [22]. This learning paradigm
 Huadong Wang is with ModelBest Inc., Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: has recently been adopted to address anomaly detection probhuadw2012@163.com).
 Hanyuan Hang is with the Department of Applied Mathematics, University lems [17], [23] for image data. Here, image rotations are
of Twente, 7522 NB Enschede, The Netherlands. leveraged to generate distinct categories, and a neural network
 Shumin Ma is with the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory IRADS and is trained based on these “supervised” data. Since these pretext
the Department of Mathematical Science, BNU-HKBU United International
College, Zhuhai 519087, China. tasks are largely inapplicable to the analysis of structured
 Xin Shen is with the Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, data, Bergman and Hoshen [24] broadened the application of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. classification-based pretext tasks to outlier detection with gen-
 Yong Shi is with the School of Economics and Management, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. eral data by defining multiple random affine transformations
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3348833 (RATs) as different categories. It is noteworthy, however, that
 2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2676 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 classifier will then be used on the self-labeled testing data.
 Ultimately, samples with low testing accuracy are categorized
 as anomalies.
 In summary, the main contributions of this article are
 mentioned as follows.
 1) We develop a self-supervised anomaly detection method
 for structured data, dubbed “self-supervised forest (sForest).” This method introduces a novel self-labeled data
 distribution, derived from the application of RFT and
 orthogonal rotation, for self-supervised anomaly detection methodologies.
 2) We provide a theoretical rationale for our method’s
 superiority. The data distribution obtained through the
 combination of RFT and orthogonal rotation is more
 stable (“kernel approximation with lower expected variance”) than that acquired through RAT.
 3) The superiority and robustness of our proposed
Fig. 1. Effect of data distribution in a 2-D space. (a) Original data. (b) Rotated method have been examined on various artificial
data based on the original data in (a), where the transformed abnormal data and benchmark datasets. The performance of “sForis specially marked by adding a black edge. (c) Transformed data based on est” is contrasted with several state-of-the-art anomaly
a random Fourier transform (RFT) ψ : R2 → R2 . (d) Rotated data based
on the transformed data in (c). The {Ri }i=0 3
 represent the four categories detection algorithms, encompassing forest-based methof self-labeled data, and each category corresponds to a random rotation ods isolation forest (iForest) and partial identitransformation. fication forest (PIDforest), distance-based methods
 [i.e., k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) and local outlier factor
 (LOF)], kernel-based method one-class support vecthe distribution of data procured from affine transformation tor machine (OCSVM), and the self-supervised-based
is of great importance, as it directly influences the performance method geometric-transformation anomaly detection
of the final classifier. As an illustration, we display the effect (GOAD).
of kernel feature transformation in a 2-D space in Fig. 1.
In Fig. 1(b), the four categories of self-supervised data are
 II. R ELATED W ORKS
intensely mixed, making it challenging for the subsequent
classifier to distinguish features and thereby leading to failure The study of anomaly detection, alternatively termed as
in anomaly detection. Therefore, we propose that an opti- outlier detection, fault detection, or novelty detection, has
mal approach to implementing self-supervised-based anomaly gained substantial traction within the field of machine learning.
detection on general data involves “creating” a superior data Broadly, it encompasses three distinct methodologies: superdistribution for the ensuing classifier. vised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised learning, the choice
 In this article, we introduce a novel distribution for of which hinges on the accessibility of labeled data. In this
self-supervised-based anomaly detection, which incorporates research paper, our primary focus rests on semi-supervised
RFT [25] and random orthogonal rotations. This new method- anomaly detection, a scenario wherein only a minimal number
ology supplants the RAT, previously used in research [24], of samples are labeled, leaving the majority without groundthereby enabling more effective control over the distribution truth labels. Notably, based on the strategies applied to this
of the generated data. Our proposed method initially maps the learning paradigm, it can be segmented into distance-based
input data into a feature space at the onset of the learning methods [26], [27], [28], density estimation and probabilistic
process, applying RFT [25] to the original data. Subsequently, models [29], [30], as well as classification-based methods [17],
these newly generated, less correlated, or redundant features [23], [24], [31].
are used to train a random forest (RF) classifier via super- In recent years, the field of anomaly detection has witnessed
vised learning with self-labeled data. This self-labeled data is an evolutionary leap, wherein the self-supervised mechanism
produced through random orthogonal rotations. In this article, within this learning paradigm has been leveraged to reframe
we primarily employ our data distribution methodology with anomaly detection as a classification problem. This novel
RF to underscore the advantages of our data distribution. approach has delivered substantial enhancements in perfor-
However, it is essential to note that our data distribution can mance across both image and non-image datasets. In fact,
be applied to any classifiers, including neural networks, not it transforms the structured data into different categories by
just the RF classifier. In Fig. 1(d), there is a pronounced defining a set of geometric transformations and makes the
separation between the four categories of normal data follow- anomaly detection problem a conventional classification task.
ing transformation. Conversely, the transformed abnormal data For the image data, Golan and El-Yaniv [17] initially
points intermingle. During the testing phase, the same series introduced the concept of a “supervised task” by rotating each
of rotations will be implemented on the testing data, which image by 90◦ , 180◦ , and 270◦ , where each angle is defined
includes both normal and anomalous samples. The trained RF as an individual category. This approach was later expanded
LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION 2677

upon by Hendryck and Gimpel [23], who combined additional A. Rotations and RFT in Self-Supervised Learning
self-supervision mechanisms to enhance performance. They 1) Rotations in Self-Supervised Learning: For the image
deemed the low-confidence samples from the softmax activa- data, classical self-supervised learning algorithms usually pertion statistics to be anomalies, following a specific selection form fixed-angle rotations with the angle θ taking values from
rule. However, these geometric transformations are primarily the set {0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , and 270◦ }. However, such methods are
designed for unstructured data like images and are therefore tailored for image data, and cannot be directly applied to
not directly transferable to tabular data. high-dimensional structured data. To address the challenge of
 Addressing the challenge of non-image data, Bergman rotation on structured data, we propose a self-labeling method
and Hoshen [24] broadened the scope of the geometric through the random rotation [32]. The details are described as
transformation method to include RATs. They put forth follows.
an anomaly detection technique that synergistically amalga- Given a feature space Z ⊆ Rd , a matrix R ∈ Rd×d is called
mated a one-class model with the transformation classification a proper rotation matrix when it is orthogonal and has unit
method. This methodology boasts a dual advantage: it can determinant, namely
process a wide array of data types and has an auto-tuning
capability for transformation parameters, thanks to the utiliza- R ⊤ = R −1 and |R| = 1.
tion of RATs. Furthermore, the variance between disparate The set of all proper rotation matrices form the special
data types can be effectively minimized through the selec- orthogonal group, which we denote as SO(d). It is a subtion of random transformations, simultaneously reducing the group of the orthogonal group O(d) that contains additional
detrimental impact of adversarial samples. improper rotations involving reflections (orthogonal matrices
 However, the method proposed by [24] has overlooked the with determinant −1). To be more specific, matrices in SO(d)
influence of data distribution on the overall performance of the share the same determinant 1, whereas matrices in O(d) may
self-supervised model. In terms of the geometric morphology have determinant 1 or −1.
of the original data distribution, the application of affine We perform the random rotation by uniformly sampling over
transformation functions preserves a similar morphology in all feasible rotations in SO(d). It is worth mentioning that
the transformed data. Moreover, if the geometric morphology uniformly sampling in SO(d) is not equivalent to rotating a
of the original data distribution is unsuitable, the self-labeled random angle in the spherical coordinates. As it can be proved,
data after transformation will be challenging for classifiers to randomly rotating one angle does not guarantee a uniform
discern (as shown in Fig. 1, where the original data is normally distribution over all rotations when the feature dimension d is
distributed around the origin), or substantial intervals between larger than 2. Actually, some rotations are more likely to be
different classes of data are generated. This allows classifiers generated than others. Inspired by [32], we adopt the “true”
to easily differentiate between data classes, which complicates uniformly random rotations instead of naïve ones. Because
the learning of complex patterns of normal data distribution sampling naïve random rotations that are not uniformly disfor any classifier, leading to the failure of anomaly detection. tributed can lead to some rotations being over-represented and
In addition, this method does not consider the influence of others being under-represented in the resulting distribution,
data redundancy or feature correlation on the self-supervised causing bias in the solution. Besides, for categorical variables,
model. rotation is unnecessary and ill-defined. Hence, the random
 rotations will not be applied to categorical variables.
 III. A LGORITHM D ESIGN 2) Random Fourier Transform: A well-observed phenomenon is that, when the dimension of the input data
 We train the sForest model only on the normal data d is small, the features generated by the random rotation
D := {x1 , . . . , x N }, where each observation xi is drawn transformation often overlap across categories. This makes the
i.i.d. from one probability distribution P. The construction subsequent RF classifier fail to detect anomaly. To solve this
of sForest starts with mapping the input data into a feature problem, we adopt the random approximation method prospace Z := {ψ(x1 ), . . . , ψ(x N )}, with a nonlinear kernel posed in [25] to first transform the low-dimensional data into a
transformation ψ(·) (such as the Monte Carlo approximation high-dimensional feature space. Specifically, on the input data,
of the Fourier transform [25]). Then, we augment the data by we apply a random transformation ψ : Rd → R D , where D ≥
 M
applying random rotations {Rm }m=0 to the features. In par- d. According to [25], when D is large enough, the evaluation
ticular, R0 signifies the identity transformation, implying that of the kernel K(x, y) between x ∈ Rd and y ∈ Rd can be
no changes are made to the features when the rotation R0 is approximated by the inner product ψ(x)⊤ ψ(y). It is shown that
applied. For every rotated feature, Rm (ψ(xi )), is assigned the the transformed feature space saves the geometric distribution
corresponding label Rm , resulting in a self-labeled dataset: of the data in the original low-dimensional feature space.
{(Rm (ψ(xi )), Rm )}i∈{1,...,N },m∈{0,...,M} . Using these self-labeled In this article, we define ψ(x) := [ψ1 (x), . . . , ψ D (x)]⊤ and
data pairs, we proceed to train an RF classifier in a supervised each ψi (·) is a real-valued transformation function (see [25])
way. During the testing phase, similar operations are carried r
out on the test data using the function ψ(·) and the set of 2
 ψi (x) = cos wi⊤ x + φi , i = 1, 2, . . . , D.
 
 (1)
 M D
rotation matrices {Rm }m=0 . The previously trained RF classifier
is utilized to assess the samples. Anomalies are discerned Here, φi is uniformly sampled from the interval [0, 2π ],
based on low testing accuracy. and wi is randomly sampled from the distribution
2678 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 √
p(w) = 2γ N (w; 0, 1). N (w; 0, 1) denotes a standard Since φi ∼ Uniform[0, φ], wi is drawn from the Fourier
Gaussian distribution, and γ is the parameter of the transform p(w), then
approximated RBF kernel. One can easily find that p(w) D
is the Fourier transform of the Gaussian kernel function. 2
 X
 u i j Ewi ,φi ,w j ,φ j cos wi⊤ x + φi cos w⊤j y + φ j
   
When the dimension of the input data is high enough, this j=1
transformation is unnecessary. The parameter γ defines how D
far the influence of a single training example reaches, with =
 X
 u i j Ewi ,φi ,w j ,φ j cos wi⊤ x − w⊤j y + φi − φ j
  
low values meaning “far” (i.e., more disperse the transformed j=1
data distribution) and high values meaning “close” (i.e., more
 Ewi ,φi ,w j ,φ j cos wi⊤ x + w⊤j y + φi + φ j
  
compact the transformed data distribution). +
 = u ii Ewi cos wi⊤ (x − y) .
  
 3) Theoretical Analysis: This part devotes to a theoreti- (8)
cal analysis over why the proposed method can outperform
 Then, let v = (x − y)/σ , we have
GOAD [24]. More specifically, it proves that the distribution of
the self-labeled data obtained by combining RFT together with 1 X
 D
 AB
 (x, y)) = u ii E cos(wi⊤ v) .
  
random orthogonal rotation is more stable than that obtained E(KRFT (9)
 D i=1
by a RAT. This stability is measured by the variance of the
kernel function within the transformed feature space. Let w be a d-dimensional vector distributed N (0, Id ).
 Let O S(D) be the orthogonal group on the transformed By Bochner’s theorem,
feature space of Z := {ψ(x1 ), . . . , ψ(x N )} ⊆ R D . For any
 E[cos(w⊤ v)] = e−v /2
 2
rotation transformation A ∈ O S(D), we denote the feature (10)
after rotation as r A (x) = Aψ(x), where x ∈ Rd is the input
 and (1/D)
 PD ⊤
data. We denote the inner product of x and y in the transformed i=1 u ii = tr(A B)/D, hence
space R D with the orthogonal transforms A and B as −v 2 /2
 = tr(AD B) e−v /2 (11)
 ⊤ 2
 (x, y)) = D1
 AB PD
 E(KRFT i=1 u ii e
 .
 KAB (x, y) = r A (x)⊤r B (y). (2) where v = ∥v∥. RFT yields an unbiased estimate.
 We now compute the variance of RFT approximation.
 Denote the approximate kernel with ψ taking the RAT as Observe that
KRAT (x, y) and the approximate kernel with ψ taking the RFT 1 + cos(2w⊤ v) 1 + cos(w⊤ (2v))
as KRFT (x, y). cos2 (w⊤ v) = = . (12)
 2 2
 Theorem 1: For any A, B ∈ O S(D), KRFT AB
 (x, y) is an
unbiased estimator of the Gaussian kernel, i.e., Hence by Bochner’s theorem
 2
 1 + e−2v
 ⊤
  tr(A B) −∥x−y∥2 /(2σ 2 ) E[cos (w v)] =
 2 ⊤
 . (13)
 AB
 E KRFT (x, y) = e . (3) 2
 D
 Therefore,
Let v = ∥x − y∥/σ . The variance of KRFT
 AB
 (x, y) is Var(cos(w⊤ v)) = E[cos2 (w⊤ v)] − (E[cos(w⊤ v)])2
 2 2
 1 + e−2v 2 (1 − e−v )2
  tr(A⊤ B)  2 2
  = − e−v = . (14)
 AB
 Var KRFT (x, y) = 1 − e−v . (4) 2 2
 2− D
 If we take D such independent random variables
 Proof: From (2), we have w1 , w2 , . . . , w D , since variance of the sum is sum of
 variances
 AB
 KRFT (x, y)) = r A (x)⊤r B (y) D
 ! 2
 1 X tr(A⊤ B)(1 − e−v )2
 = ψ(x)⊤ A⊤ Bψ(y) = r I (x)⊤rU (y) (5) Var ⊤
 u i j cos(wi v) = . (15)
 D i=1 2− D

where U = A⊤ B is also a member of the orthogonal group Theorem 2: Consider the sample data D = {xi }i=1 N
 , where
O S(D). Let ui = [u i1 , . . . , u i D ] be the ith row of U . Then d
 xi ∈ R . Suppose that W D×d
 ⊂R D×d
 be the affine space of
 d-to-D-dimensional transformations from the standard normal
 2 X distribution. For any A, B ∈ W D×d and any x, y ∈ D, let
r I (x)⊤rU (y) = u i j cos wi⊤ x + φi cos w⊤j y + φ j . (6)
  
 .
 D i, j A,B
 KRAT (x, y) = r A (x)⊤r B (y) = (Ax)⊤ By, then the variance of
  
 Var KRATA,B
 (x, y) = D∥x∥2 ∥y∥2 . (16)
The expectation of the approximate kernel is
 Proof: Let C = A⊤ B. Then
E[r I (x) rU (y)]
 ⊤
 D
 2 X
 u i j E cos wi⊤ x + φi cos w⊤j y + φ j .
    X
 = (7) ci j = ati bt j . (17)
 D i, j
 t=1
LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION 2679

Since ati and bt j are independent of each other, the expectation combined with a set of random orthogonal rotations as random
of the product ati bt j is equal to 0, so we have transformation mappings to transform the original data into
   a new feature space. Theorem 1 shows that the sample
 d
 X inner product in the transformed space can approximate the
 E[x⊤ A⊤ By] = E xi ci j y j  = 0. (18)
 Gaussian kernel function, and the inner product’s expectation
 i, j=1
 variance Var(KRFTAB
 (x, y)) is fixed under a given transformation
For the expectation of squared quantity, we break it into a matrix and dimension, which meets the general properties
summation of terms of the Gaussian kernel function. In comparison, Theorem 2
  2 
 d
 shows that using a set of RAT does not meet the requirements
  X
 E[(x⊤ A⊤ By)2 ] = E xi ci j y j  
  of the kernel function (the expectation of the transformed
 i, j=1
 sample inner product is 0, and the variance of the transformed
 sample inner product is related to the sample size). In addition,
 d
 X adjusting the parameter γ of RFT is equivalent to adjusting the
 = xi y j xk yl E[ci j ckl ]. (19) distribution of the approximate Gaussian kernel, which affects
 i, j,k,l=1
 the fitting and generalization ability of the classifier.
It suffices to evaluate E[ci j ckl ] in the following cases. A stable data distribution offers two primary advantages for
 Case 1: When i = k, j = l, we have anomaly detection.
 1) Consistency and predictability: Stable data distributions
  !2 
 XD
 E[ci2j ] = E ati bt j  ensure a lower expected variance in kernel approxit=1 mations after applying random transformations. This
 D D translates to more predictable and less random data
 distributions, making it easier to discern patterns and
 X  X
 E ati2 bt2j +
 
 = E[ati asi bt j bs j ]
 t=1 t̸ =s detect anomalies. Furthermore, the smooth nature of the
 = D. kernel approximation, such as the approximated RBF
 kernel, resists minor variations, enhancing the model’s
 Case 2: When i = k, j ̸ = l, we have robustness.
 D
 X  2  XD 2) Robust feature representation: Stability in transforma-
 E[ci j cil ] = E ati bt j btl + E[ati asi bt j bsl ] = 0. (20) tions, as offered by RFT, means that features remain
 t=1 t̸ =s consistent, allowing models to focus on inherent data
 Case 3: When i ̸= k, j = l, similarly, E[ci j ckl ] = 0. structures rather than noise. This robust representation
 Case 4: When i ̸= k, j ̸ = l, similarly, E[ci j ckl ] = 0. aids in emphasizing crucial patterns pivotal for anomaly
 In summary, we have detection, as deviations from these patterns are typical
 indicators of anomalies.
   d
 A,B
 Var KRAT (x, y) = D
 X
 xi 2 y j 2 = D∥x∥2 ∥y∥2 . (21) In essence, a more stable data distribution facilitates better
 i, j=1
 model training, reduces the risk of overfitting, and strengthens
 the detection of genuine anomalies by prioritizing consistent,
 From (16) in the Theorem 2, the approximate kernel with noise-resistant features.
RAT KRAT (x, y) is linearly positively related to the norm of
 4) How to Guarantee the Appropriate Transformation of the
the input samples x, y and the dimension D of the transformed
 Data Distribution: Our method transforms the data distribuspace. Comparing (16) and (4), we can observe that when
 tion by sequentially applying an RFT and then ROTs. The
the transformed dimension D increases, the variance of the
 key to this transformation lies in the parameter γ used in the
approximate kernel of the RAT Var(KRAT A,B
 (x, y)) increases,
 approximated RBF kernel exp(−γ ∥x − y∥2 ) during the RFT
but the variance of the approximate kernel of the RFT
 stage. The appropriate data distribution can be achieved by
 A,B
Var(KRFT (x, y)) becomes smaller, which indicates that the data
 tuning the parameter γ (in our experiments, we tune γ among
distribution using the RFT is more stable than the RAT.
 the values of {0.1, 0.01, 0.001}). Specifically, γ influences the
 Our anomaly detection algorithm is built on self-labeled
 transformation of the data distribution in the following two
classification data obtained through a set of random transforways.
mation mappings and then a classifier is trained to predict the
class distribution and construct the sample anomaly scores. 1) Width of the kernel: By adjusting γ , we can control the
Therefore, controlling and generating appropriate data distri- width of the approximated RBF kernel, thereby finding
bution will be beneficial to our self-labeled classification-based the optimal balance between the model complexity and
anomaly detection. Kernel method is often used to imple- its generalization ability.
ment nonlinear learning; kernel approximation is a powerful 2) Distribution of wi : For an RFT, each wi √ in (1) is sampled
technique to make kernel methods scalable by mapping input from a Gaussian distribution p(w) = 2γ N (w; 0, 1).
features into a new space where inner products approxi- Thus, the spread of this Gaussian distribution is influmate the kernel well. Random Fourier features is a typical enced by γ . Larger γ leads to wider distributions of wi ,
data-independent technique to approximate the kernel function while smaller γ results in more concentrated distribuusing an explicit feature mapping RFT [33]. We adopt RFT tions of wi .
2680 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

B. sForest Classifier Algorithm 1 Construction of sForest
 1: Input: Training (normal) data D := {x1 , . . . , x N };
 In this section, we provide a detailed description on the M
proposed self-supervised classifier. On the normal training The random rotation matrices {Rm }m=0 (Rm ∈ S O(D),
dataset D := {x1 , . . . , x N } ⊆ Rd , we first conduct feature R0 denotes the identical transformation).
 2: Apply the RFT ψ(·) to D and obtain the data
transformation with the RFT ψ(·). Then, we generate M
rotation matrices {Rm }m=1 M
 by uniformly sampling among {(ψ(x0 ), . . . , ψ(x N ))};
 3: for m = 0 → M do
SO(d) and construct the self-labeled normal dataset as
 4: Generate random rotation matrix Rm ;
 D A := {(Rm (ψ(xi )), Rm )}i∈{1,...,N },m∈{0,...,M} . (22) 5: Apply Rm to {(ψ(x0 ), . . . , ψ(x N ))} and achieve labeled
Here, R0 denotes the identical transformation and data {(Rm (ψ(xi )), Rm )}i=1
 N
 ;
 6: end for
{R0 (ψ(xi ))}i∈{1,...,N } stand for the data only after the
 7: Obtain self-labeled normal dataset D A as in Eq. (22).
RFT ψ(·). It is worth noting that when the data dimension
 8: Build random forest classifier based on D A .
d is very small (e.g., d < 5), it is necessary to do the RFT
 9: Output: R̂ sForest (x; R, D) defined as in Eq. (23).
to transform the data into a higher-dimensional feature space
where the dimension of transformed data D ≫ d (e.g.,
D = 100). However, when the data dimension d is large
or the data contains lots of redundant features, we need
to reduce the data dimension before applying the RFT.
Reducing the dimensionality of the high-dimensional data can
eliminate redundant information contained in the data, thus
improving the final performance of the classifier. Moreover,
it can efficiently reduce the computational complexity for
the subsequent RF training. Here, various dimensionality
reduction methods apply, including principle components
analysis (PCA), singular-value decomposition (SVD), etc.
 Now we are ready to construct our sForest based on the
RF classifier proposed by [34]. First, we generate B buckets
of self-labeled normal samples randomly through a bootstrap
method, with the bth sample bucket denoted as Db ⊂ D A .
Then, we construct a decision tree on each bucket. It divides
the predictor space into non-overlapping regions {A j } Jj=1 , with
J denoting the total number of terminal nodes of the decision
tree. Borrowing notations from [35], in a node j, representing
a region A j with N j observations, for (R(ψ(xi )), Yi ) ∈ Db ,
 Fig. 2. t-SNE visualization of RFT-based rotated data. (a1) Toy data.
let (a2) Self-labeled data. (b1) Toy data. (b2) Self-labeled data.
 1 X
 p̂ j,m,b := 1(Yi = Rm )
 N j (R(ψ(x )),Y )∈A
 i i j datasets “blob” and “moons.” Both of the two datasets contain
be the proportion of class Rm observations in node A j , where 200 data points, 80% of which are normal data and 20%
the random parameter R stands for random rotation and 1(·) abnormal points generated by uniform sampling in the region
is the indicator function. Then, we take the vector of [−7, 7] × [−7, 7]. The normal data points of “blob” are
 J
 X M generated by isotropic Gaussian. The normal data of “moons”
 R̂ b (x; R, Db ) := p̂ j,m,b · 1(x ∈ A j ) contains two interleaving half-circles. The two toy datasets are
 j=1
 m=0 visualized in Fig. 2(a1) and (b1).
 On the two datasets, we first increase the data dimension
 P M We mention that
as the output of the bth self-supervised tree. from 2 to 10 with RFT, and then generate different random
R̂ b (x; R, Db ) is a standard vector since m=0 p̂ j,m,b = 1. orthogonal matrices to transform the 10-D features into dif-
 Then by ensembling the outputs of all trees, the ferent categories. We visualize the generated self-labeled data
self-supervised forest classifier can be denoted as in Fig. 2(a2) and (b2). Different colors in Fig. 2 represent
 B different categories. Note that the abnormal data is specially
 1 X
 R̂ sForest (x; R, D) := R̂ b (x; R, Db ). (23) marked by adding a black edge. Surprisingly, most of the
 B b=1
 abnormal data is clustered to the center of Fig. 2(a2) and (b2),
Intuitively, we can take the mth element of vector while the normal data is more concentrated to different clusters
R̂ sForest (x; R, D) as the probability of R(x) being classified according to their corresponding labels. Then the classifier
to Rm . The detailed construction procedure of sForest is trained by the normal data and their corresponding rotations
presented in Algorithm 1. makes it easier to classify the normal data, and harder for the
 Here, we provide an intuitive explanation on why our model abnormal ones. Note that the normal clusters also contain a
can boost the performance of anomaly detection with two toy small number of abnormal data, which mainly results from a
LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION 2681

small blob of the generated abnormal samples overlaps with Algorithm 2 sForest for Anomaly Detection
the normal data. 1: Input: The sForest R̂ sForest (x; R, D) trained as in Eq.
 (23); Testing data Dt = {xt1 , . . . , xtN }; Number of random
 M
C. Self-Supervised Forest (sForest) for Anomaly Detection rotations M; the random rotation matrices {Rm }m=0 (Rm ∈
 S O(D), R0 denotes the identical transformation).
 After training the classifier, the main issue is how to
 2: Apply the same RFT ψ(·) employed in training data to
separate the anomalous and normal instances in the testing
 Dt .
data. Golan and El-Yaniv [17] and Hendrycks and Gimpel [23]
 3: for m = 0 → M do
claimed that anomalous points tend to obtain lower probability
 4: Apply Rm to Dt and achieve labeled data
belonging to their predicted labels by a classifier, with the
 {(Rm (ψ(xit )), Rm )}i=1
 N
 ;
intuition being that class-exclusive features must be captured
 5: end for
by training the classifier to distinguish between self-labeled
 6: Obtain self-labeled testing dataset D A,t in Eq. (24);
data. Now we apply the well-trained sForest classifier defined
 7: Apply the well-trained R̂ sForest (x; R, D) classifier to D A,t
in (23) to detect the anomalies.
 and achieve the output matrix Â(xit ) in Eq. (25).
 Let Dt = {xt1 , . . . , xtN } denote the testing dataset that
 8: Output: Measure the normality and anomaly in the test
contains both normal samples and anomalies. With RFT,
 data based on the score defined as in (26).
we can obtain the transformed dataset {ψ(xt1 ), . . . , ψ(xtN )}.
 M
After the transformation, we apply the rotations {Rm }m=0 to
the transformed dataset and generate the self-labeled testing
dataset 2) PIDForest [28] favors partitions of greatly varying sparsity, and detects anomalies based on the PID scores.
 D A,t := Rm ψ(xit ) , Rm i∈{1,...,N },m∈{0,...,M} .
   
 (24) 3) GOAD [24] is a classification-based anomaly detector
 with deep neural networks.
Then, we apply the well-trained sForest classifier to D A,t , and
achieve the output vectors 4) LOF [36] is a distance-based anomaly detector focus on
 the locality of samples.
 R̂ sForest ψ xit ; Rm , Dt m∈{0,...,M} , i = 1, . . . , N .
   
 5) k-NN [37], [38] is a prevailing distance-based anomaly
 detection method, while it has computational cost when
Specifically, for each xit , we feed the M +1 rotational versions
 data size and dimension is high.
to the classifier, and can simply write the output vectors as an
 6) OCSVM [39] trains a classifier to perform the separation
(M + 1) × (M + 1) matrix Â
 of normal points and outliers.
  M
 Â(xit ) := R̂ sForest ψ xit ; Rm , Dt m=0 .
 
 (25) 7) COPOD [40], parameter-free method which first constructs an empirical copula, and then uses it to predict
Notice that the diagonal elements are the probabilities for tail probabilities of each given data point to determine
every self-labeled R(ψ(xit )) being correctly classified. There- its level of “extremeness.”
fore, by aiming to categorize the points with low accuracy as
anomalies, we design the normality score for xit as the sum of
these probabilities, i.e., B. Experiments on Synthetic Data
 In this part, we first demonstrate the advantage of applying
 Score xit := tr Â ψ xit .
  
 (26)
 a self-supervised learning mechanism to anomaly detection
where tr(A) means the trace of the matrix A. Normality scores through two synthetic datasets. We conduct the experiment by
describe how normal a testing sample is, and we recognize generating two datasets that each of which contains 400 points,
those with the lowest normality scores as anomalies. The where the proportion of abnormal samples is set to 20%.
detailed process of our model for anomaly detection is shown For the first dataset “moon,” the normal points are generated
in Algorithm 2. by sklearn with noise setting 0.5, and the second dataset
 is obtained by employing “make_blobs.” For both datasets,
 IV. N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS the abnormal data are uniformly sampled in the region of
 In order to evaluate the generalization and effectiveness of [−7, 7] × [−7, 7].
the proposed sForest, we conduct extensive experiments on More specifically, we compare the performance of the prosynthetic and real-world datasets. We compare the proposed posed method with seven state-of-the-art methods introduced
method with the state-of-the-art methods. Besides, we also in Section IV-A. For fair comparisons, the number of trees is
carry out extensive numerical simulations to analyze the set as 100 for all the tree-based algorithms, and three fully
behavior of the model parameters and data transformation. connected layers are employed for GOAD with the hidden
 layer setting 100. The default node setting is adapting for
 k-NN and LOF. For sForest, we first change the dimension
A. Baselines
 to 100 by RFT, and then conduct 16 orthogonal rotations to
 The following anomaly detection methods are taken as generate self-supervised labels.
baselines for comparison. Fig. 3 provides the visual results for different methods on
 1) iForest [26] recognizes anomalies as those more likely the two datasets, where the normal and abnormal data are,
 to be “isolated” in the early stage of tree construction. respectively, represented by white and black dots. The red
2682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 3. Comparison of different methods on two synthetic datasets, where the red line denotes the decision boundary for normal and abnormal data.

dotted line is the decision boundary with the yellow and on the remaining 50% of the normal data and all the
blue regions denoting normal and abnormal data, respectively. anomalies.
Besides, we also provide the degree for abnormal data in the 2) High-dimensional datasets: Since the feature dimenblue region, where the darker region means higher degree of sions of the above datasets are too low and there
certainty. The number on the downside is the corresponding are the maximum of 400-D in datasets, we introduce
error for each algorithm for different datasets. Based on the another three datasets with higher dimensions including:
result presented in Fig. 3 that our method could predict 1) OSQ-768d; 2) OSQ-1024d: these two datasets are
the region for normal data more correctly, which is more generated from a textual dataset OSQ in task-oriented
closed to the ground-truth distribution. In the meanwhile, the dialogue systems. OSQ provides a set of manually
lower number of errors can also prove the advantage of our labeled out-of-scope queries (OSQs) that are not supmethod. Note that our method is consistently and significantly ported by the current system. These OSQs are regarded
superior to GOAD [24], which is also constructed by the self- as anomaly instances in our experiments. We take each
supervised mechanism. These synthetic data experiments can utterance as input and obtain its feature vector using
also efficiently demonstrate the advantage of our method for the two pre-trained English language models BERT-base
anomaly detection compared with other methods. and BERT-large [41], respectively; and 3) IPA dataset: it
 contains a set of Chinese utterances that were collected
C. Experiments on Real-World Data and annotated in the development process of a commercialized intelligent personal assistant (IPA) named
 We perform numerical experiments to illustrate the effec-
 Bixby. This dataset covers 81 intents, but 15 intents
tiveness of our sForest method compared with other typical
 are not supported by the current IPA system. In this
anomaly detection algorithms on real-world outlier detection
 study, these non-supported intents are selected as the
benchmark datasets.
 1) Datasets: out-of-domain intents, and the corresponding utterances
 are considered as anomaly data. We generate their fea-
 1) Low-dimensional datasets: We perform numerical experture vectors by Chinese BERT-base.1 The datasets are
 iments on 30 real datasets to illustrate the effectiveness
 divided into the train, validation, and test sets, while the
 of our proposed sForest on real-world outlier detecanomaly data were only used for validation and test.
 tion benchmark datasets. There are 28 multidimen-
 We keep the same data splits with [42] and [43]. The
 sional real datasets from Outlier Detection DataSets
 partitions of the data used in our experiment are shown
 (ODDS), with various sample sizes and dimensionalin Table II.
 ities. For example, small-size datasets such as glass,
 ionosphere, wbc, and wine, and large-scale datasets 2) Parameter Settings: In the following, we present the
 such as forestcover, http, and smtp are included details of implementation. For the proposed sForest, we fix the
 in the experiments. High-dimensional datasets such number_of_rotations M = 64 and randomly sample
 as arrhythmia and speech are also included. each element of d × d transformation matrices according
 Details of datasets are shown in Table I. For these to the standard normal distribution. For the RF classi-
 28 datasets, our configuration follows that of Bergman fier, we fix the number_of_trees B = 100 and the
 and Hoshen [24]. We use 50% of the normal data to
 train the outlier detector, and evaluate the outlier detector 1 https://github.com/google-research/bert
LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION 2683

 TABLE I
 D ESCRIPTIONS OF A NOMALY D ETECTION B ENCHMARK DATASETS

 TABLE II win 6, 6, 2, and 3 out of 31 datasets, respectively. Besides,
D ESCRIPTIONS OF A NOMALY D ETECTION B ENCHMARK DATASETS . in the perspective of the top two performance, sForest, iForest,
 OSQ-768d AND OSQ-1024d H AVE 768- AND 1024-D F EATURES ,
 R ESPECTIVELY, W HICH A RE B OTH G ENERATED F ROM OSQ BY
 PIDforest, GOAD, k-NN, LOF, OCSVM, and COPOD win 20,
 BERT-BASE AND BERT-L ARGE . IPA I S C ONVERTED I NTO 6, 4, 2, 9, 13, 6, and 5 out of 31 datasets. Moreover, in the
 768-D DATA T HROUGH B ERT-BASE aspect of the average performance of benchmark datasets, our
 method has the lowest rank sum.
 When it comes to the three high-dimensional datasets as
 shown in Table IV, sForest consistently outperforms other
 baselines by a large margin. Specifically, there are 1.3, 4.1, and
 8.5 AUC improvements compared to the second best results
 for OSQ-768d, OSQ-1024d, and IPA, respectively. Note
 that the performance gap for high-dimensional datasets is more
 obvious compared to that in low-dimensional datasets. The
min_samples_split p = 2. For PIDForest, we use main reason is that high-dimensional data has more redundant
the implementation of the authors provided in github.2 For features, and it can boost the performance of the downstream
iForest, LOF and OCSVM, we utilize the implementation of tasks by reducing the dimensionality of the data.
scikit-learn. For k-NN, we use the PyOD implementation.3 The above results can efficiently demonstrate the advantage
For hyperparameter settings, we fix the hyperparameters of of sForest in dealing with tabular data. In the meanwhile,
sub-sampling size to 256 and the number of trees to 100 for it can also indicate that the self-supervision-based methods
iForest. For PIDForest, we fix the hyperparameters of depth to can not only achieve the best performance for image data,
10 and the number of trees to 50, which is used in [28]. We fix but also for tabular data. Furthermore, it is also consistent
the number of neighbors to 20 for LOF, and use RBF kernel with our analysis that the data distribution obtained by the
with default hyperparameter gamma for OCSVM, referred to combination of RFT and orthogonal rotation is more stable and
hyperparameter settings in scikit-learn. For k-NN, we fix k to robust. Thus, a better performance is achieved by the proposed
be 5. sForest.
 The performance evaluation has been done based on the area
under the ROC curve (AUC). We run these algorithms 10 times
 D. Analysis on Relationship Between Classification
and record the means and standard deviations of the AUC
 and Anomaly Detection
values. Since some methods such as LOF, k-NN, OCSVM,
and COPOD are deterministic, it is not necessary to repeat To demonstrate the efficacy of classification-based anomaly
experiments for three datasets (OSQ-768d, OSQ-1024d, and detection, we perform simulations on four real datasets
IPA) in which data partitions are provided. of varying sizes and dimensions. We assess the baseline
 3) Main Results: The experimental results for the classifiers by calculating the classification accuracy of the
low-dimensional datasets are illustrated in Table III. In the self-labeled normal samples in the testing set, each adhering
aspect of best performance, our method wins 14 out of to a specific classification rule. The anomaly detection perfor-
31 datasets, and the other three forest-based methods, iForest, mance is measured by the area under the ROC curve, denoted
PIDforest, win 7 and 5 out of 31 datasets, respectively. as AUC. A higher AUC value signifies greater anomaly
The network-based GOAD wins only 1, and the other three detection accuracy.
deterministic methods, k-NN, LOF, OCSVM, and COPOD, For parameter settings, we fix the number_of_
 rotations M = 32 and the number_of_trees
 2 https://github.com/vatsalsharan/pidforest B = 100 for the all datasets. Then, we vary the
 3 https://github.com/yzhao062/pyod min_samples_split p to adjust the performance of
2684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE III
AUC P ERFORMANCE (E XPRESSED IN P ERCENTAGES ) ON B ENCHMARK DATASETS . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD , AND THE S ECOND B EST
 IN U NDERLINE . F OR S F OREST, I F OREST, PID FOREST, AND GOAD, THE S TANDARD D EVIATION I S R EPORTED IN THE S UBSCRIPT. T HE L AST
 ROW S HOWS THE S UMMATION OF R ANKS FOR E ACH M ETHOD , W HICH I S THE L OWER THE B ETTER . I F OREST [26], PID FOREST [28],
 GOAD [24], k-NN [37], LOF [36], OCSVM [39], AND COPOD [40]

 TABLE IV
 AUC P ERFORMANCE (E XPRESSED IN P ERCENTAGES ) ON T HREE T EXTUAL DATASETS . G IVEN THE S TABILITY OF AUC P ERFORMANCE
 D UE TO THE L ARGE S IZE OF T HESE DATASETS , S TANDARD D EVIATION I S O MITTED

the RF classifier, and observe its impact on the accuracy of is needed to capture the features of the self-labeled normal
anomaly detection. We apply PCA to remove the feature class. From Fig. 4 for Mnist, the classification accuracy
correlation in datasets by transforming the dimensionality of drops rapidly, while the anomaly detection AUC declines
Mnist and Ionosphere to 32. For IPA and OSQ-678d, at a slower pace (e.g., when p increases from 2 to 100,
their dimensionality is reduced to 128. We run the the classification accuracy drops by 10%, but the AUC only
experiment five times under different random seeds to decreases by 0.5%). The reason may be that for the self-labeled
obtain the average value of AUC and the classification classification data of Mnist, the data distributions of different
accuracy. categories overlap each other, so a classifier with stronger
 The results for the four datasets are shown in Fig. 4. As the classification ability is required to discriminate. In addition,
min_samples_split p increases, first the self-label classi- sForest achieves a high AUC when p is large (indicating the
fication accuracy and the AUC criterion for anomaly detection classifier’s weaker classification ability). This could be because
show a negative correlation trend. Meanwhile, as the classifica- the abnormal samples are derived from one of the handwrittion accuracy of the RF classifier decreases, the AUC criterion ten digits, making them distinctly different from the normal
for anomaly detection turns better. This indicates that choosing samples.
an appropriate weak classifier or constructing a more difficult self-supervised classification task is useful for anomaly
detection. However, the performance of both classifiers will E. Analysis on the Effect of RFT
eventually turn worse consistently. This consistency in the In this experiment, we compare the performance between
performance of the classification and anomaly detection-based the self-labeled data obtained by the RFT + orthogonal
methods can be reasonable properties so that a good classifier rotation transform and the self-labeled data obtained by the
LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION 2685

Fig. 4. Relationship between accuracy of classification and anomaly detection.

random affine transform (RAT).4 For a fair comparison, we set
the same setting for both RFT and RAT. We normalize each
row of the affine transformation matrix wm .5 Note that we
denote RFT + orthogonal rotation transform as RFT for simplicity of notation. Specifically, we first generate the training
data according to the corresponding setting, where the number
of orthogonal rotation transforms is set as 16. Meanwhile,
the initial input feature is d, and then is transformed to
D. For RFT, we randomly sampled transformation matrices
wm using the normal distribution for each element. Each
matrix has dimensionality D × d. We examine changes in the
performance and the trend of the approximation error (MSE)
of RBF kernel under different transformation dimensions. The
odds from Ionosphere and Mnist are regarded as test data.
In the experiment, the parameter γ of RBF is set to 0.01, and
the final experimental results are shown in Fig. 5.
 As shown in Fig. 5, the AUC value of sForest is very stable
with the increase of transformation dimension when choosing
the self-labeled data generated by RFT. This indicates that
RFT method can achieve comparable performance without
an extra increasing transformation dimension. In addition,
 Fig. 5. Comparison of RFT and RAT with the same setting.
the kernel approximation error of this method presents a
steady downward trend with the increase of transformation
dimension, which indicates that RFT + orthogonal transfor- effectiveness of generating proper data distribution by our
mation can maintain a good kernel approximation, as well method.
as reflecting the stability of transformation data distribution.
However, when it comes to sForest based on RAT, although F. Effect of Different Classifiers and Transformations
the kernel approximation error of samples also reduces with
 We conduct the comparison by replacing the RF classifier
the increase of affine transformation dimension, its MSE is
 and our random transformations RFT with other classifiers
far more than the results of RFT. Moreover, the performance
 and RAT, respectively. More specifically, we mainly select
fluctuates a lot with different dimensions and has a larger
 Gaussian Naive Bayesian (GNB), logical regression (LR), supprediction variance. These experiments can indicate the high
 port vector machine (SVM), k-NN, and multilayer perceptrons
 (MLPs) as the base classifiers. The final results are shown in
 Table V, where different combinations are constructed to com-
 4 This self-labeled data is done by transforming data X ∈ Rn×d using M
 pare the performance with six datasets including satellite,
different affine transformations into T (x, m) = wm X ⊤ , where wm ∈ R D×d is
a random matrix. arrhythmia, ionosphere, mnist, OSQ-768d, and
 5 If normalization is not performed, the MSE of its kernel approximation IPA.
shows a rapid increase with the increase of D/d. After normalizing wm , the The table clearly indicates that both the choice of classifier
kernel approximation MSE of RAT shows a decreasing trend with the increase
of D/d. Besides, we also find that normalizing or not normalizing wm has and the corresponding data distribution significantly influence
no significant effect on its anomaly detection results. the final performance. Notably, when combined with various
2686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE V
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF THE P ROPOSED A LGORITHM U NDER D IFFERENT C LASSIFIERS AND T RANSFORMATIONS (RAT AND RFT). T HE AUC
 P ERFORMANCE I S E XPRESSED IN P ERCENTAGES , AND THE S UBSCRIPT R EFER TO THE S TANDARD D EVIATION OF THE R EPEATED E XPERIMENTS

 As is shown in Fig. 6, we can observe the following
 conclusions: 1) the performances of anomaly detection would
 be decreased when the dimensionality of datasets d is too
 low, such as dim = 2 for Mnist and Ionosphere, dim =
 4 for the other two datasets; 2) for the difficult anomaly
 detection tasks IPA and OSQ-768d, as the dimension of
 datasets d becomes higher, the optimal M becomes larger.
 For example, when the dimension d ′ of the PCA-transformed
 OSQ-768d dataset is 8, the best M lies in the range [20, 30].
 In addition, when the dimension d ′ raises up to 16 or more,
 it can consistently boost the performances when M increases,
 and become steady when M is sufficiently large; 3) for easy
 anomaly detection datasets Ionophere and Mnist, the best
 Ms lie in the range (0, 10], which are relatively small. This
Fig. 6. AUC score versus the number_of_rotations M for datasets indicates that choosing a small M is enough to capture their
with different dimensions. data information and achieve better AUC; and 4) from dim =
 64 in Mnist, the AUC value eventually shows a decreasing
 trend as the number_of_rotations M becomes larger.
classifiers, RFT consistently outperforms RAT. Specifically, The reason may be that the PCA-transformed features with
when employing GNB, k-NN, LR, and MLP as classifiers, higher dimensions contain much redundant information. As the
RFT demonstrates superiority across all datasets in comparison number of rotations M increases, the negative impact of this
to RAT. Furthermore, RF appears to be more competitive redundant information will be amplified which will further
relative to the other five classifiers. It is worth noting that in reduce or suppress the accuracy of anomaly detection algothis section, we only replace the RF and RFT with MLP and rithms. Therefore, before using sForest, it is necessary to
RAT, which is inconsistent with GOAD. perform feature selection or feature learning on the datasets to
 reduce the redundant information or the correlation of features.
G. Analysis on Relationship Between the Dimension
of Data and the Number of Rotations H. Adversarial Samples Experiment
 For the purpose of investigating the relationship between 1) Setting: Let us assume an adversarial model in which
the best number_of_rotations M and the dimension of the attacker knows the model architecture and normal training
dataset, we conduct experiments among datasets with different data with attempting to modify normal samples to become
dimensions. Here, we employ the PCA for dimensionality anomalies. We examine three settings: 1) the attacker knows
reduction, and generate datasets with different dimensions random orthogonal transformation (ROT) and the classifier,
among {2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64}. The four datasets used in but not know the RFT; 2) the attacker knows the classifier,
Section IV-D are selected for this experiment. We conduct but not RFT and ROT; and 3) the attacker does not know
anomaly detection with our sForest algorithm with different RFT, ROT, and the classifier. Since adversarial samples are
M, and evaluate its performances via AUC. The plots of mainly targeted at neural network models, we first choose an
the AUC score versus the number_of_rotations M for MLP as the classifier to obtain adversarial samples and test
datasets with different dimensions are provided in Fig. 6. the model’s adversarial robustness.
LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION 2687

 1) To evaluate the benefits of the components of our pro- 1) The AUC values of the models in the first row of
 posed anomaly detection framework, we construct four both tables significantly decrease under the attack of
 self-supervised anomaly detection models using MLP as their generated adversarial samples, indicating that these
 the classifier: sMLP1 (RFT + ROT + MLP), sMLP2 adversarial samples can effectively attack the model.
 (RFT + ROT + MLP), sMLP3 (RFT + ROT + MLP), 2) When the generated adversarial samples are applied
 and sMLP4 (RFT + ROT + MLP). More specifically, to models with significant differences, the adversarsMLP2 has the same ROT and MLP as sMLP1 and ial samples basically become ineffective. For example,
 sMLP3 has the same MLP as sMLP1. For sMLP4, it has in Table VI, the adversarial samples generated by RFT +
 different RFT, ROT, and MLP from sMLP1. We use the ROT + MLP applied to the model using RAT, and in
 same color to indicate the same components used, where Table VII, the adversarial samples generated by RAT +
 the same MLP refers to the same network structure and MLP applied to the model using RFT + ROT, show that
 initialization. the model performance is largely unaffected, with both
 2) We also construct three self-supervised anomaly detec- increases and decreases on different datasets. This result
 tion models with RF as the classifier: sForest1 (RFT + also aligns with our intuition.
 ROT + RF), sForest2 (RFT + ROT + RF), and 3) In Table VI, the AUC value of RFT + ROT + Forest still
 sForest3 (RFT + ROT + RF). In detail, sForest1 has shows a significant decrease under adversarial samples.
 the same RFT and ROT as sMLP1, but with different This model shares the same RFT + ROT transformation
 classifiers; sForest2 has the same ROT as sMLP1 but with RFT + ROT + MLP, but even with a different
 with different RFTs and classifiers; sForest3 has differ- classifier, RF, the performance decline of other modent RFTs, ROTs, and classifiers from sMLP1. els with different RFTs is very small, mostly ranging
 3) In addition, we also compare the performance between 0% and 2%. This indicates that RFT + ROT
 with incorporating RAT-based methods including can enhance the model’s robustness against adversarial
 RAT + MLP, RAT + MLP, and RAT + RF. samples.
 Specifically, RAT + MLP has the same MLP as 4) In Table VII, the adversarial samples of RAT + MLP
 sMLP1, while RAT + MLP has different MLPs from applied to other models using RAT still show a signifsMLP1. For RAT + RF, it employs RF as the classifier. icant decrease in performance. The reduction generally
 exceeds 2%, even if the model uses a different classifier,
 In the experiment, sMLP1 is employed to generate adver- RF. Compared to Table VI, it is evident that using
sarial samples. The number of random orthogonal rotations RFT + ROT provides more advantages in terms of
M is set to 32, and the transformation dimension of the adversarial robustness than using RFT.
RFT is set to 200. The parameter γ of the RFT for each
dataset takes its optimal parameters used in Section IV-C. The I. Contamination Experiment
MLP is a three-layer perception with hidden size 256 and 1) Setting: Our proposed model assumes that the training
ReLU activation function. Adversarial examples are created data are all normal samples. Here, we conduct a contamination
using projected gradient descent algorithm (PGD) [44] based experiment to observe the robustness of the model when
on sMLP1 (making normal samples appear like anomalies). some anomalies are given normal labels and mixed into the
Divide the original test set into two parts: test normal data and training data. Different from the previous experiment setup,
test abnormal data, and then combine the adversarial samples here the anomalies are divided into train and test parts. The
obtained from sMLP1 on test normal data with test abnormal train anomalies are all used for data contamination, and the
data as the final adversarial sample test set to evaluate various test anomalies are all used for evaluation. We mix the original
models. Here, we run 40 iterations of PGD as our adversary, training set’s 1%, 2%, . . . , 10% degree of anomalies into
with a step size of α = 0.01 and against perturbations of the training data and observe the model’s anomaly detection
size ϵ = 0.1. The increase of false classification rate on the AUC value. Since some datasets have relatively few trainadversarial examples is measured using the above models. ing anomalies, such as OSQ-768d, which is less than 2%
 Besides, we also design a similar new experiment with (250/15 000), we resample from the training anomalies to
the above experiment and test whether our proposed method, obtain the corresponding ratio of contamination samples.
using RFT + ROT, has superiority in adversarial robustness 2) Results: Fig. 7 shows the experimental results of the procompared to RAT. We used another model with RAT transfor- posed framework under two classifiers RF and MLP, denoted
mation, named RAT + MLP, to generate adversarial samples, as RFT + Forest (sForest) and RFT + MLP (sMLP). Each
which were then applied to other model variations including experiment is executed five times using different random seeds.
RAT + RF, RFT + ROT + RF, etc. The RATs are obtained From Fig. 7(a) and (b), we can observe that: 1) the AUCs
through the standard normal distribution generation function of sForest and sMLP show stable changes on almost all
numpy.random.randn(). Note that it is similar to the above datasets except for mnist, which indicates that the proposed
experimental setting in this experiment, where the same color framework is generally robust to the degree of contamination
indicates the same component. and 2) the AUC value of sForest fluctuates steadily and
 2) Results: The experimental results on six datasets are insignificant, but the AUC value of sMLP fluctuates greatly.
shown in Tables VI and VII. From the results, we can draw This indicates that sForest is more stable in anomaly detection
the following conclusions. than the MLP-based sMLP overall.
2688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

 TABLE VI
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS (E XPRESSED IN P ERCENTAGES ) ON A DVERSARIAL ROBUST OF O UR M ETHOD . adv AND no_adv R EPRESENT THE E VALUATION
 R ESULTS OF THE M ODEL U NDER THE A DVERSARIAL S AMPLE T EST S ET AND THE O RIGINAL T EST S ET (W ITHOUT A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES ),
 R ESPECTIVELY. T HE VALUE W ITH ↓ D ENOTES A D ECREASE IN AUC U NDER A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES , W HILE ↑ I NDICATES AN I NCREASE .
 T HE M ODEL IN THE F IRST ROW W ITH A L IGHT B LUE BACKGROUND I S U SED TO G ENERATE A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES AND I S
 A PPLIED TO T EST THE R EMAINING M ODELS . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

 TABLE VII
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON A DVERSARIAL ROBUST OF O UR M ETHOD . adv AND no_adv R EPRESENT THE E VALUATION R ESULTS OF THE M ODEL U NDER
 THE A DVERSARIAL S AMPLE T EST S ET AND THE O RIGINAL T EST S ET (W ITHOUT A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES ), R ESPECTIVELY. T HE VALUE W ITH
 ↓ D ENOTES A D ECREASE IN AUC U NDER A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES , W HILE ↑ I NDICATES AN I NCREASE . T HE M ODEL IN THE F IRST ROW
 W ITH A L IGHT B LUE BACKGROUND I S U SED TO G ENERATE A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES AND I S A PPLIED TO T EST THE R EMAINING
 M ODELS . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

 constructed to the self-supervised training date by orthogonal
 rotation transform. Furthermore, a theoretical description is
 given to show that the proposed method produces more stable
 data distribution (kernel approximation with lower expected
 variance) rather than RAT. We conduct different experiments
 on some artificial and real data to evaluate the performance
 of the proposed method is more stable and efficient than the
 distance-based, kernel-based, forest-based, and network-based
 methods, where the RF classifier is employed to connect the
 data distribution.
Fig. 7. Plots of the relationship between the degree of contamination and In the future, we aim to extend our method to other
the anomaly detection accuracy (measured by AUC) on six datasets. The
proposed sForest is generally robust to the degree of contamination. Each line
 domain such as the anomaly detection for time series. Besides,
plot corresponds to the average AUC values, and the shaded region around this work is designed for semi-supervised anomaly detection,
each line represents the range (from minimum to maximum) of AUC values where the given training data only contain normal samples.
observed. (a) sForest. (b) sMLP.
 In the future work, we plan to design an algorithm for
 unsupervised anomaly detection, in which both normal and
 abnormal data are contained in the training data.
 V. C ONCLUSION
 R EFERENCES
 In this article, we solve the classification-based anomaly [1] J. Liu, B. Wang, Z. Qi, Y. Tian, and Y. Shi, “Learning from label
detection by proposing a more suitable data distribution, which proportions with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
is created for general data with RFT combined with orthogonal Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019.
 [2] J. Liu et al., “LLP-GAN: A GAN-based algorithm for learning from
rotation transform. Specifically, the training data is first trans- label proportions,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34,
formed to a new feature space by RFT, and then the feature is no. 11, pp. 8377–8388, 2023.
LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION 2689

 [3] J. Mao, T. Wang, C. Jin, and A. Zhou, “Feature grouping-based outlier [23] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misdetection upon streaming trajectories,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., classified and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in
 vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 2696–2709, Dec. 2017. Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR). Toulon, France:
 [4] P. Banerjee, P. Yawalkar, and S. Ranu, “MANTRA: A scalable approach OpenReview.net, Apr. 2017, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: https://
 to mining temporally anomalous sub-trajectories,” in Proc. 22nd ACM openreview.net/forum?id=Hkg4TI9xl
 SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2016, [24] L. Bergman and Y. Hoshen, “Classification-based anomaly detection
 pp. 1415–1424. for general data,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR).
 [5] J. Mao, P. Sun, C. Jin, and A. Zhou, “Outlier detection over distributed Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: OpenReview.net, Apr. 2020, pp. 1–12. [Online].
 trajectory streams,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2018, Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1lK_lBtvS
 pp. 64–72. [25] A. Rahimi and B. Recht, “Random features for large-scale kernel
 [6] Y. Yuan, J. Fang, and Q. Wang, “Online anomaly detection in crowd machines,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 3, no. 4. Princeton, NJ, USA: Citeseer,
 scenes via structure analysis,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 45, no. 3, 2007, p. 5.
 pp. 548–561, Mar. 2015. [26] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
 [7] U. Fiore, A. De Santis, F. Perla, P. Zanetti, and F. Palmieri, IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 “Using generative adversarial networks for improving classifi- [27] T. R. Bandaragoda, K. M. Ting, D. Albrecht, F. T. Liu, Y. Zhu, and
 cation effectiveness in credit card fraud detection,” Inf. Sci., J. R. Wells, “Isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest-neighbor
 vol. 479, pp. 448–455, Apr. 2019. ensembles,” Comput. Intell., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 968–998, Nov. 2018.
 [8] V. S. Tseng, J.-C. Ying, C.-W. Huang, Y. Kao, and K.-T. Chen, [28] P. Gopalan, V. Sharan, and U. Wieder, “PIDForest: Anomaly detection
 “FrauDetector: A graph-mining-based framework for fraudulent phone via partial identification,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
 call detection,” in Proc. 21st ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery pp. 15783–15793.
 Data Mining, Aug. 2015, pp. 2157–2166. [29] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu-
 [9] Y.-H. Yoo, U.-H. Kim, and J.-H. Kim, “Recurrent reconstructive network pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
 for sequential anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 1–19.
 pp. 1704–1715, Mar. 2021. [30] X. Yang, L. J. Latecki, and D. Pokrajac, “Outlier detection with globally
[10] C. Yin, S. Zhang, J. Wang, and N. N. Xiong, “Anomaly detection optimal exemplar-based GMM,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining,
 based on convolutional recurrent autoencoder for IoT time series,” Apr. 2009, pp. 145–154.
 IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 112–122, [31] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
 Jan. 2022. detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learn-
[11] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time ing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
 series with smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,” pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1177–1191, [32] R. Blaser and P. Fryzlewicz, “Random rotation ensembles,” J. Mach.
 Mar. 2021. Learn. Res., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 126–151, 2016.
[12] T. Ergen and S. S. Kozat, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with LSTM [33] F. Liu, X. Huang, Y. Chen, and J. A. K. Suykens, “Random features
 neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 8, for kernel approximation: A survey on algorithms, theory, and beyond,”
 pp. 3127–3141, Aug. 2020. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 7128–7148,
[13] T. Schlegl, P. Seebock, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidterfurth, and Oct. 2022.
 G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial [34] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
 networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process. 2001.
 Med. Imag., 2017, pp. 146–157. [35] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical
[14] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Cham, Switzerland:
 survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407. Springer, 2009.
[15] H. Wang, M. J. Bah, and M. Hammad, “Progress in outlier detec- [36] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 tion techniques: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 107964–108000, density-based local outliers,” ACM SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2,
 2019. pp. 93–104, Jun. 2000.
[16] S. Gidaris, P. Singh, and N. Komodakis, “Unsupervised representa- [37] S. Ramaswamy, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim, “Efficient algorithms for
 tion learning by predicting image rotations,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. mining outliers from large data sets,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf.
 Learn. Represent. (ICLR). Vancouver, BC, Canada: OpenReview.net, Manage. Data, May 2000, pp. 427–438.
 Apr./May 2018, pp. 1–12. [38] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
[17] I. Golan and R. El-Yaniv, “Deep anomaly detection using geomet- spaces,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discovery.
 ric transformations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2002, pp. 15–27.
 pp. 9758–9769. [39] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and
[18] J. Liu, Z. Qi, B. Wang, Y. Tian, and Y. Shi, “SELF-LLP: Self-supervised R. C. Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional dislearning from label proportions with self-ensemble,” Pattern Recognit., tribution,” Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, Jul. 2001.
 vol. 129, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 108767. [40] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copula-
[19] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. A. Efros, “Unsupervised visual rep- based outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
 resentation learning by context prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Nov. 2020, pp. 1118–1123.
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Santiago, Chile, Dec. 2015, pp. 1422–1430, doi: [41] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 10.1109/ICCV.2015.167. of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
[20] M. Noroozi and P. Favaro, “Unsupervised learning of visual represen- arXiv:1810.04805.
 tations by solving jigsaw puzzles,” in Computer Vision—ECCV 2016, [42] S. Larson et al., “An evaluation dataset for intent classification and
 vol. 9910. Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, out-of-scope prediction,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural
 Oct. 2016, pp. 69–84, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46466-4_5. Lang. Process. 9th Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP-
[21] R. Zhang, P. Isola, and A. Efros, “Colorful image colorization,” in Proc. IJCNLP), 2019, pp. 1311–1316.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., vol. 9907. Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Cham, [43] Y. Zheng, G. Chen, and M. Huang, “Out-of-domain detection for natural
 Switzerland: Springer, Oct. 2016, pp. 649–666, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319- language understanding in dialog systems,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio,
 46487-9_40. Speech, Language Process., vol. 28, pp. 1198–1209, 2020.
[22] G. Larsson, M. Maire, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Learning representations [44] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu,
 for automatic colorization,” in Computer Vision—ECCV 2016, vol. 9908. “Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” in
 Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Oct. 2016, Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–23. [Online]. Available:
 pp. 577–593, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0_35. https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJzIBfZAb