774 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 SENTINEL: Insider Threat Detection Based
 on Multi-Timescale User Behavior
 Interaction Graph Learning
 Fengrui Xiao , Student Member, IEEE, Shuangwu Chen , Member, IEEE, Siyang Chen, Student Member, IEEE,
 Yuanyi Ma , Student Member, IEEE, Huasen He , Member, IEEE, and Jian Yang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Insider threats have become a prominent driver be- Ponemon’s 2022 Insider Threat Report [2], there has been a sighind a myriad of cybersecurity incidents in recent years. Since nificant 44% increase in insider threat incidents over the past two
 the threats take place within intranet, traditional security de- years and the financial impact of each incident has risen by more
 vices located at the network perimeter can hardly detect them.
 The trust management methods employed within the organiza- than a third, with the amount of money lost per incident reaching
 tion are likewise incapable of intercepting access actions already a staggering $15.38 million. In contrast to external attacks that
 authenticated with valid credentials. In this paper, we propose a need to breach security perimeter, attacks from insiders are more
 novel insider threat detection method named SENTINEL, which pernicious because the malicious insiders are well-acquainted
 identifies abnormal behavior of insiders and provides fine-grained with core secrets and may already have delegated authority to
 threat intelligence. We devise a dynamic user behavior interaction
 graph (BIG), which jointly considers the spatial distribution of access sensitive data. Hence, insider threat poses serious security
 user behavioral trajectories among the network topology and the risks and potential harm to the organization’s network.
 temporal variations of user behavioral profiles. By incorporating a Detecting insider threat still face many challenges for busispatio-temporal graph neural network, SENTINEL is able to learn nesses and organizations of all sizes and across diverse industhe operation regularities of users at specific times and respective tries. Firstly, due to their position within security perimeter,
 positions in BIG. In order to perceive both the abrupt and persistent threats simultaneously, we conceive a multi-timescale fusion internal employees can inadvertently launch attacks without
 mechanism for detecting users’ activities at different timescales. triggering alarms from security devices. Besides, these insiders
 SENTINEL implements a log-entry-level detection without requir- with privileged access can leverage the credentials associated
 ing any attack samples during model training. The experiments with their working accounts to circumvent the multi-layer trust
 conducted on widely-used public datasets demonstrate that SEN- management mechanisms within the organization [3]. Secondly,
 TINEL achieves superior performance while maintaining a relatively low computational overhead compared to the state-of-the-art malicious activity carried out by insiders is relatively uncommethods. mon. As a result, there is often limited available data to describe
 and analyze such activities [4]. Thirdly, for the sake of exfil-
 Index Terms—Insider threat detection, graph neural network,
 anomaly detection, behavior interaction graph (BIG).
 trating confidential files, tampering with sensitive data, and sabotaging system components, insider threats perpetrators would
 move laterally across multiple hosts in the target network using
 I. INTRODUCTION stolen credentials and accounts [5]. The attacker’s footprints
 could be fragmented and scattered across various user and host
 MIDST the rapidly evolving landscape of network secu-
 A rity, insider threats have become a prominent driver behind
 a myriad of cybersecurity incidents in recent years, which have
 records, which makes it difficult to raise security personnel’s
 attention. Lastly, well-planned attackers usually employ sophisticated strategies, like multistage persistent threats and mimicry
 inflicted substantial detriment upon government, enterprises and attacks, to circumvent detection [6].
 education networks. Insider threats commonly emerges from Massive efforts have been made to promptly detect insider
 the actions of either malicious or unintentional insiders, who threats. Existing insider threat detection methods can be roughly
 exploit their authorized access to negatively affect the reliability divided into three categories: rule-based methods, machine
 of the organization’s information systems [1]. According to learning based methods, and graph-based methods [7]. Rulebased methods [8], [9], [10] employ manually defined rules
 Received 5 November 2023; revised 24 October 2024; accepted 12 December to detect data leakage, which however heavily rely on expert
 2024. Date of publication 17 December 2024; date of current version 24 knowledge, and thus can hardly handle attacks beyond prede-
 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science fined rules and prior experiences. Machine learning based [1],
 Foundation of China under Grant U23A20275 and Grant 62101525 and in
 part by the China Environment for Network Innovations (CENI) under Grant [4], [11], [12] approaches necessitate manual design of feature
 2016-000052-73-01-000515. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Baochun Li. engineering and employ techniques such as Markov models or
 (Corresponding author: Shuangwu Chen.) deep learning models to accomplish the detection task. More-
 The authors are with the Department of Automation, University of Science
 and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China (e-mail: chensw@ustc.edu.cn). over, machine learning algorithms face the challenges of feature
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2024.3519155 redundancy, feature correlation, and temporal-spatial feature
 2327-4697 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: SENTINEL: INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON MULTI-TIMESCALE USER BEHAVIOR INTERACTION GRAPH LEARNING 775

 processing [13] and rely on large volumes of labeled data to intervals [21]. Through this way, SENTINEL not only excels
 learn patterns of malicious activity. However, for insider threat in rapidly responding sudden dangerous actions, but also can
 detection, obtaining sufficiently high quality labeled data is very perceive the long-term evolutionary pattern of user behavior.
 difficult. Lack of sufficient labeled data can result in inadequate Furthermore, to deal with the insufficiency of abnormal samples,
 or biased training of the model. Graph-based methods lever- a semi-supervised insider threat detection algorithm is proposed,
 age the sequential relationships between log entries to learn which solely requires the training data to be benign.
 normal patterns from graph structures (e.g. user authentication Our contributions of this paper are fourfold as follows:
 networks and lateral movement traces) [14], [15], [16], [17]. r We propose SENTINEL, an insider threat detection algo-
 Existing graph-based insider threat detection methods usually rithm, to identify abnormal behavior of insiders and to
 treat operation logs as nodes and attempt to convert log records provide fine-grained threat intelligence. SENTINEL iminto a graph according to correlation relationships among them, plements a log-entry-level detection without requiring any
 which incurs high computational burden and lengthy execution attack samples during model training.
 times for large-scale graph learning. r We devise a dynamic user behavior interaction graph
 Inspired by the limitations of current researches, we propose (BIG), which jointly considers the spatial distribution of
 a novel insider threat detection method named SENTINEL, user behavioral trajectories among the network topology
 which provides a systematic and dynamic perspective on users’ and the temporal variations of user behavioral profiles. By
 behavior within the intranet. Since insider threats often involve incorporating ST-GNN with edge feature enhancement,
 multiple stages, including reconnaissance, lateral movement, the BIG achieves accurate modeling of spatio-temporal
 foothold establishment, and remote command and control, the relationships between nodes, enhancing the representative
 behavior patterns of malicious insiders would exhibit temporal ability of user behaviors.
 dependencies. Meanwhile, the network within organizations r In order to perceive both the abrupt and persistent threats
 typically is comprised of multiple subnets and regions with simultaneously, we conceive a multi-timescale fusion
 specific network topologies. Thus, it is possible that the attackers mechanism for incorporating users’ activities at different
 need to traverse across various network regions or subnets to timescales. With the help of the temporal hierarchy aggregain access to diverse systems during the execution of threat gation layer, the multi-level temporal interaction context
 activities. This topological constraint indicates the spatial de- is explicitly embedded into the potential representation of
 pendencies of insider threats. Based on this observation, we timescale-aware.
 model user behaviors in different time periods into dynamic r We conduct experiments on three public datasets to comgraph instances and develop an insider threat detection model pare the performance of SENTINEL to the state-of-theusing spatio-temporal graph neural network (ST-GNN). How- art methods. The results demonstrate that SENTINEL
 ever, existing graph learning-based methods [14], [16], [18], [19] achieves superior AUC value of 0.980 while maintaining a
 for insider threat detection generally treat logs as nodes, which relatively low computational overhead.
 results in extremely large graphs and significant computational The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section II
 overhead. In contrast, SENTINEL treats user interaction behav- summarizes the related work. Section III describes our threat
 ior logs between network hosts as edges rather than nodes of model and challenges, and the detailed system architecture is
 the graph, which greatly reduces the amount of nodes in graphs proposed in Section IV. Section V presents the comparative
 and thereby alleviates computational burden. Besides, analyzing experiments. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section VII.
 insider threats requires investigating and processing diverse and
 voluminous users’ log data [1], such as network traffic, file
 access records, logon authentication events, etc. Fusing such II. RELATED WORK
 a substantial volume of data to capture complex relationships Existing Researches on insider threat detection can be divided
 is a tricky problem. Nevertheless, traditional ST-GNN models into three categories: rule matching based methods, machine
 only focus on the propagation of node attributes, but ignore the learning based methods, and graph-based methods.
 edges attributes. In this paper, edges represent user interactions Rule matching has been widely applied in insider threat
 between hosts, and their attributes often reflect the behavioral detection. Early detection tools, such as Addamark LMS [8] and
 routines of different users. We can profile a user behavioral Splunk [9], primarily generated alerts by monitoring users’ log
 baseline based on the edge attributes, which plays a more critical files or network requests and matching configurable rule lists.
 role than the node attributes in our insider threat detection. To With the help of these tools, security analyst could determine
 address this problem, we leverage an Edge Graph Attention the pertinent log files to assess and prescribe appropriate alert
 (EGAT) mechanism [20] to acquire the feature representations actions [22]. Although these offline tools or schemes could be
 of various operation types among system hosts, which allows executed multiple times within an hour or a day, they lacked
 us to capture the behavioral pattern implied by edge attributes. the capacity to conduct longitudinal log analysis or proactively
 Moreover, in practical applications, abrupt threats and persistent respond in real-time. To remedy these deficiencies and deal
 threats may exist at the same time. To deal with a broad range with new emerged Advanced Persistent Threat (APT), Milajerdi
 of attack scenarios, we integrate user behavior states at multiple et al. [10] utilized the Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures
 timescales into the detection model, which enables SENTINEL (TTPs) abstract rules based on MITER’s ATT&CK frameto capture dependencies in user behavior over different time work [23], and mapped the low-level audit logs to the high-level

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 776 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 attack kill chain stages. Though rule matching approaches have where log entries represented nodes. Afterwards, they employed
 demonstrated favorable performance in insider threat scenarios, Deepwalk [29] to generate node embedding vectors, which were
 they necessitate substantial expert and prior knowledge [16] and subsequently input into clustering algorithms for anomaly detecface challenges in adapting to the constantly evolving landscape tion. To identify and track lateral movement of insiders within
 of network attacks. the intranet, Fang et al. [19] proposed LMTracker, an attack
 Given massive data generated daily within organizations, path detection algorithm based on meta-path and heterogeneous
 machine learning based detection methods have emerged as one graph learning. It should be noted that when the data cannot
 of the most promising ways for detecting insider threats. Sen- be readily represented as a graph structure, the construction of
 ator et al. [24] employed machine learning algorithms such as the graph becomes a laborious task, often requiring extensive
 Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and Gaussian Mixture Models manual engineering efforts [14].
 (GMM) to detect subtle threat signals within enterprise data In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained
 systems. However, these static features often cannot reflect popularity in graph analysis and have been successfully apthe dynamic changes of user behavior. Recognizing that user plied to anomaly detection in organizational information netbehavior evolves over time, Chattopadhyay et al. [12] proposed a works [30]. Li et al. [5] designed a hierarchical detection
 technique to detect insider threat scenarios by constructing time method. They introduced a meta-path aggregation GNN and
 series with the statistics features of each single day feature. Due an edge-augmented GNN for embedding provenance graphs
 to the variable duration of threat activities, Le et al. [4] devised a and host interaction graphs respectively. Xiao et al. [16] prouser-centric insider threat detection system with multiple levels posed a multi-edge weight relationship graph neural network
 of data granularity, employing several classic machine learning (MEWRGNN) for robust anomaly detection, which converted
 algorithms. Meng et al. [25] introduced a trust management time series related to user behavior logs into graphs. Li et al. [17]
 approach in healthcare environments based on Bayesian infer- proposed a modular approach called Dual-domain Graph Convoence to identify malicious devices. Le et al. [1] investigated lutional Network (DD-GCN), which transformed user features
 the effectiveness of various anomaly detection algorithms in the and structural data into heterogeneous graphs to achieve accurate
 context of insider threat scenarios. In general, traditional shallow and adaptive insider threat detection.
 machine learning algorithms achieve commendable accuracy in Currently, few studies take into account the dynamic migrainsider threats detection. Nevertheless, these methods often rely tion of user activities across the network topology to identify
 on manual feature engineering, which significantly restricts their the criminals’ activity path and behavioral profiles in multi-host
 flexibility. intranet environment. Actually, there are significant differences
 By contrast, deep learning, renowned for its ability to learn in the temporal and spatial distribution of attack activities in
 multi-level hidden representations from intricate data, can serve the insider threat scenarios, which lead to potential false alarms
 as a powerful tool to identify potential malicious insider activity. and intelligence omissions. In light of this, we conceive a novel
 In [26], Tuor et al. proposed an adaptive detection algorithm insider threat detection algorithm based on multi-timescale STbased on Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) language models. GNN. We compare the key characteristics of the related studies
 They trained an online unsupervised neural network language and our current work on detecting insider threats in Table I.
 model by treating system logs as interleaved “sentences”. In order to further predict the specific steps the adversary would take III. THREAT MODEL AND MOTIVATION
 when performing the attack, Shen et al. from Symantec Labs proposed Tiresias [11], an Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) based A. Threat Model
 system designed for predicting future attack events. Randive Insider threats commonly arise from internal employees or
 et al. [27] introduced an innovative image-based insider threat hackers who infiltrate internal networks through APTs. These
 detection framework that utilizes wavelet transform and capsule cybercrime initiators usually possess authorized access to sysnetworks to discern the spatial arrangement and relationships tems and deliberately exploit it to jeopardize the confidentiality,
 among internal user behavior features. Deep learning methods integrity, or availability of those systems [7]. In practice, insider
 possess the capability to capture temporal information from user threats typically involve multi-step attacks, wherein attackers
 activity sequences, but they would encounter high false alarm orchestrate a series of individual steps based on specific logical
 rates when users modify their daily behavioral routines. relationships.
 Considering that users within an organization conduct their Particularly, we consider an insider threat conducted by an
 daily activities through email, shared files or public devices, institution employee who is familiar with business logic and does
 utilizing a graph structure to illustrate the relationships and not initially have administrative privileges assigned to a local
 dependencies between user behaviors is a reasonable approach. computer. This employee may hold a technical position such as
 In [28], Eberle et al. utilized the Minimum Description Length a systems analyst or IT support personnel, which grants him/her
 (MDL) to learn normative patterns from the entire graph that access to partial sensitive information. Such attackers may have
 capture the correspondence of insiders. Similarly, Bian et al. [15] different expertise but generally possess knowledge of computer
 constructed authentication graphs based on login authentication network protocols and architecture, as well as experience with
 events between hosts. Traditional machine learning techniques scripting/programming languages such as Python, PowerShell,
 are then applied to detect hosts in the network that may be tar- and Bash. Additionally, they are likely to be well-versed in the
 geted by insiders. Inspired by graph embedding techniques, Liu company’s security policies. These attackers may be dissatisfied
 et al. [14] utilized heuristic rules to build a heterogeneous graph with their current situation in the company (e.g. frustrated by
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: SENTINEL: INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON MULTI-TIMESCALE USER BEHAVIOR INTERACTION GRAPH LEARNING 777

 TABLE I
 INSIDER THREAT DETECTION METHODS WITH CORRELATION ANALYSIS

 In-Star. Multiple accounts attempt to log into a critical server.
 b) Out-Star. Attackers systematically scan a range of internal
 network nodes in search of vulnerable hosts with open services
 and exploitable vulnerabilities. c) K-Path. Attackers initiate their
 attack from a foothold on a host, and systematically migrate
 and infiltrate the internal network, seeking out target hosts to
 store critical data. All of these activity patterns show distinct
 spatial topological patterns, which can be easily obscured by the
 abundance of parallel irrelevant data in serialized data. However,
 Fig. 1. Examples of three abnormal activities of insider threat with different attackers’ lateral movement through compromised accounts has
 spatial characteristics: (a) In-star. (b) Out-star. (c) K-path. a common feature that the access path of attackers does not
 include systems/hosts frequently accessed by compromised aclack of promotions or financial incentives) and deliberately counts [32]. This unusual access/behavior trajectory can be a
 abuse their access for malicious revenge, economic gain, or precursor to stolen credentials or dangerous operations. Besides,
 both. Consequently, they tend to target valuable and confidential crucial hosts with masses of critical data, e.g. database servers,
 information, like clients’ details and tax records stored on the are often selected as targets of cybercrime. The interaction bedatabase server. tween users and nodes in such networks contains more effective
 With the aim of surreptitiously exfiltrating confidential in- information. By analyzing the spatio-temporal patterns of users,
 formation, the attackers usually execute the following steps: the detection system can learn the operation regularities of users
 1) escalate their user privileges through illegal levers such as at specific times and respective positions. This is beneficial to
 credentials theft; 2) move between machines via login or remote detecting any activities that deviate from the established normal
 command execution events with stolen credentials for authen- patterns.
 tication; 3) launch covert and persistent attacks towards target Behavioral Profiles: Behavioral profiles, which include relaccounts and hosts to acquire confidential data; 4) exploit already evant information such as logon type, authentication type, loinstalled applications such as Powershell, and run malicious gon timestamp, etc., can describe and analyze the behavioral
 scripts to establish remote connections for transferring stolen characteristics of an individual. By constructing users’ behavior
 data. Traditional enterprise security solutions, such as firewalls, profiles, we can gain an insight into their normal operation
 intrusion detection systems (IDS), and intrusion prevention sys- routines and attributes on each host. In some cases, they can even
 tems (IPS), are primarily implemented at network perimeter, and reveal some potential threat behaviors. The attribute changes of
 thus cannot adequately detect and prevent insider threats. user operations in the same hosts may indicate the presence of
 potential security risks. For example, the attacker can exploit
 B. Motivation stolen accounts to remotely access a database server, and then
 In real-world system, attackers’ historical operation data ex- implant a backdoor for the purpose of monitoring the flow of
 hibit distinct spatio-temporal patterns and behavioral profiles information and stealing credentials. If the Service Principal
 that deviate from normal service logic, and such characteristics Name (SPN) of this server is registered in the Active Directory,
 are widely distributed in data with multiple timescales. the victim would have accessed the server through the Kerberos
 Spatio-temporal Patterns. Typical insider threats may involve protocol to retrieve information. However, other services (e.g.
 multiple stages such as reconnaissance, lateral movement, and backdoor software) are not registered in Active Directory. At
 foothold establishment, which will give rise to serial event se- this point, the attacker has to replace Kerberos with another
 quences in the log system. These sequential information not only protocol, NTLM. In this case, changes in the behavioral profile
 possess temporal dependencies but also often have the charac- should be of concern. Behavior profiles offers a comprehensive
 teristics of spatial patterns. Fig. 1 illustrates the communication perspective for detecting and identifying potential security risks
 characteristics that an attacker may exhibit during each stage: a) and threat behaviors.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 778 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 Fig. 2. The framework of SENTINEL, which mainly consists of three stages: 1) BIG construction. 2) ST-GNN based behavioral dependency learning. 3) Insider
 threat detection.

 Multiple Timescales: Due to the high uncertainty of insider
 threat, it is necessary to fuse multiple timescales in the detection
 scheme to describe the behavioral patterns of users. On one
 hand, insider threats occur at different frequencies, some events
 may occur with low frequency but high risk, while others may
 occur with high frequency but low risk. By building a multitimescale model, it becomes possible to analyze and compare
 low-frequency and high-frequency events to normal behavior
 patterns simultaneously. On the other hand, users’ behavior
 baselines may change over time. Persistent changes over time
 may indicate a potential insider threat, but infrequent behavioral Fig. 3. An example of user behavior interaction graph where nodes represent
 patterns in the short term could still be normal or accidental. diverse network hosts (such as DNS server, database, users’ terminal, etc.) and
 edges represent different interaction events (such as authentication, network
 Fusing the multi-timescale context information can contribute transfers and DNS lookup, etc.) with multidimensional information.
 to handling alerts of suspicious behavior and clarifying the
 boundary between malicious behavior and normal operation.
 to learn the spatio-temporal dependencies of user behavior.
 IV. INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON EDGE FEATURE Considering the uncertainty of insider threats, SENTINEL si-
 ENHANCED SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK multaneously extracts state information at multiple timescales
 A. Overview and proposes an aggregation layer to model the underlying
 dependencies of multiple temporal dynamics. This modeling
 We propose a novel framework for detecting insider threats, scheme is beneficial to perceiving propagation paths of insider
 named “SENTINEL”, as shown in Fig. 2. SENTINEL infers threats, and promptly identifying potential sources of threats.
 potential insider threats that may endanger the system security 3) Insider Threat Detection: We assess the threat degree of
 from large amounts of heterogeneous users’ behavior logs col- behavioral events by utilizing the learned node feature reprelected by geographically dispersed servers and terminals in the sentations. To adapt to the extremely sparse abnormal data in
 internal network. network security logs, we uses negative sampling to train the
 SENTINEL consists of three main parts: entire network and implement a semi-supervised training model.
 1) User Behavior Interaction Graph Construction: The existing computer system is essentially a distributed system comprised of multiple hosts, network components, and storage B. User Behavior Interaction Graph Construction
 devices. Sensitive information may be stored in the storage We adopt user behavior interaction graphs to model users’
 devices or across multiple nodes within this system. This graph interaction in the intranet. Fig. 3 presents an example of BIG
 provides us a holistic view of structural interactive topology and where users log into their work accounts, and produce various
 a detailed users’ behavioral profile. Under this situation, users’ types of operational events which are represented by different
 requests may be transmitted and processed among different types of edges. Since individuals within an organization have
 hosts to fetch their desired resources. The interactive behaviors diverse tasks and positions, the edges exhibit multiple attributes
 across internal systems are naturally formed as a graph, named in the graph. For example, administrators usually access differ-
 Behavior Interaction Graph (BIG), where the internal network ent hosts for network configuration, database maintenance and
 hosts and the users’ operational behaviors across hosts denote risk assessment, whereas the common users frequently perform
 nodes and edges, respectively. file transmissions and Internet access, which may generate vast
 2) Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network Model: We em- quantities of network stream records and DNS traffic logs. To
 ploy ST-GNN, which integrates GNN and temporal model, depict these inter-host behaviors, BIG needs to consider the

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: SENTINEL: INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON MULTI-TIMESCALE USER BEHAVIOR INTERACTION GRAPH LEARNING 779

 effects of multiple types of events simultaneously. Formally, symbols, words, or sentences. Following the approach in [16],
 a BIG is denoted by G = (V, E), where V is the set of ver- we utilize the Word2Vec [34] to convert the continuous text into
 tices, each v ∈ V representing a host node or user entity in a numerical vector. In fact, different operations may possess
 the local network topology; E is the set of edges, each e ∈ E distinct log formats (i.e. containing different fields), which may
 representing an event that occurs between different hosts. Let lead to a potential escalation in the logical intricacies of data
 H = [h1 , h2 , . . ., hN ] ∈ RN ×d denote the node embedding in processing. To address this problem, we create a uniform log
 the graph where N represents the number of graph nodes and d is format containing all the fields appeared in the logs. If a certain
 the dimension of node embedding. The connection relationship log record does not contain a specific field, we can pad such
 between nodes in the graph can be represented by an adjacent field with 0. Suppose the operation logs contain K distinct fields
 matrix A, where ∀e = (i, j) ∈ E, A[i][j] = 1. and each field generates a corresponding numerical vector f k .
 To capture temporal dependencies in user behaviors, SEN- Then, we can get a feature vector for each log by cascading all
 TINEL dissects the long-term log stream into a sequence of numerical vectors, i.e. Fij = fij1 ||fij2 ||. . .||fijK . If a user has an
 short-term snapshots, each of which encapsulates all interactive interactive event between nodes i and j, there exists an edge
 events taking place within a discrete time interval (e.g., hours). between them, which is represented by (i, j, Fij ). Since users
 Let T denote the total number of time snapshots. A BIG stream may interact with other hosts after logging into a source host,
 is denoted by {Gt }Tt=1 , where each Gt = {Vt , Et } represents we use an attention mechanism to aggregate these operational
 the BIG snapshot at time t. For convenience, let V = ∪Tt=1 Vt features. Actually, different log field exhibits different imporand E = ∪Tt=1 Et denote the set of nodes and edges across all tance for threat detection. For example, the usage of removable
 time intervals, respectively. Given the union of BIG stream devices are likely indicative of data breach. Hence, given an edge
 {Gt }Tt=1 = (V, E), the goal of SENTINEL is to detect mali- e = (i, j, Fij ) in G = (V, E), we regard the K fields of Fij as
 cious events (i.e. edges in the graph E) caused by insider threats. K-channel signals, and utilize a separate attention network for
 each channel to update the original node features H. For the k-th
 k
 field, the attention coefficient αij is calculated as follows:
 C. Edge Feature Enhanced Graph Embedding
 BIG describes a series of communication and interaction k
 βij = a(Whk hi ||Whk hj ||Wek fijk ), (1)
 actions of users within intranet. These actions are characterized
 as multi-attribute edges in the BIG, which can help us understand exp(LeakyReLU(βij
 k
 ))
 k
 αij = , (2)
 s∈Ni exp( LeakyReLU(βis ))
 the behavioral habits of users in their daily work and identify k

 abnormal operation sequences. Hence, the edge of BIG plays a
 more important role than node in insider threat detection, that where Whk and Wek are the weight matrices for the k-th channel,
 is, BIG is edge-sensitive. However, the existing graph learning hi and hj are the node feature vectors of node i and node j
 methods are typically node-centric, which fail to effectively respectively, Ni is the neighboring of node i, and a(.) is a linear
 leverage edge features. Based on such node-centric graph, previ- mapping function.
 ous graph-based insider threat detection methods [14], [16], [33] By concatenating the outputs of each channel, we can update
 treat operation logs as nodes and attempt to convert log records the node embedding vector as follows:
 into a graph according to correlation relationships among them.
 
 However, since the number of user logs may be several orders of hi = (K
 k=1 σ(
 k
 αij (Whk hj ||Wek fijk )))Wo , (3)
 magnitude higher than the number of network endpoints, the size j∈Ni
 of the graph is very huge, which makes these methods encounter
 significant computational complexity issues. Hence, in this sec- where Wo is a projection weight vector and σ(.) is the Sigmoid
 tion, we propose a graph embedding method to aggregate node function. In this way, the whole graph is embedded as follows:
 features with edge attributes for enhancing the model’s ability
 to capture complex relationships between nodes. H = EGAT (H, E), (4)
 The raw operation logs consist of both numerical and textual
 fields. For the numerical fields, such as network flow bytes and where H is the updated embedding vector of all nodes in V.
 port numbers, are already represented as numerical values and The above aggregation process is illustrated in Fig. 4.
 do not require any conversion. In order to handle the unstructured Aggregating the edge features can enhance the ability of
 text in the raw operation logs, we have to transform them into BIG to represent the behavioral routines of insiders. Since the
 a numerical vector so that the learning-based detection model embedding of a node fuses the features of all the edges origcan handle the logs. The operation logs typically contain two inating from such node, the node embedding characterizes all
 kinds of textual fields: 1) discrete text often represents the interactive operations launched by this node (i.e. host or user)
 distinct operation objects and types, such as logon authentication towards other system entities. Therefore, we can employ the
 protocol and logon type, which is predefined and thus has a widely-used node-centric graph learning method to handle the
 finite value range. We can employ simple ordinal encoding to edge-sensitive BIG. As the size of BIG depends on the number
 convert the discrete text into a numerical vector. 2) continuous of hosts in the intranet which is far less than the number of
 text typically represents the description of accessed resources, logs, the computational burden of graph learning can be greatly
 such as file paths and file contents, which is comprised of alleviated.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 780 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 In order to combine the spatial and temporal dependencies, we
 employ a GRU to fuse Spat(L) with Tempt , where Spat(L)
 and Tempt serve as the current input and the hidden state of
 GRU, respectively. The GRU is composed of an update gate Zt
 and a reset gate Rt , which are calculated by:
 Zt = σ(UZ Spat(L) + WZ Tempt + bZ ), (8)
 Rt = σ(UR Spat(L) + WR Tempt + bR ), (9)
 where σ(x) = 1/(1 + e−x ) is the Sigmoid function, and
 WZ , WR , UZ , UR , bZ , bR are weight matrices and biases
 Fig. 4. Illustration of edge graph attention layer. Each edge is composed of K
 channels, denoted by different colors. Fij is the feature vector of the directed
 matrices of GRU. Reset gate Rt determines the relevant past
 edge eij and αij is the attention factor calculated through (2). hi indicates the information to incorporate when generating a new state H̃t :
 initial node embedding of node i and hi is the updated node embedding which
 aggregates edge information through (3). H̃t = tanh(Uh Spat(L) + Wh (Rt  Tempt )), (10)
 where  is the element-wise multiplication operator, and
 Wh , Uh are weight matrices. Afterwards, the update gate Zt
 D. Spatio-Temporal Behavioral Dependencies Learning removes the forgotten information from the previous states, and
 The insider threat activities typical exhibit obvious spatio- retains the information that need to be remembered. Finally, we
 temporal pattern as illustrated in Section III-B. In light of this, can get a graph embedding Ht fusing both spatial and temporal
 we attempt to learn the operation regularities of users at specific dependencies as follows:
 times and positions from the above edge-enhanced BIG. As Ht = (1 − Zt )  Tempt + Zt  H̃t . (11)
 ST-GNNs can effectively capture both the spatial and temporal
 characteristics of graphs, we adopt a GCN+GRU model [35] to The final graph embedding H not only captures the temporal
 t

 learn the spatio-temporal behavioral dependencies from BIG. dependencies of user behavior, but also aggregates the structural
 At time t, the snapshot of user behavioral logs is modeled as features of users’ interactive trails.
 a BIG Gt = {Vt , Et } with an adjacent matrix At and a node
 embedding matrix Ht ∈ RN ×d . Here, an L-layer GCN [36] is E. Multiple Timescales Fusion
 exploited to capture the spatial correlations between nodes in Insider threat activity may emerge abruptly in a brief time (e.g
 BIG. The spatial embedding at l-th layer is described as a half day) or persist gradually within the system over a long
 1 1 duration (e.g several months). Hence, monitoring the alterations
 Spat(l) = ReLU (D̃− 2 Ãt D̃− 2 Spat(l−1) W(l−1) ), (5) of user behavior solely in a single timescale is insufficient
 where Spat(0) = H , Ãt = At + IN isthe regularized adja- to perceive these uncertain insider threats. A short-timescale
 cent matrix with self loops, and D̃ii = N t monitoring is beneficial for the detection of abrupt abnormal
 j=i Ãij denotes the
 degree of node i. The propagation process of GCN describes how behaviors, although it may introduce more noise and false
 intensively hosts or users in the internal network interact with positives. Whereas, a long-timescale monitoring contributes to
 other system entities. Spat(L) represents the structural patterns capturing the persistent abnormal behavior patterns, which may
 of users’ behaviors. overlook subtle but crucial events. The insider threat detection
 The enormous logs generated by users’ daily activities within system should monitor user behaviors at different timescales.
 the internal network may form a large number of graph snap- To achieve this goal, current researches [1], [4], [12] train a
 shots. Analyzing the association among all the snapshots may separate detection model for each timescale, which incurs extra
 lead to dependency explosion [37]. Therefore, we use a sliding storage and computation burden, and more importantly, may
 time window with a size of ω to capture the temporal depen- increase false alarms. The regular actions that are conducted
 dencies among graph snapshots over a short period of time. infrequently in a short term are easily misidentified as attacks,
 At time t, a historical sequence of embedding of node i over for example the data backup by administrators could be regarded
 recent snapshots is denoted by Cth,i = [ht−ω , . . ., ht−1 as data breaches. Therefore, we attempt to fuse multi-timescale
 i i ]. We use
 a hierarchical contextual attention (HCA) based model [38] to BIG embedding in this section.
 capture the sequential dependencies of Cth,i as follows: When fusing the embedding of different timescale, the embedding of different node at different timescales has a distinct
 ath,i = sof tmax(rT tanh(Qh (Cth,i )T )), (6) weight. Taking the CERT dataset [39] as an example, the interactive behaviors between some hosts have obvious peak hours in
 where Qh and r are weight parameters. ath,i measures the impact the morning and evening. In this situation, the daily-period and
 of the historical behaviors of node i on its current behavior. The weekly-period detection are more critical than monthly-period.
 temporal embedding of all nodes in V is described as: However, there are no distinct behavioral patterns for some other
 Tempt = [tempt1 , . . . , tempti , . . . , temptN ], (7) hosts, thus the daily-period and weekly-period detection may be
 unhelpful. Here, we use a gate mechanism to learn the weights
 where tempti = (ath,i Cth,i )T . of node embedding at different timescales.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: SENTINEL: INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON MULTI-TIMESCALE USER BEHAVIOR INTERACTION GRAPH LEARNING 781

 Fig. 5. An example of fetching snapshot into the sliding windows at different timescales. Ts represents the duration of a snapshot which is half day in the
 figure. Td , Tw and Tm denote the time interval of daily-period, weekly-period, and monthly-period respectively. Gt represents a graph snapshot fetched at
 time t.

 We analyze the BIG embedding at three timescales, i.e. daily- the graph. Specifically, we define a Bernoulli distribution for
 period, weekly-period, and monthly-period, the time intervals negative sampling. Given a normal edge e = (i, j, Fij ), we
 of which are denoted by Td , Tw , and Tm , respectively. As replace the source host i with the probability of did+d
 i
 j
 or the
 mentioned in Section IV-D, we capture the temporal depen- j
 destination host with the probability of di +d
 d
 , where di and dj
 j
 dencies among graph snapshot in the sliding window ω. Here,
 represent the degrees of node i and node j, respectively.
 as illustrated in Fig. 5, we fetch the snapshots in the same
 Even though we have corrupted normal samples with negative
 time of past few days, weeks or months and put them into the
 sampling, there still exists the possibility that the generated
 daily-period, weekly-period, and monthly-period sliding winedges turn out to be normal. Hence, we use a critic network
 dows, respectively. The snapshots in the three-timescale sliding
 to evaluate the anomaly score as follows:
 windows are defined as:
 Gtp = [Gt−(ω−1)∗Tp , . . . , Gt−Tp , Gt ] (12) S(e) = σ(ws (hi ||hj ||Fij ) + bs ), (14)

 where p ∈ [day, week, month] represent the timescale. where hi and hj denote the embedding of node i and node
 Through aforementioned spatio-temporal dependency learn- j respectively, σ(.) is the Sigmoid function, and ws and bs
 ing, we can acquire the node embedding Htd , Htw , Htm at differ- are network parameters. Moreover, strict loss functions such as
 ent timescales. The multi-timescale node embedding is fused as cross-entropy is not feasible to distinguish original edges from
 follows: generated edges. Instead, we employ an edge-based pairwise
 loss function in the training of SENTINEL:
 Ht = Wd  Htd + Ww  Htw + Wm  Htm . (13) 
 Lt = min max{0, γ + S(e) − S(eneg )}, (15)
 where  is the element-wise multiplication operator, and
 e∈Et
 Wd , Ww , Wm are linear parameters for different timescales.
 Ht is the weighted sum of multi-timescale node embedding. where S(.) is the anomaly score function, eneg is the generated negative edge, γ ∈ (0, 1) is the margin (hyperparameter)
 F. Negative Sampling and Anomaly Detection between the possibilities of normal edge and anomalous edge,
 and S(e) and S(eneg ) are the anomaly scores of original samples
 Due to the diversity and stealthiness of insider threats, it is
 and negative samples, respectively.
 almost impossible to acquire adequate labeled data for compre-
 The minimization of the loss Lt encourages that the anomaly
 hensively describing their attack tactics. Additionally, there is
 score of normal samples become smaller while the anomaly
 serious data imbalance where the quantity of normal behavior
 score of generated negative samples become larger, which fits
 samples far exceeds abnormal behavior samples. Therefore, conwith our aim perfectly. In addition, we introduce L2 regularizaventional supervised methods are not suitable for the scenario
 tion loss to avoid model overfitting. The final loss function is
 of insider threat detection. To address this issue, we train the
 summarized as follows:
 detection model using negative sampling, which eliminates the
 requirement for balanced and well-annotated samples. After- L = Lt + λLreg , (16)
 wards, we propose anomaly scores to quantify the degree that a
 behavior deviates from the baseline of normal behavior, so that where λ is a hyperparameter and Lreg is an L2-regularization
 the anomalous edges can be detected in a semi-supervised way. loss.
 To surmount the insufficiency of anomaly data, we adopt the We provide the training process of SENTINEL in Algonegative sampling [40] to generate an anomalous edge for each rithm 1. SENTINEL trains in an iterative and end-to-end mannormal edge. Intuitively, abnormal edges are generated when ner. In each iteration, each edge is first undergoing negative
 insiders establish interactions with the hosts that are rarely sampling to generate a negative edge (line 5). Then, for all
 accessed. For a graph snapshot Gt = (Vt , Et ), we generate positive and negative edges, we conduct edge feature enhancing,
 |Et | new edges as the candidates of negative edges by randomly spatio-temporal dependency learning, multi-timescale feature
 replacing the endpoints of normal edges with other nodes in fusing, and anomaly score computing successively (lines 6-11).

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 782 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 Algorithm 1: The Training Process of SENTINEL. employees, such as lateral movement and unauthorized access.
 Input: User behavior logs x collected from the internal In this paper, we employ the authentication events, DNS lookup
 network, Number of training epochs I. events and network flow events of the LANL dataset. We select
 Output: Anomaly score S(.) of logs x. all 104 malicious insiders that have ever appeared in red team
 1: Parse log x into graph edges {Et }Tt=1 , and generate activity, and randomly select 400 normal users. Our final dataset
 graph snapshots sequences {Gt }Tt=1 . consists of 4,735,761 authentication events, 619,552 network
 2: for i = 1 to I do flows events, and 574,651 DNS lookup events involving 7,825
 3: for t = 1 to T do hosts for 504 users, of which 698 events are malicious attack
 4: for e in Et do events.
 5: eneg ← negative sampling; CERT Dataset: The CERT (Computer Emergency Response
 6: H ← Team) dataset [39] is a well-known dataset in the field of in-
  sider threat detection, which collects synthetic attacks’ activities
 hi = (Kk=1 σ(
 k k k
 j∈Ni αij (Wh hj ||We fij )))Wo
 k

 for each node i; records and provide both background and malicious actor syn-
 7: Spat(L) ← Spat(l) = GCN (Spat(l−1) ) for l thetic data. It is comprised of many types of data, including users’
 in range (L) where Spat(0) = H ; logon, http communication, file operations, emails, and device
 8: for p in timescales {day, week, month} do usage. However, in real-world scenarios, obtaining user email
 9: Tempt ← tempti = (ath,i Cth,i )T for each and http communication data can often be challenging due to
 node i; privacy and security concerns. Therefore, in our experiments, we
 10: Htp = GRU (Spat(L) , Tempt ); utilize three files from the latest version of the CERT6.2 dataset,
 11: end for which separately record logon operations, usage of removable
 12: Ht ← Wd  Htd + Ww  Htw + Wm  Htm storage devices, and file operations. CERT dataset also contains
 13: S(e), S(eneg ) ← S(.) = records of real insider threat incidents, providing detailed infor-
 σ(ws (hi ||hj ||Fij ) + bs ) mation on how internal attackers use organizational resources
 14: end for  to launch attacks. The final dataset consists of 40,051 operation
 15: Lt ← min e∈Et max{0, γ + S(e) − S(eneg )} events from 5 abnormal users and 25 randomly selected normal
 16: Back propagation and update the parameters; users, involving 4,400 host nodes. Among these events, there
 17: end for are 161 abnormal events.
 18: end for TWOS Dataset: The TWOS (The Wolf of SUTD) dataset [42]
 is collected during a competition held by the Singapore University of Technology and Design in March 2017. It includes six
 Finally, the parameters are updated through back propagation data sources as well as psychological personality questionnaire
 under the supervision of loss function defined in (15). data. The competition simulates user interactions within and
 During the detection phase, we can acquire an anomaly score between competing companies over a period of 5 days, including
 for each edge in BIG, which measures the degree that a behavior 12 masquerader incidents and 1 traitor incident. In this study,
 deviates from the baseline of normal behavior. Hence, we set a we use logon events, mouse records and keystroke records. The
 threshold as the anomalous boundary to detect which behavior final dataset consists of 1,433,094 operational events involving
 is abnormal. 32 users and host nodes. Among these events, there are 1,892
 malicious events.
 V. EXPERIMENT
 In this section, we present the evaluation of our proposed
 SENTINEL. Specifically, we first introduce the datasets. Then, B. Experimental Settings
 the experimental setup are elaborated, including the comparative
 1) Baselines: We compare SENTINEL to several state-ofbaselines and the metrics for evaluation. Finally, the effectivethe-art baselines for insider threat detection, such as machine
 ness and accuracy of SENTINEL are evaluated, and the comparlearning-based methods and deep learning-based methods. The
 ison experiments with the baseline methods are also presented.
 machine learning methods applied to compare in this section include two excellent machine learning-based methods of
 A. Dataset
 anomaly detection, i.e. Lightweight on-line Detector of Anoma-
 We evaluate the performance of our proposed SENTINEL on lies (LODA) [43] and Local Outlier Factor (LOF) [44], which
 three publicly available datasets including LANL dataset, CERT have shown good performance in insider threats field [1]. The
 and TWOS dataset, which are widely employed in the field of deep learning-based schemes in this section include an LSTMinsider threats detection [1], [4], [5], [12], [14], [15], [16], [31]. based sequential language model [26], a graph dynamic detec-
 The detailed description are demonstrated as follows. tion algorithm named Addgraph [35], an EGAT-based hierar-
 LANL Dataset: LANL dataset is generated by Los Alamos chical APT detection model [5] and two heterogeneous graph
 National Laboratory (LANL) [41], which documents a sequence learning-based methods, i.e. Log2vec [14] and LMTracker [19].
 of user operational events within the laboratory’s internal com- 2) Metrics: In this paper, Accuracy, ROC (Receiver Operputer network, including irregular actions by certain malicious ating Characteristic) Curve and AUC (Area Under the Curve)

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: SENTINEL: INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON MULTI-TIMESCALE USER BEHAVIOR INTERACTION GRAPH LEARNING 783

 Fig. 7. Performance comparison under multiple timescales. (a) ROC curves.
 Fig. 6. Performance of SENTINEL under (a) different snapshot duration. (b) (b) AUC values comparison between single temporal and multiple timescales.
 different timescales.

 metrics are used to measure the performance of insider threat detection. The ROC curve is a plot of the True Positive Rate (TPR)
 duration of snapshot decreases, i.e. the AUC rises from 0.677 to
 against the False Positive Rate (FPR). The AUC summarizes the
 0.941. A smaller time span implies a shorter log sequence under
 ROC curve by measuring the area under the ROC curves. In the
 monitoring, which is more sensitive to the abnormal behaviors.
 insider threat scenarios, relying solely on the accuracy metric
 Conversely, a larger time span may potentially overshadow such
 can not exactly reflect of the model’s detection performance
 behavior within the log stream.
 because the majority of samples that need to be detected are
 In order to explore the impact of different detection
 normal samples. Considering TPR and FPR jointly, ROC curve
 timescales on the performance, we change the time interval
 and AUC metric can effectively evaluate the performance of
 between snapshots, including day (D), week (W), month (M),
 model under serious data imbalance.
 day+week (D+W), day+month (D+M), week+month (W+M),
 3) Parameter Setup: We divide the three datasets into snapand day+week+month (D+W+M). Fig. 6(b) depicts SENshots with a fixed time duration. For the LANL dataset, we use
 TINEL’s performance of different timescale combinations. The
 the first 40 hours of benign activity before the first abnormal
 figure clearly demonstrates that the one-day interval yields the
 event appearing to train the anomaly detector and the rest for
 best performance among the single-timescale results. As the
 testing. The duration of each snapshot is 1 h. Similarly, for
 increase of time interval, the performance deteriorates signifthe CERT dataset, we use the first 200 days of benign activity
 icantly due to the difficulty of capturing short-term behavfor training and the rest for testing. Due to the conspicuous
 ioral patterns. Notably, the model incorporating three differassociation between employees’ regularity and the designated
 ent timescales exhibits the highest AUC of 0.960. Leaning
 working hours, we set the duration of each snapshot to half a day
 the temporal hierarchy with daily, weekly and monthly behav-
 (12 hours) to distinguish between working hours and off-duty
 ioral patterns enhances the ability to perceive uncertain insider
 hours. In detail, we divide a day into two distinct time slices: 7:00
 threats. This result indicates that fusing the temporal feature
 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.+1. For the TWOS
 representations of multiple timescales could greatly improve the
 dataset, we select the first day of benign activity for training and
 overall performance.
 the rest for testing. The duration of each graph snapshot is set as
 Afterwards, our investigation focuses on comparing the per-
 1 h. We set the time window of each graph snapshot stream as
 formance of SENTINEL, AddGraph and EGAT when fusing
 3. We set the learning rate to 0.001, the number of GCN layers
 multi-timescale features. The rest of the baselines are not into 3, and the regularization weight decay λ to 5e-7. Dropout is
 cluded in this comparison because they do not utilize feaset to 0.2, and the hidden state dimension size is set to 512. The
 ture representations specifically related to multiple timescales.
 margin γ is set to 0.7. The detection threshold is set as 0.05 for
 The results presented in Fig. 7 reveal that all the three meth-
 LANL, 0.02 for CERT and 0.05 for TWOS respectively.
 ods demonstrate a performance improvement compared to the
 4) Equipment Environment: We use the TensorFlow library
 single-timescale results, i.e. an average increase of 0.061in AUC
 to build SENTINEL, version 2.11.0. We conduct all comparative
 value. And SENTINEL still outperforms than baselines. In
 experiments on a 64-bit CentOS 7.9 operating system. An Nvidia
 summary, decomposing the temporal effects into multiple scale-
 A100 GPUs with 40GB of memory each is used as accelerators.
 specific feature representations proves beneficial for accurately
 modeling users’ behavioral temporal regularity.
 C. Experiment on Multiple Timescales
 To evaluate the performance of SENTINEL under different
 graph snapshot duration, we conduct experiments on the CERT
 D. Experiment on Single Log Source
 dataset, which offers an extensive time span for evaluation. We
 consider five time spans in our evaluation varying from half a To further demonstrate the effectiveness of the SENTINEL,
 day, a day, a week, 10 days to a month (30 days). Fig. 6(a) we compare its performance to baselines on single data source
 illustrates the detection performance under different time spans. dataset, which is the validation way that many methods [15],
 It is evident that the detection effectiveness improves as the [26], [31], [45], [46] have used. Due to the limited time span,

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 784 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 Fig. 8. Performance comparison on single log source for LANL dataset. (a) AUC value. (b) Accuracy. (c) True positive rate. (d) False positive rate.

 Fig. 9. Performance comparison on single log source for CERT dataset. (a) AUC value. (b) Accuracy. (c) True positive rate. d) False positive rate.

 Fig. 10. Performance comparison on single log source for TWOS dataset. (a) AUC value. (b) Accuracy. (c) True positive rate. (d) False positive rate.

 we can only evaluate the performance of single-timescale SEN- for LANL, 0.917 for CERT and 0.921 for TWOS, followed by
 TINEL on LANL and TWOS dataset, denoted as SENTINEL- the Addgraph. The results suggest that the dynamic graph detec-
 ST. Accordingly, the multi-timescale SENTINEL model is de- tion methods is sensitive to malicious activities within internal
 noted as SENTINEL-MT. In addition, LMTracker, LOF and networks. However, since Addgraph hardly considers interactive
 LODA methods need to collect features involving multiple logs features, its performance is slightly lower than SENTINEL. The
 and thus cannot participate in the evaluation on a single data Log2vec shows a good performance on the LANL dataset with
 source. For the LANL dataset, we use authentication events, the AUC value of 0.852, but underperforms on the CERT and
 while for the CERT and TWOS dataset, we use users’ logon TWOS dataset, as it has high false positive rates with low AUC
 records. In a real-world scenario, security audit experts can values of only 0.520 and 0.451. This result can be attributed to the
 leverage this type of log files to identify attackers exhibiting fact that the heterogeneous graph constructed by Log2vec graph
 signs of lateral movement or internal employees engaging in rules under the single data source of CERT/TWOS dataset is too
 covert file exfiltration. sparse, and the random walk based embedding method cannot
 The experimental results are shown in the Figs. 8, 9 learn the relationship between logs. Additionally, the graph emand 10. We observe that the SENTINEL outperforms other base- bedding method employed by Log2vec disregards the attributes
 line methods in terms of AUC values for all datasets, i.e. 0.972 of logs, which have an obvious impact on its performance. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: SENTINEL: INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON MULTI-TIMESCALE USER BEHAVIOR INTERACTION GRAPH LEARNING 785

 Fig. 11. Performance comparison on multiple log source for LANL dataset. (a) AUC value. (b) Accuracy. (c) True positive rate. (d) False positive rate.

 Fig. 12. Performance comparison on multiple log source for CERT dataset. (a) AUC value. (b) Accuracy. (c) True positive rate. (d) False positive rate.

 Fig. 13. Performance comparison on multiple log sources for TWOS dataset. (a) AUC value. (b) Accuracy. (c) True positive rate. (d) False positive rate.

 EGAT solely relies on edge features and lacks a mechanism events, and network flow events. For the CERT dataset, we
 to recognize the dynamic changes in the graph structure. This use logon records, usage of removable storage devices, and file
 limitation is particularly evident in the results obtained from operation records. For TWOS dataset, we use logon records,
 the CERT dataset, i.e. a low AUC value of 0.473. Although the mouse records and keystroke records.
 LSTM model performs well on LANL authentication events, its Figs. 11, 12 and 13 illustrates the comparison results of
 effectiveness is hindered in the CERT and TWOS dataset. The SENTINEL and baselines on multiple sources experiments.
 relatively short length of logon logs results in insufficient context Table II presents the AUC values comparison between singleinformation and adversely impacts its detection performance. source experiments and multi-source experiments. It is observed
 The above results indicate that the SENTINEL method can ef- that SENTINEL consistently achieves the best performance on
 fectively detect insider threats involving logon or authentication multi-source experiments, i.e. the largest AUC values of 0.980
 events in an internal network. on the LANL dataset, 0.960 on the CERT dataset and 0.956
 on the TWOS dataset. Compared to the previous single-source
 results, SENTINEL’s multi-source results exhibit an increase in
 E. Experiments on Multiple Log Sources AUC on the three datasets by 0.008, 0.04 and 0.035, respec-
 To evaluate the performance of SENTINEL in detecting tively. Log2vec shows a notable performance improvement, esthreats from multi-source data, we conduct experiments on pecially on the CERT dataset where the AUC increases by 0.245.
 multiple types of log files in LANL, CERT and TWOS datasets. Log2vec utilizes different graph constructing rules to integrate
 For the LANL dataset, we use authentication events, DNS different types of logs into a heterogeneous graph, expanding

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 786 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 TABLE II
 AUC COMPARISON BETWEEN SINGLE LOG SOURCE AND MULTIPLE LOG SOURCES

 its coverage to monitor more network behaviors and thus can TABLE III
 COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT THREAT SCENARIOS
 more accurately identify outlier abnormal events. In practice,
 attackers usually participate in a wide range of threat activities,
 including but not limited to lateral movement and data theft.
 Therefore, incorporating a larger number of logs from different
 sources can improve the accuracy of identifying outliers. Similar
 method LMTracker, which builds heterogeneous graphs based
 on meta-paths, also achieves better results because its meta-path TABLE IV
 rules are more directional. Machine learning-based anomaly ABLATION STUDY OF KEY COMPONENTS IN SENTINEL ON THE CERT
 DATASET
 detection methods LOF and LODA cannot capture the complex
 features and interrelations of structural information, thus their
 performance is often inferior to graph-based methods. However,
 using multiple log source is also a double-edged sword. For some
 unstable models like EGAT and LSTM, the use of multiple types
 of log records may introduce substantial data noise, which may
 lead to the degradation of performance on the contrary.

 F. Comparison of Different Threat Scenarios average TPR of 98%, but exhibits poor performance on S3 where
 nearly 42% of malicious behaviors undergo undetected. The
 In order to explore whether SENTINEL’s performance is
 result reveals that SENTINEL works well in those scenarios (e.g,
 consistent in different insider threat scenarios, we conduct an
 S1 , S2 , S4 ) where malicious insiders conduct actions diverging
 analysis of its performance variances within multiple threat
 from their routine operations, but may fail in the scenarios (e.g,
 scenarios present in the CERT r6.2 dataset. The CERT r6.2
 S3 ) where malicious contents is hidden in routine operations.
 dataset contains four explicit threat scenarios:
 r A departing employee, who has never used a removable For instance, the insider in S1 has no prior history of using
 removable drives or working overtime; in S2 , there is a sudden
 drive or worked overtime before, logs in after office hours
 spike in the insider’s thumb drive device usage; and in S4 ,
 and uploads data to a publicly accessible website (S1 ).
 r A employee seeking new employment opportunities fre- the insider has never logged into another individual’s machine
 using his/her own credentials before. In contrast, since the crime
 quently access job search websites and use a thumb drive
 administrator in S3 already possesses high authority, his/her
 to steal confidential information before leaving (S2 ).
 r A system administrator who is disgruntled with his/her historical behavior of frequently logging into other machines
 may make SENTINEL misclassify the action of logging into
 supervisor downloads a keylogger and obtains a list of passthe supervisor’s machine as normal operation. This suggests that
 words belonging to various employees within the organi-
 SENTINEL is prone to misjudging malicious actions that closely
 zation. Subsequently, he/she uses a thumb drive to transfer
 resemble routine tasks.
 the password list to the supervisor’s machine and attempts
 to search for the supervisor’s password. Ultimately, he/she
 logs into the supervisor’s machine and sends a mass email G. Ablation Study
 designed to create panic, resulting in chaos within the We present ablation study in this subsection to evaluate the
 organization (S3 ). contribution of each key component on the widely used CERT
 r An indignant employee logs into other users’ computers, dataset. The results are presented in Table IV, where EFE repsearches for files of interest, and sends these files to their resents the edge feature embedding component, SDL and TDL
 personal email address (S4 ). respectively represent the spatial dependency learning compo-
 Table III shows the true positive rates and false negatives rate nent and the temporal dependency learning component of the
 (FNR) of SENTINEL for the above four threat scenarios. As spatial-temporal graph neural network, and MTF represents the
 illustrated, SENTINEL performs well on S1 , S2 , and S4 with an multiple timescale fusion component. We can observe from the

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: SENTINEL: INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON MULTI-TIMESCALE USER BEHAVIOR INTERACTION GRAPH LEARNING 787

 Fig. 15. SENTINEL’s (a) ROC curves. (b) TPR&FPR difference curves.

 to the detection of more malicious behaviors. However, this
 benefit comes at the cost of generating more false positives.
 In general, the experimental results show that a longer training
 set duration can cover users’ normal behavior routines more
 comprehensively, leading to a more effective trained model.

 I. Selection of Detection Threshold
 As mentioned in Section IV-F, SENTINEL finally outputs
 Fig. 14. Performance comparison on varying training sets. (a) AUC value. (b) anomaly scores for different user behavior events. To select an
 Accuracy. (c) True positive rate. (d) False positive rate. appropriate detection threshold, we first plot the ROC curve of
 SENTINEL on test data. The closer the ROC curve is to the
 top-left corner (indicating high TPR and low FPR), the better
 table that the w/o EFE model results in the poorest performance, the model’s performance. Therefore, we choose the detection
 with a decrease in AUC value by 0.084 compared to full model. threshold corresponding to the point nearest to the upper left
 This result indicates the critical importance of using users’ corner of the ROC curve, i.e. maximizing (TPR - FPR). Specifbehavioral feature for detecting insider threats. Comparing to ically, during the test, setting different detection thresholds th
 the w/o TDL model, the w/o SDL model has a more severe (i.e. samples with anomaly scores greater than th are classified as
 performance degradation due to the absence of spatial topology anomalies) will yield multiple sets of TPR and FPR. These (TPR,
 learning. This result suggests that malicious insider threat be- FPR) tuples can form a ROC curve. Fig. 15(a) shows the ROC
 haviors exhibit more significant changes in network topology curves of SENTINEL on three datasets. Then, we analyze the
 than in temporal pattern. We also find that the w/o MTF model differences between the TPR and FPR across various detection
 results in a decrease in AUC value by 0.019, which demonstrates thresholds, as illustrated in Fig. 15(b). We select the threshold
 the effectiveness of integrating multi-time scale information. with the maximum TPR/FPR difference as the decision boundary. For the CERT dataset, the optimal threshold is th = 0.02,
 H. Influence of Varying Training Sets which results in the largest difference of 0.874. For the LANL
 and TWOS datasets, the optimal threshold is th = 0.05, with the
 In order to demonstrate the influence of varying training
 maximum differences reaching 0.892 and 0.824, respectively.
 sets on SENTINEL, we conduct comparative experiments by
 Fig. 16 presents the Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) districontrolling the proportion of training data. Taking the LANL
 butions of the testing samples’ anomaly scores for SENTINEL
 dataset as an example, a training proportion of 100% indicates
 across three datasets. We can observe that the aforementioned
 that the training set consists of all 40 hours of benign activity
 selected thresholds effectively differentiate between normal beprior to the appearance of the first abnormal event whereas
 havior and malicious insider threat behaviors, thereby justifying
 50% means using the first 20 hours as the training set, and
 the appropriateness of these thresholds.
 so on. Fig. 14 shows the experimental results of SENTINEL
 across various datasets. We can observe that as the proportion
 of training data decreases, the overall model performance tends J. Runtime Overhead Analysis
 to decline. Specifically, accuracy decreases by an average of Finally, we investigate the model efficiency of our SEN-
 20.8%, the AUC value decreases by an average of 14.6%, and TINEL. We present SENTINEL’s training time and resource
 the FPR increases by an average of 2.08 times. This is consistent consumption on three datasets in Table V. As shown in the
 with our expectations, as a smaller training set causes the model table, the training time for the LANL dataset is 488 seconds,
 to learn a more prejudiced behavioral baseline, which is unable significantly higher than the other two datasets. This is because
 to cover the diverse range of normal behaviors. Interestingly, the LANL dataset includes 7825 nodes, significantly more than
 we find that SENTINEL’s TPR tends to increase on the LANL CERT (4400 nodes) and TWOS (32 nodes), and also contains a
 and TWOS datasets. Our analysis suggests that limited training larger number of logs, resulting in an average of 4246.2 edges
 data might make insider threats more conspicuous, which leads per graph snapshot, compared to 145.9 for CERT and 74.6 for

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 788 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 TABLE V
 SENTINEL’S TRAINING TIME AND RESOURCE CONSUMPTION

 TABLE VI
 DETECTION COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF DIFFERENT COMPARISON METHODS

 of different comparative methods. We observe that AddGraph
 exhibits the least resource occupancy and the fast running speed
 compared to other methods. By contrast, the detection time and
 computational overhead are slightly increased for SENTINEL.
 It is worth noting that the attention-based graph embedding
 propagation layer of SENTINEL incurs a higher computational
 cost compared to the adjacent matrix-based graph convolution
 utilized by AddGraph. Considering the comparison of prediction
 accuracy between SENTINEL and Addgraph, the additional
 computational cost could bring positive results via learning
 the correlation of edge features. Similarly, the attention-based
 EGAT presents a notable increase in GPU memory usage and
 utilization due to the high-dimensional node embedding. In
 Table VI, LSTM and Log2vec exhibit an average GPU utilization
 of over 50%, which is significantly higher than that of AddGraph
 and SENTINEL (less than 5%). Furthermore, we also find
 that the average GPU memory usage of LSTM is the largest,
 followed by EGAT and Log2vec. In addition, the detection time
 consuming of SENTINEL, Addgraph and EGAT is far less than
 the log generation time (mins vs hours), which can meet the
 Fig. 16. SENTINEL’s KDE distribution of normal and anomaly samples on needs of real-time insider threat detection. Overall, SENTINEL
 (a) LANL dataset. (b) CERT dataset. (c) TWOS dataset.
 can achieve a good detection accuracy at the cost of a minor
 computational burden.

 TWOS. Despite the large data scale, most graphs in the LANL
 dataset are sparse, which means that the number of parameters VI. CASE STUDIES
 involved in each update is not excessive. Therefore, the GPU SENTINEL is deployed within an organization’s local area
 memory usage for LANL training is only 20.7% higher than network, specifically tailored for detecting insider threats in
 CERT and 27.4% higher than TWOS, with GPU utilization sensitive government departments and enterprises. By analyzing
 being approximately twice that of the other datasets. Overall, network interaction behaviors of internal employees and audit
 SENTINEL’s training time and resource consumption remain logs from terminal hosts, SENTINEL could monitor the threat
 acceptable. levels of insiders in real time. If monitored user behavior is
 At detection phase, for the two anomaly detection algorithms, deemed highly threatening, such as exhibiting unusual chari.e. LOF and LODA, we can achieve fast detection speed without acteristics or logon patterns divergent from typical activities,
 GPU acceleration, which benefits from the relatively simple the security operation center will initiate appropriate responses.
 computational architecture of machine learning. However, it Below, we illustrate two typical insider threat scenarios, i.e.
 should be noted that these two methods rely on pre-extracted malicious insiders and compromised insiders.
 complex features, which took more than 90 minutes before r Malicious Insiders: User 1 typically logs into his/her host
 testing. In comparison, SENTINEL requires a graph construc- between 8:30 and 9:00 AM, and logs out between 6:30
 tion process, which takes only less 18 seconds due to the and 7:00 PM. However, this user frequently logs into other
 small size of our graph. Table VI shows the average GPU users’ computers around 12:00 noon and 6:00 PM, searches
 utilization, average GPU memory usage, and time consuming for files of interest, and subsequently emails these files to

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: SENTINEL: INSIDER THREAT DETECTION BASED ON MULTI-TIMESCALE USER BEHAVIOR INTERACTION GRAPH LEARNING 789

 personal addresses. This unusual logon pattern triggers an [10] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. Venkatakralert from SENTINEL. ishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of susr Compromised Insiders: User 2 steals user 3’s creden- picious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019,
 pp. 1137–1152.
 tials through a covertly installed keylogger. Subsequently, [11] Y. Shen, E. Mariconti, P. A. Vervier, and G. Stringhini, “Tiresias: Predicting
 he/she utilizes these credentials to remotely access the security events through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput.
 Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 592–605.
 database server and implant a backdoor, aiming to monitor [12] P. Chattopadhyay, L. Wang, and Y.-P. Tan, “Scenario-based insider threat
 information flow and steal commercial secrets. Since the detection from cyber activities,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 5,
 Service Principal Name of this server is registered in Active no. 3, pp. 660–675, Sep. 2018.
 [13] S. Lei, C. Xia, Z. Li, X. Li, and T. Wang, “HNN: A novel model to study
 Directory, user 3 generally accesses the server through the the intrusion detection based on multi-feature correlation and temporal-
 Kerberos protocol to retrieve information. However, user spatial analysis,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 3257–3274,
 2’s backdoor software operates outside Active Directory Oct.–Dec. 2021.
 [14] F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng, “Log2vec:
 and thus he/she is compelled to use NTLM protocol for A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for detecting cyber
 authentication. SENTINEL identifies this shift in user op- threats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 eration attributes, and signals a potential security risk. 2019, pp. 1777–1794.
 [15] H. Bian, T. Bai, M. A. Salahuddin, N. Limam, A. Abou Daya,
 and R. Boutaba, “Uncovering lateral movement using authentication
 VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK logs,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1049–1063,
 Mar. 2021.
 In this paper, we propose a novel method SENTINEL, which [16] J. Xiao, L. Yang, F. Zhong, X. Wang, H. Chen, and D. Li, “Robust anomalybased insider threat detection using graph neural network,” IEEE Trans.
 utilizes an edge-enhanced spatio-temporal graph neural network Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3717–3733, Sep. 2022.
 for detecting insider threats. In SENTINEL, user’s behavior in- [17] X. Li et al., “A high accuracy and adaptive anomaly detection model with
 teractions within the internal network are formed as a graph. We dual-domain graph convolutional network for insider threat detection,”
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensic Secur., vol. 18, pp. 1638–1652, 2023.
 subsequently employ an ST-GNN to learn the spatio-temporal [18] F. Liu, Y. Wen, Y. Wu, S. Liang, X. Jiang, and D. Meng, “MLoperation regularities of users. SENTINEL adopts a semi- Tracer: Malicious logins detection system via graph neural network,” in
 supervised strategy that requires only normal behavior log data Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun., 2020,
 pp. 715–726.
 for training, which enhances the flexibility of deployment. Eval- [19] Y. Fang, C. Wang, Z. Fang, and C. Huang, “LMTracker: Lateral movement
 uation on the LANL/CERT/TWOS datasets demonstrates that path detection based on heterogeneous graph embedding,” Neurocomput-
 SENTINEL outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in terms of ing, vol. 474, pp. 37–47, 2022.
 [20] Z. Wang, J. Chen, and H. Chen, “EGAT: Edge-featured graph attention
 AUC and ROC curve. To address the problem that SENTINEL network,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Springer, 2021,
 is prone to misjudging malicious actions that closely resemble pp. 253–264.
 routine operation, we will integrate additional behavioral indi- [21] X. Zhang et al., “Traffic flow forecasting with spatial-temporal
 graph diffusion network,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 cators, such as employees’ mental health status or social records pp. 15008–15015.
 for insider threat detection in the future. Moreover, we will focus [22] A. Ambre and N. M. Shekokar, “Insider threat detection using log analysis
 on automating the reconstruction of the attack scenarios for and event correlation,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 45, pp. 436–445, 2015.
 [23] MITRE, “Adversarial tactics, techniques and common knowledge,” (n.d.).
 insider threat based on threat alerts. This will provide a clear 2013. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org
 understanding of the attack strategy and intentions. [24] T. E. Senator et al., “Detecting insider threats in a real corporate database
 of computer usage activity,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Discov. Data Min., 2013, pp. 1393–1401.
 REFERENCES [25] W. Meng, K.-K. R. Choo, S. Furnell, A. V. Vasilakos, and C. W. Probst, “Towards Bayesian-based trust management for insider attacks in healthcare
 [1] D. C. Le and N. Zincir-Heywood, “Anomaly detection for insider threats
 software-defined networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 15,
 using unsupervised ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
 no. 2, pp. 761–773, Jun. 2018.
 vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1152–1164, Jun. 2021.
 [26] A. R. Tuor, R. Baerwolf, N. Knowles, B. Hutchinson, N. Nichols, and R.
 [2] Proofpoint, “2022 ponemon cost of insider threats global report,”
 Jasper, “Recurrent neural network language models for open vocabulary
 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.proofpoint.com/us/resources/
 event-level cyber anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 threat-reports/cost-of-insider-threats
 2018, pp. 285–293.
 [3] N. F. Syed, S. W. Shah, A. Shaghaghi, A. Anwar, Z. Baig, and R. Doss,
 [27] K. D. Randive and M. Ramasundaram, “MWCapsNet: A novel multi-
 “Zero trust architecture (ZTA): A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Access,
 level wavelet capsule network for insider threat detection using image
 vol. 10, pp. 57143–57179, 2022.
 representations,” Neurocomputing, vol. 553, 2023, Art. no. 126588.
 [4] D. C. Le, N. Zincir-Heywood, and M. I. Heywood, “Analyzing data
 [28] W. Eberle, J. Graves, and L. Holder, “Insider threat detection using a
 granularity levels for insider threat detection using machine learning,”
 graph-based approach,” J. Appl. Secur. Res., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 32–81, 2010.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 30–44, Mar. 2020.
 [29] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “Deepwalk: Online learning of
 [5] Z. Li, X. Cheng, L. Sun, J. Zhang, and B. Chen, “A hierarchical approach
 social representations,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
 for advanced persistent threat detection with attention-based graph neural
 Data Min., pp. 701–710, 2014.
 networks,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, 2021, Art. no. 9961342.
 [30] Y. Zhang, C. Yang, K. Huang, and Y. Li, “Intrusion detection of industrial
 [6] M. Villarreal-Vasquez, G. M. Howard, S. Dube, and B. Bhargava, “Hunting
 Internet-of-Things based on reconstructed graph neural networks,” IEEE
 for insider threats using LSTM-based anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2894–2905, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 Dependable Secur. Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 451–462, Jan./Feb. 2023.
 [31] B. Bowman, C. Laprade, Y. Ji, and H. H. Huang, “Detecting lateral
 [7] L. Liu, O. De Vel, Q.-L. Han, J. Zhang, and Y. Xiang, “Detecting and
 movement in enterprise computer networks with unsupervised graph AI,”
 preventing cyber insider threats: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut.,
 in Proc. Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Defenses, 2020, pp. 257–268.
 vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1397–1417, Second Quarter 2018.
 [32] G. Ho et al., “Hopper: Modeling and detecting lateral movement.,” in Proc.
 [8] A. Sah et al., “A new architecture for managing enterprise log data,” in
 USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3093–3110.
 Proc. Conf. Syst. Admin., 2002, pp. 121–132.
 [33] C. Wang and H. Zhu, “Wrongdoing monitor: A graph-based behavioral
 [9] M. Hanley and J. Montelibano, “Insider threat control: Using centralized
 anomaly detection in cyber security,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensic Secur.,
 logging to detect data exfiltration near insider termination,” DTIC, Fort
 vol. 17, pp. 2703–2718, 2022.
 Belvoir, VA, USA, Tech. Rep. 024, 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 790 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

 [34] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Distributed Siyang Chen (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,” in Proc. B.S. degree in 2019 from the University of Science
 Adv. Neural Inf. Proces. Syst., 2013, pp. 3111–3119. and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
 [35] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection in where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
 dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. Int. Joint with the School of Information Science and Technol-
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4419–4425. ogy, USTC, affiliated with the Laboratory for Future
 [36] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph Network. His research interests include network seconvolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017, curity traffic analysis, and website fingerprinting.
 pp. 1–12.
 [37] Y. Kwon et al., “MCI: Modeling-based causality inference in audit logging
 for attack investigation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., vol. 2,
 p. 4, 2018.
 [38] Q. Cui, S. Wu, Y. Huang, and L. Wang, “A hierarchical contextual
 attention-based network for sequential recommendation,” Neurocomput- Yuanyi Ma (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 ing, vol. 358, pp. 141–149, 2019. B.S. degree in 2018 from the University of Science
 [39] J. Glasser and B. Lindauer, “Bridging the gap: A pragmatic approach to and Technology of China, Hefei, China, where he is
 generating insider threat data,” in Proc. IEEE CS Secur. Privacy Work- currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
 shops, 2013, pp. 98–104. School of Information Science and Technology. His
 [40] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Feng, and Z. Chen, “Knowledge graph embedding research interests include future network, network
 by translating on hyperplanes,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2014, optimization, and network security.
 pp. 1112–1119.
 [41] A. D. Kent, “Comprehensive, Multi-source cyber-security events,” Los
 Alamos Nat. Lab., Los Alamos, NM, USA, 2015, doi: 10.17021/1179829.
 [42] A. Harilal, F. Toffalini, J. Castellanos, J. Guarnizo, I. Homoliak, and M.
 Ochoa, “TWOS: A dataset of malicious insider threat behavior based on
 a gamified competition,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Manag. Insider Secur.
 Threats, 2017, pp. 45–56. Huasen He (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. de-
 [43] T. Pevny, “Loda: Lightweight on-line detector of anomalies,” Mach. gree in automation from the University of Science
 Learn., vol. 102, pp. 275–304, 2016. and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
 [44] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying in 2013, and the M.S. degree in signal processing
 density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manag. and communications and the Ph.D. degree in digital
 Data, 2000, pp. 93–104. communications from the University of Edinburgh,
 [45] R. Paudel and H. H. Huang, “Pikachu: Temporal walk based dynamic Edinburgh, U.K., in 2014 and 2018, respectively.
 graph embedding for network anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP He is currently an Associate Research Fellow with
 Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–7. the School of Information Science and Technology,
 [46] Y. Yuan, S. S. Adhatarao, M. Lin, Y. Yuan, Z. Liu, and X. Fu, “ADA: USTC. His research interests include future networks,
 Adaptive deep log anomaly detector,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. network modeling, and optimization.
 Commun., 2020, pp. 2449–2458.

 Fengrui Xiao (Student Member, IEEE) received the Jian Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 B.E. degree in information science and technology in and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science and
 2019 from the University of Science and Technology Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China, in 2001
 of China (USTC), Hefei, China, where he is currently and 2006, respectively. He is currently a Professor in
 working toward the Ph.D. degree. His research in- the School of Information Science and Technology,
 terests include encrypted traffic classification, insider USTC. His research interests include future network,
 threats, and multi-step attack. distributed system design, modeling and optimization, multimedia over wired and wireless and stochastic optimization. Dr. Yang was the recipient of the Lu
 Jia-Xi Young Talent Award from Chinese Academy
 of Sciences in 2009.

 Shuangwu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science
 and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
 in 2011 and 2016, respectively. He is currently an
 Associate Professor with the Department of Automation, USTC. His research interests include multimedia communications, future network, and stochastic
 optimization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:00:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.