1310 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2025

 SIR-HCL: Semantic-Inconsistency Reasoning and
 Hybrid Contrastive Learning for Efficient
 Cross-Emotion Anomaly Detection
 Xin Liu , Senior Member, IEEE, Qiyan Chen , Yiu-ming Cheung , Fellow, IEEE,
 and Shu-Juan Peng , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Cross-emotion anomaly detection is an emerging is employed to significantly improve the data utilization and
and challenging research topic in cognitive analysis field, which a two-component Beta Mixture Model is adaptively utilized
aims at identifying the abnormal emotion pair whose semantic to reason the anomalous emotion pairs. Extensive experiments
patterns are inconsistent across different emotional modali- evaluated on two benchmark datasets show that the proposed
ties. To the best of our knowledge, this topic has yet to be SIR-HCL method can well detect the anomalous emotional
well studied, which could potentially benefit lots of valuable pairs across audio-visual emotional data, and brings substantial
cognitive applications such as autistic children diagnosis and improvements over the state-of-the-art competing methods.
criminal deception detection. To this end, this article proposes an
 Index Terms—Audio–visual emotion, beta mixture model,
efficient cross-emotion anomaly detection approach via semanticcross-emotion anomaly detection, hybrid contrastive learning,
inconsistency reasoning and hybrid contrastive learning (SIRsemantic-inconsistency reasoning.
HCL), which is the first attempt to detect the anomalous
emotional pairs across the audio–visual emotions. First, the proposed framework utilizes dual-branch network to obtain the deep
emotional features in each modality, and then employs the shared I. INTRODUCTION
residual block to derive the semantically compatible features.
Subsequently, an efficient hybrid contrastive learning approach is
designed to enlarge the semantic-inconsistency among abnormal
emotional pair with different affective classes, while enhancing
 E MOTION recognition is one of the most attractive interdisciplinary research topics in artificial intelligence [1],
 which has drawn much attention recently and led to the adthe semantic-consistency and increasing the feature correlation vancement of a wide range of applications, such as sentiment
between normal emotional pair from the same affective class.
 analysis, psychological evaluation, the assessment of fatigue
At the same time, an efficient bidirectional learning scheme
 and depression. Many cognitive studies lend sufficient credence
 to the hypothesis that the perception of human emotion plays
 a vital role in their everyday lives. To be specific, anomaly
 detection in emotional data refers to identifying the human’s ab-
 Received 19 August 2024; revised 15 February 2025; accepted 5 March normal emotional patterns that are significantly different from
2025. Date of publication 12 March 2025; date of current version 15 October
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation other numerous normal emotional patterns, which is an imof China under Grant 62476103, in part by the Natural Science Foundation portant sentiment analysis technique due to the fact that the
of Xiamen City under Grant 3502Z202473043, in part by the National anomalous emotions often provide significant and critical in-
Science Foundation of Fujian Province under Grant 2024J01096 and Grant
2022J01316, in part by the NSFC/Research Grants Council (RGC) Joint formation to the evaluation of psychological counseling, autism
Research Scheme under Grant N_HKBU214/21, in part by the RGC Senior diagnosis, and healthcare treatments [2]. For instance, many
Research Fellow Scheme under Grant SRFS2324-2S02, and in part by the studies in cognitive science have shown that anomaly detection
General Research Fund of RGC under Grant 12201321 and Grant 12202622.
Recommended for acceptance by Associate Editor Guoqi Li. (Corresponding in facial emotions is of crucial importance to the evaluation
authors: Yiu-ming Cheung; Shu-Juan Peng.) of depression, while anomalous pattern identification in voice-
 Xin Liu is with the Department of Computer Science, Huaqiao Univer- conversation plays an important role in diagnosing and screensity, Xiamen 361021, China, and also with the Department of Computer
Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China (e-mail: ing autistic children.
xliu@hqu.edu.cn). In the literature, most existing abnormal emotion detection
 Qiyan Chen is with Xiamen Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Pattern methods predominately focus on examining the emotional data
Recognition, Xiamen 361021, China, and also with Fujian Key Laboratory
of Big Data Intelligence and Security, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361021, from a single source, e.g., facial data, voice data, or social
China (e-mail: qychen@hqu.edu.cn). media data [3]. In recent years, there has been a growing in-
 Yiu-ming Cheung is with the Department of Computer Science, terest in the research of multimodal emotion analysis, due to
Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China (e-mail:
ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk). its potential in providing rich information and robustness to
 Shu-Juan Peng is with the Department of Artificial Intelligence, Huaqiao sensor noise [4]. Under such circumstances, anomaly detection
University, Xiamen 361021, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Com- from multimodal emotional data is highly desirable in many
puter Vision and Machine Learning (Huaqiao University), Fujian Province
University, Xiamen 361021, China (e-mail: pshujuan@hqu.edu.cn). applications such as disease monitoring and abnormal behav-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCDS.2025.3550645 ior analysis. For instance, anomaly detection in multimodal

 2379-8939 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIU et al.: SIR-HCL: SEMANTIC-INCONSISTENCY REASONING AND HYBRID CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1311

conversation data focuses on identifying abnormal sentiment
patterns and their temporal dynamics [5], which can be well
utilized to perform psychological evaluation on the speaker.
Moreover, the analysis of multi-modal emotional data collected
by innovative imaging sensors and user interactions can provide
automatic remote monitoring of Parkinson’s patients, aiding in
early health-related event detection. Besides, recent cognitive
studies have shown substantial evidence that autistic children
struggle with cross-modal integration during expressive tasks
[6]. Nevertheless, the subtle movements in facial dynamics may
not be easily captured by manual visual inspection alone. As Fig. 1. Illustration of the difference between multimodal emotion analysis
such, traditional unimodal abnormal emotion detectors cannot and cross-emotion anomaly detection.
discover multimodal emotional anomalies.
 In fact, it is found that some of the multimodal emotions are
often not anomalous when they are viewed separately in each
individual modality, but which contain inconsistent responses from different modalities may cover different dynamic
when multiple modalities are jointly considered. Audio–visual representations, and it is generally difficult to extract the
emotion may probably be the most natural multi-modal ex- most relevant, comprehensive and discriminative expression
pression to achieve emotion analysis, favored for its unique from each modality [9]. 2) Modality heterogeneity: audio
advantages including ease of use and is less invasive to humans and visual emotions are captured by different sensors, and
[7], [8]. In the literature, most recent audio–visual emotion anal- there exists a huge modality gap between audio and visual
ysis methods primarily concentrate on fusing the heterogeneous emotion representations. 3) Complex semantic correlation:
features extracted from facial and vocal modalities, with limited most existing audio–visual emotion analysis methods often
exploration of semantic inconsistencies across different emo- fuse the information from various modalities to learn a richer
tional modalities. Although recent multiview anomaly detection multimodal representation, which inherently ignores the
algorithms have been designed to detect the anomalous samples semantic relevance and difference between different emotional
that have abnormal behaviors in each view or have inconsistent modalities. Therefore, it is still a nontrivial task to perform
behaviors across different views, they are not directly appli- efficient cross-emotion anomaly detection from a practical
cable to dynamic and heterogeneous audio–visual emotional viewpoint.
data. Besides, there has been little discussion about semantic- In this article, we propose an efficient cross-emotion anomaly
inconsistency analysis across different emotional modalities. detection framework via semantic-inconsistency reasoning and
 In this article, we focus on a relatively new topic in the hybrid contrastive learning (SIR-HCL), which is the first atabnormal emotion detection field, i.e., cross-emotion anomaly tempt to detect the anomalous emotions across the audio–visual
detection, particularly for audio–visual emotional data. It aims data. The proposed framework can well reason the semanticat identifying the abnormal emotional data pair whose affec- inconsistency among the high-level audio–visual representative patterns are inconsistent across different emotional modal- tions of all semantically irrelevant emotions, while enhancing
ities, which may benefit lots of valuable cognitive applications the semantic-consistency between the semantically relevant
such as psychological disease diagnosis and abnormal behavior ones. The main contributions are summarized as follows.
monitoring. For instance, suspects may attempt to hide their 1) A novel cross-emotion anomaly detection framework is
emotions in criminal or judicial cases, whose emotions might explicitly designed to identify the abnormal emotions
have incongruity between facial microexpression and speech across audio–visual data. To the best of our knowledge,
emotion. Under such circumstances, abnormal emotion detec- this work is the first attempt to detect the anomalous
tion across different emotional modalities is beneficial to assist audio–visual emotions which do not behave consistently
potential deception detection. Besides, recent cognitive studies across different modalities.
have shown substantial evidence that autistic children often pro- 2) An efficient hybrid contrastive learning method is preduce emotional sentences with weak cross-modal consistency sented to simultaneously preserve intra-/cross-modal inacross speech and facial expressions [6]. As shown in Fig. 1, teractions and hard-sample relationships, which can well
the emotions conveyed through their facial expressions could be learn the discriminative cross-emotion embeddings by
positive, while the relevant emotions surveyed by their speeches contrastive learning in a hybrid manner.
are negative. Evidently, developing a computational approach 3) The bidirectional learning scheme is developed to sigto detecting the cross-modal emotional inconsistency, if any, nificantly improve the data utilization, while a twois capable of providing a new promising way for the early component Beta Mixture Model is well designed to
screening of autistic children. reason about semantic-inconsistency and the semantic-
 To the best of our knowledge, cross-emotion anomaly consistency across different emotional modalities.
detection across audio-visual modalities has yet to be well 4) Extensive experiments verify the superiorities of the prostudied and there are still three main challenges. 1) Weak posed framework and show its competitive abnormal
emotional representation: the multimodal emotions acquired emotion detection performances.
1312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2025

 The remainder part of this article is structured as follows: information relevance (HFIR) for multimodal sentiment anal-
Section II provides a brief overview of related works. In Sec- ysis, which unifies two separate multimodal networks to mine
tion III, we elaborate the architecture and implementation de- the complementary and correlated information among different
tails of the proposed framework, and Section IV presents the modalities. Notably, this approach fuses the features of difexperimental results and extensive comparisons. Finally, we ferent emotions to perform sentiment analysis, is incapable of
draw a conclusion in Section V. discovering the inherent anomalous behaviors across different
 emotional modalities. Specifically, multimodal abnormal emo-
 II. RELATED WORKS tion detectors mainly aim to identify the possible anomalies
 from completely heterogeneous emotional modalities, such as
 Cross-emotion anomaly detection across audio–visual data visual, audio, and text data. Along this line, Dawel et al. [18]
is a relatively new research topic in cognitive science, and this utilized the meta-analyses to detect the evidence of pervasive
section mainly surveys the most relevant abnormal emotion impairments across facial and vocal modalities, with significant
detection or multimodal anomaly detection works. deficits evident for several emotions (i.e., not only fear and
 sadness) in both adults and children/adolescents. Note that, this
A. Abnormal Emotion Detection approach just employs a low-level fusion method to detect the
 Abnormal emotion detection primarily refers to identify the significant impairments between the facial and vocal expresabnormal sentiments, opinions, or attitudes from numerous sions, which cannot reveal fine-grained abnormal expressions
normal patterns. Often, the abnormal emotion may be hidden in the captured multimodal emotions. In recent years, multiin a facial expression, voice conversation, or a paragraph of modal deep-learning based anomaly detection algorithms have
text to reflect sudden changes in sentiment. Along this line, become increasingly popular, and some works have attempted
Germine et al. [10] employed the functional magnetic resonance to cast the anomaly detection problem as a one-class classificaimaging to investigate abnormal neural activity in emotional tion problem or as the detection of out-of-distribution samples.
face processing, while Clavel et al. [11] developed a fear-type Along this way, Jiang et al. [19] utilize the deep networks to
emotion recognition system to detect abnormal situations for interact visual and auditory signals, and jointly create a sense of
surveillance applications. Later, Sun et al. [5] utilized a hybrid emotional atmosphere within the scene. Accordingly, they furmodel that combines the convolutional neural network, long ther build an audio–visual modality fusion model to recognize
short-term memory network and Markov chain Monte Carlo the abnormal emotion. It is noted that such a method mainly
(MCMC) methods to identify conversation anomaly. fuses multiple information to capture the abnormal information,
 The detection of abnormal emotions using physiological which neglects the semantic relationship and interactions besignals also brings significant benefits to the field of digital tween different emotional modalities. Therefore, this approach
healthcare and human–computer interaction. Along this way, is explicitly incapable of discovering the abnormal multimodal
Gannouni et al. [12] utilize dthe electrocardiogram signals to emotions that have inconsistent behaviors across different emodetect abnormal emotions and therefore bring significant ben- tional modalities.
efits to the field of digital healthcare. Later, Zhu et al. [13] Recently, Li et al. [20] have innovated the concept of crossutilized a low-cost wearable sensor to collect electrocardio- modal anomaly detection (CMAD), which aims to identify the
gram signals and present an unsupervised abnormal emotion inconsistent patterns or behaviors of instances across differdetection method. Note that, these methods mainly focus on ent modalities. Specifically, this approach first trains multidetecting the unusual samples from a single emotional data. modal deep neural networks to extract features from different
With the popularity of different sensors, multimodal emotion modalities, and then utilizes a predefined threshold to detect
learning has gained increasing attention due to the availability the potential cross-modal anomalies. Note that, this method is
of diverse information sources [14]. For instance, Alvarez et al. tailored to detect multimodal data with substantial semantic in-
[15] gathered emotional signals from multiple sources to detect consistencies, which is incapable of identifying dynamic crossabnormal behaviors, offering critical insights for early health- modal anomalies, including inconsistent behaviors across facial
related event prevention. Nevertheless, this approach focuses on expressions or acoustic patterns. Therefore, there is still a lack
identifying anomalies when emotional signals from one modal- of efficient models to achieve cross-emotion anomaly detection
ity are missing or corrupted, which essentially neglects the from a practical viewpoint.
affective relationships between different emotional modalities
and therefore cannot identify the potential semantic inconsis- III. METHODOLOGY
tencies across different emotional modalities.
 Cross-emotion anomaly detection is a relatively new topic in
 multimodal emotion analysis field. Without loss of generality,
B. Multimodal Anomaly Detection the proposed framework mainly focuses on abnormal emotion
 Multimodal data analysis mainly aggregates both indepen- detection across audio–visual data pairs, and this section first
dent and complementary information to provide comprehen- clarifies the relevant notation and formal definition of crosssive representations, and such a technique has drawn much emotion anomaly detection. Then, the proposed network archiinterest in multimodal emotion analysis [16], [17]. For in- tecture, hybrid contrastive learning, and semantic-inconsistency
stance, Chen et al. [17] proposed a hybrid fusion based on mining scheme are introduced in tandem. Finally, the reasoning
LIU et al.: SIR-HCL: SEMANTIC-INCONSISTENCY REASONING AND HYBRID CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1313

Fig. 2. Schematic architecture of the proposed cross-emotion anomaly detection framework.

of anomalous emotional data pair and its optimization process emotion instances. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed
are explicitly provided. SIR-HCL framework is the first attempt to detect cross-modal
 emotional anomalies within heterogeneous emotional expres-
A. Notation and Problem Formulation sions.
 Suppose that we have an emotional multimodal dataset that
 N
consists of visual emotional data Xv = {xvi }i=1 and audio emoa N B. Dual-Branch Network Architecture
tional data X = {xi }i=1 , where xi ∈ R
 a v l×dv
 and xai ∈ Rl×da ,
N represent the total data number within these two modalities, The proposed SIR-HCL model aims to identify semanticl is the emotional sequence length, da and dv are respectively inconsistency among high-level representations of irrelevant
the raw embedding dimension of visual and audio modalities. expressions while enhancing semantic-consistency within rele-
Given an emotional data pair {xvi , xai }, the primary task of vant ones. Recent advances in multimodal deep neural networks
cross-emotion anomaly detection is to determine whether the have enabled effective learning of compatible features across
emotional data pair xvi and xai have inconsistent emotional modalities [21]. Specifically, we first utilize a dual-branch netbehavior or not. work architecture to obtain the deep emotional feature represen-
 Note that, the training of a single-modal classifier on visual tations in each modality, and then employ the shared residual
data or audio data is able to predict the affective labels of indi- block to derive the semantically compatible features across
vidual emotion instance, and these predicted affective labels can heterogeneous emotions.
be intuitively utilized to evaluate the semantic-inconsistency Feature Encoding Subnetworks: The inputs to the visual
between emotional data pairs. It is noteworthy that such a train- subnetwork and audio subnetwork are respectively the facial
ing approach inherently necessitates the explicit definition and image sequence and acoustic frames in an emotional utterance.
prior prediction of affective labels for each emotion instance. Specifically, the visual subnetwork Fv (·) and audio subnetwork
However, if the emotional instances are inaccurately classi- Fa (·) are both implemented using a single-directional long
fied into incorrect categories, this baseline model will make short-term memory (LSTM), and the end-state hidden reprea wrong prediction and fail to detect semantic-inconsistency sentations followed by a fully connected layer are selected as
across different emotional modalities. To tackle this problem, as the outputs. To produce an efficient visual emotion embedding
shown in Fig. 2, we present an efficient cross-emotion anomaly that has the same size as the acoustic emotion embedding,
detection framework via semantic-inconsistency reasoning and we set the size of the last network layer to be the same for
hybrid contrastive learning (SIR-HCL). Specifically, we formu- each subnetwork. Consequently, the high-level visual emotional
late the cross-emotion anomaly detection as a binary classifi- embedding vi and acoustic emotional embedding ai of the ith
cation problem, and utilize the semantic-consistency labels of data pair can be obtained by
emotional data pairs to measure the detection results, thereby
bypassing the prediction of affective categories for each single vi = Fv (xvi , θvlstm ), ai = Fa (xai , θalstm ) (1)
1314 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2025

where θvlstm and θalstm respectively represent network parame- That is, a positive pair is defined as the unimodal representaters of visual subnetwork and audio subnetwork. tions from different emotional samples of the same affective
 Shared Residual Block: The heterogeneous audio and visual class, while a negative pair is defined as the unimodal reprefeature representations often exhibit significantly different dy- sentations from two emotional samples whose affective classes
namic characteristics, and previous multi-modal emotion anal- are different. Given the ith visual emotion embedding vir , we
ysis works often learn modality-invariant and modality-specific select a group of positive samples Piv and negative samples Niv
features for predicting the affective states. Although audio– according to their affective labels in a mini-batch of size B.
visual emotional embeddings may be semantically relevant at Then, the intramodal contrastive loss of visual modality can be
the utterance level, there still exists a modality gap across formulated as
two modalities. To alleviate this concern, we employ a shared 
 s (vir , vkr )
residual block to learn the semantically relevant representation B
 vk ∈Piv
 r
 Lv = −
 intra
 log     . (5)
of heterogeneous embeddings and bridge their semantic gap s (vir , vkr )+ s vir , vjr
 i=1 r ∈P v
between different emotional modalities vk i vjr ∈Njv

 vir = σ (vi + η · FC(vi )) , ari = σ (ai + η · FC(ai )) (2) Often, the bidirectional learning scheme is able to improve
 the data utilization. Similarly, given the ith audio emotion emwhere σ is the nonlinear activation function such as ReLU, η
 bedding ai , we also select a group of positive samples Pia and
represents a learnable scale factor, and FC denotes the fully
 negative samples Nia according to their affective labels in a
connected layer. Consequently, the shared residual block conmini-batch of size B. Accordingly, the intramodal contrastive
nects the output features in jumps, which can be well utilized
 loss of visual modality can be formulated as
to preserve the original features as well as mitigating the elim- 
ination of network gradients. Meanwhile, the shared weight- s (ari , ark )
 B
 a r ∈P a
ing parameters through fully connected layers are beneficial to Lintra
 a =− log  k i
    . (6)
achieve cross-emotion compatible feature learning, and such i=1
 s (ari , ark )+ s ari , arj
 ark ∈Pia arj ∈Njv
a learnable residual block structure can be optimized by the
shared embedding loss Lice Accordingly, the intramodal contrastive loss of audio–visual
 Lshare = Lce (vir , yiv ) + Lce (ari , yia ) (3) modalities can be expressed as

where yiv and yia are respectively the ground truth of affective all = Lv
 Lintra intra
 + Lintra
 a . (7)
labels for the ith emotional pair, Lce is the symbolic notation 2) Cross-Modal Contrastive Learning: It aims to learn the
of standard cross-entropy loss. cross-modal dynamic relationships between different emotional
 samples. That is, a positive pair is defined as the grouped mul-
C. Hybrid Contrastive Learning Module timodal emotional data from different modalities of the same
 Contrastive learning has emerged as a highly effective ap- affective class, while a negative pair is defined as the grouped
proach for representation learning, which allows the model to multimodal emotional data from two heterogeneous samples
contrast the positive samples against a set of negative samples whose affective classes are different. Given the visual emotion
[22]. For instance, Kim et al. [23] presented a self-supervised embedding vir of an instance i, the positive samples from set
contrastive learning framework to train a robust neural network Pia and negative samples from set Nia are selected for crosswithout labeled data, while Yang et al. [24] combined the spike- modal contrastive learning. Then, the cross-modal contrastive
based self-supervised learning and contrastive learning to train loss of visual modality can be formulated as
 
the spiking neural network. Besides, Wu et al. [25] provided s (vir , ark )
a comprehensive review of existing self-supervised contrastive B
 ak ∈Pi
 r a
 Lcross
 v =− log  r r
    . (8)
learning techniques for graph data. Notably, these contrastive
 i=1
 s (v i , ak )+ s vir , arj
learning works are generally designed to enhance representation ark ∈Pia arj ∈Nja
learning in single modality. The proposed framework aims to Similarly, given the audio emotion embedding ari of an inenlarge the semantic-inconsistency between emotional data pair stance i, the positive samples from set Piv and negative samples
with different affective classes, while enhancing the semantic- from set Niv are selected. Then, the cross-modal contrastive loss
consistency between emotional data from the same affective of audio modality can be formulated as
class. To this end, we present a hybrid contrastive learning 
module to minimize modality gap. s (ari , vkr )
 B
 vk ∈Piv
 r
 Specifically, given the ith visual emotion embedding vir and La = −
 cross
 log     . (9)
jth acoustic emotion embedding arj , the popular cosine simi- i=1
 s (ari , vkr )+ s ari , vjr
 r ∈P v
 vk vjr ∈Njv
larity is utilized to measure their semantic relevance i

   Accordingly, the cross-modal contrastive loss across audio–
 s vir , arj = exp(cos(vir , arj )). (4)
 visual modalities can be expressed as
 1) Intramodal Contrastive Learning: It aims to learn the
intramodal relationships between different emotional instances. all = Lv
 Lcross cross
 + Lcross
 a . (10)
LIU et al.: SIR-HCL: SEMANTIC-INCONSISTENCY REASONING AND HYBRID CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1315

 3) Hard-Sample Contrastive Learning: The intramodal contrastive learning is performed to capture intra-modal instance
relationships, while the cross-modal contrastive learning is designed to explore inter-class relationships. However, as the
number of samples in these contrastive learning tasks increases,
the risk of encountering invalid emotional data pairs also rises.
To address this issue, we further parse a group of hard samples
to guide the training process within the proposed framework,
and thus promote the model to identify the abnormal emotion Fig. 3. Similarity distributions of semantic-consistency scores and semanticpairs more efficiently. inconsistency scores.
 Specifically, we select the top-ranked k negative samples
with the greatest similarity and the top-ranked k positive sam-
 Therefore, the hard-sample contrastive loss of audio modality
ples with the smallest similarity to regularize the learning procan be derived as follows:
cess in a cross-modal learning way. Given a visual emotion ⎛
embedding vir , we compute and sort the cross-modal similarity B 
score of each pair in a mini-batch size, and then select k pairs Lhard
 a =− ⎝ a−v
 yi,s · log(s(ari , vsr ))
that have low similarity from acoustic positive set Pia to form i=1 s∈P̄iv
 ⎞
the hard positive set P¯a i 
    + a−v
 yi,m · log (s(ari , vm
 r
 ))⎠ (16)
 P̄ia = Rank min s (vir , arw )w∈P a . (11) m∈N̄iv
 1,...,k i

 a−v a−v
 Similarly, we select k pairs that have high similarity from where yi,s and yi,m are respectively the affective consisacoustic negative set Nia to form the hard negative set N¯ia tency label of emotional data pair {ari , vsr } and {ari , vm
 r
 }, with
    value 1 for the semantic-consistency and 0 for the semantic-
 N̄ia = Rank max s (vir , arw )w∈N a . (12) inconsistency. Accordingly, the total hard-sample contrastive
 1,...,k i
 loss can be obtained by
 Since cross-emotion anomaly detection can be well regarded Lhard
 all = Lv
 hard
 + Lhard
 a . (17)
as a binary classification problem, their semantic-consistency
labels can be generated naturally according to the semantic The overall hybrid contrastive loss function in a mini-batch
correspondence of emotional data pair. That is, if the affective size is a weighted sum of shared embedding loss, intramodal
expressions of audio–visual emotion data pair are matched, the contrastive loss, cross-modal contrastive loss, and hard-sample
values of these semantic-consistency labels are equal to 1, and 0 contrastive loss, which can be integrated as
otherwise. Therefore, the hard-sample contrastive loss of visual Lall = Lshare + λ1 Lintra
 all + λ2 Lall + λ3 Lall
 cross hard
 (18)
modality can be derived as follows:
 ⎛ where λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 are the hyper-parameters to balance the
 B  contributions of the different contrastive losses.
 Lhard
 v =− ⎝ v−a
 yi,s · log(s(vir , ars ))
 i=1 s∈P̄ia
 ⎞ D. Semantic-Inconsistency Reasoning and Optimization
 
 + v−a
 yi,m · log (s(vir , arm ))⎠ (13) The main objective of SIR-HCL is to reason the semanticm∈N̄iv
 inconsistency among the semantically irrelevant emotion pairs,
 while enhancing the semantic-consistency between semantiv−a v−a cally relevant ones. On the one hand, the emotions with
where yi,s and yi,m are respectively the affective-consistent
labels for data pair {vir , ars } and {vir , arm }, with value 1 for the semantic-inconsistency will be pushed away from each other,
semantic-consistency and 0 for the semantic-inconsistency. resulting in very small/large cross-modal similarity in the trans-
 Similarly, given an audio emotion embedding ari , we com- formed feature space. On the other hand, the emotions with
pute and sort the cross-modal similarity score of each pair in semantic-consistency will be pulled together, leading to very
mini-batch, and then select k pairs that have low similarity from large cross-modal similarity in the transformed feature space.
visual positive set Piv to form the hard positive set P¯iv To illustrate this, we randomly group 300 normal emotion pairs
    and 300 abnormal emotion pairs from the MOSI dataset [26] to
 P̄iv = Rank min s (ari , vw r
 )w∈P v . (14) show their similarity differences. After the training process, the
 1,...,k i
 representative similarity distributions of semantic-consistency
 Similarly, we select k pairs that have high similarity from scores and semantic-inconsistency scores are shown in Fig. 3. It
visual negative set Niv to form the hard negative set N¯iv can be observed that the similarity scores of different emotional
    pairs are in different ranges. Inspired by this finding, we utilize
 N̄iv = Rank max s (ari , vw r
 )w∈N v . (15) two-component beta mixture model (BMM) [27] to fit the sim-
 1,...,k i
 ilarity distributions: s (i) = exp(cos(vir , ari )) of each normal
1316 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE I
 ANNOTATIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS OF DATASETS

 Datasets Original Redefine Labels c-Labels
 [−3,−2) −3 Strong negative
 MOSI [−2,−1) −2 Negative Negative
 [−1,0) −1 Weak negative
 0 0 Neutral Neutral
 MOSEI (0,1] 1 Weak positive
 (1,2] 2 Positive Positive
Fig. 4. Illustration of multimodal emotional data organizations. (2,3] 3 Strong positive

and abnormal emotional pair, and thus obtain the probability of visual, audio and text, and the visual and audio modalities
a sample pair being normal or abnormal as follows: are particularly employed in our experiments. Similarly, each
 
 M sample is annotated by human annotators with a continuous
 pi = πm Beta (si | αm , βm ) (19) sentiment score ranging from –3 to 3. In our work, we utilize
 m=1 16 285 utterances for training, and 4643 utterances for testing.
where M is the total mixture number, πm is the mth mixture These two datasets include diverse speakers with approxicoefficient, αm and βm are respectively the probability density mately equal gender distribution. The training, validation, and
function parameters of Beta function for the mth mixture. test sets are divided into a 3:1:1 ratio, where the emotional
 To initialize the model parameters, we fit the components of segments are randomly selected from the same video. Similar
the BMM to the similarity scores of positive audio–visual emo- to work [29], we extract 35-dimensional visual features, prition pairs and negative audio–visual emotion pairs during the marily comprising basic and advanced facial action units, from
training stage. The expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm video frames using FACET [30]. Additionally, 74-dimensional
is then employed to optimize the model parameters. During audio features, including 12 Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients
the testing phase, we compute the similarity score between (MFCCs) and other low-level acoustic features, are extracted
visual–audio emotion pairs and utilize the derived probability from acoustic signals using COVAREP [31]. As shown in Fig. 4,
distribution to determine whether the emotional state across the paired emotional instances derived from the same video
audio-visual modalities is abnormal or not. clips share the same affective label. Since no abnormal multimodal emotional instances exist in the datasets, we randomly
 shuffle 50% of the audio–visual emotional data pairs from
 IV. EXPERIMENT
 the same speaker to generate abnormal emotional pairs that
 This section conducts a series of quantitative experiments on are affectively mismatched. Following the intuitive sentiment
public multimodal sentiment datasets, and validates the effec- categorization [26], as shown in Table I, the affective labels of
tiveness of the proposed SIR-HCL method. The experimental the two datasets are ultimately processed into three categories:
results, comparative analyses, and quantitative evaluations are positive, neutral, and negative.
detailed in the following sections. For these multimodal emotional datasets, the visual subnetwork and audio subnetwork are employed to extract visual
 emotion embeddings and acoustic emotion embeddings, re-
A. Datasets and Implementations
 spectively, each with a dimensionality of 256. Within these
 In the experiments, two popular multimodal sentiment networks, the number of hidden neurons in each cell is set to
datasets, CMU-MOSI and CMU-MOSEI, are selected for eval- 128, the dropout rate is fixed at 0.5, and the batch size is set
uation, and their brief descriptions are clarified as follows. to 16 for MOSI and 32 for MOSEI. The number k of hard
 1) CMU-MOSI: This dataset refers to the multimodal corpus samples is set to 6, and the parameters {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 } are set to
of sentiment intensity [26], which consists of 2199 opinion {1, 1, 0.5}. The proposed model is optimized using Stochastic
video clips. Each opinion video is annotated with a sentiment gradient descent (SGD) with a learning rate of 0.0001. For the
score ranging from –3 to 3, which respectively corresponds to two-component beta mixture model estimation, the probability
highly negative (–3), negative (–2), weakly negative (–1), neu- threshold is fixed at 0.5 to reason about abnormal emotions
tral (0), weakly positive (+1), positive (+2), and highly positive across different modalities. In all experiments, the learning
(+3) to the sentiment intensity. The dataset is rigorously anno- rate is decayed by 0.1 after 10 epochs. The entire network is
tated with labels for subjectivity, sentiment intensity, per-frame trained in an end-to-end manner, and the network parameters
and per-opinion annotated visual features, and per-millisecond are updated through backpropagation.
audio features.
 2) CMU-MOSEI: It is a large multimodal sentiment analysis and gender-balanced emotional dataset [28], consisting B. Evaluation Metrics and Baseline Methods
of 22 856 videos derived from 5000 videos and 1000 distinct The goal of cross-emotion anomaly detection is to
speakers [28]. Each video inherently contains three modalities: identify abnormal multimodal emotion pair whose semantic
LIU et al.: SIR-HCL: SEMANTIC-INCONSISTENCY REASONING AND HYBRID CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1317

patterns are inconsistent across different modalities. This TABLE II
task can be formulated as a typical binary identification AUC, FPR, TPR, AND ACCURACY RESULTS EVALUATED
 ON MOSI DATASET
problem. Therefore, the popular true positive rate (TPR)
and false positive rate (FPR) are selected for quantitative
 Method AUC FPR TPR Accuracy
analysis: TPR = (TP/TP + FN) , FPR = (FP/TN + FP),
where TP, FN, TN, and FP, respectively, represent the CMAD [20] 0.8437 0.2230 0.9193 0.8437
number of true positives, false negatives, true negatives, CMPC [7] 0.8627 0.2471 0.7954 0.7621
and false positives. For the performance evaluation, the NCR [33] 0.8342 0.2189 0.8370 0.8219
larger TPR values often reveal the better identification MISA [29] 0.8549 0.1653 0.8739 0.8739
performance, while the smaller FPR values indicate HFIR [17] 0.9079 0.1823 0.8635 0.8817
the better detection results [32]. Additionally, accuracy SIR-HCL 0.9143 0.1531 0.9468 0.8876
Accuracy = (TP + TN/TP + TN + FP + FN) and Note: The best results are highlighted in bold.
AUC values are also selected to validate the detection
performances.
 The proposed framework is the first attempt to detect anoma- TABLE III
lous emotion pairs across audio-visual emotional data, and there AUC, FPR, TPR, AND ACCURACY RESULTS EVALUATED
 ON MOSEI DATASET
are no relevant works to tackle this problem. For meaningful comparisons, we extend a few relevant methods to per-
 Method AUC FPR TPR Accuracy
form cross-emotion anomaly detection tasks. MISA [29] learns
modality-invariant and specific representations for multi-modal CMAD [20] 0.8734 0.1781 0.8507 0.8767
sentiment analysis. CMAD [20] exploits a deep structured CMPC [7] 0.8865 0.1939 0.9312 0.8419
framework to characterize the feature representations between NCR [33] 0.8627 0.1782 0.9234 0.8291
heterogeneous data samples, and utilizes a threshold to de- MISA [29] 0.8754 0.1887 0.9155 0.8471
tect the abnormal examples across different modalities. NCR HFIR [17] 0.8971 0.2135 0.9228 0.8651
[33] employs triplet loss and Gaussian mixture distributions SIR-HCL 0.9137 0.1723 0.9563 0.8895
to distinguish different kinds of data pairs. CMPC [7] utilizes Note: The best results are highlighted in bold.
cross-modal prototype contrastive learning to perform voiceface matching in a cross-modal way. HFIR [17] employs information relevance as the matching degree between cross-modal approach holds a strong ability to detect the abnormal emotions
features at the emotional semantic level, and utilizes hybrid across different modalities.
fusion based on information relevance (HFIR) for multimodal For the large CMU-MOSI dataset, it can be found that the
sentiment analysis. Since CMPC and MISA do not directly competing baselines have delivered relatively lower AUC, TPR,
detect anomalous pairs, we also utilize a two-component Beta and accuracy values, while generating larger FPR values. For
Mixture Model as stated within the proposed framework to instance, the AUC score and accuracy values obtained by the
distinguish possible anomalous emotion samples. For the other MISA method are respectively equal to 0.8754 and 0.8471,
baselines, we utilize the same similarity threshold value to de- while the AUC score and accuracy value obtained by the HFIR
tect the possible abnormal emotions across different modalities. method are respectively equal to 0.8971 and 0.8651. Notably,
 these two methods utilize the fusion model to bridge the semantic gap between heterogeneous emotion features, which
 can detect some obvious abnormal emotion pairs. However,
C. Performance Comparison and Analysis these methods often fail to detect inconsistent emotional be-
 1) Results of Detection Performance: The cross-emotion haviors when the abnormal emotions exhibit minor differences.
anomaly detection results obtained by different methods and Specifically, NCR [33] just considers one positive sample and
tested on different datasets are shown in Tables II and III, one negative sample of the specified instance, which therefore
respectively. It can be seen that the proposed method has de- cannot learn the discriminative latent embeddings and therelivered very competitive cross-emotion anomaly detection per- fore result in a lower performance. CMPC [7] employs the
formances, and outperforms most of the baselines in different unsupervised clustering to construct the positive embedding and
datasets. For the smaller CMU-MOSI dataset, the abnormal negative embedding between voice-face representations, and
emotion detection results obtained by the proposed SIR-HCL the accuracy score obtained by this approach is 0.8419. Note
approach do not differ significantly from the baseline methods. that, this approach ignores the intra-modal negative samples to
The main reason lies that the CMU-MOSI dataset has fewer explore the fine-grained representations in each modality, and
examples, and the emotional complexity is not very compet- its performance is uncompetitive when processing the largeitive. Accordingly, the detection results obtained by different scale emotional dataset. CMAD [20] first utilizes a deep strucmethods do not differ very much. Note that, the proposed SIR- tured framework to learn the feature representations between
HCL method has delivered better AUC, FPR, and TPR scores. heterogeneous modalities, and then applies a simple anomaly
For instance, the TPR value obtained by the proposed approach threshold to identify the anomalies whose patterns are signifireached up to 0.9563. This indicates that the proposed SIR-HCL cantly disparate across different modalities. Remarkably, this
1318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE IV
 CROSS-EMOTION ANOMALY DETECTION RESULTS OBTAINED BY DIFFERENT APPROACHES AND TESTED ON DIFFERENT DATASETS

 Undevided Positive-Negative Positive-Neutral Neutral-Negative
 Datasets Method
 Acc AUC Acc AUC Acc AUC Acc AUC
 CMAD [20] 0.8437 0.8859 0.8679 0.854 0.8211 0.8251 0.8367 0.825
 CMPC [7] 0.7621 0.8627 0.8123 0.850 0.8216 0.8438 0.8246 0.8317
 NCR [33] 0.8219 0.8342 0.8874 0.8421 0.8168 0.8514 0.8722 0.8861
 CMU-MOSI
 MISA [29] 0.8739 0.8546 0.8464 0.8320 0.8129 0.8764 0.8905 0.8910
 HFIR [17] 0.8817 0.9079 0.8852 0.8751 0.8974 0.9094 0.9076 0.8861
 SIR-HCL 0.8876 0.9143 0.8982 0.9135 0.8937 0.9178 0.9107 0.9165
 CMAD [20] 0.8767 0.8734 0.8511 0.8692 0.8397 0.8463 0.8712 0.8609
 CMPC [7] 0.8419 0.8865 0.8733 0.8512 0.8250 0.8137 0.7882 0.8215
 NCR [33] 0.8291 0.8627 0.8456 0.8419 0.8845 0.8512 0.8142 0.8736
 CMU-MOSEI
 MISA [29] 0.8471 0.8754 0.8367 0.8329 0.8190 0.8268 0.8506 0.8578
 HFIR [17] 0.8651 0.8971 0.8978 0.8879 0.8651 0.8539 0.8613 0.8426
 SIR-HCL 0.8895 0.9137 0.9106 0.8958 0.8976 0.8902 0.8913 0.8998
Note: The best results are highlighted in bold.

Fig. 5. Detection performance obtained by different approaches on different datasets. The abbreviation and corresponding full form of each label are as
follows: pos, positive; neu, neutral; neg, negative.

method just utilizes the triple loss to penalize the instances accuracy values are always higher than the results obtained
with inconsistent pairs, failing to leverage the negative sam- by all the competing baselines. That is, the proposed SIRples that are crucial for identifying abnormal emotions. As a HCL approach not only effectively handles various abnormal
result, its detection performance needs further improvement. emotion detection tasks across different modalities, but also
Comparatively speaking, the proposed SIR-HCL approach can delivers relatively stable detection performance under different
well measure the semantic-consistency among normal emotion abnormal conditions.
pairs, while accurately identifying semantic-inconsistency in Besides, we evaluate the proposed methods on fine-grained
abnormal emotion pairs. Consequently, SIR-HCL consistently cross-emotion anomaly detection tasks, where the affective laachieves higher cross-emotion anomaly detection accuracy than bels are defined in a more granular manner, i.e., strong negative
the competing baselines. (s-neg), negative, weak negative (w-neg), neutral, weak positive
 Further, we detail the cross-emotion anomaly detection tasks (w-pos), positive and strong positive (s-pos). Accordingly, five
into three subtasks: positive–negative anomaly, positive–neutral abnormal cross-emotion cases are designed for enhanced fineanomaly, and negative–neutral anomaly. As shown in Table IV, grained detection tasks, i.e., negative–positive, negative–neural,
it can be observed that the proposed SIR-HCL approach con- positive–neural, weak-positive to weak-negative and strongsistently achieves better detection performance under different positive to strong-negative. As shown in Table V, it can be
abnormal conditions. For the more challenging negative–neutral observed that CMAD and NCR methods achieve relatively
task, the detection performance obtained by the baselines meth- lower ACC and AUC scores, while CMPC, MISA, and HFIR
ods often yields relatively lower scores. For the CMU-MOSEI approaches also exhibit degraded performance across weakdataset, the proposed SIR-HCL method yields about 2.01% im- positive and weak-negative data collections. By contrast, as
provement on recognizing “neutral–negative” abnormal emo- shown in Fig. 6, our proposed SIR-HCL method demonstrates
tion pairs compared with CMAD method [20]. Fig. 5 shows very competitive detection performances and significantly outthe comparison curves obtained by different approaches. It performs these baseline methods. This indicates that the procan be found that the accuracy values evaluated on “positive– posed framework is capable of detecting abnormal emotional
negative” abnormal emotion pairs and obtained by competing pairs even when the affective differences are subtle and the
baselines were relatively unstable when tested on MOSI dataset, cross-emotion scenarios are highly complex.
In contrast to this, our proposed SIR-HCL method demonstrates 2) Ablation Study: Within the proposed framework, the devery stable performance on both datasets, and the corresponding signed hybrid contrastive loss plays a critical role in learning
LIU et al.: SIR-HCL: SEMANTIC-INCONSISTENCY REASONING AND HYBRID CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1319

 TABLE V
 ENHANCED FINE-GRAINED CROSS-EMOTION ANOMALY DETECTION PERFORMANCE ON CMU-MOSEI DATASET

 Pos-Neg Pos-Neu Neu-Neg Neg(w)-Pos(w) Neg(s)-Pos(s)
 Methods
 Acc AUC Acc AUC Acc AUC Acc AUC Acc AUC
 CMAD [20] 0.7951 0.7178 0.7820 0.7865 0.8448 0.8589 0.7111 0.7112 0.7069 0.7077
 CMPC [7] 0.8352 0.8380 0.8465 0.8513 0.8396 0.850 0.7922 0.7801 0.8426 0.8397
 NCR [33] 0.7065 0.7246 0.7114 0.7295 0.8569 0.8347 0.7514 0.7517 0.8269 0.8310
 MISA [29] 0.8093 0.8119 0.8307 0.8482 0.8298 0.8313 0.7815 0.7780 0.8223 0.8377
 HFIR [17] 0.8436 0.8529 0.8627 0.8775 0.8392 0.8491 0.8507 0.8374 0.8782 0.8834
 SIR-HCL 0.8471 0.8981 0.8753 0.8907 0.8816 0.8891 0.8652 0.8317 0.8857 0.8891
 Note: The best results are highlighted in bold.

 TABLE VI
 ABLATION STUDIES ON THE CMU-MOSEI DATASET

 MOSE MOSEI
 Method
 AUC Accuracy AUC Accuracy
 w/o-Lshare 0.8573 0.8669 0.8792 0.8753
 w/o-Lintra 0.8705 0.8613 0.8727 0.8681
 w/o-Lcross 0.8692 0.8718 0.8691 0.8781
 w/o-Lhard 0.8737 0.8715 0.8893 0.8703
 Lall 0.9143 0.8876 0.9137 0.8875
 Note: The best results are highlighted in bold.

 embeddings, thereby significantly improving cross-emotion
 anomaly detection performance.
 3) Visualization and Analysis: To visually verify the superi-
Fig. 6. Enhanced fine-grained detection performance obtained by different ority of the proposed SIR-HCL model, Fig. 7 shows several repapproaches on CMU-MOSEI dataset. resentative cross-emotion anomaly detection examples, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed SIR-HCL framework.
 To be specific, the detection results marked in green indicate
the discriminative cross-emotion embeddings. As illustrated in that the facial expression and voice clip share the same affective
Table VI, we conduct an ablation study to evaluate the con- class, and the detection results are recognized as the normal pair.
tribution of each loss component by sequentially removing it In contrast to this, the detection results marked in red indicate
from the model, in which w/o-Lshare , w/o-Lintra , w/o-Lcross , and that the facial expression and voice clip do not belong to the
w/o-Lhard , respectively, denote the removal of shared embed- same affective class, and the detection results are recognized as
ding loss, intra-modal contrastive loss, cross-modal contrastive the abnormal pair. It can be observed that the derived similarity
loss and hard-sample contrastive loss. It can be found that the scores provide an intuitive measure of the correlation degree
removal of shared embedding loss results in a slight perfor- between heterogeneous emotional modalities. That is, if the
mance degradation, which indicates that the shared residual facial expression and voice clip share the same affective class,
block can well bridge the modality gap between heterogeneous the proposed model is able to recognize their strong relevance.
emotions. Meanwhile, the learning of cross-emotion relation- Conversely, if the facial expression and voice clip are mistakships is a fundamental component that leads to the high ab- enly grouped together, the proposed SIR-HCL framework is
normal emotion detection performance, while the intra-modal capable of identifying such irrelevance and its corresponding
contrastive loss and hard-sample contrastive loss also contribute similarity score is very small. This indicates that the proposed
to boosting the detection performance. This demonstrates that model exhibits high discriminability to reason the affective rethe proposed model effectively enhances the discriminative lationship between heterogeneous emotional samples, making
power of audio–visual embeddings, achieving significantly bet- it highly effective in detecting abnormal emotions practically.
ter results when the intra-modal, cross-modal, and hard-sample Further, we utilize the t-SNE algorithm to visualize the
contrastive losses are jointly incorporated. Overall, the inte- derived multimodal emotional embedding vectors. As shown
gration of shared embedding loss, intramodal contrastive loss, in Fig. 8, it can be found that the initial embeddings of
cross-modal contrastive loss, and hard-sample contrastive loss audio–visual emotions belonging to the same affective class
enables the learning of more discriminative cross-emotion are separated into two distinct clusters due to modality gap.
1320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 7. Visualization of representative cross-emotion anomaly detection examples. For each audio-visual emotion pair, a facial expression frame and an
audio clip respectively represent a kind of affective class. The detection results marked in red (abnormal pair) indicate that the facial expression and voice
clip do not behave consistently with each other, while the detection results marked in green (normal pair) indicate that the facial expression and voice clip
behave consistently with each other.

 (a) (b) (c) (d)

Fig. 8. t-SNE visualization of the cross-modal embeddings in the case without or with training. The green color represents visual modality, while the blue
and pink colors respectively represent audio modality with the same or different affective classes. (a) Positive pairs before training. (b) Negative pairs before
training. (c) Positive pairs after training. (d) Negative pairs after training.

Moreover, the emotional distributions from the different affec- abnormal emotion pairs exhibit a wide range before training,
tive classes are always overlapping. Under such circumstances, with some peaks of their distribution waves often falling within
it is very difficult to reason the anomalous emotion pairs with similar intervals. Under such circumstances, it is very difficult
semantic-inconsistency. After training, the audio–visual emo- to identify the anomalous emotional data pairs across audiotions belonging to the same affective class are clustered closely visual emotion data. After training, it can be seen that most
together, while those from different affective classes are clearly similarity scores for normal emotional pairs are significantly
separated. The main reason lies that the proposed SIR-HCL higher than those for abnormal pairs, and the main peaks of their
model is able to aggregate the cross-emotion data pairs of distribution waves are clearly separated into distinct intervals.
the same affective class close together, while pulling those of This clear distinction between the similarity distributions can
different affective classes away. As a result, the derived cross- be effectively utilized to differentiate abnormal emotional data
emotion embeddings are semantically meaningful, to enhance pairs. This demonstrates that the proposed model provides valuabnormal emotion detection performances. able cross-modal information to reason about semantic incon-
 Besides, we investigate the similarity distributions of abnor- sistency, thereby enabling the detection of anomalous emotional
mal and normal emotional data pairs predicted by the proposed samples across audio-visual data.
SIR-HCL model at different learning stages. Fig. 9 shows the
similarity distributions of 600 abnormal and 600 normal emotion pairs derived from the MOSEI dataset. On the one hand,
it can be observed that the overlapping regions of similarity V. CONCLUSION
distributions before training are significantly larger than those Cross-emotion anomaly detection across heterogeneous
after training. On the other hand, the similarity distributions of modalities is a relatively emerging topic in the field of
LIU et al.: SIR-HCL: SEMANTIC-INCONSISTENCY REASONING AND HYBRID CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 1321

 [7] B. Zhu et al., “Unsupervised voice-face representation learning by crossmodal prototype contrast,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022,
 pp. 3787–3794.
 [8] A. Jan, H. Meng, Y. F. B. A. Gaus, and F. Zhang, “Artificial intelligent
 system for automatic depression level analysis through visual and vocal
 expressions,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Develop. Syst., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 668–
 680, Sep. 2018.
 [9] W. Yu, H. Xu, Z. Yuan, and J. Wu, “Learning modality-specific
 representations with self-supervised multi-task learning for multimodal
 sentiment analysis,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 10790–
 10797.
 [10] L. T. Germine, L. Garrido, L. Bruce, and C. Hooker, “Social anhedonia
 is associated with neural abnormalities during face emotion processing,”
 Neuroimage, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 935–945, 2011.
 [11] C. Clavel, L. Devillers, G. Richard, I. Vasilescu, and T. Ehrette,
 “Detection and analysis of abnormal situations through fear-type acoustic manifestations,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal
 Process., 2007, pp. 21–24.
 [12] S. Gannouni, A. Aledaily, K. Belwafi, and H. Aboalsamh, “Emotion detection using electroencephalography signals and a zero-time
 windowing-based epoch estimation and relevant electrode identification,”
 Sci. Rep., vol. 11, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 7071.
 [13] J. Zhu, F. Deng, J. Zhao, D. Liu, and J. Chen, “UAED: Unsupervised
 abnormal emotion detection network based on wearable mobile device,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 3682–3696, Nov./Dec.
 2023.
Fig. 9. Similarity distributions of abnormal and normal emotional data pairs
 [14] G. Sharma, A. Dhall, and J. Cai, “Audio-visual automatic group affect
derived before and after training processes.
 analysis,” IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1056–1069,
 Apr./Jun. 2023.
 [15] F. Alvarez, M. Popa, V. Solachidis, and G. Hernández-Peñaloza, “Behavior analysis through multimodal sensing for care of parkinson’s and
multimodal sentiment analysis. This work presents an effi- alzheimer’s patients,” IEEE MultiMedia, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 14–25,
cient cross-emotion anomaly detection approach via semantic- Jan./Mar. 2018.
inconsistency reasoning and hybrid contrastive learning, which [16] T. Horii, Y. Nagai, and M. Asada, “Modeling development of multimodal emotion perception guided by tactile dominance and perceptual
effectively identifies anomalous emotion pairs across audio– improvement,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Develop. Syst., vol. 10, no. 3, pp.
visual data. Within the proposed framework, an innovative hy- 762–775, Sep. 2018.
brid contrastive learning approach is designed to enlarge the [17] D. Chen, W. Su, P. Wu, and B. Hua, “Joint multimodal sentiment
 analysis based on information relevance,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol.
semantic inconsistency between abnormal emotional data pairs 60, no. 2, 2023, Art. no. 103193.
from different affective classes, while strengthening the se- [18] A. Dawel, R. O’Kearney, E. McKone, and R. Palermo, “Not just fear
mantic correspondence and feature correlation between normal and sadness: Meta-analytic evidence of pervasive emotion recognition
 deficits for facial and vocal expressions in psychopathy,” Neurosci.
emotional data pairs from the same affective class. Additionally, Biobehav. Rev., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 2288–2304, 2012.
a bidirectional learning scheme is employed to enhance data [19] Y. Jiang, K. Hirota, Y. Dai, Y. Ji, and S. Shao, “Abnormal emotion
utilization, and a two-component BMM is utilized to reason recognition based on audio-visual modality fusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Intell. Robot. Appl., 2023, pp. 162–173.
about anomalous emotion pairs with semantic inconsistency [20] Y. Li, N. Liu, J. Li, M. Du, and X. Hu, “Deep structured cross-modal
in a more interpretable manner. Extensive experiments have anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp.
shown its competitive performance over the state of the arts. 1–8.
 [21] X. Liu, Y. He, Y.-M. Cheung, X. Xu, and N. Wang, “Learning
 relationship-enhanced semantic graph for fine-grained image-text matching,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 948–961, Feb. 2024.
 REFERENCES [22] A. Jaiswal, A. R. Babu, M. Z. Zadeh, D. Banerjee, and F. Makedon,
 “A survey on contrastive self-supervised learning,” Technologies, vol. 9,
 [1] X. Jin, P. Jing, J. Wu, J. Xu, and Y. Su, “Visual sentiment classification no. 1, p. 2, 2021.
 via low-rank regularization and label relaxation,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. [23] M. Kim, J. Tack, and S. J. Hwang, “Adversarial self-supervised con-
 Develop. Syst., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1678–1690, Dec. 2022. trastive learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 [2] C. Park et al. “The neural systems of emotion regulation and abnor- 2020, pp. 2983–2994.
 malities in major depressive disorder,” Behav. Brain Res., vol. 367, pp. [24] S. Yang, B. Linares-Barranco, Y. Wu, and B. Chen, “Self-supervised
 181–188, 2019. high-order information bottleneck learning of spiking neural network for
 [3] B. Yang, J. Cao, N. Wang, and X. Liu, “Anomalous behaviors detection robust event-based optical flow estimation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
 in moving crowds based on a weighted convolutional autoencoder-long Mach. Intell., early access, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3510627.
 short-term memory network,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Develop. Syst., vol. [25] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning
 11, no. 4, pp. 473–482, Dec. 2019. on graphs: Contrastive, generative, or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
 [4] W. Liu, J.-L. Qiu, W.-L. Zheng, and B.-L. Lu, “Comparing recognition Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023.
 performance and robustness of multimodal deep learning models for [26] A. Zadeh, R. Zellers, E. Pincus, and L.-P. Morency, “Multimodal sentimultimodal emotion recognition,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Develop. Syst., ment intensity analysis in videos: Facial gestures and verbal messages,”
 vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 715–729, Jun. 2022. IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 82–88, Nov./Dec. 2016.
 [5] X. Sun, C. Zhang, and L. Li, “Dynamic emotion modelling and anomaly [27] Z. Ma and A. Leijon, “Bayesian estimation of beta mixture models with
 detection in conversation based on emotional transition tensor,” Inf. variational inference,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 33,
 Fusion, vol. 46, pp. 11–22, 2019. no. 11, pp. 2160–2173, Nov. 2011.
 [6] T. Sorensen, E. Zane, T. Feng, S. Narayanan, and R. Grossman, [28] A. Bagher Zadeh, P. P. Liang, S. Poria, E. Cambria, and L.-P. Morency,
 “Cross-modal coordination of face-directed gaze and emotional speech “Multimodal language analysis in the wild: CMU-MOSEI dataset and
 production in school-aged children and adolescents with ASD,” Sci. interpretable dynamic fusion graph,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Meeting Assoc.
 Rep., vol. 9, no. 1, 2019, Art. no. 18301. Comput. Linguistics, 2018, pp. 2236–2246.
1322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2025

[29] D. Hazarika, R. Zimmermann, and S. Poria, “MISA: Modality-invariant Yiu-ming Cheung (Fellow, IEEE) received the
 and -specific representations for multimodal sentiment analysis,” in Proc. Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Depart-
 ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020, pp. 1122–1131. ment of Computer Science and Engineering, The
[30] T. Baltrušaitis, P. Robinson, and L.-P. Morency, “Openface: An open Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
 source facial behavior analysis toolkit,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. China, in 2000.
 Comput. Vis., 2016, pp. 1–10. Currently, he is a Chair Professor (Artificial
[31] G. Degottex, J. Kane, T. Drugman, T. Raitio, and S. Scherer, Intelligence) with the Department of Computer
 “COVEREP- A collaborative voice analysis repository for speech tech- Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong
 nologies,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Kong, SAR, China. His research interests include
 2014, pp. 960–964. machine learning, pattern recognition, and visual
[32] X. Liu, Z. Hu, H. Ling, and Y.-M. Cheung, “MTFH: A matrix tri- computing.
 factorization hashing framework for efficient cross-modal retrieval,” Dr. Cheung is the Editor-in-Chief (2023) of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
 IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 964–981, EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, and serves as an As-
 Mar. 2021. sociate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL
[33] Z. Huang et al., “Learning with noisy correspondence for cross-modal SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, Pattern Recognition,
 matching,” in Proc. Int. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 29406– Knowledge and Information Systems, to name a few. He is an IET Fellow,
 29419. AAAS Fellow, and BCS Fellow. For details, see: https://www.comp.hkbu.edu.
 hk/ymc.
 Xin Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree in computer science from Hong Kong Baptist Shu-Juan Peng (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 University, Hong Kong, SAR, China, in 2013. the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Wuhan
 From 2017 to 2018, he was a Visiting Scholar University, Wuhan, China, in 2009.
 with Computer & Information Sciences Department, Currently, she is a Full Professor with the Depart-
 Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Cur- ment of Artificial Intelligence, Huaqiao University,
 rently, he is a Full Professor with the Department Xiamen, China, and also a Research Fellow with the
 of Computer Science and Technology, Huaqiao Uni- Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Machine
 versity, Xiamen, China, and also a Research Fellow Learning (Huaqiao University), Fujian Province
 with the Department of Computer Science, Hong University, Xiamen. Her research interests include
 Kong Baptist University. His research interests in- multimedia data analysis and pattern recognition.
clude multimedia data analysis, pattern recognition, and affective computing.

 Qiyan Chen received the B.S. degree in computer
 science and technology from Xiamen University of
 Technology, Xiamen, China, in 2022.
 Currently, she is a Research Fellow with Xiamen
 Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, Xiamen, China, and also a Research
 Fellow with Fujian Key Laboratory of Big Data
 Intelligence and Security, Xiamen. Her research interests include multimedia content analysis, pattern
 recognition, and deep learning.