11684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 SnifferDog: Comprehensively Learning
 Heterogeneous Features of Network Traffic to
 Identify Malicious Flows
 Xi Luo , Lihua Yin , Hongyu Yang , Zeyan Liu, Weizhe Chen , Shijie Jia , Bo Luo , Member, IEEE,
 and Hongli Xiang

 Abstract—Deep learning has recently attracted significant rules. The processes of capturing and analyzing attack samples
attention in the field of network intrusion detection. Despite a are time-consuming, and the detection rates remain low, as
substantial number of efforts have been made, previous works each rule is effective only against specific attack types.
struggle to comprehensively learn the features of network traffic,
 Behavior-based NIDSs have increasingly gained preference
resulting in inconsistent performance across various environments and attacks. To address these limitation, this study presents among security researchers due to their ability to support
SnifferDog, a novel network attack detection system that takes more generalized attack detection with higher detection rates
raw packets as input and rationally extracts and integrates compared to signature and handcrafted rule-based systems.
heterogeneous features involved in packets, flows and topology. Relevant technologies can be categorized into two types:
It formats the packets and flows concurrently to achieve a high- traditional machine learning (TML) and deep learning (DL).
level throughout for feature learning. Then, a flow pretraining DL-based approaches are foundational for current network
model consisting of a LSTM, a self-attention and cross-attention
layers is developed to learn both sequential and nonsequential intrusion detection tasks, while TML methods are limited by
inter packet relation features as initial flow vectors. Subsequently, a strong reliance on manual feature engineering and exhibits
a node-to-node and a node-to-edge attention layers are imple- reduced effectiveness in extracting and learning network feamented to enhance an inductive GNN model that dynamically tures [3], [4], [5]. Many studies, including [5], [6], [7],
embeds the flow-to-flow and flow-to-topology relation features [8], [9], [10], [11], and [12], have demonstrated the efficacy
into the flow vectors. The resulting flow vectors involve com- of DL-based technologies in areas such as DDoS attack
prehensive information of packet-to-packet, flow-to-flow and
flow-to-topology relations, enabling high detection performance. detection, botnet traffic identification, and IoT attack traffic
In-lab experiments across eight datasets from diverse envi- analysis.
ronments demonstrate SnifferDog’s superior effectiveness over Nevertheless, existing DL-based methods focus only on
existing solutions. A scalable prototype deployed in our institute’s representing partial network traffic features. Specifically,
network achieves a false positive rate of only 0.08%, validating they consider only a part of packet-level, flow-level, and
SnifferDog’s practicality in real-world scenarios. topology-level characteristics instead of fusing them in
 Index Terms—NIDS, GNN, heterogeneous feature fusion, atten- whole. For instance, many studies [13], [14], [15], [16],
tion mechanism. [17], [18], [19], [20] utilized statistical features derived
 from packet headers, neglecting the payload and thus losing
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 information. Some researches like [21], [22], and [23]
N OWADAYS, cyberattacks have infiltrated various critical applications, including Internet of Things (IoT)
systems, well-protected corporate networks, and industrial
 attempted to represent entire packets at the byte level, but
 they were computationally intensive due to the bi-gram byte
 embeddings (65,535 dimension per byte), byte graph learning
infrastructures, causing significant damage to users worldwide and large language models they used. Moreover, they failed
[1]. Network-based intrusion detection systems (NIDSs) have to learn the features capturing the relations between packets,
emerged as effective security solutions [2]. However, tradi- flows and topology. Packets are related when application-layer
tional NIDSs still heavily rely on signatures and handcrafted data is split across multiple packets for network transfer, while
 Received 29 October 2024; revised 4 June 2025; accepted 2 October 2025. flows and topology become interrelated during multi-step or
Date of publication 13 October 2025; date of current version 4 November distributed attacks. These relations are not easily extracted
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and as statistical values based on expertise. The SOTA works
Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB3104100. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
 [12], [24] took some relations into account, fully integrate
was Dr. Abdallah Shami. (Corresponding author: Lihua Yin.) them. Additionally, they used only a limited set of statistical
 Xi Luo, Lihua Yin, Hongyu Yang, Weizhe Chen, and Hongli Xiang are with features, such as timestamps and packet sizes, as the raw
the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University, input information to ensure system throughput, resulting in
Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: xluo@gzhu.edu.cn; yinlh@gzhu.edu.cn;
binball@e.gzhu.edu.cn; chenwz@e.gzhu.edu.cn; xamxxegen@e.gzhu.edu.cn). unstable detection efficiency in real-world implementation
 Zeyan Liu and Bo Luo are with the Department of EECS and the Institute due to substantial variations in feature distributions observed
of Information Sciences, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045 USA across varying network environments and cyber-attacks.
(e-mail: zyliu@ku.edu; bluo@ku.edu).
 Shijie Jia is with the State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute
 Unfortunately, efficiently and comprehensively extracting
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100195, these features without expertise remains highly challenging,
China (e-mail: jiashijie@iie.ac.cn). primarily due to two major obstacles. 1) Data Scale: Using
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3620640 raw packet bits (approximately 1500×8 dimensions) instead of
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LUO et al.: SnifferDog: COMPREHENSIVELY LEARNING HETEROGENEOUS FEATURES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC 11685

statistical features (around 80 dimensions) results in a 150-fold encrypted traffic) packet relations. We chose LSTM rather than
increase in input dimensionality, creating prohibitive com- the popular Transformer architecture here because 1) a large
putational burdens. 2) Feature Heterogeneity:Packets, flows, portion of flows are short and contain only a few packets [24],
and topology exhibit distinct data structures. While statistical while the Transformer is designed for long sequence, and the
features of them can be directly extracted through basic mathe- flows are split into a sequence of short slices in SnifferDog
matical operations, relational features among them necessitate to accelerate the learning process; 2) the multi-head attention
specialized models for training and learning. These involve the mechanism in the Transformer increases the computational
representation and integration of heterogeneous features from demand, which deteriorates the throughput.
raw bits, sequential data, and graph-based formats. Particularly Flow graph learning. We formulate the flow graph as
for graph-based formats, multiple flows may exist between an edge-centric structure, in which each edge has a unique
two communication devices, forming a graph structure where identity represented by the flow embeddings and its endpoints.
multiple edges connect two nodes. This structure, referred to Therefore, information in the flow graph can be propagated
as a flow graph in this study, is more complex than the typical by random sampling and iterating identities, regardless of
single-edge-connected graph structure, making the learning the number of edges between two nodes. In the propagation
and fusing of features more challenging. process, we implement two attention layers, i.e., node-to-edge
 In this work, we present a novel network intrusion detec- (n2e) and node-to-node (n2n), to learn the feature of flowtion system named SnifferDog,1 which identifies malicious to-flow and flow-to-topology relations. Instead of the scaled
flows by comprehensively and efficiently fusing the features dot product, the n2e attention utilizes cosine similarity to
involved in packets, flows, topology, and their relations, with- measure the similarity between the query and key vectors
out manual intervention. For clarity, we categorize the relations of the node and the edge, since the cosine similarity can
into three types: packet-to-packet, flow-to-flow and flow-to- more reflect the pattern similarity rather than the distance
topology. The packet-to-packet relation denotes the contextual between two vectors, which is more suitable to identify the
relevance among the packets in a single flow inherited from the similar flows transferring similar payloads; the n2n attention
application layer data. The flow-to-flow relation represents the utilizes euclidean similarity to measure the distance between
collaborative relevance when flows are involved in a benign the query and key vectors, since the node vectors denote the
application or an attack behavior. The flow-to-topology rela- points located in the same euclidean space. At the end of each
tion refers to the relevance between flows and communication epoch, the edge embeddings integrate the vectors of both the
devices in a network environment, as attackers usually assign endpoints. After training, the final edge embeddings, namely,
dedicated malicious tasks to specific devices. the flow vectors, involve the heterogeneous characteristics of
 SnifferDog is composed of two critical components: 1)Flow packets, flows, and topology.
pretraining normalizes packet and flow data formats in a In summary, our contributions are as follows.
concurrent mode to support batch processing, thus enhancing • We analyze the entropy of more than 22 million packets
the throughput; and it constructs a self-supervised model to associated with over one hundred protocols, and identify
generate initial flow embeddings by learning feature of the the minimal number of bytes of the initial packet vectors
packets and packet-to-packet relation. 2)Flow graph learning that should be reserved to guarantee the effectiveness of
takes the initial flow embeddings as initial edge embeddings, subsequent flow pretraining. Based on this, we implement
and implements a novel Graph Neural Network (GNN) model a concurrent padding module, which is 12.45 times faster
for the flow graph, which can fuse the heterogeneous features than nPrint [26].
of flow-to-flow and flow-to-topology relations concurrently • We convert network flows into fixed-length slices and
into flow embeddings. develop an LSTM-with-attention encoder-decoder to ini-
 Flow pretraining. This component captures packets from tialize flow embeddings. This model automatically learns
the gateway device and generates initial flow vectors, thereby sequential (reflecting plaintext protocols with ordered
introducing two main performance challenges. 1) the process- packet content) and nonsequential (capturing ciphertext
ing speed during packet capturing and normalization and 2) the protocols disrupting plaintext order) packet relation feacomputational efficiency of the self-supervised learning model. tures, enabling SnifferDog to detect both plaintext and
For the first issue, SnifferDog increases the buffer size of the ciphertext malicious flows.
packet capture tool (libpcap [25]), thereby boosting the number • We propose a GNN tailored to flow graphs, which embeds
of concurrent threads during packet normalization processing. heterogeneous flow-to-flow/flow-to-topology relations via
For the second issue, SnifferDog analyzes the smoothing n2e and n2n attention propagation. This allows Snifferpoints in the entropy distribution of packets to minimize Dog to capture key features of: 1) multi-step attacks
the number of bits used in each packet while preserving (e.g., RCE, with cooperative attacker-victim flows); 2)
sufficient information for attack detection. Then, SnifferDog distributed attacks (e.g., DDoS, with multi-machine flows
transforms each flow into a sequence of slices consisting of targeting a victim).
a fixed number of packet vectors, through a sliding window • We evaluate SnifferDog on 8 datasets collected
mechanism. The self-supervised learning model is an encoder- in different environments, showing it outperdecoder model designed based on the Long Short Term forms 6 baselines—especially in multi-class
Memory (LSTM) network and attention mechanism to learn classification—proving superior feature representation.
both the sequential (for plaintext traffic) and nonsequential (for Deployed distributedly in our institute’s network, it
 exhibits a low false positive rate, verifying real-scenario
 1 Source code and datasets: https://github.com/ciat-gzhu/SnifferDog effectiveness.
11686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION number of MD5 value i, and n p is the total number of packets,
 count(md5ip )
 In this section, we introduce the background knowledge and and p(md5ip ) = np . The results show that the largest
motivation of this work. First, we briefly discuss the TCP entropy of the header and payload is about 24.1 and 17.1,
and UDP protocols to specify the heterogeneity of network respectively. This suggests the payload contains about 71% of
traffic and standards required by deep learning models. Then, the information present in the header. Using only the packet
we present an entropy analysis to illustrate the information header for feature extraction results in a loss of about 41% of
loss of features extracted from the packet header. Finally, we the packet’s information. As mentioned by LeCun et al. [27] in
explain the relations involved in packets, flows, and topology, Nature, the more the amount of information in the input data,
and explore the motivation of our proposed GNN model. the richer the abstract representations the model can learn,
 leading to higher accuracy in various tasks. This demonstrates
 a positive correlation between the amount of information in
A. Heterogeneity of Network Traffic the input data and the model’s accuracy. A 41% information
 Network protocols define the meaning of bits in packets loss significantly undermines the effectiveness and stability of
and describe how messages are exchanged between parties. deep learning models.
However, the protocol specifications vary significantly from However, the features of payload cannot be straightforone another. Taking TCP and UDP, the dominant transferring wardly extracted as statistical values, since its bit sequence
protocols on the Internet, as examples, the former’s header has no officially defined meaning, unlike the header. Packets
contains at least 20 bytes, defining a 4-byte sequence num- in a flow are used to transfer data segments of serialized
ber, a 4-byte acknowledgment number, etc., to ensure high files, videos, images, and so forth. The payloads of these
reliability. In contrast, the UDP header is only 8 bytes long, packets contain semantic relation according to the data they
achieving a high communication speed. A flow corresponds to load. In the case of plaintext, the relation is sequential when
an entire application layer data transmission, which consists the data segments are loaded in order, i.e., the sequential
of a sequence of packets. However, the number of packets in a relation. In the case of ciphertext, encryption may disrupt the
flow is unpredictable. For example, an SSH flow may contain ordered relation. For example, in TLS, the widely implemented
over 10 thousand packets when serving for telecommuting, encryption algorithm is AES-128 in CMC mode. AES-128 and
but may only generate around 16 packets after three failed other symmetric encryption algorithms are all developed upon
password attempts. confusion and diffusion, which disrupt the character order
 Deep learning (DL) models are known for their end-to-end of plaintext. Therefore, the payloads of packets in encrypted
learning capabilities. However, the input layer of those DL traffic involve disrupted semantic relation originating from
models typically requires data to be in a normalized format. upper-layer data, i.e. the nonsequential relation. The sequential
For example, in the attention mechanism, original input vectors and nonsequential relations motivate us to develop the flow
are multiplied by with three matrices WQ , WK , WV to obtain pretraining component by integrating the LSTM and attention
the corresponding Q, K, and V matrices, respectively. The mechanisms.
sizes of WQ , WK , and WV are predefined, so the dimension of
input vectors must be fixed. While sequence learning models
like RNN can process variable-length inputs, their comput- C. Relations in Flows and Topology
ing speed is significantly slower compared to fixed-length In practice, both benign network activities and attacks
inputs because additional padding and packing processes are tend to generate multiple flows to achieve their objectives.
introduced, which degrade system performance in real-world For example, remote login tools like XTerminal [28], which
applications. Therefore, packets of different sizes cannot be assembles SSH functions, keeps monitoring CPU and memory
treated as direct input vectors, and flows with varying lengths usage of remote hosts, and generates several long flows.
are not feasible to be processed as sequences for learning. To Another benign example is the web browsing, where each
optimize the throughput, SnifferDog first transforms packets request to a website generates multiple HTTP connections
into a format with fixed dimensions and then slices flows into to load resources like images, texts, sheets, etc. Each HTTP
fixed-length segments. connection forms a flow, and these flows together form a trace
 of the website request.
 In contrast, malicious activities such as RCE (Remote Code
B. Limitations of Using Packet Headers Execution) and DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) attacks
 To investigate the exact information loss of statistical fea- often involve multiple flows that work together to achieve their
tures extracted from the packet headers, we collected one objectives. Taking the notorious Eternalblue as an example,
day’s traffic from our institute’s network, consisting of over it is an buffer overflow vulnerability in the Windows Server
22 million packets with 275 protocols. We then calculated cal- Message Block (SMB) service that can be exploited to carry
culate the entropy distributions of their headers and payloads, out RCE attack. In the reconnaissance stage, an attacker uses
respectively. probing tools, like nmap, to scan for open ports, confirming
 All packets are padded with 0, resulting in a 128-byte header that port 445 is exposed. The vulnerability check module
and a 1504-byte payload. The 128-byte header contains a 60- then scans the target for the EternalBlue vulnerability, and
byte IP header, a 60-byte TCP header and an 8-byte UDP if successful, a remote control session is established. In the
 Pn is calculated through calculated through
header. The entropy final stage, the attacker can perform malicious actions, such
formula E = − 1 p p(md5ip )log2 p(md5ip ), where md5 p is the as information gathering, lateral movement & persistence,
MD5 hash code of the header or payload, count(md5ip ) is the and data exfiltration & control. All the probing, vulnerability
LUO et al.: SnifferDog: COMPREHENSIVELY LEARNING HETEROGENEOUS FEATURES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC 11687

check, exploit and remote control actions generate flows to a lightweight system deployed on programmable switches to
maintain a connection to the victim, forming multiple coop- classify flows. Fu et al. [24] implemented a system, named
erative edges between two nodes in a flow graph. Another HyperVision, which identified abnormal flows based on a set
example is DDoS attack, in which an attacker organizes a set of statistical or clustering algorithms.
of compromised devices (often forming a botnet) to disrupt the While the feature selection methods have improved both
normal functioning of a targeted server, service, or network by the accuracy and the computing efficacy of machine learningoverwhelming it with a flood of internet traffic. This results in a based techniques, the heavy dependence on statistical features
flow-to- topology relation, where flows between different node causes significant information loss. Moreover, these methods
pairs collaborate to accomplish a distributed attack, forming a rely on heuristic rules or metrics, which limits their ability to
star-shaped plot in a flow graph. learn complex interactions between features.
 GNN is particularly suitable for modeling flow-to-flow and
flow-to-topology relations, but most existing GNN models
focus on general graphs with a single edge between two nodes. B. Deep Learning-Based Approaches
In this work, we attempt to develop a novel GNN model Deep learning outperforms traditional machine learning in
capable of effectively learning features from the heterogeneous automatically generating high quality features from raw data.
relations presented in flow graphs. It has demonstrated powerful capabilities in many fields,
 such as image recognition, document classification and speech
 III. R ELATED W ORK recognition, inspiring numerous security researchers to apply
 Rule-based IDSs like [29], [30], [31], [32], and [33] deep learning models.
drew considerable attention before learning-based approaches In practice, the statistic features were widely used as
became popular, in fields such as DDoS mitigation, phishing original input instead of raw traffic data in DL-based works.
detection, and false data injection detection. However, these Vigneswaran et al. [36] presented a 3-layer DNN to dynamimethods rely on continuous manual updates of the rule library, cally fuse the statistical features in the KDD-99 dataset. Wang
making them easily evaded by manipulating some key words et al. [41] implemented lightweight gradient boosters (Lightor snippet of the attack payload or code. Moreover, the rules GBM) to enhance the robustness of the features learned by
are usually isolated and cannot capture complex characteristics DNN. Min et al. [10] made use of both word embedding and
of attacks. In recent years, learning-based NIDS research Text-CNN to extract valid information from the payload. Wang
has become dominant and can be categorized into TML- et al. [44] incorporated CNN and long short-term memory
based and DL-based. The TML-based models use shallow (LSTM) to fuse spatial features and temporal features. Wang et
architectures with one or a few layers (e.g., linear regression, al. [39] combined a modified LeNet-5 structure and an LSTM
SVMs, decision trees) and rely heavily on manual feature layer to learn spatiotemporal features of flows. Andresini et al.
engineering. DL-based works employ deep neural networks [35] represented network data as a 2D image and a 2D CNN
with many layers (e.g., CNNs for images, RNNs/Transformers was trained to embed packet streams. Baldoni and Battisti
for sequences) and are capable of learning hierarchical features [37] used a few statistics, such as the mean number and the
automatically. In the following subsections, we briefly intro- standard deviation of received bytes, and a PCA enhanced
duce network attacks or anomaly detection studies based on histogram-based representation model to detect anomalies in
these two models and summarize their limitations. network traffic. Chen et al. [9] developed an NBAD algorithm
 based on DBN and LSTM to automatically extract features and
 reduce dimensions. Lo et al. [11] presented a model named
A. Traditional Machine Learning-Based Approaches E-GraphSage to analyze abnormal topological relations of IoT
 In TML-based approaches, feature engineering aims to devices. Akpaku et al. [38] took adversarial actions like adding
logically select a subset of the original features or reduce deceptive positive edges or reducing critical negative edges
their dimensionality for use as input to a learning model. into account, and presented a robust adaptive GNN to solve
This process helps to avoid dimensional disasters, improve this issue. Sayem et al. [5] developed a framework based on
generalization performance, and servers as a preliminary step LSTM, CNN and GRU, which takes the result of NIDS as
for the classification of NIDS. input to improve its performance. Fu et al. [43] introduced
 Ambusaidi et al. [15] presented a mutual information- a deep semantic analysis method based on a U-shaped CNN
based algorithm for automatically selecting optimal features architecture, taking only the packet length pattern as input to
by capturing linear and non-linear correlations. Thaseen and identify tunneled flooding traffic.
Kumar [14] adopted cardinal feature selection techniques for Several researches also attempted to develop sophisticate
dimensional reduction. Zhou et al. [19] proposed an intrusion methods to enable raw packet learning or integrate features
detection framework based on an algorithm called CFS-BA for of heterogeneous relations. For example, Zhang et al. [22]
dimension reduction. Alazzam et al. [16] proposed a wrapper- designed TFE-GNN, a model treating bytes as nodes in a graph
based feature selection algorithm that used a pigeon-inspired to represent packets through a self-supervised GNN model. Lin
optimizer (PIO) to select optimal feature subsets. Engly et et al. [21] presented a model called ET-BERT that utilizes the
al. [17] used imbalance correction and feature selection tech- Bert model to represent flows based on bigram byte tokens
niques to improve the quality of data in intrusion detection. with 65,535 dimensions. These two byte-level methods intro-
Li et al. [18] identified optimal feature subsets based on duced a significant resource requirement, as a packet typically
random forest with information gain and AP clustering feature contains up to 1,500 bytes. Cui et al. [23] utilized Tshark to
grouping algorithms. Barradas et al. [20] introduced FlowLens, extract protocol fields in different packet layers, and fed these
11688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 1. Overview of SnifferDog.

 TABLE I flows. SnifferDog is composed of two critical components:
S UMMARY OF THE I NFORMATION U SED IN R ELATED W ORKS . TML: flow pretraining and flow graph learning. In the flow pre-
 T RADITIONAL M ACHINE L EARNING , DL: D EEP L EARNING , P2P: training component, SnifferDog incorporates a flow formatting
 PACKET- TO -PACKET R ELATION , F2F: F LOW- TO -F LOW R ELATION ,
 F2T: F LOW- TO -T OPOLOGY R ELATION
 module designed to efficiently generate uniform inputs, along
 with a flow encoding module for generating an initial embedding for each flow based on these inputs. In the flow graph
 learning component, SnifferDog employs our proposed GNN
 model to learn the flow-to-flow and flow-to-topology relations,
 and to output the final flow embeddings which are fed into a
 random forest model to train the classifier. The training tasks
 for both components are carried out offline to ensure a high
 real-time efficiency.

 A. Flow Pretraining
fields key-value pairs as language tokens into LLMs. This
process required extracting raw packets through Tshark in a 1) Flow Formatting: The objective of Flow Formatting is
structured format, leading to increased resource consumption, to standardize raw network packet and flow formats to optiand the LLMs are slow and heavy for network traffic analysis. mize computational resources and efficiency for subsequent
Holland et al. [26] presented a packet padding tool, nPrint, processing stages. This module consists of two core modules:
which encodes each packet with a fixed length to facilitate Packet Encoding and Flow Slicing.
packet classification tasks; however, it analyzes and pads only Packet Encoding–To standardize the input for subsequent
the packet header. Qu et al. [12] utilized packet size and models, SnifferDog fills any empty fields in the packet with 0,
timestamp as basic information to hierarchically and uniformly just like nPrint [26]. A packet header vector here consists of
embed packet, flow, and trace features of web applications. a 480-bit IP header, a 480-bit TCP header, and a 64-bit UDP
Although they optimized computational consumption by using header. Unlike nPrint, we exclude ICMP protocol packets from
only packet size and timestamp, their method showed a low consideration since ICMP cannot form a flow. Additionally,
process speed in both training and testing, as since they did we remove the 64-bit source and destination IP addresses, as
not format the length of input flows. well as the 32-bit source and destination ports for the TCP or
 In summary, these approaches have attempted to dynam- UDP protocols, from the packet headers. This reduction helps
ically generate rich embeddings; however, most fail to prevent overfitting, ensuring the pretraining process focuses
efficiently fuse the features from packets, flows, and topology. on the information of transferred content, rather than the
In contrast to these methods, we implement a highly efficient connection entities, which are better captured at the topology
flow pretraining module that allows batch learning of the level during the flow graph learning phase. Ultimately, the byte
packet-to-packet relation. Additionally, we develop a powerful values from the packet headers are used to form a 116-byte
GNN model to represent heterogeneous relations, i.e., the vector for each packet. The payload in a packet can exceed
flow-to-flow and flow-to-topology, in a flow graph. Table I 1,500 bytes. After entropy analysis (as discussed in Section
presents the features used in existing works, demonstrating that II-B), we determine the smoothing point of the packet entropy
SnifferDog reads the most comprehensive information from distribution to be 193 bytes from the original payload. If the
network traffic. payload length is shorter than 193 bytes, it is padded to this
 length. When combined with the 116-byte header vector, each
 packet is thus represented by a 309-dimensional vector.
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY To enhance the runtime performance of the packet encod-
 Figure 1 provides an overview of SnifferDog, which takes ing process and optimize throughput compared to nPrint,
raw packets as input and represents the features possessed SnifferDog implements several key improvements tailored
in packets, flows and topology to accurately detect malicious to real-world environments. First, SnifferDog resolves issues
LUO et al.: SnifferDog: COMPREHENSIVELY LEARNING HETEROGENEOUS FEATURES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC 11689

 the flow. It is important to note that, unlike the transformer
 decoder which processes elements of a sequence one by one,
 our decoder reads all the packet vectors simultaneously to
 accelerate the process. This approach aligns with our goal of
 capturing relational features and fusing them with the packet
 vectors, rather than performing content generation tasks, as is
 typical with Transformer models.
 During the training phase, the Decoder’s output is compared
 with the input vectors to minimize the mean squared error
 (MSE) loss. The hidden state hi ∈ R128×1 at the i-th time step
 in the LSTM layer can be calculated as:

 zi = σ(µz vi + Wz hi−1 + bz ) (1)
 fi = σ(µ f vi + W f hi−1 + bz ) (2)
 oi = σ(µo vi + Wo hi−1 + bo ) (3)
 Fig. 2. Example of Flow Encoding.
 ci = tanh(µc vi + Wc hi−1 + bc ) (4)
related to high packet loss rates caused by nPrint’s lack of ci = fi ∗ ci−1 + zi ∗ ci (5)
support for VLAN-tagged packets. Second, it increases the hi = tanh(ci ) ∗ oi (6)
original buffer queue size in the libpcap library from 10 MB to
100 MB to support more packet encoding threads (from 2 to 8 Specifically, µ j ∈ R128×309 , W j ∈ R128×128 and b j ∈ R128×1 ( j ∈
threads), thereby enhancing concurrency and reducing latency. {z, f , o, c}) are learnable parameters. Here, zi , fi , oi , and ci are
Third, SnifferDog identifies memory leaks in nPrint using a the input gate, forget gate, output gate, and the i-th content
valgrind tool [45] and introduces a RAII tool [46] to address vector, respectively. σ is the logistic sigmoid function, tanh is
the problem. This tool employs a scope guard mechanism, the Tanh activation function, and * is the Hadamard product.
ensuring that memory is dynamically released, which enhances Assuming that the number of packets in the sliding window is
long-term stability during deployment. lw , the first le packet vectors are input into Encoder’s LSTM
 Flow Slicing–As mentioned in Section II, a key limitation of network, that is, the input sequence length is le , and then the
LSTM networks and attention mechanisms is their dependence rest ld vectors are fed to the Decoder (ld = lw − le ). This
on input samples with consistent time steps. To address this model compresses a slice of high-dimensional (309×lw ) packet
challenge and meet the input requirements of our LSTM features into a lower-dimensional (128) embedding.
and attention-based flow encoding model, we introduce a The self-attention layer takes the matrix H sel f consistsliding window mechanism. This mechanism transforms a ing of the le hidden h0 , . . . , hle −1 as input, where H sel f =
flow into multiple fixed-length slices, each serving as an [h0 , . . . , hle −1 ]. The Q sel f , K sel f and V sel f matrices of the selfencoding unit, ensuring that the flow encoding model can attention layer are calculated as follows:
consistently process fixed time steps. Based on the provided
quintuples, i.e., source IP, source Port, destination IP, desti-
 Q sel f = H sel f Wqs (7)
nation Port and protocol, of the packet vectors, SnifferDog
aggregates them into a flow sorted by their timestamps. K sel f = V sel f = H sel f Wkv
 s
 (8)
Specifically, for the packet sequence p1i , p2i , . . . , pni i of the i-th
flow f lowi (assuming that f lowi has ni packets), each packet where Wqs , Wkv
 s
 ∈ R128×128 are the trainable parameters. The
 0
is encoded and uniformly transformed into a 309-dimensional output matrix H sel f is computed using the Scaled Dot-Product
vector vki (1 ≤ k ≤ ni ). Next, a sliding window sequence Attention:
is constructed with a window size lw and a step size of !
 T
ls for vector sequences v1i , v2i, . . . , vni i (vi ∈ R309×1), namely Q sel f K sel f
 H sel f = so f tmax
 0
 √ V sel f (9)
 v0i , . . . , viw , vis , . . . , viw s −1 , . . . , vni i −lw , . . . , vni i −1 .
 l −1 l l +l
 
 ds
 2) Flow Encoding: Our flow encoding model consists
 of two main components: an Encoder and a Decoder, as where d s is the dimension of the hidden vectors (i.e., 128 in
 illustrated in Figure 2. The Encoder incorporates an LSTM
 f = [h0 , . . . , hle −1 ] serves as an input to the
 0 0 0
 this work), and H sel
 network to encode first several packets of a slice as input cross-attention layer of the decoder.
 and a self-attention layer to share information with each other The input of the decoder consists of three parts: the rest
 packets. The Decoder includes an LSTM network and a cross- packet vectors vle , . . . , vlw −1 , the output hidden vector h0ini of
 attention layer. It takes the last few packets of a slice, the the Encoder’s LSTM layer, and H sel 0
 f . The LSTM layer of
 output hidden vectors of the encoder LSTM and self-attention the Decoder operates similarly to the Encoder’s LSTM and
 layers, as input, and generates the slice embedding v s . The generates Hcross = [hle , . . . , hlw −1 ]. The Qcross , Kcross and Vcross
 sequential relation is represented by the LSTM layer, while matrices of the cross-attention layer are calculated as follows:
 the feature of nonsequential relation is captured by the selfattention and cross-attention layers. SnifferDog aggregates the Qcross = Hcross Wqc (10)
 embeddings of the slices belonging to the same flow by
 averaging them, which serve as the initial embedding for Kcross = Vcross = H sel
 0 c
 f Wkv (11)
11690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

where Wqc , Wkv
 c
 ∈ R128×128 are the trainable parameters. The as the edges connected to node v). For node v, the message
 0
output matrix Hcross is computed as the Scaled Dot-Product propagation is performed recursively as follows:
Attention:  
 (k−1) (k−1) (k−1)
  T
  h(k)
 v = σ(gv
 h v , h N(v) , h D(v) W
 (k)
 + b(k) ) (14)
 Qcross Kcross
 Hcross = so f tmax
 0
 √ Vcross (12)
 dc where h(k)v is the feature vector of node v after propagation

where dc is the dimension of the hidden vectors (i.e., 128 in in the k-th layer; σ(·) represents a differentiable non-linear
this work), and Hcross 0
 = [h0le , . . . , h0lw −1 ]. After process by a activation function, with LeakyReLU used here; gv () is the
two-layer Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), we have the output aggregation function, denoted as a SUM operation; h(k−1) N(v) is
matrix Z = zle , . . . , zlw −1 of the decoder. The loss function is the aggregated representation of all neighboring nodes N(v)
computed as follows: of node v at the (k − 1)-th layer; and h(k−1) D(v) represents the
 aggregated representation of all connected edges D(v) of node
 1 X
 Z v at the (k − 1)-th layer. When k = 0, h(0) v = Wini bip , where
 Loss f p = ||zi − vi ||2 (13) Wini ∈ R128×32 is a learnable weight matrix, and bip is the
 lw − le z
 i bit sequence of IP address of the node; and W (k) and b(k) are
 the learnable weight matrix and bias vector at the k-th layer,
After training, the optimized parameters are obtained, and a
 respectively. From the formula above, it is evident that the
slice embedding is calculated by aggregating the vectors in
 key to computing the node embedding hv is to aggregate the
 0
 , i.e., v s = lw 1−le hHi cross hi .
 P
Hcross
 features of its neighbors hN(v) and edges hD(v) .
 As shown in Figure 2 by an example, assuming lw = 8 and
 1) The n2e and n2n Attentions: As shown in the right
le = 5, there is a vector sequence [v0 , . . . , v7 ]. The LSTM netpart of Figure 1, the n2e and n2n attentions are used to
work of the Encoder calculates the input sequence [v0 , . . . , v4 ]
 aggregate the neighboring node and edge features, respectively.
to obtain the corresponding hidden state vectors [h0 , . . . , h4 ].
 In the n2e attention layer, the cosine similarity is employed
The hidden state h4 is fed into the Decoder for initialization.
 to calculate the attention score, since it focuses on capturing
The self-attention layer outputs H sel f = [h00 , . . . , h04 ]. The
 similar patterns rather than quantitative values of vectors. The
LSTM layer of the Decoder produces Hcross = [h5 , h6 , h7 ],
 pattern here resembles a density distribution of the dimensions
and the cross-attention layer takes both H sel f and Hcross as
 of a flow embedding, which reflects both the packet contents
input to compute Hcross 0
 = [h05 , h06 , h07 ]. After training, the slice
 h0 +h0 +h0 and the relations between them. Cosine similarity is suitable
embedding is computed as v s = 5 36 7 . During a real-time for measuring the patterns since it removes the impact of
encoding scenario, after flow formatting, the flow is segmented ranges by dividing lengths of the vectors. Specifically, if a
into a series of slices: slice0 = [v0i , . . . , vliw −1 ], slice1 = payload is transferred multiple times in a flow and only once
[vlis , . . . , vils +lw −1 ], . . ., slice ni −lw +ls −1  = [vni i −lw , . . . , vni i −1 ]. For in another, the cosine similarity effectively captures the content
 ls
each slice, based on the pretrained parameters, we have the similarity. This is exactly the purpose for identifying similar
representation vector v s for that slice. At last, we aggregate or correlated malicious content across different flows. The
the average of representation vectors from all slices in Pthe n2e attention acts as an intermediary to facilitate message
flow to obtain the initial flow embedding v f = ni −lw 1+ls −1 v s , propagation from one edge to another. We implement this
where v f ∈ R128×1 . intermediary propagation because the number of nodes in the
 flow graph is much smaller than that of edges, reducing the
 computing complexity from O(|E|2 ) to O(|V| ∗ |E|). Euclidean
B. Flow Graph Learning similarity is employed to measure the relation between two
 Based on the connectivity of network devices, we construct nodes in n2n attention layer. The reason is that the nodes
a flow graph where IP addresses serve as nodes, and flows represent IP addresses which are pretty suitable to be measured
between IP addresses serve as edges connecting the nodes. the distance by euclidean distance rather then dot product-
The results of the flow encoding model are used as initial based measurement like the cosine similarity. For example,
embeddings for the flows, i.e., the initial attributes of the the similarity between IP addresses 1.1.1.1 and 2.2.2.2 is
edges. This results in an attributed flow graph. In the flow calculated to be 1 by computing the cosine similarity, while
graph, multiple edges may exist between two IP addresses, they are distributed in different class A addresses, and only
and simply aggregating them as one cannot represent their 0.33 by computing the euclidean similarity. When an attack
collaborating relationships. Therefore, the flow graph is rep- launched multiple times, the attention weight (i.e., the similarresented as AIN f a = {V, E}, where v ∈ V is an IP address and ity) becomes large between these flows and nodes generated by
an edge e ∈ E is identified as a triple (src, f eat, dst). Here, this attack, so the flow vectors become close. This is similar for
src, dst, and feat represent the source IP address, destination benign applications, of which the flow vectors become close
IP address, and flow vector, respectively. during training phase. The differentiated flow vectors facilitate
 In message propagation, random edge and node sampling classifying attack traffic.
are performed on the flow graph respectively to obtain the For the n2e attention, the attention score s(v, e) for the node
propagating candidates and to reduce computing complexity. v and the edge e (e ∈ D(v)) is calculated as follows:
In terms of graph AIN f a , let N(v) be all sampled nodes among s(v, e) = Distcos (hv We , re ) (15)
the neighboring nodes of node v (hereinafter referred to as the
neighboring nodes of node v), and D(v) be all sampled edges where hv is the feature vector of node v, We is the learnable
among the edges connected to node v (hereinafter referred to weight matrix used to map the node feature hv to the edge
LUO et al.: SnifferDog: COMPREHENSIVELY LEARNING HETEROGENEOUS FEATURES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC 11691

feature re , and Distcos () is the cosine similarity function. After With the message propagation completed, the final vector of
calculating the attention scores s(v, e) for all edges e in D(v), the edge is updated, and the process is formulated as follows:
the aggregated edge information hD(v) , i.e., the result of the
 f ,v) = g (hv , r(u, f ,v) , hu )
 0 e (k) (k)
n2e attention weighted for node v, is described as follows: r(u, (23)

 exp (s(v, e)) where ge () represents the aggregation operation. The CON-
 αe = P 0
 (16) CAT operation is employed to aggregate edge features with
 e0 ∈D(v) exp (s(v, e ))
 node features. Analysis of the impact of the number of
 AttnD(v) = {αe , e ∈ D(v)} (17) message propagation layers k (from 1 to 3) on our our
 hD(v) = (Σe∈D(v),αe ∈AttnD(v) αe re )Wv (18) GNN model reveals that the optimal performance is generally
 achieved when k is set to 2. The possible reason is that these
where exp() is the exponential function, re is the attributes of datasets contain rare complex attacks that involves multiple
the edge, and ae is the attention value corresponding to the IP addresses. The primary objective of our work is to enhance
edge. AttnD(v) is the attention distribution over all edges, and the efficacy of identifying malicious network flows, rather than
Wv is the learnable weight matrix that maps the aggregated establishing correlations across all attack steps. Therefore, in
edge information back to the node features. our system, the value of k is set to 2, which reduces the
 The attention score between node v and its neighboring node resource consumption associated with the propagation process.
u (where u ∈ N(v)) is calculated as follows: The complete algorithmic process is detailed in Algorithm 1.
 s(v, u) = Disteuc (hv , hu ) (19) Unlike methods such as Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN)
 that rely on pre-defined topological parameters (e.g., adjacency
where Disteuc () is the Euclidean similarity function. Then, matrices), our approach requires no such prior restriction. Conthe node information aggregation result hN(v) after attention sequently, it enables inductive learning, like GraphSage [47]
weighted aggregation of node messages is obtained as follows: and Jbeil [48], with uncertain node distributions—a critical
 advantage for handling dynamic or incompletely defined graph
 exp (s(v, u))
 αu = P 0
 (20) structures.
 u0 ∈N(v) exp (s(v, u )) 2) Classification: We choose Cross Entropy Loss and mini-
 AttnN(v) = {αu , u ∈ N(v)} (21) batch ADAM optimizer to optimize the topology embedding
 hN(v) = Σu∈N(v),αu ∈AttnN(v) αu hu (22) model. The early stopping strategy is chosen for the training
 task. Specifically, Z = [z0 , z1 , . . . , zC−1 ] denotes the non-
Here, αu is the attention value corresponding to node u, and softmax output of a flow, where C is the number of labels.
AttnN(v) is the attention distribution between node v and its Then, the loss function equation can be expressed as:
neighboring nodes. !
 exp(z[c])
 loss(z, c) = −log PC−1
Algorithm 1 Topology Feature Learning
 j=0 exp(z[ j])
Input: AIN f a = {V, E}; 0
 C−1
 1
 1: Node Features h0v , ∀v ∈ V;
 X
 = −z[c] + log @ exp(z[ j])A (24)
 2: Edge Features re , ∀e ∈ E;
 j=0
 3: message propagation Layers K;
 4: Weight Matrices We , Wv ; where c is the label of a specific sample. During the training
 5: non-linearity σ; phase, flow vectors with the same label gradually share large
 6: Differentiable Aggregator Functions gv , ge ; attention weights than others. This ocurs because the payloads
Output:: Edge Embedding re0 , ∀e ∈ E transferred through these flows either contain similar content,
 7: for k ← 1 to K do such as in DDoS and Brute attacks, or exhibit similar patterns
 8: for v ∈ V do   when the same multi-step attacks are repeated. As a result,
 9: s(v, e) ← Distcos We h(k−1)
 v , re(k−1) , ∀e ∈ D(v) during testing or real-time classification, the vectors of flows
 exp (s(v,e)) serving for the same attacks are closer than that for others,
10: αe = Σe0 ∈D(v) exp (s(v,e0 )) ensuring high detection effectiveness.
11: AttnD(v) = {αe , e ∈ D(v)}
12: h(k−1)  v , ∀e ∈ D(v)
 D(v) ← (Σe∈D(v),αe ∈AttnD(v) αe re )W V. E VALUATION
13: s(v, u) ← Disteuc h(k−1)
 v , h(k−1)
 u , ∀u ∈ N(v)
 exp (s(v,u))
 To evaluate SnifferDog, we tested its performance on eight
14: αu = Σu0 ∈N(v) exp (s(v,u0 )) network traffic traces collected from different environments
15: AttnN(v) = {αu , u ∈ N(v)} like IoT, campus network, VPN, etc. Seven of them are open-
16: h(k−1)  u ∈AttnN(v) αu hu , ∀u ∈ N(v)
 N(v) ← Σu∈N(v),α source, ensuring reproducibility of our experiments, and one
 h(k) h(k−1) , h(k−1) (k−1) was generated by ourselves. Moreover, we discuss the model’s
 v ← σ(g N(i) , hD(i) W (k) + b(k) )
 v
17: i
 real-world deployment in our institute’s network. The model
18: end for
 training and testing are based on a machine with an Intel
19: end for
 Xeon Gold5318Y@2.10GHz 24Cores x2 CPU, an NVIDIA
20: for e ∈ E do
 A800 GPU card, and a 256GB memory. The training and
21: re0 ← ge (h(k) (k)
 head , re , htail ) testing datasets were divided in a 7:3 ratio for all subsequent
22: end for
 experiments.
11692 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II TABLE III
 OVERVIEW OF THE DATASETS U SED IN O UR E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS OF O UR ATTACK DATASET

A. Dataset
 The eight datasets used in the evaluation, including UNSW-
NB15 [49], ToN-IoT [50], Darknet-2020 [51], Bot-IoT [52],
CICDDoS-2019 [53], CICIDS-2017 [54], ISCX-2012 [55],
and a customized one generated by us, are summarized in
Table II. Among them, only the CICIDS-2017, ISCX-2012,
and customized dataset provide pcap files. These three datasetmeasure the multi-class classification effectiveness of
sare were used to evaluate the entire process of SnifferDog,
 SnifferDog, even though attack traffic is relatively rare
while the others were employed to assess the effectiveness of
 in real-world scenarios.
the flow graph learning component. We used the CICFlowMeter [56] to extract features from pcap files for the baseline Though four of the five CSV-format datasets (excluding
methods. The details of these datasets are as below. Darknet-2020) provide pcap files, the profiles and labels they
 provide cannot be correctly mapped to the flows in their pcap
 • UNSW-NB15 is generated by the IXIA PerfectStorm tool files. Therefore, we only uses the CSV records to avoid errors.
 [57]. The Argus [58] and Bro-IDS tools [59] are used to
 generate 49 features for each flow.
 • ToN-IoT consists of network traffic of new generations
 B. Comparative Experiment
 of IoT/IIoT, and has been widely used to evaluate AIenabled cybersecurity applications. Accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score are used as the
 • CICIDS-2017 contains network traffic in packet-based performance indicators in this paper. Accuracy evaluates the
 and bidirectional stream formats that are collected in a overall correctness on both normal and abnormal flows. Precisimulated environment over one week. sion measures the ability to correctly identify attack flows,
 • Darknet-2020 is a dark network dataset created while recall assesses the ability to detect all attacks. F1
 by merging two public datasets, ISCXTor2016 and score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, which
 ISCXVPN2016, to detect and characterize VPN and Tor tests the overall effectiveness of models. We conducted a
 applications. comparison test involving several classifiers, including mul-
 • Bot-IoT is a dataset created by the University of tilayer perceptron (MLP), SVM, and random forest [18], [61],
 Canberra’s Cyber Range Lab in New South Wales. This [62]. The results indicate outperforms the others, achieving a
 dataset consists of attack activities in IoT scenarios. performance improvement of approximately 2.4% over MLP
 • CICDDoS-2019 contains both benign flows and the most and 3.3% over SVM on our dataset, as introduced in Section
 lastest common DDoS attacks. The B-Profile system [60] V-A, respectively. Therefore, SnifferDog utilizes random forest
 is used to build benign behaviors. as the final classifier.
 • ISCX-2012 consists of 7 days of network activity, includ- 1) Baselines: We conduct both binary-class and multi-class
 ing full packet payloads in pcap format, along with the experiments upon the eight datasets in comparison to six
 relevant profiles. The packet payloads involve 4 attacks. baselines, including two DNN-based [36], [41], a RNN-based
 • Customized is a dataset collected in an institute network [34], a GNN-based [11] models, a recent hierarchical deep
 environment (detailed in Section V-F) from October 20th learning framework presented by Qu et al. [12], and a machine
 to 26th, 2023. It contains 18 types of attacks, including learning based anomaly detection system proposed by Fu et
 dos, brute, backdoor, remote code execution and so forth. al. [24]. The first four methods are widely used deep learning
 Most of these attacks are generated using tools from models (CNN, DNN, LSTM and GNN), all of which rely on
 Kali system except PHPmyadmin Brute (No. 14), Web statistical features and can be applied to all the eight datasets.
 Shell (No. 15) and Drupal RCE (No. 16). Targets are They can be used to compare the effectiveness of our flow
 randomly selected, ranging from 20 to 100 addresses encoding and proposed GNN models. The last two methods are
 (less than 0.5%) for each attack, and source addresses are SOTA works that implement an assembled structure to identify
 random selected ranging from 2 to 10 (less than 0.05%). malicious flows and use pcap files as input. They therefore
 The parameters for reproducing these attack traffic data only provide results for the three pcap datasets. Table VI
 are provided in Table III to facilitate the reproduction presents the parameters involved in the experiments, which
 of these traffics. Notably, a large portion (35.7%) of were manually and meticulously tuned to achieve optimal
 the generated attack traffic was specifically designed to performance across the above mentioned datasets.
LUO et al.: SnifferDog: COMPREHENSIVELY LEARNING HETEROGENEOUS FEATURES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC 11693

 TABLE IV TABLE V
B INARY-C LASS R ESULT.A: ACCURACY,P: P RECISION , R: R ECALL ,F1: F1 M ULTI -C LASS R ESULT.A: ACCURACY,P: P RECISION , R: R ECALL ,F1: F1
 S CORE .T HE B EST M ETRICS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD S CORE . T HE B EST M ETRICS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 2) Binary Classification: Table IV presents the binary SnifferDog consistently exhibits stable performance across
classification results for SnifferDog and six baseline meth- multiple datasets, achieving over 98%, and demonstrating
ods. SnifferDog demonstrates excellent performance across superior generalization capabilities.
all datasets, with all evaluation metrics exceeding 0.98, and 3) Multi-Class Classification: The results for multi-class
outperforms the other models. On the Bot-IoT dataset, Snif- classification are presented in Table V. It can be observed that
ferDog ahieves performance, with all metrics reaching a SnifferDog outperforms the other models across all datasets
score of 1, indicating accurate identification of malicious on every metric. Notably, on the CICDDoS-2019 dataset,
flows. On the ToN-IoT dataset, SnifferDog’s metrics are SnifferDog’s accuracy is approximately 4%, 6.6%, 5.5%, and
approximately 0.49% higher than the second-best method, i.e., 35% higher than that of the other methods. For the ToN-
E-GraphSAGE, and more than 4% higher than other meth- IoT dataset, SnifferDog’s F1 score is respectively about 7.3%,
ods, showing a significant improvements across all metrics. 18.9%, 18.1%, and 1.2% higher than the others. Moreover,
Compared to the top four baseline models based on statistical SnifferDog exhibits more stable performance across different
features, SnifferDog yields better results, which highlights the datasets, as shown by the pink curve in Figure 3. TThis
effectiveness of our flow graph learning component. Qu et al.’s stability reflects SnifferDog’s strong generalization capability
model achieves over 99% on the metrics on our dataset, but it and adaptability in heterogeneous network environments. It
falls below 90% on the ISCX-2012 dataset, indicating unsta- also highlights its comprehensive feature learning ability, conble effectiveness across different environments. In contrast, firming that our method has the minimal information loss. The
11694 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VI
 PARAMETER S ETTINGS

 TABLE VII
T HE M ULTI -C LASS R ESULT OF FPR, MCC AND D ETECTION L ATENCY (Dla ). H ERE O NLY P RESENTS THE R ESULT OF S NIFFER D OG , C OMPARING W ITH
 THE B EST P ERFORMANCE OF THE BASELINES I NSIDE THE B RACKETS , FOR THE S AKE OF B REVITY

 Fig. 3. Plots of accuracy, recall and F1 score metrics on the datasets. (Upper: binary classification; Bottom: multiclass classification).

false positive rate (FPR), Matthews Correlation Coefficient TABLE VIII
(MCC), and detection latentcy of SnifferDog are compared C ROSS D OMAIN A NALYSIS
with the baselines. As illustrated in Table VII, SnifferDog
achieves the best performance in terms of both MCC and FPR,
with all multi-class FPRs being below 0.02 and seven of them
even below 0.002. The best detection latency is achieved by
EFS-DNN, which contains the fewest parameters and does not
process the graph structure. SnifferDog’s detection latency is
close to the second best, DNN3. 95%; while in our experiment using their open source github
 Compared with the method proposed by by Qu et al. [12], code, the result is smaller than 50%. Anyway, even compared
SnifferDog performs better across all metrics on the CICIDS- to their claimed value of 95%, our result of beyond 99% is
2017, ISCX-2012 and customized datasets. Both ISCX-2012 better.
and customized datasets contain HTTP-based attacks, and
SnifferDog still achieves better results for them. This comparison indicates that, for NIDS, the data-centric designation
 C. Feature Analysis
of deep learning model or architecture may be more effective
than simply orchestrating or assembling multiple models. This experiment is carried out to measure the effects of
 The traditional machine learning-based method [24] shows different features. We analyze their effects by comparing the
undesirable results with low values (smaller than 50%) of 77 statistical features extracted from the flows, and our flow
precision, recall and F1 score on ISCX-2012 dataset. In the encoding and topology features. CICIDS-2017, ISCX-2012
appendix of their paper, the F1 score of ISCX-2012 achieved and customized datasets are used here.
LUO et al.: SnifferDog: COMPREHENSIVELY LEARNING HETEROGENEOUS FEATURES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC 11695

Fig. 4. Visualization of different features in multiclass task on CICIDS-2017 (upper), ISCX-2012 (middle) and customized (bottom) datasets, where S denotes
statistical features, F denotes flow encoding and T denotes topology feature.

 TABLE IX In Figure 4, we utilize sample data and edge embeddings,
E FFECT OF D IFFERENT F EATURES . T HE B EST M ETRICS A RE H IGH - followed by employing t-SNE (t-Distributed Stochastic Neigh-
 LIGHTED IN B OLD bor Embedding) and UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection) dimensionality reduction algorithms
 to map high-dimensional data into an easily understandable
 two-dimensional form for visual presentation. We visualize
 all the five feature sets for the three datasets. It is highly
 obvious that the plots of flow encoding and topology feature
 show more clear separations than others. The statistical plots
 undoubtedly show the worst result. The excellent flow encoding plots indicate that our flow encoding module can work
 effectively without topology learning. In summary, all these
 results show the effectiveness of our heterogeneous feature
 Table IX shows the results of these feature combinations, learning method and illustrate that our flow encoding result is
i.e., statistical only (S), flow encoding only (F), statistical and a perfect substitute for statistical features.
topology feature (ST), flow encoding and topology feature We have also shown the wonderful effectiveness of cross-
(FT), and all the three types (SFT), in order. The fusion domain application of our flow pretraining component, in
of statistical features and topology feature is implemented which we train the model using the customized benign traffic
by initializing the edges with statistical features, and all the and apply it to other two datasets. As shown in Table VIII,
classifiers are trained based on random forest algorithm. As all the metrics exceed 99%, which are event better than
we can see, the flow encoding and topology feature, i.e., the the result shown in Table IX. This result illustrates that the
features used in our system, achieves all the best metrics. flow pretraining component significantly facilitates the real-
The statistical features indeed confound the classifiers, as world cross-domain applications. For example, it can be used
there is a decrease in performance when they are combined to correlate compromised machines of a botnet in networks
with the flow encoding and topology features. This also managed by different institutes, while preserving privacy by
demonstrates that encoding the raw flow data of network only correlating the flow embeddings.
traffic and combining it with network topology for flow graph
learning can achieve more effective detection without the need
for artificially constructed statistical features. This approach D. Ablation Experiment
reduces the process of manually extracting and designing To analyze the effectiveness of packet-to-packet, flowfeatures, as well as the errors associated with this process. to-flow and flow-to-topology learning modules, we con-
In brief, the feature analysis experiments demonstrate that ducted multi-class experiments on the ToN-IoT, Bot-IoT, and
effective feature expression of network traffic can be achieved CICDDoS-2019 datasets. These datasets were selected because
through raw traffic information without the need for artificially they showed the worst results for both the baselines and
constructed features, with the network topology relationship SnifferDog, making them ideal for highlighting the differences
enhancing the feature expression at the flow level. in ablation analysis. We evaluated our topology embedding
11696 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE X
R ESULT OF A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF F LOW E NCODING . T HE B EST
 M ETRICS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 TABLE XI
R ESULT OF A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF T OPOLOGY E MBEDDING . T HE
 B EST M ETRICS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 Fig. 5. Real-world deployment architecture.

 tion information and associations between nodes and edges,
model with and without attention layers, and utilized the three thereby positively impacting detection performance.
pcap datasets to measure the flow encoding model with and
without LSTM and attention layers. The reason we do not
 E. Runtime Performance
directly utilize the pcap datasets to measure the topology
embedding model is that the flow encoding feature achieves We conducted a comparison test between our packet
high performance across the four evaluation metrics, leading padding process and nPrint with 8 concurrent threads on a
to negligible differences in the ablation analysis. machine equiped with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4314 CPU
 Table X presents the accuracy and F1 score from the abla- and a 16GB memory. SnifferDog pads 7.5 million packets in
tion study of the flow encoding module. When a single module 69 seconds, achieving an average speed of 108,695 packets
is employed, the performance of the Attention-only module is per second, about 12.45 times of nPrint (about 8,731 packets
suboptimal. This suggests that the mechanism, when adept at per second). This proves that SnifferDog is more suitable for
focusing on individual features, struggles to capture relational real-time processing tasks.
information within the flow sequence. In contrast, the LSTM- We also compared the performance of our system with
only module maintains an accuracy rate above 99% across the that of Qu et al. [12], whose work has a similar purpose—to
three datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in handling flow implement nearly end-to-end feature representation of network
sequences and indicating that the sequential order of packets traffic. The results are listed in Table XII. Their method
provides valuable information. However, this approach does extracts only flow features unless processing HTTP traffic, in
not achieve the best possible results. The combination of the which they aggregate the flows according to HTTP traces. Our
attention mechanism with LSTM yields the best outcomes on flow pretraining process takes 46.8, 120.8 and 137.3 seconds
all three datasets, with accuracy rates exceeding 99.60%. On for training on the three datasets, respectively, while 0.6, 2
the customized dataset, the performance is enhanced by 0.23% and 2.2 seconds for encoding. In contrast, their work spends
compared to using LSTM alone. This demonstrates that the 67.5, 313.2 and 319 seconds for testing, respectively, with their
integration of Attention and LSTM not only strengthens the training phase taking even longer. Overall, our approach is
intrinsic features of the data but also effectively captures the much more efficient than theirs in flow feature learning. In
interconnections between flow sequences. the topology feature learning and classification phases, i.e.,
 In the flow graph learning part, the ablation study comparing the process of our flow graph learing component, SnifferDog
n2n, n2e, and their combined approach is shown in Table XI. spends 51.3, 597.3 and 259.4 seconds on the three datasets,
It is evident from the accuracy and F1 scores that n2n and respectively, classifying about 4,300 flows per second.
n2e aggregation of information is crucial. The n2n method
outperforms the n2e method, particularly on the complex
CICDDOS-2019 dataset. While methods achieve the accuracy F. Real-World Deployment
and F1 score above 73%, the n2e method shows a 1.76% To evaluate the effectiveness and efficacy in the realimprovement in accuracy and a 3.21% improvement in F1 world environment, we deployed SnifferDog in our institute’s
score compared with the n2n method. This suggests that network starting on Nov. 1st, 2023. As briefly mentioned
aggregating edge information provides more effective insights in Section V-A, this network consists of about 1,800 active
for detection. This is reasonable because most open-source IP addresses, serving devices like personal desktops, mobile
datasets include single-step attacks, such as DoS and brute- phones, servers, and cameras. In a single day, there are about
force attacks, which involve rich flow-to-flow interactions 20,000 outside IP addresses communicating with the internal
with numerous correlated behaviors. Combining n2n and n2e ones, resulting inaproximately 5,000 flows per hour and a total
methods enables a better capture of both inter-node interac- bandwidth usage of about 1.2 Gbps.
LUO et al.: SnifferDog: COMPREHENSIVELY LEARNING HETEROGENEOUS FEATURES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC 11697

 TABLE XII
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

 In Figure 5 presents the deployment architecture for this though this solutionis not perfect. The concept drift has not
experiment, which includes the collector, encoder and server been considered in this studyand will be an interesting task
sides. These components generate uniform packet vectors for future work.
and flow embeddings, train models, and classify malicious
flows, respectively. The office area of our institute covers VI. C ONCLUSION
three floors ( f loor1 , f loor2 and f loor3 ), within a building.
Several switches have been installed in the low-voltage room This paper introduces SnifferDog, a novel flow detection
on each floor to manage the network communication. These system that comprehensively learns and fuses features involved
rooms are too small to place servers and lack cooling equip- in packets, flows and topology. It implements an efficient flow
ment. Thesefore, we deployed three desktops with an Intel(R) formatting process to ensure high throughput and extracts
Xeon(R) Silver 4314 CPU and a 64GB memory on each floor. both the sequential and non-sequential relations of pack-
These desktops are used to carry out both the packet and flow ets in a flow. Furthermore, a GNN model, adaptive to the
encoding components and transfer results to the GPU server flow graph format, is enhanced by n2n and n2e attention
center. The GPU server center contains three machines, each layers to integrate heterogeneous topological relations into
equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold5318Y@2.10GHz 24Cores flow vectors. The rich feature representation ability enables
x2 CPU, an NVIDIA A800 GPU card and a 256GB memory. accurate identification of malicious behaviors. Experimental
They perform flow encoder training as well as the topol- results demonstrate SnifferDog’s excellent effectiveness across
ogy embedding and classification tasks. The historical packet different environments and its practical usability in real-world
vectors are collected directly from client side to server side, scenarios.
while the real-time data is delivered in json format through
a distributed data pipeline (i.e., Kafka-3.5), which is served R EFERENCES
by five machines with an Intel Xeon Gold5318Y@2.10GHz [1] Z. Xu, P. Fang, C. Liu, X. Xiao, Y. Wen, and D. Meng, “DEPCOMM:
24Cores x2 CPU, and a 256GB memory. Alarms are send back Graph summarization on system audit logs for attack investigation,” in
to the pipeline for visualization in the UI modules, which are Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA, USA, May
not detailed here. 2022, pp. 540–557.
 [2] M. H. Nasir, S. A. Khan, M. M. Khan, and M. Fatima, “Swarm intel-
 The flow encoding model was trained based on data col- ligence inspired intrusion detection systems—A systematic literature
lected on Oct. 30th and 31st, 2023 from f loor2 , with about review,” Comput. Netw., vol. 205, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 108708.
0.7 million (benign) flows. This means during this period, [3] L. Vu, Q. U. Nguyen, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, and E. Dutkiewicz,
 “Deep generative learning models for cloud intrusion detection systems,”
no attacks were detected in our institute’s network, likely IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 565–577, Jan. 2023, doi:
due to the deployment of multiple IDS and EDR (Endpoint 10.1109/TCYB.2022.3163811.
Detection and Response) modules at the network border and [4] D. Chen, F. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “Heterogeneous IoT intrusion
on critical machines. Additionally, the users—students and detection based on fusion word embedding deep transfer learning,” IEEE
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 9183–9193, Aug. 2023, doi:
faculty—possess a strong security awareness, making unau- 10.1109/TII.2022.3227640.
thorized access to the network difficult. The clean environment [5] I. Mohammed Sayem, M. Islam Sayed, S. Saha, and A. Haque, “ENIDS:
provides an ideal setting for evaluating the false positive rate A deep learning-based ensemble framework for network intrusion
 detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 5,
(FPR) of SnifferDog, in which any alarms are false positives. pp. 5809–5825, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3414305.
The FPR represents the ratio of misclassified normal flows, [6] Z. Yang et al., “A systematic literature review of methods and
which is a crucial metric for assessing real-world usability. datasets for anomaly-based network intrusion detection,” Comput.
At the beginning, the FPR of our system is about 0.08%, yet Secur., vol. 116, May 2022, Art. no. 102675.
 [7] M. Nakıp and E. Gelenbe, “Online self-supervised deep learning
it rises to approxiamately 3% after a month in Nov. 30th, for intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
2023. This introduces a data drift problem, where the data vol. 19, pp. 5668–5683, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3402148.
distribution changes as time goes by. Upon further investi- [8] M. Ge, N. F. Syed, X. Fu, Z. Baig, and A. Robles-Kelly, “Towards a deep
 learning-driven intrusion detection approach for Internet of Things,”
gation, this shift was found to be caused by the afterwards Comput. Netw., vol. 186, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 107784.
installed applications in our institute. For example, the frequent [9] A. Chen, Y. Fu, X. Zheng, and G. Lu, “An efficient network behavior
communication generated by the load balancing function of anomaly detection using a hybrid DBN-LSTM network,” Comput.
our kafka cluster led to a large portion of the false alarms, as Secur., vol. 114, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 102600.
 [10] E. Min, J. Long, Q. Liu, J. Cui, and W. Chen, “TR-IDS: Anomalythe kafka cluster was not present during the training period. based intrusion detection through text-convolutional neural network and
This issue is addressed by periodically retraining our models, random forest,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2018, pp. 1–9, Jul. 2018.
11698 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[11] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, [34] J. Sinha and M. Manollas, “Efficient deep CNN-BiLSTM model for
 “E-GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Pattern
 system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., Recognit., Jun. 2020, pp. 223–231.
 Budapest, Hungary, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–9. [35] G. Andresini, A. Appice, and D. Malerba, “Nearest cluster-based intru-
[12] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework sion detection through convolutional neural networks,” Knowl.-Based
 for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Syst., vol. 216, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106798.
 Secur.), J. A. Calandrino and C. Troncoso, Eds., 2023, pp. 589–606. [36] R. K. Vigneswaran, R. Vinayakumar, K. Soman, and P. Poornachandran,
[13] B. M. Aslahi-Shahri et al., “A hybrid method consisting of GA and “Evaluating shallow and deep neural networks for network intrusion
 SVM for intrusion detection system,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 27, detection systems in cyber security,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Comput.
 no. 6, pp. 1669–1676, Aug. 2016. Commun. Netw. Technol. (ICCCNT), Oct. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[14] I. Sumaiya Thaseen and C. Aswani Kumar, “Intrusion detection model [37] S. Baldoni and F. Battisti, “Histogram-based network traffic represenusing fusion of chi-square feature selection and multi class SVM,” tation for anomaly detection through PCA,” Comput. Netw., vol. 265,
 J. King Saud Univ.-Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 462–472, Oct. Jun. 2025, Art. no. 111276, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2025.111276.
 2017. [38] E. Akpaku, J. Chen, M. Ahmed, F. K. Agbenyegah, and W. L. Brown-
[15] M. A. Ambusaidi, X. He, P. Nanda, and Z. Tan, “Building an intrusion Acquaye, “RAGN: Detecting unknown malicious network traffic using
 detection system using a filter-based feature selection algorithm,” IEEE a robust adaptive graph neural network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 262, May
 Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 2986–2998, Oct. 2016. 2025, Art. no. 111184, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2025.111184.
[16] H. Alazzam, A. Sharieh, and K. E. Sabri, “A feature selection algorithm [39] Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, and J. Lan, “FCNN: An efficient intrusion detection
 for intrusion detection system based on pigeon inspired optimizer,” method based on raw network traffic,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021,
 Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 148, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 113249. pp. 1–13, Jun. 2021.
 [40] B. Wang, Y. Su, M. Zhang, and J. Nie, “A deep hierarchical net-
[17] A. H. Engly, A. R. Larsen, and W. Meng, “Evaluation of anomaly-based
 work for packet-level malicious traffic detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
 intrusion detection with combined imbalance correction and feature
 pp. 201728–201740, 2020.
 selection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Syst. Secur., 2020, pp. 277–291.
 [41] Z. Wang, J. Liu, and L. Sun, “EFS-DNN: An ensemble feature selection-
[18] X. Li, W. Chen, Q. Zhang, and L. Wu, “Building auto-encoder intrusion based deep learning approach to network intrusion detection system,”
 detection system based on random forest feature selection,” Comput. Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, pp. 1–14, Apr. 2022.
 Secur., vol. 95, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 101851. [42] J. Xie, S. Li, X. Yun, Y. Zhang, and P. Chang, “HSTF-model: An
[19] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Jiang, and M. Dai, “Building an efficient intrusion HTTP-based trojan detection model via the hierarchical spatio-temporal
 detection system based on feature selection and ensemble classifier,” features of traffics,” Comput. Secur., vol. 96, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 101923.
 Comput. Netw., vol. 174, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 107247. [43] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Detecting tunneled flooding traffic
[20] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. V. Ramos, via deep semantic analysis of packet length patterns,” in Proc. ACM
 and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2024, pp. 3659–3673, doi:
 ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. 10.1145/3658644.3670353.
 Secur. Symp., 2021. [44] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial–temporal
[21] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A con- features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,”
 textualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018.
 encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. WWW, F. Laforest, R. Troncy, [45] N. Nethercote and J. Seward, “Valgrind: A program supervision
 E. Simperl, D. Agarwal, A. Gionis, I. Herman, and L. Médini, Eds., framework,” in Proc. 3rd Workshop Run-Time Verification, RV@CAV,
 Apr. 2022, pp. 633–642, doi: 10.1145/3485447.3512217. Jul. 2003, pp. 44–66.
[22] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph [46] G. Combette and G. Munch-Maccagnoni, “A resource modality for
 neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. RAII,” in Proc. LOLA: Workshop Syntax Semantics Low-Level Lang.,
 ACM Web Conf., Austin, TX, USA, Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075, doi: 2018, pp. 1–4.
 10.1145/3543507.3583227. [47] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
[23] T. Cui et al., “TrafficLLM: Enhancing large language models for learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 network traffic analysis with generic traffic representation,” 2025, I. Guyon, U. von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. M. Wallach, R. Fergus,
 arXiv:2504.04222. S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
[24] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic [48] J. Khoury, D. Klisura, H. Zanddizari, G. De La Torre Parra, P. Najafirad,
 in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. and E. Bou-Harb, “Jbeil: Temporal graph-based inductive learning to
 Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, California, Feb. 2023. infer lateral movement in evolving enterprise networks,” in Proc. IEEE
[25] N. Bonelli, S. Giordano, and G. Procissi, “Enabling packet fan-out in Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2024, pp. 3644–3660, doi: 10.1109/
 the libpcap library for parallel traffic processing,” in Proc. Netw. Traffic SP54263.2024.00009.
 Meas. Anal. Conf. (TMA), Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2017, pp. 1–9. [49] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
[26] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
 in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
 Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383. [50] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
[27] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. E. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, security systems at the edge: Network TON IoT datasets,” Sustain.
 vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015, doi: 10.1038/nature14539. Cities Soc., vol. 72, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102994.
 [51] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Kaur, and A. Rahali, “DIDarknet: A contempo-
[28] Xterminal. Accessed: Jul. 10, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
 rary approach to detect and characterize the darknet traffic using deep
 www.xterminal.cn/
 image learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., Nov.
[29] R. Mitchell and I.-R. Chen, “Behavior-rule based intrusion detection 2020, pp. 1–13.
 systems for safety critical smart grid applications,” IEEE Trans. Smart [52] J. Ashraf et al., “IoTBoT-IDS: A novel statistical learning-enabled botnet
 Grid, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1254–1263, Sep. 2013. detection framework for protecting networks of smart cities,” Sustain.
[30] S. Mabu, C. Chen, N. Lu, K. Shimada, and K. Hirasawa, “An intrusion- Cities Soc., vol. 72, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 103041.
 detection model based on fuzzy class-association-rule mining using [53] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 genetic network programming,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., C “Developing realistic distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack dataset
 Appl. Rev., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 130–139, Jan. 2011. and taxonomy,” in Proc. Int. Carnahan Conf. Secur. Technol. (ICCST),
[31] R. M. A. Mohammad, M. K. Alsmadi, I. Almarashdeh, and M. Alza- Oct. 2019, pp. 1–8.
 qebah, “An improved rule induction based denial of service attacks [54] A. Yulianto, P. Sukarno, and N. A. Suwastika, “Improving AdaBoostclassification model,” Comput. Secur., vol. 99, Dec. 2020, Art. no. based intrusion detection system (IDS) performance on CIC IDS 2017
 102008. dataset,” J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 1192, Mar. 2019, Art. no. 012018.
[32] M. Moghimi and A. Y. Varjani, “New rule-based phishing detection [55] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
 method,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 53, pp. 231–242, Jul. 2016. developing a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for
[33] Q. Yang, J. Yang, W. Yu, D. An, N. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “On false data- intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374, May
 injection attacks against power system state estimation: Modeling and 2012.
 countermeasures,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 25, no. 3, [56] CICFlowMeter. Accessed: Oct. 27, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
 pp. 717–729, Mar. 2014. github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter
LUO et al.: SnifferDog: COMPREHENSIVELY LEARNING HETEROGENEOUS FEATURES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC 11699

[57] Ixia Perfectstorm. Accessed: Jul. 12, 2024. [Online]. Available: Zeyan Liu received the bachelor’s degree in math
 https://www.keysight.com/us/en/products/network-test/network-test- from Wuhan University in 2019 and the Ph.D. degree
 hardware/perfectstorm.html in computer science from The University of Kansas
[58] Argus. Accessed: Jul. 12, 2024. [Online]. Available: https:// in 2024 advised by Dr. Bo Luo and Dr. Fengjun
 openargus.org/ Li. He is currently a tenure-track Assistant Profes-
[59] B. Chen, J. Lee, and A. S. Wu, “Active event correlation in bro IDS sor at CSE, University of Louisville. His research
 to detect multi-stage attacks,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Workshop Inf. interests include cybersecurity and AI, including
 Assurance (IWIA), Apr. 2006, pp. 32–50. adversarial and privacy-preserving machine learning,
[60] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward AI safety, accountability, fairness, explainability, and
 generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic transparency (SAFE-T), and AI for cybersecurity.
 characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy,
 Portugal, Jan. 2018, pp. 108–116.
[61] V. Labayen, E. Magaña, D. Morató, and M. Izal, “Online classification
 of user activities using machine learning on network traffic,” Comput.
 Netw., vol. 181, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 107557.
[62] G. Oluchi Anyanwu, C. I. Nwakanma, J.-M. Lee, and D.-S. Kim,
 “Optimization of RBF-SVM kernel using grid search algorithm for Weizhe Chen is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 DDoS attack detection in SDN-based VANET,” IEEE Internet Things with the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Tech-
 J., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 8477–8490, May 2023. nology, Guangzhou University, China. His research
 focuses on applying deep learning techniques to
 address challenges in cyberspace security, with spe-
 Xi Luo received the Ph.D. degree in computer cific interests in data security, federated learning, and
 science and technology from the Institute of Infor- network intrusion detection.
 mation Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 in 2019. He is currently an Associate Professor
 of network security with the Cyberspace Institute
 of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University,
 Guangzhou, China. He has authored publications
 published by refereed international journals and
 conferences, e.g., ICDE, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE T RANSAC -
 TIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGE - Shijie Jia received the Ph.D. degree in information
MENT , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON R ELIABILITY , and the High Performance security from the University of Chinese Academy
Computing and Communications. His research interests include AI-enabled of Sciences in 2017. He is currently an Associate
threat analysis, the Internet of Things security, and network anomaly detec- Professor with the Institute of Information Engition. neering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research
 interests include information system security and
 cryptographic application security.

 Lihua Yin received the Ph.D. degree from Harbin
 Institute of Technology, Harbin, China. She is
 currently a Professor and the Associate Dean of
 the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
 Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China. She has
 authored more than 140 papers published by refereed
 international conferences and journals, e.g., IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE DATA E NGI - Bo Luo (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 NEERING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL
 from The Pennsylvania State University in 2008. He
 I NFORMATICS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S OFT- is currently a Professor with the Institute for Infor-
 WARE E NGINEERING , Computers and Security, and
 mation Sciences and the Department of Electrical
Infocom. She has been the Project Leader of the National Natural Science Engineering and Computer Science, The University
Foundation of China, the National Key Research and Development Plan of of Kansas. His current research interests include the
China, the Major State Basic Research Development Program of China, and intersection of security and privacy and AI/ML.
the National High-Tech Research and Development Program of China. Her
research interests include network security, the Internet of Things, secure
threat intelligence sharing, and big data. She is an Editorial Board Member
of Journal of Network and Information Security.

 Hongyu Yang received the B.S. degree in Internet Hongli Xiang received the M.S. degree from
 of Things engineering from the North University the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
 of China, Taiyuan, China, in 2022, and the M.S. Guangzhou University, China. His expertise lies in
 degree in network and information security from network-traffic analytics and deep learning, with a
 the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, focus on building robust intrusion detection systems
 Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China, in 2025, (IDS). He now applies these skills to real-world
 where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cybersecurity challenges, identifying and mitigating
 cyberspace security. His research interests include network intrusions.
 network intrusion detection and graph neural networks.