IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 7013

 Solving Data Contamination in DDoS Detection: A
 Method Based on Hierarchical Federated Learning
 Jiaping Gui , Member, IEEE, Ruiwen Ji , Haishi Huang, Jianan Hong , Member, IEEE,
 and Cunqing Hua , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks can as packets [3] or flows [4]. In ML-based anomaly detection,
cause significant damage to network applications. A crucial supervised learning often encounters challenges in obtaining
step in combating these attacks lies in promptly and accurately attack traffic. Moreover, inspecting and labeling every training
detecting DDoS attack traffic. However, existing solutions struggle
with data imbalance and contamination, leading to suboptimal sample requires extensive laborforce. Hence, unsupervised
DDoS detection. Furthermore, current methods typically require learning is also applied to intrusion detection [4], [5]. A typical
access to raw data for training, posing a significant privacy risk. process of unsupervised learning involves collecting traffic
To tackle these challenges, we propose HFL-AD, a hierarchical data from a device’s routine operations within the network. We
federated learning framework specifically designed for detecting then extract packet or flow-level features to train an anomaly
DDoS attack traffic by resolving the data contamination issue.
In our approach, a federation of lower-layer clients train local detection model, assuming that all traffic is normal. Since the
anomaly detection models using diverse raw data. A selected few model learns the distribution of normal traffic during training,
clients, possessing a small supplementary dataset, serve as upper- any traffic that deviates from this distribution will be classified
layer clients, responsible for excluding model updates uploaded as anomalous.
by lower-layer clients that have been trained on contaminated However, the above process encounters three practical chaldatasets. Experimental results demonstrate that HFL-AD outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) solutions in DDoS detection, lenges. Firstly, traffic data from a single device lacks diversity,
particularly when some training datasets are contaminated. so the model cannot learn other normal traffic patterns during
 training. Consequently, the model misidentifies unseen normal
 Index Terms—DDoS attack, anomaly detection, federated
learning, data contamination. traffic as suspicious, thereby increasing the false positive rate.
 Secondly, the traffic data collected during regular operations
 of the device may contain a small proportion of attack traffic.
 I. I NTRODUCTION Thus, the model learns a mixed distribution of normal and
 attack traffic, erroneously representing it as normal. This poses
D ISTRIBUTED Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks have
 been a significant threat to our network. In such attacks,
the attacker controls a large number of devices located
 a data contamination problem and could have a significant
 impact on the model performance [6], such as a decrease in
in different areas, particularly the Internet of Things (IoT) the recall rate. Unlike malicious intent that is purposeful, data
devices with limited security resources [1]. These devices, contamination is often unintentional (see detailed comparison
under attacker control, flood the victim with traffic simultane- in Section III). Thirdly, collected traffic data may contain
ously. This depletes the victim’s bandwidth, CPU, or memory sensitive information. To protect privacy, existing ML methresources. The massive traffic generated by DDoS attacks can ods cannot simply aggregate data from multiple devices for
severely impact or even disrupt the service availability of the centralized training.
victim host. For instance, a DDoS attack on Github in 2018 In this paper, we propose HFL-AD,1 a novel approach to
[2] reached a peak traffic of 1.35Tbps, temporarily rendering tackle the aforementioned three challenges. Specifically, to
Github’s services unavailable. handle the challenges of data diversity and privacy protection,
 Due to the rapid advancement of deep learning techniques, we utilize federated learning (FL) to train the anomaly detecvarious machine learning (ML)-based anomaly detection meth- tion model. In FL, participants collaboratively train a global
ods (e.g., DoS/DDoS detection [45]) have been employed to model, thereby overcoming the issue of limited data diversity.
scrutinize network traffic at different levels of granularity, such The model can learn the joint distribution of normal traffic
 that is collected by all participants without disclosing sensitive
 Received 23 December 2024; revised 14 May 2025 and 9 June 2025; data [44]. To address the challenge of data contamination,
accepted 2 July 2025. Date of current version 14 July 2025. This work was
supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program
 we leverage a small supplementary dataset containing labeled
of China under Grant 2022YFB2702302 and in part by the Natural Science anomaly samples collected by a few participants. These
Foundation of Shanghai under Grant 23ZR1429600. The associate editor attack traffic samples are labeled by security experts. Our
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was insight is that participants with a supplementary dataset can
Prof. Guowen Xu. (Corresponding authors: Jiaping Gui; Cunqing Hua.)
 The authors are with the School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao exclude contaminated model updates (trained on contaminated
Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: jgui@sjtu.edu.cn;
jiruiwen@sjtu.edu.cn; mxrjkwy@sjtu.edu.cn; hongjn@sjtu.edu.cn;
cqhua@sjtu.edu.cn). 1 We provide a comprehensive comparison between this work and our prior
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3587185 conference version [39] in Appendix 1.
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

data) during aggregation. The supplementary dataset is also the average F1-scores of all baseline approaches fell below
employed to train the model, further mitigating the issue of 0.975.
data contamination. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
 In HFL-AD, we introduce a hierarchical federated learning • We proposed HFL-AD, a novel approach to training
framework, where aggregation is conducted in both upper- an anomaly detection model on network traffic using
layer clients and the central server. Upper-layer clients possess federated learning. This approach addresses the issues of
a supplementary dataset and guide the aggregation process limited data diversity, data contamination, and the leakage
related to lower-layer clients. Leveraging this supplementary of sensitive data.
dataset, we obtain a post-training model that is resilient to data • We gained insights that, to identify contaminated model
contamination. Compared to manually inspecting each train- updates in federated anomaly detection, a supplementary
ing sample individually, compiling a supplementary dataset dataset outperforms a clean dataset.
with a limited number (e.g., 30) of anomaly samples is • We demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach
significantly more cost-effective. Traditional hierarchical FL through numerous experiments. The results indicate that
solutions mainly address issues like heterogeneous comput- our approach maintains high accuracy, F1-score, and
ing resources and FL acceleration [7], [8]. In contrast, our AUC value across a contamination ratio ranging from 0%
work extends this approach to provide valuable insights into to 8%.
anomaly detection tasks. Some previous works [6], [12] have Open Science. We have also released the source code and
also proposed the incorporation of a small supplementary experimental configurations at https://github.com/realllriven/
dataset. However, these efforts have primarily focused on the HFL-AD to facilitate further research.
centralized training scenario, which differs from the distributed
FL scenario presented in this paper.
 Nonetheless, we encountered three technical challenges II. R ELATED W ORK
while implementing our insights. The first challenge lies A. Hierarchical Federated Learning
in distinguishing between normal models and contaminated With aggregation conducted in more than one layer, hiermodels. To address this, we utilize the supplementary dataset archical FL has garnered increasing attention in recent years.
from upper-layer clients to simulate normal and contaminated Wang et al. [7] propose FedCH to address client heterogeneity
models, which provides a baseline for subsequent compar- in FL. Lim et al. [8] introduce a hierarchical game framework
isons. The second challenge is determining the threshold for dynamic resource allocation in self-organizing FL netbetween contaminated and normal models. To tackle this works. Xu et al. [32] design CAHFL to improve hierarchical
challenge, we adopt a learning strategy in upper-layer clients, FL accuracy under unbalanced data distribution. Zhang et al.
simulating two different scenarios: unsupervised learning with [33] focus on solving the problem of device scheduling and
the same settings as lower-layer clients, and semi-supervised assignment in hierarchical FL. Deng et al. [43] proposed
learning guided by the labeled supplementary dataset. Then, a hierarchical FL framework that optimizes edge-level data
we calculate the similarity score between models trained in distribution, significantly reducing communication costs while
these different scenarios, and use the average similarity score maintaining model accuracy. Unlike these works, we propose
among all upper-layer clients to determine the threshold. The leveraging hierarchical FL to address data contaminated probthird challenge is resolving threshold dynamics during model lems in anomaly detection.
training, especially when the similarity range of a normal
model may undergo changes. To handle this challenge, we
introduce a dynamic threshold mechanism. Unlike FLTrust B. Federated Learning-Based DDoS Detection
[11], which employs a static threshold for aggregation, our To preserve client privacy, researchers have leveraged FL
approach calculates the threshold dynamically in each global to detect DDoS attacks. Mateus et al. [27] propose a DDoS
training round, which adapts to the vast diversity of normal detection system based on FL within SDN networks. They
traffic behaviors under varying network conditions. To accom- trained various classification models to categorize DDoS
plish this, we utilize models trained on various batches of attack traffic and discovered that LSTM performed optimally.
data, encompassing both normal data and contaminated (sup- Doriguzzi-Corin et al. [28] devise an FL-based adaptive
plementary) data, for comparison. This ensures contaminated DDoS detection mechanism. It addresses convergence issues
models can be promptly identified and filtered out. in dynamic cybersecurity scenarios. Fotse et al. [46] pro-
 We evaluated HFL-AD through extensive experiments. The posed an efficient FL method to combat DDoS attacks in
results demonstrate that a supplementary dataset containing large-scale SDN-based networks, especially in multi-controller
labeled anomaly samples is more beneficial than a clean architectures. Xu et al. [26] utilize an FL framework tailored
dataset in identifying contaminated model updates. Across a for DDoS attack detection in blockchain networks, enabling
range of contamination ratios from 0% to 8%, our approach clients to train the model without excessive resource consumpachieved higher AUC and F1-score compared to baseline tion. Pourahmadi et al. [4] introduce an auto-encoder into FL
approaches. Specifically, in our experiments conducted on to improve model performance through an outlier exposure
three different network traffic datasets, HFL-AD attained technique. While all these efforts employ FL for DDoS attack
an average F1-score of 0.994 when 1/3 of the participants detection, they overlook the issue of data contamination that
possessed a dataset with a contamination ratio of 4%, whereas HFL-AD aims to address.
GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL 7015

C. Data Contamination in Anomaly Detection where n represents the number of samples in DN . The gradient
 Data contamination refers to the scenario where traffic data descent algorithm is employed to iteratively update the model
is normally collected but may contain anomalous samples. parameters θ as follows:
Data contamination can lead to a significant decline in model n
 1X
performance [6]. To address data contamination, Qiu et al. θ(k + 1) = θ(k) − η · ∇θ L(xi ; θ(k)), (2)
 n
[15] first estimate the contamination ratio and then jointly i=1
infer the binary label of each training sample during model where k represents the training round and η represents the
parameter updates. Wu et al. [6] introduce an extra dataset learning rate. g(k + 1) = θ(k + 1) − θ(k) is referred to as the
containing a few anomaly samples. Zhang et al. [31] utilize model gradient for this iteration.
the extra dataset as a validation set to label contaminated Model M’s performance depends on DN ’s quality. Ideally,
samples. Kim et al. [29] design an iterative learning framework DN contains only normal samples, so M learns to assign them
with dynamically decreasing weights for training samples. low anomaly scores. However, if DN inadvertently contains a
Su et al. [30] introduce an extra dataset to train a bidi- few anomaly samples, the performance of M will be comprorectional GAN. This GAN includes a discriminator capable mised. Manual inspection of DN is impractical, undermining
of distinguishing between normal, anomalous, and generated unsupervised anomaly detection’s purpose.
samples. All these works tackle the data contamination issue To address the aforementioned data contamination probin a centralized manner; however, they lack the capability to lems, some prior works [6], [12] proposed leveraging a small
protect data privacy. In contrast, HFL-AD leverages FL to supplementary dataset, denoted as DA , which comprises a
preserve the privacy of both collected data and supplementary limited number of anomaly samples. In the context of intrudata. sion detection, security experts can assist in preparing this
 The most similar work to ours is that of Sanon et al. supplementary dataset by labeling a small number of attack
[47]. The authors showed that median aggregation can mit- flows.
igate the influence of malicious data sources in FL by By maximizing the anomaly scores of samples in DA , the
reducing the impact of abnormal updates. However, their issue of data contamination can be alleviated. Formally, let
approach does not identify or eliminate malicious clients, La (x; θ) be a monotonically decreasing function of the anomaly
allowing polluted data to persist in the global model. As a score L(x; θ), such as La (x; θ) = −L(x; θ) or La (x; θ) = L(x;θ)
 1
 .
result, the model exhibits significant robustness and reliability The new loss function is given by:
deficiencies when dealing with large-scale or stealthy DDoS
 n+na
pollution. 1 X
 ((1 − yi ) · L(xi ; θ) + yi · La (xi ; θ)), (3)
 Overall, in the context of DDoS detection, limited data n + na
 i=1
diversity, data contamination, and sensitive data leakage are
three key challenges that existing approaches struggle to where na represents the number of anomaly samples in DA .
address effectively. This motivates us to propose HFL-AD, a The binary value yi is used to indicate the origin of xi : yi = 0
novel hierarchical federated learning-based solution. By lever- denotes that xi comes from the (potentially contaminated)
aging a small supplementary dataset, HFL-AD effectively dataset DN , and yi = 1 denotes that xi comes from the
detects DDoS traffic while filtering out contaminated model dataset DA .
updates. In Section III, we further elaborate more on the The aforementioned method can effectively mitigate the
background and motivation. issue of data contamination on a single device. However, in
 real-world scenarios, training data often originates from multiple devices. Maintaining a small dataset with anomaly samples
 III. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION on each device, if not impossible, poses significant practical
 In this section, we formally describe anomaly detection challenges. Moreover, traditional centralized training uses this
for network traffic, focusing on data contamination, to justify method but cannot protect data privacy. This motivates us
federated learning. to propose a novel approach that can handle data diversity,
 privacy protection, and data contamination.

A. Traditional Anomaly Detection on Network Traffic
 B. Federated Learning (FL) for Anomaly Detection
 The procedure of a traditional anomaly detection task on
network traffic is as follows. Given a dataset DN comprised of FL can be utilized to train a global model for anomaly detecnormal samples, the goal of unsupervised anomaly detection is tion without sharing clients’ private data. Suppose there are in
to train a model M to learn the patterns within DN . This model toal c clients. To train a global detection model among these
M assigns an anomaly score L(x; θ) to each input sample x, clients without disclosing their sensitive data, the following
where θ represents the learnable parameters of M. three steps are iteratively executed:
 The training of M requires minimizing the anomaly scores 1) The central server disseminates the global model paramof the samples in DN . The loss function is given by: eters θk−1 (where θ0 represents the randomly initialized
 n
 model parameters) to all clients.
 1X
 L(xi ; θ), (1) 2) Each client updates its local model parameters using θk−1
 n and its respective loss function Lossi derived from its
 i=1
7016 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON B ETWEEN P REVIOUS W ORKS AND O UR WORK

 local training dataset, obtaining θk,i , i = 1, 2, . . . , c, which
 are then uploaded to the central server.
 3) On the server side, all local model parameters θk,i , i =
 1, 2, . . . , c are aggregated according to a predefined
 aggregation strategy. The result of this aggregation constitutes the new global model parameters θk , which are
 then disseminated in the subsequent iteration.
By repeating the above steps iteratively, the global model
gradually converges. Upon completion of the model training, the final aggregated global model is leveraged for
anomaly detection on the test dataset (i.e., new network traffic
data).
 In the aforementioned FL scenario, it is possible that the
network traffic collected (pertaining to DN ) on each client
 Fig. 1. Hierarchical structure in HFL-AD. Every round of federated learning
may be contaminated and contain malicious traffic, ultimately consists of five steps: (1) Lower-layer clients obtain the current global model
resulting a substantial decline in model performance [6]. parameters. (2) All clients train their models using local data. (3) Each
Existing FL solutions primarily concentrate on tasks such lower-layer client sends its training results to its corresponding upper-layer
 client within the same group. (4) Each upper-layer client exchanges model
as classification (e.g., Byzantine-robust FL) [10], [16] and information with other upper-layer clients and aggregates all the training
word prediction [11], but cannot handle anomaly detection. In results from its group accordingly. (5) Each upper-layer client transmits the
Section VII, we demonstrate that, despite their effectiveness in aggregated results to the central server. Finally, the central server aggregates
 these results and distributes the updated global model back to the upper-layer
defending against malicious clients, traditional robust aggre- clients.
gation algorithms (such as Krum [9], Trimmed mean [10],
FLTrust [11], and RFA [34]) fail to address data contamination
in anomaly detection tasks. This is attributed to the fact that IV. T HREAT M ODEL AND A SSUMPTIONS
excluding model updates trained on contaminated datasets We consider an FL system comprising a central aggregation
differs from excluding model updates deliberately crafted server and a collection of distributed clients that belong to two
by malicious clients. Firstly, malicious clients intentionally distinct layers, as depicted in Fig. 1. We assume there are no
craft model updates to disrupt the training process, whereas malicious clients that intend to disrupt the training process on
data contamination arises when attacks compromise a small purpose by crafting model updates. Among all clients, the local
fraction of collected data. Secondly, malicious clients typi- traffic data may be contaminated, i.e., it may contain a small
cally strive to craft harmful model updates in every round, proportion of attack traffic. Only clients in the upper layer
aiming to maximize their impact. However, in our work, (as shown in the figure) can obtain annotated attack traffic
each client trains their local model using a batch of data from security analysts. For communications between clients or
randomly sampled from the training dataset in every round. between clients and the central server, only model information
The number of contaminated samples within this batch is is transmitted, thus protecting privacy.
random.
 We present a detailed comparison of our work with the V. A PPROACH OVERVIEW
existing literature in Tabel I. Therefore, a new FL aggregation We realize our strategy as a framework, HFL-AD, of which
strategy that minimizes the influence of contaminated model the workflow is shown in Fig. 1. It comprises three layers:
updates is desired for the anomaly detection of DDoS traffic. lower-layer clients, upper-layer clients, and a central server.
To achieve this, we proposed a hierachical FL approach, which Each upper-layer client coordinates a few (e.g., 6) lowerwe describe in Section VI. layer clients. Regarding the training data, each lower-layer
GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL 7017

client has only local normal traffic dataset (DN ) that may 1) Each lower-layer client Bi, j receives the current model
be potentially contaminated, whereas each upper-layer client parameters θ(k − 1) from its upper-layer client Ai .
has a small supplementary dataset (DA ) containing labeled 2) Each lower-layer client Bi, j trains a local model with
anomaly samples, in addition to normal traffic data (DN ). The parameters θi, j (k) using its dataset DN . Meanwhile, each
key insight is that benign traffic far outweighs attack traffic in upper-layer client Ai trains a local model with paramethe real world. By adopting a hierarchical structure, HFL-AD ters θi,0 (k) using both its datasets DN and DA . The loss
is viable for extension to a large network. Below, we outline function for lower-layer clients is given in Eq. 1, whereas
the working procedure of HFL-AD. the loss function for upper-layer clients is provided in
 At the beginning of each global round, the central server Eq. 3.
disseminates the global model to the upper-layer clients, each 3) Each lower-layer client Bi, j sends the local model paramof which then distributes the global model to its lower-layer eters θi, j (k) to its upper-layer client Ai .
clients within the same group (step O 1 in Fig. 1). Lower- 4) Each upper-layer client Ai aggregates {θi,0 (k), θi,1 (k), . . .,
layer clients train the model unsupervised on local data, while θi,qi (k)} and obtains θi (k). This step will be referred to
upper-layer clients employ both local data and the labeled as lower-layer aggregation in the rest of the paper.
supplementary dataset for semi-supervised training (step O). 2 5) A central server aggregates {θ1 (k), θ2 (k), . . ., θ p (k)} sent
Once local training is completed, each lower-layer client by the upper-layer clients, obtains the result θ(k). This
sends the trained model to its corresponding upper-layer client step will be referred to as upper-layer aggregation in
within the same group (step O). 3 Each upper-layer client then the rest of the paper.
trains additional models, calculates cosine similarities among In the procedure outlined above, the lower-layer aggregation
them, and exchanges these values with peers to derive a plays a crucial role. It excludes model updates trained on
contamination-filtering threshold. The details of this step (step contaminated datasets, utilizing a mechanism that we will
O)
 4 will be elaborated in Section VI-B. Finally, each upper- outline in Section VI-B.
layer client calculates the average of all retained models and
uploads the average model to the central server for global B. Aggregation Algorithm
aggregation (step O),5 completing one global training round. The goal of the proposed aggregation algorithm is to
 determine a threshold that distinguishes contaminated model
 VI. D ESIGN
 updates from uncontaminated ones. This operation is con-
 In this section, we delve into the design details of ducted on upper-layer clients, where both local model updates
HFL-AD, including its hierarchical structure and the aggre- and model updates from lower-layer clients are collected.
gation algorithm. In the high level, we aim to identify a boundary between
 contaminated and uncontaminated model updates by utilizing
A. Hierarchical Structure the supplementary dataset.
 FL training data in real-world scenarios may contain Intuitively, we have two choices for this additional small
attack traffic, though most data is benign. As outlined in labeled dataset: clean traffic and attack (or contaminated)
Section II-C, data contamination can significantly impact traffic, both enabling contamination detection. FLTrust [11]
model performance. Checking all data samples individually leverages a small, clean dataset to determine the trust score
to eliminate attack traffic is infeasible due to the immense of a client model, thereby assisting in filtering out malicious
laborforce required. A more viable solution is to filter out clients. However, The utilization of clean traffic presents a
contaminated model updates trained on the collected data, challenge in addressing the data contamination issue. Normal
ensuring only uncontaminated model updates are aggregated traffic behavior exhibits greater diversity compared to malion the server side. However, distinguishing between clean and cious traffic, given that the majority of traffic collected in
contaminated model updates is challenging, as the number of real-world scenarios pertains to normal network behaviors.
labeled attack samples is limited. A client with uncontaminated Models trained on a different type of normal traffic data might
DN cannot reliably identify clean model updates without be misidentified as contaminated and consequently excluded
additional information (see Section VII-B). from the upper-layer aggregation. The absence of these models
 To address the aforementioned challenge, we propose lever- ultimately impacts the global model’s performance in anomaly
aging a hierarchical structure that divides all clients into two detection (see Section VII-B). Conversely, the behavioral
layers: the lower layer and the upper layer. In the lower patterns of attack traffic deviate more significantly from those
layer, clients that lack the supplementary dataset DA train their of clean (i.e., uncontaminated) traffic than from contaminated
models in each round solely using DN . In contrast, clients in traffic. This enables models trained on clean normal traffic
the upper layer possess DA , and employ both DN and DA for to be included in the upper-layer aggregation, enhancing the
model training. performance of the global model in DDoS detection.
 As depicted in Fig. 1, suppose there are a total of p clients Therefore, we leverage labeled attack traffic as supplemenin the upper layer, namely A1 , A2 , . . ., A p . Each Ai manages tary data. To make such a comparison, we leverage cosine
a few lower-layer clients Bi,1 , Bi,2 , . . . , Bi,qi for i = 1, 2, . . . , p. similarity [11], a widely adopted approach to measure vector
We refer to Ai and Bi,1 , Bi,2 , . . ., Bi,qi as belonging to the same differences. In this process, we encounter a challenge: as the
group, for i = 1, 2, . . . , p. In the k-th round of the federated training progresses, the similarity range of a normal model
learning process, the following steps are performed: will change. Existing solutions, such as FLTrust, which focus
7018 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

on detecting malicious clients, fail to account for this circum- Algorithm 1 The Upper-Layer Client Ai Dynamically Deterstance. These solutions determine whether to incorporate a mines the Threshold in Round k
new model into aggregation based on a static threshold. For
example, FLTrust only aggregates models with a similarity
score above zero.
 To address the aforementioned challenge, we dynamically
adjust the threshold each global training round by comparing
models trained on mixed normal and contaminated (supplementary) data batches. The threshold is dynamically calculated
in each round, ensuring that contaminated models can be
identified and filtered out in a timely manner. Compared to
static thresholds, this dynamic threshold mechanism adapts to
the vast diversity of normal traffic behaviors, demonstrating
that HFL-AD can be applied to varying network conditions.
 In the high level, the proposed aggregation algorithm aims
to filter out contaminated model updates (e.g., from clients
with poisoned data) in federated learning (FL) by dynamically
adjusting a similarity threshold. Just as a thermostat adjusts
room temperature based on real-time feedback, our threshold adapts to model behavior in each round. Unlike static
thresholds (e.g., FLTrust), our method adapts to changes in
model behavior during training, ensuring robustness against
data contamination (e.g., DDoS attack traffic).
 The process involves two main steps, executed by upperlayer clients:
 1) Dynamic Threshold Calculation: In this step, HFL-AD
determines a threshold to separate contaminated vs. normal With a list of the estimated cosine similarities of contaminated
updates. To do it, HFL-AD computes a threshold T (k) in gradients, the mean µ(k) and the standard deviation σ(k) are
each global round k to identify suspicious updates as follows: calculated (Lines 5-13). Then, µ(k) + mσ(k) is used as T (k),
i) Simulating Contaminated Updates. Each upper-layer where m is a hyper-parameter.
client Ai first trains a “contaminated” model θit1 (k) using a mix 2) Model Aggregation: HFL-AD filters and aggregates
of normal data DN and attack data DA . This mimics potential updates based on the threshold. In this step, only trustworthy
malicious behavior, creating a baseline for comparison. We updates (with similarity > T (k)) are aggregated. This process
leverage attack traffic as reference because normal traffic consists of two substeps: i) Collecting Updates. The upperis diverse and attack traffic provides a sharper signal for layer client Ai first gathers models from lower-layer clients
contamination. Attack traffic prevents false exclusion of benign Bi, j along with its own local model θi,0 (k). ii) Filtering
clients with atypical normal data. ii) Computing Cosine and Aggregating. For each model, HFL-AD computes its
Similarity. Each upper-layer client then compares the contam- similarity to θi,0 (k). HFL-AD then retains only those updates
inated model’s gradient gt1 i (k) with the local (normal) model’s where si, j (k) > T (k) and aggregates them using FedAvg. The
gradient gi,0 (k) using the cosine similarity. This similarity acts key difference from FLTrust is that our method includes θi,0 (k)
as a “Trust Meter” to measures how much a client’s update in aggregation (as it is trained to maximize attack detection).
aligns with the expected direction (like a compass pointing to We outline the entire procedure that an upper-layer client
“normal”). Low similarity suggests deviation from expected Ai follows during the global training round k in Algorithm 2.
behavior. iii) Collaborative Thresholding. Clients share sim- Initially, Ai receives the global model parameters θ(k − 1)
ilarity scores st1i (k) and compute the mean µ(k) and standard from the central server (Line 1) and disseminates them to
deviation σ(k). The threshold is set to T (k) = µ(k) + m · σ(k), its lower-layer clients (Lines 2-4). Subsequently, Ai trains a
where m is a hyperparameter. We introduce this dynamic model locally (Line 5) and receives the newly trained models
threshold because normal behavior varies across rounds, to from its lower-layer clients upon their completion of training
which static thresholds (e.g., FLTrust’s fixed T = 0) fail to (Lines 6-8). Then, Ai computes the threshold T (k) through
adapt. Algorithm 1 (Line 9). Following this step, Ai calculates the
 Algorithm 1 illustrates the process of dynamic threshold similarity score between its locally trained model θi,0 (k) and
calculation. Specifically, each client Ai in the upper layer only all collected models (Lines 10-13), and aggregates all models
trains one model, θit1 (k), which utilizes the loss function in whose cosine similarity exceeds T (k) using FedAvg (Lines
Eq. 1 to mimic a contaminated model update (Line 2). After 14-20). Notice that unlike the existing work FLTrust, where
that, the cosine similarity st1 i (k) is calculated and exchanged the model trained on the supplementary dataset does not
(Lines 3-4), where participate in the model aggregation, HFL-AD utilizes θi,0 (k)
 as a basis for calculating the similarity score and includes it in
 aT · b
 S (a, b) = . (4) the model aggregation. This is because the training of θi,0 (k)
 |a| · |b|
GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL 7019

Algorithm 2 The Entire Procedure Followed by the Upper- 1 − Φ(m), where Φ(m) is the CDF of the standard normal
Layer Cilent Ai in Round k distribution. For m = 2, this probability exceeds 95%.
 2) Convergence Guarantees: The convergence of traditional hierarchical federated learning (HFL) has been
 extensively analyzed and theoretically guaranteed [7], [40],
 [41], [42]. Traditional HFL corresponds to HFL-AD without
 any contaminated models being filtered out. In HFL-AD,
 the lower-layer aggregation mechanism ensures that excluded
 updates are high-probability outliers, thereby preserving
 the unbiasedness of aggregated gradients. Furthermore, the
 upper-layer aggregation in HFL-AD maintains this unbiased
 property through its use of FedAvg. Therefore, HFL-AD is
 guaranteed to converge to a stationary point of the global loss
 function.

 VII. E VALUATION
 We implemented a prototype of HFL-AD and evaluated
 it using three representative datasets of network traffic in
 the DDoS detection task. These datasets are: CICDDoS2019
 [17], CICIoT2023 [18], and CICIoMT2024 [19]. In this
 section, we first describe our experimental setup, including
 hyper-parameters and settings, training models in the lowerlayer aggregation, and the hardware configurations utilized for
 evaluation.
 To evaluate HFL-AD, we aim to answer the following
 research questions:
 RQ 1: Are supplementary datasets and dynamic thresholds
 necessary to distinguish between clean and contaminated
 model updates?
 RQ 2: How effective is HFL-AD in detecting DDoS attacks
 when the training data is contaminated?
aims to maximize the abnormal score of labeled attack traffic RQ 3: Is HFL-AD scalable to accommodate a larger numin DA , which is beneficial for resisting data contamination. ber of clients within the FL framework, anomaly detection
Finally, Ai sends the resulting parameters θi (k) to the central of non-traffic data, and alternative upper-layer aggregation
server, which subsequently conducts the model aggregation algorithms?
(i.e., FedAvg).
 A. Experimental Setup
C. Theoretical Analysis In both upper-layer and lower-layer clients, we adopt Neural
 Transformation Learning (NTL) [14] as the local anomaly
 In this section, we investigate the impact of HFL-AD’s detection model. NTL comprises K learnable transformations,
hierarchical aggregation on its model robustness and denoted as T ri (·), along with a shared encoder, fφ (·). The
convergence. anomaly score for an input x is calculated as follows:
 1) Robustness: The hierarchical aggregation in HFL-AD
 K
improves robustness by localized contamination filtering and X
dynamic threshold adaptivity. Specifically, upper-layer clients L(x; θ) = − log di (x), (5)
exclude contaminated updates before global aggregation, i=1

reducing the propagation of biased gradients, whereas the where
threshold T (k) ensures tighter bounds on gradient deviations h(T ri (x), x)
compared to static thresholds (e.g., FLTrust). Proof sketch. di (x) = P , (6)
 h(T ri (x), x) + l,i h(T ri (x), T rl (x))
A model update θi, j (k) from lower-layer client Bi, j is retained
if its cosine similarity with the upper-layer client’s gradient h(a, b) = exp(S ( fφ (a), fφ (b))/τ), (7)
 g j (k)T gi,0 (k)
gi,0 (k) satisfies: S i, j (k) = kg i, (k)kkg (k)k > T (k). Let gclean be and τ is the temperature parameter, θ denotes all the learnable
 i, j i,0
the gradient of an uncontaminated model and gcont be that of a parameters, encompassing the K transformations and one
contaminated model. Due to the divergence in loss landscapes, encoder. In our experiments, we set τ = 0.1 in NTL, and
S (gcont , gi,0 ) tends to be smaller than S (gclean , gi,0 ). By setting chose Adam as the optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01. The
T (k) = µ(k) + m · σ(k), we ensure: P(S (gcont , gi,0 ) ≤ T (k)) ≥ system comprises three upper-layer clients, each managing six
7020 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

lower-layer clients. Among these, seven clients (one upper- TABLE II
layer and two lower-layer per group) were intentionally fed DATASET- INDEPENDENT S ETTINGS U SED IN EXPERIMENTS
contaminated training data.
 To train the model utilizing the supplementary dataset DA ,
we refer to the related work [15] by employing the following
loss function:
 K
 X
 La (x; θ) = − log (1 − di (x)), (8)
 i=1

where di (x) retains the same meaning as in Eq. 5. By substituting Eq. 5 and Eq. 8 into Eq. 1 and Eq. 3, we obtain the
loss function utilized by the lower-layer clients and upper-layer
clients, respectively.
 We leverage FedAvg for aggregating models in the upperlayer aggregation. For the lower-layer aggregation, apart
from the algorithm proposed in HFL-AD (Section VI-B), details all dataset-independent settings. In addition, we list the
we further assess FedAvg [13], Krum [9], Trimmed mean dataset-dependent settings in Table III. These parameters were
[10], FLTrust [11], and RFA [34] as baseline methods for empirically determined to ensure optimal model performance.
comparison. Notice that the latter four algorithms are specif- All experiments were conducted on a system equipped
ically designed for robust aggregation. We adapt them to with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-14900K CPU and an NVIDIA
address the data contamination issue in our work. Below, we GeForce RTX 4090 GPU, using the PyTorch framework and
briefly introduce these four baseline methods, assuming that Python 3.9.
each upper-layer client collects in total n trained models for
aggregation.
 B. RQ1: Necessity of Supplementary Datasets and Dynamic
 • Krum: Among n models, Krum selects one model that
 Thresholds
 is “nearest to the rest n − z − 2 models” as the aggregation
 result, assuming that at most z models are malicious or To answer this research question, we first present empirical
 contaminated. evidence that merely utilizing a clean DN is insufficient to
 • Trimmed mean: It utilizes a coordinate-wise aggregation distinguish between clean and contaminated model updates.
 strategy, assuming that at most z models are contami- Then, we underscore the necessity of dynamically determinnated. For each parameter, Trimmed mean removes the z ing the threshold. Across all datasets, we observe consistent
 largest and z smallest value, and uses the average of the results, and for the purpose of illustration in this subsection,
 remaining n − 2z values as the aggregation result for that we utilize findings from CICDDoS2019.
 parameter. To do the analysis, we assess the gradients of trained
 • FLTrust: This algorithm collects a clean root dataset anomaly detection models in three distinct scenarios: (1) using
 at the server. A gradient trained on this root dataset is only a clean DN , (2) using both DA and clean DN , and
 used as a basis. The aggregation result is the weighted (3) using only a contaminated DN . For brevity, we introduce
 average of n normalized gradients, where the weights are the following terminology to represent these scenarios.
 determined by the cosine similarity between the basis and • type0: The model is trained on a purely clean batch
 each of the n gradients (excluding gradients with a cosine consisting of 1,024 normal samples, employing the loss
 similarity less than 0). function outlined in Eq. 1.
 • RFA: RFA calculates the geometric median of n models • type1: The model is trained on a batch that includes
 as the aggregation result. To calculate the geometric 994 normal samples, along with 10 samples of NetBIOS
 median, RFA employs an iterative method. attack, 10 samples of Syn attack, and 10 samples of
Compared to the baselines above, HFL-AD introduces novelty LDAP attack, utilizing the loss function specified in Eq. 3.
in the following aspects: dynamic thresholding for contamina- • type2: The model is trained on a contaminated batch with
tion detection, leveraging attack traffic (rather than clean data) 1,003 normal samples, including 7 samples of SNMP
for robustness, integration of contamination-aware training, attack, 7 samples of Portmap attack, and 7 samples
and hierarchical robustness. Table IV provides a comparison of UDPLag attack, using the loss function detailed in
based on these aspects. Eq. 1. The contamination ratio within this batch is
 Since there are at most three models contaminated in approximately 2%.
each client group during our evaluation, we set z = 3 for Intuitively, the type2 gradient has a negative impact on the
both Krum and Trimmed mean. As for FLTrust, each upper- training process. As indicated by prior work [6], the type1
layer client possesses a dataset DF comprising 30 labeled gradient can alleviate the issue of data contamination to some
normal samples (i.e., traffic flows), which serves as the root degree. Hence, our objective is to eliminate type2 gradients
dataset. We chose this size to be consistent with the labeled and retain as many type0 and type1 gradients as possible.
supplementary dataset on each upper-layer client. Table II To understand the probability distribution of cosine similarity
GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL 7021

 TABLE III
 DATASET- DEPENDENT S ETTINGS U SED IN EXPERIMENTS

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON W ITH BASELINES

Fig. 2. Differentiating capability of type0 and type1 gradients (training starts Fig. 3. Differentiating capability of type0 and type1 gradients (training starts
from a randomly initialized model). from a model that has been trained on 100 clean batches).

 type1 gradients. The overlap between type1-type1 and type1-
between gradients of different types, we repeatedly sample type2 gradients is minimal.
two batches, train two gradients, and calculate their cosine In contrast, Fig. 2(b) depicts the cosine similarity between
similarity. This calculation is repeated 1,000 times for each type0 gradients and those of type0, type1, and type2. Two
“type pair.” observations can be drawn from this subfigure: (i) The overlap
 Fig. 2 shows the histogram of cosine similarity, where between the undesired type2 gradients (type0-type2, shown
the training starts from a randomly initialized model. In in red) and the desired type0 gradients (type0-type0, shown
Fig. 2(a), we present the cosine similarity between type1 gradi- in green) is greater than that depicted in Fig. 2(a). (ii) The
ents and gradients of type0, type1, and type2, respectively. The overlap between the undesired type2 gradients (type0-type2)
choice of cosine similarity to compare gradients (type0/-type1/ and the desired type1 gradients (type0-type1) is substantial.
type2) is grounded in its widespread use for measuring direc- Therefore, it is challenging to distinguish these two types of
tional alignment in high-dimensional spaces, particularly in gradients in the type0 scenario.
federated learning (FL) robustness studies (e.g., [9], [11]). We further show the histogram of cosine similarity in Fig. 3,
It can be observed that type1 gradients exhibit the highest where the training starts from a model pre-trained on 100 clean
cosine similarity with gradients of the same type, whereas batches. From the figure, it becomes evident that the prior
type2 gradients demonstrate the lowest cosine similarity with analysis remains valid. Therefore, we propose the following
7022 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE V
 S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE ( P - VALUES ) OF P ERFORMANCE C OMPAR -
 ISONS B ETWEEN HFL-AD AND BASELINE METHODS

 (Figs. 2–3), justifying the need for adaptive thresholds. Static
 Fig. 4. Wasserstein distance of cosine similarity distributions. thresholds would fail to capture this non-stationarity.

aggregation rule in HFL-AD: utilizing type1 gradients as a C. RQ2: Effectiveness of HFL-AD
basis, we estimate a cosine similarity threshold to exclude In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
as many type2 gradients as possible. Specifically, we propose proposed method from two different perspectives. Firstly,
that clients possessing DA (pertaining to the type1 scenario) we utilize the AUC (the area under the ROC curve) value
should be positioned in the upper-layer clients and tasked with to assess the model’s performance on DDoS detection.
excluding contaminated gradients. In addition, by comparing AUC-ROC is adopted due to its threshold-agnostic nature,
the corresponding cosine similarity values in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, which is critical for unbiased evaluation under varying conwe observe that the appropriate threshold undergoes significant tamination ratios. This aligns with best practices in anomaly
changes after training on 100 clean batches. This suggests that detection literature [6], [15]. A higher AUC value indicates
a dynamic threshold needs to be estimated for each training better model performance, with a value of 1 representing perbatch. fect distinction between positive and negative samples. Notice
 To better understand the cosine similarity distribution that the ROC curve plots the true positive rate (TPR) against
throughout the training process, we leverage the Wasserstein the false positive rate (FPR) for all thresholds, providing a
distance [38], a measurement method used to quantify the comprehensive understanding of the model’s capabilities. This
difference between two probability distributions. We chose the also indicates the AUC value derived from the ROC curve is
Wasserstein distance because it is sensitive to both shape and indepedent of threshold determination.
location shifts in probability distributions. This dual-metric Fig. 5 shows the performance of various aggregation algoapproach ensures robustness against contamination by distin- rithms across all three datasets, with contamination ratios of
guishing type0/type1 and type2 updates. A larger distance 0%, 1%, 2%, 4%, and 8%. We chose these ratios because they
value indicates that the two distributions are more distinct, align with empirical observations from [6] and [15], where
facilitating a more accurate threshold determination in HFL- low-to-moderate anomaly fractions (typically less than 10%)
AD. To assess this distance, we initiate the training process reflect realistic attack scenarios. The AUC value is evaluated
using a model pre-trained on a batch range of 0 to 800. for all types of DDoS attacks. From the figure, it is evident that
Specifically, Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 correspond to the 0th and HFL-AD achieves the highest AUC value across all contam-
100th batch indices, respectively. We present the experimental ination ratios. When the contamination ratio is 0%, indicating
results in Fig. 4, where the blue line depicts the Wasserstein that all clients possess clean datasets, HFL-AD effectively
distance between the cosine similarity distribution of type1- leverages the model updates from all clients, yielding a result
type1 gradients and the distribution of type1-type2 gradients, that is comparable to FedAvg. As the contamination ratio
while the green line represents the distance between type0- increases, HFL-AD effectively mitigates the adverse impact
type0 gradients and type0-type2 gradients. It is evident that of contaminated model updates.
the Wasserstein distance for the similarity distribution related Secondly, to further evaluate models, we leverage thresholdto type0 gradients (green line) is significantly smaller than dependent metrics, including accuracy, precision, recall, and
that of type1 gradients (blue line), aligning with our previous F1-score. Specifically, we utilize a small validation dataset
analysis. comprising 300 normal samples and 300 abnormal samples.
 Based on the above results, we conclude that even with a We adopt the threshold that yields the highest F1-score on
completely clean DN which corresponds to the type0 scenario, the validation dataset for testing. Fig. 6 presents the results
it is challenging to identify contaminated training updates (i.e., of different aggregation algorithms across all contamination
type2 gradients). In contrast, the type1 gradient is able to ratios. Overall, among all four metrics, HFL-AD achieves the
differentiate contaminated gradients from non-contaminated best performance, particularly reflected by the F1-score, which
ones, thus making it more suitable as a basis for use in represents a harmonious balance between precision and recall.
HFL-AD. These results underscore the effectiveness of HFL-AD.
 The Wasserstein distance analysis further validates our To verify the superiority of our proposed method, we
assumption that gradient distributions evolve during training conducted two-sample t-tests comparing HFL-AD’s results
GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL 7023

 Fig. 5. AUC performance among different aggregation algorithms on three datasets.

Fig. 6. Performance comparison among different aggregation algorithms under five contamination ratios. Notice that Avg, TM, FLT, H-A stand for FedAvg,
Trimmed Mean, FLTrust, and HFL-AD, respectively.

in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 with baseline methods. As shown in
Table V, the statistical results demonstrate that HFL-AD
achieves statistically significant superiority over all baselines
in Accuracy, F1-score, and AUC (with p-value ≤ 0.05), while
showing competitive performance in Precision and Recall
(where some p-values are slightly above 0.05).

D. RQ3: Scalability of HFL-AD Fig. 7. AUC performance of different aggregation algorithms under varying
 We answer this research question by presenting the AUC numbers of lower-layer clients in a group.
score of HFL-AD, considering factores such as the number
of lower-layer clients per group, non-traffic data for anomaly
detection, and an alternative upper-layer aggregation algo- 1) Number of Lower-Layer Clients: The upper-layer aggrerithm. These factors are illustrated in Fig. 7, Fig. 8, and Fig. 9, gation in HFL-AD is based on FedAvg. As a result, HFL-AD
respectively. can support a large number (e.g., 100+) of upper-layer clients,
7024 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 HFL-AD remains effective when applied to non-traffic data. In
 contrast, existing solutions exhibit considerable performance
 degradation, highlighting HFL-AD’s superior adaptability and
 scalability compared to these solutions.
 3) Alternative Upper-Layer Aggregation Algorithm: In all
 the aformentioned experiments, we leverage FedAvg as the
 upper-layer aggregation algorithm in HFL-AD. However, the
 design of HFL-AD is not dependent on a specific upperlayer aggregation algorithm. To validate this independence, we
 replaced FedAvg with FedLAW [37] as an alternative upper-
Fig. 8. AUC performance of different aggregation algorithms on the Census layer aggregation algorithm within HFL-AD and conducted
dataset. repeated experiments. Fig. 9 shows the results on the CICD-
 DoS2019 dataset. It is evident that HFL-AD is adaptable to
 different upper-layer aggregation algorithms, further showcasing HFL-AD’s exceptional scalability.

 E. Practical Implications
 The experimental results demonstrate that HFL-AD effectively mitigates the impact of contaminated training data in
 federated DDoS detection while maintaining scalability across
 different network environments and anomaly detection tasks.
 These findings have several real-world implications:
Fig. 9. AUC performance of HFL-AD under different upper-layer aggrega- 1) Robust Federated Learning for Cybersecurity: HFLtion algorithms.
 AD enables organizations (e.g., ISPs, cloud providers, or
 enterprise networks) to collaboratively train DDoS detection
 models without sharing raw traffic data, preserving privacy
similar to other FL solutions [3], [4], [22], [27], [28]. To
 while improving threat detection. In addition, the dynamic
analyze the scalability of HFL-AD with lower-layer clients,
 threshold mechanism ensures resilience against evolving traffic
we conduct experiments using the CICDDoS2019 dataset. We
 patterns, making it suitable for real-world deployments where
vary the number of lower-layer clients within each group to 3,
 normal network behaviors frequently change.
6, 9, 15, and 25, respectively. Notice that due to the dataset’s
 2) Adaptability to Diverse Threat Scenarios: Unlike prior
limited sample size, 25 is the maximum number of lowermethods that struggle with low contamination ratios (1-8%),
layer clients that can be assigned to each group to ensure
 HFL-AD maintains high AUC and F1-scores even when maliviable training on each client. In this configuration, there are
 cious clients inject subtle adversarial updates. This makes it
a total of 78 clients, with each client receiving 942 training
 practical for real-world FL deployments, where attackers may
samples. For each experiment, one-third of the clients are
 attempt to evade detection by introducing small perturbations.
contaminated with malicious data for training purposes. Fig. 7
 The framework’s effectiveness on non-traffic data (e.g., Census
depicts the experimental results. We can see that HFL-AD
 dataset) suggests broader applicability beyond DDoS, such as
maintains stable performance across various contamination
 fraud detection, IoT anomaly detection, or industrial sensor
ratios (ranging from 0% to 4%). When the contamination
 monitoring.
ratio reaches 8%, there is a notable decrease in HFL-AD’s
 3) Scalability for Large-Scale Deployments: HFL-AD
performance, especially when a higher number of lower-layer
 supports hundreds of clients without significant perforclients is assigned to each group. However, this performance
 mance degradation, making it feasible for distributed threat
decrement is minimal. Despite the higher contamination ratio
 intelligence sharing among multiple organizations. The comand reduced training data per client, the AUC performance of
 patibility with different upper-layer aggregation algorithms
HFL-AD still surpasses existing solutions (see Fig. 6).
 (e.g., FedLAW) allows integration into existing FL frame-
 2) Applicability to Non-Traffic Data: HFL-AD is designed
 works, reducing adoption barriers.
to train the anomaly detection model in a federated manner.
That said, beyond DDoS, HFL-AD can also detect other
anomalies, such as malware traffic (see Section VIII) or non- VIII. D ISCUSSION
traffic anomalies. To assess the applicability of HFL-AD to HFL-AD detects DDoS attack traffic using hierarchical fedother types of datasets, we leverage the Census dataset [48], erated learning (FL). It operates in a semi-supervised manner
a tabular dataset pertaining to income surveys. We follow with limited labeled anomaly samples. Specifically, HFL-AD
the same procedure as was employed for the traffic datasets addresses the following three problems in the real world:
utilized in the network intrusion detection task. The last (1) Data contamination exists in monitored traffic, which can
column in Table III outlines the setting information pertinent significantly impact model performance. It is impractical to
to the Census dataset. Fig. 8 shows the performance of examine all collected traffic samples due to the immense
various aggregation algorithms on this dataset. We can see that labor involved. (2) Traffic collected from a single host lacks
GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL 7025

 TABLE VI per round, which is feasible for resource-constrained edge
 OVERHEAD OF HFL-AD AND BASELINE M ETHODS ACROSS DATASETS devices.
 Regarding communication cost, the hierarchical structure of HFL-AD alleviates server-side bottlenecks while
 adding negligible overhead. The 0.003∼0.004% (equivalent to
 0.13∼0.24 MB) increase stems from scalar cosine similarity
 exchanges among upper-layer clients, preserving bandwidth
 efficiency.
 The moderate computational cost and minimal communication overhead are justified by HFL-AD’s superior accuracy
 (Section VII-C), enabled by dynamic thresholding for contamination detection, attack traffic repurposing as signal,
 contamination-aware training, and multi-layer hierarchical
 defense.

 B. Feasibility of Labeled Anomaly Data
 While labeled anomalies (DA ) are required for contamination detection, their acquisition is realistically manageable
 for the following reasons: i) Minimal data requirements:
 DA is small (e.g., 30 samples per upper-layer client) and
 can be sourced from historical attack traces (e.g., past
 intrusion logs, synthetic attack replay), public threat intelligence (e.g., CICIDS, CIC-DDoS datasets), and lightweight
 manual labeling (e.g., flagging anomalies during initial deploydiversity and is insufficient for DDoS detection. Model training ment). ii) One-time effort for long-term robustness: Unlike
requires traffic data from various hosts. (3) Traffic collected FLTrust (which requires continuous clean data updates), DA
from different hosts may contain private data that cannot be is static—once collected, it can be reused across rounds.
shared directly. Below, we discuss further aspects of HFL-AD Furthermore, attack patterns (e.g., DDoS signatures) exhibit
in terms of its overhead, convergence, and robustness. temporal stability, reducing the need for frequent relabeling.
 iii) Hierarchical delegation lowers burden: Only upper-layer
 clients (a small subset of the network) need DA , not every
A. Overhead participant. In enterprise settings (e.g., IoT networks), these
 We evaluate the overhead of HFL-AD from the perspective clients can be operated by administrators with access to
of computation and communication, measured in terms of security tools.
training duration and transmission load, respectively. Table VI For heterogeneous scenarios where labeled anomalies are
compares the overhead of HFL-AD and baseline algorithms hard to obtain uniformly, we propose: i) Transferable attack
across three datasets. The results exhibit consistent trends, and representations: DA can include generalizable attack features
we analyze the CICDDoS2019 dataset as a representative case. (e.g., packet size anomalies in DDoS) rather than client-
 For computation cost, FedAvg is the most efficient due to its specific samples. Our experiments (Section VII) show robustnon-robust averaging. Krum and FLTrust introduce moderate ness across multiple datasets (CICDDoS2019, CICIoT2023),
overhead from pairwise distance calculations and gradient suggesting DA need not be exhaustive. ii) Federated anomaly
normalization, respectively. Trimmed Mean and RFA incur sharing: Upper-layer clients can securely share curated DA
higher costs due to coordinate-wise filtering and iterative (e.g., via differential privacy) to mitigate data scarcity. iii)
geometric median computation. HFL-AD strikes a balance, Fallback mechanisms: If DA is unavailable, HFL-AD can
being only 17.2% slower than FLTrust and 18.4% slower than default to weaker baselines (e.g., Krum), though with reduced
Krum, while significantly outperforming them in robustness contamination resistance.
(Section VII-C). Similar trends hold for CICIoT2023 and
CICIoMT2024, with RFA consistently being the slowest. In
practical deployments, upper-layer clients in HFL-AD incur C. Robustness
moderate computational overhead due to their dual role in To evaluate the robustness of HFL-AD in more complex
local model training and contamination detection. Based on and varied environments, we have conducted additional experour experiments, the per-round computational time for an iments on the CICIoT2023 dataset, a large-scale IoT dataset
upper-layer client (e.g., a mid-tier IoT gateway with 4 CPU designed for robust evaluation in complex attack scenarios.
cores and 8 GB RAM) averages 2—3 seconds for local train- This dataset includes 33 attack types (e.g., DDoS, DoS, Recon,
ing and aggregation (100 epochs, batch size 32) and 15—38 Spoofing, Mirai) executed in a realistic IoT topology with 105
seconds for contamination detection (dynamic thresholding devices, providing a highly challenging environment for flowand cosine similarity calculations). This totals 17—41 seconds based anomaly detection.
7026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 10. Performance of HFL-AD across different contamination ratios under varying configurations. Labels A-E on the X-axis represent five distinct
configurations. For each configuration, we evaluated different data samples at various contamination ratios, resulting in minor AUC value fluctuations.

 TABLE VII
 K EY E NHANCEMENTS IN J OURNAL V ERSION VS . P RIOR C ONFERENCE V ERSION [39]

 Specifically, we designed five distinct configurations with gradient cosine similarity to filter contaminated updates.
varying compositions of DDoS and non-DDoS attacks, Experiments demonstrate HFL-AD’s superiority over SOTA
including: methods in detection accuracy, scalability, and adaptability to
 1) Configuration A: 4 DDoS attacks (ICMP/UDP/TCP/ non-traffic tasks.
 SY-N Flood). Practical Deployment Scenarios. HFL-AD’s robustness
 2) Configuration B: 3 DDoS attacks + 1 non-DDoS (DNS and privacy-preserving design make it particularly valuable
 Spoofing). for real-world collaborations:
 3) Configuration C: 2 DDoS attacks + 2 non-DDoS • ISP Networks: Multiple ISPs can jointly train DDoS
 (Vulnerability Scan, DNS Spoofing). detectors on traffic from geographically distributed net-
 4) Configuration D: 1 DDoS attack + 3 non-DDoS (Bro- works without sharing raw data, enabling early threat
 wser Hijacking, Vulnerability Scan, DNS Spoofing). mitigation while complying with data sovereignty reg-
 5) Configuration E: 4 non-DDoS attacks (Dictionary Brute ulations.
 Force, Browser Hijacking, etc.). • Industrial IoT: In smart factories, HFL-AD can
 For each configuration, attack samples were injected into aggregate anomaly reports from sensor fleets (e.g., prenormal traffic at multiple contamination ratios to simulate dictive maintenance alerts) across different manufacturers,
varying interference intensities. In addition, within each con- improving detection of adversarial tampering or equipfiguration, all attack types were equally represented to ensure ment failures.
unbiased evaluation of our method’s resilience against diverse • Cloud Providers: Federated threat intelligence sharing
attack interactions. The results (as shown in Fig. 10) demon- among cloud platforms (e.g., AWS, Azure) could idenstrate that HFL-AD maintains high detection performance tify cross-tenant attack patterns while isolating sensitive
across all configurations, even under aggressive mixed- customer data.
attack scenarios. This comprehensive validation underscores Future work should address dynamic client churn and reduce
HFL-AD’s adaptability to heterogeneous, real-world IoT reliance on labeled upper-layer data, further bridging research
threats. and deployment gaps.
 IX. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 A PPENDIX A
 In this paper, we proposed HFL-AD, a hierarchical fed-
 C OMPARISON TO C ONFERENCE V ERSION
erated learning framework for DDoS detection that mitigates
data contamination while preserving privacy and improving Table VII explicitly highlights the novel advancements of
data diversity. HFL-AD designates clients with supplemen- this work in design, algorithm, and evaluation compared to the
tal labeled anomaly data as upper-layer clients, leveraging conference version.
GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL 7027

 Specifically, we discuss the novel contributions of this work [9] P. Blanchard, E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer,
over the conference version from four aspects. “Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient
 descent,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, Dec. 2017,
 1) Algorithmic Innovation. pp. 118–128.
 • Aggregation Algorithm: The conference version [10] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 required training two local models in each upper- Mach. Learn., Jul. 2018, pp. 5650–5659.
 layer client for dynamic threshold calculation. In [11] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “FLTrust: Byzantine-robust
 this journal version, we propose training only one federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
 local model per upper-layer client, which proves [12] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
 more effective (Figs. 5–6). Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2019, pp. 1–23.
 [13] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
 2) Generalizability. “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 • Extended from DDoS-only detection to multi- data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Stat. (AISTATS), Jan. 2016,
 scenario anomaly detection (e.g., Census income pp. 1273–1282.
 [14] C. Qiu, T. Pfrommer, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Neural
 data in Section VII-D). transformation learning for deep anomaly detection beyond images,” in
 • Support for alternative upper-layer aggregators Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2021, pp. 8703–8714.
 (FedLAW in Fig. 9) and scalability to 25 lower-layer [15] C. Qiu, A. Li, M. Kloft, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Latent outlier
 exposure for anomaly detection with contaminated data,” in Proc. Int.
 clients per group (Fig. 8). Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jan. 2022, pp. 18153–18167.
 3) Enhanced Evaluation. [16] M. Fang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Gong, “Local model poisoning attacks
 to Byzantine-robust federated learning,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur.
 • Additional Metrics: Introduced more evalua- Symp., 2020, pp. 1605–1622.
 tion metrics (e.g., accuracy, precision, recall, and [17] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 F1-score) to comprehensively assess HFL-AD’s “Developing realistic distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack dataset
 and taxonomy,” in Proc. Int. Carnahan Conf. Security Technol. (ICCST),
 performance (Fig. 6). 2019, pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/CCST.2019.8888419.
 • Comparative Baselines: Added RFA [34] and Fed- [18] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
 LAW [37] to validate superiority over newer FL A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark
 for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13,
 methods. p. 5941, Jun. 2023, doi: 10.3390/s23135941.
 4) Practical Implications. [19] S. Dadkhah, E. C. P. Neto, R. Ferreira, R. C. Molokwu, S. Sadeghi,
 and A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoMT2024: Attack vectors in health-
 • Added overhead analysis (Section VIII) showing care devices—A multi-protocol dataset for assessing IoMT device
 only 32% runtime increase versus FedAvg despite security,” Internet Things, vol. 28, pp. 1–29, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.20944/
 dynamic thresholding. preprints202402.0898.v1.
 [20] J. G. Almaraz-Rivera, J. A. Perez-Diaz, and J. A. Cantoral-Ceballos,
 • Real-world applicability discussion “Transport and application layer DDoS attacks detection to IoT devices
 (Section VII-E) for ISPs and IoT networks. by using machine learning and deep learning models,” Sensors, vol. 22,
 no. 9, p. 3367, Apr. 2022.
 [21] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha,
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated
 learning,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 115, pp. 619–640, Oct.
 The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers 2020.
for their valuable feedback on this paper. [22] R. Benameur, A. Dahane, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel federated
 learning based intrusion detection system for IoT networks,” in Proc.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2024, pp. 2402–2407.
 R EFERENCES [23] K. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Xu, and J. Chao, “DDoS attacks detection with
[1] B. Bala and S. Behal, “AI techniques for IoT-based DDoS attack AutoEncoder,” in Proc. NOMS-IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp.,
 detection: Taxonomies, comprehensive review and research challenges,” Apr. 2020, pp. 1–9.
 Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 52, May 2024, Art. no. 100631. [24] A. Zainudin, L. A. C. Ahakonye, R. Akter, D.-S. Kim, and J.-M. Lee,
[2] S. Ranger. (Feb. 28, 2018). GitHub Hit With the Largest DDoS Attack “An efficient hybrid-DNN for DDoS detection and classification in
 Ever Seen. ZDNet. [Online]. Available: https://goo.gl/BmqekG software-defined IIoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10,
[3] J. Yan, H. Zhou, and W. Wang, “Intelligent network element: A pro- no. 10, pp. 8491–8504, May 2023.
 grammable switch based on machine learning to defend against DDoS [25] D. Akgun, S. Hizal, and U. Cavusoglu, “A new DDoS attacks intrusion
 attacks,” Inf. Syst. Frontiers, vol. 2025, pp. 1–20, Jan. 2025. detection model based on deep learning for cybersecurity,” Comput.
[4] V. Pourahmadi, H. A. Alameddine, M. A. Salahuddin, and R. Boutaba, Secur., vol. 118, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 102748.
 “Spotting anomalies at the edge: Outlier exposure-based cross-silo [26] C. Xu et al., “A federated learning architecture for blockchain DDoS
 federated learning for DDoS detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure attacks detection,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 17, no. 5,
 Comput., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 4002–4015, Sep. 2023. pp. 1911–1923, Sep. 2024.
[5] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [27] J. Mateus, G.-A.-L. Zodi, and A. Bagula, “Federated learning-based
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in solution for DDoS detection in SDN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Com-
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15. put., Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Big Island, HI, USA, Feb. 2024,
[6] S. Wu, J. Zhao, and G. Tian, “Understanding and mitigating data pp. 875–880.
 contamination in deep anomaly detection: A kernel-based approach,” [28] R. Doriguzzi-Corin and D. Siracusa, “FLAD: Adaptive federated learnin Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2022, pp. 2319–2325. ing for DDoS attack detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024,
[7] Z. Wang, H. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Xu, H. Huang, and Y. Zhao, Art. no. 103597.
 “Accelerating federated learning with cluster construction and hier- [29] M. Kim, J. Yu, J. Kim, T.-H. Oh, and J. K. Choi, “An iterative method for
 archical aggregation,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 7, unsupervised robust anomaly detection under data contamination,” IEEE
 pp. 3805–3822, Jul. 2022. Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 13327–13339, Oct.
[8] W. Y. B. Lim, J. S. Ng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, C. Miao, and D. I. Kim, 2024.
 “Dynamic edge association and resource allocation in self-organizing [30] Q. Su, B. Tian, H. Wan, and J. Yin, “Anomaly detection under conhierarchical federated learning networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., taminated data with contamination-immune bidirectional GANs,” IEEE
 vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 3640–3653, Dec. 2021. Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5605–5620, Nov. 2024.
7028 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[31] H. Zhang, L. Cao, P. VanNostrand, S. Madden, and E. A. Runden- [41] J. Liu, X. Wei, X. Liu, H. Gao, and Y. Wang, “Group-based
 steiner, “ELITE: Robust deep anomaly detection with meta gradient,” hierarchical federated learning: Convergence, group formation, and
 in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, sampling,” in Proc. 52nd Int. Conf. Parallel Process., Aug. 2023,
 pp. 2174–2182. pp. 264–273.
[32] J. Xu, H. Fan, Q. Wang, Y. Jiang, and Q. Duan, “Adaptive idle model [42] L. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Song, and K. B. Letaief, “Hierarchical fedfusion in hierarchical federated learning for unbalanced edge regions,” erated learning with quantization: Convergence analysis and system
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 4603–4616, Sep. 2024. design,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 2–18,
[33] T. Zhang, K.-Y. Lam, and J. Zhao, “Device scheduling and assignment Jan. 2023.
 in hierarchical federated learning for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet [43] Y. Deng et al., “A communication-efficient hierarchical
 Things J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 18449–18462, May 2024. federated learning framework via shaping data distribu-
[34] K. Pillutla, S. M. Kakade, and Z. Harchaoui, “Robust aggrega- tion at edge,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 3,
 tion for federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 2600–2615, Jun. 2024.
 pp. 1142–1154, 2022. [44] H. Lu et al., “FL-AMM: Federated learning augmented
[35] Y. Dong et al., “HorusEye: A realtime IoT malicious traffic detection map matching with heterogeneous cellular moving
 framework using programmable switches,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. trajectories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 12,
 Symp., 2023, pp. 571–588. pp. 3878–3892, Dec. 2023.
[36] J. Yin et al., “Masked memory network for semi-supervised anomaly [45] E. Owusu et al., “Online network DoS/DDoS detection:
 detection in Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19, Sampling, change point detection, and machine learning
 pp. 30636–30647, Oct. 2024. methods,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 1,
[37] Z. Li, T. Lin, X. Shang, and C. Wu, “Revisiting weighted aggregation pp. 15–35, 1st Quart., 2024.
 in federated learning with neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. [46] Y. S. N. Fotse, V. K. Tchendji, and M. Velempini, “Federated
 Learn. (ICML), Jan. 2023, pp. 19767–19788. learning based DDoS attacks detection in large scale software-
[38] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein generative adver- defined network,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 74, no. 1,
 sarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 214–223. pp. 101–115, Jan. 2025.
[39] H. Huang, J. Gui, J. Hong, and C. Hua, “HFL-AD: A hierarchical [47] S. P. Sanon, R. Reddy, C. Lipps, and H. D. Schotten, “DDoS attacks
 federated learning framework for solving data contamination in DDoS in communication: Analysis and mitigation of unreliable clients in
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf.
 Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2024, pp. 2376–2381. (CCNC), Jan. 2024, pp. 986–989.
[40] Z. Lin et al., “Hierarchical split federated learning: Convergence analysis [48] UCI Mach. Learn. Repository. (1997). Census-Income (KDD)
 and system optimization,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., early access, Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/
 Apr. 29, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2025.3565509. Census+Income