1588 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 Spatio-Temporal Anomaly Detection for
 5G-Clusters: A Multi-Scale Fuzzy Contrastive
 Learning Approach
 Luo Chao , Member, IEEE, Li Yinghua, Ding Fengqian, and Shao Rui
 Abstract— Anomaly detection is an important data-mining greater bandwidth and low latency, but it also leads to a
task closely related to specific applications. In recent years, significant increase in the number of wireless base stations.
spatio-temporal data deriving from various networks has been By the end of June 2023, China has more than 2,937,000
collected from many real-world scenarios, but how to detect
anomalies in such data is still an open problem. In this article, 5G base stations for commercial operation and 676 million
we propose a novel anomaly detection framework, Multi-scale 5G users. Facing such a huge number of base stations, how
Fuzzy Contrastive Anomaly Detection (MFCAD), by capturing to effectively and timely detect anomalies has become a key
anomalous patterns of data from multiple spatio-temporal scales issue in daily operations.
so as to learn distinguishable feature representations. Different 5G mobile network clusters (5G-MNCs) can be defined
from conventional reconstruction- or prediction-based anomaly
detection methods, this approach is not concerned with the as collaborative regional systems within a specific coverage
consistency of the encoded representation of the implicit layer area formed by a group of highly correlated base stations.
and the discriminability of the implicit layer of the anomalies. For instance, an example of 5G-MNC is shown in Fig.1,
MFCAD implements a more discriminative representation using where each node represents a base station, and the edge
fuzzy contrastive learning and explicitly performs anomaly detec- represents the correlation between two base stations. It can
tion in the potential space by measuring the distance between
outliers and implicit values. This proposed method has been be observed that even within the same cluster, the degree of
applied for the anomaly detection of 5G mobile network clusters mutual influence between base stations varies due to geograph-
(5G-MNCs) in China Mobile. Furthermore, in order to validate ical distance. Maintaining the correlation between wireless
the generalizability of the proposed method, it is further tested base stations is essential for ensuring continuous coverage
on public datasets and experiment results show the promising and efficient load distribution, facilitating signal switching
performance.
 and load balancing as users move. To achieve these goals,
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, fuzzy contrastive learning, collaboration and virtualization techniques are employed to
graph learning, spatio-temporal modeling. enable resource sharing and dynamic scheduling within clus-
 I. I NTRODUCTION ters. As a result, data generated by 5G-MNCs exhibits inherent
 both spatial and temporal dependencies [5]. Due to the

A NOMALY detection aims to discover anomalous
 points/patterns from data that do not match normal
patterns. Anomaly detection plays a key role in many realaforementioned spatio-temporal characteristics, it significantly
 increases the complexity of anomaly detection for 5G-MNC
 data.
world applications, such as network intrusion detection [1], In the field of anomaly detection in mobile networks,
financial fraud detection [2], equipment failure detection [3], conventional approaches manually set fixed thresholds for
health monitoring [4], and so on. Mobile networks are the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of different base stations,
current infrastructure for wireless communication. In recent which requires the experience of domain experts [6]. Furtheryears, 5G mobile networks are gradually replacing 3G/4G more, these methods are designed for univariate sequences,
networks. The millimeter wave band of 5G technology brings which means that each base station is monitored individually.
 Received 8 January 2024; revised 5 August 2024; accepted 2 February 2025; However, multiple base stations in 5G-MNCs interact with
approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor D. Pei. Date of each other due to the cooperation in a specific coverage
publication 17 February 2025; date of current version 20 August 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
 area. Consequently, it is unable to capture the spatio-temporal
China under Grant 62172264 and in part by Shandong Provincial Natural synchronization correlations existing in the 5G-MNC data and
Science Foundation under Grant ZR2019MF020. (Corresponding author: cannot reflect the overall state of the system well [5].
Luo Chao.)
 Luo Chao is with the School of Information Science and Engineering,
 Recently, the efficacy of deep learning-based techniques
Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, China, and also with Shandong for anomaly detection has been well-established [7], [8],
Provincial Key Laboratory for Novel Distributed Computer Software Tech- [9]. Particularly, Thill et al. [10] introduced an auto-encoder
nology, Jinan 250014, China (e-mail: luochao@sdnu.edu.cn).
 Li Yinghua is with the School of Information Science and Engineering,
 (AE) model based on temporal convolution, effectively apply-
Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, China. ing it to anomaly detection in electrocardiogram (EEG)
 Ding Fengqian is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, recordings. Li et al. [11] devised a superimposed varia-
Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China.
 Shao Rui is with the Center of Network Optimization, China Mobile
 tional autoencoder (VAE) model employing graphical neural
Shandong Company Ltd., Jinan 250014, China. networks (GNNs) for time series anomaly detection. Deng
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3540091 and Hooi [12] proposed a predictive model based on GNN,

 2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS 1589

 by external factors and exhibit subtle pattern variations across
 different periods, fuzzy C-means (FCM) [17] is applied to
 cluster the learned representations from various time steps.
 This process aims to derive corresponding prototypes. Finally,
 the distances between the representations and their corresponding prototypes are utilized for anomaly inference, thereby
 enhancing the robustness of detection performance.
 The main contributions of this work are summarized as
 follows:
 • A novel framework for spatio-temporal anomaly detection is proposed, which not only is notably suitable for 5G
 mobile networks in real-world scenario, but also exhibits
Fig. 1. An example of 5G-MNCs. good performance on other public datasets.
 • A multi-scale contrastive learning is first proposed to
 capture anomalous patterns by obtaining temporal and
leveraging the discrepancy between predicted and actual values spatial features at different scales, where differences in
to detect anomalies. He and Zhao [13] harnessed Temporal normal and abnormal features at diverse data granularity
Convolutional Networks (TCNs) for anomaly detection, uti- are utilized.
lizing prediction errors to compute anomaly scores. These • To better generalize the generated positive and negative
methodologies primarily ascertain whether a sample is abnor- samples, intuitionistic fuzzy information is involved in
mal by evaluating reconstruction or prediction errors, since data augmentation, which combines with multivariate
they assumed the model would fail to reconstruct or fore- dynamic time warping (MDTW) to achieve robustly
cast the unseen abnormal samples. Nonetheless, their focus metric among samples.
primarily rested on reconstruction or prediction performance, • The real 5G-MNC datasets and two sensor datasets are
potentially overlooking the distinction between representations used for validation. Experimental results demonstrate the
of anomalous and normal samples. As a result, even anomalous capability of the method to achieve anomaly detection in
data might be well reconstructed or fitted [14]. Recently, real-world scenarios.
by possessing the ability to obtain discriminative features,
contrastive learning was also applied in temporal data anomaly II. R ELATED W ORK
detection [15], [16]. However, existing works did not take into
account spatial factors and the multi-scale characteristics of A. Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series
data in real applications. Furthermore, these approaches did In many scenarios, spatio-temporal data is presented in
not readily apply to anomaly detection within 5G-MNC envi- the form of multidimensional time series. Existing researches
ronments, as commercial 5G networks often exhibit intricate on anomaly detection in multivariate time series can gendynamic temporal-spatial traits. erally be divided into two categories: prediction-based [12],
 In this study, we have discovered that anomaly detec- [13] and reconstruction-based methods [10], [18], [19], [20].
tion can be effectively carried out within the latent space Prediction-based models detect anomalies by comparing the
by measuring the representation distances between outliers deviation between predicted values and actual values. For
and normal data. Notably, this approach is achieved without instance, Deng and Hooi [12] proposed a method that comreliance on reconstruction or prediction models. Because the bines a graph structural learning module with Graph Neural
latent representations are relatively low-dimensional compared Networks (GNN) to detect anomalies based on the deviawith the original 5G-MNC data with high dimensionality and tion between predicted and actual values. He and Zhao [13]
complicated structure. Performing anomaly detection on the applied a temporal convolutional network for anomaly deteccompact latent representations helps to concentrate solely on tion, where the prediction errors are fitted into a multivariate
the features that distinguish normal and anomalous. Based on Gaussian distribution and used to compute anomaly scores.
this idea, we propose a novel framework named MFCAD, Reconstruction-based models typically utilize auto-encoders
designed to tackle the challenge of anomaly detection in 5G- (AE) or variational auto-encoders (VAE) [10], [19], [20] to
MNCs. Firstly, we elaborate on an effective data augmentation learn representations from normal data and perform anomaly
method for specific KPI time series in 5G-MNCs, where detection based on the reconstruction error between real samfuzzy mechanism is involved for the nonlinear data processing. ples and reconstructed samples. Thill et al. [10] proposed a
And, a multi-scale fuzzy contrastive module is designed to temporal AE architecture for anomaly detection, where the
extract temporal and spatial features from raw data. To capture reconstruction error is used as an indicator of anomalous
anomalous behaviors at different scales, our proposed frame- data. Su et al. [19] introduced a recursive neural network for
work employs two GCN-based models that simultaneously anomaly detection in multivariate time series data, utilizing
conduct node-level and subgraph-level contrastive learning. reconstruction probability to identify anomalies. Xu et al. [6]
Subsequently, the data is projected from the temporal and proposed an unsupervised algorithm based on a variational
spatial modules into distinct representations within the latent auto-encoder for anomaly detection in seasonal KPI data.
space. Considering that KPI time series are often influenced Zong et al. [20] designed a deep auto-encoder and Gaussian
1590 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 2. Framework of the proposed MFCAD.

mixture model called DAGMM for modeling the density dis- the anomaly detection in a compact latent space without
tribution of multi-dimensional data. However, these methods relying on reconstruction or prediction models.
typically focused solely on anomalies in either the temporal
or spatial aspect. As data with spatio-temporal features often B. Multi-Scale Contrastive Learning
exhibits interdependencies and mutual influences, previous Contrastive learning is a self-supervised approach. It has
methods may overlook underlying influences. achieved significant performance in the fields of computer
 Recently, temporal and spatial dimensions in multivariate vision (CV) [27] and natural language processing (NLP)
time series have been explored [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26]. [28]. The objective of contrastive learning is to learn better
For instance, Tian et al. [21] introduced an anomaly detection feature representations of unlabeled data through unsupervised
network that incorporated temporal and spatial information, learning, maximizing the consistency between samples and
aiming to enhance the differentiation between normal and their augmentations, thereby facilitating their application in
anomalous instances by reconstructing the prediction error. downstream tasks [29]. Many researchers have explored the
STDTB-AD [22] extracted features from trajectory data by application of contrastive learning in representation learning
computing motion statistics within spatio-temporal units to for time series data [30], [31], [32]. Tonkaboni et al. [30] prohandle the heterogeneity of behaviors. Hu et al. [24] proposed posed a self-supervised framework for learning a generalized
an anomaly detection algorithm based on the fusion of target representation of non-stationary time series. Eldele et al. [31]
spatio-temporal context to fully leverage the spatio-temporal designed an unsupervised learning framework that leverages
contextual information of the targets for anomaly detection. time and context for contrastive learning, learning represen-
3G-Net [25], an end-to-end deep learning framework, was tations of time series. Zhong et al. [32] applied contrastive
proposed for detecting anomalies in spatio-temporal data in learning to clustering to increase inter-class differences and
the Internet of Things. Wang et al. [26] proposed a frame- reduce intra-class differences. However, these methods overwork for anomaly detection based on spatio-temporal graph look the complex relationships among spatio-temporal data.
neural network, utilizing spatio-temporal graph neural network In recent years, researchers in the field of graph anomaly
technique to extract feature data from information graphs detection have adopted multi-scale contrastive methods [33],
containing spatial and temporal features. [34], [35], [36], [37]. For example, Jin et al. [33] proposed
 Both time and space can be divided into different scales. ANEMONE, a framework based on multi-scale contrastive
For example, the difference in sampling frequency on the learning that captures richer anomaly information through
temporal dimension leads to differences in the details of node-level and context-level contrasts. Zheng et al. [34]
data fluctuation features. And, the differences in the scope introduced a self-supervised learning framework called SLof data aggregation at the spatial scale will affect the learning GAD. This approach utilized multi-scale contrastive methods
of relevant features of adjacent data. However, the existing to construct different contextual views, allowing for the capmethods commonly did not consider the impact on multiple ture of anomalies in structural space and enabling graph
spatio-temporal scales. And, most methods also relied on the anomaly detection. Zhang et al. [35] integrated multi-view
reconstruction or prediction. Here, we incorporate multi-scale contrastive learning and attribute reconstruction-based models
spatio-temporal features into contrastive learning and perform to address anomaly detection in attribute networks. However,
CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS 1591

these existing methods did not fully exploit the intrinsic
relationships among spatio-temporal data.
 Recently, temporal data anomaly detection employing contrastive learning is attracting the attention of researchers. For
instance, in 2023, MGCLAD [15] adopted contrastive learning to capture multiple dependencies of signals to enhance
the discriminative power of feature representations. Meanwhile, DCdetector [16] introduced a dual-attention asymmetric
design that utilized contrastive learning to learn features
obtaining an invariant representation. Both of the above studies
achieved relatively competitive performance in time series
anomaly detection by utilizing contrastive learning. However,
there are still some open problems. Firstly, existing works
mainly focused on temporal data. But, as to spatial-temporal
data, more complex correlations and mutual influence existing
in both temporal and spatial dimensions. In this case, how can
one implement anomaly detection applying contrastive learning to obtain discriminative feature learning? Secondly, both
temporal and spatial dimensions essentially have multi-scale
characteristics, and obtaining various features from different
scales is meaningful. But existing works still extracted features
from temporal data based on a single scale, often neglecting Fig. 3. Framework of the designed data augmentation method.
the learning of multi-scale spatial features.
 Motivated by this insight, this study transforms
 containing observations of 5G-MNCs as Ω = {X1 , X2 , . . . ,Xt ,
spatio-temporal data into corresponding graph structures and
 Xt = [Xt,1 , X t,2 , . . . , X t,B ], Xt,i ∈ RN ×T (e.g.Xt,1 =
applies multi-scale contrastive methods from both temporal
 [ 1t , 2t , . . . , Tt ]), where Xt covers one time period, such as an
and spatial perspectives to capture more comprehensive
 hour, a day, or a week. Xt is divided into B segments (denoted
anomaly information. Through contrastive learning, the
 as Xt,i ) and each segment occupies T samples (denoted as
learned latent representations can effectively distinguish
 xTt ). N is the amount of the observed base stations. The
outliers from normal values.
 objective of this task is to design a learning framework to
 learn discriminative representations for distinguishing normal
 III. M ETHOD and anomalous behaviors, thus achieving anomaly detection
 The proposed MFCAD framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. in spatio-temporal data.
The data augmentation module is used to generate enhanced
positive and negative samples for subsequent feature learning B. Data Augmentation
from the raw 5G-MNC data. Subsequently, the spatio-temporal
data is transformed into corresponding graph structures. Corre- Generally, contrastive learning frameworks aim to maximize
spondingly, multi-scale contrastive learning is then performed the similarity between positive pairs, which are samples and
from temporal and spatial perspectives. And, two graph atten- their augmentations. Therefore, applying appropriate data augtion networks are involved, as GAT has the inherent capacity mentation is crucial in contrastive learning. Considering that
for relational modeling and the contrastive loss ensures the the KPI time series generated by 5G-MNCs typically exhibit
discriminability of representations in the latent space. The periodic patterns that occur regularly, we propose a specific
following sections provide more detailed information. data augmentation method that treats data from the same time
 period as positive samples and data from different time periods
 as negative samples. The motivation behind this method is that
A. Problem Formulation the patterns during the time period from 9:00 to 10:00 differs
 In this article, we transform the problem into an anomaly from the one from 23:00 to 24:00, but which is similar to
detection task for spatio-temporal data with multiple variables. the patterns during the identical time period on the previous
The anomalous behaviors of neighboring nodes are to be day. Because people’s behaviors may vary across different
captured by converting the spatio-temporal features into graph time periods. The abstract framework of the designed data
structures. Each univariate sequence represents a specific Key augmentation method is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Performance Indicator (KPI) sequence generated by a base sta- Specifically, given a batch of data, and the batch covers
tion in 5G-MNCs. The KPI data in mobile networks typically only one period, which can be an hour, a day, or a week.
exhibit temporal correlations within each dimension sequence Here, the batch covers one day. For each batch, its previous
(i.e., periodicity of sequences generated by a particular base M batches are considered as its candidate batches. It is worth
station) and spatial correlations between different dimension noting that there are also slight differences between the same
sequences (i.e., collaborative relationships among base sta- time in different cycles. For example, people’s behaviors on
tions in a specific coverage area). We consider a dataset Ω Monday morning may differ from those on Sunday morning.
1592 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

  21
To alleviate this phenomenon, multivariate dynamic time warp- 2
 + VX′t (Xt,i ) −v X′j (Xj,i ) (5)
ing (MDTW) [35] is applied to select the top augmented
batches that are most similar to the current batch from the
 The distance between X′t and X′j is d X′t , X′j . And it satisfies
 
M candidates. Specifically, the augmentation set selected for
 the following properties:
Xt is as follows:
 (1) 0 ≤ d X′t , X′j ≤ 1;
 
 ′
 (2) d(Xt , X′j ) = d(X′t , X′j );
 ′
 dist,j = M DT W (Xt , Xj ) , j = 1, 2, . . . , M (1) (3) d(Xt , X′j ) = 0, if and only if X′t = X′j .
 φaug
 t = {Xk | k ∈ arg sort(dist, ) [: K]} (2) The Hamming distance formula and the cosine similarity
 function are also explored to compute the distance between
where dist, represents the MDTW distance of batch Xt two fuzzy sets for measuring the closeness of their relationwith the other M candidate batches, and φaug t denotes the ship. The Hamming distance formula is as follows:
augmentation set for Xt with K augmentation batches. The
 d X′t , X′j
 
samples with the same index from the current batch and
 {[U (Xt,i ) , V (Xt,i )] , . . . , [U (Xt,B ) , V (Xt,B )]} ,
  
its augmentation batches are considered as positive samples, =d
while those with different indexes as negative samples. To be {[U (Xj,i ) , V (Xj,i )] , . . . , [U (Xj,B ) , V (Xj,B )]}
specific, for Xt,i in the current batch, its positive sample in the B
 1 Xn
k-th augmentation segment is Xk,i , and for all Xk,j (j ̸= i) = |UX′t (Xt,i ) − UX′j (Xj,i ) |
 B i=1
are its negative samples. o
 The data collected in real scenes is often affected by noise + |VX′t (Xt,i ) − VX′j (Xj,i ) | (6)
and external interference. To improve the robustness of detection, the generated positive and negative samples need to have And the cosine similarity function is as follows (7), as
generality. In this article, intuitionistic fuzzy set is introduced shown at the bottom of the next page.
into data augmentation, based on which MDTW distances are In the experimental section, we conducted an investigation
calculated [39], [40]. Specifically, given a segment of data of three different calculation methods. The experiment proved
Xt,i , it passes through a fuzzy operator to generate the output that utilizing the Euclidean distance for calculating the disdata. First, the membership degree is calculated as follows: tance between two intuitionistic fuzzy sets works better.
 2
 t,i −µt,i
 X
 U (Xt,i ) = e σt,i +ξ
 (3) C. Multi-Scale Contrastive Modules
where µt,i is the mean of Xt,i , σt,i is the standard deviation Spatio-temporal data typically exhibit intrinsic correlations
of Xt,i , ξ belongs a very small decimal set to prevent zero in in both temporal and spatial dimensions. Consequently, data
the denominator. with spatio-temporal characteristics often display interdepen-
 Considering the uncertainty of membership degrees, hesi- dence and mutual influence. From the perspective of spatial
tation [41] indicates a greater degree of uncertainty. To adapt features, taking 5G-MNC data as an example, one can natuto fluctuations in sequence data, refer to [41], the hesitation rally obtain a graph structure as shown in Fig.1. Therefore,
degree can be obtained online based on Femi formula as given that graph neural networks have demonstrated strong
follows: capabilities in processing graph-structured data, we choose to
 convert spatio-temporal data into graph structures and utilize
 1
 V (Xt,i ) = + ϵu(Xt,i ) (4) graph learning methods for anomaly detection. Furthermore,
 1 + exp (u(Xt,i )) the dependencies within spatio-temporal data are typically
where ϵ is the interference value, which is set to 0.25 based nonlinear and exhibit different characteristics across various
on discussion in the experimental section. temporal and spatial scales. Therefore, single-scale analysis
 As a result, each segment is converted into the intuitionistic methods are often insufficient for comprehensively revealing
fuzzy set that encompasses both membership degrees and anomaly patterns in the data. To capture the comprehensive
hesitations as follows: Xt,i ′
 = [U (Xt,i ) , V (Xt,i )] , X′t = anomaly information present in spatio-temporal data, a multi-
{[U (Xt,1 ) , V (Xt,1 )] , . . . , [U (Xt,B ) , V (Xt,B )]. scale spatio-temporal contrastive module is designed. This
 Thus, MDTW distance is to calculate the distance between module enhances the ability to detect anomalies by learning
two intuitionistic fuzzy sets. Here, three distance methods are consistency information at different scales. Based on this
applied, i.e. the Euclidean distance, Hamming distance and intuition, we develop a multi-scale spatio-temporal contrastive
the cosine similarity. The calculation method of Euclidean module that integrates temporal and spatial features to capture
distance between two intuitionistic fuzzy sets is as follows: more anomaly information.
 The multi-scale spatio-temporal contrastive module includes
 d X′t , X′j
 
 two main components: the multi-scale module and the Graph
 {[U (Xt,i ) , V (Xt,i )] , . . . , [U (Xt,B ) , V (Xt,B )]} , Attention Network (GAT) module. In the multi-scale module,
  
 =d
 {[U (Xj,i ) , V (Xj,i )] , . . . , [U (Xj,B ) , V (Xj,B )]} it mainly includes a node-subgraph contrastive network and a
 ( B  subgraph-subgraph contrastive network.
 1 X 2
 = UX′t (Xt,i ) − UX′j (Xj,i ) In the node-subgraph contrastive network, the primary
 B i=1 objective is to capture anomalous information by comparing
CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS 1593

 the temporal encoder Etemp is Xitemp . The feature extraction
 formula is as follows:
 i
 = conv Xispat
 
 Fspat (8)
 i i
 
 Ftemp = conv Xtemp (9)
 i i
 where Fspat and Ftemp are the high-level features of the spatial
 and temporal views of the augmentation data, respectively.
 1) Node-Subgraph Contrastive Network: Specifically, in the
 node-subgraph contrastive network, the subgraphs are used as
Fig. 4. An example of the temporal subgraph construction process.
 inputs, and graph convolutional networks (GCN) are employed
 for learning. GCN is a deep learning model based on graph
the consistency between node information and its neighboring structures, which allows for the propagation and aggregation
information. Node-level anomalies can cause their neighbor- of node features on graphs. First, the l-th node embedding in
ing nodes to exhibit abnormal patterns, meaning that local the subgraph obtained through GCN is as follows:
anomalies can also trigger global anomalies. By learning the  
consistency of local and global information, the model can ℓs ]ℓs ℓs
 Hspat = GCN Aspat Mspat Wspat
capture potential anomalous features. Specifically, the target !
node and the corresponding subgraph need to be mapped − 12 − 12
 =σ D ^ ℓs ]
 Aℓs ^
 D ℓs
 M ℓs
 W (10)
into the same embedding space. For subgraph embeddings, spat spat spat spat spat

node features are propagated and aggregated through GCN,  
followed by obtaining the final embedding representation via ℓt
 Htemp = GCN ^
 Aℓt ℓt
 temp Mtemp Wtemp
an average readout function. The target node is mapped to !
the same embedding space as the subgraph through a Multi- − 12 − 12
 ^
 =σ D ℓt ^
 Aℓt ^ℓt ℓt
layer Perceptron (MLP). To measure the consistency between temp temp Dtemp Mtemp Wtemp (11)
subgraph embeddings and target node embeddings, a bilinear
function is used for calculation. The subgraph-subgraph con- where ℓs and ℓt are the ℓ-th node in the spatial and temporal
 ls
trastive network has a similar structure to the node-subgraph subgraphs respectively. Mspat is the ℓ-th node feature matrix
  
network. It primarily captures anomalies by comparing differ- ]
 in the spatial subgraph. Aℓs
 = Aℓs + I is the adjacency
 spat spat
ent subgraphs, identifying differences and irregularities in the
 matrix added self-loop. D ^ ℓs
data. spat is the degree matrix. Wspat is
 For example, consider base stations that record network per- the weight matrix of the GCN layer. σ (· ) is the activation
formance indicators (KPIs) at different time points. These base function, here the ReLU activation function is used.
 ℓs ℓt
stations can be taken as nodes in the graph, with edges between Then, Hspat and Htemp are mapped to an embedding space
nodes representing their geographical proximity. To detect using an embedding function f (·), resulting in embedding
anomalies, we first generate subgraphs from different time representations. The embedding representations are obtained
segments. The node-subgraph contrastive network learns the as:
features of each base station in different time segments and  
checks whether these features are consistent with those of its Zℓspat
 s ℓs
 = f Hspat (12)
  
neighboring base stations. The subgraph-subgraph contrastive Zℓtemp
 t ℓt
 = f Htemp (13)
network captures anomalous information between entire subgraphs. When cross effects of multiple base stations within The final representations of the subgraphs are then coma certain time segment exhibit abnormal patterns, that time puted by a Readout function, and here we use the average
segment might have a global anomaly. For the segment Xt,1 = function.
[ 1t , 2t , . . . , Tt ], 1t ∈ RN ×1 the procedure of constructing sub

temporal subgraphs is shown in Fig. 4.   spat
 X Zℓspat
 s
 sub
 Zspat = AvgReadout Zℓspat
 s
 = (14)
 Before entering the multi-scale module, two parallel sub
 spat
 ℓs =1
1D convolution operations are initially applied to extract sub
high-level features from both temporal and spatial perspec-   temp
 X Zℓtemp
 t

tives. Typically, given an input sample X i ∈ RN ×T , the
 sub
 Ztemp = AvgReadout Zℓtemp
 t
 = sub
 (15)
 temp
input to the spatial encoder Espat is Xispat and the input to ℓt =1

 cosin = Dot X′t , X′j
 
 PB
 i=1 {[U (xt,i ) · U (Xj,i )] + [V (xt,i ) · V (Xj,i )]}
 =r o rP (7)
 PB n 2
 n
 2 B
 n
 2
 n
 2
 o
 i=1 [U (X t,i )] + [V (X t,i )] × i=1 [U (X j,i )] + [V (Xj,i )]
1594 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

where sub sub
 spat and temp are the numbers of nodes in the spatial 3) Advanced Feature Extraction: To fully utilize the spatial
and temporal subgraphs respectively. and temporal structure information of the graph network to
 For the target node, we use multilayer perceptron (MLP) detect anomalous behaviors, two parallel GAT layers with
to map it into the same embedding space as the subgraph. multi-head attention mechanisms are used to capture the
The time step node embedding is similarly to the target relationships between nodes. For a general graph with n nodes,
node. The feature matrix of the target node is denoted as i.e., {h1 , h2 , . . . ,hn }, adj is the adjacency matrix constructed
 node
Mspat . The calculation process of MLP is as follows: from the nodes. The output of the GAT layer is as follows:
 node node node i
 Gispat = GatConv(Sspat
  
 Zspat = M LP Mspat Wspat = σ Mspat Wspat (16) , adj) (28)
 node node node i
 Gitemp = GatConv(Stemp
  
 Ztemp = M LP Mtemp Wtemp = σ Mtemp Wtemp (17) , adj) (29)

Here, the weight is shared with the GCN. After that, a global maximum pooling operation is used to
 To measure the consistency between the subgraph embed- extract the key features.
ding and the target node embedding, a bilinear function is i
 Pspat = GlobalM axP ool(Gispat ) (30)
utilized to calculate the similarity between them. i
 Ptemp = GlobalM axP ool(Gitemp ) (31)
 n−s sub node sub node
 Sspat = Bilinear(Zspat , Zspat ) = Zspat WBiliner Zspat
 The fully connected layer is then used to obtain the most
 (18) representative feature representations.
 n−s sub node sub node
 Stemp = Bilinear(Ztemp , Ztemp ) = Ztemp WBiliner Ztemp i i
 rspat = Dense(Pspat ) (32)
 (19) i i
 rtemp = Dense(Ptemp ) (33)
where WBiliner is the weight matrix of the bilinear function.
 2) Subgraph-Subgraph Contrastive Network: The Finally, a project layer fproj is used to obtain a fused
subgraph-subgraph contrastive network is similar in representation:
structure to the node-subgraph contrastive network. The i
 Zi = fproj (rspat i
 ⊕ rtemp ) (34)
final embedding representations of the subgraphs obtained in
the subgraph-subgraph contrastive network are as follows: The obtained fusion results are called time-slice embeddings
 (TSEs) because they represent the embedded potential repre-
   X sub Zℓs sentations in a certain time slice.
 spat spat 4) Loss Function: To ensure that time slice embeddings
 sub
 Zspat = AvgReadout Zℓspat
 s
 = sub
 (20)
 ℓs =1 (TSEs) from different time slices are distinguishable in potenspat

 ′
   X sub′ Zℓs tial space, a customized loss of contrast is designed. TSEs with
 spat spat
 sub
 Zspat = AvgReadout Zℓspat
 s
 = sub′
 (21) the same indices from the current batch and its augmentation
 ℓs =1
 spat
 batch are considered positive samples, while TSEs with dif-
  X sub Zℓt
 ferent indices are considered negative samples. Let Xt denote
 
 temp temp
 sub
 Ztemp = AvgReadout Zℓtemp
 t
 = (22)
 ℓt =1 sub
 temp the current batch and Xk denote its k-th augmentation batch.
   sub ′
 Zℓ t Then Xt,i ∈ Xt and Xk,i ∈ Xk are form a positive input
 sub′ temp
 X temp ′
 Ztemp = AvgReadout Zℓtemp
 t
 = sub′ (23) sample pair, and zt,i and zk,i are the corresponding learned
 ℓt =1
 temp TSEs. The loss of contrast between the current batch and its
 sub
Here, we use Zspat
 ′
 to denote the embedding representation of k-th augmented batch can be expressed as:
 ′   . 
another subgraph and sub
 spat to denote the number of nodes in XB exp sim zt,i , zk,i′
 τ
another subgraph. Lk = − log P   . 
 i=1 B ′
 Next, the same bilinear function is used to compute their j=1 I[i̸=j] exp sim zt,i , zk,j τ
similarity.
 (35)

 s−s sub
 
 sub sub′
 
 ′ sub ′ where I[i̸=j]∈{0,1} is an indicator function and is 1 when i̸= j,
 Sspat = Bilinear Zspat , Zspat = Zspat WBiliner Zspat
 0 otherwise. τ is a temperature parameter. The total loss is the
 (24) weighted sum of the current batch and its corresponding K
 s−s
 
 sub sub′
 
 sub ′ sub′ augmented batches, as follows:
Stemp = Bilinear Ztemp , Ztemp = Ztemp WBiliner Ztemp
 XK βk
 (25) L= Lk (36)
 k=1 B

 Finally, the results of the node-subgraph contrastive network where βk is the coefficient between the current batch and its
and the subgraph-subgraph contrastive network are concate- k-th augmentation batch, and its formula is:
nated using a concatenation operation to serve as the inputs dist,k
for the next step. βk = PK (37)
 u=1 dist,u
 i n−s s−s
 
 Sspat = concat Sspat , Sspat (26) The training procedure of the proposed method is summarized
 i n−s s−s
 
 Stemp = concat Stemp , Stemp (27) in Algorithm 1.
CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS 1595

 Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm of the Proposed Method An interpretation analysis is then presented, followed by con-
 Input: Training set Ω = {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xt }, where ducting ablation studies and sensitivity analyses. Additionally,
 Xt = [Xt,1 , Xt,2 , . . . , Xt,B ]. ablation studies and sensitivity analyses are carried out. Lastly,
 M : The number of candidate batches. the model’s generalizability is validated by applying it to an
 K : The number of augmented batches. industrial dataset.
 Output: A trained MFCAD model with parameters sets Θ.
 for each iteration do
 for current batch Xt in Ω do A. 5G-MNC Dataset Description
 Step1: Select M candidate batches for Xt . To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, the
 Step2: For each Xt,i in Xt fuzzy the data into an
 intuitive fuzzy set containing membership degrees and real-world 5G-MNC datasets are used. The datasets are colhesitation degrees: lected by China Mobile Communication, and they contain the
 Xt′ = KPI records from two 5G-MNCs. Wherein, MNC 1 contains
 {[U (Xt,1 ) , V (Xt,1 )] , . . . , [U (Xt,B ) , V (Xt,B )]}. 11 base stations, and MNC 2 contains 4 base stations. The
 Step3: Calculate the MDTW distance between current selected KPI for performing anomaly detection is the number
 batch and its candidate augmented batches to obtain the
 top-K candidates so as to form augmentation setφaug . of Radio Resource Control (RRC) connection establishment
 t
 Step4: Feed Xt and its augmented batches from φaug t
 requests, and the KPI data is aggregated every 15 minutes.
 into the multi-scale spatio-temporal contrastive model The time period is from 3rd Sep 2021 to 3rd Jan 2022, and
 to obtain the generated TSEs for forming sample pairs. the first two months of historical records are used as a training
 Step5: Calculate the batch loss using Eq. (36). set and validation set, and the rest serves as a test set. The
 Step6: Use optimizer to train the model.
 end for statistics of the two MNCs are shown in Table I.
 end for In practical scenarios, anomalies within a 5G-MNC generally manifest in a continuous manner. Consequently, for two
 datasets, the anomalies are annotated segment-wise, i.e., if a
 segment contains an anomalous pattern, the entire segment
D. Anomaly Detection
 is annotated as anomalous. The annotation of anomaly labels
 To achieve anomaly detection in latent space, a clustering is carried out by domain experts from China Mobile. Two
method is applied for each group of TSEs, where the clustering illustrative examples are provided in Fig. 5. In the green area of
centers are regarded as the corresponding prototypes. To this Fig. 5(a), there is an obvious boost in a base station. However,
end, the FCM clustering method is utilized. Given a group of sudden changes in a certain base station do not mean anoma-
TSEs Zt = {zt,1 , zt,2 , . . . , zt,B }, where zt,i denotes the i-th lies in the whole network system. While in Fig. 5(b), one
learned TSE from the t-th group. Calculating the clustering can find that the areas marked in red demonstrate anomalous
centers can be achieved by minimizing the following problem. patterns compared to the other areas, which indicates there are
 XC XB 2
 anomalies occurring in the system.
 minJ = um
 rp (zt,i − ct,r )
 r=1 i=1
 XC
 s.t. umri = 1, ∀i = 1, 2, . . . , B (38) B. Experimental Settings
 r=1
 1) Evaluation Metric: To measure and evaluate the perforwhere C is the number of centers for a group, ct,r is the r-th mance of the method, three common metrics, precision, recall,
center for the t-th TSE group, um ri is the membership degree and F1-score are utilized. These metrics are derived from the
of sample i belonging to the r-th center, and m is a weighted following expressions:
index. The ℓ2 distance between the TSE and its corresponding
prototypes is used to measure the inference score: TP
 P recision = (40)
  TP + FP
st,i = min ∥zt,i − ct,1 ∥2 , ∥zt,i − ct,2 ∥2 , . . . , ∥zt,i − ct,C ∥2 TP
 Recall = (41)
 (39) TP + FN
 2 · P recision · Recall
where st,i is the inference score for the i-th TSE which F 1 − score = (42)
 P recision + Recall
calculates the minimum ℓ2 distance between the TSE and
its corresponding prototypes. An input sample is considered where TP is the true positives, FP represents the false
anomalous if its TSE is distant from all the corresponding pro- positives, and FN stands for the false negatives. In real
totypes. Specifically, we identify an anomaly if the inference applications, the anomalies generally occur in a continuous
score is larger than a threshold, where the Drift Peak Over manner, thus we do not care about the point-wise metrics.
Threshold (DPOT) [44] is adopted to choose the threshold Following the same evaluation strategy as [17], we mark the
dynamically. whole segment as positive if any anomalous observation is in
 this segment.
 2) Baselines: We compare the proposed method with state-
 IV. E XPERIMENTS of-the-art anomaly detection methods, which are AE [45],
 In this section, the datasets and experimental settings are VAE [46], Local Outlier Factor (LOF) [47], Isolation Forest
introduced. Subsequently, the performances of MFCAD are (IF) [48], LSTM-VAE [49], DAGMM [20], MGCLAD [15],
assessed using real-world 5G-MNC data and public datasets. and DCdetector [16]. Specifically, all the baselines follow the
1596 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE I
 DATASET S TATISTICS

 Fig. 6. Two clusters of 5G-MNCs (each marker denotes a base station) and
 corresponding heat maps of weighted adjacency matrixes.

 is computed based on the distances among base stations in the
 mobile networked cluster. The weighted adjacency matrix can
 be formed as:
  !
 2 2
  exp − ηij , i ̸= j and exp(− ηij ) ≥ ò
 
 aij = σ2 σ2
 
 0, otherwise.
 
 (43)
 where aij is the weight of the edge, and it is determined by
 ηij , which is the distance between base station i and j. σ 2 and
 ò are the thresholds to control the distribution and sparsity of
 adjacency matrix, and they are set to 1e-5 and 0.3 in this work.
Fig. 5. Examples of 5G-MNC data. The two selected 5G-MNCs and corresponding heat maps of
 weighted adjacency matrixes are shown as Fig. 6.

architecture proposed in the original articles. Since not all D. Parameter Comparison
the anomaly detection methods are designed for 5G-MNC During the experiment, we found that setting a suitable
anomaly detection, we performed all possible thresholds for interference value when calculating the hesitation degree can
every model and reported the experimental results according better reflect the uncertainty. By setting different interference
to the highest F1-score. values for exploration, the experimental results show that the
 3) Implementation Details: The proposed method is imple- model’s performance is best when the interference value is set
mented in Tensorflow Library and is trained on a 64-bit to 0.25. That is to say, the experimental performance metrics,
Intel core i7-6700CPU@ 3.40GHz/16GB RAM configuration including recall, precision, and f1 score, are relatively high
computer. The Adam optimizer with learning rate is used for when the interference value is set to 0.25. This can be visually
training, and the training epochs are set to 50. The time slice presented in Fig. 7.
length T is set to 8, which means each time slice contains two An appropriate distance formula is needed to measure the
hours for sampling. similarity between two fuzzy sets when calculating the MDTW
 distance. In this paper, we explore three distance formulas
C. Data Preprocessing including Euclidean distance, Hamming distance, and cosine
 Generally, there are often missing values and huge spike similarity function. The experimental results demonstrate that
values involved in the original data. Since the ratio of these using Euclidean distance yields the best performance comvalues is less than 5% in each series, just as in [50], we simply pared to the Hamming distance and cosine similarity function.
remove the data that deviates the most from the mean value This can be observed in Fig. 8.
and replace them with their neighboring normal observations.
Besides, we perform data normalization on both training and E. Experimental Results
testing sets to improve the robustness of the proposed method. In this subsection, we conduct experiments on real-world
Furthermore, same as [51], the adjacency matrix of a 5G-MNC 5G-MNC datasets to evaluate the effectiveness of MFCAD.
CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS 1597

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE OF WADI AND SWAT DATASETS ON D IFFERENT BASELINES

 anomaly detection method, like DAGMM, tries to predict the
 values based on historical data and performs anomaly detection according to the forecasting errors. However, some data
 are inherently unpredictable due to various internal/external
 factors, especially complex, dynamic mobile network data.
 Therefore, normal observations would be easily mistakenly
 detected by DAGMM and cause a false positive. In the
 proposed MFCAD, the spatio-temporal patterns of the original
 data at different time intervals in a cycle are fully explored.
 Moreover, MFCAD detects anomalies in latent space, which
Fig. 7. Experimental effects at different interference values. does not require reconstruction or prediction of features. This
 further mitigates the potential errors introduced by the model
 itself. Therefore, MFCAD achieves the best performance compared with other methods.

 F. Visualized Explanation
 To explain the performance of the proposed method on 5G-
 MNC data, the TSEs from the same time slice generated
 by MNC 1 in different cycles are visualized in Fig. 9.
 From the figure, one can see that most TSEs are gathered
 together indicating normal patterns, while the abnormal TSEs
 are farther apart. To validate this phenomenon, we show the
Fig. 8. Experimental effects of using different distance formulas. original data corresponding to several of these TSEs. Upon
 observation, one can see that the TSEs of A and E behave
The overall experimental results of MFCAD with six methods abnormally, while the others behave normally.
are demonstrated in Table II, where the best F1-score achieved Furthermore, to demonstrate the relationships between difis in bold. ferent TSEs, we also project all the learned TSEs into 2D
 IF and LOF achieve the lowest F1-score since they are both embedding space for visualization. The t-SNE plot is shown in
unsupervised anomaly detection methods that do not capture Fig. 10 where each colored point denotes an embedding vector
temporal and spatial information. However, the information of TSE from a different time slice and different colored star
hidden in the raw data is critical for anomaly detection. symbols represent the corresponding prototypes for each group
AE, VAE, and LSTM-VAE are reconstruction-based anomaly of TSEs. From the figure, one can see that the TSEs have a
detection methods, which use sequential data as input so significant aggregation phenomenon. It indicates that the TSEs
that the temporal information can be retained. Nonetheless, from the same time slices share similar patterns, while the
reconstruction-based anomaly detection methods mainly focus TSEs from different time slices share distinct patterns.
on the performance of sample reconstruction, and do not care
about the distinguishability of the encoded features for abnor- G. Ablation Study
mal and normal samples. Thus, it would cause even abnormal In this subsection, the MNC 1 dataset is used for analyzing
data to be well reconstructed. Moreover, the prediction-based the influence of different modules in the model. Detailly,
1598 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 The designed data augmentation method enables a robust
 contextual representation for each time slice in a cycle, therefore, a performance decrease is observed after disabling data
 augmentation. Performing anomaly detection by the distance
 between two TSEs of adjacent cycles uses only local information, while global information cannot be utilized, thus the
 variant without clustering performs poorly. In conclusion, the
 ablation of any of the modules in the designed architecture
Fig. 9. A t-SNE plot of the TSEs from same time slice and the time patterns leads to poorer performance. The variant without a multi-scale
corresponding to five of these TSEs. contrastive module solely captures anomalies from a single
 scale. This restricts its capacity to capture anomalous patterns
 in neighboring time or space. As a result, its performance is
 diminished. In summary, the removal of any module within the
 architectural design can result in a decline in performance.

 H. Sensitivity Analysis
 In this subsection, experiments using the MNC 1 dataset to
 analyze the sensitivity of MFCAD have been done. Specifically, the dimension of TSEs D, the candidate augmentation
 set size M , and the top-K augmentation set size K are utilized
Fig. 10. A t-SNE plot of different TSEs. Each color represents a different for analysis. Fig. 11(a) shows the impact of a key hypertime slice of a cycle, and the star symbols indicate the prototypes of each parameter D. Increasing the dimension of TSEs can improve
group of TSEs.
 the capability of representation. However, a larger dimension
 can harm performance as it adds redundant information.
 TABLE III
 Therefore, we empirically set the value of D to 18. Fig. 11(b)
 C OMPARISON W ITH D IFFERENT VARIANTS
 demonstrates the results of varying M and K in a range since
 they are used jointly to control the size of the data augmentation. According to the results, the F1 score shows an upward
 trend with the increase of M and K and tend to flatten out at
 the end. Such results demonstrate that applying an appropriate
 size of data augmentation can improve the performance, while
 excessive augmented data cannot guarantee the robustness of
 the learned representations and further increase the burden of
 training. Therefore, in practice, K is set to 3 and M is set
 to 7.
 TABLE IV Furthermore, in anomaly detection of multivariate time
 P ERFORMANCE OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AND BASELINES series, the window size has an important impact on the
 performance of the model. Different window sizes affect the
 model’s ability to capture anomalies and its detection accuracy.
 Therefore, we explore the effect of window size on model
 performance using the 5G-MNC datasets. The experimental
 results are shown in Fig. 12. The performance is relatively
 good when the window size is around 12. And too large or
we perform an ablation study by disabling a certain module
 too small size will make the model performance decrease.
of MFCAD. Wherein, w/o spatial denotes the variant without
spatial GAT layer, and w/o temporal denotes the variant
without temporal GAT layer. We also compare MFCAD with I. Industrial Data Applications
the variant that simply uses the last consecutive cycle as an 1) Datasets: To further verify the generality of the proposed
augmentation set and it is denoted by w/o data augmentation. method, two sensor datasets based on water treatment physical
The variant denoted by w/o clustering performs anomaly testbed systems SWaT and WADI are used for validation.
detection by using the distance between the two TSEs of The SWaT dataset is derived from a water treatment testbed
adjacent cycles to analyze the effect of the cluster module. w/o coordinated by the Public Utilities Board of Singapore, which
multi-scale denotes the variant without multi-scale contrastive is a dataset used for cybersecurity field research based on a
module. The results are shown in Table III, from which one can dataset of actual water treatment systems. The SWaT dataset
see that all the above modules of MFCAD are indispensable. consists of 11 days of continuous operation, of which 7 days
 The variant without temporal or spatial module extracts of data were collected under normal operation, while 4 days
features from only one view, which prevents the full explo- of data were collected through attack scenarios. WADI is
ration of the spatial and temporal correlation of the data. an extension of SWaT that absorbs some of the reverse
CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS 1599

 through the self-encoder and then using Gaussian mixture
 models to model the normal data [20].
 • LSTM-VAE: It Combines LSTM and variational selfencoder. By learning the temporal dependencies and
 latent spatial representations of the data, anomalous
 samples may exhibit different sequence patterns than
 normal samples, allowing anomaly detection by comparing the distribution of reconstruction errors or latent
 variables [49].
 • MAD-GAN: It is a multi-class anomaly detection method
 based on generative adversarial networks. By training
 generators and discriminators, MAD-GAN can generate
 normal samples and distinguish abnormal samples [55].
 • GDN: This approach combines graph neural networks
 and graph structure learning to identify anomalies by
 leveraging graph attention-based prediction errors [12].
 • STADN: Spatio-temporal information is combined and
 anomaly detection is performed using GAT and Long
 Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [21].
 • MGCLAD: MGCLAD utilizes a multi-view graph
 contrastive learning approach. It considers both the
Fig. 11. Sensitive experiments on partial hyper-parameters.
 intra-signal graph structure and the relationship between
 different signals to improve the performance of anomaly
 detection [15].
 • DCdetector: DCdetector is a state-of-the-art contrastive
 learning-based anomaly detection method. It designs a
 dual-branch attention structure based on contrastive learning to learn a permutation-invariant representation and
 guides the learning process by using contrastive loss [16].
 3) Effectiveness Assessment: We compare the precision,
 recall, and F1 score of the proposed method MFCAD with the
 baseline, and the results are presented in Table V. Based on the
 experimental data, one can observe that MFCAD outperforms
 all baseline methods in terms of F1 scores on both datasets,
Fig. 12. The effect of window size on the performance of model.
 showing significant improvement. F1 scores peak at 0.98 and
 0.98, respectively. In addition, MFCAD improves the recall
osmosis permeate and raw water from SWaT, thereby form- to 97.43% and 99.78%. Higher recall value indicates that the
ing a complete and authentic water treatment, storage, and model can cover almost all anomalous samples. This proves
distribution network. The WADI dataset consisted of 14 days the effectiveness of MFCAD in anomaly detection tasks, as it
of continuous normal operation and 2 days of data collection is able to capture the vast majority of anomalous samples.
based on attack scenarios. The statistics for the two datasets And, ablation experiments are conducted on the WADI and
are shown in Table IV. The two datasets are available at SWaT datasets shown in Table VI, which further verify the
https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/itrust-labs_datasets/ . effectiveness of each module to the model performance.
 2) Baselines: To comprehensively evaluate the proposed method, we further incorporate AUROC and AUPRC metrics. AUROC
 • KNN: Categories are determined by majority vote or
 measures the balance between the true positive rate and the
 weighted average based on the distance between the
 false positive rate at different thresholds and is commonly used
 sample to be tested and the individual samples in the
 to assess the performance of classification models. The closer
 training set [52].
 the value is to 1, the better the model’s performance. AUPRC
 • FB: The input signal is decomposed into a number of
 focuses on the balance between precision and recall, with
 subbands of different frequencies and a different filter is
 higher values indicating better model performance. We comapplied to each subband for feature extraction [53].
 pare the proposed method with two state-of-the-art models.
 • AE: The basic structure consists of an encoder and
 As shown in the table VII, the proposed method performs
 decoder that learns a compressed representation of the
 well on most of the datasets.
input data by minimizing the reconstruction error. Anomaly
detection is performed based on the reconstruction [54]. J. Complexity and Robustness Analysis
 • DAGMM: Combine a self-encoder with a Gaussian The time complexity of the proposed method is primarily
 mixture model. Learning the representation of the data contributed by the fuzzy data augmentation method and the
1600 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE V
 DATA FOR TWO P UBLIC DATASETS

 TABLE VI
 R ESULTS OF A BLATION E XPERIMENTS W ITH WADI
 AND SWAT DATASETS

 TABLE VII
 AUROC AND AUPRC M ETRICS FOR 4 DATASETS
 ON D IFFERENT M ODELS

 Fig. 13. Experiments on complexity analysis.

multi-scale spatio-temporal contrastive encoder. The data augmentation method involves similarity computation and sorting,
 e n )·log( n )), where n denotes
with a complexity of O(n2 ·D+( B B
time series length, D denotes the feature dimension, B denotes
 e
batch size. And, the time complexity of the spatio-temporal
contrastive encoder is O(n2 ·D).e Furthermore, we evaluate Fig. 14. An example. Light blue line represents the original time series
the efficiency of the proposed method by calculating the data and the red part shows the changed data with different characteristics
average running time and memory usage. The experiments distribution.
run on a computer with a 64-bit Intel Core i7-6700 CPU @
3.40GHz and 16GB RAM configuration, implemented using in Table I and Table IV. We also compared the proposed
Python 3.6. Four datasets of different sizes are applied to method with two other methods based on contrastive learning.
fully evaluate the performance, and the datasets are described The results are shown in Fig. 13. When the data size and
CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS 1601

 correlations existing in temporal features at different scales
 also have valuable information to the construction of graph
 structures. Therefore, in the future work, we would like to
 find an effective way to further integrate multi-scale temporal
 features on the basis of priori spatial features for graph
 structure construction in the application of anomaly detection.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] Z. Ahmad, A. Shahid Khan, C. Wai Shiang, J. Abdullah, and F. Ahmad,
 “Network intrusion detection system: A systematic study of machine
 learning and deep learning approaches,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun.
 Technol., vol. 32, no. 1, p. 4150, Jan. 2021.
Fig. 15. Comparative experimental results between original data and changed [2] R. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Ma, D. Yang, and S. Sun, “Internet financial fraud
data. detection based on graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst.,
 vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1394–1401, Jun. 2023.
 [3] J. Viola, Y. Chen, and J. Wang, “FaultFace: Deep convolutional generadimensionality are small (e.g., MNC1, MNC2), the difference tive adversarial network (DCGAN) based ball-bearing failure detection
in the running time of all methods is insignificant. When the method,” Inf. Sci., vol. 542, pp. 195–211, Jan. 2021.
 [4] S. P. Chatrati et al., “Smart home health monitoring system for predicting
data size and dimension are large (e.g., WADI and SWaT), the type 2 diabetes and hypertension,” J. King Saud Univ.-Comput. Inf. Sci.,
proposed method outperforms the other methods in terms of vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 862–870, Mar. 2022.
both runtime and memory consumption. [5] X. Wang et al., “Adaptive multi-receptive field spatial–temporal graph
 convolutional network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. IEEE Global
 To explore the model performance under longer and evolv- Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–7.
ing environment, we further introduce intervention into the [6] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational
datasets to simulate evolving network conditions by chang- auto-encoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World
ing the characteristics of data distribution, as exemplified in Wide Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
 [7] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
Fig. 14. And, in four datasets, we compare the results of the detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
proposed model between the original data and the changed Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1409–1416.
data, where the experimental results are shown in Fig. 15. [8] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
One can observe that data drift in characteristics distribution in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
does not significantly degrade the performance of the proposed Aug. 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
model, which still maintains a robust performance. These [9] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,”
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12081–12094,
experiments indicates that the model has the capability to Dec. 2023.
adapt to different environments in applications with long-term [10] M. Thill, W. Konen, H. Wang, and T. Bäck, “Temporal convolutional
deployment. autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series,” Appl.
 Soft Comput., vol. 112, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 107751.
 [11] W. Li, W. Hu, T. Chen, N. Chen, and C. Feng, “StackVAE-G: An
 V. C ONCLUSION efficient and interpretable model for time series anomaly detection,”
 2021, arXiv:2105.08397.
 We propose a novel universal anomaly detection model, [12] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
namely Multi-scale Fuzzy Contrastive-based Anomaly Detec- May 2021, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4027–4035.
tion (MFCAD), which is capable of detecting anomalies [13] Y. He and J. Zhao, “Temporal convolutional networks for anomaly
in multivariate time series with spatio-temporal features. detection in time series,” J. Phys., Conf., vol. 1213, no. 4, Jun. 2019,
MFCAD utilizes multi-scale contrastive learning to obtain Art. no. 042050.
 [14] N. Huyan, D. Quan, X. Zhang, X. Liang, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao,
more discriminative representations and performs explicit “Unsupervised outlier detection using memory and contrastive learning,”
anomaly detection in the latent space by measuring the IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 6440–6454, 2022.
distance between outliers and inliers. Our ablation exper- [15] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multi-view graph contrastive
 learning for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE
iments demonstrate that the spatio-temporal contrastive Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Dec. 2023.
model, data augmentation method, and multi-scale mecha- [16] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
nism significantly enhance the anomaly detection performance attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
of MFCAD. Experimental results on real-world 5G-MNC Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
datasets demonstrate that MFCAD outperforms state-of-the- [17] T. C. Havens, J. C. Bezdek, C. Leckie, L. O. Hall, and M. Palaniswami,
art methods, achieving the best performance. Furthermore, “Fuzzy c-Means algorithms for very large data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy
 Syst., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1130–1146, Dec. 2012.
the effectiveness of MFCAD is further validated using an
 [18] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory
industrial dataset. As a result, the proposed MFCAD model networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detecholds practical value in rapidly and accurately diagnosing tion,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–12080,
anomalies. Dec. 2023.
 [19] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 How to effectively construct graph structure is an important detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
issue to the performance of anomaly detection with graph network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
learning. In this article, spatial features of data are mainly Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 [20] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsuapplied to construct graph structures, which is a typical and pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
reasonable approach. However, from a data-driven perspective, pp. 1–19.
1602 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

[21] Z. Tian, M. Zhuo, L. Liu, J. Chen, and S. Zhou, “Anomaly detection [47] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 using spatial and temporal information in multivariate time series,” Sci. density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 Rep., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 4400, Mar. 2023. Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[22] W. Yu and Q. Huang, “A deep encoder–decoder network for anomaly [48] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
 detection in driving trajectory behavior under spatio-temporal context,” IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 115, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 103115. [49] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
[23] J. Mulerikkal, S. Thandassery, V. Rejathalal, and D. M. D. Kunnamkody, robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 “Performance improvement for metro passenger flow forecast using IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 spatio-temporal deep neural network,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 34, [50] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Liu, and D. Pei, “Robust and rapid clustering of KPIs
 no. 2, pp. 983–994, Jan. 2022. for large-scale anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp.
[24] C. Hu, L. Zhu, and S. Lai, “Spatio-Temporal-based context fusion for Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
 video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Mach. [51] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional
 Vis. Intell. Algorithms (PRMVIA), Mar. 2023, pp. 187–192. networks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” 2017,
[25] S. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Chen, Q. Jiang, and H. Huang, “Spatio-temporal arXiv:1709.04875.
 data anomaly detection using 3G-net in IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Int. [52] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
 Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst. (ICPADS), Jan. 2023, pp. 770–777. spaces,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discovery.
[26] Y. Wang, H. Peng, G. Wang, X. Tang, X. Wang, and C. Liu, “Monitoring Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2002, pp. 15–27.
 industrial control systems via spatio-temporal graph neural networks,” [53] A. Lazarevic and V. Kumar, “Feature bagging for outlier detection,” in
 Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 122, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 106144. Proc. 11th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
[27] L. Jing and Y. Tian, “Self-supervised visual feature learning with deep Aug. 2005, pp. 157–166.
 neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., [54] C. C. Aggarwal et al., Data Mining: The Textbook, vol. 1. Berlin,
 vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 4037–4058, Nov. 2021. Germany: Springer, 2015.
[28] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE [55] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023. Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
 adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN).
[29] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
 Munich, Germany: Springer, 2019, pp. 703–716.
 representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 4650–4661.
[30] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised representation learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” 2021, Luo Chao (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 arXiv:2106.00750. degree in computer science from Dalian University
[31] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and of Technology, China, in 2013. He is currently a Procontextual contrasting,” 2021, arXiv:2106.14112. fessor with the School of Information Science and
 Engineering, Shandong Normal University, China.
[32] H. Zhong, C. Chen, Z. Jin, and X.-S. Hua, “Deep robust clustering by He has published more than 60 refereed articles. His
 contrastive learning,” 2020, arXiv:2008.03030. research interests include machine learning, complex
[33] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE: systems, and time series analysis.
 Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[34] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
 and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233, Li Yinghua received the B.E. degree from Shandong
 Dec. 2023. University of Finance and Economics, Jinan, China,
[35] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view in 2021. She is currently pursuing the M.E.
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” 2022, degree with the School of Information Science
 arXiv:2205.04816. and Engineering, Shandong Normal University. Her
[36] H. Lee, Y. Kim, and S.-G. Lee, “Multi-scale contrastive learning for research interests include anomaly detection and
 complex scene generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. spatio-temporal data analysis.
 Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 764–774.
[37] Z. Zhao et al., “MMGL: Multi-scale multi-view global–local contrastive
 learning for semi-supervised cardiac image segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE
 Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2022, pp. 401–405.
[38] A. Javed, B. S. Lee, and D. M. Rizzo, “A benchmark study on time series
 clustering,” Mach. Learn. Appl., vol. 1, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 100001.
[39] Z. Xu and M. Xia, “Distance and similarity measures for hesitant fuzzy Ding Fengqian received the M.S. degree from
 sets,” Inf. Sci., vol. 181, no. 11, pp. 2128–2138, Jun. 2011. Shandong Normal University, Shandong, China,
[40] G. Wei, R. Lin, and H. Wang, “Distance and similarity measures for in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 hesitant interval-valued fuzzy sets,” J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 27, no. 1, with the School of Information Science and Engipp. 19–36, 2014. neering, Shandong University, Qingdao, China. His
[41] C. Luo, N. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Time series prediction based research interests are application of time series analon intuitionistic fuzzy cognitive map,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 9, ysis and machine learning.
 pp. 6835–6850, May 2020.
[42] R. Sawhney, S. Agarwal, A. Wadhwa, T. Derr, and R. R. Shah, “Stock
 selection via spatiotemporal hypergraph attention network: A learning to
 rank approach,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 1,
 pp. 497–504.
[43] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Shao Rui received the master’s degree in com-
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008. puter software and theory from Shandong University.
[44] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detec- He is currently employed by China Mobile Commution in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD nications Group Shandong Company Ltd., mainly
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075. engaged in wireless network optimization and plan-
[45] C. C. Aggarwal and C. C. Aggarwal, An Introduction to Outlier Analysis. ning work for 5G/4G networks. His current main
 Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2017. research directions are 5G communication network planning, strategy optimization, SON, anomaly
[46] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection
 recognition, and network structure optimization.
 using reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, pp. 1–18,
 Dec. 2015.