2944 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 StatAvg: Mitigating Data Heterogeneity in
Federated Learning for Intrusion Detection Systems
 Pavlos S. Bouzinis , Panagiotis Radoglou-Grammatikis , Member, IEEE, Ioannis Makris ,
 Thomas Lagkas , Senior Member, IEEE, Vasileios Argyriou , Georgios Th. Papadopoulos , Member, IEEE,
 Panagiotis Sarigiannidis , Member, IEEE, and George K. Karagiannidis , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Federated learning (FL) enables devices to collabo- demonstrate the efficiency of StatAvg in mitigating non-iid
ratively build a shared machine learning (ML) or deep learning feature distributions across the FL clients compared to the
(DL) model without exposing raw data. Its privacy-preserving baseline methods, offering a gain in IDS accuracy ranging from
nature has made it popular for intrusion detection systems 4% to 17%.
(IDS) in the field of cybersecurity. However, data heterogeneity
across participants poses challenges for FL-based IDS. This paper Index Terms—Cybersecurity, intrusion detection systems, fedproposes statistical averaging (StatAvg) method to alleviate erated learning, data heterogeneity, statistical averaging.
non-independently and identically (non-iid) distributed features
across local clients’ data in FL. In particular, StatAvg allows
the FL clients to share their individual local data statistics
 I. I NTRODUCTION
with the server. These statistics include the mean and variance
 N THE dynamic era of smart technologies, including the
of each client’s feature vector. The server then aggregates
this information to produce global statistics, which are shared
with the clients and used for universal data normalization,
 I Internet of Things (IoT) [1], artificial intelligence (AI) [2]
 and future wireless networks [3], [4], the attack surface
i.e., common scaling of the input features by all clients. It is
worth mentioning that StatAvg can seamlessly integrate with increases significantly. In particular, from single-step attacks,
any FL aggregation strategy, as it occurs before the actual the attackers now have the ability to design and execute multi-
FL training process. The proposed method is evaluated against step attack scenarios, targeting multiple systems and domains
well-known baseline approaches that rely on batch and layer in a coordinated and synchronized manner. According to the
normalization, such as FedBN, and address the non-iid features MITRE ATT&CK framework, notable examples of attack
issue in FL. Experiments were conducted using the TON-IoT
and CIC-IoT-2023 datasets, which are relevant to the design of campaigns include (a) C0034 - the 2022 Ukraine Electric
host and network IDS, respectively. The experimental results Power Attack, and (b) C0022 - Operation Dream Job. These
 incidents highlight the increasingly complex and evolving
 Received 6 November 2024; revised 22 March 2025; accepted 17 nature of cyber threats, which continue to pose significant
April 2025. Date of publication 25 April 2025; date of current version risks to critical infrastructure and organizational security. As
7 August 2025. This work has received funding from the European UnionâĂŹs cyberattack strategies evolve and grow more complex, it is
Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under grant agreement
No 101070450 (AI4CYBER). Disclaimer: Funded by the European Union. evident that traditional methods are no longer sufficient to
Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only safeguard critical infrastructure and organizational security.
and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or European Hence, there is now a strong demand for reliable, real-time
Commission. Neither the European Union nor the European Commission
can be held responsible for them. The associate editor coordinating the intrusion detection systems (IDS). In a cybersecurity landscape
review of this article and approving it for publication was H. Ould-Slimane. where threats can quickly morph and adapt, efficient IDS are
(Corresponding author: Panagiotis Radoglou-Grammatikis.) not just important, but essential.
 Pavlos S. Bouzinis and Ioannis Makris are with the Research &
Development Department, MetaMind Innovation P.C., 501 00 Kozani, Greece Traditionally, IDS rely on signature-based methods, where
(e-mail: pbouzinis@metamind.gr; makris@metamind.gr). predefined attack rules or patterns, referred to as signatures,
 Panagiotis Radoglou-Grammatikis is with the Department of Electrical and are identified and compared with the monitoring data, thus
Computer Engineering, University of Western Macedonia, 501 00 Kozani,
Greece, and also with the Research & Development Department, K3Y Ltd., alerting a potential threat if a match is found. For instance,
1000 Sofia, Bulgaria (e-mail: pradoglou@uowm.gr). Snort and Suricata are popular IDS in this category. On
 Thomas Lagkas is with the Department of Computer Science, Democritus the other hand, in recent years, both machine learning (ML)
University of Thrace (Kavala Campus), 654 04 Kavala, Greece (e-mail:
tlagkas@cs.duth.gr). and deep learning (DL) models have already demonstrated
 Vasileios Argyriou is with the Department of Networks and Digital Media, significant promise as a means to detect cyberattacks [5].
Kingston University London, KT1 2EE London, U.K. (e-mail: vasileios. However, it is worth mentioning that these models need
argyriou@kingston.ac.uk).
 Georgios Th. Papadopoulos is with the Department of Informatics and the presence of appropriate security datasets that are often
Telematics, Harokopio University of Athens, 177 78 Athens, Greece (e-mail: not publicly available, especially for critical domains [5]. In
g.th.papadopoulos@hua.gr). addition, appropriate adjustments are required to re-train and
 Panagiotis Sarigiannidis is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Western Macedonia, 501 00 Kozani, Greece integrate these models. Finally, conventional ML/DL methods
(e-mail: psarigiannidis@uowm.gr). are conducted in a centralized fashion, where a central entity
 George K. Karagiannidis is with the Department of Electrical and Computer collects all the necessary data from endpoints to construct
Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 541 24 Thessaloniki, Greece
(e-mail: geokarag@auth.gr). training datasets and afterwards generates the ML/DL models.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3564387 Although this approach successfully enables the detection of
 
 c 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
BOUZINIS et al.: STATAVG: MITIGATING DATA HETEROGENEITY IN FL FOR IDS 2945

intrusions, it raises privacy concerns since endpoints’ private In [14], authors describe MV-FLID, a multi-view FL-based
data are shared with third parties. IDS which focuses on the detection of attacks against mes-
 To alleviate privacy issues and mitigate communication sage queuing telemetry transport (MQTT) communications
overhead, federated learning (FL) has been proposed as within IoT environments. In particular, MV-FLID adopts a
an inherently privacy-preserving decentralized learning solu- multi-view approach, combining bi-directional flow features,
tion [6], [7]. According to the FL principles, the participating un-directional flow features and packet features. An FL model
clients are building an ML/DL model collaboratively with the is generated for each of the previous viewpoints. Regarding
aid of a central entity (e.g., a central server). The salient the feature selection process, the authors leverage the grey
feature of FL is that clients transmit locally trained models wolf optimizer introduced in [15]. Next, the federated training
to the server rather than raw data. Afterwards, the server procedure follows. Finally, an ensemble-based technique is
aggregates the received parameters, updates the global model, used to combine the outcomes of the FL models in order to
and subsequently broadcasts it to the clients. Consequently, provide a unified prediction outcome. Traditional performance
the server has no access to clients’ raw datasets. However, evaluation metrics are considered to demonstrate the overall
despite the benefits of FL, a notable challenge in the design detection effectiveness of MV-FLID.
of an FL-based IDS is the existence of non-independently In [16], a semisupervised FL scheme for intrusion detecand identically distributed (iid) data among clients, commonly tion within IoT environments was introduced. The proposed
referred to as data heterogeneity. In particular, if the data is scheme relies on CNN models, while four phases are followed
not representative across the clients, the global model may in an iterative manner within the FL fashion, namely (a) client
become biased, thus working efficiently on some cases but training, (b) knowledge distillation, (c) discrimination between
inaccurately on others. Also, the presence of non-iid data can familiar and unfamiliar traffic packets and (d) hard-labeling
affect the federated training procedure in terms of delaying or and voting. During the first phase, the clients train their
hindering convergence. CNNs with private local data. In the second phase, knowledge
 distillation follows a teacher-student approach, where a teacher
 model guides the training of a student model, providing soft
A. Related Work targets or logits. Next, a discrimination network is used from
 The related work is organized into two subsections. The the FL server to evaluate further the predicted labels of each
first focuses on the design of general FL-based IDS, while the client’s CNN. Finally, hard labeling and voting mechanisms
second examines studies that address non-IID data challenges take place in order to consider only the labels from the
in FL-based IDS. The latter will primarily be the driving factor majority of the FL clients and proceed with the aggregation
for the motivation behind our proposed approach. process.
 1) FL-Based IDS: Several works investigate the role and 2) Non-iid Data in FL-Based IDS: Non-iid data and data
impact of FL in cybersecurity and, more precisely, in the scope heterogeneity refers to the variation in the distribution, types,
of intrusion detection. Some survey papers in this field are or characteristics of data across different clients. This varilisted in [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. In [8], the authors present a ation poses challenges when creating FL models, as they
comprehensive survey regarding the impact of FL within the need to generalize across diverse datasets. Towards tackling
scope of intrusion detection, highlighting challenges and future the above challenge in FL-based IDS, [17] proposes the
directions. In [9], a detailed comparison regarding centralized, FL-based Attention-Gated Recurrent Unit (FedAGRU) to
distributed and FL-driven intrusion detection mechanisms for address, among others, the issue of different label distri-
IoT environments was provided. Similarly, the authors in [10] bution across clients’ data, thus demonstrating performance
discuss advances of FL within cybersecurity applications in gains over conventional FL aggregation strategies. Moreover,
IoT ecosystems. Reference [11], provide a comprehensive in [18], the authors propose a peer-to-peer algorithm, namely
study regarding FL-driven intrusion detection, game theory, P2PK-SMOTE, to train FL-driven anomaly detection models
social psychology and explainable AI. Finally, in [12], the in non-iid data scenarios. The latter refers to inter and intraauthors focus their attention on security and privacy issues imbalanced classes across the FL clients. Numerical results
regarding FL applications. Next, we further discuss recent indicated performance gain of the proposed strategy against
works that deliver FL-driven IDS. non-rebalancing approaches. Additionally, [19] leveraged the
 In [13], the authors introduce DeepFed, an FL-driven IDS Fed+ method [20] for FL-driven intrusion detection in hetfor cyber-physical systems. In this method, a trust authority is erogeneous networks. The clients own datasets from various
introduced, whose role is to produce the encryption keys for types of networks, such as industrial IoT, wireless networks
the proposed Pailier public-key cryptosystem utilized for the and wireless vehicular networks, while Fed+ facilitates the
communication between the server and the industrial clients. generation of personalized local models with enhanced attack
For the detection process, the authors leverage a combined classification performance. The concept of non-iid data was
convolutional neural network (CNN) - gated recurrent unit supported by the assumption that the data stem from different
(GRU), while special attention is paid to the proposed Pailier- network devices. In addition to this, in [21], the authors
based secure communication protocol for the communication take Fed+ a step further by incorporating differential privacy
between the server and the clients. Finally, three evaluation techniques. Next, in [22], data augmentation techniques to
metrics are considered, namely accuracy, precision, recall and address class imbalance and non-iid settings are investigated.
F1-score, demonstrating the detection efficiency of DeepFed. Specifically, data augmentation methods such as SMOTE,
2946 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

ADASYN and adversarial generative networks were invoked proposed a FL/split learning method to address non-iid data in
to support upsampling of the imbalanced client data. The eval- a user authentication scenario. The method involves splitting
uation results indicate a performance improvement compared a global model trained initially on a public dataset, into
with baselines that do not rely on data augmentation strategies. two parts: a feature extractor subnetwork and a classifier
Finally, in [23], authors propose a clustering-enabled FL meta- head. Clients compute the mean and variance of the feature
learning framework to tackle class imbalance and non-iid data. extractor based on their local datasets and send these statistics
Specifically, they design a data- and model-agnostic meta- to the server. The server then generates a synthetic dataset
sampler that adaptively balances local data sets, and thus, by sampling from the aggregated client statistics. While this
mitigating the data imbalance problem. Hence, the focus of method proved effective, it assumes the availability of a prethis work lies mainly in dealing with class imbalance in FL- existing public dataset on the server and depends on data
based IDS. augmentation techniques. Finally, as per [31] experimental
 study, none of the existing state-of-the-art FL methods and
 aggregation strategies for non-iid data outperform the other
B. Motivation ones in all cases. Therefore, exploring novel techniques to
 Undoubtedly, the previous works offer valuable insights and address the impact of data heterogeneity in terms of nonmethodologies. However, in the majority of them, the assump- iid features, particularly within FL-based IDS, which is still
tion of iid data across the clients is not valid within realistic immature in the context of the mentioned challenge, is an
FL conditions. Conventional FL strategies like FedAvg are interesting and promising topic. To the best of our knowledge,
not designed for handling non-iid data and may experience limited attention has been given to the issue of non-iid features
notable performance degradation or even divergence when among clients in FL-based IDS. Notably, the works [17], [18],
applied in such situations [24]. Although the works [17], [18] [19], [20], [21], [22], [23] do not particularly focus on this
and [16], [22], [23] successfully examine and design FL-based subject.
IDS considering non-iid data, emphasis was mainly given to
the following cases: (a) class imbalance across clients datasets
and/or different label distributions and (b) different number C. Contribution
of samples per client. Therefore, the aforementioned works In light of the aforementioned motives, in this paper, we
mainly address class and data imbalance issues. The case of introduce the Statistical Averaging (StatAvg)
non-iid features among clients’ data is underrepresented, while method to circumvent the challenges of non-iid features
its impact on the global model convergence remains vague. of clients in FL. Due to different feature distributions
On the contrary, the authors in [19] study a broader aspect of across clients, the local data normalization process may differ
non-iid settings by considering heterogeneous datasets across from client to client. It is noted here that data normalthe clients. However, personalized FL methods such as Fed+ ization refers to the scaling of the input data, e.g., the
are employed, generating multiple personalized local models scaling of features through methods such as standard scaling.
instead of a unified global one. Such approach prevents the Inconsistencies in feature distribution can hinder or even
generation of a single global model, that can be further prevent the convergence of the federated global model, as each
distributed to third parties. local model is trained on a different input data distribution. To
 Well-known techniques in the literature that address non- this end, StatAvg aims at producing global data statistics that
iid data issues include FedProx [25], which stabilizes local can serve as a universal normalization for the local data of each
training by introducing a proximal term, FedNova [26], client. This approach enables clients to scale their input data
which considers that each client may conduct a different (features) based on this unique global scaler. To achieve this,
number of local training steps, and SCAFFOLD [27], which the server is responsible for collecting the local data statistics
uses control variates both at server and clients to estimate the of the clients and afterwards aggregating them properly to
model update direction. However, as mentioned previously, a produce global data statistics. In this way, clients use a
particular example of non-iid data among clients is the case of shared global normalization scale, based on the aggregated
non-iid features, which has generally received less attention in data statistics, to standardize their local data, helping to reduce
the FL-related literature. Methods addressing this issue mainly the impact of non-iid features in their individual datasets. The
rely on layer normalization [28] and batch normalization [29] contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
techniques. Specifically, [29] proposes FedBN, a method • The StatAvg method is proposed to alleviate the
that incorporates batch normalization layers on local clients’ effects of non-iid feature distributions in FL. According
model, which are not included in the aggregation step at to StatAvg, the FL clients calculate their local data
the server side. Although FedBN has shown potential in statistics, specifically the mean and variance of the input
mitigating non-iid features, it assumes that clients possess feature vector, and transmit them to the server. The server
batch normalization layers and have been actively involved aggregates the clients’ local statistics to generate global
in the FL training. Consequently, non-participating clients statistics. We prove mathematically that the aggregated
that may want to access the global model are excluded, as global statistics represent the true mean and variance of the
the method cannot generate a universally applicable global combined datasets across all clients. Afterwards, the server
model. This fact implies limitations in distributing the global broadcasts the global statistics to all clients, normalizing
model to additional entities. Moreover, the work in [30], their input features based on these global statistics.
BOUZINIS et al.: STATAVG: MITIGATING DATA HETEROGENEITY IN FL FOR IDS 2947

 • StatAvg enables the generation of global data statistics is to obtain the global parameter w , which minimizes the loss
 that can be interpreted as a universal input data nor- function on the whole dataset.
 malization process and applied before feeding the data N
 
 into the global model. It is important to emphasize that F (w ) = ni Fi (w ), (2)
 typically, a trained model should be accompanied by the n=1
 corresponding normalization technique on the input data.
 Otherwise, the model will be ineffective during inference, where ni = D i
 D is the proportion of data samples owned by
 without the proper input data normalization. However, client i relative to the entire dataset.
 this aspect is often overlooked in the existing literature. In a nutshell, the FL process is executed for a specified
 Therefore, StatAvg serves as a means to offer a global number of communication rounds. At the t-th round, the server
 data normalization technique that can be applied to the firstly broadcasts the global model w (t) to all clients. Each
 (t)
 global model by external entities that are not necessarily client i updates its local model w i via a gradient-based
 involved in the training procedure. method on the loss function Fi and uploads it to the server.
 • The performance of StatAvg is evaluated through Finally, the server generates the global model w (t+1) by using
 experiments on two open datasets for host and network an aggregation strategy of its preference. The aforementioned
 intrusion detection, namely the TON-IoT and CIC-IoT- process is repeated for the selected number of rounds until the
 2023. Various FL aggregation strategies are used as convergence of the global model is achieved.
 baseline methods for comparison, including FedAvg,
 FedLN [28], and FedBN [29]. The demonstrated results B. Non-iid Features in FL
 showcase the prevalence of StatAvg over the baselines In line with the definitions provided by [24] and [29], the
 in terms of evaluation metrics such as the detection presence of non-iid features across clients can be expressed
 accuracy and the F1 score. Finally, some illustrative through the following concepts:
 insights are provided that justify the presence of clients’ • Feature distribution skew (covariate shift): The marginal
 non-iid features on the examined intrusion detection distributions Pi (x ) varies across clients, even if Pi (y|x )
 datasets. is the same for all clients.
 • Same label, different features (concept drift): The condi-
D. Structure tional distributions Pi (x |y) may vary across clients even
 The structure of the paper comes as follows. Section II if Pi (y) is common. As such, the same label y can have
provides preliminary information regarding FL and non-iid different features x for different clients.
features. Next, Section III presents and analyzes StatAvg. Non-iid features can significantly degrade the performance
Finally, Section IV focuses on the evaluation analysis of of FL, by introducing inconsistencies in model updates across
StatAvg, while Section V concludes this paper. clients. Since each client is exposed to different input distributions, their local models may learn patterns that do not
 generalize well to other clients. This inconsistency can result
 II. P RELIMINARIES OF F EDERATED L EARNING
 in unstable training, where the global model struggles to
A. FL System converge in a timely manner. In extreme cases, the divergence
 We consider an FL environment consisting of N clients, between local models can be so severe that the global model
indexed as i ∈ N = {1,2,. . ., N} and a server. Each client completely fails to converge. These challenges make it difficult
owns a dataset Di = {(x ji , yij ) ∈ RS × C}D j
 j =1 , where x i is
 i for the server to effectively aggregate the locally trained
the j-th input sample, Di = |Di | is the number of samples models into a coherent global model that performs well across
and S denotes the number of features. Here, R denotes the all clients. Consequently, the presence of non-iid features
set of real numbers. Additionally, we denote C as the set to requires specialized techniques or modifications to standard
 j
which the label yi belongs, e.g., it could be a subset of the real FL algorithms to ensure successful training and generalization.
numbers, a set of categorical values for classification tasks, etc.
In this paper, C contains the labels of cyberattacks and will III. S TATAVG - S TATISTICAL AVERAGING
be described below in this work, along with the description of A. Description and Algorithm
the datasets used in the evaluation experiments.
 The overall dataset across all clients is denoted as D = Traditionally, individual FL clients normalize their local
 
 ∪ Di and the size of all training data is D = N n=i Di . The
 data based on their own local statistics, with the most promii∈N nent normalization technique being the z-score normalization,
loss function of client i, is defined as: i.e., clients subtract the mean from each data sample of a given
 Di   feature and then divide it with the standard deviation. This is
 1 
 Fi (w )  φ w , x ji , yij , ∀i ∈ N , (1) equivalent to shifting the input feature distribution to have a
 Di zero mean and unit variance. Accordingly, in the testing phase,
 j =1
 the testing dataset is scaled based on the aforementioned
 j j
where φ(w , x i , yi ) captures the error of the model parameter normalization, individually per client. In the presence of nonw ∈ RK for the input-output pair (x ji , yij ), where K is the iid features between clients, the local normalization process
size of model parameters. The ultimate goal of the FL process may significantly differ from client to client. As a result,
2948 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

this variability may affect the convergence of the global Algorithm 1 StatAvg
FL model since each local model is trained on a different Input: N , {Di }i∈N , w (1)
input data distribution. To tackle the issue of non-iid features Output: w , {μG , σ 2G }
across clients, our objective is to discover global statistics that 1: for t = 0,1,2,... do
clients can share without requiring access to their raw data. 2: if t = 0 then
Typical statistical metrics include the mean and variance of the 3: for each client i ∈ N do
features, whereas this study investigates the impact of these 4: calculate μi , σ 2i according to (3), (4)
particular metrics. 5: send μi , σ 2i to the server
 In the light of the previous discussion, we proceed to
 6:
  the global statistics as:
 server calculates
compute the mean and variance for each client’s features. The
 μG = i∈N ni μi ,
mean value across all samples of a feature s ∈ S of client i,  
 
where S is the entire feature set, is given as: σ 2G = i∈N ni σ 2i + (μi − μG )2
 D
 1 i
 j 7: server sends {μG , σ 2G } to all clients
 μi,s = xi,s (3) for each client i ∈ N do
 Di 8:
 j =1 9: normalize input features as:
and μi = (μi,1 , μi,2 , . . . , μi,S ) is the vector with all the j
 j
 xi,s −μG,s
means of each feature. Its is worth noting that xi,s j
 is the x̃i,s = σG,s , ∀j ∈ {1, ..., Di }, ∀s ∈ S
 j j j Di
s-th entry of x i . Accordingly, the corresponding variance is 10: D̃i = {(x̃ i , yi )}j =1
calculated as: 11: else  standard FL procedure
 Di  2 server sends w (t) to all clients i ∈ N
 2 1  j
 12:
 σi,s = xi,s − μi,s (4) for each client i ∈ N do
 Di 13:
  
 j =1 (t) (t) (t) (t) (t)
 14: w i = w i − η∇Fi w i , ξ i , ξ i ⊆
and σ 2i = (σi,1 2 , σ 2 , . . . , σ 2 ). Hereinafter, with the term
 i,2 i,S D̃i
local statistics of client i, we refer to the tuple {μi , σ 2i }. (t)
 15: send w i to the server
The StatAvg strategy aims at obtaining the global statistics  (t)
{μG , σ 2G } of the overall dataset D by aggregating the local 16: w (t+1) = i∈N ni w i
statistics {μi , σ 2i }i∈N . In this manner, all clients can normal- 17: w = w (t)
ize their data based on global statistics, which guarantees a
common normalization/scaling of the input data. The detailed
process of StatAvg is described in Algorithm 1.
 As can be seen, the StatAvg strategy occurs solely during
the first round (t = 0), prior to the actual FL training. Firstly, normalized local dataset D̃i . Finally, if the local dataset Di
 (t)
in steps 2 - 4, each client calculates its local statistics and changes dynamically in each round (it can be denoted as Di ),
sends them to the server. Following that, in steps 5 - 6, the applying StatAvg in such case is straightforward. This can
server calculates the global statistics based on the received be done by computing the local statistics in each round and
 (t)
local statistics and broadcasts them back to the clients. It constructing the normalized dataset D̃i , based on the global
is worth mentioning that the operations in step 5 are car- statistics of the given round.
ried out element-wise. The rationale behind the aggregation It should be again clarified that StatAvg focuses on the
technique used to obtain μG and σ 2G is explained later in aggregation of statistical metrics rather than local models
 (t)
this work. Afterwards, in steps 7 - 8, the clients normalize w i , facilitating its integration with any model aggregatheir input features based on the global statistics by utilising tion strategy. Fig. 1 provides an illustration of StatAvg’s
conventional z-score normalization. It should be highlighted implementation. Finally, we stress that through StatAvg,
that the communication overhead for exchanging the local a universal input data normalization technique is provided.
and global statistics between the clients and the server is This is a crucial remark since a trained model should
negligible since it takes place solely during the first round. be paired with the appropriate data normalization tech-
Additionally, the size of the local statistics tuple is negligible nique (also known as scaler) to render it effective during
compared to the size of the local model, because the number inference.
of features is typically much smaller than the number of model In the continue, we will show that μG and σ 2G are the
parameters (weights) used during training, i.e., 2S  K. At mean and variance of the overall dataset D. First, we assume
step 10 and afterwards, a conventional FL process follows, that Di ∩ Dk = ∅, ∀i , k ∈ N , i = k . This implies that
e.g., FedAvg, that will ultimately generate the global FL all local datasets are pairwise disjoint. The assumption is
model. However, the selection of the aggregation strategy reasonable, considering that each dataset originates from a
is not limited to FedAvg and can vary according to the distinct client, thus making it highly unlikely - if not imposparticularities of the underlying FL task. Note also that during sible - for identical samples to appear across different local
the client local update in step 13, η is the learning rate datasets. To this end, we proceed to formulate the following
 (t)
and ξ i ⊆ D̃i is a randomly sampled mini-batch from the proposition.
BOUZINIS et al.: STATAVG: MITIGATING DATA HETEROGENEITY IN FL FOR IDS 2949

Fig. 1. Visual representation of StatAvg design and implementation.

 Di 
  2
 Proposition 1: Let x i,s ∈ RDi be the vector containing
the s-th feature across all samples of Di . Also, let z s = = xij − μi + 2Di μi (μi − μG ) + Di μ2G − Di μ2i
 j =1
(x 1,s , . . . , x N ,s ) be the concatenation of all clients vectors,
with z s ∈ RD . The mean and variance of z s are given as = Di σi2 + Di μ2G − 2Di μi μG + Di μ2i
  = Di σi2 + Di (μi − μG )2 . (9)
 μG,s = ni μi,s
 i∈N 
 2
 
 2  2  By combining (9) with (8) we conclude to
 σG,s = ni σi,s + μi,s − μG,s . (5)
   
 i∈N 2
 σG = ni σi2 + (μi − μG )2 , (10)
 Proof: First, the notation of s is dropped for the simplicity i∈N
of presentation. It is straightforward to compute the mean of
z as: which completes the proof.
 Proposition 1 provides a way to obtain the global mean and
 D N D N D j
 1  1 i
 j 1   i
 xi variance across the whole dataset D for a given feature s. The
 μG = zl = xi = Di proof can be easily generalized ∀ s ∈ S, which gives rise to the
 D D D Di
 l=1 i=1 j =1 i=1 j =1 vector representation of the global mean and variance for each
 N
  feature, i.e., μG and σ 2G , respectively. This result is used in
 = ni μi . (6) step 5 of Algorithm 1 to derive the global mean and variance.
 i=1

 Before examining σG2 , first, it is noted that for the local
 B. Differential Privacy Extension
variances, it holds:
 It is clarified that the local statistics being shared with the
 Di 
  2 server are high-level, aggregated summaries of the data and
 σi2 ni = xij − μi , ∀i ∈ N . (7) do not reveal individual data points or sensitive attributes.
 j =1 Therefore, these statistics lack sufficient granularity to recon-
 Similarly, for z we get struct the underlying dataset or any individual client’s private
 information. However, to further enhance privacy, differen-
 D
   Di 
 N  2 tial privacy (DP) strategies could be easily integrated into
 j
 2
 σG D= (zl − μG )2 = x i − μG the proposed method during the transmission of the local
 l=1 i=1 j =1 statistics [32]. Specifically, by adding a controlled amount of
 Di  
 N 
  random noise to the local statistics, DP ensures that individual
 2
 = xij − 2xij μG + μ2G . (8) client contributions cannot be easily inferred by the server.
 i=1 j =1 According to DP principles, instead of directly sending the
 The inner sum in the last term of (8) can be expanded by local statistics {μi , σ 2i } to the server, the clients perturbs them
adding and subtracting μ2i , as: and send a distorted version. Specifically, to ensure (, δ)-
 DP [32], for a given feature s ∈ S, client i adds Gaussian
 D i   noise to μi,s and σi,s 2 as follows:
  j 2 j
 xi − 2xi μG + μ2G + μ2i − μ2i
  
 j =1 μ̃i,s = μi,s + Gaussian 0, ζμ2i,s ,
 D i 
  2 
 = xij − μi + 2xij (μi − μG ) + μ2G − μ2i 2 2
 σ̃i,s = σi,s + Gaussian 0, ζσ22 , (11)
 j =1 i,s
2950 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE I
 L IST OF N OTATIONS

 2 are described, TABLE II
where the variance of the noise for μi,s and σi,s TON-I OT DATASET: F EATURE D ESCRIPTION
respectively as
 2 ln(1.25/δ) 2
 ζμ2i,s = Δμi,s ,
 2
 2 ln(1.25/δ) 2
 ζσ22 = Δσ2 (12)
 i,s 2 i,s

and the sensitivities Δ2μi,s , Δ2σ2 of the mean and variance
 i,s
functions are given by
 j j
 maxj {xi,s } − minj {xi,s }
 Δ2μi,s = ,
 Di
  2
 j j
 maxj {xi,s } − minj {xi,s }
 Δ2σ2 = , (13)
 i,s Di
accordingly. By applying the above process for each feature
s ∈ S independently, each client i creates the peturbated local
statistics {μ̃i , σ̃ 2i } and sends them to the server, which then normal behaviour of the host system. More details regarding
proceeds with the conventional aggregation process. the dataset can be found in [33] and [34].
 CIC-IoT-2023 Dataset: The CIC-IoT-2023 Dataset [35] is
 IV. E VALUATION A NALYSIS a realistic IoT attack dataset, using an extensive topology composed of multiple IoT devices designated as either attackers or
 This section presents experiments conducted on different
 targets. The dataset entails 48 features that are characterized
datasets to detect intrusions in a federated setting. The effecby metrics such as packet flow statistics, employed application
tiveness of the proposed strategy StatAvg is evaluated by
 layer protocols, TCP flags, etc. As we do not explicitly
comparing it with various baseline methods.
 describe all features for brevity, additional information can be
 found in [35]. Furthermore, the dataset categorizes attacks into
A. Evaluation Datasets
 eight classes, namely “Brute force”, “dDoS”, “DoS”, “Mirai”,
 The experiments were conducted on the following well- “Recon”, “Spoofing”, “Web-based”, and “Normal”.
known public datasets.
 TON-IoT Dataset: Among others, the TON-IoT
Dataset [33] includes operating system data of Ubuntu versions B. Baseline Aggregation Methods
14 and 18, which is adopted in our work. More specifically, To evaluate the performance of StatAvg, we use the
it includes audit traces documenting memory activities within following baseline aggregation strategies:
the operating system. The dataset is suitable for training FedAvg: It is the de facto approach for FL [6]. Clients
and designing host-based IDS. Also, the dataset is composed perform local model updates and the server executes the
of data stemming from various physical or virtual devices aggregation of the local models to generate the global
belonging to the edge and cloud layers. The description of model.
the selected features is provided in Table II. Furthermore, FedLN: The layer normalization is included in the local
the attacks on the host system that serve as the labels of the models for mitigating the effects of non-iid features [28].
dataset are “dDoS”, “DoS”, “Injection”, “Password”, “Mitm”, FedLN performs local updates and averages local models
while also a class named “Normal” is included, indicating the similarly to FedAvg.
BOUZINIS et al.: STATAVG: MITIGATING DATA HETEROGENEITY IN FL FOR IDS 2951

 TABLE III
 E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

 FedBN: Employs local batch normalization (BN) to the
local models prior to averaging them towards alleviating feature shift. Nonetheless, FedBN assumes that local models have
BN layers and omits their parameters from the aggregation
step at the side of the server [29].
 It is worth noting that FedLN and FedBN are specially tailored to address the issue of non-iid features,
justifying their selection. As follows, in FedAvg, FedLN
and FedBN, the normalization of the local training data
is performed based on the local client statistics, aligning
with the conventional FL approach. Also, the testing data
undergo scaling in accordance with the respective local normalization for each client individually. Finally, it is noted
 Fig. 2. Testing accuracy on TON-IoT dataset (N = 5 clients).
that the proposed technique StatAvg utilizes FedAvg at
step 9 of Algorithm 1 as the default model aggregation
strategy.
 D. Evaluation Results
 Regarding the performance evaluation, we use common
C. Experimental Setup evaluation metrics such as the confusion matrix, accuracy, and
 The following settings apply to all experiments unless spec- F1 score. Given a specific attack/class, the confusion matrix
ified otherwise. The number of clients has been set as N = 5 includes the following standard metrics: the True Positive (TP)
and N = 10, while all clients are considered to participate in represents instances where the model correctly identifies a
every FL round. Also, the number of FL rounds is set to 50 and sample as belonging to a specific attack type. True Negative
80, for N = 5 and N = 10, respectively. Each client receives an (TN) counts instances where the model accurately identifies
equal proportion ni = N1 of the original dataset D. Moreover, a sample as not belonging to a specific attack type when it
the division is conducted through stratification based on the truly does not. False Positive (FP) denotes instances where
labels of the original dataset, aiming to approximate a common the sample is predicted as of a certain attack, but actually,
Pi (y) across all clients. This implies that clients share a the sample does not belong to that attack type. False Negative
common label distribution. Following that, each client splits (FN) is the number of instances for which the model fails to
its local dataset into training and testing subsets, with a ratio predict a sample as a specific attack type, even though the
of 4 to 1. Due to the significant class imbalance in the datasets, sample actually belongs to that attack. Next, the accuracy and
each client generates synthetic instances from the minority F1 score are defined as:
classes in the training set by using SMOTE [36]. It is noted TP + TN
 ACC = (14)
that SMOTE is applied independently on each client, after the TP + TN + FP + FN
splitting of the overall dataset. and
 The local model of each client is a neural network consisting
 2TP
of 3 Fully Connected (FC) hidden layers with 128 neurons F1 = , (15)
and ReLU activation, denoted as (FC(128), ReLU), followed 2TP + FP + FN
by a softmax activation on the output layer. In the case of respectively.
the baselines FedLN and FedBN, layer normalization (LN) The evaluation metrics showcased in the results have been
and batch normalization (BN) layers are incorporated into averaged across all classes due to the multi-class nature of the
the local models, resulting in each layer being structured as problems we are addressing. Finally, it is noted the evaluation
(FC(128), ReLU, LN) and (FC(128), BN, ReLU), respec- was performed using clients’ testing sets, and the demonstrated
tively. For the local training updates, the Adam optimizer is results were also averaged across all clients.
adopted [37]. Finally, additional settings are summarized in First, the evolution of testing accuracy throughout the
Table III1 FL rounds is evaluated, for both N = 5 and N = 10
 clients. In Fig. 2, 3, and Fig. 4, 5, the StatAvg strategy
 1 In the spirit of reproducible research, the code used for the numerical is compared with the selected baselines on the TON-IoT
results is available at: https://flower.ai/docs/baselines/statavg.html. and CIC-IoT-2023 datasets, respectively. It is evident that
2952 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

 TABLE IV
 E VALUATION M ETRICS ON TON-I OT DATASET

Fig. 3. Testing accuracy on TON-IoT dataset (N = 10 clients). TABLE V
 E VALUATION M ETRICS ON CIC-I OT-2023 DATASET

 consistently outperforms the baseline methods in both client
Fig. 4. Testing accuracy on CIC-IoT-2023 dataset (N = 5 clients). settings, demonstrating its robustness to client scaling.
 Moreover, in Table IV and Table V, some evaluation metrics for the case of TON-IoT and CIC-IoT-2023 datasets are
 demonstrated, respectively. The considered metrics showcase
 the performance of the best models encountered during the FL
 training for each strategy. It can be observed that StatAvg
 has superior performance against the baseline strategies.
 Specifically, in the case of the TON-IoT dataset, StatAvg
 demonstrates a notable improvement, for both settings of
 clients, of over 17% and 16% in accuracy and F1 score, respectively, compared to the second-best strategy FedLN. Also,
 when considering the CIC-IoT-2023 dataset, the corresponding
 increase is over 4% and 2% for accuracy and F1 score. The
 detailed confusion matrices of the StatAvg metho, when
 considering N = 5 clients, are presented in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7,
Fig. 5. Testing accuracy on CIC-IoT-2023 dataset (N = 10 clients). for the TON-IoT and CIC-IoT-2023 datasets, respectively. In
 both datasets, it is evident that some classes are easier to
 classify, e.g., “DDoS”, “DoS”, “Mirai”, and “Normal”. This
StatAvg significantly outperforms the baseline strategies can be attributed to the large number of samples that these
across both datasets in terms of accuracy. Moreover, the classes usually have (e.g., “DoS” and “Normal” are majority
convergence curve of StatAvg is more stable compared to classes in both datasets), as well as their more recognizable
that of the baseline methods, which display higher variance. traffic patterns. On the other hand, certain classes are often
The exhibited performance gain lies in the fact that StatAvg misclassified, e.g., “Brute Force”, “Recon”, “Spoofing” in
utilizes global statistics to normalize the clients’ features. Fig. 7, likely due to the similarity in their underlying traffic
Although FedLN and FedBN have been designed to minimize patterns [35].
the effects of non-IID features between clients, it is discernible To shed light on the concept of non-iid features, we present
that they struggle to address this issue in certain datasets. some illustrative examples derived from the examined datasets.
The variations in local client statistics, and consequently, the First, we take a deeper look into the training samples of the
diverse local normalization utilized, appear to degrade the CIC-IoT-2023 dataset, focusing specifically on those labelled
performance of FL. Additionally, it is observed that Statavg with the attack category y = “Web-based”. Fig. 8 illustrates
BOUZINIS et al.: STATAVG: MITIGATING DATA HETEROGENEITY IN FL FOR IDS 2953

 Fig. 8. Distribution of the feature “Flow Duration”, given the attack label
 “Web-based”, on CIC-IoT-2023 dataset.

 TABLE VI
 S TATISTICAL M ETRICS OF C LIENTS ’ F EATURES ON TON-I OT DATASET

Fig. 6. Confusion matrix of StatAvg on TON-IoT dataset.

 in Table VI. Here, statistical metrics for selected features
 from the TON-IoT dataset have been calculated. It can be
 observed that the feature “VSIZE” demonstrates consistent
 mean and variance across clients, while the feature “MINFLT”
 displays high variations in the statistical metrics. This example
 highlights the statistical differences that some features may
 exhibit among clients, which in turn influences the local
 normalization of the features and potentially hinders the FL
 stability and convergence.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 This paper proposes the StatAvg technique for mitigating
 the impact of non-iid features among clients in FL settings.
 The key aspect of StatAvg is to produce global data statistics
 based on the local data statistics of FL clients. The generation
 of global statistics, which is carried out by the server, gives rise
Fig. 7. Confusion matrix of StatAvg on CIC-IoT-2023 dataset. to a universal data normalization technique that is performed
 by all clients. Particular attention is given to FL-based IDS,
 which is the focus of the experiments that were conducted.
 The results corroborate the effectiveness of StatAvg in
the distribution of the feature “Flow Duration” for the clients
 providing robust FL convergence and classifying cyber-attacks
i = {1,2}, formally written as Pi (xi,s |y = “Web-based”)
 compared to various baseline FL schemes. Moreover, valuable
where s = “Flow Duration”. It can be observed from Fig. 8
 insights are offered within the scope of non-iid features among
(a) that the distributions of the clients differ. Nevertheless,
 clients for the selected intrusion detection datasets. Finally,
it remains uncertain whether this disparity in distributions is
 as StatAvg precedes the actual FL procedure, it can be
inherent or if it is related to the limited number of samples
 combined with any FL aggregation strategy, a topic which
within the selected class. It is worth noting that the “Webis left for future investigation. Moreover, the applicability of
based” class is indeed a minority class. From Fig. 8 (b), it
 StatAvg is not limited solely to FL-based IDS, as its efficacy
is evident that the difference in distributions persists after
 may encompass any FL application associated with non-iid
upsampling the dataset via SMOTE. This example shows that
 features among clients.
even if Pi (y) is approximately the same for all clients, as
previously explained in the experimental setup, the conditional
distributions Pi (x |y) can still differ. This phenomenon is ACKNOWLEDGMENT
related to the concept of Same label, different features, Disclaimer: Funded by the European Union. Views and
discussed in Section II. Another example that highlights opinions expressed are, however, those of the author(s) only
the differences in the distributions of features is presented and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or
2954 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

European Commission. Neither the European Union nor the [22] B. Weinger, J. Kim, A. Sim, M. Nakashima, N. Moustafa, and K. J. Wu,
European Commission can be held responsible for them. “Enhancing IoT anomaly detection performance for federated learning,”
 Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 314–323, 2022.
 [23] W. Han, J. Peng, J. Yu, J. Kang, J. Lu, and D. Niyato, “Heterogeneous
 R EFERENCES data-aware federated learning for intrusion detection systems via metasampling in artificial intelligence of things,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 [1] X. Deng, B. Chen, X. Chen, X. Pei, S. Wan, and S. K. Goudos, “Trusted vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 13340–13354, Apr. 2024.
 edge computing system based on intelligent risk detection for smart IoT,” [24] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,”
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1445–1454, Feb. 2024. Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, nos. 1–2, pp. 1–210, 2021.
 [2] M. Taddeo, T. McCutcheon, and L. Floridi, “Trusting artificial intel- [25] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
 ligence in cybersecurity is a double-edged sword,” Nat. Mach. Intell., “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” Proc. Mach. Learn.
 vol. 1, no. 12, pp. 557–560, 2019. Syst., vol. 2, 2020, pp. 429–450.
 [3] X. Deng et al., “A review of 6G autonomous intelligent transportation [26] J. Wang, Q. Liu, H. Liang, G. Joshi, and H. V. Poor, “Tackling the objecsystems: Mechanisms, applications and challenges,” J. Syst. Architect., tive inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization,” in
 vol. 142, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 102929. Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 7611–7623.
 [4] P. Radoglou-Grammatikis et al., “Strategic honeypot deployment in [27] S. P. Karimireddy, S. Kale, M. Mohri, S. Reddi, S. Stich, and
 ultra-dense beyond 5G networks: A reinforcement learning approach,” A. T. Suresh, “Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated
 IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 643–655, learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 5132–5143.
 Apr./Jun. 2024. [28] Z. Du et al., “Rethinking normalization methods in federated learning,”
 [5] P. Radoglou-Grammatikis, P. Sarigiannidis, G. Efstathopoulos, in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Distrib. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 16–22.
 T. Lagkas, G. Fragulis, and A. Sarigiannidis, “A self-learning approach [29] X. Li, M. Jiang, X. Zhang, M. Kamp, and Q. Dou, “FedBN: Federated
 for detecting intrusions in healthcare systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. learning on non-IID features via local batch normalization,” 2021,
 Commun. (ICC), 2021, pp. 1–6. arXiv:2102.07623.
 [6] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas, [30] P. Oza and V. M. Patel, “Federated learning-based active authentication
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized on mobile devices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Biometrics (IJCB),
 data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Stat., 2017, pp. 1273–1282. 2021, pp. 1–8.
 [7] Y. Lin et al., “DRL-based adaptive sharding for blockchain-based feder- [31] Q. Li, Y. Diao, Q. Chen, and B. He, “Federated learning on non-IID
 ated learning,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 5992–6004, data silos: An experimental study,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Conf. Data
 Oct. 2023. Eng. (ICDE), 2022, pp. 965–978.
 [8] S. Agrawal et al., “Federated learning for intrusion detection system: [32] K. Wei et al., “Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms
 Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., and performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15,
 vol. 195, pp. 346–361, Nov. 2022. pp. 3454–3469, 2020.
 [9] E. M. Campos et al., “Evaluating federated learning for intrusion [33] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
 detection in Internet of Things: Review and challenges,” Comput. Netw., “TON_IoT telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and
 vol. 203, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108661. IIoT for data-driven intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
[10] B. Ghimire and D. B. Rawat, “Recent advances on federated learning pp. 165130–165150, 2020.
 for cybersecurity and cybersecurity for federated learning for Internet of [34] N. Moustafa, M. Ahmed, and S. Ahmed, “Data analytics-enabled intru-
 Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8229–8249, Jun. sion detection: Evaluations of ToN_IoT linux datasets,” in Proc. IEEE
 2022. 19th Int. Conf. Trust Security Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom),
[11] S. Arisdakessian, O. A. Wahab, A. Mourad, H. Otrok, and M. Guizani, 2020, pp. 727–735.
 “A survey on IoT intrusion detection: Federated learning, game theory, [35] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
 social psychology, and explainable AI as future directions,” IEEE A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 4059–4092, Mar. 2023. for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13,
[12] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha, p. 5941, 2023.
 and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated learn- [36] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,
 ing,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 115, pp. 619–640, Feb. 2021. “SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Intell.
[13] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “DeepFed: Federated Res., vol. 16, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002.
 deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber–physical [37] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624, 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
 Aug. 2021.
[14] D. C. Attota, V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, and S. Pouriyeh, “An ensemble
 multi-view federated learning intrusion detection for IoT,” IEEE Access,
 vol. 9, pp. 117734–117745, 2021.
[15] S. Mirjalili, S. M. Mirjalili, and A. Lewis, “Grey wolf optimizer,” Adv.
 Eng. Softw., vol. 69, pp. 46–61, Mar. 2014.
[16] R. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Xue, T. Ohtsuki, B. Adebisi, and G. Gui,
 “Semi-supervised federated learning based intrusion detection method
 for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10,
 pp. 8645–8657, May 2023.
[17] Z. Chen, N. Lv, P. Liu, Y. Fang, K. Chen, and W. Pan, “Intrusion
 detection for wireless edge networks based on federated learning,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 8, pp. 217463–217472, 2020.
[18] H. Wang, L. Muñoz-González, D. Eklund, and S. Raza, “Non-IID
 data re-balancing at IoT edge with peer-to-peer federated learning for
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. 14th ACM Conf. Security Privacy Wireless
 Mobile Netw., 2021, pp. 153–163. Pavlos S. Bouzinis received the Diploma and Ph.D.
[19] S. I. Popoola, G. Gui, B. Adebisi, M. Hammoudeh, and H. Gacanin, degrees in electrical and computer engineering from
 “Federated deep learning for collaborative intrusion detection in hetero- the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece, in
 geneous networks,” in Proc. IEEE 94th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), 2019 and 2023, respectively, where he was a member
 2021, pp. 1–6. of the Wireless Communications and Information
[20] A. Kundu, P. Yu, L. Wynter, and S. H. Lim, “Robustness Processing Group. He is currently works as a
 and Personalization in federated learning: A unified approach via Research Engineer with MetaMind Innovations P.C.
 Regularization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Edge Comput. Commun. His main research interests include machine learn-
 (EDGE), 2022, pp. 1–11. ing, optimization, and intrusion detection systems.
[21] P. Ruzafa-Alcázar et al., “Intrusion detection based on privacy- He has served as a Reviewer for several scientific
 preserving federated learning for the Industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. journals. He was an Exemplary Reviewer of IEEE
 Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1154, Feb. 2023. W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS L ETTERS, in 2021 (top 3% of reviewers).
BOUZINIS et al.: STATAVG: MITIGATING DATA HETEROGENEITY IN FL FOR IDS 2955

 Panagiotis Radoglou-Grammatikis (Member, Georgios Th. Papadopoulos (Member, IEEE)
 IEEE) received the Diploma and Ph.D. degrees received the Diploma and Ph.D. degrees in elecfrom the Department of Electrical and Computer trical and computer engineering from the Aristotle
 Engineering, University of Western Macedonia, University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
 Greece, in 2016 and 2023, respectively. He He is an Assistant Professor in the area of
 has published more than 50 research papers in computer graphics and computational vision with
 international scientific journals, conferences and the Department of Informatics and Telematics,
 book chapters. He was included in Stanford Harokopio University of Athens, Greece. He has
 University’s list (shared by Elsevier) of the Top worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher with the
 2% of Scientists in the World for 2021 and 2022, Foundation For Research And Technology Hellas,
 respectively. He is currently working as a Research Institute of Computer Science and the Centre for
Director with K3Y Ltd., while he is also a Postdoc Researcher with the Research and Technology Hellas, Information Technologies Institute. He has
ITHACA Lab, University of Western Macedonia and a Co-Founder of published over 70 peer-reviewed research articles in international journals
MetaMind Innovations P.C. He is involved in several national and international and conference proceedings. His research interests include computer vision,
projects. His main research interests focus on AI-driven cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, machine/deep learning, human action recognition,
intrusion detection, and security games. He has received five best paper human–computer interaction, and explainable artificial intelligence. He is a
awards. Finally, he is a member of ACM and the Technical Chamber of member of the Technical Chamber of Greece.
Greece.

 Ioannis Makris received the B.Sc. degree in
 computer science with specialization in artificial
 intelligence and software engineering from the
 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and the M.Sc.
 degree in business analytics from the University of Panagiotis Sarigiannidis (Member, IEEE) received
 Edinburgh. Furthermore, he is a Project Management the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer sci-
 Professional by the Project Management Institute. ence from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
 He is currently working as a Network and Security Thessaloniki, Greece, in 2001 and 2007, respec-
 Engineer/Researcher. His interests include privacy- tively. He is a Director of ITHACA Lab, Co-Founder
 preserving AI techniques, interpretable machine of MetaMind Innovations P.C., and a Full Professor
 learning, and security. with the Department of Electrical and Computer
 Engineering, University of Western Macedonia,
 Kozani, Greece. He has published over 270 papers
 in international journals, conferences and book
 chapters. He is involved in several national and
 international projects. He served as the Project Coordinator of three H2020
 Thomas Lagkas (Senior Member, IEEE) received projects, namely SPEAR, EVIDENT, and TERMINET. Moreover, he has coorthe Graduate (Hons.) degree from the Department dinated national and Erasmus+ KA2 projects, while he served as a Principal
 of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Investigator in SDN-microSENSE and three Erasmus+ KA2: ARRANGE-ICT,
 the Ph.D. degree in wireless networks, and the MBA JAUNTY, and STRONG. Finally, he participates in several editorial boards of
 degree from Hellenic Open University. He received various journals. His research interests include telecommunication networks,
 a Postgraduate Certificate on Teaching and Learning Internet of Things, and cybersecurity. He has also received five best paper
 from The University of Sheffield. He is an Assistant awards.
 Professor with the Department of Computer Science,
 Democritus University of Thrace and the Director
 of the Laboratory of Industrial and Educational
 Embedded Systems. He has been a Scholar of
the Aristotle University Research Committee and a Postdoctoral Scholar
of the National Scholarships Institute of Greece. His research interests are in
the areas of IoT communications with numerous highly cited publications.
He is a Fellow of the Higher Education Academy, U.K., and a member of
the Editorial Board of reputable scientific journals. Moreover, he actively
participates in several EU-funded research projects.
 George K. Karagiannidis (Fellow, IEEE) received
 the Ph.D. degree in telecommunications engineering from the Electrical Engineering Department,
 University of Patras, Greece, in 1998.
 He is currently a Professor with the Electrical
 Vasileios Argyriou received the B.Sc. degree in and Computer Engineering Department, Aristotle
 computer science from the Aristotle University of University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece,
 Thessaloniki, Greece, in 2001, and the M.Sc. and and the Head of Wireless Communications and
 Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering working on Information Processing Group. His research interests
 registration from the University of Surrey, in 2003 are in the areas of wireless communications systems
 and 2006, respectively. From 2001 to 2002, he and networks, signal processing, optical wireless
 held a research position with Aristotle University, communications, wireless power transfer, and signal processing for biomedical
 with a focus on image and video watermarking. He engineering. He recently received three prestigious awards: The 2021 IEEE
 joined the Communications and Signal Processing ComSoc RCC Technical Recognition Award, the 2018 IEEE ComSoc SPCE
 Department, Imperial College London, London, in Technical Recognition Award, and the 2022 Humboldt Research Award
 2007, where he was a Research Fellow working on from Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. He is one of the Highly Cited
3D object reconstruction. He is currently a Professor with Kingston University, Authors across all areas of Electrical Engineering, recognized from Clarivate
London, working on computer vision and AI for crowd and human behavior Analytics as the Web-of-Science Highly-Cited Researcher from 2015 to
analysis, computer games, entertainment, and medical applications. Also, 2024. He is currently an Editor-in Chief of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS
research is conducted on educational games and on HCI for augmented and ON C OMMUNICATIONS and in the past was an Editor-in Chief of IEEE
virtual reality systems. C OMMUNICATIONS L ETTERS.