3746 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

STMBAD: Spatio-Temporal Multimodal Behavior
Anomaly Detector for Industrial Control Systems
 Jianzhen Luo , Yan Cai , Jun Cai , Member, IEEE, Wanhan Fang , and Wenwei Zheng

 Abstract—Modern cyber attacks against industrial control systems (ICSs) are highly stealthy, persistent, and
targeted. Existing anomaly detection methods are mainly
based on a set of rules defining correct behaviors and
use loosely bounded detection thresholds, which can be
exploited by attackers to evade detection. In this article, we
propose STMBAD, a spatio-temporal multimodal behavior
anomaly detector based on spatio-temporal ICS behavior
analysis to improve the performance of ICS anomaly detection. STMBAD leverages the rich information available
in industrial multimodal data to achieve a deep understanding of complex ICS behaviors and enhance the ability to
detect stealthy attacks. To avoid data processing cross heterogeneous type/structure and temporal confusion caused
by unsynchronized time series, STMBAD embeds time se- Fig. 1. Attacks in ICS environments.
ries of individual modality separately into variate tokens
and applies the attention mechanism and feedforward network to capture multivariate correlations and interdependencies. Meanwhile, based on the attention mechanisms, I. INTRODUCTION
temporal evolution law and spatial correlation of different NDUSTRIAL Internet is a promising technology that
modalities can be captured to model the characteristics
of the spatio-temporal multimodal behavior of ICS. When
detecting attacks, an adaptive detection mechanism com-
 I combines industrial systems with Internet connectivity to
 improve production efficiency and reduce production costs.
bining global and local detection is proposed to utilize Industrial control systems (ICSs) are important in the industrial
dynamic thresholds at different levels and reduce errors Internet, providing process automation, distributed control, and
caused by a loose global threshold. The simulation results process monitoring. To fulfill the requirements of the industrial
show that the proposed method outperforms the base- Internet, ICSs are connected to enterprise networks, allowing
line methods and yields the highest F1 score, reaching business users to access real-time data generated by industrial
95%. systems. However, this new paradigm exposes insecure devices
 Index Terms—Adaptive thresholds, anomaly detection, to public networks and raises security issues as those devices
industrial control system (ICS), multimodal data. are more vulnerable to external attacks [1].
 Anomaly detection is widely used to identify potentially
 anomalous activities of a system when a lurking adversary
 or malware starts to launch an attack on the system. Existing
 anomaly detection technology solutions can be categorized into
 Received 7 October 2024; accepted 22 December 2024. Date of mechanism-driven and data-driven methods. Mechanism-driven
publication 10 February 2025; date of current version 21 April 2025. This approaches leverage expert knowledge of the underlying mechwork was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China “Demonstration of Next-generation Communica- anisms to detect anomalies [2]. These approaches require comtion and Network Application in Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater prehensive theoretical knowledge that is difficult to obtain for
Bay Area” under Grant 2019YFB1804403, in part by the Innovation Pop- highly complex ICSs. Data-driven anomaly detection methods
ularization Field of Science and Technology Department of Guangdong use techniques such as statistical analysis, data mining, and ma-
Province under Grant 2023A1414020053, in part by the Provincial Scientific Research Project of General Universities of Guangdong Province chine learning to automatically identify anomalous data points
under Grant 2021ZDJS026, in part by the Key Project of Guangdong or events that are significantly different from normal patterns
Provincial Department of Education under Grant 2021ZDZX1031, and in from a large amount of collected data [3]. The data-driven
part by the Guangdong Province Key Construction Disciplines Scientific
Research Capacity Enhancement Project under Grant 2022ZDJS133 of
 methods are widely used because they do not need to consider
Guangzhou Institute of Science and Technology. Paper no. TII-24-5192. the increasingly complex physicochemical reaction mechanisms
(Corresponding author: Jun Cai.) in industrial processes.
 The authors are with the School of Cyberspace Security, Guang- However, since modern attacks against ICSs are usually
dong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou 510635, China (email: luojz@gpnu.edu.cn; caiyan@gpnu.edu.cn; caijun@gpnu.edu.cn;
 stealthy, persistent, and targeted, it is much difficult to detect
whfang@gpnu.edu.cn; zhengwenwei@stu.gpnu.edu.cn). them. As shown in Fig. 1, attacker lurks in the target system for
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3528559 a long time and uses a combination of attacks to gain control or

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 3747

modify data by exploiting vulnerabilities in the system, such multimodal learning, especially when dealing with data
as in the SolarWinds attack [4] and the Stuxnet attack [5]. from ICS where various sensors and subsystems may
Sophisticated attackers usually have a deep understanding of the operate at different sampling rates and with different
execution of the targeted ICSs and can hide their manipulation timing constraints. When multimodal data are unsynchroin the system by closely following the expected behavior of the nized, the data points from a single time step cannot
system while injecting just enough false information at each reveal beneficial information due to the temporal contime step to achieve their goals [6]. Previous methods leverage fusion between multivariate. Besides, while modalities
a set of rules defining the correct behavior of ICSs. However, can be greatly influenced by the sequence order, attention
the rules define variable ranges across all possible ICS states,
 mechanisms are improperly adopted on the spatial dimenleading to loosely bounded detection thresholds. Thus, attackers
 sion to analyze the multivariate correlations. These issues
can exploit these loose bounds and launch stealthy attacks that
evade detection without violating such rules. can significantly impact the accuracy and reliability of
 To address these problems, anomaly detection systems need data analysis and decision-making processes.
to understand not just individual actions but also complex se- 3) Threshold setting is critical to the effectiveness of
quences of events over time so as to detect subtle changes in be- anomaly detection: The spatio-temporal multimodal behavior that might be indicators of compromise. Thus, this work havior changes with the manufacturing process. Setting
leverages multimodal data to identify spatio-temporal behavior appropriate thresholds for anomaly detection is often
patterns that might indicate sophisticated attacks in ICSs. In- a balancing act. Too sensitive thresholds lead to false
dustrial multimodal data are collected from multiple sources and alarms, while too lax thresholds result in missed deteccommonly exhibit a large degree of heterogeneity in form, scale, tions. Most existing anomaly detection methods use static
and resolution [7]. The fusion of multimodal data can reveal thresholds to determine anomaly results. However, the opthe operational characteristics of the system more accurately, erating conditions, data distribution, and environmental
hence effectively improving the accuracy of data analysis, such factors of ICSs would change according to manufacturing
as quality prediction [8] and anomaly detection [9]. Instead of processes. Thus, static thresholds cannot adapt to these
just looking at instantaneous values, we consider the trajectory of dynamic changes and lead to false alarms or missed detecvariables over time, which can help detect subtle deviations that
 tions [12]. Furthermore, due to ignoring spatio-temporal
might indicate a stealthy attack. Meanwhile, we also consider
 dependencies, static thresholds cannot capture contextual
correlations between different components or sensors in the ICS,
which can help detect attacks that manipulate multiple variables anomalies [13].
in concert to stay within individual thresholds. To address these challenges, this article proposes a spatio-
 Based on a better understanding of ICS behaviors, we develop temporal multimodal behavior anomaly detector (STMBAD)
algorithms to discover recurring patterns in the spatio-temporal for ICSs based on the spatio-temporal behavior analysis of
behavior of the system and monitor deviations from these pat- multimodal sequences. For challenges (1) and (2), STMBAD
terns to indicate potential attacks. Leveraging the rich informa- employs inverted transformers (iTransformer) framework [14]
tion available in ICS environments can significantly enhance to industrial multimodal data. In the iTransformer, the roles of
our ability to detect and respond to complex, stealthy attacks. the attention mechanism and the feedforward network (FFN)
However, developing an anomaly detector for ICS that monitors are inverted. The time points of individual series are embedded
spatio-temporal multimodal behavior is challenging, at least into variate tokens, which are then utilized by the attention
from the following perspectives. mechanism to capture multivariate correlations. Meanwhile, the
 FFN is applied to each variate token to learn nonlinear represen-
 1) Multimodal data are heterogeneous: The multimodal data
 tations. STMBAD embeds individual series into variate tokens
 are heterogeneous in data type and structure, which poses
 and uses the attention mechanism to capture multivariate correhuge challenges to the development of data-driven mod- lations, thereby preserving the internal feature information of the
 els. Effective solutions have been proposed to address modality and avoiding the problem of temporal misalignment.
 the issues arising from multimodal data processing, such For challenge (3), which is about the threshold setting to enas missing values resulting from heterogeneous sam- able effectiveness of ICS anomaly detection, STMBAD obtains
 pling sequences [10]. However, one important problem the sliding window-based loss values by comparing the reconin multimodal data preprocessing is to integrate diverse structed data within the sliding window with the real data. To betdata types (continuous, discrete, categorical) from mul- ter adapt the detection method to the changing data distribution,
 tiple sources with different formats and structures. The the model updates the loss value of each window of the test data
 state-of-the-art multimodal data analysis models, such to the loss value sequence of the training data in real time. Then,
 as transformer-based approaches [11] embed multiple the percentage method is used to determine the threshold value of
 variates of the same timestamp into indistinguishable the current window, thus realizing adaptive anomaly detection.
 channels and apply attention to these temporal tokens to The main contributions of this work are as follows.
 capture temporal dependencies. The unified embedding 1) A method for analyzing the spatio-temporal correlation
 for each temporal token that fuses multiple variates with of industrial multimodal data is proposed: The proposed
 potentially unaligned timestamps may fail in learning method embeds the time points of individual series into
 variate-centric representations and result in meaningless variate tokens and uses the attention mechanism to capattention maps. ture multivariate correlations, weakening the impact of
 2) Multimodal data are unsynchronized: Temporal align- temporal interference and confusion caused by modality
 ment and synchronization are critical challenges in heterogeneity and misalignment.
3748 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 2) An adaptive threshold mechanism combining global and computational mutual information to reduce computational cost
 local detection is proposed: It ensures that the system can and improve overall performance.
 utilize dynamic thresholds at different levels and reduce Deep learning methods: Recently, deep learning has been
 errors caused by insufficient local information or by only widely used due to its powerful feature extraction and represenprocessing global information. tation learning capabilities [25]. For example, Zheng et al. [26]
 3) A multimodal data-based framework is developed to iden- integrated correlation learning into a spatio-temporal network of
 tify anomalous events in the industrial process by mining multivariate time series and uses graph convolutional networks
 the spatio-temporal correlations between multivariate in to obtain spatial dependencies between variables and reconstruct
 data. Notably, this model can identify the root causes of anomaproduction equipment.
 lous events by ranking the univariate variables that contribute
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. Secthe most to the anomaly score, enabling early detection and
tion II overviews the related work on ICS anomaly detection.
 interpretability of anomalies. However, it has limitations in
Section III describes in detail the algorithm design of STMBAD.
 capturing temporal evolution due to misalignment of multimodal
The evaluation is discussed in Section IV. Finally, Section V
 time series and distortion of internal modal features. Therefore,
concludes this article.
 Padmavathi et al. [27] combined the attention mechanism with
 bidirectional LSTM and uses CNN to extract pattern features
 II. RELATED WORK to improve the accuracy of malicious node detection. In [28],
 an efficient real-time sensor anomaly detection method is used
 The growing complexity of ICSs leads to the industrial data
 to detect instantaneous network anomaly information by recexhibiting multimodal, nonlinear, and strongly coupled characognizing sensor anomalies through Markov and LSTM-based
teristics [15], which poses new challenges to anomaly detection
 networks.
methods. In face of these challenges, statistical learning, ma-
 Transformer-based methods: However, in real industrial scechine learning, deep learning, and transformer-based methods
 narios, the data collected by sensors can have information loss
have emerged as widely employed approaches of anomaly dedue to a series of complex reasons. Meanwhile, real multidimentection based on multimodal data.
 sional time-series data have repetitive patterns in the long and
 Statistical learning methods: Traditional techniques such as
 short term, which is intractable for LSTM-based models. Therecluster-based methods [16], independent component analysis
 fore, many articles have used transformer to capture long-term
(ICA), and rule-based approaches [2] have been applied to
 dependencies in time series. To mitigate the overfitting problem,
anomaly detection in multimodal data. Minjie et al. [17] ex-
 Miao et al. [29] used an autoencoder based on a transformer
tracted the key features of traffic through principal component
 architecture to capture temporal dependencies in time series and
analysis and constructed a normal traffic behavior detection
 integrates the encoder into a generative adversarial network to
model for power IoT terminals based on one-class support vector
 constrain the reconstruction process. Zhang et al. [30] introduced
machines (OCSVMs). Harrou et al. [18] combined ICA and Kanthe Conv-Transformer model by combining local and global
torovich distance-based processing of supervisory control and
 features of the image to achieve higher accuracy and use fewer
data acquisition data with kernel density estimation to compute
 computational resources. Ma et al. [31] learned the temporal
thresholds. This makes the model more flexible in detecting senpatterns of transformer-based sequences and detects anomalies
sor anomalies such as accuracy degradation and freezing faults.
 through pattern differences to achieve adaptive detection of the
However, the thresholds of this approach are determined based
 model. Although these models make up for the shortcomings
on residuals during the training phase and cannot be dynamically
 of LSTM, they still force multiple variables under the same
adjusted to adapt to the changing state of the system. Moreover,
 timestamp to be aligned into one token, which affects correthese methods also suffer from information loss when dealing
 lation extraction among variables to some extent and introduces
with complex data distributions and high-dimensional data [19],
 unpredictable noise at the same time.
which significantly degrades the performance of ICS anomaly
detection.
 Machine learning methods: Machine learning algorithms can III. ALGORITHM DESIGN
automatically learn the process dynamics and control strategies
deployed in an ICS, which leads to relatively easier and faster A. Architecture Overview
creation of anomaly detectors [20]. Li et al. [21] proposed a The framework of STMBAD is composed of two main
parallel mutual information computation based on the Spark parts: behavior modeling module and anomaly detection modplatform, which resulted in a weighted outlier attribute detection ule, as depicted in Fig. 2. Industrial multimodal data from
scheme for mixed data and reduced the detection time of outliers. multiple sources (referred to as modalities), which generally
In response to the fact that OCSVM is not suitable for feature exhibit a significant degree of heterogeneity in form, scale,
extraction for high-dimensional data, He et al. [22] proposed resolution, and accuracy [7], is input into STMBAD. The becombining dictionary learning with OCSVM to extract correla- havior modeling module is developed based on iTransformer
tions and local dynamics in multivariate time series for sparse framework [14]. In this module, the spatial-temporal correlarepresentation and anomaly detection tasks. The accuracy of tion between data sequences is extracted to establish a spatiothese models is highly dependent on the quality of the input data. temporal sequence behavior model of the normal industrial
Moreover, either undersampling or oversampling of multimodal process. In anomaly detection module, a data reconstruction
data affects model performance [23]. Xu et al. [24] addressed based anomaly detection module is implemented to monitor the
this problem by using a synthetic few oversampling technique spatio-temporal behavior of multimodal data. In this module, the
algorithm and random undersampling to balance the dataset. test data is classified as benign or abnormal by using adaptive
They also reduced the model by discarding features with low thresholds.
LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 3749

Fig. 2. Algorithm architecture overview. The blue area is the behavioral modeling part and the yellow area is the anomaly detection part. In the
figure, h× represents an attention mechanism with a total of h attention heads. Q, K, and V denote Query, Key, and Value, respectively. Γ is the
result of a nonlinear transformation of each input feature and X is the result after reconstruction. Anomaly detection is a combination of global and
local anomalies, where ψ denotes a local threshold within each window.

 The training data is defined as X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }, where
N is the number of modalities. The nth modality is xn =
{x1n , x2n , . . . , xM
 n } (n ∈ [1, N ]) with M as the length of xn .
 T

To avoid information loss due to dimensionality reduction in
data preprocessing, STMBAD directly performs an independent
embedding operation on each sequence xn by using a shared
multilayer perceptron (MLP), denoted as F ∈ RN ×D , and D is
the embedding dimension. The test dataset can be denoted as
Xtest ∈ RN ×Mtest , which performs the same embedding operation as X, and Mtest is the length of test sequences. The behavioral modeling uses only the training dataset to learn the normal
behavior of system, while anomaly detection is performed on the
test dataset. Anomaly detection result is represented as a vector Fig. 3. STMBAD treats the entire sequence of a modality as a token,
L = {Lt } (t = 1, 2, . . . , Mtest ) consisting of predicted labels focuses only on the internal features of the modality during embedding,
Lt ∈ {0, 1} representing ICS is normal (Lt = 0) or abnormal and then analyzes the correlation between modalities.
(Lt = 1) at time t.
 through the attention mechanism is a weighted representation
B. Behavioral Modeling integrating global information and the self-attention mechanism.
 To capture the relationships between modalities, STMBAD This is because when Q and K perform the dot product operemploys a self-attention mechanism to compute the correlation ation, the information of one modality interacts with that of
among them, and utilizes a multihead attention mechanism to other modalities. The obtained attention score indicates, to a
weight the values. certain degree, the contribution of this variable to the entire
 The queries, keys, and values Q, K, V ∈ RN ×dk are obtained system. In further interaction with the value V, variables with
using linear projection, where dk is the projected dimension. high correlation can obtain larger attention weights.
The ith attention head gets a set of Qi , Ki , Vi . The attentional In the encoder, the self-attention mechanism is used to achieve
weights are obtained by calculating the similarity between the correlation extraction between different variables and layer norquery and the keys, using the attentional weight matrix to malization is used to obtain the intermediate variable Γ̂. Layer
perform a weighted summation on the value matrix V. The normalization is applied to the feature representation so that the
weighted output A is defined as feature channels of all variables are under a relatively uniform
 distribution. For each weighted token Ai , perform Z-Score
 A = Concat(head1 , head2 , . . . , headh )M normalization as
   
 Qi KTi Ai − μ
 headi = Vi softmax √ + mask , i ∈ [1, h] (1) Γ̂ = , (i = 1, 2, . . . , N ) (2)
 dk σ
where h denotes the number of attention heads and M is a where μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of Ai .
learnable output weight matrix. Fully connected features are encoded for Γ̂ in an FFN and
 STMBAD treats the entire sequence of a modality as a token, the reconstructed result is obtained by projection and cropping.
as shown in Fig. 3, while the correlation analysis focuses on Different from the FFN in the traditional transformer, which
the interaction among modalities. Consequently, the A acquired encodes variables under the same time stamp, the FFN in this
3750 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 Algorithm 1: Behavioral Modelling. The behavioral modeling procedure for spatio-temporal multimodal time series is given in the Algorithm 1. The algorithm takes as input the training data X, training epoch k,
 and training window size ω. The output is reconstructed data
 X . Algorithm 1 is an iterative process whose main process is
 multimodal time-series correlation analysis as lines 5–10. To
 avoiding overfitting, the process of training will be stopped when
 the model performance improves no longer. In each iteration, the
 loss function value is used as a performance indicator to compare
 the current validation loss with the previous minimum validation
 loss. There, we use the smooth L1 loss function to evaluate the
 difference between the model reconstructed values and the true
 values. The smooth L1 loss function is defined as
 
 1 2
 ς , if |ς| ≤ 1
 Loss(ς) = 2 (5)
 |ς| − 2 , otherwise
 1

 where ς is the difference between the reconstructed value and
 the true value.
 The best score is updated and the model weights are saved,
 as shown in lines 13–20. If the current validation loss is not
 significantly reduced or exceeds a certain tolerance range of
 the minimum validation loss, an early stopping condition is
 triggered. Meanwhile, a counter, denoted as Θ, indicating the
 triggering times of early stopping. The training will be stopped
 early when the counter exceeds the tolerance value.
 The entire encoder can be represented as a stack of multiple encoder layers. In one encoder, by using MLP, nonlinear
 transformations and feature extraction can be performed on the
 inputs, resulting in a higher level representation of the input data.
 At the same time, global correlation analysis and encoding of
 features are performed in an inverted manner, avoiding information weakening and noise interference caused by temporal
article represents tokens for the entire sequence of variables misalignment.
and calculates the global representation within the sequence.
As a part of each EncoderLayer, FFN consists of two fully C. Industrial Process Anomaly Detection
connected layers each of which has an activation function. The
input is linearly transformed by a one-dimensional convolutional Existing detection methods utilize the statistical characterislayer, which converts the dimensionality of the input from D to tics of normal parameters to determine a fixed threshold value
a higher feedforward neural network dimensionality D . This as the basis for system detection. However, when operating
linear change can be expressed as W1 Γ̂ + b1 , where W1 is the conditions or the environment change, the internal properties of
weight matrix of convolutional layer and b1 is bias vector. the data will also change. The threshold value determined using
 The dimension of the output is transformed from D back to historical data will be unable to capture such changes, leading to
D by a second one-dimensional convolutional layer in order to detection errors. Therefore, we implement a multiple detection
add it to the Nonlinear rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation strategy in the detection phase. This strategy combines historical
function is applied to the output of the convolutional layer. As and current information with a sliding window to ensure that the
a result, the entire computational process of the FFN can be system can make full use of different levels of information. By
represented as doing so, it reduces errors that may be caused by insufficient
 local information or global information processed individually,
 Γ = ReLU(W1 Γ̂ + b1 )W2 + b2 (3) thereby improving the comprehensiveness, accuracy, and robustness of the detection. In the real world, devices have a boot phase
where W2 is the weight matrix of the second convolutional layer
 for software or firmware loading. Hence, we take 30% of the
and b2 is the bias vector and get Γ ∈ RN ×D .
 training set and use it to simulate the state changes during the
 After fully connected feature encoding using FFN, it is again
 boot phase.
normalized by one layer to obtain F̂. Finally, each variable Specifically, as shown in Fig. 4, multiple detection strategy
representation is mapped to the reconstructed result separately includes global detection and local detection. For each time
through a mapping layer, which is implemented by MLP as series xn , after reconstruction to obtain the loss sequence x̂n ,
 XN ×M = F̂N ×D WD×M + b (4) we employ the sliding window and the three-sigma rule for
 detecting the degree of deviation. Assume that the size of the
where W is the parameter that the model wants to learn and sliding window is w and window slide step is m, where m ⩽ w.
b is an M -dimensional bias vector. Projective mapping of the By sliding the window sequentially from the starting position of
encoder’s output yields the output X . loss series. The subsequence can be recorded as x̂[s:s+w−1] =
LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 3751

Fig. 4. Illustration of anomaly detection. In the figure, The window keeps sliding and each window outputs a local threshold value ψs . Then all
these ψs values are connected together to obtain Ψ. where μ and σ denote the mean and standard deviation of the subsequence within the window,
respectively. λ is the standard deviation multiplier, t and s denote the time point corresponding to the current window starting point, and w is the
local threshold of the window [s, s + w].

{x̂s , x̂s+1 , . . . , x̂s+w−1 }, the window mean μs and standard
deviation σs are obtained. STMBAD measures the extent of
deviation of the loss data within the window in terms of the
three-sigma rule to obtain a measured value as
 ψs = μs + λσs (6)
where λ = 3. As a rule of thumb, most data points can be
covered when λ = 3 to provide more conservative bounds [32].
Subsequently, STMBAD concatenates the obtained ψs to have
a dynamic sequence of measurements Ψ. Fig. 5. Examples of segment detection. Adjustment of predicted labels
 For global detection, the percentage method is applied to when predicted anomalies overlap with real anomaly segments.
determine the threshold. The percentage method is based on
the principle of data distribution, where the dataset is sorted In practice, anomalies typically do not occur in isolation but
in ascending order and the pth percentile is selected as the rather manifest as a continuous segment of anomalies. Focusing
threshold. If any point in x̂n exceeds the threshold that point solely on the detection of a single point may overlook the
in time is marked as an abnormal. This method ensures that the reality of the entire segment of anomalies. Therefore, STMBAD
threshold is set within a specific distribution of the data, thus employs a segment detection strategy [33]. Fig. 5 shows that in
effectively identifying extreme values or anomalies in the data. this strategy, when any point in the actual abnormal segment
 In localized detection, the local threshold is ψs . Since m ⩽ w, is detected, the segment is considered to have been correctly
this means that the window x̂[s:s+w] partially overlaps with the detected. This approach reduces the reliance on isolated points
previous window x̂[s−w−1:s−1] . The overlapping part undergoes and avoids having false alarms at a single point affect the overall
repeated detection, and the results may show bias due to noise assessment.
or sudden data changes. Therefore, to reduce the interference of STMBAD proposes a multiple detection method with adapuncertainty and enhance the robustness of the detection method, tive thresholds. This approach aims to enhance the accuracy
we apply the AND operation in the overlapping part to achieve and robustness of anomaly detection by capturing long-term
stricter detection criteria. This implies that the overlap is con- trends and periodic changes in the system. It can flexibly and
sidered an exception only when both results of repeated testing automatically adjust thresholds to adapt to different time scales
are abnormal. and changing environmental contexts.
 Finally, in the face of the different results obtained from global
and local detection, we use the OR operation. Local detection IV. EVALUATION
can provide fine-grained information, and global detection can
 A. Datasets
provide macroscopic contextual information. The OR operation
can combine local and global detection results. In this way, The proposed STMBAD performed experimental simulations
anomalies missed in local detection due to strict criteria can in industrial water treatment processes and water distribution
be supplemented by this operation. At the same time, possible (WADI) processes. Secure water treatment (SWaT), battle of
misdetections in global detection can be corrected by local attack detection algorithms (BATADAL), and WADI are used to
detection. evaluate the validity and performance. These scenarios simulate
3752 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 TABLE I TABLE III
 CORE INFORMATION OF DATASETS COMPARION OF HYPERPARAMETERS OPTIMIZATION THE BATCH SIZE IN THE
 BATADAL DATASET

 TABLE II
 EXPERIMENTAL HYPERPARAMETERS

 with an initial learning rate ε0 = 0.0001, a decay coefficient of
 0.5, and training epochs of 100 for each dataset.
 In the anomaly detection phase, a sliding window is used to
 extract dynamic and localized information. To determine the
 optimal sliding window size and sliding step size corresponding
 to each dataset, several tests are performed. Fig. 6(a) shows the
 tuning of w with a fixed m, it can be seen from that the model
physical attacks, such as water leaks and malicious data injec- performs best when w = 205 or w = 210. Then, m is adjusted
tion, in addition to attacks and defenses against programmable when w is 205 or 210, respectively. Fig. 6(b) shows that the
logic controllers (PLCs) and networks. The core information of F1 score of the model obtains its maximum value when w =
these datasets is given in Table I. 205 and m = 20. Using the same methodology, the detection
 The detailed description of each dataset is as follows. parameters of w = 50 and m = 10 are obtained under the SWAT
 1) SWaT [34]: SWaT is a water treatment testbed for re- dataset, and w = 135 and m = 10 are obtained under the WADI
 search in the field of cybersecurity. During data collection, dataset.
 the ICS was run for 11 consecutive days. Of these, 7 days This article implemented several baseline algorithms, inwere in normal operation, and 4 days were in an attack cluding transformer, PatchTST, and TimesNet-based anomaly
 scenario. Attacks last anywhere from a few minutes to an detection methods. The experimental results of these baseline
 hour. algorithms are then compared with that of STMBAD.
 2) WADI [35]: WADI is a natural extension of SWaT, form- 1) Transformer (2017, [11]) is a well-known neural network
 ing a complete and realistic network for water treatment, model based on the attention mechanism. In sequenstorage, and distribution. The system operated continu- tial data processing, the attention mechanism allows the
 ously for 16 days, which included 14 days of normal model to attend to different time steps or elements of
 operation and 2 days of attacks. During these attacks, the sequence, giving more weight to relevant parts and
 the system was attacked 15 times. reducing the influence of less important ones.
 3) BATADAL [36]: BATADAL dataset represents a WADI 2) PatchTST (2023, [37]) is a transformer-based long timenetwork consisting of seven storage tanks. The training set series prediction model. This model can effectively deal
 was generated from a year-long simulation and does not with the length variation and imbalance of the time series.
 contain any attacks. The test dataset contains three months It achieves this by using a patch-based approach where
 of continuous recordings and includes seven attacks. the time series is divided into smaller patches, and then
 In the experiments, only continuous time series are chosen transformer architecture is applied to these patches for
during the dataset preprocessing stage. Then, 25, 62, and 27 prediction.
variables are actually used in SWaT, WADI, and BATADAL, 3) TimesNet (2023, [38]) is a time-series-based anomaly
respectively. detection model. It combines CNN and LSTM networks
 to capture local and temporal dependencies in time-series
B. Parameter Settings
 data, effectively discovering abnormal behavior in time-
 STMBAD is implemented with Python 3.6.5. In our work, series data.
20% of the training set is set aside to be used as the validation After extensive parameter tuning of the methods on the same
set, while the remaining 80% is used for model training. The dataset, the combination with the best performance is selected
training set is employed to initially train the model, and the as the final training parameters. Meanwhile, all methods are
validation set is used to evaluate the performance of different fully trained to ensure the authenticity and reliability of the
combinations of hyperparameters. comparison.
 The hyperparameters of the model are carefully adjusted to
ensure optimal performance for each dataset, as shown in Table
 C. Overall Detection Performance
II. The training set size of BATADAL is only 8761, which is too
small for deep model training. Table III shows that in the opti- 1) ROC and AUC: To visualize the effectiveness of STMmization experiment of BATADAL data, the loss is the lowest BAD, the degree of coverage between predicted labels and true
when Bs = 1. This means that only one sample is used in each labels for our model and all baselines at the current time interval
training iteration to achieve higher flexibility in model training is shown in Fig. 7. As can be seen from the figure, our model is
with small datasets. The learning rate ε is adjusted using an ex- able to cover all anomalous regions in the sample, while the other
ponential decay method as ε = 0.5epoch−1 εi (i = 0, 1, . . . , 100) baselines have missed detections. Meanwhile, receiver operating
LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 3753

Fig. 6. Adjust the parameters of window size (w) and sliding step (m) size in the BATADAL dataset. (a) Window size (m = 30). (b) Sliding step
(w = 205). (c) Sliding step (w = 210).

Fig. 7. Capability of anomaly detection on the BATADAL dataset. The blue region represents the real anomalous region, while the yellow color
indicates the anomalous region detected by the corresponding model. (a) STMBAD. (b) PatchTST. (c) TimesNet. (d) Transformer.

Fig. 8. Comparison of model performance. (a)–(c) ROC curves and corresponding AUC values under different datasets. (a) SWaT. (b) BATADAL.
(c) WADI.

characteristic (ROC) curves are used to analyze the relationship 2) Precision and F1-Score: The model proposed in this artibetween the false positive rate (FPR) and the true positive cle is combined with several classical neural network framerate (TPR). The area under the ROC curves, namely AUC, is works for anomaly detection. Comparative experiments are
computed to evaluate the overall performance. As shown in conducted according to the original structure of the compared
Fig. 8, the AUC values of STMBAD on the BATADAL, SWaT, models or open source code. In Table IV, the F1 scores of our
and WADI datasets are 0.8502, 0.9508, and 0.8717, respectively. model on the SWaT, BATADAL, and WADI datasets are 0.9508,
The average AUC of our model is approximately 2% higher than 0.8502, and 0.8717, respectively. The average precision rate of
that of the model in second place. In testing, there is a small STMBAD is 0.8757, and the average recall rate is 0.9069, with
bias in the optimal AUC. However, in anomaly detection, we the accuracy maintained above 98%. Compared with the average
prefer to obtain the best F1 value because having an excellent recall rate of the second-ranked model, the average recall rate
F1 value at a certain threshold is more important than having only has increased by 7.2%, and the average F1 has increased by
high but less excellent F1 values at most thresholds [33]. The 4.35%. This indicates that our model has high credibility and
average values of FPR and TPR obtained by STMBAD in the more comprehensive coverage in anomaly detection. Although
optimal state are 0.92% and 90.69%, respectively. Most of the the indicators of STMBAD on a single dataset are lower than
important metrics are higher than those of the baselines, which those of the baseline model, it is still in an advantageous position
indicates that our classifier performs better than the baselines. from an overall analysis. In the SWaT dataset, the precision
The proposed method also achieves a high recall rate while of transformer is about 4.69% higher than that of our model,
ensuring a low false alarm rate. but its recall rate is only 81.56%, which is 14.36% lower than
3754 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
 COMPARISON OF ANOMALY DETECTION RESULT OF DIFFERENT METHODS COMPARISON OF F1 SCORES UNDER DIFFERENT METHODS
 UNDER THREE DATASETS

 latency time of only 1.41 s. This model is 46.64% quicker than
 the one ranked second. This indicates that STMBAD is highly
 capable of detecting anomalies in a timelier fashion. It reduces
 the time difference between the occurrence of anomalies and
 their detection. In practical applications, this timely detection is
 crucial as it allows for prompt action to be taken to address the
 anomalies and prevent potential negative consequences.
 4) Fixed Versus Adaptive Threshold: In this section, we will
 analyze the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive threshold
 setting method. The F1 scores of STMBAD on three different
 datasets are presented in Table VI. When the model is without
 TABLE V the adaptive threshold, it obtains an average F1 score of approxi-
COMPARISON OF DETECTION INFERENCE AND LATENCY TIME OF DIFFERENT mately 0.7815. In contrast, our model with the adaptive threshold
 MODELS UNDER THREE DATASETS maintains an average F1 score at around 0.8909, representing an
 increment of 10.94%. This clearly demonstrates that the scene
 adaptive threshold determination algorithm is highly effective
 in identifying anomalies. Most existing algorithms typically
 only consider the global characteristics of the time series while
 neglecting the local trends of the data. As a result, this leads to an
 increase in the false alarm rate of some detection results. On the
 other hand, our model operates by computing local anomalies
 through sliding a window over the data series. In addition, it
 updates the global anomaly threshold based on the distribution
 of the data. By doing so, our model is able to capture the changing
 trends and periodicity of the data, thereby obtaining a more
 desirable detection result.
 Upon analyzing the abovementioned four dimensions, it becomes evident that the performance of our model under different
 simulation datasets is at a high level. This proves that STMBAD
 has the ability to effectively address the problem of anomaly
 detection in multimodal spatio-temporal sequences.

 V. CONCLUSION
that of STMBAD. And in the WADI dataset, the performance
of our model ranks second. This is because the dataset has a This work propose an ICS anomaly detection approach,
higher frequency of sample collection, higher data density, and called STMBAD, based on spatio-temporal multimodal bemore serious data imbalance [39]. When training the model, the havior. STMBAD leverages the rich information available in
generalization ability of the model itself is insufficient, resulting industrial multimodal data to deepen the understand of complex
in the test results being affected. ICS behaviors and enhance the ability of detecting stealthy
 3) Inference and Delay Time: Across the three datasets un- attacks. The proposed approach first embeds individual modality
der consideration, the inference time of STMBAD shows vari- sequence separately into variate tokens, then uses the attention
ation depending on the size of the dataset. As demonstrated in mechanism and FFN to capture multivariate correlations and
Table V, in the relatively small BATADAL dataset, the infer- interdependencies. Meanwhile, it utilizes the attention mechaence time is a mere 63 s. Moreover, on average, only 0.003 s nisms to model the characteristics of the spatio-temporal multiare spent on inference per window. On the other hand, in the modal behavior of ICS. STMBAD performs anomaly detection
large WADI dataset, the inference time amounts to 2542 s. The by evaluating the deviation of reconstructed variate tokens and
average inference time over the three datasets is 2006 s, which is leverages an adaptive detection mechanism combining global
approximately 25% faster than that of the model ranked second. and local detection for variable industrial process. The simu-
Evidently, STMBAD can perform detection rapidly and produc- lation results show that the proposed method can effectively
ing results in a timely fashion. It significantly enhances detection identify the anomalies in the ICSs and show high performance
efficiency and saves valuable time costs. When compared from in anomaly detection tasks. STMBAD outperforms the baseline
the perspective of latency time, it becomes clear that STMBAD methods in many aspects, including average AUC value, average
is consistently at the fastest response level. It has an average recall rate, average accuracy, and average F1 score. Moreover,
LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS 3755

the average detection duration per window of STMBAD is [18] F. Harrou, K. R. Kini, M. Madakyaru, and Y. Sun, “Uncovering sensor
0.008 s, and the average latency is 1.41 s, which indicates that faults in wind turbines: An improved multivariate statistical approach for
 condition monitoring using SCADA data,” Sustain. Energy, Grids Netw.,
STMBAD responds much faster than the baseline systems. vol. 35, 2023, Art. no. 101126.
 In the experiment, it is found that the proposed model is more [19] L. Yu, X. Zhao, J. Huang, H. Hu, and B. Liu, “Research on machine
sensitive to the quality, size, and distribution of the data. For learning with algorithms and development,” J. Theory Pract. Eng. Sci.,
instance, when the data sample is unbalanced and the distribution vol. 3, no. 12, pp. 7–14, 2023.
 [20] I. Bayane, J. Leander, and R. Karoumi, “An unsupervised machine learning
undergoes drastic changes, the performance of the model will be approach for real-time damage detection in bridges,” Eng. Struct., vol. 308,
affected. This indicates that the model’s generalization ability 2024, Art. no. 117971.
is relatively degraded when facing with frequent changes in [21] J. Li and Z. Liu, “Attribute-weighted outlier detection for mixed data
data distribution. These limitations are the mainly aspects being based on parallel mutual information,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 236, 2024,
 Art. no. 121304.
supposed to improve in future. By addressing these issues, the [22] J. He, Z. Cheng, and B. Guo, “Anomaly detection in telemetry data using a
performance and applicability of the proposed model can be jointly optimal one-class support vector machine with dictionary learning,”
further enhanced in real-world anomaly detection scenarios. Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 242, 2024, Art. no. 109717.
 [23] O. Surucu, S. A. Gadsden, and J. Yawney, “Condition monitoring using
 machine learning: A review of theory, applications, and recent advances,”
 REFERENCES Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 221, 2023, Art. no. 119738.
 [24] H. Xu, Z. Sun, Y. Cao, and H. Bilal, “A data-driven approach for intrusion
 [1] J. Cai, Z. Wei, and J. Luo, “ICS anomaly detection based on sensor
 and anomaly detection using automated machine learning for the Internet
 patterns and actuator rules in spatiotemporal dependency,” IEEE Trans.
 of Things,” Soft Comput., vol. 27, no. 19, pp. 14469–14481, 2023.
 Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 10647–10656, Aug. 2024.
 [25] Y. Qiao, J. LÃŒ, T. Wang, K. Liu, B. Zhang, and H. Snoussi, “A
 [2] M. Salehi and S. Bayat-Sarmadi, “PLCDefender: Improving remote attesmultihead attention self-supervised representation model for industrial
 tation techniques for PLCs using physical model,” IEEE Internet Things
 sensors anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2,
 J., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 7372–7379, May 2021.
 pp. 2190–2199, Feb. 2024.
 [3] H. Gao, B. Qiu, R. J. D. Barroso, W. Hussain, Y. Xu, and X. Wang,
 [26] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial-temporal graph learning for
 “TSMAE: A novel anomaly detection approach for Internet of Things time
 multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 series data using memory-augmented autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
 Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11802–11816, Sep. 2024.
 Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2978–2990, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 [27] B. Padmavathi, A. Bhagyalakshmi, D. Kavitha, and P. Indumathy, “An
 [4] J. Yang, Y. Lee, and A. P. McDonald, “Solarwinds software supply
 optimized Bi-LSTM with random synthetic over-sampling strategy for
 chain security: Better protection with enforced policies and technologies,”
 network intrusion detection,” Soft Comput., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 777–790,
 in Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking and Paral-
 2023.
 lel/Distributed Computing. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 43–58.
 [28] V. Shanmuganathan and A. Suresh, “LSTM-Markov based efficient
 [5] P. Kumar, V. Govindaraj, V. S. Erturk, K. S. Nisar, and M. Inc, “Fractional
 anomaly detection algorithm for IoT environment,” Appl. Soft Comput.,
 mathematical modeling of the stuxnet virus along with an optimal control
 vol. 136, 2023, Art. no. 110054.
 problem,” Ain Shams Eng. J., vol. 14, no. 7, 2023, Art. no. 102004.
 [29] J. Miao, H. Tao, H. Xie, J. Sun, and J. Cao, “Reconstruction-based anomaly
 [6] D. I. Urbina et al., “Limiting the impact of stealthy attacks on industrial
 detection for multivariate time series using contrastive generative adversarcontrol systems,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 ial networks,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 61, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 103569.
 New York, NY, USA, 2016, pp. 1092–1105.
 [30] Y. Zhang, P. Zhou, and E. Ma, “Anomaly detection of industrial smelting
 [7] N. Gaw, P. M. Pardalos, and M. R. Gahrooei, Multimodal and Tensor
 furnace incorporated with accelerated sampling denoising diffusion prob-
 Data Analystics for Industrial Systems Improvement. Berlin, Germany:
 ability model and conv-transformer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73,
 Springer, 2024.
 2024, Art. no. 3513811, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2024.3375410.
 [8] X. Yuan et al., “Quality prediction modeling for industrial processes using
 [31] S. Ma, S. Guan, Z. He, J. Nie, and M. Gao, “TPAD: Temporal-pattern-based
 multiscale attention-based convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans.
 neural network model for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,”
 Cybern., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 2696–2707, May 2024.
 IEEE Sensors J., vol. 23, no. 24, pp. 30668–30682, Dec. 2023.
 [9] W. Lin, S. Wang, W. Wu, D. Li, and A. Zomaya, “Hybridad: A hybrid
 [32] Y. Damine, N. Bessous, A. C. Megherbi, and S. Salim, “Early bearing
 model-driven anomaly detection approach for multivariate time series,”
 fault detection using EEMD and three-sigma rule denoising method,”
 IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 866–878,
 Mechanics, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 302–308, 2023.
 Feb. 2024.
 [33] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
[10] X. Yuan et al., “Attention-based interval aided networks for data modeling
 for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
 of heterogeneous sampling sequences with missing values in process
 2018, pp. 187–196.
 industry,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 5253–5262,
 [34] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
 Apr. 2024.
 research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Crit. Inf.
[11] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf.
 Infrastruct. Secur., 2017, pp. 88–99.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
 [35] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
[12] L. Xu, X. Ding, H. Peng, D. Zhao, and X. Li, “ADTCD: An adaptive
 testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in
 anomaly detection approach toward concept drift in IoT,” IEEE Internet
 Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
 Things J., vol. 10, no. 18, pp. 15931–15942, Sep. 2023.
 pp. 25–28.
[13] C. Lin, B. Du, L. Sun, and L. Li, “Hierarchical context representation
 [36] R. Taormina, S. Galelli, N. O. Tippenhauer, and E. Salomons, “The battle
 and self-adaptive thresholding for multivariate anomaly detection,” IEEE
 of the attack detection algorithms: 1 disclosing cyber attacks on water
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 3139–3150, Jul. 2024.
 distribution 2 networks,” J. Water Resour. Plan. Manage., vol. 144, no. 8,
[14] Y. Liu et al., “iTransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
 2018, Art. no. 04018048.
 series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024,
 [37] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time
 pp. 1–25, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.06625.
 series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transform-
[15] P. P. Liang, A. Zadeh, and L.-P. Morency, “Foundations & trends in
 ers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–24,
 multimodal machine learning: Principles, challenges, and open questions,”
 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2211.14730.
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1–42, 2024.
 [38] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Times-
[16] A. Belhadi, Y. Djenouri, G. Srivastava, A. Cano, and J. C.-W. Lin, “Hybrid
 Net: Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analgroup anomaly detection for sequence data: Application to trajectory data
 ysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–23,
 analytics,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 9346–9357,
 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.02186.
 Jul. 2022.
 [39] P. Liu, Q. Han, T. Wu, and W. Tao, “Anomaly detection in industrial
[17] Z. Minjie and Z. Yilian, “Abnormal traffic detection technology of power
 multivariate time-series data with neutrosophic theory,” IEEE Internet
 IoT terminal based on PCA and OCSVM,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Inf. Technol.,
 Things J., vol. 10, no. 15, pp. 13458–13473, Aug. 2023.
 Netw., Electron. Autom. Control Conf., 2023, vol. 6, pp. 549–553.