IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025 6215

 StorSec: A Comprehensive Design for Securing the
 Distributed IoT Storage Systems
 Shiwen Zhang , Wen Zhang, Wei Liang , Senior Member, IEEE, Wenqiang Jin , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Keqin Li , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Internet of Things (IoT) networks have penetrated the storage capacity of IoT devices is facing serious limitaour daily life and industries. However, IoT devices are typically tions. According to predictions from the International Data
small-sized with constrained storage. Distributed storage systems Corporation (IDC) [1], nearly 80ZB of data will be generated
are emerging as promising solutions to tackle such challenges.
InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) is a desired framework by IoT devices by 2025, while many IoT devices may only
enabling IoT devices to upload its data to a distributed cloud have a few MB to GB of storage space. This means that
while returning a hash-ID for downloading and file-sharing these devices cannot store all the data generated locally, which
purposes. Nevertheless, IPFS lacks of robust security design and undoubtedly brings some challenges. The vast volumes of
is vulnerable to security threats such as data tampering, and data produced by IoT requires the use of hardware virtudata leakage. In particular, whenever device A’s file hash-ID is
shared to an arbitrary device B, device A will fully lose the alization technology for storage, and this further stimulates
control over file. In other words, device B could further share it to the development of centralized storage and distributed storanyone without device A’s agreements. To conquer the challenge, age technologies. The typical representative of centralized
we propose a comprehensive design for securing the distributed storage technology is cloud storage. Many organizations or
IoT storage systems, named StorSec. Specifically, we design commercial companies typically use the cloud [2], [3], [4]
a new heterogeneous framework using an improved attribute
encryption algorithm to eliminate the single-point performance to store data. However, the user data generated by the
bottleneck problem, which not only realizes fine-grained access terminal devices often involve personal privacy information.
control and ensures the security of data during transmission, Delivering this information to third-party cloud data centers
but also improves the performance of key generation. Secondly, not only reduces the efficiency of data processing due to high
we design an anomaly detection algorithm, which is based on transmission latency, but also increases the risk of privacy
hashchain technology and combines the user privacy metadata
stored on the blockchain to complete the verification process, leakage [5], [6], [7], as shown in Fig. 1.
effectively protecting the file hash identifier, ensuring access To solve the aforementioned problems in centralized storcontrol to the file, and thus providing protection for the security age, the concept of distributed storage [8], [9], [10] for the
and integrity of data storage. Furthermore, we design an auditing IoT environment has gradually emerged. IPFS [11], with its
algorithm that helps the system in tracking malicious entities. peer-to-peer global distributed file system, offers a robust
Ultimately, the security and efficiency of the proposed scheme
are evaluated by both security analysis and experimental results. solution for handling massive data storage. It eliminates single
 points of failure through distributed and persistent storage,
 Index Terms—IoT, blockchain, IPFS, attribute-based encryp- supports deduplication, high throughput, and content addresstion, verifiable.
 ing. However, although IPFS offers high storage efficiency, it
 does not provide security for data by itself and is vulnerable to
 I. I NTRODUCTION security threats such as data tampering and data leakage. This
 means that without additional security measures, the stored
 HE INTERNET of Things (IoT) has grown to be an
T essential component of our everyday existence. However,
 content could be accessed by unauthorized users.
 Due to the risks of malicious tampering and privacy leak-
 Received 22 September 2024; revised 17 May 2025; accepted 7 August
 age during data storage and transmission, many researchers
2025. Date of publication 11 August 2025; date of current version have recommended encrypting data and enforcing access
5 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the Scientific Research control before transmission to prevent unnecessary network
Fund of Hunan Provincial Education Department under Grant 24A0337, and
in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan province under Grant attacks [12], such as replay attacks, collusion attacks, man-
2025JJ50348. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and in-the-middle attacks, data tampering, and DDoS attacks.
approving it for publication was P. Varga. (Corresponding author: Wenqiang Many ideas have been put out to address the encryption
Jin.)
 Shiwen Zhang, Wen Zhang, and Wei Liang are with the School of challenge of data access control [13], [14], [15]. Of them,
Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan University of Science and one of the most potential is Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-Based
Technology, Xiangtan 411201, China (e-mail: shiwenzhang@hnu.edu.cn; Encryption (CP-ABE) [15]. It is capable of guaranteeing both
francefff@qq.com; wliang@hnust.edu.cn).
 Wenqiang Jin is with the College of Computer Science and Electronic confidentiality and detailed access control. At present, access
Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China (e-mail: control schemes based on CP-ABE are primarily divided into
wqjin@hnu.edu.cn). two categories: single-authority [16], [17], [18] and multi-
 Keqin Li is with the Department of Computer Science, State University of
New York, New Paltz, NY 12561 USA (e-mail: lik@newpaltz.edu). authority [19], [20], [21]. In the existing single-authorization
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3597550 scheme, only one authoritative organization is responsible for
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6216 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. The problem of IoT data storage.

allocating all attributes. In situations where user volume is (3) We propose a blockchain-based decentralized auditing
high, a single point of performance bottleneck can easily algorithm that helps the system track down malicious
occur, causing system congestion. Since all attributes are entities while being able to ensure the transparency of the
managed by one authoritative organization, users may need auditing process and the immutability of the data.
to queue when obtaining private keys, resulting in low key (4) We conduct a detailed security analysis, proving that the
generation efficiency. In multi-authorization application sce- scheme is secure under the Decisional q-parallel Bilinear
narios, if multiple authoritative institutions manage different Diffie-Hellman Exponent Assumption(q-BDHE) model,
subsets of attributes separately, this may also lead to inefficient and can resist collusion attacks from AAs and users.
key distribution. Moreover, this situation also presents the The sufficient experimental results demonstrates that this
issue of data breaches resulting from coordinated attacks by scheme exhibits greater efficiency.
entities. The existing schemes [22], [23], [24] propose some The structure of the remaining sections of this article is
accountability mechanisms for collusion among entities but do outlined as follows. In Section II, we reviewed the related work
not offer the corresponding technologies to detect collusion of this article. Section III introduces the relevant preliminaries.
activities of entities to prevent data from being illegally The system model and workflow are in Section IV. We
obtained. describe the proposed scheme in Sections V and VI. In
 In this article, we propose a comprehensive design scheme Section VII, we present a safety analysis of this scheme. In
to ensure the security of distributed IoT storage systems. First, Section VIII, we assess the performance of the scheme through
we build a decentralized storage framework based on the the experimental results. The article concludes with a summary
blockchain, using IPFS to establish verifiable links between of our findings in Section IX.
blockchain status and content addresses published to IPFS,
ensuring the integrity and correctness of data. Simultaneously,
the improved adaptability and detailed features of the CP- II. R ELATED W ORK
ABE scheme are used for data encryption. This technology A. Secure Data Storage for IoT
not only improves the performance of key generation, but also In recent years, secure data storage has always attracted
ensures the security of data in transit while realizing fine- wide attention from the IoT industry and academia. For examgrained access control. Then, to detect abnormal behaviors ple, Chen et al. [25] proposed decentralized public auditing
of institutions or users and prevent data from being illegally scheme based on blockchain technology to address the security
obtained, this scheme designs a private key verification algo- challenges of data integrity in cloud storage. This scheme aims
rithm based on the hashchain technique, which combines with to decentralize and entrust the auditing tasks to multiple Cloud
the metadata of user’s private data stored on the blockchain Service Providers (CSPs), and uses blockchain technology
to verify the authenticity of the user’s private key. Next, we to record the entire auditing process to ensure the security
design an audit algorithm that can help the system track and integrity of data. However, the CSPs mentioned in the
malicious entities. Finally, we conduct extensive simulation article are set as semi-trusted, and the uncertainty of their
experiments to confirm the security and efficiency of our behaviors poses potential risks to data storage. Specifically,
proposed design. The primary contributions of this article are once the outsourced data is damaged during the management
summarized as below. or processing by a particular CSP, it may cause a single point
 (1) We design a new heterogeneous framework using an of failure, thereby leading to data loss or integrity damage.
 improved attribute encryption algorithm to eliminate the Lu et al. [26] designed a novel anonymous authentication
 single-point performance bottleneck problem, which not scheme with a group signature priority that minimizes both
 only realizes fine-grained access control and ensures the computational and communication overheads. They built a
 security of data during transmission, but also improves blockchain-based IoT sensor cloud storage protocol using this
 the performance of key generation. proposed group signature scheme, and implemented proxy
 (2) We propose a verifiable multi-authorization attribute re-encryption to ensure the security of data transmission.
 encryption scheme based on blockchain, and use Although this scheme achieved secure data storage and sharing
 blockchain to design an anomaly detection algorithm in cloud-supported IoT environments, it still faces some singlethat prevents data from being illegally accessed by point failure issues, including the possibility of cloud service
 regulating the anomalous behaviors of institutions or disruptions and internal malicious attacks. These potential
 users. risks could potentially undermine the stability and security
ZHANG et al.: STORSEC: A COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN FOR SECURING THE DISTRIBUTED IOT STORAGE SYSTEMS 6217

of the system. Later, Azbeg et al. [27] proposed a decen- mechanism for data sharing in smart grid. However, this
tralized IoT healthcare system solution based on blockchain scheme did not explain in detail how to determine whether
technology, which addresses the security issues faced by the data was leaked and how to identify the responsible party
traditional cloud storage or third-party storage. The scheme for the leakage. Bader et al. in [30] presented a blockchainensures the security and tamper-proof nature of data by uti- based scheme that preserves privacy for supporting lightweight
lizing blockchain technology, while also employing IPFS for multi-hop information accountability in supply chains. The
distributed storage. However, IPFS itself does not provide data scheme designed an accountability mechanism based on smart
security, and it is susceptible to threats such as data tampering contracts, which can be used to punish and incentivize negand data leakage. The integration of blockchain technology ligent and irresponsible behaviors in supply chains. However,
with IPFS ensures the integrity of the data. Nevertheless, the this literature [30] did not provide detailed explanations of the
inherent openness of blockchain allows anyone to view the design and implementation details of the smart contracts, nor
content identifiers (hash-ID) returned by IPFS. This means did it verify their correctness and robustness, so it is difficult
that without additional security measures, unauthorized users to ensure that they can effectively execute the accountability
may gain access to the stored content. To further protect data, mechanism and avoid logical errors or malicious attacks.
Ullah et al. [28] introduced a blockchain-based solution for In contrast to prior research, this article proposes a design
decentralized distributed storage and sharing. This solution for a blockchain-based distributed data storage system. This
integrates end-to-end data encryption, the IPFS decentralized system designs a new heterogeneous framework with improved
storage system, and the Ethereum blockchain. By encrypting attribute encryption algorithms to eliminate the single-point
the content identifiers stored in IPFS, the data storage is performance bottleneck problem, which not only realizes
effectively safeguarded. However, in large-scale applications, fine-grained access control and ensures the security of data
the use of symmetric encryption for file data poses challenges during transmission, but also improves the performance of
in key management and distribution. Symmetric encryption key generation. To prevent unauthorized access to data, we
requires each pair of users to have an independent key to introduce an anomaly detection algorithm. This algorithm
ensure the security of communication. In a network composed leverages hashchain technology combined with user privacy
of N users, the number of keys that need to be managed grows data metadata stored on the blockchain to complete the
exponentially. This complexity in key management not only verification process, effectively protecting file hash identifiers
increases the operational costs of the system but also may and ensuring control over the files, thereby guaranteeing the
become a potential security risk point, as issues such as key security and integrity of data storage. Moreover, we design an
loss, leakage, or improper management can all lead to the fail- audit mechanism that can help the system track the responsible
ure of data protection. To address these challenges, we propose parties.
a decentralized storage solution that simultaneously ensures
data confidentiality, minimizes key management overhead, and
prevents metadata leakage, making it well-suited for secure
 III. P RELIMINARIES
and scalable storage in IoT applications.
 A. InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) for IoT
 The swift advancement of the IoT has resulted in a marked
B. Multi-Authority Attribute-Based Encryption escalation in the necessity for data storage capacity. This
 In order to prevent data leakage during storage and transmis- growth has driven the development of storage solutions such as
sion, we summarized the following research on data encryption centralized and distributed storage. Centralized storage is easy
and access control simultaneously. Currently, attribute-based to manage and maintain, but it also faces challenges in terms
encryption technology CP-ABE is seen as one of the most of data security and efficiency. Distributed storage technology,
potential data access control technologies [15]. According with its better security and scalability, is considered the future
to the number of participating institutions, these CP-ABE direction of IoT development. IPFS [11] is a distributed file
schemes can be classified into two categories: single authority- system that operates on a peer-to-peer basis, enabling contentbased schemes and multiple authority-based schemes. In a addressable storage. Multiple nodes running the IPFS program
single-authority application scenario, the distribution of keys constitute the IPFS storage network, and the data stored in
corresponding to attributes is provided by a one institution this network is divided into multiple blocks and stored at
center. The computation is not only heavy, but we also have different nodes. When a user uploads a file to an IPFS node for
to have faith in the one authorization hub. To address the issue storage, the node will store the file after dividing it into blocks.
of low efficiency and poor security of the single authorization Each file block is organized in the form of a Merkle Directed
center, multiple authorization alternatives have emerged. In Acyclic Graph (Merkle DAG), as shown in Fig. 2, and the
2007, Chase in [19] proposed the concept of attribute-based root hash of the Merkle DAG is used to represent the file.
encryption scheme based on multiple authorities. However, At the same time, a Distributed Hash Table (DHT), as shown
in multi-authority application scenarios, there is no corre- in Fig. 3 is used to implement the location of file content
sponding technology to detect the abnormal behavior of the through hash values. IPFS supports deduplication and content
responsible party, to prevent data from being illegally obtained. addressing, but due to the lack of effective data integrity and
Yang et al. in [29] proposed a secure data access control security measures, there may be issues with data reliability
scheme enabled by edge blockchain with a fair accountability and security.
6218 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE I
 K EY N OTATIONS

Fig. 2. Merkle DAG.

 (DO), data user (DU), interplanetary file system (IPFS), and
 blockchain (BC), as shown in Fig. 4. To address security issues
 during data transmission, we set up a multi-authority attribute
 encryption framework consisting of a single CA and multiple
 AAs. We define each of these entities as follows.
 1) CA: The CA serves as the manager of the entire
 framework and is responsible for system initialization. It is
 considered a trusted entity within the system, forming the
 foundation for secure and authenticated operations.
Fig. 3. DHT. 2) AAs: AAs are responsible for verifying the legitimacy of
 user identities. In a multi-authority attribute-based encryption
 setting, each AA governs a subset of attributes and issues
B. Research Problem attribute-based keys to users based on their verified credentials.
 The problem we consider is how to design a secure data 3) DO: The DO defines the access policy for each file and
storage solution in the background of the IoT. We focus on encrypts the data accordingly before outsourcing it.
how to ensure its security during data transmission, that is, 4) DU: A DU is any entity requesting access to the data.
using reliable encryption technologies to prevent data from Only users who have been verified by the blockchain are
being intercepted or tampered with during transmission to authorized to retrieve the CID from BC and then fetch the
prevent unauthorized access. Simultaneously, we take into corresponding ciphertext from IPFS.
account the following potential threats. 5) IPFS: The encrypted data is stored within IPFS, and
 Threat 1: In multi-authority encryption scenarios, Attribute we utilize IPFS to establish a verifiable link between the BC
Authorities (AAs) are sincere and curious. They will abide state and the content address published to IPFS, ensuring the
by the contract, assign attributes to users, and verify their integrity of the data.
legitimacy. Since the verification of users is done manually, 6) Blockchain: The blockchain component stores metadata
there may be careless mistakes or malicious behavior, leading related to users’ private data and manages access control
to illegal access to data by users. information. To mitigate data leakage risks from collu-
 Threat 2: AAs and users may be malicious, and they might sion attacks in multi-authority ABE, the blockchain uses
initiate a collusion attack, attempting to conspire to obtain and hashchains to provide tamper-evident verification of stored
decrypt ciphertexts that neither can decrypt alone. metadata.

 B. Workflow
 IV. S TOR S EC D ESIGN
 The main workflow is presented in Fig. 5. The scheme
 In this section, we describe the system model and workflow
 consists of two parts: Multi-ABE and BC Verify.
of the proposed scheme. Table I lists the key symbols used in
 In the Multi-ABE process, we describe it in four stages.
this article.
 Stage 1: during the system initialization process, the CA
 is responsible for generating the public key and a series of
A. System Model parameters, and assigns unique identifiers when the DU and
 This article proposes a blockchain-aided verifiable multi- AAs register.
authority attribute-based encryption scheme for distributed IoT Stage 2: when encrypting data, DO first encrypts the data
Storage System. It consists of six entities, namely, certifi- with a symmetric encryption algorithm. Then, it secures the
cate authority (CA), attribute authorities (AAs), data owner resulting key by encrypting it with the public key acquired
ZHANG et al.: STORSEC: A COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN FOR SECURING THE DISTRIBUTED IOT STORAGE SYSTEMS 6219

Fig. 4. System model.

from CA. The owner then dispatches both the encrypted data and the public key that needs to be publicized is
and the symmetric key (in the form of ciphertext CT) to IPFS  
for storage. PK = Gg , GT , H , g, e(g, g)α , g β , h1 , . . . , hU (1)
 Stage 3: in the key management process, the CA generates
 Then, CA begins by processing the registration of AAs and
the corresponding keys for the users and uploads the metadata
 users. For each AA with identity Aid, the CA generates a
to the BC.
 signing and verification key pair: a private key skAid ∈ Zp
 Stage 4: when users are authenticated through the correct
 and the corresponding public key pkAid = g skAid . The CA
key and their attribute set matches the access structure in the
 then issues a certificate certAid containing pkAid , and securely
ciphertext, they can obtain the ciphertext and decrypt it using
 sends both certAid and skAid to the respective AA. Similarly,
their private key.
 each user is assigned a unique identifier Uid, and is issued a
 In the BC Verify process, users can compare the hash
 private key skUid along with a certificate certUid by the CA.
value of the data before decryption to verify whether the data
 Next, CA constructs and initializes a hashchain. Given a
has been tampered with. To prevent data leakage caused by
 hash function H, hashchain denotes a hashchain, which is a
collusion of malicious entities, we utilize blockchain technolfinite sequence of x0 , x1 , . . . , xl−1 , satisfying xi = H (xi−1 )
ogy for anomaly detection. Specifically, before obtaining the
 for i = 1, 2, . . . , l , where l is the length of the hashchain,
ciphertext, the DU first initiates a keyword request to the BC.
 x0 is the seed of the hashchain, xi is the i-th element in the
Upon receiving this request, BC finds the corresponding index
 hashchain, and xl−1 is the end of the hashchain. Then we
value in the indextable based on related metadata and sends it
 have:
to the CA to request the return of the related hash value. BC
performs hash verification with the private key uploaded by hashchain = (x0 ← x1 ←, . . . , ← xl−1 )
DU, and after verification, returns the keyword CID to DU.
DU uses this keyword to query and download the ciphertext The process of system initialization can be summed up as
from IPFS. follows using Algorithm 1.

 B. Data Encryption
 V. M ULTI -ABE
 The data encryption process is performed by the data owner
A. System Initialization themselves. DO first selects a symmetric encryption function
 Firstly, let Gg and GT as two multiplicative cyclic groups Ek : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}∗ , such as AES, and CP-ABE encryption
of prime order p, with g serving as the generator of Gg . The algorithm. The DO then selects a random symmetric key k and
bilinear map e is, e : Gg × Gg → GT . CA selects a safety uses this key along with the symmetric encryption function Ek
collision hash function H :{0, 1}∗ → Z∗p and a pseudorandom to encrypt the plaintext data M, resulting in the encrypted data
function PRF : Z∗p × {1, 2, . . . , n} → Z∗p . The CA randomly Ek (M ). To secure the symmetric key k, the DO utilize the CPgenerates four numbers α, β, u, v ∈ Z∗p , and for each property ABE in accordance with their personally defined access policy
i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , U }, where U denotes the maximum number Γ. Consider a set of parties, denoted as {P 1 , P 2 , . . . , P n }.
 1 2
 We define a collection Γ ⊆ 2{P ,P ,...,P } , as monotone
 n
of attributes, it randomly selects the parameters h1 , . . . , hU ∈
Gg . The system master key msk = {α, β, u, v } is generated, if for all subsets E and F, if E is an element of Γ and
6220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 5. Workflow.

Algorithm 1 System Initialization {at1 , at2 , . . . , atU }. The symmetric key k is encrypted by
 Input: Security parameter λ, attribute universe U; choosing a random key parameter s. DO first selects a random
 Output: System public key PK, master key msk; vector μ = (s, a2 , . . . , an ) ∈ Znp to share the secret value s.
 1: Choose a prime p of bit-length λ; Then, for i = 1, 2, . . . , r , the DO calculates ηi = Ai μ  , where
 2: Let Gg , GT be cyclic groups of order p, with generator Ai represent the vector corresponding to the i-th row of matrix
 g ∈ Gg ; A. Finally, the DO randomly chooses p1 , p2 , . . . , pr ∈ Z∗p ,
 3: Define bilinear map e:Gg × Gg → GT ; and the ciphertext is uploaded as CT(M ) :
 4: Define collision-resistant hash function H :{0, 1}∗ → Z∗p 
 and pseudorandom function PRF :Z∗p × {1, ..., n} → Z∗p ; CT(M ) = C  = ke(g, g)αs , C0 = g s
 
 5: CA randomly selects α, β, u, v ∈ Z∗p ;
 ∀i = 1 to r , Ci1 = g βηi h−p i C 2 = g pi . (2)
 6: For i = 1 to |U |, choose hi ∈ Gg ; (i) i
 7: Compute msk = {α, β, u, v }; Then, DO sends the ciphertext to IPFS, IPFS returns a hash
 8: Compute PK = (Gg , GT , H , g, e(g, g)α , g β , h1 , ..., hU ); value CID, and upon receiving it, DO uploads the CID as a
 9: return PK, msk; keyword to the blockchain. We can present the process of data
 10: CA assigns Aid and Uid, and sends certificate certAid encryption storage as Algorithm 2.
 and certUid ;
 11: Hashchain construction:
 12: Generate random x0 ∈ Z∗p ; C. Key Management
 13: For i = 1 to l: xi = H (xi−1 ); In our proposed scheme, which differs from traditional key
 14: Set hashchain = (x0 ← x1 ← · · · ← xl−1 ); management methods, a user selects an AA for verification
 and attribute allocation. After completing the above steps, the
 user obtains the key from CA, which maps the hash value
 of the user’s private key to the corresponding position in
E is a subset of F, then F is also an element of Γ. An the hashchain. Then, CA uploads and maps the position index,
access structure is defined as a collection of non-empty subsets the user’s attribute set SUid , and Uid to the index table on the
of{P 1 , P 2 , . . . , P n }, denoted as Γ, which is a subset of the blockchain.
power set of 2{p1 ,p2 ,...,pn } excluding the empty set. The When sending a key request, the user Uid needs to choose
subsets that are elements of Γ are referred to as authorized an AA with the identity Aid through a certain scheduling
sets, while the others are referred to as unauthorized sets. algorithm, and sends CertUid to demonstrate the legality of
The DO formulates a monotonous Boolean expression, which his/her identity. After the verification is successful, AA gets the
can be transformed into an LSSS access structure represented current timestamp value TCA , computes t = H (Uid ||TCA ||0)
by (A, ) using the method introduced in [31]. A matrix A and t  = H (Uid ||TCA ||1), and generates
of dimension r × n exists. Each row of A is assigned to
 pk t 
a specific attribute using the function , denoted as (i ) ∈ Di = hi Aid , di = hit , ∀i ∈ SUid (3)
ZHANG et al.: STORSEC: A COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN FOR SECURING THE DISTRIBUTED IOT STORAGE SYSTEMS 6221

Algorithm 2 Data Encryption and Storage
 Input: Symmetric key k, public key PK, data M and access
 policy Γ;
 Output: Ciphertext CT , CID;
 1: DO selects a arbitrary key k ∈ GT as the symmetric key, Fig. 6. The data format stored in the index table.
 and uses the key to encrypt M;
 2: Compute Ek (M ) using AES or other symmetric encryp- Algorithm 3 Key Management
 tion; Input: Master key msk, user attribute set S, and allowable
 3: Convert Γ into LSSS matrix (A, ); time difference ΔT ;
 4: Run CP-ABE encryption on k: Output: User private key SK;
 Compute C  = ke(g, g)αs , C0 = g s ; 1: CA selects an AA for user Uid;
 For each row i in A, compute Ci1 , Ci2 ; 2: AA receives request and computes t and t  ;
 5: Form CT = (Ek (M ), C  , C0 , {Ci1 , Ci2 }); 3: Compute Di = hipkAid t and di = hit ;
 

 6: Upload CT to IPFS; 4: Send (Uid , Aid , SUid , Di , di , TCA ) to CA;
 7: Receive the content identifier CID from IPFS; 5: CA obtains the current time T  ;
 8: Upload CID to the blockchain as the keyword; 6: Compute T  = T  − TCA ;
 9: return CT, CID; 7: if T  > ΔT
 8: Break;
 9: else
then delivers the subsequent communication to CA: 10: CA computes t and t  again;
 {Uid , Aid , SUid , Di , di , TCA } 11: end if
  
 12: Compute Di = Diu · g v (t+t ) and Di = diα · g −v (t+t ) ;
 Upon receipt of the message from AA, CA finds the 13: Generate SK = {D, D0 , Di , Di };
matching pkAid according to Aid. Next, CA calculates the 14: return SK;
difference between the current time and the received time 15: CA computes index = H (SKUid ) mod l ;
TCA , determines whether the transmission delay is within the 16: Store hashchain[index ] = H (SKUid );
allowable range ΔT , a system-defined security parameter 17: Upload SUid , Uid, and index to BC;
(e.g., 5 seconds). If the delay is acceptable, it proceeds to the 18: BC stores the mapping (Uid , SUid ) → index in the
next step; otherwise, it will terminate the current operation. IndexTable.
CA continues to compute t and t  , and ensures that they are
not reused by the same user. This mechanism helps to prevent
collusion attacks from AAs. In the end, for the user Uid, CA
 table is maintained on the blockchain, which maps each tuple
generates the key SKUid using master key msk in the manner
 (Uid , SUid ) as keys to the value index. This index indicates
described below:
  βut the position of the user’s private key hash in the hashchain
  
 D = g α (pkAid )βut g αβt = g α g skAid g αβt , and ensures verifiability. The data format stored in the index
 
  ut 
 table is shown in Fig. 6. The process of key management uses
 D0 = (pkAid )ut g αt = g skAid g αt , Algorithm 3, which can be described as follows.
  
 ∀i ∈ SUid , Di = Diu · g v (t+t ) = hiskAid ut · g v (t+t ) ,
    D. Data Decryption
 Di = diα · g −v (t+t ) = hiαt · g −v (t+t ) . (4)
 Let φ ⊂ {1, 2, . . . , m} denote {i :(i ) ∈ SUid }. If the
To simplify the formula, we have introduced a parameter w, access structure (A, ) is satisfied by SUid , δi ∈ Z∗p will
where w = skAid ut + αt  . Consequently, the user’s secret key be calculated when i∈φ δi ηi = s, where {ηi } is a set of
formulations, SKUid , can be expressed as follows: valid shares of the secret parameter SUid . For ∀i ∈ SUid , DU
 D = g α g βw , D0 = g w , computes:
  
 ∀i ∈ SUid , Di = Diu · g v (t+t ) = hiskAid ut · g v (t+t ) , DDi = Di · Di
 −v (t+t  ) αt  −v (t+t  )  sk ut    
 Di = diα · g = hi ·g . (5)  
 · g v (t+t ) · hiαt · g −v (t+t )
 Aidi
 = hi
CA securely distribute user attribute private keys. = hiw , (6)
 H represents a hash function, which maps data items
to the interval [0, l − 1], that is, H : d → [0, l − The user proceeds to compute further, utilizing the parameter
1], where d represents the set of data items, i.e., d = {δi }i∈φ :
{H (SKUid1 ), H (SKUid2 ), . . . , H (SKUidl )}. The CA computes index = H (SKUid ) mod l and securely maps the e(C0 , D)
user’s private key hash H (SKUid ) to the corresponding index CM =
   δi
in the hashchain: hashchain[index ] = H (SKUid ). An index i∈φ e(Ci1 , D0 )e(Ci2 , DD(i) )
6222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

  
 e g s , g α · g βw Algorithm 4 Anomaly Detection
 =
   δi Input: Attribute set SUid of Uid, and the private key SKUid ;
 i∈φ e((g β )ηi · h−p
 (i)
 i
 , g w ) · e(g pi , hw(i) ) Output: Verification result R, and ciphertext keyword CID;
 1: DU sends a keyword CID query request to the BC;
 e(g, g)αs e(g, g)βsw
 =  w βηi δi
 2: BC queries the index through SUid and Uid;
 i∈φ e(g, g) 3: Send index to CA;
 e(g, g)αs e(g, g)βsw 4: CA computes a = currentHash and returns it to BC;
 = 
 5: BC computes b = H (SKUid ) using SHA-256;
 e(g, g)w β i∈φ (ηi δi )
 6: if a = b
 = e(g, g)αs . (7)
 7: Verification failed;
Next, the user proceeds to calculate the key k. 8: Set R = 0;
 9: Return (R, ⊥);
 k = C  /CM = C  /e(g, g)αs . (8) 10: else
The final plaintext data M can be acquired by the user by 11: Verification successful;
decrypting the ciphertext CT(M ) using the symmetric key k. 12: Set R = 1;
 Before decrypting the ciphertext, users can first verify 13: Retrieve and return corresponding CID;
the integrity of the data. Since the CID is a hash value 14: end if
generated based on the content, users can first hash the 15: return (R, CID);
obtained ciphertext and compare the calculated hash value with
the corresponding CID. If they are equal, it means the data has
not been tampered with. Otherwise, the data may have been • Key issuance inconsistencies: Mismatches in key issuance
tampered with or damaged. history traced through the hashchain.
 Handling of False Positives and False Negatives: To
 VI. BC V ERIFY reduce false positives (legitimate users mistakenly flagged),
 the system supports time-based tolerance and allows users
A. Anomaly Detection to re-initiate verification via the CA. False negatives are
 DU can query and download any encrypted data of interest prevented by binding all key usages to hashchain verification
from IPFS. However, before downloading the ciphertext, the — every access request must match the on-chain key hash
key verification of the blockchain must be passed first to exactly, leaving no room for outdated or forged keys to pass
ensure the correctness and legality of its key. This allows the undetected.
DU to obtain the ciphertext storage address stored in BC, that System Response to Anomalies: When an anomaly is
is, the index keyword CID. Keep in mind that if users’ attribute detected, the system:
set does not align with the access structure embedded in the • Immediately denies access to the ciphertext.
ciphertext, they will be unable to decrypt the data, even if the • Logs the event on-chain, including the Uid and reason
ciphertext is downloaded. We utilize blockchain technology for failure.
to implement the function of anomaly detection. Users can • Optionally notifies the CA for further review and blackonly obtain the corresponding ciphertext after the private key listing of suspicious identities.
verification is passed. Specifically, DU sends a data access We can present the process of data acces as Algorithm 4.
request to the blockchain, along with SUid , Uid and the private
key SKUid . Upon receiving the message, the blockchain finds B. Auditing & Tracing
the corresponding index through the attribute set SUid and Uid
 If user verification fails (R = 0), we suspect issues with a
in the Indextable, and then sends the index to CA, requesting
 AA or the user. The CA audits and tracks this. The failure may
CA to return the corresponding key hash currentHash in the
 be due to a AA maliciously assigning incorrect attributes to
hashchain. The blockchain then computes b = H (SKUid ).
 the user, leading to verification failure. After the blockchain
If b = currentHash, the key verification succeeds, and the
 returns the failure result, it sends the user’s attribute set and
verification result R is set to 1, otherwise R is set to 0. The
 Uid to the CA. The CA tracks and confirms the suspicious
blockchain then returns a keyword CID to the user, who can
 AA that assigned and verified this attribute set for the user.
use it to query and download the ciphertext from IPFS. If the
 Specifically, the CA retrieves the public key linked to the AA
verification fails, the CID will not be available to the user.
 using the master key msk and locks the AA using the public
 Detectable Anomalies: StorSec’s hashchain-based mechkey pk.
anism detects several types of access-related anomalies,
  
  1/ut
including: pk = D0 · g −αt = g skAidi ut/ut = g skAidi
 • Key tampering: Use of forged keys inconsistent with the
 hashchain record. The CA checks if the received attribute set matches the one
 • Key reuse attacks: Reuse of compromised keys from assigned by the AA. If they don’t match, it indicates that the AA
 previous users. has conducted malicious verification of the user’s legitimacy.
 • Unauthorized access: Key usage by users who were never As a penalty, the identified AA is expelled from the system.
 issued the key by the certified authority. If they match, it suggests the user obtained a key related
ZHANG et al.: STORSEC: A COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN FOR SECURING THE DISTRIBUTED IOT STORAGE SYSTEMS 6223

Algorithm 5 Auditing of CA The challenge lies in the difficulty of differentiating
 q+1 
 Input: Verification result R; e(g, g)x s ∈ GT from an element within GT that is
 Output: Responsible party; random.
 1: if R = 0 We apply the following theorem to demonstrate the data
 2: BC sends attribute set SUid to CA; confidentiality of StorSec:
 3: CA searches for corresponding AA; Theorem 1: Assuming that the decisional q-parallel BDHE
 4: Compute pk = g skAidi and retrieve assigned attribute assumption is valid, there is no opponent capable of selectively
 
 set SUid from Aid;; breaking StorSec when faced with a challenge matrix of
 
 5: if SUid = SUid dimension l ∗ ×n ∗ , where l ∗ , n ∗ ≤ q, using a polynomial-time
 6: return malicious AA identified by Aid; algorithm.
 7: else Proof: When w = skAidi ut + αt  is simplified as w,
 8: return suspicious user Uid; the user’s key can be refined by performing a combination
 9: end if operation on Di and Di . Specifically:
 10: else
 11: Break; D = g α g βw , D0 = g w , ∀i ∈ SUidj , DDi = Di · Di = hiw ,
 12: end if
 where w can be understood as a number that varies according
 to different values of t and t  . Subsequently, the demonstration
 of Theorem 1 is analogous to that found in [31]. Viewers who
to a specific attribute set through some method, attempting are interested in this proof can refer to [31] for more detailed
unauthorized access and causing key verification failure. The information.
discovered malicious user will face severe penalties, such as Attackers cannot directly obtain a user’s private key from
being kicked out of the system. the hashchain, as the private key is not stored in plaintext
 The AA may have incorrectly verified the user’s attributes, within the hashchain. The hashchain itself does not contain
allowing the user to pass the blockchain verification. However, specific information about the private key, but generates a hash
decryption fails because the user’s attribute set cannot value related to the private key through hash operations. The
meet the access policy in the ciphertext, thus still ensur- private key of users is bound to their Global Identifier(GID,
ing that the data has not been illegally stolen. A minor referred to as Uid in this context), and each user’s GID is
penalty, such as a one-month suspension, can be imposed unique, ensuring the uniqueness of the private key. Attackers
on the AA. We can present the process of Auditing cannot directly obtain relevant information from the private
as Algorithm 5. key, even in the event of an attacker stealing the private key,
 they cannot pass the blockchain verification to illegally steal
 data.
 VII. S ECURITY A NALYSIS 3) Completeness of Data: In this scheme, the blockchain
A. Security Model Insurance plays the role of data index lookup and verification, while
 IPFS serves as the underlying protocol for actual file and data
 1) Security and Availability: The combination of storage. After data is stored in IPFS, IPFS will return an IPFS
blockchain with IPFS and data encryption enhances the hash, namely CID, which can serve as an index for accessing
security and availability of the system. The access control of files and can check whether the file content has been altered.
identities using blockchain technology protects the CID data The immutability of the blockchain can ensure that this CID
of IPFS from unauthorized access or tampering. The core of will not be tampered with.
blockchain technology is decentralization, which maintains Therefore, DU uses a hash function (such as SHA-256) to
data through multiple nodes on the network, avoiding the hash the ciphertext obtained, and compares the calculated hash
risk of single point failure. This means that even if some value hCT with the hash value acquired from the blockchain,
nodes fail, the rest of the system can still operate normally, i.e., hC = CID. If hCT = hC , it indicates that the data
thus ensuring the availability of data, which complements the remains unaltered. Otherwise, there may be data tampering or
characteristics of IPFS, which is also a decentralized storage damage.
system.
 2) Data Confidentiality: The following is the defini-
 B. Resistance to Attacks
tion of this issue. Select a prime order group Gg ,
where g is the generator of the group, and p is the 1) DDoS Attacks: The distributed denial of service attack
prime order. We define x , s  , k1 , k2 , . . . , kq to be ele- is when an attacker controls a large number of infected
ments of Zp . An opponent is provided with Y  , which computers (often called a “botnet”) and simultaneously sends
includes: a large number of requests to the target system, causing the
 target system to be overloaded and unable to provide services
  q q+2 2q normally. DDoS attacks usually overwhelm a single node with
g, g s , g x , . . . , g x , g x , gx
  2q a large number of requests. In a decentralized distributed
 ∀1 ≤ i ≤ q, g s ·ki , g x /ki , . . . , g x /ki , g x
 q+2 /k
 , . . . , g x /ki
 q
 i
 system based on blockchain and IPFS, data is stored in
 x ·s  ·k d /ki x q ·s  ·k d /ki
 ∀1 ≤ i , d ≤ q, d = i , g ,...,g multiple independent nodes instead of being concentrated in a
6224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

 TABLE II
 S TORAGE OVERHEAD

single server. It is difficult for attackers to launch attacks in a A. Theoretical Analysis
centralized manner, which increases the complexity and cost We define some elements as follows: let |p| to represent the
of attacks. magnitude of elements within prime order groups denoted by
 2) Man-in-the-Middle Attack: MITM attacks usually tam- p, and let S signify the attribute count. Nu denotes the total
per with information by intercepting or forging communication user count, the average size of attributes that users possess is
data. By using blockchain technology for authentication and denoted by NUid , NA represents the number of AAs. NCT
access control, the system can prevent unauthorized nodes represents the average number of attributes in a ciphertext,
or attackers from intercepting or tampering during data |Cu | represents the average size of a user certificate. while
transmission. All transactions and interactions are encrypted, |CA | represents the average number of an AA certificate.
verified and recorded on multiple nodes, making it difficult 1) Storage Overhead: Table II presents the analysis of storfor attackers to modify data unilaterally. In addition, IPFS age overhead for each entity. Compared with other schemes,
uses content addressing and distributed storage, and data is the main overhead of CA in StorSec comes from storing the
accessed through a unique content hash value, which means public keys pkAid of each AA and maintaining a hashchain.
that users can get data directly from the network instead of These extra storage spaces are used for key generation,
relying on a specific server, thereby reducing the risk of data auditing, and verification. Since our scheme focuses on
being intercepted during transmission. security, some extra storage costs are acceptable. From the
 3) Collusion Attack: Since AAs cannot be fully trusted, perspective of AA, our scheme stores one more certificate
there may be cases where AAs conspire with one another to than CP-ABE [31], because StorSec explicitly considers the
get information from the system that they desire. A malevolent distribution of AA certificates when AA registers with CA. AC-
AA can impersonate another AA by using a arbitrary private CP-ARBE [3] transfers most of the work of CA to AA, and also
key if two AAs conspire to create and submit keys to the CA maintains a user list. In AC-CP-ARBE scheme, the storage
for the same user concurrently. In this scenario, both t and overhead of every user is relatively large, mainly because the
t  values will be the same. In this way, colluding AAs can user needs to store the attribute certificate (AC) for key update.
generate arbitrary keys for users, thereby illegally obtaining 2) Communication Overhead: Table III shows the comthe privilege of CA. But the CA will verify whether TCA munication costs of different entities in different phases of
is within the permitted time frame, to ensure that the same StorSec, CP-ABE [31] and AC-CP-ARBE [3]. In the initial
user is not reused by different AAs within the time interval, setup stage, schemes involving multiple authorities incur extra
generating different t and t  values. Therefore, the situation of communication costs within the CA, because the registration
AA collusion attacks is strangled in the cradle. In the proposed of AAs is a necessary sacrifice. To ensure the auditability
scheme, each user is given a worldwide unique identifier Uid, of AAs, additional overhead is incurred during the StorSec
which is connected to their key. In the key management phase, key generation and distribution phase. Our StorSec is equally
upon the generation of the user’s key, a unique value w is efficient as Waters’ schemes in the encryption and decryption
linked to each key component, and it’s beyond the user’s phase.
ability to compute. Therefore, multiple users cannot collude
to obtain and decrypt the ciphertext.
 B. Experimental Evaluation
 We assess the efficiency of our model by implementing
 VIII. P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS the scheme according to the structure proposed by [32],
 To ensure a meaningful and balanced evaluation of our the algorithm is deployed on Apache server through IntelliJ
proposed scheme, we selected the representative existing IDEA, and we apply the Java pairing-based cryptography
works listed in Table II as comparison baselines. These library (IPBC). The experiment was completed using the
reference schemes aim to address issues related to data Windows 11 operating system, powered by an Intel Core
confidentiality, integrity, or key management, which are fun- i5-12500H processor and equipped with 16G memory. The
damental concerns in secure decentralized storage systems. security parameters are set such that p is 128 bits and q
In this section, we focus on comparing the proposed scheme is 256 bits. The physical experiment environment requires
with the classic CP-ABE scheme [31] and the representative three hosts and a router. Three local area network (LANs)
AC-CP-ARBE scheme [3] in terms of key update, from were constructed by connecting the physical hosts through
other aspects such as storage overhead, communication over- the router to simulate different areas where groups of IoT
head, computation efficiency and system throughput. CP-ABE devices and service providers are located. Network nodes were
scheme only involves one AA responsible for generating and deployed using virtual machine-based hosts to form clusters of
distributing keys. nodes with different IP addresses to simulate the P2P network
ZHANG et al.: STORSEC: A COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN FOR SECURING THE DISTRIBUTED IOT STORAGE SYSTEMS 6225

 TABLE III
 C OMMUNICATION OVERHEAD

 scheme taking more time, it enhances its security. Therefore,
 we think that this extra overhead is acceptable, as can be seen
 from Fig. 9(a). During the phase of generating keys, as shown
 in Fig. 9(b), we compare StorSec with EHRChain [33] and
 Waters’ scheme. StorSec is faster and more efficient because of
 multiple AAs. During the phase of encryption and decryption,
 as depicted in Fig. 9(c),(d), our StorSec is as effective as
 Waters’ scheme. The cost of retrieving the key or ciphertext
 is displayed in Fig. 9(e). We use the instance simulated by
 scheme BC-SABE [2] to analyze the effectiveness of the
 search algorithm. It is observable that the time expense of
 the BC-SABE scheme’s search algorithm correlates linearly
Fig. 7. An illustration of IPFS deployment. with the attribute count, while our StorSec scheme uses
 the advantage of the hash table to provide a fast retrieval
 mechanism, reducing the time overhead of retrieval to O(1).
transmission structure of the blockchain network. The main Key update phase in CP-ABE involves retrieval, update, and
role of the blockchain in this scheme is for verification, and distribution. Traditional methods need to find and regenerate
the choice of its consensus mechanism has little impact on the all users’ keys with revoked attributes. This is more complex
overall scheme performance. IPFS private network deployment than key generation. Fig. 9(f) shows the key update time of
is shown in Fig. 7. StorSec and other schemes. StorSec is faster than AC-CP-
 1) Storage Overhead: We compared the proposed storage ARBE, EHRchain and CP-ABE when revoking attributes. In
scheme with the AC-CP-ARBE scheme, which runs in the the key update test scenario, one attribute is revoked from
cloud environment. Fig. 8 shows the time efficiency of IPFS five attributes. StorSec has an efficient retrieval mechanism
and cloud storage. The experiment selected different data sizes that saves time for finding users. AC-CP-ARBE uses a thirdand recorded the upload, download and concurrent test time party authority for key update, but AA still needs to find
of cloud storage and IPFS. As shown in Fig. 8(a)(b), the and notify users, and send them the attribute revocation
upload and download times of IPFS and cloud storage increase configuration. EHRchain reduces the key size by using a semiwith the size of the data. However, the increase in IPFS hidden strategy, but does not improve the retrieval time.
is smaller, and its advantage becomes more obvious as the 3) Average Transaction Delay: In the experiment, cloud
data volume increases. To further test system performance, architecture and IPFS are deployed at the bottom of each node.
under unchanged conditions, multiple identical files were Fig. 10 shows the average delay of traditional cloud architecuploaded simultaneously to test the impact of concurrency on ture and IPFS architecture under different transaction numbers
file transfer. The experimental results of uploading files of when the number of nodes n is 6, 9 and 12 respectively. It
different data sizes 10 times in a row are shown in Fig. 8(c). can be seen that with the growth of transaction number, the
Since IPFS is a content-addressable distributed file system, mean transaction delay of both architectures shows an upward
the content of the files it stores will not be duplicated, and trend. The upper limit of cloud-based architecture Fig. 10(a)
only when the file is uploaded for the first time will the is about 2.5s, while the upper limit of IPFS-based distributed
file upload time consumption be larger. When the same data architecture Fig. 10(b) is about 2s. Compared with cloud
file is uploaded multiple times, the cloud server will store it architecture, the average transaction delay of IPFS architecture
repeatedly. Therefore, the cloud upload time is much greater is smaller.
than IPFS. 4) System Throughput Measurement: To further evaluate
 2) Computation Efficiency: We compare our scheme with our system’s performance, we conduct a comparison of
AC-CP-ARBE [3] and CP-ABE [31] in system initialization. the system’s average throughput under identical operations.
Although the construction of the hashchain results in our Fig. 11 compares the average throughput of traditional cloud
6226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 8. Time efficiency of IPFS and cloud storage systems.

Fig. 9. (a) System global initialization time. (b) Key generation time. (c) Plaintext encryption time. (d) Ciphertext decryption time. (e) Retrieval execution
time. (f) Key update time.

and IPFS architectures with different transactions and nodes. scheme grants data to be securely and efficiently accessed by
With a constant number of transactions, an increase in the those users who have been authenticated. To achieve secure
number of nodes set in the architecture leads to a larger aver- and efficient storage and access to IoT data, we employ a
age throughput. Compared with traditional cloud architecture, storage system that combines blockchain and IPFS. We design
IPFS architecture has higher average throughput because IPFS a new heterogeneous framework and adopt improved attribute
uses distributed, content-addressed, and peer-to-peer design, encryption algorithms to eliminate single-point performance
which reduces network distance, time, bandwidth, and latency. bottlenecks. This not only realizes fine-grained access control
IPFS-based storage system can process transactions faster and and ensures the security of the data during transmission
improve transaction efficiency. but also improves the performance of key generation. To
 prevent data from being illegally accessed, we design a
 blockchain key verification method to monitor the improper
 IX. C ONCLUSION behavior of the responsible party. Moreover, our scheme is
 In this article, we explore the issue of data security storage safe and efficient, as demonstrated by our detailed security and
in the IoT environment. Different from prior works, our performance analysis, and it can withstand collusion attacks
ZHANG et al.: STORSEC: A COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN FOR SECURING THE DISTRIBUTED IOT STORAGE SYSTEMS 6227

Fig. 10. Average latency of traditional cloud architecture (a) and IPFS based architecture (b) for different number of transactions when the number of nodes
n is 6, 9 and 12 respectively.

Fig. 11. The traditional cloud architecture (a) and the IPFS-based architecture (b) show the trend of system throughput changes under varying quantities of
transactions when the number of nodes n is 6, 9, and 12 respectively.

from institutions or users effectively, as well as attacks from R EFERENCES
malicious users and colluding institutions. Although StorSec
 [1] S. Chen. “Digital wisdom point of view: Multi-directional empowerachieves secure and auditable access control over decentralized ment of China’s artificial intelligence arithmetic development to run
storage, it still has some limitations. First, due to the static out of ‘acceleration.” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://m.thepaper.cn/
nature of CP-ABE, the current design does not support fine- baijiahao_18876314/
 [2] S. Liu, J. Yu, Y. Xiao, Z. Wan, S. Wang, and B. Yan, “BCgrained or real-time revocation of keys and attributes. While SABE: Blockchain-aided searchable attribute-based encryption for
outdated keys can be detected through the hashchain-based cloud-IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 7851–7867,
verification mechanism, there is currently no efficient method Sep. 2020.
for immediate revocation, which may impact the integrity of [3] S. Fugkeaw, “Secure data sharing with efficient key update for industrial
 cloud-based access control,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 16,
access control and auditing in dynamic environments. Second, no. 1, pp. 575–587, Jan./Feb. 2023.
in distributed storage systems like IPFS, data availability is [4] S. Namasudra, “Fast and secure data accessing by using DNA computing
inherently tied to the robustness of the incentive mechanism. for the cloud environment,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 15,
 no. 4, pp. 2289–2300, Jul./Aug. 2020.
If a large number of storage nodes go offline, users may be
 [5] L. Zhang, C. Jin, H.-p. Huang, X. Fu, and R.-c. Wang, “A trajectory
unable to retrieve their data, threatening system reliability. privacy preserving scheme in the CANNQ service for IoT,” Sensors,
 To address these challenges, in the future, we plan to vol. 19, no. 9, p. 2190, 2019.
enhance StorSec by integrating time-constrained ABE schemes [6] S. Zhang, J. He, W. Liang, and K. Li, “MMDS: A secure and
 verifiable multimedia data search scheme for cloud-assisted edge com-
(e.g., T-ABE) and attribute expiration timestamps to support puting,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 151, pp. 32–44, Feb. 2024.
dynamic and low-overhead revocation. In addition, we will [7] S. Zhang, B. Hu, W. Liang, K.-C. Li, and B. B. Gupta, “A cachingincorporate the Filecoin incentive layer to promote long-term based dual K-anonymous location privacy-preserving scheme for edge
node availability and stable bandwidth provisioning within the computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 9768–9781,
 Jun. 2023.
IPFS network. This will improve data resilience and ensure [8] A. Kokolis, A. Psistakis, B. Reidys, J. Huang, and J. Torrellas,
continuous access in decentralized environments. We will “Distributed data persistency,” IEEE Micro, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 107–115,
also explore advanced key management techniques, including Jul./Aug. 2022.
periodic key refreshing and revocation handling, to strengthen [9] H. Tian, X. Ge, J. Wang, C. Li, and H. Pan, “Research on distributed
 blockchain-based privacy-preserving and data security framework in
the system’s security and scalability. IoT,” IET Commun., vol. 14, no. 13, pp. 2038–2047, 2020.
6228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

[10] C. Liu, “HPCLS-BC: A novel blockchain framework using heteroge- [33] F. Li, K. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Huang, and Q. Wu, “EHRChain: A
 neous peer-node and cloud-based ledger storage for Internet of Things blockchain-based EHR system using attribute-based and homomorapplications,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 150, pp. 364–379, phic cryptosystem,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 15, no. 5,
 Jan. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ pp. 2755–2765, Sep./Oct. 2022.
 article/pii/S0167739X23003473
[11] E. Daniel and F. Tschorsch, “IPFS and friends: A qualitative comparison
 of next generation peer-to-peer data networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
 Tuts., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 31–52, 1st Quart., 2022. Shiwen Zhang received the Doctorate degree
[12] L. Cao, X. Jiang, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, D. You, and X. Xu, “A survey in computer science and electronic engineering
 of network attacks on cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, from Hunan University in 2016. He currently
 pp. 44219–44227, 2020. holds an Associate Professorship with the School
[13] S. Rana and D. Mishra, “An authenticated access control framework of Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan
 for digital right management system,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 80, University of Science and Technology. As an IEEE
 pp. 25255–25270, Apr. 2021. and CCF affiliate, his scholarly pursuits encompass
[14] A. K. Singh, K. Acharya, and R. Dutta, “Cloud assisted semi-static identity verification, safeguarding privacy within
 secure accountable authority identity-based broadcast encryption fea- wireless body area networks (WBAN), as well as
 turing public traceability without random oracles,” Ann. Telecommun., advancing cloud computing, data protection, and
 vol. 78, nos. 1–2, pp. 79–90, 2023. cybersecurity measures.
[15] A. Sahai and B. Waters, “Fuzzy identity-based encryption,” in Proc.
 24th Annu. Int. Conf. Theory Appl. Cryptogr. Tech. Adv. Cryptol.
 (EUROCRYPT), 2005, pp. 457–473. Wen Zhang received the B.S. degree from Zhoukou
[16] H. Deng et al., “Ciphertext-policy hierarchical attribute-based encryption Normal University. She is currently pursuing the
 with short ciphertexts,” Inf. Sci., vol. 275, pp. 370–384, Aug. 2014. Master of Science degree in computer science and
[17] L. Zhang, G. Hu, Y. Mu, and F. Rezaeibagha, “Hidden ciphertext policy engineering with the Hunan University of Science
 attribute-based encryption with fast decryption for personal health record and Technology. She delves into the realm of
 system,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 33202–33213, 2019. blockchain technology, focusing on its security
[18] S. Yao, R. V. J. Dayot, I.-H. Ra, L. Xu, Z. Mei, and J. Shi, “An aspects for storage solutions.
 identity-based proxy re-encryption scheme with single-hop conditional
 delegation and multi-hop ciphertext evolution for secure cloud data
 sharing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 3833–3848,
 2023.
[19] M. Chase, “Multi-authority attribute based encryption,” in Proc. 4th
 Theory Cryptogr. Conf. (TCC), 2007, pp. 515–534.
[20] K. Xue et al., “RAAC: Robust and auditable access control with multiple Wei Liang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 attribute authorities for public cloud storage,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
 Security, vol. 12, pp. 953–967, 2017. from Hunan University in 2013. He currently serves
[21] S. Das and S. Namasudra, “Multiauthority CP-ABE-based access control as a Professor and the Dean with the School
 model for IoT-enabled Healthcare infrastructure,” IEEE Trans. Ind. of Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan
 Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 821–829, Jan. 2023. University of Science and Technology. His academic
[22] J. Li, K. Ren, B. Zhu, and Z. Wan, “Privacy-aware attribute-based focus lies in the areas of identity verification within
 encryption with user accountability,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Inf. Secur. WBAN and the security protocols of wireless sensor
 (ISC), 2009, pp. 347–362. networks.
[23] J. Li, Q. Huang, X. Chen, S. S. Chow, D. S. Wong, and
 D. Xie, “Multi-authority ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption
 with accountability,” in Proc. 6th ACM Symp. Inf., Comput. Commun.
 Secur., 2011, pp. 386–390. Wenqiang Jin (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[24] J. Li, K. Ren, and K. Kim, “A2BE: Accountable attribute-based the Ph.D. degree from The University of Texas at
 encryption for abuse free access control,” Cryptol. ePrint Arch., IACR, Arlington, TX, USA, in 2021. He is currently a
 Bellevue, WA, USA, Rep. 2009/118, 2009. [Online]. Available: https:// Professor with the College of Computer Science and
 eprint.iacr.org/2009/118 Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China.
[25] J. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, C. Ruan, and C. Hu, “A decentralized public His research interests include mobile security, the
 auditing scheme for secure cloud storage based on blockchain,” Wireless loT security, and ubiquitous computing.
 Commun. Mobile Comput., vol. 2022, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 3688164.
[26] J. Lu, J. Shen, P. Vijayakumar, and B. B. Gupta, “Blockchain-based
 secure data storage protocol for sensors in the industrial Internet of
 Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 5422–5431,
 Aug. 2021.
[27] K. Azbeg, O. Ouchetto, and S. J. Andaloussi, “BlockMedCare: A healthcare system based on IoT, blockchain and IPFS for data management
 security,” Egyptian Inform. J., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 329–343, 2022.
[28] Z. Ullah, B. Raza, H. Shah, S. Khan, and A. Waheed, “Towards
 blockchain-based secure storage and trusted data sharing scheme for IoT Keqin Li (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 36978–36994, 2022. in computer science from Tsinghua University,
[29] W. Yang, Z. Guan, L. Wu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Secure data Beijing, in 1985, and the Ph.D. degree from the
 access control with fair accountability in smart grid data sharing: An University of Houston in 1990. He is renowned
 edge blockchain approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 10, as a SUNY Distinguished Professor with the State
 pp. 8632–8643, May 2021. University of New York in Albany and holds the
[30] L. Bader et al., “Blockchain-based privacy preservation for supply title of National Distinguished Professor with Hunan
 chains supporting lightweight multi-hop information accountability,” Inf. University, Changsha. With over 850 publications to
 Process. Manage., vol. 58, no. 3, 2021, Art. no. 102529. his name, including journal articles, book chapters,
[31] B. Waters, “Ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption: An expressive, and conference papers, his expertise spans parallel
 efficient, and provably secure realization,” in Proc. 14th Int. Workshop and distributed computing, as well as security in
 Public Key Cryptogr., 2011, pp. 53–70. cloud computing. He serves as an Associate Editor for ACM Computing
[32] J. Bethencourt, A. Sahai, and B. Waters, “Ciphertext-policy attribute- Surveys and CCF Transactions on High Performance Computing, and has been
 based encryption,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2007, a part of the editorial boards for several IEEE journals. He is also recognized
 pp. 321–334. as a Fellow of the AAIA and belongs to the Academia Europaea.