IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 5027713

 SWANet: A Sliding Window Affinity Network
 With Dual-Branch Structure for Detection of
 Automotive Chip Packaging Carriers
 Huimin Wang , Bumin Meng , Member, IEEE, Jiang Zhu , and Rui Du , Graduate Student Member, IEEE

 Abstract— In automotive chip packaging carrier (ACPC) defect
detection, distinguishing defects is particularly challenging due
to the high similarity between missing regions and background
textures. Additionally, the scarcity of defect samples further
exacerbates this issue. To address these problems, a defect
detection network based on sliding window affinity (SWA) with
a dual-branch structure has been proposed. The defect sample Fig. 1. ACPCs production line. Manually detecting missing positions
pool is effectively expanded through a region transformation in assembly boxes. (a) Production equipment, (b) manual assembly, and
augmentation technique, which helps alleviate class imbalance (c) ACPCs missing assembly detection.
issues. Affinity maps are calculated via local affine transformations to enhance internal pixel relationships, and heterogeneous
feature parsing (HFP) is employed to emphasize subtle proactive they prevent the integrated circuits from overheating, thereby
layer features. This method achieves a significant improvement reducing the likelihood of failures and the need for frequent
in detection accuracy, reaching 74.38% mAP on the ACPC replacements.
dataset, and demonstrates strong robustness under varying noise Fig. 1 shows the actual production line of ACPCs. The
conditions. The results indicate that the proposed method meets
the requirements of real-world production environments and has ACPCs are first cut by the relevant production equipment and
the potential for application in other industrial scenarios. then loaded into the test cassettes by the assembly equipment.
 During the assembly process, ACPCs may be missed due to
 Index Terms— Automotive chip packaging carriers (ACPCs),
cross-region transformation, detection, dual-branch, sliding aging of the machine or other factors, which affect the producwindow affinity (SWA). tion efficiency. Detecting the missing assembly of ACPCs is
 of great significance to reduce production costs and improve
 I. I NTRODUCTION production efficiency. At present, the missing detection of
 ACPCs is mainly performed manually by skilled workers.
W ITH the scarcity of oil and the increasing emphasis
 on environmental protection in various countries, new
energy vehicles and electric vehicles have been developing
 However, this detection method is labor-intensive, inefficient,
 and inaccurate. It is crucial to research machine vision-based
rapidly in recent years. As the core of controlling most of the detection of missing assembly of ACPCs. In general, machine
application scenarios of electric vehicles, chips are also the vision-based missing assembly detection can be regarded as a
most important factor in determining the safety, comfort, and special object detection task.
service life of the entire vehicle. Automotive chip packaging Currently, deep learning [1], [2] methods have been widely
carriers (ACPCs), as the carrier for placing IC chips, are the applied in industrial product inspection. While dedicated
key to ensuring the normal operation of electric vehicle chips. research on the automated detection of missing components
They provide a stable and reliable operating environment for in ACPCs remains relatively limited, related defect detecelectric vehicle chips, shielding them from physical shocks, tion studies offer valuable insights. Similar scenarios can
temperature fluctuations, humidity, and other environmental be referenced in surface defect detection based on machine
factors, as well as electromagnetic interference. Additionally, vision, such as battery defect detection [3], [4], [5], steel
 strip defect detection [6], [7], [8], and electric two-wheeled
 Received 4 December 2024; revised 14 March 2025; accepted 24 March vehicle defect detection [9]. For example, Badmos et al. [3]
2025. Date of publication 14 April 2025; date of current version 30 April learned an accurate representation of microstructural images
2025. This work was supported in part by the Hunan Province Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 2025JJ50376. The Associate Editor by the CNN to accurately distinguish between defective and
coordinating the review process was Dr. Donghoon Kang. (Corresponding nondefective cases. Zhao et al. [6] improved the traditional
authors: Bumin Meng; Jiang Zhu.) fast R-CNN by using a multiscale algorithm, replacing the
 Huimin Wang, Bumin Meng, and Jiang Zhu are with the School
of Automation and Electronic Information, Xiangtan University, Xiang- traditional convolution with a deformable convolution to
tan 411105, China (e-mail: 16673296983@163.com; mengbm@163.com; improve the accuracy of the detection of defects in steel
zhu_jiang@xtu.edu.cn). belts. In another study, a convolutional neural network (CNN)
 Rui Du is with the School of Robotics, Hunan University, Changsha 410012,
China (e-mail: durui@hnu.edu.cn). steered with wavelet synchro squeezing transform (WSST)-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3558829 based scalograms is proposed for fault identification in an
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5027713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

electric two-wheel [9]. Zhang et al. [10] proposed an insulator incorporates a cross-region transformation algorithm (CRTA),
defect detection framework based on image reconstruction, a sliding window affinity (SWA) module, a dual-branch strucwhich achieved high-precision detection of various insulator ture, and a heterogeneous feature parsing (HFP) module.
defects by collecting images of catenary insulators captured The CRTA is employed to augment sample data and mitby high-speed rail inspection equipment and constructing the igate overfitting by randomly transforming missing regions
catenary insulator defect (CID) dataset. However, given that and background segments. The SWA module enhances the
catenary insulators are large detection objects, this method detection of missing component regions by calculating local
is not suitable for small object detection tasks like those feature affinity through a sliding window mechanism. The
involving ACPCs. dual-branch structure is designed to extract the proactive layer
 Although these methods have achieved promising results in and supporting layer features separately, thereby addressing
industrial product inspection, several challenges are encoun- the issue of high similarity between the proactive layer and the
tered when directly applied to ACPCs missing component supporting layer in ACPC images. The HFP module parses
detection. the features extracted by the dual branches and strengthens
 the correlation between the proactive layer and the supporting
 1) There is a scarcity of samples in the ACPC’s missing
 layer using a cross-attention (CA) mechanism, facilitating
 component regions, resulting in the issue of sample
 precise localization of missing regions. To further improve
 imbalance. Several methods have been employed to
 detection accuracy, multiscale feature decoding is utilized to
 enhance data and increase sample diversity. CutPaste
 fuse deep and shallow features for the accurate detection of
 [11], for instance, offers a way to generate defect
 small objects.
 samples by randomly copying and pasting regions of
 In summary, the main contributions of this article are as
 the original samples to augment the data. However, due
 follows.
 to the ordered arrangement of ACPCs, directly applying
 this method would disrupt the actual distribution of 1) To tackle the issues of data imbalance and the scarcity
 samples, resulting in a significant difference from real of defective samples, the CRTA has been introduced,
 test samples, thereby limiting generalization. utilizing regional random transformations and positional
 2) The pixel proportion of missing regions in ACPCs is exchanges to augment the dataset and enhance the
 small, making it difficult to effectively extract discrim- network’s generalization capability. This data augmentainative features. Some multimodal approaches address tion technique effectively mitigates class imbalance and
 similar small-object issues through multiscale fusion. improves the network’s robustness under varying noise
 For example, Zhu et al. [12] proposed an efficient conditions.
 multiscale perception enhancement network (ADDet) 2) The SWA has been proposed, which enhances pixel
 for detecting aluminum defects, considering the inher- interconnections in object regions through pixel affinity
 ent characteristics of aluminum surface defects, which calculations in local areas. This mechanism not only
 exhibit diverse morphologies and multiscale variations. effectively captures both local and global contextual
 Zheng et al. [13] introduced a novel efficient conflict information but also improves the detection accuracy
 filtering network (ECF-Net) specifically for detecting of small objects in ACPCs, demonstrating exceptional
 small defects. However, these methods are challenging performance in scenarios where pixel features exhibit
 to apply directly to ACPCs, where the difference in high similarity.
 texture and color between the detection object and 3) An innovative dual-branch structure has been designed
 the background is minimal, making such tasks more to separately extract proactive layer and supporting layer
 complex. features, addressing the high similarity between these
 3) The proactive layer and supporting layer of ACPCs are elements in ACPCs. Through the parsing conducted by
 highly similar, making direct differentiation challenging. the HFP module, this dual-branch structure effectively
 Existing Transformers are primarily designed for global amplifies the differences between the proactive layer and
 information modeling, while CNNs excel at capturing the supporting layer, thereby enhancing the network’s
 local information. ACPCs, built upon this foundation, ability to discern missing components and subtle variamust distinguish between the proactive layer and the tions, particularly in complex industrial environments.
 supporting layer under conditions where their colors The rest of the article is organized as follows. Related work
 closely resemble those of the background, resulting in is presented in Section II. SWANet is discussed in Section III.
 minimal pixel variance across regions. The mere use of The constructed dataset and related experiments are presented
 CNNs or Transformers struggles to yield robust feature in Section IV. Section V presents the conclusions of this study.
 discriminability; additionally, the pixel features in the
 missing areas are not pronounced, often overlooked in II. R ELATED W ORK
 the feature extraction by existing CNNs or Transformers,
 This study is related to the application of computer vision
 complicating precise localization.
 techniques for missing assembly detection of ACPCs. In turn,
 To address these challenges, a sliding window affinity missing assembly detection serves as an important category
network (SWANet) with a dual-branch structure is proposed in the defect detection of ACPCs. Currently, there are fewer
in this article for the detection of ACPCs. The network missing assembly detections for ACPCs. Similar work can
WANG et al.: SWANet WITH DUAL-BRANCH STRUCTURE FOR DETECTION OF ACPCs 5027713

be referred to as industrial surface defect detection, which is a novel network architecture called LSwin Transformer to
categorized into traditional methods, CNN-based methods, and construct a convolutional embedding module and an atten-
Transformer-based methods. tion patch merging module to improve the retention of
 image information. Zhang et al. [38] proposed a two-stage
A. Traditional Methods for Defect Detection “promote–suppress” Transformer (PST) framework, which
 Traditional methods have continued to play an impor- employs wavelet features to direct the network to focus on
tant role in industrial surface defect detection for a long the detailed features in the image and accurately localize and
time, mainly through manually extracted features for defect classify the defective regions in the image. Zhou et al. [39]
detection. Currently, traditional defect detection methods are effectively classified and sensed defects of different shapes
categorized into three main types: 1) statistical-based defect and sizes by fusing two modules, ETDNet, a Transformerdetection methods [17], [18], [19], [20]; 2) structure-based based detection network, and a channel-modulated feature
defect detection methods [21], [22], [23], [24]; and 3) model- pyramid network (CM-FPN). Gao et al. [14] constructed a
based defect detection methods [25], [26], [27], [28]. The first novel Transformer detection framework for surface defect
method consists of learning models from data to differentiate detection of automotive bearings and so on, which outperforms
between normal data objects and anomalies for defect detec- CNN detection. Luo et al. [15] addressed the problem of
tion. Yuan et al. [29] proposed an improved Otsu method semantic gaps between multiscale features by importing the
for detecting defects on product surfaces by weighted object CA Transformer (CAT) into the encoder–decoder network
variance (WOV). However, the method depends heavily on (EDNet). Yu et al. [40] presented a dynamic Transformer
the key point detection algorithm or similarity measurement network for surface defect detection, which utilizes a selfstrategy. The second method focuses on the spatial location attention-based Transformer to accurately capture long-range
of pixels. Tolba and Raafat [30] proposed the multiscale semantic information in the routing space, enabling accurate
structural similarity index (MS-SSIM), which shows the strong online detection of multiscale surface defects.
discriminative ability of MS-SSIM between normal and abnormal surfaces. The computational complexity of the third
method is strongly affected by the estimation of the stochastic C. Anomaly Detection Methods
model parameters. Wang et al. [17] applied the entity sparsity Additionally, anomaly detection methods have become
pursuit (ESP) method to identify surface defects based on an important research direction in industrial scenarios.
the fact that surface image textures usually form a low-rank In recent years, both self-supervised and unsupervised learning
structure. approaches have made significant progress in this field. The
 DRAEM method proposed by Zavrtanik et al. [41] utilizes an
B. Deep Learning Methods for Defect Detection anomaly synthesis strategy within a self-supervised learning
 In the past few years, the emergence of deep learning algo- framework to enhance surface anomaly detection performance.
rithms has brought deep transformations to machine learning The anomaly detection method based on a self-supervised
algorithms, distinguishing them from traditional methods such predictive convolutional attentive block (SCAB) proposed by
as eddy current inspection [31] and ultrasonic inspection [32] Ristea et al. [42] has also shown excellent performance,
by their convenience and speed. For example, for the sur- combining prediction with self-supervised learning to improve
face quality inspection problem of LED chips, Shu et al. the detection accuracy of industrial defects. The unsupervised
[33] proposed a parallel DCNN model and built a fully anomaly detection method based on a masked convolutional
automated inspection system operating with high detection Transformer block proposed by Madan et al. [43] further
accuracy (99%) to solve the cover glass defect detection demonstrates how convolution and Transformer can be comproblem. Lu et al. [34] presented a multiscale feature-enhanced bined under unsupervised conditions to enhance the model’s
fusion (MFEF) for surface defects detection and a named ability to perceive defect regions. Building on this, Roth et al.
MRD-Net reverse attention (RA) network for real-time and explored how to improve anomaly detection performance in
end-to-end defect segmentation. Liang et al. [35] used deep industrial settings through a global recall mechanism, proposdynamic convolution as the basic structure of the network to ing PatchCore, which effectively balances memory-efficient
detect surface defects of nickel-plated perforated steel strips feature sampling with high recall performance in industrial
using adaptive feature extraction. Li et al. [36] suggested an anomaly detection [44]. Additionally, Liu et al. [45] proposed
automated vision and line-laser feeding system combining the appearance-motion prototype network (AMP-net), which
industrial object localization and classification methods to leverages external memory mechanisms to capture appeardetect defects in the assembly of crankshaft shingle covers. ance and motion features, excelling in anomaly detection
 Recently, due to the remarkable performance of Transform- for surveillance videos. This approach balances the effecers in computer vision, a multitude of studies have been tive representation of normal events and anomaly detection,
devoted to introducing Transformers into defect detection achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance [45]. Liu et al.
tasks. In contrast to CNNs, where the inherent localization [46] also developed the memory-enhanced spatial–temporal
of convolution prevents them from explicitly modeling long- encoding (MSTE) framework, specifically designed for indusrange interactions, Transformer-based networks can correlate trial scenarios, addressing the challenges of scarce industrial
each element of the data with each other through their built-in video data and the complexity of anomaly events, improving
global self-attention mechanism. Zhu et al. [37] proposed the accuracy and spatial–temporal localization of anomaly
5027713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Pipelines of the detection network. Stage 1 is used for feature extraction; Stages 2–4 are for multiscale feature learning, including MHSA, SWA,
and HFP.

detection. Gong et al. [47] proposed the memory-augmented one-eighth of its original size in the first stage. Unlike the first
autoencoder (MemAE), which enhances the ability to mem- stage, the second to fourth stages perform a 2× downsampling
orize normal patterns by incorporating a memory module between adjacent stages. Moreover, to address variations in
into the autoencoder architecture, thereby improving anomaly angle and scale present in the captured images, the network
detection performance. Wang et al. [48] introduced a incorporates a multiscale structure. Three MHSA-SWA strucdual-branch learning framework with prior information for tures are designed to learn the multilevel features of ACPCs.
surface anomaly detection, which effectively mitigates the In the MHSA-SWA structure, the global modeling capability
overkill problem, a common issue in industrial defect detec- of the Transformer is utilized to extract discriminative global
tion. Liu et al. [49] developed SimpleNet, a lightweight features for the proactive layer Fi (i = 1, 2, 3) and supporting
yet effective model designed to enhance the compatibil- layer Bi (i = 1, 2, 3). These global features are then input into
ity between defect detection models and industrial imaging, the corresponding SWA modules of each stage, where pixel
thereby improving detection accuracy. Li et al. [50] proposed affinity relationships are established through a sliding window
a novel approach for few-shot anomaly detection by leveraging mechanism.
prompt learning based solely on normal samples, enabling The features of the proactive layer and the supporting layer
more efficient learning in scenarios with limited anomaly data. are first obtained by mapping to high-dimensional embeddings
 through a weight-sharing CNN. Subsequently, two MHSA
 III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD branches with nonshared weights are constructed to extract
A. Structure of the Detection Model the proactive layer and supporting layer features separately.
 This overall CNN–Transformer structure effectively captures
 In this article, a SWANet with a dual-branch structure is detailed information about the object while establishing comproposed for the detection of missing components in ACPCs. prehensive global connections.
Initially, the data undergoes augmentation via the CRTA To parse the heterogeneous features within the dual
before being fed into the network. As illustrated in Fig. 2, branches, the HFP module is constructed to accurately difthe network employs an encoder–decoder architecture. Unlike ferentiate between the proactive layer and the supporting
traditional object detection networks, the proposed encoder layer, allowing the network to focus on detecting assembly
utilizes a dual-branch structure to separately extract and pro- differences of the missing components. During the decoding
cess distinctive features of the proactive layer and supporting phase, the multiscale HFP features are progressively decoded
layer, significantly enhancing the network’s capability to per- through CA, facilitating the gradual fusion of features across
ceive subtle differences between these two elements, thereby different levels. These discriminative features are directly input
addressing the issue of high similarity in ACPC images. into the detection head for identifying missing regions within
 In the dual-branch structure, the proactive layer and the the ACPC assembly.
supporting layer, respectively, take on the roles of capturing core information and providing auxiliary support. This
division enables the network to more effectively distinguish B. Cross-Region Transformation Algorithm
key features and background details in complex scenarios, Due to the small number of missing samples in the collected
thereby enhancing its ability to detect missing components, ACPCs dataset, there is a problem of imbalance between
especially in ACPC images with high-similarity features. positive and negative samples, which will cause over-fitting.
Each branch comprises four feature extraction and process- Therefore, to avoid the above problems, it is necessary to
ing stages. Specifically, the input image is downsampled to enhance the collected image data to achieve the purpose of
WANG et al.: SWANet WITH DUAL-BRANCH STRUCTURE FOR DETECTION OF ACPCs 5027713

 Algorithm 1 Random Region Exchange Module
 1: Input: Image I of size H ×W , divided into m ×n regions,
 network parameters θ
 2: Output: Augmented image I ′
 3: Divide I into regions Ri, j where i ∈ {1, . . . , m} and
 j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
  
 H H W W
 Ri, j = I i · : (i + 1) · , j · : ( j + 1) ·
Fig. 3. Pipelines of CRTA. The input image is divided into six equally sized m m n n
subregions. The random function f and probability matrix p are used for 4: Generate probability matrix p using the network f (p; θ )
exchanging subregions. Optimize parameters θ through loss function L.
 5: Randomly select two regions (i 1 , j1 ) and (i 2 , j2 ) based
 on p such that (i 1 , j1 ) ̸ = (i 2 , j2 )
expanding the data. Compared with only using data augmen- 6: Perform region exchange:
tation methods such as color transformation, this article can I ′ (Ri1 , j1 ) = Ri2 , j2
change the pixel distribution of the whole image by using the
 I ′ (Ri2 , j2 ) = Ri1 , j1
above local region transformation method, so that the network
pays more attention to the difference between the missing 7: Keep other regions unchanged
area and the normal area, thereby improving the generalization 8: Compute the loss L(θ ) using I ′ and I
ability of the model. 9: Update θ to minimize the loss:
 Before initiating the data augmentation step, it is essential to
extract the object region from the collected images to facilitate θ ← θ − η · ∇θ L(θ )
subsequent subregion swapping. As illustrated in the figure, 10: Return: Augmented image I ′
the input image I is set with dimensions H × W and divided
into m × n areas with each area sized ((H/m), (W/n)),
where m = 2 and n = 3. The specific process is shown in where I is the object image, guiding the network to learn
Fig. 3. how to enhance data through region swapping and improve
 Each subregion Ri, j is defined by its row i and column j the model’s generalization capability.
indices and can be specifically expressed as To avoid the disruption of data distribution consistency
     
 H H caused by random region transformations, we supervise the
 Ri, j = I i · : (i + 1) · similarity between regions before and after transformation
 m m
  
 W
  
 W based on the aforementioned mathematical model. The specific
 j· : ( j + 1) · . (1) process is detailed in Algorithm 1, where the transformation
 n n
 parameters θ are set to be learned through the network. This
 Following this, two different subregions (i 1 , j1 ) and (i 2 , j2 ) adaptive transformation parameter learning approach prevents
are randomly selected, ensuring they are distinct. This selec- excessive region transformations that could lead to abnormal
tion process can be mathematically expressed as data distribution, ensuring the expansion of samples while
 (i 1 , j1 ) ∼ Uniform(1, m) × Uniform(1, n) maximizing the similarity between the original and augmented
 samples.
 (i 2 , j2 ) ∼ Uniform(1, m) × Uniform(1, n)
 (i 1 , j1 ) ̸ = (i 2 , j2 ). (2)
 C. Sliding Window Affinity
 A swap operation S is defined, where the selected areas To make the network learn the location of the missing area
Ri1, j1 and Ri2, j2 are exchanged. The image after swapping, in ACPCs more quickly, we use a new method to calculate
I ′ , is represented as the similarity between the object pixel area and the nonobject
 I ′ (Ri1 , j1 ) = Ri2 , j2 pixel area, that is, the SWA method. The calculation result
 of the similarity of different regions is affinity. The sliding
 I ′ (Ri2 , j2 ) = Ri1 , j1 (3)
 window size of the sliding affinity module is set to be 5 × 5,
with other areas remaining unchanged. and the sliding step size is 1. First, the local window of 5 ×
 The swap position selection function f is defined as 5 in the upper left corner of the feature map is selected. In the
(i 1 , j1 ), (i 2 , j2 ) = f ( p; θ), where p is a probability matrix feature map part of the selected local window, linear mapping
representing the likelihood of each area being selected, learned is performed to obtain the Q and the K , and the local affinity is
through training network parameters θ. obtained by multiplying Q and K . Finally, the local affinity
 Finally, a loss function L is defined based on the L2 loss, is mapped to the original position of the feature map. The
which minimizes the pixel-wise difference between the trans- calculation process is shown in Fig. 4.
formed image I ′ and the target image I . It is formulated The feature map of 28 × 28 sizes obtained after feature
as: θ fusion is connected to the sliding affinity module. The window
 slides on the original feature map according to the step size.
 L(θ) = ∥I ′ −I ∥2 (4) The feature map selected by the sliding window continues
5027713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Fig. 5. Pipelines of HFP. The proactive layer and the supporting layer features
 undergo linear transformations, with the supporting layer generating queries
 (Q) and the proactive layer generating keys (K ) and values (V ). A multihead
 self-attention mechanism captures the feature relationships, focusing on subtle
 differential regions. The output features are processed through a feedforward
Fig. 4. Pipelines of SWA. A 5 × 5 local window in the feature map is network and normalization layers.
selected and linearly mapped to obtain Q and K , from which the local affinity
is computed and mapped back to the original position. The sliding window
traverses the feature map with a stride of 1, repeatedly computing and mapping
the local affinity. For overlapping regions, affinities are multiplied, ultimately layer features. This approach allows the network to effectively
generating a complete affinity map. learn distinguishing characteristics for each region, thereby
 improving the model’s ability to detect subtle differences in
 the assembly areas.
to calculate the local affinity and is also mapped to the As illustrated in Fig. 5, the features are first processed
corresponding position of the feature map. If there is an through their respective linear layers to ensure that each
overlapping part, the affinity is multiplied. Then, repeat the set undergoes appropriate transformation before the attention
steps of sliding, calculating affinity, and mapping to the feature computation. A multihead CA mechanism is then employed,
map until the sliding is completed, and the affinity map of the where the supporting layer features are used to generate
entire feature map is obtained. queries (Q), while the proactive layer features produce keys
 Let f be the original feature map, w f and h f be the width (K ) and values (V ). This configuration enables the netand height of f , respectively, and the feature map of each work to learn the relationships between the proactive layer
local window divided by f is and the supporting layer, allowing it to focus on regions
 f i j = f [5i : 5i + 5/5, 5 j : 5 j + 5/5] (5) where the differences, though subtle, are crucial. The use of
 the self-attention mechanism aids the network in capturing
 i = 0, 1, . . . , w f − 5, j = 0, 1, . . . , h f − 5. (6)
 long-range dependencies, which is particularly beneficial in
 The local affinity diagram calculated by SWA is identifying the anomalies related to missing components in
  p  ACPC assembly. The output features are subsequently proaffi( f i j ) = softmax Q × K T / dk . (7) cessed by a feedforward network and normalization layers
 Among them, Q, K , and V are obtained by the linear to ensure that the parsed features maintain a high level of
transformation of the characteristic map f discriminative power. This design significantly enhances the
 model’s performance in distinguishing between the proactive
 Q = wq f i j (8) layer and the supporting layer, especially in environments
 K = wk f i j (9) where the assembly regions closely resemble the background.
 V = wv f i j . (10)
 E. Loss Function
 Finally, the affinity map of the characteristic map f is
obtained as To jointly optimize both classification and bounding box
 X regression, we combine focal loss and CIoU loss using a
 Affi( f ) = affi( f i j ) × αi j . (11) weighted sum. The total loss function is defined as
 i, j

 Among them, αi j is the weight coefficient, which determines Ltotal = λ1 Lfocal + λ2 LCloU (12)
the proportion of local affinity in the affinity map at each where Lfocal is the focal loss for classification, LCloU is the
position. CIoU loss for bounding box regression, and λ1 and λ2 are the
 weights that control the tradeoff between the classification and
D. Heterogeneous Feature Parsing localization loss, respectively.
 HFP is intended to address the challenges associated with Focal loss is used to reduce the impact of easily classified
the high similarity between ACPC assembly regions and negative samples in ACPCs and focus more on hard-to-classify
their background, a similarity that complicates the detection positive samples. It reshapes the standard cross-entropy loss
of missing components. This resemblance makes it difficult by lowering the weight of correctly classified examples and
for traditional methods to accurately distinguish between the increasing the weight of misclassified or difficult examples.
regions. The core design principle of the HFP module lies in The definition of focal loss is as follows:
processing the heterogeneous proactive layer and supporting Lfocal ( pt ) = −αt (1 − pt )γ log( pt ) (13)
layer features separately, followed by the application of an
attention mechanism to prioritize the more salient proactive based on empirical experience, we set αt = 0.25 and γ = 2.
WANG et al.: SWANet WITH DUAL-BRANCH STRUCTURE FOR DETECTION OF ACPCs 5027713

 CIoU loss is used to improve the localization accuracy
of bounding boxes. This loss function not only considers
the overlap between the predicted and ground-truth boxes of
ACPCs but also takes into account their aspect ratios and the
distance between their center points. The definition of CIoU
loss is as follows:
 ρ 2 (b, bg )
 LCloU = 1 − IoU + + αv. (14)
 c2
 Here, b and bg are the center points of the predicted and
ground-truth boxes, ρ is the Euclidean distance between these
points, c is the diagonal length of the smallest enclosing
box covering both the predicted and ground-truth boxes, v
measures the similarity of aspect ratios, and α is a positive
tradeoff parameter.

 Fig. 6. ACPC image acquisition system using Basler CCD industrial camera,
 IV. E XPERIMENT demonstrating the process of flat placement for missing assembly detection.
 In this section, we show the evaluation results of the
proposed method on the ACPC dataset, which validates the
effectiveness of our proposed method.

A. Dataset and Environment
 This study utilized an ACPC’s image acquisition system,
with the collection process illustrated in Fig. 6: ACPCs were
placed flat on a platform and illuminated by a single LED
light source. In this system, a Basler ruL2098-10gc chargecoupled device (CCD) industrial camera was used as the
acquisition sensor, and a display screen was used for real-time
monitoring of the acquisition process. Images with missing
assembly are manually filtered out for the object box labeling.
Due to the presence of different production lines for ACPCs,
there is no single type of chip for missing assembly detection,
posing higher requirements for the missing detection network.
Fig. 7 shows two missed and nonmissed chip maps with
different backgrounds were selected for gray value detection,
respectively, and the results show that the gray values of the
missed and nonmissed maps with different backgrounds are
very close to each other, which illustrates the characteristics
of the dataset in which the differences between the missed and
nonmissed regions are small.
 Through the ACPC’s image acquisition system and data Fig. 7. Comparison of gray values between (a) and (b) missing and (c) and
 (d) nonmissing areas of ACPCs on different backgrounds.
augmentation algorithms, the ACPC dataset was established.
The images in the ACPC dataset were uniformly resized to
2560 × 1920 pixels to ensure consistency in model training 1) Training Loss Curves: The curve represents the variation
and testing. The dataset contains 1228 labeled missing images, of the model’s performance metrics on the training set with
with 983 used for training and 245 for testing. In the missing the number of training samples. It is a curve with dataset size
images, the average pixel proportion of the missing area is 1%. as the horizontal axis and model accuracy as the vertical axis.
 The experiment is carried out on the Linux Ubuntu By gradually increasing the dataset size and observing the
20.4 platform. The GPU is NVIDIA Tesla A100, and the trend of accuracy change on the training set, the optimization
deep learning environment is python3.8 + pytorch1.8 + space and overfitting of the model can be known. The perforcuda11.4. The learning rate is 0.0001, epoch is 100, and the mance of the model can be improved by adjusting the model
optimizer is Adam. complexity or obtaining more data.
 2) Mean Average Precision: The average precision (AP)
 can be obtained in object detection tasks by calculating the
B. Evaluation Metrics area under the P–R curve, reflecting the average accuracy rate
 In this study, the training loss curves, mean average pre- for different recall cases. AP50 is one of the commonly used
cision (mAP), frames per second (FPS), and other relevant metrics, and it represents the AP value when the intersection
metrics are used to evaluate the performance of the model. over the union (IoU) threshold is 50%. In this article, AP50 is
5027713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE I
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF VARIOUS D ETECTION M ETHODS FOR ACPC M ISSING A SSEMBLY D ETECTION BASED ON M AP AND FPS

used to evaluate the detection performance of our method. The
mAP is the average accuracy summation of all the categories
divided by all the categories. The AP and mAP for a particular
category i are calculated as follows:
 Z 1
 A Pi = P(R) d R (15)
 0

 N
 1 X
 m AP = A Pi (16)
 N i=1
where P(R) is the mapping relationship between P and R and
N is the total number of categories.
 Fig. 8. Training loss curve comparison.
 3) Frames Per Second: FPS indicates the inference speed of
the model, measured by the number of image frames processed
 and GFLOPs by 15.8% and 44.6%, enhancing efficiency and
per second.
 practicality.
 4) Params: Params denotes the parameters of the object
 To visually illustrate the detection efficacy of the model,
detection model.
 input test images were randomly chosen as depicted in
 5) GFLOPs: GFLOPs represent the computational com-
 Fig. 9(a), with the visual outcomes contrasted with those of
plexity of the model, measured in billions of floating-point
 other methods presented in Fig. 9(b)–(f). Enlargements of
operations.
 the missing position and its adjacent pixels are positioned in
 the upper left corner of each image. It is evident that our
C. Comparison With SOTA Methods method yields a higher single-image prediction probability and
 To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on ACPCs, a finer delineation of the detection box location compared to
we compared it with the current SOTA feature similarity-based other methods. This is attributed to SWA enhancing the pixel
methods, including Faster RCNN [51], FCOS [52], RetinaNet connectivity via affinity, thereby ensuring that pixels in the
[53], and Swin Transformer [37]. The experimental results missing area secure a superior feature representation, which
are shown in Table I. To fully ensure the validity of the leads to more precise positioning of the detection frame and
results, the values in the table represent the mean and standard a discrimination probability that approaches 1.
deviation from fivefold cross-validation. All methods were To further highlight the network’s capability to precisely
trained and tested in the same environment, and the results identify areas of missing installation, the test images menindicate that our method outperforms the others. Specifically, tioned above were selected, and the feature maps resulting
in the missing assembly detection task, we achieved the from feature fusion were visualized, as shown in Fig. 10. In the
best results in mAP50, mAP75, mAP50:95, and mAR50:95 resulting visualization feature maps, areas that tend toward red
(mean average recall at different thresholds). Fig. 8 shows indicate a higher attention level by the network, suggesting that
the training loss curves of the proposed method and other these areas are more likely to be detected as missing parts
methods. According to the comparison results, our method areas. The visualization analysis results clearly demonstrate
achieved performance comparable to the best training curve that the perception ability of the network model proposed in
method, indicating better generalization on the ACPC test set. this study significantly surpasses that of other comparative
We believe that when the randomness of the missing position is methods. In contrast, the latter methods exhibit excessive
strong, the features obtained by the SWA in this article exhibit attention to normal areas and weaker recognition capability
higher discrimination. This is because the feature embedding for missing parts areas, indicating these network models’
vector of the missing position enhances the distinction from inadequate performance in distinguishing between missing
the background through affinity, thereby improving the detec- parts areas and normal areas. Furthermore, this phenomenon is
tion and localization of defects. Table I further compares attributed to the effectiveness of the SWA module within our
computational efficiency. Although Swin Transformer achieves network model. The SWA module enhances the correlation
higher FPS, its computational cost is significantly higher. Our among pixels within missing parts areas, making the feature
method maintains optimal accuracy while reducing Params representation of these areas more pronounced and thus more
WANG et al.: SWANet WITH DUAL-BRANCH STRUCTURE FOR DETECTION OF ACPCs 5027713

Fig. 9. Visualization and detection results. (a) Original images. (b) Swin Transformer. (c) Faster RCNN. (d) FCOS. (e) Retinanet. (f) Ours.

easily recognized and located by the network. Consequently, TABLE II
it can be concluded that the network model proposed in this A BLATION R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS
study demonstrates higher accuracy and precision in locating
missing parts areas on chips.

D. Ablation Experiment
 1) Different Components Proposed: To rigorously validate
the effectiveness of the proposed method, ablation experiments
were conducted to compare the contributions of each component. As a control, the CRTA was replaced with a randomly
replicated and pasted alternative. The experimental results,
as shown in Table II, indicate that the CRTA provided an TABLE III
exceptionally robust data foundation. Building on this, the R ESULTS FOR D IFFERENT I NPUT I MAGES
SWA further enhanced the model’s representational capacity
through affinity, while the HFP improved the discriminative
power between the proactive layer and the supporting layer.
 2) Results for Different Input Images: To evaluate the
impact of different input image resolutions on detection
results, images of various resolutions were fed into the network. The results, as presented in Table III. At a resolution of
224, all metrics demonstrated relatively low performance, particularly with map75 and map50:95 values of 0.544 and 0.507,
respectively. However, as the input size increased, performance
progressively improved, reaching its peak at a resolution some metrics, the overall performance at 1300 × 800 was
of 1300 × 800. At this resolution, map50, map50:95, and the most outstanding, aligning well with the COCO dataset.
mar50:95 achieved the highest values of 0.985, 0.743, and On the one hand, this resolution is closer to the actual
0.782, respectively, indicating superior detection accuracy data distribution, helping to eliminate extraneous redundant
and robustness. Additionally, although the input sizes of information. On the other hand, this size fully leverages the
896 × 896 and 1792 × 1792 showed similar performance in multiscale characteristics of the network structure.
5027713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 10. Visualization effects of feature maps. (a) Original images. (b) Swin Transformer. (c) Faster RCNN. (d) FCOS. (e) Retinanet. (f) Ours.

E. Robustness Experiment network for detection, and the detection effect of the model
 In the actual assembly process, due to changes in the site under the noise is intuitively displayed.
environment or aging of equipment after long-term operation, To verify the robustness of different models, the test set was
noise interference may occur when acquiring ACPC images. added with two sets of salt-and-pepper noise with different
To cope with new noises that may be generated in actual intensities and then sent to different models for comparison.
production, it is necessary to verify the robustness of ours. It can be seen from Table IV that salt-and-pepper noise has
The original test set was randomly introduced into four groups the greatest influence on the accuracy of the model compared
of different types of noise, and the strength of each group with other noise. Therefore, this experiment is representative.
of noise was compared with each other. The specific test The results are shown in Table V. For single-stage detection
results are shown in Table IV. Among them, the strong noise methods such as FCOS and RetinaNet, the quality of feature
group includes Gaussian noise with a standard deviation of extraction has a great influence on the final results, so it is
10, salt-and-pepper noise with a ratio of 0.007, Poisson noise difficult to cope with inclement noise. The Swin Transformer
with an average incidence rate of 25, and speckle noise and Faster RCNN, respectively, enhance the feature extraction
with a parameter of 0.05. The weak noise group includes and candidate box generation, so the declining accuracy is
Gaussian noise with a standard deviation of 5 and a ratio of slightly better than the previous two methods. Under the
0.005, salt-and-pepper noise, Poisson noise with an average same extreme conditions, the accuracy of our model decreases
incidence rate of 2, and speckle noise with a parameter the least. The correlation between pixels is enhanced by
of 0.01. the proposed SWA. Even if the noise is added, the output
 The results show that the different noises introduced in discriminative features can be output stably.
the test set will cause a drop in detection accuracy of the
proposed method, but it is still within the acceptable range. F. Generalization Experiments
Under the most extreme perturbation of strong salt-and-pepper To further evaluate the applicability and detection effinoise, the one with the most change only dropped by 0.124. cacy of the network model proposed in this study across
The proposed method has good environmental adaptability and various detection objects, the NPSS dataset was introduced
can cope with various disturbances that randomly appear in the as a new object for conducting generalization performance
actual assembly inspection process. Strong noise visual effects experiments. The NPSS dataset [35] is specifically designed
are shown in Fig. 11. The images in the test set are randomly for identifying defects in nickel-plated punched steel strips,
selected, added with the above strong noise, and sent to the comprising 1500 images of nickel-plated punched steel strip
WANG et al.: SWANet WITH DUAL-BRANCH STRUCTURE FOR DETECTION OF ACPCs 5027713

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
 A NTI -I NTERFERENCE E XPERIMENT C OMPARISON R ESULTS W ITH VARIOUS F RAMEWORKS
 FOR THE NPSS DATASET (%)

 Fig. 12. Visual results of the NPSS dataset using the proposed method.

 TABLE VII
Fig. 11. Strong noise visual effect. R ESULTS OF THE P ROPOSED M ODULE ON THE MVT EC DATASET (%)

 TABLE V
 ROBUSTNESS C OMPARISON E XPERIMENT

 excellent generalization capability, affirming its suitability for
 a variety of detection scenarios. To intuitively demonstrate the
 generalization ability of this method, the visual results of the
 NPSS dataset under this method are shown in Fig. 12. It can
 be seen that this article has good detection performance in
defects collected on-site with industrial cameras. This dataset categories such as CH and BH, which have similar structures
is categorized into five defect types: blind hole (BH), connect- to the ACPCs dataset proposed in this article. Although the
ing hole (CH), rusty spot (RU), scratch (SC), and water spot positioning is slightly flawed for irregular categories such as
(WS), with each category containing 300 images. Due to the rusty, it can still meet the needs of actual industrial production,
use of image stitching technology, these images vary in size. further fully verifying the generalization of this article.
 The experimental comparison results on the NPSS dataset The scarcity of defect data and the reliance on supervised
are presented in Table VI, the network model proposed in learning on labeled defect samples impose significant limitathis study demonstrates exceptional performance across all five tions on supervised methods for industrial defect detection.
categories of nickel-plated punched steel strip defect detection As industrial defect inspection tasks become increasingly
tasks, particularly ranking first in four of the defect detection diverse, exploring self-supervised learning-based defect deteccategories. In terms of the mean mAP metric, the method tion has become particularly crucial. Therefore, this paper
proposed in this study significantly outperforms other compar- further investigates the feasibility and adaptability of the core
ative methods. These results validate the proposed network’s module SWA within an anomaly detection framework.
5027713 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Given that SimpleNet is the latest SOTA model in the field [7] R. Wang et al., “Development of an improved YOLOv7-based model
of anomaly detection and its network architecture facilitates for detecting defects on strip steel surfaces,” Coatings, vol. 13, no. 3,
 p. 536, Mar. 2023.
seamless integration of external modules, we select SimpleNet [8] Y.-J. Cha, W. Choi, and O. Büyüköztürk, “Deep learning-based crack
as the anomaly detection baseline and incorporate the SWA damage detection using convolutional neural networks,” Comput.-Aided
module into its structure. Specifically, SWA is inserted after Civil Infrastruct. Eng., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 361–378, May 2017.
 [9] A. Choudhary, T. Mian, S. Fatima, and B. K. Panigrahi, “Fault diagthe backbone feature extractor and before the feature adaptor, nosis of electric two-wheeler under pragmatic operating conditions
aiming to enhance feature discriminability. Meanwhile, Sim- using wavelet synchrosqueezing transform and CNN,” IEEE Sensors J.,
pleNet’s loss mechanism remains unchanged to ensure training vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 6254–6263, Mar. 2023.
stability and compatibility. [10] T. Zhang, S. Zhong, W. Xu, L. Yan, and X. Zou, “Catenary insulator
 defect detection: A dataset and an unsupervised baseline,” IEEE Trans.
 Comparative experiments conducted on the public dataset Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–15, 2024.
MVTec, as shown in Table VII, demonstrate that while the [11] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self-supervised
SWA-enhanced SimpleNet does not surpass the original model learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Nashville, TN, USA,
in overall detection accuracy, it achieves a higher PRO score, Jun. 2021, pp. 9659–9669.
validating the effectiveness of the SWA module in anomaly [12] J. Zhu, Q. Pang, S. Li, S. Tian, J. Li, and Y. Li, “ADDet: An effilocalization tasks and further confirming its potential for cient multiscale perceptual enhancement network for aluminum defect
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–14, 2024.
unsupervised defect detection. [13] Y. Zheng, W. Lyu, C. Wang, Q. Guo, D. Zhou, and W. Xu, “Efficient
 conflict-filtered network for defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 V. C ONCLUSION Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023.
 [14] L. Gao, J. Zhang, C. Yang, and Y. Zhou, “Cas-VSwin transformer:
 In this study, the ACPC dataset was initially constructed. A variant Swin transformer for surface-defect detection,” Comput. Ind.,
To address the issue of sample imbalance, the data were vol. 140, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 103689.
effectively expanded using the fast region transformation [15] Q. Luo, J. Su, C. Yang, W. Gui, O. Silvén, and L. Liu, “CAT-EDNet:
method. Then, a missing assembly detection algorithm based Cross-attention transformer-based encoder–decoder network for salient
 defect detection of strip steel surface,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
on local window affinity calculation is proposed to calculate vol. 71, pp. 1–13, 2022.
the similarity relationship between pixels, strengthen the inter- [16] L. Zhang, S.-F. Yan, J. Hong, Q. Xie, F. Zhou, and S.-L. Ran,
nal relationship between pixels, highlight the pixel difference “An improved defect recognition framework for casting based on DETR
 algorithm,” J. Iron Steel Res. Int., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 949–959, May 2023.
between the missing area and the normal area, and use multi- [17] J. Wang, Q. Li, J. Gan, H. Yu, and X. Yang, “Surface defect detection via
scale feature fusion to enhance the defect feature and improve entity sparsity pursuit with intrinsic priors,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
the discrimination of small object area features. Ultimately, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 141–150, Jan. 2020.
 [18] J. P. Yun, D. Kim, K. Kim, S. J. Lee, C. H. Park, and S. W. Kim, “Visionthis approach demonstrated significant advantages over other based surface defect inspection for thick steel plates,” Opt. Eng., vol. 56,
methods and fulfilled industrial production requirements. This no. 5, May 2017, Art. no. 053108.
research provides a reference for the application of vision [19] G. K. Nand, Noopur, and N. Neogi, “Defect detection of steel surtechnology in intelligent industrial production lines. face using entropy segmentation,” in Proc. Annu. IEEE India Conf.
 (INDICON), Pune, India, Dec. 2014, pp. 1–6.
 However, certain limitations exist and should be addressed [20] N. Neogi, D. K. Mohanta, and P. K. Dutta, “Defect detection of steel
in future work. The method relies on a grid-based structural surfaces with global adaptive percentile thresholding of gradient image,”
prior, which may limit its applicability to more complex J. Inst. Eng. India, B, vol. 98, no. 6, pp. 557–565, Dec. 2017.
 [21] J. Kittler, R. Marík, M. Mirmehdi, M. Petrou, and J. Song, “Detection
and unstructured industrial assembly scenarios. Additionally, of defects in colour texture surfaces,” in Proc. IAPR Workshop Mach.
the incorporation of the SWA model and a dual-branch Vis. Appl. (MVA), Kawasaki, Japan, Dec. 1994, pp. 558–567.
structure introduces additional computational overhead, which [22] K. Y. Song, J. Kittler, and M. Petrou, “Defect detection in random colour
may affect real-time performance in high-speed industrial textures,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 667–683, Oct. 1996.
 [23] W. Wen and A. Xia, “Verifying edges for visual inspection purposes,”
production lines. Future research should focus on enhancing Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 315–328, Mar. 1999.
adaptability, optimizing computational efficiency, and broad- [24] J. Chen and A. K. Jain, “A structural approach to identify defects in
ening applicability to diverse industrial defect detection tasks. textured images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 1,
 Beijing, China, Aug. 1988, pp. 29–32.
 [25] F. Timm and E. Barth, “Non-parametric texture defect detection using
 R EFERENCES Weibull features,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 7877, pp. 150–161, 2011.
 [1] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for [26] J. Yang et al., “Development of an optical defect inspection algorithm
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. based on an active contour model for large steel roller surfaces,” Appl.
 (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV, USA, Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. Opt., vol. 57, no. 10, p. 2490, 2018.
 [2] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. [27] H. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Tian, H. Chen, H. Sun, and K. Liu,
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008. “A simple guidance template-based defect detection method for
 [3] O. Badmos, A. Kopp, T. Bernthaler, and G. Schneider, “Image-based strip steel surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 5,
 defect detection in lithium-ion battery electrode using convolutional neu- pp. 2798–2809, May 2019.
 ral networks,” J. Intell. Manuf., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 885–897, Apr. 2020. [28] F. Pernkopf, “3D surface inspection using coupled HMMs,” in Proc.
 [4] D. Li, D. Yang, L. Li, L. Wang, and K. Wang, “Electrochemical 17th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), 2004, pp. 223–226.
 impedance spectroscopy based on the state of health estimation for [29] X.-C. Yuan, L.-S. Wu, and Q. Peng, “An improved Otsu method using
 lithium-ion batteries,” Energies, vol. 15, no. 18, p. 6665, Sep. 2022. the weighted object variance for defect detection,” Appl. Surf. Sci.,
 [5] Z. Cui, L. Kang, L. Li, L. Wang, and K. Wang, “A hybrid neural network vol. 349, pp. 472–484, Sep. 2015.
 model with improved input for state of charge estimation of lithium-ion [30] A. S. Tolba and H. M. Raafat, “Multiscale image quality measures for
 battery at low temperatures,” Renew. Energy, vol. 198, pp. 1328–1340, defect detection in thin films,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 79,
 Oct. 2022. nos. 1–4, pp. 113–122, Jul. 2015.
 [6] W. Zhao, F. Chen, H. Huang, D. Li, and W. Cheng, “A new steel defect [31] P. Zhu, Y. Cheng, P. Banerjee, A. Tamburrino, and Y. Deng, “A novel
 detection algorithm based on deep learning,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci., machine learning model for eddy current testing with uncertainty,” NDT
 vol. 2021, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2021. & E Int., vol. 101, pp. 104–112, Jan. 2019.
WANG et al.: SWANet WITH DUAL-BRANCH STRUCTURE FOR DETECTION OF ACPCs 5027713

[32] A. Wronkowicz, K. Dragan, and K. Lis, “Assessment of uncertainty [54] Z. Ge, S. Liu, F. Wang, Z. Li, and J. Sun, “YOLOX: Exceeding YOLO
 in damage evaluation by ultrasonic testing of composite structures,” series in 2021,” 2021, arXiv:2107.08430.
 Compos. Struct., vol. 203, pp. 71–84, Nov. 2018. [55] A. Bochkovskiy, C.-Y. Wang, and H.-Y. Mark Liao, “YOLOv4: Optimal
[33] Y. Shu, B. Li, and H. Lin, “Quality safety monitoring of LED chips using speed and accuracy of object detection,” 2020, arXiv:2004.10934.
 deep learning-based vision inspection methods,” Measurement, vol. 168, [56] M. Tan, R. Pang, and Q. V. Le, “EfficientDet: Scalable and efficient
 Jan. 2021, Art. no. 108123. object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog-
[34] P. Lu, J. Jing, and Y. Huang, “MRD-Net: An effective CNN-based seg- nit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 10781–10790.
 mentation network for surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. [57] K. Duan, S. Bai, L. Xie, H. Qi, Q. Huang, and Q. Tian, “CenterNet:
 Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–12, 2022. Keypoint triplets for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
[35] Y. Liang, J. Li, J. Zhu, R. Du, X. Wu, and B. Chen, “A lightweight Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 6568–6577.
 network for defect detection in nickel-plated punched steel strip images,” [58] Y. Wang et al., “LEDNet: A lightweight encoder–decoder network
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–15, 2023. for real-time semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image
[36] J. Li, R. Du, J. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Xu, and M. Cai, “Autofeeding system Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2019, pp. 1860–1864.
 for assembling the CBCs on automobile engine based on 3-D vision
 guidance,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–13, 2021.
[37] W. Zhu, H. Zhang, C. Zhang, X. Zhu, Z. Guan, and J. Jia, “Surface defect
 detection and classification of steel using an efficient Swin transformer,”
 Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 57, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 102061. Huimin Wang was born in 2000. She received the
[38] Q. Zhang, J. Lai, J. Zhu, and X. Xie, “Wavelet-guided promotion- B.S. degree in automation from Xiangtan University,
 suppression transformer for surface-defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Xiangtan, China, in 2022, where she is currently
 Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 4517–4528, 2023. pursuing the M.S. degree in electronic information
[39] H. Zhou, R. Yang, R. Hu, C. Shu, X. Tang, and X. Li, “ETDNet: Efficient with the School of Automation and Electronic Infortransformer-based detection network for surface defect detection,” IEEE mation.
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023. Her main research interests include machine
[40] H. Yu, D. Liu, Z. Zhang, and J. Wang, “A dynamic transformer network vision, industrial image processing, and object
 with early exit mechanism for fast detection of multiscale surface detection.
 defects,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–10, 2023.
[41] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRÆM—A discriminatively
 trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Montreal, QC, Canada,
 Oct. 2021, pp. 8310–8319.
[42] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive Bumin Meng (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. degree in control theory and control engineering
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans, LA, USA, Jun. 2022, from Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 2018.
 pp. 13566–13576. He is currently an Associate Professor with the
[43] N. Madan et al., “Self-supervised masked convolutional trans- College of Automation and Electronic Informaformer block for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. tion, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, China, and a
 Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 525–542, Jan. 2024, doi: Researcher with the National Engineering Research
 10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3322604. Center of RVC, Changsha. His current research
[44] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler, interests include intelligent system control, energy
 “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. management, and optimization.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans,
 LA, USA, Jun. 2022, pp. 14298–14308.
[45] Y. Liu et al., “AMP-Net: Appearance-motion prototype network assisted
 automatic video anomaly detection system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2843–2855, Feb. 2024.
[46] Y. Liu et al., “Memory-enhanced spatial–temporal encoding framework Jiang Zhu received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 for industrial anomaly detection system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 250, in control science and engineering from Hunan
 Sep. 2024, Art. no. 123718. University, Changsha, China, in 2005 and 2011,
[47] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory- respectively.
 augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” He is currently a Professor with the School of
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, Automation and Electronics Information, Xiangtan
 pp. 1705–1714. University, Xiangtan, China. His current research
[48] S. Wang, C. Lv, Z. Zhang, and X. Wei, “Dual-branch learning with interests include intelligent information processing,
 prior information for surface anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. pattern recognition, and parallel distributed systems.
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[49] X. Liu et al., “SimpleNet: A lightweight network for industrial defect
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
[50] X. Li et al., “PromptAD: Learning prompts with only normal samples
 for few-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 16848–16858. Rui Du (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) was born
 in 1996. He received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
[51] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards realfrom Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, China, in
 time object detection with region proposal networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 2017 and 2020, respectively. He is currently pursu-
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015, pp. 91–99.
 ing the Ph.D. degree with the National Engineering
[52] Z. Tian, C. Shen, H. Chen, and T. He, “FCOS: Fully convolutional Research Center of Robot Visual Perception and
 one-stage object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Control Technology, Hunan University, Changsha,
 (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 9627–9636. China.
[53] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for His research interests include multimodal percepdense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), tion.
 Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.