This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

 Temporal-Spatial Decoupled Self-Supervised
 Multi-Task Learning for Video Anomaly Detection
 and Localization in Intelligent Transportation
 Surveillance Systems
 Dicong Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Qilong Wang , Member, IEEE,
 Qinghua Hu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Kaijun Wu , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Video anomaly detection (VAD) has become a criti- Index Terms— Video anomaly detection, multi-task learning,
cal research focus in the realms of computer vision and intelligent decoupling, generative AI, self-supervised Learning.
transportation systems, particularly with the rise of generative
AI and advancements in self-supervised learning. These develop- I. I NTRODUCTION
ments open up new frontiers in understanding complex scenarios
within intelligent transportation systems. Since previous methods,
confined to a single paradigm, inadequately captured intricate
feature information, which led to a bottleneck that constrained
 W ITH the rapid development of intelligent transportation
 systems, video surveillance, as a critical component of
 traffic management, serving as one of the core technologies for
the performance; individuals form unbiased and logical evaluations of matters through an in-depth review of a multitude
 real-time traffic monitoring and anomaly behavior detection.
of factors and rationalizations. Decoupled multi-task learning In particular, pedestrian anomaly behavior detection in road
not only overcomes the limitations of single-task paradigms scenarios is not only vital for traffic safety but also a key task
but also meets the requirements for comprehensiveness and in enhancing the intelligence level of intelligent transportation
objectivity in distinguishing things. Therefore, we propose a systems [1], [2]. In recent years, driven by an exponential
self-supervised multi-task learning network with object-level
spatiotemporal decoupling in this paper. We decouple the video
 surge in surveillance video, video anomaly detection continues
anomaly detection task in both spatial and temporal dimensions to maintain its indispensability within the fields of computer
to construct multiple proxy tasks, optimizing overall performance vision and pattern recognition. Video anomaly detection, as a
through joint learning. Specifically, we first utilize a pre-trained crucial component of intelligent video analysis, is widely
object detector to construct spatiotemporal context cubes. Then, applied in various urban management sectors, including intelon the decoupled dimensions, we design several related proxy
tasks, adjusting the context cube structure to accommodate
 ligent transport system, autonomous driving, and infrastructure
each proxy task, and providing reliable information for anomaly maintenance, within the construction of smart cities [3]. Addidetection through joint training. In the end, our method achieved tionally, in intelligent transportation systems [4], real-time
performance that surpasses existing methods on three traffic road identification and processing of abnormal events in traffic flow
datasets, namely UCSD Ped2, Avenue, and ShanghaiTech, with (such as traffic accidents, violations, emergencies, etc.) can
AUCs of 99.6%, 95.6%, and 87.7%, respectively. It demonstrates
the potential of generative AI-powered anomaly detection systems significantly improve traffic safety and management efficiency,
in advancing intelligent transportation applications. promote the intelligent and digital transformation of urban
 traffic management, and optimize traffic flow and resource
 allocation. Hence, augmenting the performance and efficiency
 Received 4 January 2025; revised 15 March 2025; accepted 2 April 2025. of video anomaly detection holds paramount significance
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation and value in realizing intelligent applications and propelling
of China under Grant 62276186; in part by the Natural Science Foundation
Key Project of Gansu Province under Grant 23JRRA860; in part by Inner relevant research endeavors forward.
Mongolia Key Research and Development and Achievement Transformation Up to the present, various anomaly detection methods have
Project under Grant 2023YFDZ0043, Grant 2023YFDZ0054, and Grant emerged under different supervisory settings, encompassing
2023YFSH0043; in part by the Key Research and Development Project of
Lanzhou Jiaotong University under Grant ZDYF2304; and in part by the Key remarkable techniques in unsupervised [5], [6], [7], [8], [9],
Talent Project of Gansu Province. The Associate Editor for this article was [10], [11], [12], weakly supervised [13], [14], and semi-
T. R. Gadekallu. (Corresponding authors: Qilong Wang; Kaijun Wu.) supervised paradigms [15], [16]. In these regimes, early
 Dicong Wang is with the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300350, China, and also with the School of Electronics reconstruction or prediction methods simply utilized either
and Information Engineering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou 730070, motion or appearance information of objects for anomaly
China (e-mail: wangdc_2021@tju.edu.cn). detection. However, Cai et al. [6] combined both to capture
 Qilong Wang and Qinghua Hu are with the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: qlwang@tju.edu.cn; the consistency between motion and appearance. Although
huqinghua@tju.edu.cn). this combination has somewhat advanced the progress in
 Kaijun Wu is with the School of Electronics and Information Engi- addressing the consistency issue, the vanilla fusion of motion
neering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou 730070, China (e-mail:
wkj@mail.lzjtu.cn). appearances may overlook the fact that the same type of
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3559166 abnormality could exhibit different patterns. In order to
 1558-0016 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

further explore higher-level visual features and investigate the
complex relationship between object motion and appearance.
Yang et al. [11] proposed a new paradigm for video anomaly
detection based on keyframe reconstruction, grounded in video
encoding theory. Although this method excels in maintaining
video continuity and consistency, its effectiveness heavily
depends on the representativeness of the selected keyframes.
In the real world, abnormal events are relatively rare, with Fig. 1. Illustration of difference in various task paradigms for video anomaly
normal data typically dominating the dataset, leading to a detection. (a) single-task paradigms lack subtle anomaly feature capture,
 (b) temporal-spatial separation misses feature interactions, and (c) Ours is
prevalent imbalance in favor of negative samples. Among the a decoupled self-supervised multi-task learning approach.
existing unsupervised methods in use, particularly in detecting
rare anomalies, are significantly influenced by the abundance
of dominant negative samples. While the above-mentioned we designed a more challenging proxy task by spatialendeavors have been continuously exploring and striving temporal decoupling, where we designed multiple proxy
within the domain of VAD, the detection of anomalies in sub-tasks along the time and space dimensions to process
VAD still presents challenges with regard to two distinct time and spatial information at a finer granularity. First,
variables [2]: (1) Rarity or scarcity. Anomalies are rare, to extract key information from the video, we employed
making it challenging to acquire enough authentic examples an off-the-shelf object detector to detect each object in the
for training. (2) Ambiguity or vagueness. Anomalies lack fixed video and extract the corresponding feature information.
semantics, as they encompass diverse events across varying Next, for each detected object, we performed a series of
subjects and scenarios. Whether an event is normal or anoma- operations, including cropping along the object’s bounding
lous depends on the task’s context or overall scenario, thus box to construct a spatiotemporal context cube centered
introducing variability and uncertainty. More recently, self- around the object, adapting the cube structure based on
supervised multi-task learning has emerged as another avenue the task requirements. In the spatial dimension. ① We
for VAD, yielding significantly improved results [17], [18], applied a mask operation to the segmented patches and
[19], [20], [22], [23], [24]. Self-supervised learning methods used them as input to train the model by reconstructing
aim to explore supervisory signals by learning representations the masked parts of the information. ② For each frame in
from unlabeled data. It involves designing auxiliary tasks the spatiotemporal context cube, we decomposed it into
(proxy tasks) to leverage unlabeled data for self-supervised several equal-sized patches, scrambled the original positions
learning. These auxiliary tasks encompass various strategies, of these patches, and then trained the model to predict their
including data augmentation by manipulating parameters of correct positions. These tasks help the model gain a deeper
existing data to transform it into new and unique samples; understanding of the structural aspects of spatial information
employing temporally aware contrastive learning to address and its relationship to the overall content of the video. In the
performance issues arising from inconsistencies between indi- temporal dimension. ③ For all frames in the spatiotemporal
vidual auxiliary tasks and anomaly detection tasks [25]; context cube, we shuffled their temporal order and then
combining different forms of predictive tasks or implementing trained the model to predict the correct position of these
various variants of a single predictive task [10], [11]; and frames in the original sequence. ④ We removed a specific
utilizing different methods in one or more reconstruction tasks frame from each spatiotemporal context cube and used the
to alleviate the “identity mapping” problem in reconstruction, information from the preceding and succeeding frames to
thereby better distinguishing anomalies [12]. The ultimate goal predict the removed frame. Through these operations, the
is to empower models to discern valuable features within model is able to capture anomalous patterns in time and
the data and progressively assimilate an understanding of the further enhance its ability to understand temporal information.
inherent structure and semantic information through the exe- We believe that anomaly detection involves not only motion
cution of these tasks, leading to enhanced overall performance. anomalies but also appearance anomalies. Therefore, through
 Based on the preceding discussion, Individual spatial-temporal decoupling, we perform multitask processing
reconstruction- or prediction-based methods (Fig. 1(a)) along the time and space dimensions to more effectively
struggle to capture comprehensive object representations, identify different types of anomalies. We highlight the main
especially for subtle anomalies, leading to suboptimal contributions as follows:
performance. Dual-branch structures (Fig. 1(b)), which – We have decoupled the video anomaly detection task into
separately learn spatial and temporal features, may suffer both temporal and spatial dimensions, designing it as a
from information loss when handling these dimensions multi-task learning paradigm for anomaly detection.
independently. Jointly training multiple correlated tasks – We approach video anomaly detection as a multi-task
often outperforms single-task approaches, extracting more learning challenge, wherein we consolidate diverse
comprehensive features. As shown in Fig. 1(c), multiple self-supervised proxy tasks from various dimensions
proxy tasks can guide the model toward richer feature within a unified model for joint learning.
representations, enhancing anomaly detection performance. – We were among the early adopters of decoupled self-
This synergistic approach improves the model’s consistency supervised multi-task learning in the domain of video
and effectiveness in detecting subtle anomalies. In this work, anomaly detection.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION 3

 – We have conducted experiments that illustrate the superi- and self-supervised learning. By using dictionary learning to
 ority of our approach over state-of-the-art methods across generate segment-level features and leveraging self-supervised
 three different traffic road scenario benchmarks. learning to generate pseudo-normal/abnormal samples, the
 The subsequent parts of this paper are organized in the framework trains an anomaly detector. Although it effectively
following manner: Section II delves into the related work on distinguishes normal and abnormal events in most cases, it still
self-supervised multi-task learning in video anomaly detection. encounters false negatives when dealing with certain complex
Section III offers a comprehensive description of the proposed anomalies, such as low-frequency anomalies. Zanella et al.
self-supervised multi-task learning method with temporal- [28] leveraged existing vision-language models to generate
spatial decoupling. Section IV presents a series of experiments textual descriptions for each test frame, along with a specific
conducted to evaluate the proposed method, along with a dis- prompting mechanism to unlock the language model’s capacussion of some of future directions and practical implications. bilities in temporal aggregation and anomaly score estimation,
In the end, Section V provides a summary of the methodology making it an effective video anomaly detector.
adopted for this paper.
 B. Multi-Task Learning on VAD
 II. R ELATED W ORK As described by Zhang and Yang [29], we initially provide
 the definition of multi-task learning:
A. Video Anomaly Detection Definition 1 (Multi-task learning): Given m learning tasks
 m
 {Ti }i=1
 The advancement of deep neural networks has signifi- where all the tasks or a subset of them are related
cantly enhanced anomaly detection by incorporating various but not identical, multi-task learning aims to help improve the
research paradigms, including knowledge distillation [20], learning of a model for Ti by using the knowledge contained
[21], self-supervised learning [22], [23], [24], [25], and meta- in the m tasks.
learning [26]. These approaches collectively contribute to Multi-task models have the capacity to learn both the
the improved efficiency and accuracy of capturing anoma- commonalities and differences among various tasks, resulting
lous behaviors within complex scenes. Georgescu et al. [19] in improved efficiency and model quality for each individual
proposed an object-level approach that treats anomaly detec- task [30], [31]. Consequently, compared to single-task models,
tion as a binary classification task. To overcome the issue the risk of over fitting diminishes, while the generalizaof lacking anomaly samples and to improve performance, tion capability strengthens. Georgescu et al. [20] pioneered
they created scene-independent pseudo-anomaly samples for the treatment of video anomaly detection as a multi-task
adversarial training and binary classifier training. However, the learning endeavor. By combining knowledge distillation and
introduction of optical flow significantly reduced the model’s several self-supervised proxy tasks into a unified architecture,
computational efficiency, potentially making it unsuitable for they effectively tackled the complex challenge of anomaly
real-time processing of high frame-rate or high-resolution detection. Baradaran and Bergevin [30] incorporated three
videos. Zhou et al. [27] proposed an appearance-motion complementary proxy tasks, establishing two branches for
network to improve the accuracy of video-based accident future semantic segmentation and optical flow magnitude
detection in congested traffic. Features are extracted through estimation to achieve anomaly detection. Additionally, they
parallel appearance and motion convolutional networks, and innovatively integrated factors such as the direction of object
auxiliary networks, optical flow learners, and temporal atten- motion and distance from the camera into the scope of
tion modules are introduced to enhance the model’s ability to anomaly detection. Barbalau et al. [23] revisited the selfrecognize complex traffic scenes. Additionally, a new traffic supervised multi-task learning framework originally proposed
anomaly dataset is constructed and effectively validated. How- in [20]. Building upon this foundation, they explored alterever, the model occasionally misidentifies non-collision events, native proxy tasks and adopted the convolutional vision
such as vehicle malfunctions, as collisions due to the similarity Transformer (CvT) [31] as the backbone, resulting in further
in motion features. Qing et al. [24] proposed a self-supervised enhanced performance of the model. Therefore, leveraglearning approach called hierarchical consistency (HiCo) ing the characteristics and advantages of multitask learning,
specifically designed for untrimmed videos that contain abun- we designed several targeted proxy tasks and trained them
dant visual and semantic information. This method tailors jointly. The model can fully explore the intrinsic correlations
the learning process to capture various levels of visual and and complementarities between the tasks, significantly enhancsemantic consistency, adapting them based on the relevance ing its ability to understand and represent the data. Multitask
between visual and semantic components. Utilizing recon- learning enables knowledge sharing across different tasks,
struction or prediction has emerged as a prevalent approach allowing the model to simultaneously learn and extract inforwithin the realm of video anomaly detection. These methods mation from multiple perspectives. This not only enhances the
are trained solely on data representing normal patterns, never- model’s generalization performance in complex scenarios but
theless, deep neural networks exhibit an impressive capacity also facilitates knowledge transfer and sharing between tasks.
for generalization, enabling the model to adeptly reconstruct
(or predict) demanding anomaly samples as well, it introduces C. Self-Supervised Learning on VAD
the challenge of over-generalization. Wu et al. [17] devised Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a general learning
the self-supervised sparse representation (S3R) framework, paradigm with the aim of automatically constructing superviexploring the synergistic effect between dictionary learning sion signals from raw data, without external labels or manual
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

annotations. Its core principle is to leverage the inherent struc- our approach are as follows: generating spatiotemporal context
ture and information within the data for the learning process. cubes, developing spatiotemporal decoupled proxy tasks, and
SSL can be divided into two main methods: constructing joint training. To begin, we utilize an off-the-shelf object
proxy tasks and conducting contrastive learning. In proxy tasks detector such as YOLOv3 or YOLOv5 to obtain a series of
for images, researchers design a series of tasks such as data bounding boxes related to the object in the adjacent frames
rotation [32], jigsaw puzzles [33], prediction, or reconstruc- of the video I = {Ii−l , · · · , Ii−1 , Ii , Ii+1 , · · · , Ii+l }, We then
tion [34], [35] to enable the model to learn visual features perform cropping and resizing operations along these boundfrom the data. Unlike image proxy tasks, video proxy tasks ing boxes for the same object to generate the spatiotemporal
have their unique attributes—temporal information. In video context cube. After that, in order to adequately take into
proxy tasks, the focus is often on temporal information, such as account the attributes of the spatial and temporal dimensions,
frame sequence ordering [22], frame playback speed [36], and we apply an array of explores to develop adaptable proxy
the arrow of time [20], [37], among others. Wang et al. [22] tasks. Within the spatial dimension, two proxy subtasks are
introduced a novel proxy task for predictive sequence model- introduced: “the spatial patches masking” and “predicting the
ing that disentangles spatiotemporal components by shuffling positions of the spatial patches”. The model learns information
spatial and temporal cubes, simplifying the self-supervised of different spatial visual features through such tasks, thereby
learning framework and achieves remarkable performance improving its ability to pick up spatial structures and patterns
improvements, although it requires substantial computational in videos. Within the temporal dimension, two proxy subresources due to the extensive use of permutation-based data. tasks are established: “predict missing boxes” and “predict
Shi et al. [38] proposed a progressive learning strategy based temporal position”. These tasks contribute to the model’s
on the difficulty of proxy tasks, gradually introducing mul- learning of the temporal evolution and changes that occur
tiple proxy tasks in ascending order of task difficulty to during abnormalities. In the end, we train the aforementioned
improve performance. If a proxy task is more challenging, proxy subtasks jointly by a shared backbone. Diverse proxy
they typically encourage the model to learn more complex subtasks are able to interact and connect by a shared visual
features; the performance might be better, which is exactly representation of features. By acquiring more extensive and
what our method achieves. In contrastive learning, models detailed feature information from various proxy subtasks, the
are tasked with extracting features from the same sample model enhances its performance. Furthermore, by sharing the
or distinct samples and learning by comparing the similarity backbone, conflicts and competition among distinct proxy
of these extracted features [16]. Liu et al. [26] proposed tasks are minimized, which ended in a more stable and efficient
a meta-learning method based on ensemble uncertainty for learning procedure for the model. The symbols and their
anomaly detection in road scenes, particularly suitable for corresponding descriptions are presented in Table I of this
autonomous driving. This method implicitly quantifies uncer- paper.
tainty by measuring the differences between different models, 1) Backbone Architecture: Drawing on prior works [20],
detecting out-of-distribution (OoD) samples that deviate sig- [22], [40], we employ 3D convolutional neural network (3D
nificantly from the training data distribution. However, due to CNN) and Transformer blocks to construct the backbone
its reliance on the outputs of multiple semantic segmentation network, with each proxy subtask having its corresponding
models, inference requires running multiple models, which prediction head. Initially, we model the spatiotemporal repremay lead to longer inference times, posing certain limitations, sentation of the input using a 3D CNN block. Each 3D block
especially in real-time road monitoring systems. Wang et al. consists of two 3 × 3 × 3 3D convolutional layers and a
[39] used an autocorrelation mechanism to map video features 3D max-pooling layer, with each convolutional layer followed
into sub-feature spaces, supervised by contrastive loss to detect by a batch normalization (BN) layer and a ReLU activation
anomalous videos. Still, it demands a substantial amount of function. Following that, we provide Transformer blocks that
training data and task-specific data augmentation strategies. are capable of effectively processing video sequences, the
Inspired by the significant success of self-supervised learning output produced by the Transformer blocks is subsequently
in the field of image representation learning, we attempt to subjected to global pooling in order to generate the final result.
extend this paradigm to the domain of anomaly detection,
exploring its potential in video analysis. By applying selfsupervised multi-task learning to video, we can fully exploit B. Temporal-Spatial Decoupled Self-Supervised Multi-Task
the latent information within the video, thereby better learning Learning
video representations and features. It will bring new perspec- Spatial dimension—Proxy subtask I. Spatial patches masktives and challenges to research and applications in the field ing. Within the field of self-supervised learning, He et al.
of video anomaly detection. [41] devised a straightforward yet exceptionally efficient
 method: they reconstruct the missing pixels of the input image
 III. M ETHODOLOGY after randomly masking a portion (or patch) of it. A significantly enhanced performance has been achieved through
A. Overview the implementation of this approach. Encouraged by this,
 Overview. An overview of the spatiotemporal decoupled we implemented the mask reconstruction task in the frames
self-supervised multi-task learning network that we propose at the object level and optimized the network utilizing the
at the object level is depicted in Fig. 2. The basic parts of L2 loss. In the testing phase, a random subset of the patches
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION 5

Fig. 2. Method overview. We propose an object-centric spatiotemporal decoupled self-supervised multi-task learning network, which consists of three main
components: the construction of spatiotemporal context cubes; employing diverse strategies to generate flexible proxy tasks in both temporal and spatial
dimensions; and joint training using a shared backbone. We can simultaneously learn temporal and spatial features within a unified framework, thus better
capturing anomalies in videos.

 TABLE I whether the current frame is anomalous by calculating the
 N OTATIONS AND T HEIR D ESCRIPTIONS I NVOLVED difference between the original image and the completed
 IN THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
 reconstruction.

 Iˆ I = f T (I ; θ I ) ; θ f
 
 (1)
 2
 Lsub1 = I − Iˆ I (2)
 2
 1 Xm
 Scor est1 = Ii − IˆiI (3)
 m i=1

 where, the ground truth of the i-th object-level frame is
 denoted as Ii , Iˆ I represents the output obtained from the proxy
 subtask I, T (∗; θ I ) represents the spatiotemporal context cube
 with masked patches, f ∗; θ f represents the backbone of our
 model, the 3D encoder, and the number of frames in the cube
 is denoted by m.
 Proxy subtask II—Predict the positions of the spatial
 patches. First, each frame within the spatiotemporal context
 cube is split into n × n the same patches, which are subsequently shuffled. To ensure that the content and relative
 position of each patch within the context cube are correct,
 we set the absolute positions of the patches to be arranged
 sequentially from left to right and from top to bottom.
 Concurrently, so as to preserve the natural temporal order,
 the relative positions of each frame along the temporal axis
 of the spatiotemporal context cube remain constant. After
 inputting it into the backbone for training, use the spatial
 patches position classifier to predict the absolute position of
 each patch in every frame, and optimize the network using
 cross-entropy loss, as shown in equation (5). During the
 testing phase, we use context cubes containing the correct
 patch position sequences. The model predicts the position of
in the input (64 × 64 in our settings) is masked for recon- patches in each frame and generates a position matrix. In the
struction. Finally, the anomaly score, which is calculated using position matrix, the diagonal values should be the largest
mean absolute difference (MAD), is utilized for determining in their respective columns, indicating the probability that
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

the corresponding patch is in the correct position. Since the Proxy subtask IV. Predict the missing box. Discarding (or
model is trained only with normal data, when encountering removing) a frame from the spatiotemporal context cubes and
anomalous events during testing, the model often produces predicting the frame using its contextual information. This
large prediction errors at the correct anomalous locations, includes predicting not only the next frame based on the
resulting in significantly lower confidence in the predicted preceding video sequence but also an intermediate frame using
outcome at these locations, which leads to the detection of the frames before and after it, and predicting the content of
anomalies at those positions. Therefore, for anomaly scores, a prior video frame using subsequent frames. This design
the predicted probabilities along the diagonal of the matrix guarantees a comprehensive prediction process by including
are used as the anomaly scores for these patches. The matrix various perspectives to capture the features of the object frame.
predicted by the spatial patches classifier is denoted as Zs . As a result of object-level frame prediction, the prediction
The diagonal of the matrix is extracted using diag(·), and the process is less susceptible to background interference, which
minimum value is used to obtain Scorest2 . This value denotes improves the accuracy of the missing frame prediction. During
the object-level anomaly score. In a nutshell, the object-level training, we optimize the network using the L2 loss function,
anomaly score is determined by selecting the minimum score and we utilize mean squared error (MSE) as the anomaly score
along the diagonal of the matrix. This is due to the fact that (Scorest4 ) to determine anomalies, as shown below:
a sample may be considered abnormal if a frame or patch is Iˆ I V = f T (I ; θ I V ) ; θ f
 
 (10)
incorrectly predicted.
 Lsub4 = I − Iˆ I V (11)
 Iˆ I I = f T (I ; θ I I ) ; θ f
  2
 (4)
 1 Xn 2 where, Iˆ I V represents the output obtained from the proxy
 Lsub2 = 2 C E(Is , IˆsI I ) (5) subtask IV, T (∗; θ I V ) represents the spatiotemporal context
 n s=1
 Scor est2 = min (diag (Z s )) (6) cube with missing frames.

where, Iˆ I I represents the output obtained from the proxy C. Joint Loss Function
subtask II, T (∗; θ I I ) represents the spatiotemporal context
cube with spatially shuffled patches. To align with the overall To train the network, we utilize a 3D backbone with Transtrend of anomaly scores for the entire task, we invert the former for joint optimization on all four of the aforementioned
frame-level anomaly scores. It implies that when the overall proxy subtasks. The loss function therefore associated with
anomaly score takes on higher values, it can be considered as joint training is as follows:
an anomaly, and vice versa. Ltotal = 1 Lsub1 + 2 Lsub2 + 3 Lsub3 + 4 Lsub4 (12)
 Temporal dimension—Proxy subtask III. Predict temporal
 where, 1,...,4 represents the weights during joint training,
position. Stephen Hawking [42], in his seminal work “A Brief
 determining the trade-off among the four proxy tasks. The
History of Time” introduced the concept of the “arrow of
 training pseudo code for the method we employ is provided
time,” which suggests the reality of a distinct trajectory for
 by Algorithm 1.
time and provides substantiation for the inexorable progression of forward-moving time that is unreversible. Influenced
 D. VAD Inference
by it, we adopted a strategy to address the spatiotemporal
context. To be more precise, we shuffle and reorder the frames When testing, we utilize an object detector to perform
within the spatiotemporal context cube along the timeline and object detection on each frame. For each object, a series of
then input them into the model for training. By predicting operations, including cropping, are conducted to generate the
the correct position of each frame, the model is guided corresponding object-level spatiotemporal context cube. The
to more comprehensively capture the temporal relationships model is trained using each spatiotemporal cube as input,
between frames. During testing, we input context cubes with and its outputs correspond to the following subtasks: Scorest1 ,
the correct temporal order to generate the temporal position Scorest2 , Scorest3 , and Scorest4 . In the spatial dimension,
prediction matrix Zt . Each element in the matrix represents for the spatial patch masking subtask, we use MAD as the
the predicted position of the corresponding frame on the time anomaly score. In the predict positions of the spatial patches
axis. Afterward, we use the diagonal prediction probability subtask, we choose the probabilities along the diagonal of
of the prediction matrix as the anomaly score. In terms of the spatial prediction matrix as the anomaly score. In the
network optimization, we utilize a cross-entropy loss function temporal dimension, for the predict temporal position subtask,
as follows: we choose the probabilities along the diagonal of the temporal
 prediction matrix as the anomaly score. In the missing frame
 Iˆ I I I = f T (I ; θ I I I ) ; θ f
 
 (7) prediction subtask, we still use MSE as the anomaly score to
 1 Xm determine anomalies. The final anomaly score of an object is
 Lsub3 = C E(Ii , IˆiI I I ) (8)
 m i=1 calculated by averaging the anomaly scores supplied by each
 Scor est3 = min (diag (Z t )) (9) prediction head:
 Scor e(I ) = 14 Scor est1 + Scor est2 + Scor est3 + Scor est4 (13)
 
where, Iˆ I I I represents the output obtained from the proxy
subtask III, T (∗; θ I I I ) represents the spatiotemporal context where, Scor est2 and Scor est3 represent negation, and higher
cube with shuffled frames. values indicate anomalies. Because the initial detection is
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

 WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION 7

 Algorithm 1 Training pseudo code of temporal-spatial TABLE II
 decoupled self-supervised multi-task learning C OMPARISON A NOMALY D ETECTION DATASETS .
 (#F RAMES\V IDEOS )
 1: Input: D the training dataset with only normal frames;
 object-centric spatiotemporal context cubes; Cube size; the
 learning rate; 3D Encoder.
 2: Output: optimally trained model.
 3: Initialize all parameters.
 4: for the number of training epochs do
 5: Sample object-centric spatiotemporal context cubes from D.
 6: Function multi − task(·):
 7: # Proxy subtask I of spatial patches masking.
 2
 8: Lsub1 ← I− IˆI
 2
 9: # Proxy subtask II of predicts the positions of the
 spatial patches.
10: Lsub2 ← CE(Is , IˆsII )
11: # Proxy subtask III of predicts temporal position.
12: Lsub3 ← CE(Ii , IˆiIII )
13: # Proxy subtask IV of Predict the missing box.
14: Lsub4 ← I− IˆIV
 2
15:
 return 1 Lsub1 + 2 Lsub2 + 3 Lsub3 + 4 Lsub4
16: Ltotal ← multi-task(·)
17: # parameter optimization
18:
 Update network parameters using the optimizer Adam.
 Fig. 3. Examples of both anomalous and normal events in each dataset.
19: end for

 • CUHK Avenue [43] is released by the Chinese University
 at the object level, it’s easy to locate the anomaly region. of Hong Kong (CUHK) in 2013. It consists of 16 training
 As there are multiple objects in the video frame, each with its videos and 21 testing videos, with a resolution of 640 ×
 own anomaly score, the overall anomaly score for the entire 360 pixels. The video clips cover various indoor and outvideo frame is determined by the maximum score among the door scenes and contain 47 different types of anomalies,
 corresponding anomaly maps. including running, crowding, loitering, and more.
 Let the frame-level anomaly score be Scorefra . For each • The ShanghaiTech Campus dataset [45] provides a variety
 video frame where j objects are detected, the overall anomaly of scenarios and anomalous behaviors. It contains video
 score is as follows: clips of both normal and abnormal behaviors, which
  includes traffic accidents, sudden occurrences, assem-
  max Scor e(I )1 , Scor e(I )2 , . . ., Scor e(I ) j ,
 
 
 blies, and more. The dataset consists of 330 training
 Scor e f ra = j >0 (14)
  videos and 107 testing videos, with 13 diverse scenes
 0, j =0
 
 and a wide range of abnormal categories. The resolution
 If there are no objects detected in a frame, the anomaly score of the videos is 856 × 480 pixels. The dataset contains
 is assigned to 0. video clips with various lengths, perspectives, conditions
 of lighting, and other details, making them more repre-
 IV. E XPERIMENTS sentative of the complexity of the actual world.
 A. Datasets Fig. 3 depicts normal and anomalous samples from the
 aforementioned datasets. The illustrations that were in the
 In this section, we evaluate our proposed method on three
 figure depict video snippets of various scenarios, including
 publicly available datasets: the CUHK Avenue dataset [43], the
 normal and abnormal actions such as walking, congestion,
 UCSD Pedestrian dataset [44], and the ShanghaiTech Campus battling, and traffic accidents, etc. Table II displays some
 dataset [45]. We conduct both qualitative and quantitative statistics regarding the various datasets, including the number
 analyses of the experimental results to demonstrate the effec- of video segments, the number of frames, and the kinds of
 tiveness of our proposed approach. abnormal behaviors present in each dataset. This information
 • The UCSD Pedestrian dataset [44] consists of two sub- provides an overview of the characteristics and range of the
 sets: UCSD Ped1 and UCSD Ped2, each corresponding datasets utilized in the evaluation.
 to a specific scenario. UCSD Ped1 includes 34 training clips and 36 testing clips, while UCSD Ped2 has
 16 training clips and 12 testing clips. Both subsets pro- B. Evaluation Metrics and Implementation Details
 vide frame-level and pixel-level ground truth annotations. As per the evaluation metric that is commonly accepted
 In this dataset, any non-pedestrian objects or abnormal and used within the VAD community [20], [34], In video
 movements of pedestrians are considered anomalies. anomaly detection, area under the curve (AUC) is a widely
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

employed evaluation metric. It assesses a model’s ability to TABLE III
distinguish between positive and negative samples by measur- C OMPARISON W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS . T HE P ERFORMANCES
 OF THE C OMPARED M ETHODS A RE S OURCED F ROM T HEIR
ing the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) O RIGINAL PAPERS
curve, depicted from the starting point (0,0) to the endpoint
(1,1). By employing AUC, subjective assumptions can be
circumvented during the threshold selection process. AUC
comprehensively considers all possible thresholds, providing
a more holistic evaluation of model performance compared
to other methods using fixed thresholds (e.g., accuracy and
recall), especially when dealing with imbalanced datasets.
Therefore, we employ AUC to evaluate our proposed method.
 1) Implementation Details: In order to guarantee fairness
and generality in comparison, we followed the setup of previous outstanding works [22], [23], [46] and used YOLOv3 as
the object of interest extractor. For different datasets, we set
different confidence thresholds according to their characteristics to filter out low-confidence objects. Specifically, for
the medium-sized dataset Avenue and the large-scale dataset
ShanghaiTech, we set the confidence threshold at 0.8 to maintain high accuracy. For the smaller and earlier-released dataset,
UCSD Ped2, due to its lower pixel resolution and relatively
smaller data volume, we set the confidence threshold at 0.5.
We resized the input data to 64 × 64 and set the batch size to
128. The Adam optimizer is employed with a learning rate of
2e-4. The hyperparameters β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999 are set up
for the Adam optimizer, with all other parameters remaining
at their default settings. To ensure that each task contributes
sufficiently during the multi-task learning process, we assign
equal weights to the hyperparameters 1,...,4 in Equation (12).
The entire network training and testing are conducted end-toend on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.

C. Comparative Evaluation With State-of-the-Art (SOTA)
Methods
 The comparison between our proposed method and the
existing state-of-the-art methods on three benchmark datasets This, in turn, illustrates the effectiveness and superiority of our
(Avenue, ShanghaiTech, and UCSD Ped2) is represented in method. Results on Avenue: consistent advancements in VAD
Table III. These methods are categorized into single-proxy and the ensuing competition among different approaches have
tasks (based on reconstruction/prediction), hybrid-proxy tasks, undeniably resulted in substantial performance enhancements,
and multi-proxy tasks according to different paradigms. enabling methods to rival one another and go close to or
We found that whether it is a single proxy task based on even surpass the 90% threshold [9], [11], [20], [46], [57],
reconstruction or prediction, or a hybrid proxy task com- [59]. Nevertheless, in comparison to these approaches, our
bining the both, the performance generally lags behind that method’s performance still reaches the current optimal level,
of self-supervised multi-proxy tasks, and this gap becomes specifically 95.9%, compared to the previous state-of-the-art
increasingly pronounced as the scenes become more complex. self-supervised method [61], our performance surpasses it by
In the self-supervised multi-task paradigm, the aggregation of around 2%. This indicates the benefits and potential shown
multiple complex task features enables the method to fully by the synergy between multiple tasks and the logical combiexploit the data itself as supervisory information, thereby nation of proxy tasks in the self-supervised learning setting.
demonstrating superior performance on larger-scale and more Results on ShanghaiTech: In terms of scene complexity and
complex datasets. Results on Ped2: the performance of various data scale, the ShanghaiTech dataset is more intricate and
proxy task methods is consistently above 90%. Compared to expansive in comparison to the ped2 and Avenue. However,
the previous state-of-the-art method [57], our method offers we unveiled the most optimal result at 87.7%, which is an
highly competitive performance, with a mere 0.1% disparity. almost 2% improvement over the previous state-of-the-art
Due to the relatively old release date of the Ped2 dataset and approach [59]. This also demonstrates the superiority of
its lower pixel resolution, the images are not particularly clear. self-supervised learning, which decouples the spatiotemporal
Therefore, when performance approaches a bottleneck, the per- dimensions of VAD and integrates expression features from
formance differences between methods are not so pronounced. multiple perspectives to optimize the model’s performance.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION 9

 TABLE IV TABLE V
C OMPARISON W ITH THE O PTIMAL M ETHODS U SING D IFFERENT P ERFORMANCE ON AVENUE AND P ED 2 W HILE VARYING
 M ODALITIES AS I NPUTS . W HERE , “ ” D ENOTES I NPUT AS RGB THE P ROXY S UBTASKS
 I MAGE , “ ” R EPRESENTS I NPUT AS O PTICAL F LOW, “ ” S IGNIFIES
 I NPUT AS S EMANTIC M AP, AND “ ” D ENOTES I NPUT AS
 G RADIENT M AP. “ ” R EPRESENTS D EPTH M AP

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE ON AVENUE W HILE C HANGING
 THE P ROXY S UBTASKS

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON OF E XECUTION E FFICIENCY W ITH
 OTHER SOTA M ETHODS

 In Table IV, we compared our method with state-of-the-art
approaches that use different modalities as inputs. From the
table, we can observe that despite prior methods using a single
modality (such as optical flow/RGB image) or combinations
of different modalities (such as RGB image + optical flow
/semantic segmentation map, etc.) as inputs, our method
remains competitive. Although the work [64] employed the
combination of optical flow and semantic segmentation maps
to reduce background interference in input data, making the
model more focused on dynamically changing foreground
objects, our approach continues to demonstrate superior performance. While the performance of [30] surpasses ours on
ShanghaiTech, it’s essential to note that they employed three TABLE VIII
different modalities (RGB image + optical flow + depth A NALYSIS OF THE I MPACT OF H YPERPARAMETER
 C ONFIGURATIONS
map), combining them, whereas our method solely utilizes
RGB image. The utilization of multiple modalities not only
enhances the capture of object appearance and motion but also
improves the performance of the model to a significant extent.
Inputs from modalities other than images reduce background
interference, benefiting the performance improvement of the
model, this contributes valuable insights to our future work.
The aforementioned analysis suggests that multi-task learning
can indeed acquire richer feature representations than a single
task, and even outperforms features learned when different
 various scenarios. The performance of the same task varies
modalities with less noise are fused as inputs.
 across different scenarios as well. However, these proxy tasks
 effectively compensate for potential limitations of the overall
D. Ablation Study model under a single task by enriching feature information
 In Table V, we provide a detailed presentation of the density from their respective perspectives. This indicates that
individual performance of each proxy subtask on the Avenue introducing diverse proxy tasks to enrich feature information
and Ped2 datasets. Encouragingly, each task exhibits unique can provide more comprehensive support for VAD, ultimately
advantages and achieves satisfactory results within its respec- leading to a significant improvement in the overall model
tive domain. This indicates that each proxy subtask in our performance.
multi-task approach contributes valuable information and fea- 1) Relevance Between Proxy Subtasks: Caruana [68] once
tures to the model training, thereby aiding in the overall made such a definition: If task A as auxiliary task can improve
enhancement of model performance. After a more detailed the performance of the model in task B, then the task A and
analysis of the data in the table, we can observe that different task B are associated, that is, “related”. The performance variproxy tasks exhibit unique performance characteristics in ations resulting from various subtask combinations on Avenue
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 from different paradigms, as displayed in Table VII. The
 results show that some methods trade higher performance
 for lower efficiency, primarily constrained by complex operations such as optical flow calculations, as in the SSMTL++
 [23] and object-centric [18] methods. In contrast, in selfsupervised multi-task methods, the simplified design of proxy
 tasks significantly improves runtime efficiency while maintaining relatively high performance, as demonstrated by the
 SLMPT [38]. Our method, within the self-supervised multitask framework, is able to maintain competitive efficiency
Fig. 4. Performance corresponding to different cube sizes. while ensuring high performance. The focus of our research
 is primarily on improving performance, and with further
 optimization of execution time in future work, its efficiency is
are displayed in Table VI. We conducted a series of exper- expected to improve further.
iments initially, combining spatial dimension subtasks 1 and 4) Analysis of Hyperparameter Effects on the Model: We
2. The results indicate a significant performance improvement tuned and selected different hyperparameter configurations on
compared to their respective individual subtasks. Subsequently, the Ped2 dataset to determine the optimal model settings,
a substantial enhancement in performance was also observed as shown in Table VIII. Experimental results indicate that
in the combined experiment that includes subtasks 2 and with a fixed learning rate, model performance fluctuates with
3. Further, we conducted experiments involving three tasks changes in batch size. Similarly, when the batch size is held
and the combination of all tasks, the results demonstrated a constant, adjustments to the learning rate have varying impacts
gradual improvement in performance. This also indicates that on model performance, with smaller learning rates outperformthe performance of anomaly detection can be substantially ing larger ones. This may be because larger learning rates tend
improved through the synergy and combination of tasks. This to cause overly large updates to the model parameters, thereby
progressive performance improvement strongly supports the affecting convergence stability. Overall, both the learning
effectiveness of our approach and highlights the advantages of rate and batch size influence model performance to different
multi-task learning, as they can capture the complementarity extents, and appropriate parameter configurations can lead to
and correlation between different tasks. improved performance.
 2) Generating Object-Centric Spatiotemporal Context
Cubes: We use the bounding box of object o in the i-th E. Visualization and Analysis
frame as the center and apply the same bounding box before Figs. 5, 6, and 7 give qualitative illustrations of our
and after, forming a spatiotemporal context cube centered approach, encompassing anomaly score curves and exemplar
around the object. Fig. 4 presents an analysis of the impact frames depicting both normal and abnormal events. Note that
of the quantity of frames included within the cube on the we recognize and categorize normal and anomalous events in
performance of the model. The frame number was configured each traffic road scene, with a focus on highlighting abnormal
within the range of 3 to 13, and its performance variability ones. In general, when anomalous events take place, there
was showcased using the Ped2 and Avenue datasets. It can is a noticeable rise in the curve representing the anomaly
be observed that there is a beneficial correlation between score, which then maintains a heightened level throughout the
the number of frames within a specific range and the duration of the abnormality. Once the event or behavior that
performance of the model. Yet, when the quantity of frames gives rise to the anomaly ceases, the curve rapidly descends
within the cube continually increases, the performance suffers to a decreased level and maintains a relatively stable trend.
a decrease. It can be conjectured that if a context cube According to them, the method we have used has great
contains too few frames, the same object may appear in sensitivity to anomalies and can efficiently detect anomalous
multiple cubes. This redundancy in object representation can events.
lead to duplicate feature information, which may overwhelm Fig. 5 illustrates how anomaly scores change during normal
the model with extraneous data during training and ultimately and abnormal events in the UCSD Ped2 dataset. When the
reduce detection accuracy. On the other hand, if the number video exclusively records pedestrians, the anomaly score curve
of frames is too many, the context cube may contain multiple continually holds a lower level, however, it is seen that the
objects. Given the potential for complex spatiotemporal anomaly score experiences a significant spike as soon as a
interactions between these objects, the model may encounter rider enters the frame, and this heightened level is sustained
greater uncertainty when distinguishing between abnormal until the rider exits the frame. Fig. 6 illustrates how anomaly
and normal behaviors, which could negatively affect the final scores change during normal and abnormal events in the
detection. Therefore, setting a reasonable number of frames CUHK Avenue dataset. In Fig. 6, normal frames depict regular
within the context cube is crucial to ensuring that the model pedestrian activities. When sudden abnormal behaviors occur
captures sufficient object features while avoiding excessive (e.g., a child running back and forth or a person pushing a
complexity and redundant information. bicycle), the anomaly score curve sharply rises, whereas when
 3) Execution Efficiency Comparison: We compared the the subject of the abnormal behavior exits the frame (the child
efficiency of our method with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods runs out of it), the curve rapidly drops. In a similar vein,
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION 11

 rise. After the entire anomalous event is over, the curve
 promptly reverts back to a lower and stable state.

 F. Discussion
 In this section, we will delve into the significant advantages
 brought by our proposed method, analyze its feasibility in
 practical applications, while also briefly introducing other possible methods in the field of video anomaly detection. Through
 comparative analysis, we aim to comprehensively evaluate the
 effectiveness of existing methods, while identifying potential
 areas for improvement and research gaps.
 We perform spatial-temporal decoupling of the video
Fig. 5. Anomaly score curves and anomaly localization examples by our anomaly detection task to separately capture temporal and
method on UCSD Ped2. The light red-shaded region and the white area
correspondingly represent the ground truth of anomalies and normal events.
 spatial information in the time and space dimensions. In the
 temporal dimension, the focus is on the temporal sequence
 patterns of events, identifying dynamic changes in abnormal
 behaviors. In the spatial dimension, attention is given to the
 spatial features and positional changes of objects, revealing spatial differences in abnormal events. By constructing
 multiple proxy tasks related to each dimension, the model
 can learn and process features at different levels, enhancing
 its ability to tackle complex anomaly detection tasks. This
 approach strengthens spatial-temporal feature understanding
 through joint learning, improving robustness, generalization,
 and efficiency. In practical applications, the spatial-temporal
 decoupling method is highly feasible. By decoupling the
 time and space dimensions, it effectively captures the
 spatial-temporal information in videos, improving the model’s
 ability to perform fine-grained detection of complex abnormal
 behaviors. This method is particularly suitable for video data
Fig. 6. Anomaly score curves and anomaly localization examples by our
method on CUHK Avenue. The light red-shaded region and the white area such as surveillance footage and event logs, which exhibit
correspondingly represent the ground truth of anomalies and normal events. significant temporal and spatial feature differences. Additionally, constructing multiple self-supervised proxy tasks related
 to time and space can promote knowledge sharing between
 tasks, enhance learning efficiency and generalization ability,
 reduce dependence on labeled data, and improve the model’s
 adaptability in fields such as security surveillance, intelligent
 transportation system, and traffic anomaly early warning.
 It is often said that, “stones from other hills may serve to
 polish jade.” the same holds true for the field of VAD. With the
 development of technologies such as domain adaptation [69],
 transfer learning [70], and federated learning [71], new solutions have been proposed for multiple bottleneck problems in
 video anomaly detection, especially in the face of challenges
 like scene variations and data distribution discrepancies. These
 approaches provide new ideas and insights. The research on
 domain adaptation technology in video anomaly detection
Fig. 7. Anomaly score curves and anomaly localization examples by our primarily focuses on enhancing the model’s generalization
method on ShanghaiTech. The light red-shaded region and the white area
correspondingly represent the ground truth of anomalies and normal events.
 ability to new environments and reducing the distribution
 gap between the source and target domains. This is particularly important when annotated data in the target domain
Fig. 7 illustrates the variation of anomaly scores for normal is scarce, as it provides effective strategies for transfer and
and abnormal events on the ShanghaiTech dataset. In normal adaptation. Meta-learning methods, applied in domain adaptaframes, pedestrians walk normally at the intersection without tion and multi-task learning, have significantly improved the
any abnormal behavior, and the anomaly score curve keeps at a model’s ability to quickly adapt to new tasks and domains.
low level. However, in the case of a sudden abnormality, such Transfer learning, by leveraging knowledge from one task,
as a pedestrian’s bag being snatched or a physical altercation at enhances the model’s generalization capability in other tasks.
an intersection, the score curve suffers a rapid and significant This is especially useful in scenarios with limited labeled
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

data, effectively addressing the data scarcity issue. Moreover, [5] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryby using methods such as similarity analysis to assess the augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
relationships between tasks, we can optimize model selection pp. 1705–1714.
in transfer learning, thereby improving detection performance. [6] R. Cai, H. Zhang, W. Liu, S. Gao, and Z. Hao, “Appearance-motion
This is particularly evident in anomaly detection tasks, where memory consistency network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 938–946.
leveraging knowledge from traffic surveillance scenarios can
 [7] L. Wang, J. Tian, S. Zhou, H. Shi, and G. Hua, “Memory-augmented
significantly enhance model performance. appearance-motion network for video anomaly detection,” Pattern
 From the brief discussion above, it is evident that there are Recognit., vol. 138, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 109335.
still many directions in the field of video anomaly detection [8] D. Wang, Q. Hu, and K. Wu, “Dual-branch network with memory for
 video anomaly detection,” Multimedia Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 247–259,
that are worth exploring and researching in depth. These Feb. 2023.
methods not only provide valuable insights for addressing [9] Y. Wang, C. Qin, Y. Bai, Y. Xu, X. Ma, and Y. Fu, “Making
the unique challenges in video anomaly detection but also reconstruction-based method great again for video anomaly deteceffectively enhance the performance of the model in several tion,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022,
 pp. 1215–1220.
aspects. [10] X. Wen et al., “Video anomaly detection based on cross-frame prediction
 mechanism and spatio-temporal memory-enhanced pseudo-3D encoder,”
 Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 126, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 107057.
 V. C ONCLUSION [11] Z. Yang, J. Liu, Z. Wu, P. Wu, and X. Liu, “Video event restoration based
 In the field of intelligent transportation, traffic anomaly on keyframes for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 14592–14601.
detection plays a critical role in enhancing road safety [12] X. Wang et al., “Robust unsupervised video anomaly detection by
and optimizing traffic management efficiency. In this paper, multipath frame prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
we propose an object-level spatiotemporal decoupled self- vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2301–2312, Jun. 2022.
supervised multi-task learning network for video anomaly [13] H. Lv, C. Zhou, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Localizing anomalies
 from weakly-labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30,
detection. Specifically, we decouple the task into spatiotem- pp. 4505–4515, 2021.
poral multi-task learning by constructing different forms of [14] C. Zhang, G. Li, Q. Xu, X. Zhang, L. Su, and Q. Huang, “Weakly superspatiotemporal context cubes in both temporal and spatial vised anomaly detection in videos considering the openness of events,”
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 21687–21699,
dimensions for joint learning of multiple tasks. Through Nov. 2022.
experimental validation and ablation analysis, we compre- [15] S. Han, H. Song, S. Lee, S. Park, and M. Cha, “Elsa: Energy-based learnhensively evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method. ing for semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.15296.
The experimental results indicate that our approach attains [16] G. Wang, Y. Zhan, X. Wang, M. Song, and K. Nahrstedt, “Hierarchical semi-supervised contrastive learning for contamination-resistant
optimal performance on widely utilized benchmark datasets, anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022,
regardless of whether it involves reconstruction, prediction, pp. 110–128.
or other hybrid methods. Our methodology maintains a high [17] J. C. Wu, H. Y. Hsieh, D. J. Chen, C. S. Fuh, and T. L. Liu, “Selflevel of competitiveness, even when compared to multimodal supervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 729–745.
input approaches. Furthermore, a succession of targeted abla- [18] R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Object-centric
tion experiments confirmed the relevance and efficacy of the auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event detection
different components of our method. Although our method in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7842–7851.
demonstrates outstanding capabilities, it is not devoid of
 [19] M. I. Georgescu, R. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu, and M. Shah,
boundaries. When dealing with subtle or more covert anoma- “A background-agnostic framework with adversarial training for abnorlies, relying on object detectors may have certain limitations. mal event detection in video,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
Therefore, future research should focus on improving the vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 4505–4523, Apr. 2021.
 [20] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. Shahbaz Khan,
model’s ability to detect these subtle anomalies while also M. Popescu, and M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via
optimizing the relevance of task agents and the interaction self-supervised and multi-task learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
representations between tasks to further enhance the potential Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
 pp. 12742–12752.
application of video anomaly detection in intelligent trans-
 [21] J. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Cheng, R. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Modality-aware
portation surveillance systems, ultimately, providing a more contrastive instance learning with self-distillation for weakly-supervised
robust technical foundation for intelligent traffic monitoring audio-visual violence detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multiand safety management. media, 2022, pp. 6278–6287.
 [22] G. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Qin, D. Zhang, X. Bao, and D. Huang,
 “Video anomaly detection by solving decoupled spatio-temporal
 R EFERENCES jigsaw puzzles,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022,
 pp. 494–511.
 [1] W. Zhou et al., “Vision technologies with applications in traffic surveil- [23] A. Barbalau et al., “SSMTL++: Revisiting self-supervised multi-task
 lance systems: A holistic survey,” 2024, arXiv:2412.00348. learning for video anomaly detection,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand.,
 [2] B. Ramachandra, M. J. Jones, and R. R. Vatsavai, “A survey of vol. 229, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 103656.
 single-scene video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. [24] Z. Qing et al., “Learning from untrimmed videos: Self-supervised
 Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 2293–2312, May 2022. video representation learning with hierarchical consistency,” in Proc.
 [3] Y. Fang et al., “Anomaly diagnosis of connected autonomous vehicles: IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
 A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 105, May 2024, Art. no. 102223. pp. 13821–13831.
 [4] K. K. Santhosh, D. P. Dogra, P. P. Roy, and A. Mitra, “Vehicular [25] C. Huang, Z. Wu, J. Wen, Y. Xu, Q. Jiang, and Y. Wang, “Abnormal
 trajectory classification and traffic anomaly detection in videos using event detection using deep contrastive learning for intelligent video
 a hybrid CNN-VAE architecture,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., surveillance system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8,
 vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11891–11902, Aug. 2022. pp. 5171–5179, Aug. 2022.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION 13

[26] Y. Liu, X. Wei, P. Lasang, S. Pranata, K. Subramanian, and H. Seow, [50] X. Feng, D. Song, Y. Chen, and Y. Wang, “Convolutional transformer
 “Ensemble uncertainty guided road scene anomaly detection: A simple based dual discriminator generative adversarial networks for video
 meta-learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 9, anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2021,
 pp. 10754–10765, Sep. 2024. pp. 5546–5554.
[27] W. Zhou, L. Wen, Y. Zhan, and C. Wang, “An appearance-motion [51] Z. Yang, P. Wu, J. Liu, and X. Liu, “Dynamic local aggregation network
 network for vision-based crash detection: Improving the accuracy in with adaptive clusterer for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 congested traffic,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 404–421.
 pp. 13742–13755, Dec. 2023. [52] Y. Hao, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Wang, and X. Gao, “Spatiotemporal
[28] L. Zanella, W. Menapace, M. Mancini, Y. Wang, and E. Ricci, “Harness- consistency-enhanced network for video anomaly detection,” Pattern
 ing large language models for training-free video anomaly detection,” Recognit., vol. 121, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108232.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR)., [53] R. Morais, V. Le, T. Tran, B. Saha, M. Mansour, and S. Venkatesh,
 Jun. 2024, pp. 18527–18536. “Learning regularity in skeleton trajectories for anomaly detection in
[29] Y. Zhang and Q. Yang, “An overview of multi-task learning,” Nat. Sci. videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 Rev., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 30–43, Jan. 2018. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 11996–12004.
[30] M. Baradaran and R. Bergevin, “Multi-task learning based video [54] W. Luo et al., “Video anomaly detection with sparse coding inspired
 anomaly detection with attention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43,
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 2885–2895. no. 3, pp. 1070–1084, Mar. 2021.
[31] H. Wu et al., “CvT: Introducing convolutions to vision transformers,” in [55] Z. Liu, Y. Nie, C. Long, Q. Zhang, and G. Li, “A hybrid video anomaly
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 22–31. detection framework via memory-augmented flow reconstruction and
[32] S. Gidaris, P. Singh, and N. Komodakis, “Unsupervised representation flow-guided frame prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
 learning by predicting image rotations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 13588–13597.
 Represent. (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–16. [56] Y. Zhong, X. Chen, Y. Hu, P. Tang, and F. Ren, “Bidirectional spatio-
[33] Y. Chen, X. Shen, Y. Liu, Q. Tao, and J. A. K. Suykens, “Jigsaw-ViT: temporal feature learning with multiscale evaluation for video anomaly
 Learning jigsaw puzzles in vision transformer,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 12,
 vol. 166, pp. 53–60, Feb. 2023. pp. 8285–8296, Dec. 2022.
[34] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction for [57] W. Liu, H. Chang, B. Ma, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Diversity-measurable
 anomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6536–6545. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 12147–12156.
 [58] X. Huang, C. Zhao, and Z. Wu, “A video anomaly detection frame-
[35] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
 work based on appearance-motion semantics representation consistency,”
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 in Proc. ICASSP - IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381.
 (ICASSP), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[36] P. Chen et al., “RSPNet: Relative speed perception for unsupervised
 [59] T. Reiss and Y. Hoshen, “An attribute-based method for video anomaly
 video representation learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 detection,” 2022, arXiv:2212.00789.
 vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1045–1053.
 [60] S. Yu et al., “Regularity learning via explicit distribution
[37] D. Wei, J. Lim, A. Zisserman, and W. T. Freeman, “Learning and using modeling for skeletal video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 the arrow of time,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 6661–6673,
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 8052–8060. Aug. 2024.
[38] C. Shi, C. Sun, Y. Wu, and Y. Jia, “Video anomaly detection via [61] S. Sun and X. Gong, “Hierarchical semantic contrast for scene-aware
 sequentially learning multiple pretext tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 10330–10340. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 22846–22856.
[39] Z. Wang, Y. Zou, and Z. Zhang, “Cluster attention contrast for video [62] T. N. Nguyen and J. Meunier, “Anomaly detection in video sequence
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2020, with appearance-motion correspondence,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 pp. 2463–2471. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1273–1283.
[40] Z. Tong, Y. Song, J. Wang, and L. Wang, “VideoMAE: Masked autoen- [63] C. Chen et al., “Comprehensive regularization in a bi-directional prediccoders are data-efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training,” tive network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 10078–10093. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 230–238.
[41] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked [64] M. Baradaran and R. Bergevin, “Future video prediction from a single
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. frame for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Vis. Comput.,
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009. 2023, pp. 472–486.
[42] S. W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time. New York City, NY, USA: [65] Y. Naji, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, M. Gouiffès, and R. Audigier, “Spatio-
 Bantam Books, 1998. temporal predictive tasks for abnormal event detection in videos,” in
[43] C. Lu, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Abnormal event detection at 150 FPS Proc. 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS),
 in MATLAB,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2013, Nov. 2022, pp. 1–8.
 pp. 2720–2727. [66] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, E. Zhu, and J. Yin, “Video anomaly
[44] V. Mahadevan, W. X. Li, V. Bhalodia, and D. M. M. M. Sigal, “Anomaly detection via visual cloze tests,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
 detection in crowded scenes,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. vol. 18, pp. 4955–4969, 2023.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2010, pp. 1975–1981. [67] M. Zhang et al., “Multi-scale video anomaly detection by
[45] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly multi-grained spatio-temporal representation learning,” in Proc.
 detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349. pp. 17385–17394.
[46] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, and Y. Wang, “Cloze test helps: Effective video [68] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 28, no. 1,
 anomaly detection via learning to complete video events,” in Proc. 28th pp. 41–75, 1997.
 ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020, pp. 583–591. [69] Y. Wu, M. Hong, A. Li, S. Huang, H. Liu, and Y. Ge, “Self-supervised
[47] M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and L. S. adversarial learning for domain adaptation of pavement distress classifi-
 Davis, “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in Proc. cation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1966–1977,
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, Feb. 2024.
 pp. 733–742. [70] S. Zhao, W. Yi, J. Shi, Z. Jiang, and X. Lu, “An innovative crack
[48] S. Saypadith and T. Onoye, “Video anomaly detection based on deep detection algorithm based on efficient feature fusion and progressive
 generative network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 12,
 May 2021, pp. 1–5. pp. 21469–21483, Dec. 2024.
[49] Y. Zhong, X. Chen, J. Jiang, and F. Ren, “A cascade recon- [71] X. Wang, W. Liu, H. Lin, J. Hu, K. Kaur, and M. S. Hossain,
 struction model with generalization ability evaluation for anomaly “AI-empowered trajectory anomaly detection for intelligent transportadetection in videos,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 122, Feb. 2022, tion systems: A hierarchical federated learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
 Art. no. 108336. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4631–4640, Apr. 2023.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 Dicong Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) is Qinghua Hu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the College B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Harbin Institute
 of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, of Technology, Harbin, China, in 1999, 2002, and
 and the School of Electronic Information Engi- 2008, respectively. He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow
 neering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University. His research with the Department of Computing, The Hong Kong
 interests include computer vision and video anomaly Polytechnic University, from 2009 to 2011. He is
 detection. currently the Chair Professor of the College of
 Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, and
 the Director of the SIG Granular Computing and
 Knowledge Discovery and Chinese Association of
 Artificial Intelligence. He was supported by the Key
 Program, National Natural Science Foundation of China. He has published
 over 300 peer-reviewed articles. His current research interests include uncertainty modeling in big data, machine learning with multi-modality data,
 and intelligent unmanned systems. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON F UZZY S YSTEMS, Acta Automatica Sinica, and Acta
 Electronica Sinica.
 Qilong Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from the School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China, in 2018. He is currently a Professor
 Kaijun Wu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 with Tianjin University. He has published more than
 degree from Lanzhou Jiaotong University, China,
 40 academic papers in top conferences and refereed
 in 2017. He is currently a Professor with the
 journals, including ICCV/CVPR/NeurIPS/ECCV,
 School of Electronics and Information Engineering,
 and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS
 Lanzhou Jiaotong University. His research interests
 AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE /IEEE T RANSAC -
 include intelligent algorithm optimization and image
 TIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING /IEEE T RANSAC -
 processing.
 TIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO
T ECHNOLOGY. His research interests include visual understanding and deep
learning, particularly deep models with high-order statistical modeling and
self-attention mechanism. He served as the Area Chair for CVPR 2024.