IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 9463

 TeRed: Normal Behavior-Based Efficient
 Provenance Graph Reduction for Large-Scale
 Attack Forensics
 Xiaoxiang Li , Xinyu Jiang, Hai Wan , and Xibin Zhao , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—System intrusions, particularly Advanced Persis- behaviors and trace the attacker’s activity path, are considtent Threats (APTs), pose significant threats to enterprises ered important means of defending against system intrusions.
 and organizations. Provenance graph-based attack detection Presently, these tools primarily rely on provenance graphs,
 and investigation methods are crucial for defending against
 these intrusions. To detect various attacks, security systems which depict the information flow between system entities as
 collect comprehensive operating system event data, resulting directed graphs, effectively illustrating the system’s execution
 in massive provenance graphs that increase storage costs and history. Provenance graphs not only visually reconstruct attack
 complicate analysis and querying. Efficiently optimizing these paths [1] but also offer rich contextual information, aiding in
 provenance graphs has thus become a core issue. However, the differentiation between benign and malicious events [2].
 existing data reduction methods often mistakenly delete critical
 security information, significantly impacting attack detection and In the real world, to detect covert attacks that have been
 investigation. This paper introduces TeRed, a novel method lurking for a long time, security systems comprehensively
 for reducing provenance graphs based on normal behavior collect operating system event data. The scale of this event data
 patterns. Our approach employs unit tests to learn the system’s is enormous, with a single host generating over 1GB of data
 normal behavior patterns, which are then used to streamline the per day [3]. Consequently, the provenance graphs constructed
 provenance graph. Experiments on five datasets show that our
 method reduces the provenance graph while preserving all attack- from the massive system event data are also immense in
 related information. Importantly, it does not compromise attack scale. Large-scale provenance graphs not only increase storage
 detection and investigation, showcasing significant advantages costs but also make analysis difficult. Therefore, efficiently
 over other data reduction techniques. optimizing provenance graphs has become a core issue.
 Index Terms—Data reduction, provenance graph, template Data reduction has emerged as a key optimization technique.
 mining, intrusion detection, attack investigation. The primary objective of data reduction is to minimize data
 size while maintaining usability. During processing, the system
 I. I NTRODUCTION retains only the streamlined data, with the original data either
 discarded or cold-stored. Therefore, the reduced data must first
 URRENTLY, with the increasing complexity of cyber-
 C attack methods, system intrusions represented by
 Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) pose a significant threat
 support attack detection and investigation, with achieving a
 high reduction ratio being secondary. This means the reduction
 process must preserve all malicious behavior data, ensuring
 to various enterprises and organizations. These threats can not complete attack-related information is retained. Additionally,
 only lead to the leakage of sensitive data but also severely the reduced data should be directly usable without restoring.
 impact the operations of enterprises. Intrusion detection and There has been a significant amount of work on reducing
 attack investigation tools, which can promptly detect abnormal provenance graphs, but none of these methods can fully meet
 the aforementioned requirements. While lossless compression
 Received 20 January 2025; revised 16 July 2025; accepted 8 August 2025.
 Date of publication 21 August 2025; date of current version 15 September
 methods do not lose any data, the compressed data needs to be
 2025. This work was supported in part by Guangdong Science and Technology decompressed before use, which increases the runtime system
 Program under Grant 2024B0101030002, in part by NSFC under Grant load. Lossy reduction methods optimize and remove redun-
 6212780016, in part by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology dant events irrelevant to the investigation process. However,
 of China, in part by the National Key Research and Development Program
 of China under Grant 2023YFB3307500, and in part by the Science and these methods cannot achieve high reduction ratios without
 Technology Innovation Project of Hunan Province under Grant 2023RC4014. negatively impacting downstream tasks. Experiments by Inam
 The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it
 for publication was Dr. Weizhi Meng. (Corresponding author: Xibin Zhao.)
 et al. on the DARPA-TC dataset [4] show that only reduction
 The authors are with Beijing National Research Center for Information algorithms with reduction ratios below 10% avoid adversely
 Science and Technology (BNRist), Key Laboratory for Information System affecting intrusion detection tasks. High reduction ratio algo-
 Security, Ministry of Education (KLISS), School of Software, Tsinghua rithms lead to a significant number of false positives and false
 University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: xx-li24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
 jiang-xy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; wanhai@tsinghua.edu.cn; zxb@tsinghua. negatives in subsequent intrusion detection algorithms. For
 edu.cn). instance, the SDPR [5] algorithm achieves a high reduction
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
 https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2025.3601381, provided by the authors.
 ratio of 92.45%, but it causes the precision of the DeepLog
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3601381 [6] algorithm to drop from 52.94% to 4.88% and the recall to
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 9464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 drop from 87.1% to 14.29%. Such a trade-off is unacceptable isomorphism algorithm to identify subgraph structures in the
 to security experts. provenance graph to be reduced that are isomorphic to the
 The negative impacts of reduction on downstream tasks templates. These identified subgraph structures represent the
 mainly come from two aspects: incorrect reduction of anoma- normal behaviors indicated by the templates and are thus
 lous behaviors and disruption of the graph structure. Intrusion targets for reduction. The method optimizes these subgraph
 detection relies on identifying anomalous behaviors, so the parts by trimming the internal edges and nodes of the subgraph
 reduction process must retain data related to these behaviors. structures and reconstructing the original dependency relation-
 Indiscriminate reduction can result in the loss of crucial ships, ensuring that reduction is achieved while preserving
 data, diminishing detection effectiveness. Attack investigation forward and backward dependency relationships.
 depends on reconstructing the attack path through both for- We implemented a prototype system of TeRed and evaluated
 ward and backward tracing, so maintaining the graph structure the method on datasets, comparing it with other advanced
 is essential. Disrupting the graph structure can sever depen- methods in the field. The datasets include three popular
 dencies between entities, leading to truncated tracing paths or vulnerabilities from the publicly available Vulhub and the
 erroneous dependencies. DARPA-TC project dataset. The evaluation results show
 Hence, the reduction method must retain anomalous data that TeRed achieves a high reduction ratio, not lower than
 and preserve graph integrity. Identifying anomalous behavior most other existing methods. More importantly, TeRed does
 is challenging and lies at the core of most intrusion-detection not negatively impact the accuracy of intrusion detection
 algorithms, whereas normal behavior is comparatively easier tasks, ensuring the precision of detection. Additionally, the
 to recognize. By learning normal-activity patterns from benign reduced data retains the dependency relationships outside the
 execution traces, locating them in the provenance graph, reduced regions, effectively supporting attack detection and
 and pruning the corresponding nodes and edges, we can investigation. The TeRed prototype is publicly available at
 avoid erroneously removing anomalies. However, this normal- https://github.com/THSS-GAD/TeRed.
 behavior–based reduction method faces several challenges. In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
 First, ensuring broad applicability demands fine-grained pat- • We propose TeRed, a provenance graph reduction frameterns, which require numerous provenance graphs containing work driven by normal-behavior patterns. By reducing
 single normal behaviors as training data. Second, accurately only those substructures that match these patterns, TeRed
 extracting those patterns from complex, noisy provenance achieves substantial data reduction without harming
 graphs calls for effective noise elimination while keeping downstream tasks. To the best of our knowledge, it is
 relevant information. Third, during graph reduction the system the first approach to apply normal-behavior patterns to
 must match patterns precisely to prevent accidental trimming provenance graph reduction.
 of suspicious data and to maintain the dependencies that • We introduce a method for extracting normal behavior
 guarantee forward and backward reachability. Finally, the patterns based on unit tests. This method accurately
 integrity of the overall graph structure must be safeguarded extracts various normal behavior patterns from programs
 so that subsequent analyses remain reliable. and continuously updates them to adapt to system updates
 This paper presents TeRed, a provenance graph reduction and changes.
 method that effectively addresses the aforementioned chal- • We evaluate TeRed on five datasets, and the results
 lenges. TeRed learns the system’s normal behavior patterns show that it can achieve a high reduction ratio while
 from unit test data, identifies the corresponding normal behav- maintaining intrusion-detection accuracy and preserving
 iors in the provenance graph, and optimizes and trims them. attack-related information.
 This allows for effective reduction of the provenance graph
 without negatively impacting attack detection and investiga-
 II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
 tion. To our knowledge, this is the first data reduction method
 that performs reduction on provenance graphs based on normal A. Provenance-Based Attack Detection and Investigation
 behavior patterns. Data provenance represents the origin of events within a
 TeRed consists of two phases: the learning phase and the system and the trajectory leading to the current state, recording
 reduction phase. In the learning phase, the method starts with the data flow between system entities. Data provenance can
 unit test cases of the program and obtains provenance graphs be represented as a directed graph, known as a provenance
 corresponding to different normal behaviors by executing graph. In a provenance graph, a node represents a system
 these unit tests. These provenance graphs meticulously reflect entity, including processes, files, sockets, and hosts, each with
 various behaviors and operations of the program under normal a unique identifier and some other attributes related to the speoperating conditions. Next, the method uses a learner based on cific entity type. Directed edges represent events between two
 the gSpan algorithm to learn from the provenance graph data entities, including read, write, clone, and other events. An edge
 and extract graph patterns that represent normal behavior pat- contains at least four elements: a unique identifier, the unique
 terns. Through this algorithm, we effectively eliminate system identifiers of the source and target nodes, and a timestamp.
 noise from the provenance graphs and extract graph patterns Provenance graphs can effectively model the relationships
 that represent normal behavior patterns. These patterns serve between entities within a system, providing security personnel
 as templates for identifying and understanding normal behav- with a highly visual representation of event-related entities and
 iors. During the reduction phase, the method uses a subgraph their relationships. Well-constructed provenance graphs can

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LI et al.: TeReD: NORMAL BEHAVIOR-BASED EFFICIENT PROVENANCE GRAPH REDUCTION 9465

 effectively display high-level semantic information, helping behaviors in a provenance graph containing tens of thousands
 security personnel to detect threats and correlate attacks, and of nodes and edges, which leads to delayed responses to attack
 thus have been widely used in numerous attack detection and behaviors.
 provenance tracking efforts. Currently, there has been a significant amount of work
 Intrusion detection [2], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11] aims to attempting to solve this problem by pruning and optimizing
 monitor and detect malicious activities within a system by ana- unnecessary nodes and edges in the provenance graph. Some
 lyzing system events. Many current methods use provenance methods prune events that are meaningless for attack detecgraphs for this purpose. Unlike other detection techniques, tion and investigation. For example, LogGC [18] identifies
 provenance-based methods analyze not only system entities and deletes temporary files, while NodeMerge [19] identifies
 and their attributes but also the causal relationships and infor- and deletes fixed file combinations loaded during application
 mation flow between entities. This enables better detection startup. Other methods (CPR [20], FDPR and SDPR [5]) delete
 of unknown attacks, such as zero-day attacks. These methods a large number of file I/O-related events while retaining events
 operate on the observation that attack behaviors are often related to information flow, thereby reducing the log size.
 low-probability events. They build models by learning from a Additionally, some methods (LogApprox [21], PCAR [20])
 large amount of benign behavior data and use these models to perform extensive deletion optimizations, retaining only data
 identify low-probability behaviors in the provenance graph. By related to causal relationships. These methods can reduce data
 analyzing these behaviors, they can detect attacks and identify size to varying degrees. Unfortunately, the high reduction ratio
 related nodes and edges. Security personnel can then conduct of existing work come at the cost of significant damage to
 further analysis and investigation based on the detected attacks. attack-related information.
 To support these detection methods, data reduction must Research by Inam et al. [4] shows that LogGC and
 preserve the frequency information of various behaviors to NodeMerge can reduce data volume by about 10% without
 avoid misclassifying normal behaviors as low-probability. causing a decline in intrusion detection metrics. CPR and
 Additionally, it must retain information related to attack behav- PCAR reduce data volume by about 30%, but at the cost
 iors to prevent misidentifying attacks as normal behaviors. of some attack data loss. Methods like LogApprox, FD, and
 Attack investigation aims to infer the chain of events SD can significantly reduce data volume but also cause a
 leading to an intrusion and assess the potential damage to noticeable decline in intrusion detection metrics. The SD
 the system [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. This process is method achieves over 90% data reduction but causes the
 divided into two parts: backward tracing and forward tracing. detection accuracy of the DeepLog method to drop from
 Backward tracing starts from the alert event and traces the 52.94% to 4.88% and recall rate from 87.10% to 14.29%.
 attack path in reverse to identify the origin of the attack, These methods indiscriminately reduce all areas of the graph,
 thereby understanding the attack process and methods for leading to erroneous pruning of attack-related information
 vulnerability remediation. Forward tracing also starts from the and loss of frequency information, thereby causing intrusion
 alert event, tracking its possible behavior paths and impacts to detection methods to fail. Specifically, LogGC and NodeMerge
 identify affected system entities, preventing further attacks and reduce only a limited subset of runtime-observed benign
 reducing system damage. Security personnel use the depen- activity, leaving the structural and statistical cues required
 dency relationships between entities in the provenance graph to for intrusion detection substantially intact. By contrast, CPR
 conduct attack investigations, reconstruct the complete attack and PCAR aggressively collapse the structural neighbourhoods
 scenario, quickly understand the intrusion, and design timely surrounding attack nodes, resulting in the inadvertent removal
 responses. of attack-critical evidence. LogApprox coalesces edges that
 To avoid negatively impacting the attack investigation pro- encode semantically similar actions, whereas FD and SD
 cess, the reduction process must preserve the dependency eliminate the majority of edges with equivalent reachability
 relationships between entities in the provenance graph. This semantics; in both cases, the consequent erasure of frequency
 ensures that the provenance paths are not cut off or incorrectly information undermines intrusion-detection techniques whose
 linked. efficacy depends on event frequency. The significant decline
 in metrics renders these high-reduction data reduction meth-
 B. Data Reduction ods ineffective in supporting subsequent attack detection and
 To achieve comprehensive security protection, it is nec- investigation.
 essary to collect and store system events from each host, It is evident that existing data reduction methods cannot
 which imposes significant pressure on data storage. On one achieve high reduction ratios while maintaining support for
 hand, the volume of system events generated by current downstream tasks. Therefore, this paper aims to propose a
 computer systems during operation is enormous, with each new data reduction method to address the issue of negative
 host capable of producing over 1GB of system event data impacts on downstream tasks caused by extensive reduction.
 per day [3]. On the other hand, because attacks often lurk
 in the system for a long time, it is necessary to retain system C. Our Method
 event data for extended periods. The massive volume of data To ensure that the reduction process does not negatively
 not only puts immense pressure on storage but also makes impact downstream tasks, it is essential to focus on reducing
 attack detection and investigation akin to finding a needle in a normal behavior data within the system. Normal behavior
 haystack. Security personnel have to search for potential attack data, generated during non-malicious operations, is unrelated

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 9466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 to attack behaviors and can thus be reduced. Identifying these
 normal behaviors in the provenance graph is a key step.
 To achieve this, a set of normal behavior patterns must be
 obtained in advance, serving as references for identifying
 normal behaviors during the reduction process.
 The set of normal behavior patterns of the system consists of
 a large number of different behavior patterns, each representing
 a specific type of program operation, such as downloading
 files from the network, writing and saving files, etc. These
 behavior patterns are defined based on the normal operation
 of the system and reflect the behaviors and operations of the
 system when it is free from attack.
 However, due to the complexity and diversity of the system,
 obtaining a comprehensive set of normal behavior patterns is
 very challenging. Extracting data corresponding to individual
 behaviors from complex system behavior data is difficult
 because system behaviors often involve multiple entities Fig. 1. Example provenance graph illustrating the Firefox backdoor attack
 from the DARPA TC project’s Drakon. Rectangles represent processes, circles
 and operations with intricate interactions and dependencies. represent files, and diamonds represent sockets. Benign system behavior is
 Transforming this complex data into understandable behavior shown in green, while the attack subgraph is shown in red.
 patterns is a significant challenge. Besides, the highly diverse
 nature of system behaviors makes it hard for any dataset to
 encompass all normal behaviors, meaning the obtained behav- 3) Identifying and Reducing Normal Behavior: In the
 ior patterns may not cover every normal behavior. Therefore, reduction stage, we match the provenance graph with the
 it is essential to continuously update and expand the set of previously extracted normal behavior template subgraphs, and
 behavior patterns to adapt to the evolving system behaviors. we refer to a matched subgraph in the provenance graph
 To address these challenges, we focus on unit testing, a as a subgraph region. Once a matching subgraph region
 crucial part of the software development process that verifies is identified, we trim the nodes and edges in that region
 the correct operation of individual modules or functions. while preserving forward and backward reachability, thereby
 A comprehensive set of unit tests can cover most normal reducing the graph’s size and complexity.
 behaviors of a program, allowing us to generate normal Here we illustrate the entire process with a simple example,
 behavior data and extract patterns from it. By executing a as shown in Figure 2. In this example, during the learning
 series of unit tests across various functions, we record system phase, we execute multiple test cases for the HTTP download
 behavior data during testing. This data reflects the program’s function of wget and collect data to construct multiple provenormal operations and can be considered normal behavior data. nance graphs. Each graph represents one HTTP download
 We then analyze and process this data to extract behavior process and includes noise generated during execution. We use
 patterns. This approach allows us to extract patterns that an algorithm to extract the maximum common subgraph from
 encompass the majority of the program’s normal behaviors. these graphs as a template, thereby eliminating the noise. This
 Additionally, leveraging the automation features of unit testing template represents the HTTP download behavior of wget,
 ensures that the pattern extraction process remains continuous including processes, files, sockets, and their relationships.
 and adaptable to program updates and changes. This method Next, we use the template to reduce the provenance graph
 effectively addresses the outlined challenges. collected in a real scenario involving an HTTP download
 Based on the above idea, we have designed and imple- with wget. We locate all subgraph regions in the provenance
 mented a reduction method based on normal behavior patterns. graph that are isomorphic to the template. We then reduce
 1) Generating Normal Behavior Data From Unit Test each matched region into two nodes connected by a single
 Cases: First, we execute a series of unit test cases and collect edge, retaining the template-related information for subsequent
 complete event data to construct normal behavior provenance provenance analysis.
 graphs. Each test case is executed multiple times to obtain
 multiple provenance graphs representing the same behavior, III. T HREAT M ODEL
 supporting the extraction of normal behavior patterns. Similar to previous work, our approach considers scenarios
 2) Extracting Normal Behavior Patterns: Next, we use data where an attacker attempts to compromise a running system
 mining algorithms to extract normal behavior patterns from the using methods such as exploiting software vulnerabilities or
 data. Specifically, a frequent itemset-based algorithm extracts deploying malware. However, we do not consider attacks that
 the maximum common subgraph from multiple provenance are not explicitly recorded by kernel-level auditing, such as
 graphs representing the same behavior. This subgraph, called hardware attacks, side-channel attacks, and covert channel
 the template subgraph, represents the behavior pattern. By attacks. TeRed is a reduction method based on normal behavior
 mining the provenance graphs of different behaviors, we obtain patterns, so we assume that when TeRed learns from the
 a series of template subgraphs for the subsequent reduction provenance graph of benign system executions, the host system
 process. is not influenced by attackers. Additionally, we assume that

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LI et al.: TeReD: NORMAL BEHAVIOR-BASED EFFICIENT PROVENANCE GRAPH REDUCTION 9467

 Fig. 2. An example of TeRed: the method runs the Wget network download test cases multiple times to obtain the corresponding provenance graph set.
 Subsequently, template subgraphs representing the Wget network download behavior are extracted from this set. These templates are then matched against
 the provenance graph to be reduced, identifying the Wget network download behaviors within the graph for reduction.

 kernel-level attacks do not occur and that events generated dur- reflect specific software behaviors, excluding other information
 ing system operation are recorded completely and accurately. to streamline template extraction. This ensures the templates
 Furthermore, we assume that the data is not tampered with, and accurately represent individual behaviors and enhances prethe provenance graph is complete and securely stored. These cision during the reduction phase when matching against
 assumptions can be ensured by existing security technologies behaviors within the provenance graph.
 [22], [23], [24], [25]. To meet the above requirements, we use normal test cases
 from software unit testing to generate the required data. The
 IV. D ESIGN primary purpose of designing unit test cases is to verify the
 A. Overview correctness and robustness of software functionality, and they
 do not contain any attack behaviors. Additionally, unit test
 Based on the above ideas, this paper proposes a template- cases focus on specific functional points of the software,
 based reduction method aimed at effectively extracting, executing one specific action at a time. For example, a unit
 matching, and reducing normal behavior data by identifying test might call a function and verify whether the function’s
 and utilizing common templates. This method is divided into output meets the expectations. In this way, the data collected
 three main stages: the template learning phase, the template during each test execution can represent a specific behavior.
 matching phase, and the template-based reduction phase. Furthermore, the software development process provides a
 rich and comprehensive set of test cases that cover differ-
 B. Template Learning ent functionalities of the software. By using these diverse
 The objective of template learning is to extract templates test cases, we can significantly enhance the coverage of the
 representing normal behavior patterns from extensive normal generated data. The high coverage test cases provide data
 behavior data. This involves filtering out randomness and encompassing a wide range of system operations, thereby
 irrelevant content to obtain stable, accurate, and reliable pat- increasing the number and coverage of the normal behavior
 terns, forming the basis for subsequent template matching and templates extracted, ultimately enhancing the overall reduction
 reduction. Template learning comprises two main processes: ratio of the system.
 generating normal data and mining subgraph templates. Consequently, we select verified unit test cases with broad
 1) Normal Data Generating: In the template learning coverage from the software development test library. A test
 phase, generating high-quality normal behavior data is crucial. case is retained only if (i) it triggers exactly one atomic
 This data must meet two essential criteria: it should be free operation, (ii) it contains no boundary-condition or faultof attack activities and correspond specifically to individ- injection logic, and (iii) its inclusion raises statement/branch
 ual behaviors. Ensuring the dataset is free from malicious coverage. Then, we execute the chosen unit test cases in bulk
 actions prevents misleading results during template learning using automated testing tools. Finally, we collect the extensive
 and matching, guaranteeing that the extracted templates rep- logs produced by executing the unit tests, followed by data
 resent normal system behavior. Additionally, the data should cleansing and format transformation to construct individual

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 9468 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 provenance graphs. These steps allow us to generate a set of Algorithm 1 Frequent Subgraph Mining
 high-quality normal data that is free of attacks and where Require: Graph database D, Minimum support τ
 each provenance graph corresponds to a single behavior, Ensure: Mining results S
 thereby establishing a solid foundation for subsequent template 1: Sort points and edges in D by label frequency
 subgraph mining. 2: Remove low frequency points and edges
 2) Template Subgraph Mining: Each subgraph template 3: Re-mark the remaining points and edges of D
 represents a general pattern of normal behavior. We attempt to 4: S 1 ← graphs in D that contain only one edge
 utilize the generated normal behavior data to mine generalized 5: Arranges the edges in S 1 in DFS dictionary order
 provenance graph representations of various normal behaviors. 6: S ← S 1
 Program execution involves inherent randomness. Firstly, 7: for e in S 1 do
 fields such as the PID during program execution are random, 8: s ←graphs in D that contain e
 leading to variations in the provenance graph information with 9: S ubMining(D, s, S , τ)
 each execution. Secondly, during the execution of test cases, 10: D← D−e
 the program may interact with entities unrelated to the test 11: if |D| < τ then
 case. These random and irrelevant interactions can affect the 12: break
 resulting provenance graph. Therefore, we cannot directly use 13: end if
 the graphs obtained from test case executions as subgraph 14: end for
 templates representing normal behavior patterns.
 To obtain template subgraphs, we need to process the prove- Algorithm 2 SubMining
 nance graphs in a way that preserves their basic topological Require: Graph database D, Input subgraph s, Mining
 structure, node types, edge types, and other key information results S, Minimum support τ
 while filtering out fields influenced by randomness and irrel- Ensure: Mining results S
 evant interactions. The specific steps are as follows: Firstly, 1: if s , min(s) then
 execute the same test case multiple times to generate multiple 2: return
 provenance graphs. Then, analyze these provenance graphs to 3: end if
 extract their common parts as template subgraphs. Essentially, 4: S ← S ∪ {s}
 this is a frequent subgraph mining process. 5: Generate all s’ potential children with one edge growth in
 Definition 1 (Graph Dataset): Graph dataset D = D
 {G1 , G2 , . . . , Gn } is a set of provenance graphs, where each 6: for each s’ child c do
 graph Gi is a provenance graph defined as Gi = (Vi , Ei ). 7: if support(c, D) ≥ τ then
 Definition 2 (Frequent Subgraph): Let τ be the support 8: s←c
 threshold. A subgraph s is considered frequent if and only 9: S ubMining(D, s, S , τ)
 if support(s, D) ≥ τ. The support of frequent subgraph s is 10: end if
 defined as 11: end for

 support(s, D) = |{Gi ∈ D : count(s, Gi ) > 0}|
 where count(s, Gi ) denotes the number of times s appears as graphs. Each recursion extends the current subgraph in DFS
 a subgraph in Gi . tree order, attempts to add a new edge to it, and removes
 Frequent subgraphs can represent patterns that consistently duplicate graphs. If the expanded code corresponds to the
 appear across multiple executions, serving as template sub- minimal code of a graph, it gets added to the result set. All
 graphs for corresponding behaviors. In this paper, we use generated graphs that meet the requirements enter the next
 gSpan [26] as the foundational algorithm for frequent sub- round of recursive calls. This expansion process allows the
 graph mining, and the algorithm framework is illustrated in algorithm to maximize the size of the frequent subgraphs, thus
 Algorithm 1. The core idea of gSpan is to discover fre- enabling the inclusion of larger areas in subsequent reduction
 quent subgraphs through DFS (Depth First Search), efficiently processes and ultimately improving the reduction rate.
 handling large-scale graph databases. The first step of the Through the template subgraph mining process, we can
 algorithm is to remove infrequent nodes and edges from effectively filter out noise from program executions (which
 the dataset and place the remaining edges in the output set is manifested in the provenance graph as infrequent nodes
 according to DFS coding order. The second step iteratively and edges), resulting in template subgraphs that represent
 invokes the SubMining growth algorithm on each frequent normal behaviors. This collection of subgraphs, which elimedge graph, continuously finding frequent subgraphs with inates random fluctuations and irrelevant interactions, lays a
 more edges. The third step removes edges from the dataset that solid foundation for subsequent template matching and data
 are identical to the mined edges, further reducing the scale. reduction stages.
 Finally, the algorithm checks for support; when the number
 of graphs in the dataset falls below the support threshold, the C. Template Matching
 algorithm terminates. Data reduction should focus on data related to normal
 The iterative module SubMining, as shown in Algorithm behavior. Therefore, when reducing the provenance graph,
 2, expands the given subgraph to find all subsequent frequent the first step is to identify the reducible parts. If regions in

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LI et al.: TeReD: NORMAL BEHAVIOR-BASED EFFICIENT PROVENANCE GRAPH REDUCTION 9469

 the provenance graph share the same structure and similar partial match has been found during the matching process. The
 attributes as the template subgraph, it indicates that the behav- mapping M(s) under state s indicates a mapping relationship
 ior represented aligns with the template’s behavior pattern. between the subgraphs G1 (s) and G2 (s) of graphs G1 and G2 .
 Consequently, the challenge becomes identifying the template The transition from state s to the next state s0 involves the
 subgraph in the provenance graph, which is essentially a process of adding a new pair of nodes (p, q) to the matching
 subgraph matching problem. set. For each state s the algorithm calculates a set of candidate
 Definition 3 (Subgraph Matching): Given two graphs G1 = node pairs P(s) that can be added to the state. For each
 (V1 , E1 ) and G2 = (V2 , E2 ), the subgraph matching problem pair (p, q) in this set, if including it satisfies the feasibility
 requires determining whether there exists a mapping f : V2 → conditions, the pair is added to state s, resulting in a new
 V1 such that: state s0 . The algorithm then iteratively invokes the matching
 • One-to-One Mapping: f is injective, that is, ∀vi , v j ∈ function for the new state s0 until the entire matching process
 V2 , vi , v j ⇒ f (vi ) , f (v j ). is complete.
 • Adjacency Relationship Preservation: ∀vi , v j ∈ The two input graphs for the algorithm are the provenance
 V2 , (vi , v j ) ∈ E2 ⇒ ( f (vi ), f (v j )) ∈ E1 . graph to be reduced and the template subgraph from the tem-
 • Attribute Matching: ∀v ∈ V2 , label(v) = label( f (v)), and plate library. The algorithm adds the application name attribute
 ∀vi , v j ∈ V2 , label(vi , v j ) = label( f (vi ), f (v j )). to specific nodes in the template subgraph (the application
 If the above conditions hold, then graph G2 is said to be a node executing the test case) and designates them as the initial
 subgraph of graph G1 . matching nodes. This operation effectively reduces the number
 During the template matching process, it is essential to of invalid matches and significantly improves algorithm effiensure that the provenance graph regions are consistent with ciency, especially when there are many template subgraphs
 the subgraph in structure and attributes, satisfying the last two in the template library. During the matching process, the
 conditions of Definition 3, known as feasibility conditions. provenance graph to be reduced is matched with each template
 Our algorithm requires that attribute matching not only aligns subgraph in the library. Successful matches, including both the
 the entity types of corresponding nodes but also ensures that matched templates and their positions, are recorded and will
 the system calls for the edges are identical. This guarantees define the region for the subsequent reduction phase.
 that the behaviors represented by the identified subgraph match
 D. Template-Based Reduction
 those of the template.
 We employ the VF2 algorithm [27] for template matching, To support causal analysis, after obtaining the template
 which is a highly efficient and precise method designed to matching results, it is necessary to reduce the provenance
 address subgraph matching problems. The algorithm is based graph while minimizing the number of nodes and edges in the
 on a recursive approach, dividing the matching process into regions to be reduced, without losing the original information.
 forward and backtracking phases. In the forward phase, the Each region to be reduced corresponds to a template subgraph,
 algorithm attempts to match the nodes in the two graphs and which represents a normal system behavior. Therefore, the
 verifies if the feasibility conditions are met. If successful, it information within the region can be viewed as an entity unreproceeds further; if not, it backtracks to try other nodes until lated to attack information, allowing us to reduce this region.
 no viable nodes remain for further matching. Specifically, our reduction algorithm first identifies the nodes
 and edges within the region to be reduced and determines
 Algorithm 3 VF2 Match the corresponding template subgraph for that region. Next, the
 Require: Graph G1 , G2 , Intermediate state s (initial state algorithm deletes these original nodes and edges, using a new,
 s0 satisfies M(s0 ) = ∅) smaller set of nodes and edges to represent the behavior of
 Ensure: Matching result M(s) the region and associate it with other nodes.
 1: if M(s)contains all the nodes of G 2 then Based on this approach, the algorithm turns the region
 2: return M(s) into two nodes and one edge. The first node represents the
 3: else application node corresponding to the template, while the
 4: Evaluates the set P(s) of the candidate pairs contained second node is a new node generated based on the template
 in M(s) information, representing all nodes within the region to be
 5: for each (p, q) in P(s) do reduced. These two nodes are connected by an edge, which is
 6: if Incorporating (p, q) into M(s) satisfies the feasi- also generated based on the template information and encapbility conditions then sulates the behavioral semantics represented by the template.
 7: s0 ← s ∪ (p, q) To ensure the coherence and integrity of information flow,
 8: VF2 Match (G1 , G2 , s0 ) after generating the new nodes and edges, the algorithm deletes
 9: end if the original nodes and edges and reconnects the nodes outside
 10: end for the reduced region to the application node and the new node.
 11: Save data structure The reconnection follows two rules to maintain the unaffected
 12: end if information flow outside the reduced region:
 • If a node outside the region is a predecessor of a node
 The specific algorithmic flow is shown in Algorithm 3. In within the region, it is reconnected to the application
 the algorithm, the state s represents a condition in which a node, becoming its predecessor.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 9470 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 3. The architecture of TeRed. In the template learning stage, the method extracts a large number of template subgraphs using test cases. In the template
 matching stage, the method attempts to find isomorphic subgraph portions in the provenance graph to be reduced that correspond to the template subgraphs.
 In the reducing phase, the method reduces the matched portions.

 Fig. 4. Single template reduction.
 Fig. 5. Multiple template reduction (same application).

 • If a node outside the region is a successor of a node within
 the region, it is reconnected to the new node, becoming
 its successor.
 By adhering to these reconnection rules, the reduced information flow remains consistent with the origin information
 flow, thus preserving the causal relationships of the external
 nodes.
 As illustrated in Figure 4, the region to be reduced is Fig. 6. Multiple template reduction (different applications).
 reduced to two nodes and one edge, with the original external
 associations retained. In the figure, node M represents the
 application node corresponding to the template, and node 3) Overlapping Regions With Different Applications: When
 N is the new node introduced during reduction. The edge two template subgraphs overlap and their corresponding appliconnecting them is also newly created. cations differ, both application nodes are retained, and two
 In practical applications, a provenance graph may contain new nodes are added. The original predecessor nodes are
 multiple normal behaviors, resulting in the presence of mul- connected to their respective application nodes, while the
 tiple regions to be reduced. Based on the aforementioned original successor nodes are connected to the two new nodes.
 reduction method, the reduction process may encounter three This process is depicted in Figure 6. In Figure 7, we present
 scenarios. a practical example of provenance graph reduction, where
 1) Non-Overlapping Regions: This is the simplest scenario. certain nodes in the graph have been simplified for clarity.
 Each independent region can be reduced separately according This template-based reduction method preserves critical
 to the previously described method. Figure 2 provides a simple information within the information flow, thus ensuring a
 example. reliable data foundation for subsequent intrusion detection and
 2) Overlapping Regions With the Same Application: If two attack investigation while completing the reduction process.
 template subgraphs overlap and their corresponding applica- This method not only effectively reduces the complexity of
 tions are the same, the algorithm preserves the application the graph but also maintains the dependency relationships
 node while adding two new nodes. The subsequent steps are between external nodes and those within the reduced regions,
 similar to the single-template approach: the original prede- fundamentally facilitating efficient causal analysis. This robust
 cessor nodes are connected to the application node, and the support is pivotal for handling large-scale provenance graphs
 original successor nodes are connected to the two new nodes, and real-time intrusion detection, enhancing the efficiency and
 as illustrated in Figure 5. accuracy of the analysis process.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LI et al.: TeReD: NORMAL BEHAVIOR-BASED EFFICIENT PROVENANCE GRAPH REDUCTION 9471

 TABLE I
 L AB DATASET

 RQ2: How effective is TeRed in reducing provenance
 graphs? (VI-C)
 RQ3: Can TeRed ensure the accuracy of subsequent attack
 detection and provenance? (VI-D, VI-E)

 A. Dataset
 We evaluated TeRed using the DARPA Transparent Computing program dataset. We selected the Trace and Theia parts
 Fig. 7. Example of provenance graph reduction: The figure illustrates
 overlapping regions corresponding to different template matches for Wget
 of Engagement 3, which were generated during the red team
 and Apache. The reduction algorithm consolidates these two regions into four and blue team adversarial engagement in April 2018. These
 nodes and connects them to the nodes outside the regions. parts contain events from a series of hosts and ground truth
 information about the attacks. Many previous works have used
 V. I MPLEMENTATION this data to evaluate their systems. We parsed the logs in
 We implemented a prototype system of TeRed in Python, the dataset and constructed provenance graphs that meet the
 which is divided into a template learning module and a format requirements for evaluation.
 reduction module. Both the learning and reduction modules In addition, we constructed three supplementary scenarios.
 accept a provenance graph as input. The attribute information These three scenarios are based on three popular pubof nodes in the provenance graph must include at least a unique licly known vulnerabilities from Vulhub: CVE-2019-9193,
 identifier (id) and an entity type (type, such as file or process). CVE-2016-4971, and CVE-2014-6271. CVE-2019-9193 is a
 The attribute information of edges in the provenance graph vulnerability in PostgreSQL that affects multiple versions from
 must include at least a timestamp, event type, and the ids of 9.3 to 11.2, allowing some database users to execute arbitrary
 the source and target nodes. Additionally, we implemented a code via PostgreSQL. CVE-2016-4971 is a vulnerability in
 provenance graph construction module that can accept sysdig versions of Wget prior to 1.18, where a remote attacker can
 logs as input and output a provenance graph that meets exploit this vulnerability to write arbitrary files by handling
 the above requirements. The system’s output is a reduced HTTP service redirections. CVE-2014-6271 is a well-known
 provenance graph, which can be saved to a Neo4j graph Bash vulnerability, where in versions prior to 4.3, an attacker
 database to support further visualized provenance analysis. can exploit this vulnerability to execute arbitrary scripts by
 To effectively evaluate TeRed, we reproduced a set of crafting the values of environment variables. These vulnerarepresentative methods, including CPR [20], PCAR [20], bilities illustrate attacker behavior in real-world scenarios from
 FDPR [5], SDPR [5], LogApprox [21], LogGC [18] and multiple perspectives. We constructed scenarios with these
 NodeMerge [19]. In implementing these methods, we vulnerabilities in a Linux environment, executed the attack
 endeavored to replicate the techniques described in their actions, and collected the corresponding data, forming three
 respective papers as accurately as possible, and we referred corresponding datasets, which we refer to as Lab 1, Lab 2,
 to the implementation of FAuST [28]. It is important to note and Lab 3. The information about the three datasets is shown
 that our reproductions of these works are centered around in Table I, and the detailed procedures for executing the attacks
 the provenance graph, so there may be deviations from are provided in Appendix A (see Supplementary Material).
 the original systems. Additionally, we used three intrusion
 detection algorithms: Unicorn [2], ProvDetector [7], and B. Template Extraction
 DeepLog [6]. For Unicorn and DeepLog, we used the opensource algorithms from the original papers, while ProvDetector Our first research question is whether the templates
 was reproduced based on the descriptions in the paper. extracted by TeRed during the learning phase faithfully capture
 the targeted normal behavior patterns. During the learning
 phase, to ensure that the extracted templates can accurately
 VI. E VALUATION represent a behavior, the system executes the same test case
 We evaluated TeRed to answer the following research multiple times and uses the data obtained from multiple exequestions (RQ): cutions for template mining. However, we do not know exactly
 RQ1: Can the template subgraph extracted by TeRed for how many times it needs to be executed. Therefore, to verify
 a specific normal behavior accurately represent the behavior the effectiveness of the extraction method and determine the
 pattern corresponding to that behavior? (VI-B) appropriate number of executions, we conducted experiments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 9472 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II TABLE III
 R ESULTS OF T EMPLATE E XTRACTION E XPERIMENT R EDUCTION R ATIO (%) OF DATA R EDUCTION M ETHODS

 In the experiments, we first executed the test case corresponding to the same behavior n times and generated the
 corresponding provenance graphs. Then, we performed template mining on the obtained provenance graphs to get the
 template subgraph corresponding to that behavior. Pilot exper- These behaviors might originate from system activities or from
 iments showed that most templates stabilize by the seventh programs for which we have not extracted the corresponding
 replay; we therefore executed the behavior 5 additional times behavior templates.
 (7−2 = 5) and generated the corresponding provenance graphs. It is also noteworthy that the TeRed method exhibits stable
 Finally, we checked whether the extracted template was a reduction performance across all environments. This shows
 subgraph of all 5 provenance graphs. If it was, we considered that it can maintain high reduction efficiency under various
 the extracted template to accurately represent the behavior circumstances. In contrast, the reduction ratios of other methpattern of that behavior. ods fluctuated significantly across different environments. For
 In this way, we can verify the effectiveness of the template example, LogGC and NodeMerge had reduction ratios as low
 extraction method and determine the appropriate number of as 0 in some environments, which might indicate that these
 test case executions. We conducted this experiment on three methods are ineffective in certain specific scenarios. While
 application: Wget, Bash, and Nginx. These three programs methods like CPR, PCAR, LogApprox, FDPR, and SDPR
 encompass the common usage patterns observed in real-world can achieve high reduction ratios in some environments, their
 systems, enabling us to assess the proposed method across performance is relatively poor in others. The stability of TeRed
 heterogeneous behaviors. The experimental results are shown stems from its unique reduction method, which reduces based
 in Table II. on a series of pre-learned behaviors in the system.
 From the results, it can be seen that for all test cases,
 we were able to extract templates that accurately represent D. Support for Intrusion Detection
 the corresponding behaviors. It can also be noted that as
 Data reduction needs to ensure that the reduced data
 the number of test case executions increases, the extracted
 remains high-quality and usable. If critical information in
 templates become more accurate. When the number of executhe data is lost during the reduction process, the reduction
 tions reaches 8, the behavior corresponding to all test cases is
 loses its significance. To check whether the reduced data
 accurately extracted as the corresponding template subgraph.
 still contains critical information, an effective method is to
 This indicates that our strategy of increasing the number of test
 apply the data before and after reduction to downstream tasks
 case executions to eliminate noise is effective. Based on this
 and compare the changes in the metrics of these tasks to
 conclusion, TeRed selects n =10 during the template extraction
 determine whether the critical information has been preserved.
 process to achieve accurate template extracting.
 However, as mentioned earlier, most current reduction methods
 struggle to completely retain critical information. Therefore,
 C. Reduction Performance this section will analyze the impact of reduction methods
 To evaluate the reduction effectiveness of TeRed, we ran on intrusion detection algorithms through experiments to
 TeRed and other methods on all datasets and calculated the demonstrate that TeRed’s reduction does not negatively affect
 reduction ratio. The results are shown in the table. Although subsequent intrusion detection. The three intrusion detection
 the obtained reduction ratios differ from those in previous methods used are DeepLog [6], Unicorn [2], and ProvDetector
 works, the relative reduction ratios between different meth- [7], all of which are typical intrusion detection systems.
 ods remain largely consistent with previous findings. The Consistent with previous studies, we adopt the F1-score as
 performance differences are likely due to variations in the the performance metric for the intrusion-detection algorithms.
 construction of provenance graphs and data statistics methods. Because it simultaneously accounts for both precision and
 The experimental results are shown in Table III. SDPR recall, the F1-score provides a comprehensive assessment of
 exhibited the best reduction performance on four out of the the model’s effectiveness. In the experiments, we adjusted
 five datasets, while TeRed achieved the best reduction effect the parameters of the algorithms to achieve the best possible
 on the Lab 2 dataset. In most datasets, TeRed outperformed detection performance. The experimental results are shown in
 most other methods, which fully demonstrates that TeRed is Table IV.
 an efficient reduction technique. We speculate that TeRed did The experimental results show that the TeRed reduction
 not achieve the best effect in all scenarios possibly because method did not negatively impact the metrics of the three
 there are some behaviors that have not yet been learned. intrusion detection algorithms across the five datasets, demon-

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LI et al.: TeReD: NORMAL BEHAVIOR-BASED EFFICIENT PROVENANCE GRAPH REDUCTION 9473

 TABLE IV
 D ETECTION R ESULTS (F1-S CORE ) OF 3 I NTRUSION D ETECTION S YSTEMS .(U=U NICORN , P=P ROV D ETECTOR , D=D EEP L OG )

 strating significant stability. This indicates that the TeRed TABLE V
 reduction process has minimal impact on the critical infor- T RACING R ESULTS OF 3 DATASETS .( PRE *= PRECURSOR N ODES ,
 mation of the original data and can effectively preserve SUCC *= SUCCESSOR N ODES )

 the characteristics of the original data. Notably, in some
 cases, the algorithms using the reduction data achieved better
 results because the reduction algorithm helped the intrusion
 algorithms eliminate some normal suspicious paths, thereby
 increasing the exposure of attack behaviors. However, other
 methods failed to avoid negative impacts on the intrusion
 detection process while maintaining high reduction ratios.
 Although the LogGC and NodeMerge algorithms did not first selected a set of entities related to the attack (i.e., the
 reduce the metrics of the intrusion detection algorithms in attack entity set) from the origin provenance graph, and then
 most cases, their reduction ratios were significantly lower chose one entity as the starting node (representing the Point
 than other methods. The CPR and PCAR algorithms, while of Interest, POI, in tracing). Through forward and backward
 effectively reducing data, had some negative impacts on the tracing, we divided the nodes in the entity set into predecessors
 intrusion detection algorithms. The LogApprox, SDPR, and and successors of the starting node. Finally, we performed
 FDPR algorithms achieved high reduction ratios but at a the same tracing operation on the same starting node in the
 significant cost, greatly reducing the metrics of the intrusion reduced provenance graph and compared the results of the
 detection algorithms. two divisions. If the results are completely consistent (i.e., no
 The experiments indicate that TeRed is the only method that missing or incorrectly divided predecessor or successor nodes
 achieves high reduction ratios without affecting subsequent after reduction), it indicates that TeRed has not disrupted the
 intrusion detection tasks. It reduces only events related to critical entity dependencies, ensuring the reachability between
 normal behavior without interfering with events related to nodes. The experimental results are shown in Table V.
 suspicious abnormal behavior, thus having the advantage of In the experiments, the predecessor and successor nodes on
 not negatively impacting intrusion detection algorithms. This the three datasets did not change before and after reduction,
 is the core advantage of TeRed. indicating that the tracing results remained unchanged. This
 demonstrates that TeRed’s reduction did not disrupt the entity
 dependencies on the attack-related paths. By incorporating
 E. Support for Attack Investigation the results from the intrusion detection experiments in VI-D,
 Data reduction must ensure the integrity of dependencies we demonstrate that analysts can identify POI events in the
 between entities to support forward and backward tracing reduced data and subsequently reconstruct the complete attack
 tasks. To evaluate TeRed’s ability to support attack inves- story from these POI events.
 tigation, we conducted experiments on Lab1, Lab2, and Moreover, we acknowledge that while the reduced graph
 Lab3. Through a simulated tracing process, we compared may introduce slight gaps in reconstructing the attack path if it
 the preservation of dependency relationships between attack- traverses the reduced areas, the preservation of essential attack
 related entities before and after reduction. Specifically, we events enables analysts to effectively trace the progression of

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 9474 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 the attack. Consequently, although there are inherent trade-offs TABLE VI
 between reduction and utility—particularly concerning poten- R EDUCTION R ATIO C HANGES W HEN THE N UMBER
 tial minor losses in detail—the overall capacity to reconstruct OF T EMPLATES I NCREASES

 the attack narrative remains strong.
 Therefore, we contend that our findings adequately address
 the concerns regarding the balance between data reduction
 and the utility of the reduced provenance graph in attack
 investigations.

 VII. D ISCUSSION
 A. Scalability of the Method
 The complexity and variability of modern computer systems present challenges for TeRed. Firstly, different operating
 environments, such as various operating systems and hardware
 configurations, can alter program behaviors. Secondly, probe useful for attack detection and investigation, this does not
 gram updates and feature modifications can change behavior
 mean that TeRed cannot achieve lossless compression. Unlike
 patterns.
 other lossy reduction methods, TeRed’s reduction is reversible.
 TeRed can adapts to changes by continuously expanding and
 It can restore the deleted information using templates, thereby
 updating its template library through new test cases. When new
 preventing information loss due to reduction.
 behavior patterns are discovered or programs are updated, we
 Since the templates record key information about the
 write and run new unit tests to extract and add these patterns
 reduced regions, we can use them to restore the deleted
 to the library. Since our template library is based on unit
 nodes and edges in the provenance graph. The restoration
 test cases, as long as we continually write and run new test
 process involves two parts: restoring the attributes of nodes
 cases, we can continuously update and expand our template
 and edges, and restoring the original dependency relationships.
 library. This allows our reduction method to continuously
 For attribute restoration, the templates save the entity types
 adapt to system changes, thereby maintaining its effectiveness
 of all nodes and the system call attributes of edges, but not
 and accuracy.
 other attributes. Therefore, an additional table is needed to
 To demonstrate TeRed’s capability, we conducted experstore these other attributes for each node and edge. During
 iments. Our experiments simulated a scenario where new
 restoration, the templates and this attribute table can be used
 software is installed in the system, and TeRed’s template
 to add the corresponding attribute values to the nodes and
 library does not include templates related to this software.
 edges. For dependency relationships, the templates save the
 Therefore, it needs to learn the behavior patterns of the
 internal dependencies within the compressed region. However,
 software from scratch and continuously expand the template
 an additional table is needed to record the original dependenlibrary to improve reduction effectiveness. In the experiments,
 cies between nodes inside the compressed region and those
 we used Lab 1-3. For each dataset, we used template files in
 outside of it. This table records the associations between each
 varying proportions from 10% to 100%, increasing the propornode inside the compressed region and the external nodes,
 tion by 10% each time. To minimize the interference caused by
 while the templates record the associations within the comsome high-frequency template files, each experiment randomly
 pressed region. By combining the two, the original dependency
 selected templates ten times to conduct ten sub-experiments,
 relationships can be restored. Attribute information occupies
 and the average of the ten results was taken as the final result.
 significant storage space as it includes all remaining attributes
 Details of the software used and their corresponding test cases
 of the nodes and edges. In contrast, dependency relationship
 are provided in Appendix B (see Supplementary Material).
 information, determined by the number of edges in the graph,
 The experimental results are shown in the Table VI. As
 typically requires less space. For example, in Lab 1, the
 expected, the reduction ratio is positively correlated with the
 storage space required to restore the attribute information and
 proportion of template files used. As the number of templates
 the dependency relationship information accounts for 27.71%
 increases, the reduction ratio also continuously improves. The
 and 0.56% of the original dataset size. The newly introduced
 experiments demonstrate that in a system undergoing changes,
 data structures will occupy additional storage space, but some
 TeRed can adapt to these changes by expanding its test cases.
 general compression algorithms can be used to reduce their
 Furthermore, the experiments indicate that by increasing the
 space cost.
 number of relevant templates, more normal behaviors can be
 Notably, restoration can be performed locally, allowing for
 identified on the provenance graph, thereby improving TeRed’s
 the restoration of only the parts of interest without needing
 reduction ratio. This achieves the “more is better” effect.
 to restore the entire provenance graph. This flexibility makes
 our method adaptable to various scenarios. For instance, dur-
 B. Reversible Reduction ing attack detection, the reduced provenance graph improves
 During the reduction process, TeRed removes most of the detection speed. During investigation, restoring compressed
 information related to matched nodes and edges. Although this regions adjacent to the attack path enhances efficiency and
 information pertains to normal system behavior and might still provides more comprehensive attack-related information. In

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 LI et al.: TeReD: NORMAL BEHAVIOR-BASED EFFICIENT PROVENANCE GRAPH REDUCTION 9475

 any case, the restored provenance graph can be directly used VIII. R ELATED W ORK
 for attack detection and investigation. A. Lossless Compression Methods
 Lossless Compression techniques ensure that no information
 C. Imperfect Data is lost during the optimization process, which is crucial for
 Although we assume that the provenance graph is complete the integrity and accuracy of log data. Logzip [40] identifies
 and untampered, real-world scenarios often lead to imperfect log repetition patterns through hierarchical aggregation and
 data due to issues such as log loss. Since TeRed targets only then uses incremental dictionary compression to similar log
 normal behaviors through templates, encountering imperfect entries to ensure that log data does not lose any information
 data may result in some templates becoming ineffective. This during compression and decompression. SEAL [29] is based
 could lead to a decrease in the reduction ratio. However, it on information-theoretic observations of system event data,
 is important to emphasize that such circumstances will not achieving lossless compression by analyzing the structure of
 adversely impact the performance of attack detection and log entries and identifying and extracting common parts. Elise
 provenance algorithms. [41] is an efficient storage and logging system that supports all
 Specifically, imperfect data can arise during both the tem- types of security analysis, using a new method for preprocessplate learning and reduction stages. In the template learning ing log files and learning optimal character encoding through
 stage, sporadic data loss does not affect the template generation deep neural networks (DNN) for lossless log compression.
 process, as our method executes multiple test cases to elimi- CLP [42] achieves higher compression ratios and faster search
 nate randomness, as described in VI-B. However, if there are performance by using domain-optimized compression and
 overarching data issues, such as incorrect collector settings, search algorithms that leverage the high repetition in text logs.
 erroneous templates may be extracted, leading to template LogBlock [43] improves the compression ratio of log files
 matching failures and affecting the reduction ratio. During by preprocessing log headers and rearranging log content to
 the reduction stage, data loss may result in template matching reduce redundancy.
 failures, preventing the reduction of the corresponding areas.
 This could lead to a decrease in the reduction ratio, but B. Lossy Reduction Methods
 since the original data remains intact, attack detection and Lossy reduction can discard some less important data to
 investigation will not be compromised. further reduce data storage requirements and improve processing efficiency. Lossy reduction retains key information while
 D. Integration With Existing Work allowing some degree of information loss. KCAL [3] uses
 FAuST’s research has demonstrated that combining multiple prior knowledge to identify important parts in logs, reducing
 existing reduction techniques can achieve better reduction redundant events before they are generated, reducing the overresults [28]. This is because different reduction methods may head of transmitting, writing, and storing redundant events.
 focus on and optimize different aspects, and by using them LogGC [18] uses garbage collection techniques to identify and
 together, their respective advantages can be fully utilized delete redundant information in logs to optimize log storage
 while compensating for each other’s shortcomings, thereby efficiency. NodeMerge [19] proposes an online system event
 achieving better reduction performance. storage data reduction system based on templates, achieving
 On one hand, TeRed, as a reduction method that directly data reduction based on the access pattern of read-only file
 operates on provenance graphs, takes standard-format prove- events. CPR/PCAR [20] observes that some events contribute
 nance graphs as both input and output, which gives it excellent equally to dependency analysis, attempting to aggregate them
 generality and compatibility. On the other hand, TeRed only to ensure high-quality forensic analysis. Traditional log-based
 reduces regions that match the templates, allowing other com- reduction methods merge log entries with the same meaning,
 pression methods to be applied to further reduce the remaining and FDPR [5] extends this idea to graph-based reduction
 regions. Therefore, TeRed can be easily combined with other methods, merging edges with the same reachability. SDPR
 reduction methods suitable for provenance graphs, achieving [5] traces suspicious nodes back to the source node and then
 better overall reduction results. performs forward analysis that only retains the dependencies
 TeRed can also be combined with other graph compression of the source node, thus achieving reduction effects. LogApmethods to further reduce data storage pressure. The work prox [21] is a regex learning method that eliminates redundant
 by Fei et al. [29] achieved lossless compression of prove- file I/O related to benign process activities by learning the
 nance graphs and supported real-time historical event retrieval. regex of a given process. FAuST [28] achieves efficient log
 Combining this with TeRed can further reduce storage costs reduction and the retention of key information by mixing
 while improving retrieval efficiency. Additionally, there are various reduction and summarization techniques.
 numerous graph compression algorithms widely applied in
 various graph analysis-related fields (such as social networks, IX. C ONCLUSION
 machine learning, and data mining) [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], This paper proposes TeRed, a novel method for reducing
 [35], [36], [37], [38], [39]. TeRed can also be combined with provenance graphs based on normal behavior patterns. Our
 these algorithms to further enhance space compression rates. method utilizes unit tests to learn the normal behavior patterns
 However, this is not the focus of this paper, so it will not be of the system and then reduces the provenance graph using the
 elaborated further. learned patterns. We conducted experiments on five datasets,

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 9476 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 and the results show that our method effectively reduces [21] N. Michael, J. Mink, J. Liu, S. Gaur, W. U. Hassan, and A. Bates,
 the size of the provenance graph while preserving complete “On the forensic validity of approximated audit logs,” in Proc. Annu.
 Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2020, pp. 189–202.
 attack-related information. It does not negatively impact attack [22] T. Pasquier et al., “Practical whole-system provenance capture,” in Proc.
 detection and investigation, demonstrating significant advan- Symp. Cloud Comput., Santa Clara, CA, USA, Sep. 2017, pp. 405–418.
 tages over other data reduction methods. [23] A. Bates, D. Tian, R. B. K. Butler, and T. Moyer, “Trustworthy wholesystem provenance for the Linux kernel,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Secur.
 Symp. (SEC), Austin, TX, USA, Aug. 2015, pp. 319–334.
 R EFERENCES [24] R. Paccagnella et al., “Custos: Practical tamper-evident auditing of
 operating systems using trusted execution,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 [1] Z. Xu, P. Fang, C. Liu, X. Xiao, Y. Wen, and D. Meng, “DEPCOMM: Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–18.
 Graph summarization on system audit logs for attack investigation,” in [25] R. Paccagnella, K. Liao, D. Tian, and A. Bates, “Logging to the danger
 Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2022, pp. 540–557. zone: Race condition attacks and defenses on system audit frameworks,”
 [2] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “Unicorn: in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, Nov. 2020,
 Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in pp. 1551–1574.
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–18. [26] X. Yan and J. Han, “gSpan: Graph-based substructure pattern mining,”
 [3] S. Ma et al., “Kernel-supported cost-effective audit logging for causality in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Maebashi City, Japan, Jan. 2002,
 tracking,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., 2018, pp. 241–253. pp. 721–724.
 [4] M. A. Inam et al., “SoK: History is a vast early warning system: [27] L. P. Cordella, P. Foggia, C. Sansone, and M. Vento, “A (sub)graph
 Auditing the provenance of system intrusions,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. isomorphism algorithm for matching large graphs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2023, pp. 2620–2638. Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1367–1372, Oct. 2004.
 [5] M. N. Hossain et al., “Dependence-preserving data compaction for [28] M. A. Inam et al., “FAuST: Striking a bargain between forensic
 scalable forensic analysis,” in Proc. 27th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2018, auditing’s security and throughput,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Comput. Secur.
 pp. 1723–1740. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2022, pp. 813–826.
 [6] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection [29] F. Peng, Z. Li, Z. Wang, X. Yu, D. Li, and K. Jee, “SEAL:
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM Storage-efficient causality analysis on enterprise logs with query-
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1285–1298. friendly compression,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021,
 [7] Q. Wang et al., “You are what you do: Hunting stealthy malware via pp. 2987–3004.
 data provenance analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., [30] Z. Chen et al., “CompressGraph: Efficient parallel graph analytics
 2020, pp. 1–17. with rule-based compression,” Proc. ACM Manage. Data, vol. 1, no. 1,
 [8] E. Manzoor, S. M. Milajerdi, and L. Akoglu, “Fast memory-efficient pp. 1–31, May 2023.
 anomaly detection in streaming heterogeneous graphs,” in Proc. 22nd [31] A. Apostolico and G. Drovandi, “Graph compression by BFS,” Algo-
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2016, rithms, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1031–1044, Aug. 2009.
 pp. 1035–1044. [32] P. Boldi, M. Rosa, M. Santini, and S. Vigna, “Layered label propaga-
 [9] F. Yang, J. Xu, C. Xiong, Z. Li, and K. Zhang, “PROGRAPHER: An tion: A multiresolution coordinate-free ordering for compressing social
 anomaly detection system based on provenance graph embedding,” in networks,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. World Wide Web, 2011, pp. 587–596.
 Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 4355–4372. [33] F. Chierichetti, R. Kumar, S. Lattanzi, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Panconesi,
 [10] X. Han et al., “SIGL: Securing software installations through deep graph and P. Raghavan, “On compressing social networks,” in Proc. 15th
 learning,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 2345–2362. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jun. 2009,
 [11] D. Han et al., “DeepAID: Interpreting and improving deep learning- pp. 219–228.
 based anomaly detection in security applications,” in Proc. ACM [34] N. R. Brisaboa, S. Ladra, and G. Navarro, “K2-trees for compact Web
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3197–3217. graph representation,” in Proc. 16th Int. Symp. String Process. Inf. Retr.,
 [12] L. Yu et al., “ALchemist: Fusing application and audit logs for precise 2009, pp. 18–30.
 attack provenance without instrumentation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. [35] F. Claude and G. Navarro, “Fast and compact Web graph
 Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18. representations,” ACM Trans. Web, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1–31, Sep. 2010.
 [13] R. Wang, Y. Peng, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, H. Wan, and X. Zhao, “TeSec: [36] J. Shun and G. E. Blelloch, “Ligra: A lightweight graph processing
 Accurate server-side attack investigation for Web applications,” in Proc. framework for shared memory,” in Proc. 18th ACM SIGPLAN Symp.
 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2023, pp. 2799–2816. Princ. Pract. Parallel Program. (PPoPP), 2013, pp. 135–146.
 [14] W. U. Hassan, M. A. Noureddine, P. Datta, and A. Bates, “OmegaLog: [37] J. Sun, E. M. Bollt, and D. Ben-Avraham, “Graph compression—Save
 High-fidelity attack investigation via transparent multi-layer log information by exploiting redundancy,” J. Stat. Mech., Theory Exp.,
 analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–16. vol. 2008, no. 6, Jun. 2008, Art. no. P06001.
 [15] S. Ma, J. Zhai, F. Wang, K. H. Lee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “MPI: [38] W. Liu et al., “On compressing weighted time-evolving graphs,”
 Multiple perspective attack investigation with semantic aware execution in Proc. 21st ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2012,
 partitioning,” in Proc. 26th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1111–1128. pp. 2319–2322.
 [16] Y. Kwon et al., “MCI: Modeling-based causality inference in audit [39] S. Maneth and F. Peternek, “Compressing graphs by grammars,”
 logging for attack investigation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), May 2016,
 Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15. pp. 109–120.
 [17] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. Venkatakrishnan, [40] J. Liu, J. Zhu, S. He, P. He, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Logzip: Extract-
 “POIROT: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber ing hidden structures via iterative clustering for log compression,” in
 threat hunting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secu- Proc. 34th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng. (ASE), Nov.
 rity, 2019, pp. 1795–1812. 2019, pp. 863–873.
 [18] K. H. Lee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “LogGC: Garbage collecting audit [41] H. Ding, S. Yan, J. Zhai, and S. Ma, “ELISE: A storage efficient logging
 log,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2013, system powered by redundancy reduction and representation learning,”
 pp. 1005–1016. in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3023–3040.
 [19] Y. Tang et al., “NodeMerge: Template based efficient data reduction [42] K. Rodrigues, Y. Luo, and D. Yuan, “CLP: Efficient and scalable search
 for big-data causality analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. on compressed text logs,” in Proc. 15th USENIX Symp. Operating Syst.
 Commun. Secur., Oct. 2018, pp. 1324–1337. Design Implement. (OSDI 21), 2021, pp. 183–198.
 [20] Z. Xu et al., “High fidelity data reduction for big data security depen- [43] K. Yao, M. Sayagh, W. Shang, and A. E. Hassan, “Improving state-ofdency analyses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., the-art compression techniques for log management tools,” IEEE Trans.
 Vienna, Austria, Oct. 2016, pp. 504–516. Softw. Eng., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 2748–2760, Aug. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:02:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.