The Discriminative Power of Cross-layer RTTs
 in Fingerprinting Proxy Traffic

 Diwen Xue Robert Stanley Piyush Kumar Roya Ensafi
 University of Michigan
 {diwenx, rsta, piyushks, ensafi}@umich.edu
 Abstract—The escalating global trend of Internet censorship developers to obfuscate it to resemble popular protocols like
has necessitated an increased adoption of proxy tools, especially TLS [48], [81]. As censors blocked circumvention traffic based
obfuscated circumvention proxies. These proxies serve a fun- on their distinctive ciphersuites, developers adopted cipherdamental need for access and connectivity among millions in suites from mainstream browsers [19], [25]. When censors
heavily censored regions. However, as the use of proxies expands, deployed active probing to identify circumvention servers,
so do censors’ dedicated efforts to detect and disrupt such
circumvention traffic to enforce their information control policies.
 developers in response implemented probe-resistant protections [14], [24]. The incidents in Myanmar, Russia, and China
 In this paper, we bring out the presence of an inherent mark the latest developments in this circumvention arms race.
fingerprint for detecting obfuscated proxy traffic. The fingerprint
is created by the misalignment of transport- and application-layer Obfuscated proxies remain one of the most popular methsessions in proxy routing, which is reflected in the discrepancy in ods for circumventing censorship, providing flexible, general-
Round Trip Times (RTTs) across network layers. Importantly, purpose access to information with good usability for average
being protocol-agnostic, the fingerprint enables an adversary to users. Similar to standard proxies, an obfuscated proxy setup
effectively target multiple proxy protocols simultaneously. We involves a user in a censored region connecting to a proxy
conduct an extensive evaluation using both controlled testbeds outside that jurisdiction in order to access an application server
and real-world traffic, collected from a partner ISP, to assess the that is otherwise blocked. The proxy, upon receiving payloads
fingerprint’s potential for exploitation by censors. In addition
 from the user, establishes a new connection with the applicato being of interest on its own, our timing-based fingerprinting
vulnerability highlights the deficiencies in existing obfuscation tion server and forwards the traffic as received. Obfuscated
approaches. We hope our study brings the attention of the circum- proxies differ from standard proxies by including an extra
vention community to packet timing as an area of concern and obfuscation layer to avoid being detected by censors. Over
leads to the development of more sustainable countermeasures. the past decade, the circumvention community has developed
 various obfuscation schemes, such as by mimicking allowed
 I. I NTRODUCTION protocols [13], [45], [68] or by randomizing proxy’s payloads
 so they cannot be statically identified [4], [62], [66].
 On May 30, 2024, Myanmar imposed a blocking on user
 The main focus of this paper is to bring out the presence of
traffic to VPN and proxy servers, affecting citizens who had rea fingerprint for detecting traffic from obfuscated proxies and
lied on these services to circumvent censorship put in place afto empirically evaluate its potential for practical fingerprinting
ter the military coup [28]. On April 25, 2024, Russia launched
 attacks by nation-state censors. At a high level, the fingerprint
a new method to fingerprint and block proxy-enabled circumis created by the inherent misalignment of sessions across OSI
vention traffic, reinforcing the government’s hold on informalayers that results from the use of a proxy. Transport-layer
tion flow and further isolating its citizens from the global Intersessions break into two parts at the proxy – client to proxy,
net [49]. In November 2021, China deployed its latest fingerand proxy to server – while the application-layer maintains an
printing attack against traffic of fully encrypted proxies, showend-to-end session that extends directly from client to server.
casing both its advancement in censorship capabilities and its
 This architecture enables the proxy to relay communication
persistent commitment to suppress circumvention efforts [74].
 between client and server while also preserving end-to-end
 These are not isolated events. They are part of a global features of higher layers like TLS. However, because transporttrend where escalating Internet censorship motivates a growing and application-layer sessions terminate at different endpoints,
reliance on circumvention tools, leading to an ongoing arms their round-trip times (RTTs) may show significant discreprace [65]: on one side, developers and users of circumvention ancies, as the paths they traverse span different distances.
tools aim to bypass restrictions on information; on the other, Throughout this paper, we focus on this discrepancy in crosscensors deploy increasingly sophisticated fingerprinting attacks layer RTTs, RT Tdif f , and demonstrate the distinguishing
to detect and block circumvention traffic. Censors used deep power it holds in fingerprinting proxy traffic.
packet inspection (DPI) to detect circumvention traffic, driving
 We emphasize that this fingerprint represents more than
 just another potential way to detect proxy traffic. Up until
 now, the vast majority of fingerprinting attacks against ob-
Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2025 fuscated proxies, whether deployed by censors or envisioned
24-28 February 2025, San Diego, CA, USA
ISBN 979-8-9894372-8-3 by researchers, focused on specific protocols – censors exploit
https://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2025.240966 the obfuscation flaws of individual protocols, while developers
www.ndss-symposium.org patch these issues and introduce new protocols in an attempt to
outpace a resource-limited censor. Both sides find themselves mitigate the proposed fingerprint and, paradoxically, may even
locked in this ongoing arms race, where each side must worsen the issue. Additionally, while our focus is on transportconstantly balance between efficacy and expenditure [65]. The layer obfuscated proxies, we also explore how the underlying
fingerprinting vulnerability discussed in this paper, however, principles of our timing-based fingerprint extend to networkbelongs to a class of fingerprints that are inherent to all layer VPNs. We hope this study highlights packet timing as
proxy protocols. Not only does this protocol-agnostic approach an area that warrants further attention from the circumvention
complement existing protocol-specific attacks; it also enables community and leads to the development of more principled,
censors to efficiently target multiple protocols at once with sustainable countermeasures.
little manual effort. Such a development could shift the balance
in the ongoing circumvention arms race. II. BACKGROUND
 Assuming the role of a censor, we empirically evaluate the A. Internet Censorship
practicality of exploiting the RT Tdif f fingerprint with only
passive monitoring capabilities. We detail our construction of News reports, personal anecdotes, and measurement studies
the exploit: first, from features visible to an on-path censor, collectively suggest an increasing trend in nation-state Internet
we estimate the RTTs at the transport and application layers censorship on a global scale, as governments exert control over
through cross-correlation and derive their discrepancy. Next, the flow of information deemed undesirable within and across
we frame a sequential hypothesis testing (SHT) problem to their borders [38], [43], [56], [59]. For over two decades,
determine whether the observed discrepancy in delays sug- researchers and Internet freedom activists have studied govgest a direct or proxied connection. Using eight geographic ernment censorship policies and their enforcement through
locations, we conducted extensive evaluation of the exploit technical means. Building upon seminal works from the early
using a mixture of controlled proxy traffic and real user traffic 2000s [10], [52], [84], censorship research has advanced
collected from an Internet provider, to assess the sensitivity our understanding of how nation-state firewalls interfere with
and specificity of RT Tdif f as a standalone fingerprint. users’ traffic [31], [32], [55], their technical capabilities [6],
 [42], [70], and their architecture and geographical distribu-
 We found that the efficacy of the exploit is largely intion [15], [78], [80]. This body of research not only exposes
dependent of the client’s location or the censor’s position
 the otherwise covert practice of censorship but also assists
relative to the client; nor is it affected by the specific proxy
 in developing a realistic threat model. In general, censorship
protocol tested, whether obfuscated or otherwise. For a client
 involves a two-step process: Detect and Disrupt. The first
visiting the top 5K domains via an obfuscated proxy, we found
 phase classifies traffic as either allowed or prohibited using
that about 80% of the domains visited would generate at
 a range of techniques from simple keyword matching to more
least one traffic flow characterized by the RTT discrepancy
 sophisticated traffic analysis. Traffic considered undesirable is
detectable by our fingerprint, with half of these detections
 then actively interfered with by dropping packets or RST-ing
made within the first 60 packets of a flow, all while maintaining
 connections [65], [67]. Note that while Disrupt often requires
a False Positive Rate (FPR) on par with those of deployed
 active engagement, Detect can operate passively, remaining
attacks. While we demonstrate the general feasibility of this
 completely invisible to the communicating parties. Our invesfingerprint, we also discuss practical factors – such as the
 tigation into proxy fingerprinting falls under the detection step.
handling of DNS resolution, the presence of CDNs, and the
potential for categorical collateral damage – that would affect
the fingerprint’s efficacy and compel a potential adversary to B. Circumvention Arms Race
weigh the costs and implications of deployment. As censorship measures intensify, users in affected regions
 Our evaluation on this timing-based fingerprint highlights increasingly seek methods to circumvent these restrictions.
the deficiencies in existing obfuscation schemes. Over the The most common and flexible circumvention mechanisms
years, researchers have long recognized that distributions of follow a channel-based approach – users establish channels
packet sizes hold significant classification power for detecting to forwarders located outside the censor’s jurisdiction, which
circumvention traffic [41], [68], and censors have indeed in turn forward their traffic to its final destinations [65]. This
exploited packet sizes in practice [49], [74]. As such, many ob- setup commonly involves proxying protocols (both networkfuscated proxy protocols have incorporated (random) padding layer and transport-layer). However, standard proxying protoschemes directly into their designs [66], [75]. While padding cols such as OpenVPN and SOCKS feature plaintext headers
provides a straightforward defense to obfuscate patterns over that can be easily detected and blocked, which necessitates
packet sizes, it leave packet timings unprotected, a source the use of obfuscation techniques, or more specifically, the
of information often overlooked by designers of obfuscation indistinguishability provided by such obfuscation, across all
schemes. What this paper showcases, however, is one example channel-based systems.
of what a censor can accomplish in fingerprinting proxy traffic
 This has led to an ongoing arms race between developers of
using only features derived from packet timings.
 obfuscated proxies, who obfuscate the traffic of their protocols
 While we demonstrate several potential short-term mitiga- to evade detection, and censors, who aim to see through such
tions, such as configuring TCP delayed ACK on the proxy obfuscation. The dynamics of this conflict are best illustrated
server or enabling connection multiplexing, we caution that by the interactions between the Great Firewall of China
these strategies result in atypical behaviors that might them- (GFW) and various circumvention tools: The GFW was able
selves be fingerprintable. In particular, we showcase how to detect and block Tor traffic using manually-crafted signaexisting delay-based timing obfuscation schemes, such as tures that exploited the unique ciphersuites of Tor’s custom
obfs4/scramblesuit, are fundamentally limited in their ability to TLS implementation [19]. In response, developers introduced

 2
 Fig. 2: Protocol layerings in Direct vs. Proxied Connections.
Fig. 1: Threat model: A censor positioned on-path relative to the In proxied connections, transport sessions terminate at the proxy,
client and proxy, receiving a copy of traffic. Figure inspired by [16].
 whereas the application layer connection remains end-to-end. ⋄

dedicated obfuscators mimicking TLS implementations from connection (e.g., at the server) and active measurements [57].
mainstream browsers [25], [58]. The GFW blocked servers In contrast, the fingerprinting vulnerability evaluated in this
hosting Tor, VPN, and other circumvention services by sending paper requires only passive monitoring capability with no
specially crafted probes to suspected endpoints and checking server-side deployment and, in principle, can be exploited at
if the responses matched the expected protocol behaviors [3], any network location between the client and proxy server.
[14], [72]. Circumvention developers countered by deploying
“probe-resistant” proxies that remain silent until the client au- III. T HREAT M ODEL AND S COPE
thenticates itself [24]. The GFW fingerprinted traffic from fully
encrypted proxies based on their atypically high entropy [74], Previous measurement studies have shown that nation-state
and developers in response changed the byte patterns of censors possess the capability for both passive monitoring and
their traffic to show lower entropy [27], [51]. This back-and- active interference [14], [65], with some demonstrating even
forth characterizes the current state of the circumvention arms more intrusive behaviors such as injecting malicious traffic or
race, where each side continually adjusts their approaches in intercepting end-to-end encryption [42], [63]. For the purpose
reaction to the advancements in fingerprinting and obfuscation. of this study, we adopt a conservatively weak but practical
 adversary model as defined in previous work [65]. We assume
 The specific fingerprint evaluated in this paper represents that the censor is limited to passive monitoring capabilities,
a potential furthering of this arms-race: unlike aforemen- examining but not injecting, removing, or otherwise altering
tioned attacks that targeted specific circumvention protocols the traffic. The censor is positioned on-path relative to the
by exploiting vulnerabilities in their obfuscation designs, this client and the proxy (e.g., deployed at chokepoints or border
timing-based fingerprint stems from an inherent character- ASes), as shown in Figure 1. We also assume the censor to
istic shared by all proxying and tunneling protocols – the be stateful, allowing it to accumulate information about each
misalignment between layers. This protocol-agnostic approach connection it observes. However, computational constraints
could overcome the trade-off between efficacy and cost in the limit the censor’s real-time, per-flow analysis to basic statistical
circumvention arms-race by enabling censors to target multiple methods; more complex methods like deep learning have not
protocols at once. The work most closely related to ours yet been observed in real-world deployments. Finally, for our
is by Xue et al., which proposed fingerprinting the protocol discussion, the censor makes use only of features derived from
encapsulations using packet size and direction [79]. packet timestamps and sizes, ignoring other potentially identifiable information such as IP addresses, ports, or payloads.
C. Timing-based Fingerprinting Attacks
 While powerful, real-world censors operate within certain
 In previous traffic fingerprinting attacks, particularly those constraints, chief among them being the cost – whether as
on website fingerprinting, the focus has traditionally been on economic losses or civil discontent – caused by accidentally
features derived from packet sizes rather than those based on blocking traffic that should have been allowed (i.e., false
packet timings. Several early work discussed that timing fea- positives). The cost of false positives, known as “collateral
tures, specifically packet inter-arrival times, are unreliable due damage”, is the only reason preventing censors from simto their dependency on network conditions like jitters [5], [40], ply shutting down the entire Internet and trivially blocking
[82]. Jaber et al., however, demonstrated that the distribution of all circumvention traffic with perfect recall [20]. Evaluating
packet timings holds discriminative power for classifying net- the practicality of a potential fingerprint, therefore, involves
work traffic [35]. Feghhi et al. proposed a website fingerprint- assessing both the reliability of the fingerprint as an indicator
ing attack that leverages only timing information, bypassing of circumvention traffic, as well as the rarity of finding the
defenses based on packet padding [16]. More recently, Rah- same fingerprint in legitimate traffic.
man et al. studied the utility of packet timing and found that
timing indeed provides meaningful classification power [54]. A. Scope
 There is limited prior work on detecting proxy traffic with The focus of this work is transport-layer obfuscated proxtiming features. Webb et al. proposed an approach for detecting ies, such as shadowsocks, Trojan, VMess, etc. These proxy
proxy usage at the server side by measuring the RTT for protocols function similarly to traditional SOCKS proxies by
each known IP and identifying anomalies in their distribu- forwarding traffic between clients and servers without modifitions, requiring separate training for each IP address [71]. cation (preserving application-layer end-to-end features), but
Ramesh et al. developed a proxy detection method using incorporate additional encryption and obfuscation to evade
RTTs, but their approach requires access to an endpoint of a detection.

 3
 HTTPS) layers often have a one-to-one correspondence: a
 higher-layer session is fully encapsulated within the one below,
 and their notions of endpoints (client and server) are aligned
 across layers, spanning the same distance. Proxied connections,
 however, introduce segmentation at one or more layers of
 the stack. For single-hop proxies, sessions at the transport
 layers could be split into two segments: client-to-proxy and
 proxy-to-server, while the application layer remains end-toend (client-to-server). Such architecture enables the proxy to
 forward communication between the client and server, while
 preserving end-to-end features of higher layers, like TLS.
 The way that proxies change the layering of protocol
 stacks also affects the Round-Trip-Times (RTTs) observed
 across different layers. In direct connections, the RTTs at
 the application and transport layers are aligned, since they
 share the same endpoints and path distances. For proxied
 connections, however, sessions at lower layers terminate at the
 proxy. An observer located between the client and the proxy
 would perceive shorter transport-layer RTTs that only account
Fig. 3: Sequence timing diagram for (a) direct HTTPS session for the distance to the proxy. The proxy’s acknowledgement
vs. (b) TLS-based proxy (vless-over-tls) session. For the proxied of data receipt appears to complete the round trip from the
connection, we observe a much higher discrepancy in transport vs. observer’s standpoint. In contrast, the end-to-end applicationapplication-layer delay as the sessions at two layers terminate at
 layer RTT additionally encompasses the time the proxy takes to
different endpoints (proxy and the web server, respectively). ⋄
 forward the request/response to/from the server. This additional
 segment results in noticeable differences in cross-layer RTTs,
 We do not consider TLS-terminating proxies in this work which can be consistently observed when there is sufficient
(i.e., MITM proxy). Although there has been some discussion distance between the proxy and the application-layer server.
about their use for censorship circumvention, they have not This discrepancy forms the basis of the timing-based fingerbeen adopted by mainstream circumvention tools due to the print that we discuss in this paper.
security risks they pose by breaking the PKI model [8], [18],
[50]. Additionally, while our focus is on transport-layer prox- B. Example: HTTPS vs. VLESS-TLS
ies, we recognize that the underlying principles of our timing- Figure 3 compares the difference in cross-layer RTTs
based exploit may have implications for network-layer VPNs between a direct HTTPS session and a proxied HTTPS
as well, and we explore this potential extension in § VII-B. session using a transport-layer TLS-based proxy, e.g., vless,
 trojan [64], [66], etc. In both scenarios, a client attempts to
 IV. C ROSS - LAYER RTT D IFFERENCE visit the same web server while an on-path adversary monitors
 traffic close to the client. Note that after the initial handshake
 We begin by describing the different connection segments
 (with either the web server or proxy), the adversary only sees
and their corresponding RTTs for a proxy connection and
 TCP control packets (e.g., ACKs) and the encrypted streams.
the intuition of how these differences can be exploited as a
fingerprint. At a high level, the idea is that using a proxy Following the initial handshake, in the direct scenario, the
inevitably affects the layering of the OSI model, leading to a client sends a request to the server. The server acknowledges
situation where the sessions at the transport layer and the appli- the reception of the request, which returns to the client exactly
cation layer terminate at different endpoints. Especially when one transport-layer RTT after the request was sent. Depending
the application layer session extends significantly beyond the on the type of request and load, the server might take some
transport layer – i.e., when there is a substantial geographical time to process the request and prepare a response, resulting
distance – we demonstrate that the difference in RTT becomes in a typically small difference (∆direct ) between the transportnoticeable and can then be exploited by an on-path adversary to layer RTT (TRTT) and application-layer RTT (ARTT). On
infer the presence of the proxy. Table IV in Appendix compiles the other hand, in the proxied case, the first packet after
a list of all symbols we use throughout this paper. the proxy handshake (in this case, TLS) typically contains
 both the SOCKS address (indicating where to forward the
A. Proxy Architecture and Round-Trip-Time traffic, e.g., blocked.com) and the first data packet (e.g., a
 clienthello for blocked.com) 1 . Upon receiving this packet, the
 A typical proxied connection involves three parties: a proxy initiates a 3-way TCP handshake with the application
client who wants to access a service that is blocked (due to server, taking one TRTT between the proxy and the application
censorship, geoblocking, etc.); an application server offering server (T RT TP W ). The proxy then forwards the clienthello,
the desired service; and a proxy that relays (and optionally ob- receives the serverhello, and returns it to the client after another
fuscates/encrypts) the client’s traffic to the application server. T RT TP W . Subsequent requests/responses follow the same
 Figure 2 describes the layering of protocol stacks for direct 1 Unlike standard SOCKS protocol that sends address and the first payload
and proxied connections. In direct connections, sessions at the packet separately, most transport-layer circumvention tools (Outline, shadownetwork (e.g., IP), transport (e.g., TCP), and application (e.g., socks, v2ray, etc.), merge them for performance and obfuscation purposes [36].

 4
Fig. 4: RT Tdif f for varying server locations and varying censor Fig. 5: Cross-correlation for application-layer RTT Estimation.
position between the client and proxy. RT Tdif f (the red line)
 (a) Bi-directional packet flow, packets ordered by SEQ/ACK; (b)
depends only on the relative distance between proxy and application
 Cross-correlating outgoing against a weighted distribution centered
server and is independent of the client’s or censor’s location. ⋄
 around incoming packets; (c) Correlation scores at different shifts.
 Shift corresponding the highest correlation is the estimated ART T .
pattern. If the client opts to resolve hostnames via the proxy, an
extra initial round trip to the proxy’s DNS server is required. V. C ONSTRUCTING A C ROSS -L AYER RTT E XPLOIT

 Comparing the cross-layer RTTs in the two scenarios This section outlines a practical instantiation of a possible
reveals that for direct connections, the difference (ARTT-TRTT) fingerprinting attack based on the previously laid conceptual
is just the server processing delay ∆direct . However, for groundwork. At its core, the exploit leverages RTT discrepproxied connections, the first cross-layer difference ∆proxy′ ancies to identify mismatches in session alignments across
includes a DNSRTT and two T RT TP W (additional path de- network layers, which are indicative of proxy use. However,
lay), while subsequent ∆proxy contains one T RT TP W and adversaries aiming to apply the cross-layer RTT fingerprint in
additionally the server processing delay ∆direct on top of the real world need to consider factors such as the limited
that. The task of fingerprinting proxy traffic is thus reduced to visibility into encrypted streams and the variances introduced
determining whether an observed cross-layer RTT difference by network jitter or server load. Our approach to implementing
ARTT-TRTT is an instance of ∆direct or ∆proxy . this exploit involves two primary phases: 1) From the traffic
 visible to an on-path adversary, estimating the RTTs at both
 the transport and application layers and calculating the cross-
C. Efficacy and Assumptions layer differences; 2) Determining whether the observed RTT
 differences align more closely with those expected from a
 We note that this timing-based fingerprint does not depend
 direct connection or a proxy setup.
on the client’s location or the distance between the client and
the proxy. As long as the adversary is positioned between
the client and the proxy, RTT measurements can simply be A. Estimating Cross-layer RTT Differences
redefined from client-server to adversary-server. Thus, the The initial step of the exploit involves measuring the crossclient’s relative location to the adversary or its distance to the layer RTT differences RT Tdif f in a potential proxy connecproxy becomes irrelevant, as illustrated in Figure 4. tion. This measurement is achieved by subtracting transport-
 What matters, however, is the proxy’s position relative to layer RTT from application-layer RTT. To obtain the former,
the application server: the proxy must not be geographically we use SEQ/ACK analysis to identify each ACK-eliciting
co-located or near the server to ensure that the transmission packet sent by the client and its corresponding ACK. If
delay introduced by the distance between them is not neg- multiple such packet pairs exist within an observation window,
ligible, an assumption that may not always hold due to the we use the median as the transport-layer RTT for that interval.
prevalence of CDNs. Moreover, exploiting the fingerprint relies However, estimating application-layer RTTs poses signifion the adversary’s ability to distinguish ∆proxy from ∆direct cant challenges, especially for our threat model where an onby consistently observing the effect of T RT TP W on the cross- path network adversary performs passive monitoring and does
layer RTT difference. In other words, the delay introduced not have visibility into the encrypted streams. The problem
by transmission (T RT TP W ) must be more pronounced than lies in the fact that the logical sequence of operations at
the variance introduced by the processing time at the server the application layer does not directly map to the observable
(∆direct ). We also assume that the proxy does not intentionally sequence of packet exchanges at the transport layer.
delay the transmission of TCP acknowledgments. Finally, and
perhaps most importantly, the exploit depends on the adver- Consider the example of a client interacting with a web sersary’s ability to observe the cross-layer RTT differences. While vice through an encrypted proxy. HTTP pipelining allows multransport-layer RTT is straightforward to measure, determining tiple transactions to reuse the same connection, and the client
application-layer RTT is more challenging due to encryption. may send several requests back-to-back without waiting for
 each response. Figure 5 (a) shows a TCP flow of incoming and
 In the following sections, we will examine each of these outgoing data-carrying packets observed by an on-path censor
assumptions to evaluate the fingerprint’s potential for exploita- located between the client and the proxy. While the transporttion and assess the susceptibility of proxy traffic to the exploit. layer sequence and acknowledgement might suggest an order-

 5
ing of [req1, req2, resp1, resp2], the actual application-layer cross-correlation to a simple analysis similar to transport-layer
logical dependencies are [req1, resp1], [req2, resp2]. Without SEQ/ACK. With a larger window size that spans much of
visibility into the encrypted streams, the adversary cannot eas- or the entirety of a persistent connection, cross-correlation
ily determine the true application-layer dependencies. Attempt- will attempt to find a common delay across all requesting to estimate ART T as T (resp1)−T (req2) would be incor- response pairs within that window. However, the presence of
rect, as resp1 and req2 are not a pair at the application layer. transient network issues or congestion fluctuations can lead to
 a broad delay distribution within a large window, in which
 Previous work on traffic analysis based on RTTs often case our approach may not provide an ARTT estimate that is
relies on having access to one end of the application-layer con- representative across the span of the entire window. In practice,
nection. For example, Ramesh et al. estimates the application- the optimal window size should be adapted and tuned based
layer RTT by actively sending WebSocket PINGs from the on the observed network conditions. It should be sufficiently
server side [57]. Such approaches benefit from directly ob- large to cover multiple request-response pairs, allowing crossserving and interacting with application-layer transactions. correlation to estimate RTT from common delays. Yet, it
However, such techniques are not applicable in our threat should not be so large that it covers significant variations in
model, where we assume the adversary is on-path, not on either network conditions within the same window. See § VI-A for
endpoint, and limited to passive monitoring only. evaluation of correlation accuracy across different W values.
 Approach: Cross-correlation for RTT Estimation We Impact of Network Jitter: We note that in the real-world,
propose a cross-correlation-based approach to estimate the propagation delay can fluctuate even within a short obserapplication-layer RTT in the presence of encryption. This ap- vation window. To address this, instead of relying on exact
proach is based on the assumption that a temporal relationship matches between outgoing and incoming timestamps, our
exists between the request and response traffic patterns. In cross-correlation incorporates a weighted distribution centered
typical client-server communication, a client sends a request around each incoming packet’s timestamp (as shown in Figto the server, and the client receives a corresponding server ure 5 (b)), assigning higher weights to packet matches closer in
response, with the delay between these actions reflecting the time while allowing for small deviations in delays. Consistent
RTT at the application layer. Cross-correlation is a statistical with previous work [33], [46], [47], we model network delays
technique that measures the similarity between two time series as i.i.d. exponential, which implies that network jitter, defined
as a function of relative displacement or delay. By measuring as the difference of two delays, follows a zero-mean Laplace
the similarity between sequences of incoming and outgoing distribution denoted by Lap(0, bδ ). The variance of this dispackets as a function of delays, cross-correlation could iden- tribution should be adapted based on the observed network
tify the delay interval at which the similarity is maximized, conditions and expected variability in RTTs. With this, the
indicating the most probable RTT. cross-correlation approach becomes more resilient to slight
 variations in RTT across a given window.
 Specifically, to apply cross-correlation for RTT estimation,
we first (1) extract the timing information of TCP data-carrying Constraints: We impose constraints when crosspackets in both directions. Next, (2) we initiate a moving correlating packet series, ensuring that outgoing packets
window of size W , where W represents the number of poten- are only matched with incoming packets that arrive after
tial request-response pairs. A potential request-response pair is them to accurately reflect RTTs. Additionally, we restrict
defined as one or more consecutive outgoing packets followed peak selection from cross-correlation results to the range
by one or more consecutive incoming packet. For example, in a [T RT T, max shift] as the application-layer RTT should be
packet sequence of [out, in, in, out], there is only one potential at least as large as the transport-layer RTT. Our method
request-response pair, while in a sequence of [out, in, out, in], assumes a RESTful request-response pattern, which applies
there are two such pairs. This window slides through the packet to many protocols like HTTP(S) and FTP but may not hold
sequence, ensuring it always contains W pairs, although the for all proxy traffic, and relies on consistent RTTs across
total number of packets within each window can vary. This request-response pairs within a time window.
step is needed as cross-correlation requires multiple instances
to accurately determine the most likely delay. Next, (3) we cat- B. Distinguishing ∆direct vs. ∆proxy
egorize packets by direction, creating separate time series for
 From the previous discussions, we explained that a key
outgoing and incoming packets, as illustrated in Figure 5 (b).
 characteristic of proxy traffic is that it typically shows greater
We then apply a shift/delay of S milliseconds (where S ≥ 0) to
 discrepancies between RTTs at different layers compared to
the outgoing series and compute the cross-correlation function
 direct traffic. Having measured transport-layer RTTs and estibetween the shifted outgoing series and the incoming series.
 mated application-layer RTTs, the next step is to determine
We continue this for each incremental delay (+1ms) up to a
 whether the observed RTT differences RT Tdif f are more
maximum (e.g., 1000 ms). Finally, (4) we identify the delay at
 likely to be caused solely by the inherent server processing
which the correlation is highest, as shown in Figure 5 (c). This
 delays (∼ ∆direct ), or are dictated instead by the additional
peak correlation represents the most common delay between
 path delays T RT TP W introduced by the distance between the
requests and responses within the current window, which is
 proxy and the application server (∼ ∆proxy ). In this section,
our estimate for application-layer RTT.
 we formulate a detection problem that provides the basis for
Impact of Correlation Window: The choice of window size a practical algorithm to detect proxy traffic on-the-fly, while
W in our approach affects the accuracy and reliability of the also striving for high precision and coverage.
cross-correlation results. Setting W to 1, the method analyzes
just one outgoing-incoming pair at a time, essentially reducing

 6
 Framework: Sequential Hypothesis Testing Ultimately, the other hand, with a perfect choice of threshold T , θ1 would
we aim to determine whether the observed RT Tdif f is primar- be close to 0, as the additional path delay (T RT TP W ) should
ily caused by the additional transport delays incurred when consistently result in larger RTT differences. In practice,
a proxy forwards data to/from the application server. This however, variability in network condition and server load, as
scenario can be represented as a statistical detection problem, well as the uncertainty around the location of the application
where the goal is to identify the presence or absence of a server (especially those served by CDNs), make it challenging
specific prior condition (i.e., the spatial separation between to maintain a static threshold T that is consistently reliable.
the transport and the application endpoints), based on the sep-
 From the construction, we define a likelihood ratio test
aration of the distributions under different priors. We adopt the
 (Λ(Y )) as each RT Tdif f observation is made, such that:
Sequential Hypothesis Testing (SHT) framework, which leverages repeated trials/observations and known outcome proba- Pr[Y1 , . . . , YN | H1 ]
 N
 Y Pr[Yn |H1 ]
bilities to distinguish between multiple hypotheses. Previous Λ(Y ) = = ≥η (3)
work has used SHT for intrusion detection and censorship Pr[Y1 , . . . , YN | H0 ] n=1 Pr[Yn |H0 ]
detection [37], [53]. SHT aligns well with our problem, where where Y represents the set of available RT Tdif f observations
RTT measurements can be streamed continuously into one at any point. Upon receiving each new observation, the algodecision making process. rithm updates the cumulative metric Λ(Y ) based on the proba-
 We begin our construction of SHT by defining an obser- bility priors and compares the current probability ratio with an
vation to be made when the monitor has observed enough upper threshold η, where η is a scalar value that quantifies how
individual packets to form W request-response pairs, where much more likely the observations are under H1 compared
W is the size of the correlation window. We classify the to H0 . The product form of (3) is derived from our earlier
RT Tdif f = ART T − T RT T of an observation as either assumption that the RT Tdif f observations are independent
“inflated” or “matched” by comparing the RT Tdif f to a (they are, in fact, not independent, and we need to account
predefined threshold T . For each flow (as defined by its four- for their dependence, which we expand in Appendix C). If
tuple), let Yi be a random variable for the ith observation of Λ(Y ) ≥ η, we accept H1 , i.e., presence of a proxy. An optional
the flow, such that: lower bound could be implemented to conclusively accept H0 .
 ( But here we follow a conservative approach where we do not
 0 if RT Tdif f < T (matched) explicitly separate H0 and U ndetermined.
 Yi = (1)
 1 if RT Tdif f ≥ T (inflated) Estimating Priors: A critical step of our SHT construction
 is to empirically measure the probability priors for the two
 Threshold T is selected as a lower bound of the expected hypotheses regarding direct and proxy connections. However,
delay introduced by the proxy’s additional network path rel- directly measuring the priors, particularly for the proxy class
ative to the application server (T RT TP W ). For example, if H1 , is exceedingly challenging. The timing of proxy connecthe proxy server is located in New York and the application tions can vary significantly based on factors such as proxy
server in Detroit, the physical distance between these two configuration and the relative distance between the proxy
locations would introduce a minimum RTT of roughly 15 and the web server, making it infeasible to directly collect
ms. In this case, RT Tdif f should consistently exceed 15 measurements representative of every possible proxy scenario.
ms, as the transport delay inherent in proxy routing (i.e., the Instead, we adopt an indirect approach to approximate the
extra distance the data must travel) cannot be eliminated, and priors for the proxy class using measurements from non-proxy
additional delays due to application-layer processing might be connections. Specifically, from three geographically distributed
added on top of the baseline transport delay. vantage points – Atlanta, Singapore, and Amsterdam – we
 We consider two hypotheses for our problem: the Null visit the top 5K websites as ranked by Chrome CrUX [29],
Hypothesis (H0 ), which suggests that the connection is direct, [61] while capturing traffic traces and TLS keys. Next, from
i.e., RT Tdif f ∼ ∆direct , and the Alternative Hypothesis (H1 ), the decrypted PCAP traces, we identify pairs of applicationwhich suggests that the apparent transport-layer server is ac- layer request-response interactions, such as Clienthello ↔
tually a proxy, i.e., RT Tdif f ∼ ∆proxy . For now, let’s assume Serverhello or HTTP GET and the corresponding 200 OK
that RT Tdif f observations are independent and identically responses. For each pair, we record three timestamps: T0 as the
distributed (i.i.d). Then, to implement SHT, we need to identify timestamp of the outgoing request; T1 as the timestamp of the
the prior conditional probabilities for each hypothesis: first packet with an ACK number greater than the sequence
 number of the request; and T2 as the timestamp of the first
 P r[Yi = 0|H0 ] = θ0 P r[Yi = 1|H0 ] = 1 − θ0 packet carrying the corresponding response.
 P r[Yi = 0|H1 ] = θ1 P r[Yi = 1|H1 ] = 1 − θ1 (2) T1 −T0 is the transport delay and T2 −T0 is the application
 delay. To estimate the priors for the direct class (H0 ), we
 These probabilities reflect the initial beliefs about the analyze the distribution of (T2 − T0 ) − (T1 − T0 ), which is the
likelihood of each scenario before observing any RT Tdif f interval between when the server acknowledges the request and
measurements. From § IV, with a reasonably chosen threshold when it responds. This directly measures the typical processing
T , we expect that an inflated RT Tdif f is more likely to occur delays inherent in direct connections (i.e., RT Tdif f for H0 ).
in a proxied connection than a direct one: 1 − θ1 > 1 − θ0 . For the proxy scenario (H1 ), we instead consider the distribu-
In an ideal scenario, with perfect network conditions and no tion of the complete application-layer round-trip time T2 − T0 .
processing delays, we can expect θ0 to approach 1, as the The rationale is that the apparent processing delay at the proxy
RTTs are expected to be closely matched across layers. On would resemble the full path latency between the proxy and the

 7
 or at least three request-response pairs have been observed 2 .
 The monitor compares Λ(Y ) with η after each update to the
 cumulative ratio, and logs the flow as proxy if the threshold
 is exceeded. Otherwise, the monitoring continues until the
 connection terminates (refer Figure 12 in Appendix for the
 workflow).
 We have implemented a PoC exploit using Zeek, an opensource network monitoring and analysis framework [83]. This
 implementation takes the form of a plugin that accepts a
 sequence of packet metadata (timestamps, size, SEQ/ACK) and
 estimates a sequence of RT Tdif f .
Fig. 6: Distributions of RTT differences for prior estimation.
T1-T0 is TRTT, T2-T0 is ARTT and T2-T1 is RTTdiff. Shaded area
 We emphasize that our instantiation of the fingerprintrepresents the separation of the distributions under different priors. ⋄ ing concept is not meant to be the most optimized or effective form of exploitation possible. Other approaches might
 exploit the same fingerprint more efficiently. Our intention is
 to demonstrate the fingerprint’s potential for exploitation and
application server, plus the processing delay at the server. In to highlight the necessity for proactive countermeasures.
other words, T2 − T0 measured at the proxy server would be
equal to T2 − T1 measured at the proxy client. This approach
essentially simulates the distribution of RT Tdif f for connec- VI. E VALUATION
tions routed through proxies located in these three locations.
 We evaluate the practicality of exploiting RTT discrepancy
 Figure 6 presents the CDFs of the measured prior proba- across layers to detect (obfuscated) proxy traffic. Inspired from
bilities, comparing T2 − T1 (for H0 ) against T2 − T0 (for H1 ). prior work on traffic fingerprintability [79], [81], our goal is
These distributions match our initial assumptions: the propaga- to conduct evaluation under realistic conditions, mirroring the
tion delay introduced by additional transmission paths in proxy operational constraints typically faced by censors.
scenarios are markedly more pronounced than the variations in Before evaluating RT Tdif f as a standalone fingerprint, we
processing delays, and an inflated RT Tdif f is more likely to start by focusing on individual components of our exploit. In
result from a proxy connection than a direct connection. For § VI-A and § VI-B, we evaluate the effectiveness of crossexample, at T = 15, we observe θ0 ≈ 0.95 and θ1 ≈ 0.50. correlation in estimating the application-layer RTT, as well as
Furthermore, Figure 6 also highlights the distributions of RTT exploring how the size of the correlation window W and the
differences across the three vantage points, located in three threshold T affect the efficacy of the exploit. Next, in § VI-C,
continents. While there are some variability among their dis- we thoroughly evaluate the RT Tdif f using a combination of
tributions, the overall separation between classes is generally controlled proxy traffic and real user traffic collected from
consistent. This consistency suggests that 1) the observation – an Internet provider. Throughout this evaluation, we aim to
inflated RT Tdif f are more commonly associated with proxy understand both the sensitivity of the fingerprint – the extent
connections – holds true across different geographical regions; to which proxy traffic is vulnerable and factors that can impact
and that 2) the same estimated priors are likely to be applicable this vulnerability – and its specificity – the uniqueness of the
regardless of the specific location of the proxy server. fingerprint to reliably distinguish proxy from regular traffic.

C. Implementation A. Evaluating Cross-correlation Method for ARTT Estimation
 The RT Tdif f exploit begins when the traffic monitor iden- We evaluate the reliability of our cross-correlation-based
tifies a new connection flow. The monitor accumulates packets, method for estimating application-layer RTTs (ARTTs), as
recording relevant fields such as timestamps, SEQ/ACK, etc., the success of subsequent exploit phases depends on these
until a sufficient number of packets have been collected to estimations being accurate. As mentioned before, for W > 1,
form a correlation window. Every time a correlation window there’s a possibility that request-response may exhibit a broad
is complete, the monitor performs cross-correlation, as detailed range of delays even within the same window. For this, we
in § V-A, to estimate the RT Tdif f for that window. first analyze the inherent variability of ARTTs within the same
 correlation windows. Using the dataset collected in § V-B,
 If the flow’s cumulative probability ratio (Λ(Y )) has been
 we quantify the ARTT in-window variances across different
previously initialized, the monitor updates the ratio followwindow sizes W . As shown in Figure 7, the variance of ARTTs
ing the process described in § V-B. If Λ(Y ) has not been
 within each window tends to increase with larger window sizes,
initialized and the current RT Tdif f exceeds the threshold
 which is expected as more request-response pairs can introduce
T , the monitor initializes Λ(Y ) for the flow. Otherwise, the
 more variability due to differing network conditions and server
monitor discards the current window and awaits the next set
 response times. For example, the median variance increases
of observations. This step is designed to accommodate proxy
 from 4.5 for W = 2 to 168 for W = 10.
protocols with varying handshake lengths, during which the
packet exchange is strictly between the client and the proxy, 2 Some proxy protocols like Shadowsocks support 0-RTT mode, combining
resulting in RT Tdif f similar to those of a direct connection. the proxy’s handshake packets with the first application payload. For others,
The monitor repeats this step until Λ(Y ) is either initialized the handshake procedure typically completes with less than three round trips.

 8
Fig. 7: Left: Distributions of normalized correlation errors. Right: Fig. 8: Left: Distribution of transport-layer delay from proxy loca-
ARTT variance with different window sizes (median in red). tions. Blue lines represent the delay of all the flows generated and the
 red lines represent the delay of selected flows that had the maximum
 Accounting for this inherent variance, we use normalized delay for each website visit. Right: Number of packets observed
squared errors as a measure to evaluate the accuracy of before detection for T = 15ms and T = 50ms, fixing FPR=.01.
 T −median ART T )2
our ARTT estimation: (estimated ART V ariance . This
 Protocol Type Changes Timing
measure compares the difference between the estimated and
 Plain SOCKS Plaintext No
the median ARTT of a window to the baseline variance of VMess Obfuscated (fully encrypted) No
the window. As shown in Figure 7, the distribution of the Shadowsocks Obfuscated (fully encrypted) No
 VLESS over TLS Obfuscated (TLS-based) No
normalized errors suggests that the majority of our estimations Trojan Obfuscated (TLS-based) No
yield relatively low errors. Balancing between need for multi- VMess over Websocket Obfuscated (HTTP) No
 Shadowsocks over WS/TLS Obfuscated (TLS-based) No
ple request-response pairs for effective correlation against the VLESS over WS/TLS Obfuscated (TLS-based) No
increased variance with larger window sizes, we use W = 3 XTLS-Vision Obfuscated (TLS-based) No
 SOCKS over obfs4 Obfuscated (fully encrypted) Yes
for subsequent evaluations. With W = 3, over 60% of our
estimations have a normalized error less than 1, implying that
our estimates typically fall within the distribution of actual TABLE I: List of proxy protocols tested in evaluation. ⋄
ARTTs. Additionally, about 80% of estimations have errors
less than 2, in which case estimates are within 1.4 standard single website visit typically generates dozens of individual
deviations of actual median ARTT. flows, a proxy server could still be exposed even if only
 some of these flows exhibit significant delays. To understand
B. Evaluating the Susceptibility of Proxy Traffic and the the possibility of observing inflated RT Tdif f during a user
selection of threshold T session, we extracted out the flows with maximum transport
 We evaluate the extent to which proxy traffic is susceptible delays for each website visit. The red curves in the same figure
to the exploit and how threshold T affects this susceptibility. illustrate this distribution, indicating that nearly every visit
While the concept of cross-layer RTT differences is inherent likely includes at least one flow with a significant RT Tdif f
to all proxy activity, an adversary’s ability to reliably detect indicative of proxying (i.e., per-website exposure).
such differences depends significantly on the proximity of the The choice of T also affects the speed of detection. A
proxy to the application server. As such, the selection of T is lower T leads to a smaller ratio of P r(T |H1 ) over P r(T |H0 ),
crucial as it determines what constitutes a “significant” RTT thereby requiring more observations to maintain a similar level
discrepancy indicative of proxy use. As mentioned before, the of specificity (False Positive Rate) as a higher T . Figure 8
threshold T should exceed the transport delay between the shows the number of packets required to achieve the same
proxy and the server, which is an unavoidable baseline delay level of detection confidence (FPR=.01) for T = 15 and T =
that is reflected in the cross-layer RTT discrepancy. 50. We use T = 15 for the following evaluation. Using the
 We measure the distribution of transport-layer delays from conversion factor of 94 c from prior work [39], a 15ms network
three proxy locations while visiting the top 5K domains to delay roughly translates to a physical distance of 600 miles,
assess this susceptibility and to inform the selection of T . The approximately the distance between New York and Detroit, or
results are shown in Figure 8. The blue curves represent the San Francisco and San Diego. In other words, as long as the
distribution of transport delays for individual flows between proxy and the application server are separated by at least this
the proxy and the website server (i.e., per-flow exposure). distance, a threshold of T = 15 should consistently observe
Surprisingly, more than half of these flows exhibit minimal inflated RT Tdif f caused by proxy routing.
transport delays, which means that the difference in RTT
caused by proxy routing would also be minimal. Apart from C. Evaluating RT Tdif f as a Standalone Fingerprint
the fact that our proxies are located in data centers with We perform an in-depth evaluation of the RT Tdif f fingerpotentially better connectivity than average hosts, we note that print using both controlled proxy traffic from our testbed and
most of these low-delay flows are to CDNs like Cloudflare, real user network traffic sourced from an Internet provider.
Google, and Fastly (refer to Table V in Appendix). The
prevalence of CDNs, to some extent, lessens the visibility 1) Evaluation Setup: Since subtle differences in traffic
of additional delays caused by proxy routing. Despite this, timing create the fingerprint, our evaluation aims for diversity
the proposed exploit still poses a realistic threat: because a among proxy clients, servers, and application servers to cover

 9
a wide range of proxy scenarios. We set up five geographically Proxy/Client DTW HKG TYO CEK ARN
distributed hosts to act as proxy clients. These include locations Remote DNS Resolution, CrUX Global 5K
in Hong Kong, China (HKG) and Chelyabinsk, Russia (CEK), ATL .207 / .819 .233 / .828 .219 / .784 .201 / .802 .215 / .791
reflecting the typical user base of censorship circumvention SIN .177 / .738 .172 / .727 .180 / .743 .199 / .732 .201 / .738
 AMS .201 / .775 .181 / .747 .201 / .759 .197 / .711 .172 / .766
tools. Notably, Hong Kong, as a special administrative region,
 Local DNS Resolution, CrUX Global 5K
is not subject to the same GFW restrictions as mainland
China [55]. Similarly, our Russian site is located in a data ATL .372 / .905 .340 / .876 .377 / .880 .443 / .927 .448 / .907
 SIN .455 / .898 .313 / .842 .315 / .851 .438 / .892 .424 / .880
center, which is exempted from the typical residential cen- AMS .435 / .905 .337 / .839 .328 / .856 .293 / .854 .339 / .877
sorship restrictions [80]. We confirmed the absence of filter- Remote DNS Resolution, CrUX Regional 5K
ing behaviors commonly associated with GFW and Russia’s ATL -/- .186 / .712 .193 / .765 .410 / .879 .364 / .851
TSPU [6], [32], [55], [80], and as such our proxy flows are not SIN -/- .147 / .719 .133 / .748 .330 / .851 .313 / .842
to be affected by any local censorship measures. Nonetheless, AMS -/- .176 / .658 .190 / .722 .352 / .827 .221 / .808
we deployed additional clients in nearby Tokyo (TYO) and
Stockholm (ARN). We set up the fifth client in Detroit, USA. TABLE II: Evaluation results on proxy traffic. Results are shown for
 both per-flow detection rate / per-website detection rate. Threshold η
 The proxy servers routing this traffic were placed in Singa- selected for FPR = .01
pore (SIN), Amsterdam (AMS), and Atlanta (ATL). Like the
clients, these servers are single-tenant bare metal machines that
are well-provisioned with processing and network resources. protocol-agnostic, as it does not target specific obfuscations
This minimizes any impact on packet timings from processing but rather exploits an inherent characteristic of proxying. Most
or bandwidth constraints, as each proxy client/server handles proxy protocols, including those with sophisticated obfuscaonly one website visit at a time. Using a script with Selenium, tions, do not by design alter packet timings. Even in protocols
we had each client use each of the proxy servers to visit the that incorporate packet-level padding, the padding is appended
top 5K domains as ranked by the CrUX report [29] (either only to application-layer payloads, without sending dummy
ranked globally or region-specific). packets when there’s no data to send. Obfs4, which was
 designed to obfuscate packet inter-arrival times, is an exception
 We selected and tested a range of popular proxy protocols
 and is further discussed in § VII-A.
in our evaluation. Our selection is informed by discussions
in censorship forums [1], [2], targeted attacks by nation- The decision threshold in hypothesis testing, η, balances
state censors [3], [23], [49], [74], and protocols selected for sensitivity against specificity. Raising η allows us to lower
evaluation by prior work [12], [22], [79]. These include fully false positives to an arbitrary level, albeit at the cost of
encrypted protocols like shadowsocks and VMess, and TLS- missing detections for many proxy flows that do not reach the
based obfuscated proxies like VLESS and Trojan. A complete decision threshold before they terminate. Selecting a threshold
list of the proxy protocols tested is provided in Table I. comes down to maximizing the detection of proxy traffic while
 To evaluate the specificity of the RT Tdif f fingerprint and maintaining a tolerable level of blocking legitimate traffic –
estimate potential false positives should the fingerprint be a censor’s operational constraint. As part of our evaluation,
deployed, we partnered with a regional Internet provider, Merit we measured the fingerprint’s sensitivity on controlled proxy
Network. Real-user traffic was mirrored from a major Point- traffic while fixing an upper bound FPR at .01 evaluated on ISP
of-Presence of the ISP to our monitoring server, with traffic traffic. We further discuss false positives in the next section.
volumes reaching up to 50Gbps. Such volume necessitates
 Table II shows the results of this case study. Looking at
sampling, as we perform all feature extraction and analysis
 the results for each proxy location in the top section of the
directly on Merit Network’s server due to ethics and privacy
 table, we note that the detection rates across all client locations
concerns (see § A for ethical considerations regarding our
 are largely consistent. This matches our expectation, as the
handling of user traffic). We applied a conservative sampling
 RT Tdif f fingerprint is generated by the routing between the
rate of 1/8, based on connection 4-tuple, to minimize the effect
 proxy and application server, rendering the client’s proximity
of packet loss and accommodate traffic spikes. On this server,
 to the proxy irrelevant. The detection rates at the per-flow
we deployed a Zeek cluster loaded with our plugin. Several
 level are only moderately effective, with approximately 20%
sanity checks were performed on each new flow, including
 of flows correctly flagged. This can be largely attributed to
verifying a complete TCP handshake and the presence of a
 the connectivity provided by CDNs, which to some extent
PSH flag. The number of flows that passed these checks was
 offsets the additional delays caused by proxy routing. Most
used as the baseline (denominator) for calculating the False
 of the proxy flows that we fail to detect are requests to static
Positive Rate (FPR). This approach is consistent with prior
 content cached at CDNs or advertising and tracking, typically
study [74], such that FPR metrics are directly comparable. Our
 occurring within 5ms of our proxy locations, as measured in
evaluation on ISP traffic extended over a 10-day period, during
 Figure 8. We highlight that our evaluation uses traffic to top
which we analyzed over 102 million TCP flows after sanity
 domains instead of a random sample of websites to simulate
checks. We applied our exploit to both the controlled proxy
 traffic that users are most likely to route through proxies. But
traffic and the ISP traffic using the exact same configuration
 since top domains are commonly served by CDNs, our findings
and parameters.
 likely represent a lower bound of the fingerprint’s sensitivity.
 2) Sensitivity: We first note that, aside from obfs4, the Still, even for top domains, the implication from such per-flow
results across all tested proxy protocols were highly identical, exposure becomes even more alarming when aggregated by
including most widely-used obfuscated proxies such as shad- website visits: at the per-website level, detection rates exceed
owsocks or VLESS. The fingerprinting vulnerability is largely 70% across all client and proxy locations. This means that the

 10
 Category Identifier Percentage of All Positives (%)
 Rmt Port 443 57.88
 993 33.29
 80 4.47
 5222 0.43
 9001 0.30
 SNI apple.imap.mail.*.com 14.89
 imap.*.com 5.32
 android.imap.mail.*.com 2.91
 imap.mail.*.com 2.90
 *.*health.com 2.13
 (empty) / Not applicable 17.47

TABLE III: Distribution of Detection Positives by Remote Port and
SNI. Note: ‘*’ in SNIs masks service names, not wildcards. Fig. 9: Per-flow detection and performance of potential mitigations. mux=N combines every N logical streams into one flow.⋄
adversary can almost guarantee that the client and server IPs
of proxy flows will be flagged after just a few website visits. IMAP traffic further reduces the FPR by one third.
 Our results also highlight the increased susceptibility of This level of per-flow FPR (0.6%-0.7%) is lower than that
proxy traffic to the fingerprinting exploit under certain con- reported in fingerprinting attacks discussed in prior work [68],
figurations. Specifically, most obfuscated proxy tools expose and is on par with the estimated FPR of attacks deployed by
a SOCKS interface for local applications, allowing the user GFW against fully encrypted proxies [74]. Nonetheless, this
to supply either a destination IP (DNS resolved locally) or FPR still implies a non-negligible amount of collateral damage
a domain name (resolving DNS at the proxy). Users who – especially considering the generally low base-rate of circumresolve DNS locally are considerably more susceptible to the vention traffic. Yet, the standalone fingerprint RT Tdif f can
exploit, with per-flow rates approximately doubling across all be complemented with protocol-specific fingerprinting attacks,
client/proxy locations. When DNS is resolved at the proxy, it and can additionally be applied on a per-host basis by accumuuses nearby DNS servers to retrieve IPs that are optimally lating per-flow RT Tdif f fingerprints over time for each destireachable from the proxy. Local DNS resolution, however, nation host. Prior work has shown that, even with looser clasmay direct the proxy to farther endpoints, particularly back sifiers, host-based analysis can significantly reduce false postowards the client’s region, thus increasing the distance and itives – even to zero – by aggregating multiple flow-level obconsequently the discrepancy in RTTs. servations [67]. As such, we believe that the evaluated vulnerability presents a realistic threat that necessitates vigilance and
 Lastly, we substituted the global site list with regionproactive countermeasures from the circumvention community.
specific lists (CrUX-China for clients in Hong Kong and
Tokyo, and CrUX-Russia for Russian and European clients).
For the Russian list, this has shown to significantly increase VII. D ISCUSSION
the sensitivity of the fingerprint. Regional lists, more tailored Previous sections demonstrate the practicality of exploiting
to local browsing behaviors, often include sites less likely to be cross-layer RTT discrepancies to fingerprint proxy traffic.
hosted on global networks (e.g., local education, government, This poses a significant threat to the availability of proxies,
finance) [60] and thus may exhibit larger RTT discrepancies. In particularly obfuscated ones that are essential for facilitating
the following mitigation section, we will discuss implications information access across the world’s most restricted networks.
of our results on proxy configurations, such as using routing
rules to ensure local traffic remains local. Exploiting the RT Tdif f fingerprint requires only passive
 monitoring and limited stateful connection tracking, simplify-
 3) Specificity: Analysis on collateral damage is crucial in ing its deployment and making it within the reach of virtuboth the design of circumvention protocols and in envisioning ally any network operator. Unlike previous attacks targeting
potential fingerprinting attacks against them. Given that Merit specific proxy or obfuscation protocols [24]–[26], [68], this
Network operates in a region with minimal network censorship, timing-based fingerprint is an inherent characteristic of proxy
we conservatively consider all detections from the ISP traffic as routing. The protocol-agnostic aspect of the fingerprint broadfalse positives, which we upper-bound at .01 for our evaluation. ens its applicability, which in turn heightens the severity of its
 implications. More, the fact that the exploit makes on-the-fly
 We note the false positives are not evenly distributed.
 detections provides censors with more options for intervention.
Table III groups the top heavy hitters either by remote port
 In cases where proxies are hosted on shared IPs (e.g., CDN),
or by SNI. Notably, traffic to port 993, commonly used for
 detecting proxy mid-flow allows flow-level actions such as
IMAP/SSL and comprising less than 1% of the total traffic,
 resetting or throttling the violating flow, when traditional
accounts for nearly a third of all potential false positives.
 blanket IP blacklisting could incur a higher cost for censors.
Similarly, results aggregated by SNIs also suggest that IMAP
traffic frequently results in what we term categorical false Despite the demonstrated practicality, we advise caution in
positives, on which we provide further analysis in Appendix F. interpreting our results: our real-world evaluation suggests a
We note that the assumption underlying our correlation-based low, but non-trivial rate of false positives, including categorical
ARTT estimation is a RESTful request/response communi- false positives, which would compel any censor to carefully
cation pattern, which might not perform well on traffic that weigh the deployment costs. We posit that a potential adversary
deviates from this pattern. Implementing a pre-filter to whitelist is more likely to use the RT Tdif f fingerprint in combination

 11
with existing protocol-specific attacks, which are orthogonal Moreover, it is unclear whether having an atypical ACK delay
and complementary to our approach, rather than as a stan- timeout might itself become an exploitable fingerprint.
dalone method. Also, the nature of the fingerprint – relying
on subtle patterns in packet timings – means that its efficacy Multiplexing Traffic analysis attacks will always have a
could be affected by unpredictable network changes along the range of uncertainty leading to false positives, and the goal of
path. Yet, it would not be a sound strategy to depend solely obfuscation is to further increase this uncertainty [73]. One
on the unreliability of the network as a defense against such way to introduce additional entropy into packet timings is
timing-based fingerprints. The responsibility therefore falls on through connection multiplexing, which interleaves packets
proxies to implement proactive countermeasures. Below, we from multiple coexisting logical streams into a single network
discuss a few potential mitigation approaches and, for some, flow, obfuscating patterns in packet size, timing, and direction.
provide a preliminary evaluation on their efficacy. The variability in the number and type of the logical streams
 (i.e., interactive or bulk transfer) introduces additional unpredictability. Prior work has shown that connection multiplexing
A. Potential Mitigation Approaches
 could be an effective defense against fingerprinting over packet
 Proxy Configuration Our results suggest that the sizes [79]. Similarly, we also find that even a basic form of
RT Tdif f fingerprint is independent of the client’s location. multiplexing – combining every two logical streams into one
Still, certain configurations on the client side can reduce network flow – lowers detections both by numbers and rates,
the susceptibility to some extent. For example, domain name as shown in Figure 9.
resolution should be handled at the proxy to prefer IPs that are However, multiplexing might also introduce new types of
optimally reachable from the proxy, reducing the additional fingerprints. For one, multiplexed flows tend to live longer
delay introduced by proxy routing. Additionally, specific rout- and carry more packets compared to non-multiplexed flows.
ing rules should be implemented on the client to ensure that For example, the median number of request-response pairs in
local traffic – traffic to services located on the same side of multiplexed flows is higher than over 97% of all flows observed
the firewall as the client – remains local and is not routed from the ISP, which already makes them outliers and more conthrough the proxy. Instances of categorical false positives spicuous. But even in comparisons with this narrow 3%, mulare particularly relevant not only to adversaries implementing tiplexed proxy flows could still be differentiated: since multithe attack but also to proxy users who might leverage these plexing interleaves packets from different streams, our estimafalse positives to their advantage. For example, proxy users tion of application-layer RTT using correlation may not conconfiguring obfuscated proxies with a decoy domain [34], verge, adding a layer of variability which, paradoxically, might
[76] should consider selecting a domain that naturally exhibits itself be fingerprintable. As shown in Figure 13 in Appendix,
inflated or unpredictable RT Tdif f , such as IMAP services, to the sequence of estimated RT Tdif f from multiplexed proxy
increase the uncertainty of the fingerprinting attack. flows exhibit wider confidence intervals compared to that of
 ISP traffic. We therefore advise caution in adopting multiplex-
 Obfs4 The evaluated fingerprint is based on timing pat- ing as the only mitigation strategy without further research.
terns introduced by proxy routing. Obfs4/scramblesuit [4], [73]
is a well-known protocol specifically designed to obfuscate Traffic Splitting Similar to connection multiplexing, trafpacket lengths and inter-arrival times through pseudo-random fic splitting provides an alternative or complementary approach
padding and delays. Figure 9 illustrates the effect of incor- to obfuscation. Traffic splitting decouples the upstream and
porating obfs4 into a proxy setup compared to the baseline. downstream of a traffic flow, reducing the information exposed
We find incorporating obfs4 degrades the performance but to an adversary with limited network perspective [11], [69].
also increases the traffic’s susceptibility to the fingerprint. Specifically, in the case of the RT Tdif f fingerprint, such
This somewhat counter-intuitive outcome can be attributed decoupling distorts the timing pattern our fingerprinting attack
to obfs4’s method of randomizing inter-arrival timings across relies on, effectively nullifying cross-correlation as a method
packets: it injects delays following the arrival of application- for estimating application-layer RTTs. An example implemenlayer data at the sending buffer. As such, application-layer tation of this strategy is the SplitHTTP transport developed
transactions always appear to have a larger RTT after obfs4’s by XTLS [44]. While not a proxy protocol itself, SplitHTTP
obfuscation, widening the discrepancies in cross-layer RTTs. can be integrated with existing protocols like shadowsocks
 in a proxy setup. When splitting upstream and downstream
 Delayed ACK The RT Tdif f fingerprint can be viewed as into separate network flows, the RT Tdif f exploit was unable
the result of a proxy server prematurely acknowledging data to make any detections, as no single flow contains paired
packets that are, in fact, still being transmitted to the appli- request&response that can be used for cross-correlating RTTs.
cation server, i.e., ACKs are being sent “too early”. One way Further research is needed to understand whether a sophistito reduce the RTT discrepancy is through the TCP Delayed cated adversary could perform cross-flow correlation based on
Acknowledgment mechanism [9], which provides a native way host IP addresses [69].
to delay the transmission of ACK packets. This feature is
typically enabled by default on Linux systems with a delay Application-independent Traffic Scheduler It might
timer of 40ms, so that ACKs can ideally be sent alongside seem surprising that obfs4, a protocol designed to obscure
data-carrying packets to minimize overheads. By adjusting the packet timing, only seems to exacerbate the issue rather than
delay timer to 500ms (the maximum allowed by RFC [7]), mitigate it. In essence, this is because obfs4 implements
we find a significant reduction in the number of detections timing obfuscation by randomly delaying the transmission of
by over half compared to the baseline, as shown in Figure 9. application-layer data already within the sending buffer: when
This method, however, does result in performance trade-offs. the application has data to send, obfs4 sends the data possibly

 12
 Fig. 11: Detection rates for network-layer VPNs, with the Transport RTT Distributions for CrUX Top 1K domains. A request to
 google.com is used as the coexisting flow. ⋄

 B. Extending to Network-layer VPNs
Fig. 10: Sequence timing diagram illustrating cross-layer RTT
discrepancies in network-layer VPN connections. Both datacarrying and TCP control packets of the encapsulated flow exhibit Our work focuses on transport-layer obfuscated proxies
cross-layer RTT discrepancies. ⋄ used for censorship circumvention. However, the underlying
 principles of our approach – sessions spanning different distances and reflecting in cross-layer RTT discrepancies – are
with some delay; when the application is quiet – or, as in our applicable to network-layer VPNs as well when used without
case, if data is still in transit – obfs4 remains quiet as well. traffic multiplexing. Figure 10 illustrates the sequence timing
This observation is analogous to previous research noting the diagram for a TCP-based VPN connection, showing how
inability of padding-based size obfuscations in mitigating de- RT Tdif f is defined in this scenario and how the same exploit
tection based on packet sizes that are conspicuously large [79]. can be directly applied (for UDP-based VPNs, an additional
 step is required to estimate the transport RTT of the tunnel).
 The current generation of obfuscation schemes operates
under an “application-dependent” model: they pad or delay
data as it moves from the application layer to the obfuscation To demonstrate the potential applicability to network-layer
layer. Their capability to obfuscate is limited to one direction VPNs, we conduct a supplementary experiment with the three
only – larger size, more delay [17], [21]. While acceptable popular VPN protocols: OpenVPN (TCP), WireGuard, and
for certain scenarios, this limitation becomes critical when OpenConnect, which are generally used across VPN products,
the traffic to be obfuscated inherently involves longer RTTs either commercial or otherwise. We target the index pages
or larger sizes than what is considered “normal”, as in our of the top 1K CrUX domains (without redirects), applying
case. A more principled obfuscation framework must operate the RT Tdif f exploit using the same parameters from § VI.
independently of application data, centered around a traffic (For WireGuard, which operates over UDP, the transport-layer
scheduler that dictates the timing and volume of traffic ac- RTTs are estimated from the initial handshake.) Figure 11
cording to a predefined schedule, regardless of the underlying shows the detection rates across the VPN protocols, with shadapplication-layer traffic pattern. Such a framework would re- owsocks included for comparison. The exploit was effective
quire an overhaul of existing obfuscation implementations. The across all protocols, with detection rates approaching theoretfocus of the obfuscation layer should shift from responding ical expectations (the C-CDF of RTT), as these protocols do
to incoming application data, to adhering to the demands of not alter traffic timing. Notably, VPNs showed slightly higher
the traffic schedule, i.e., from being triggered by input to detection rates than shadowsocks, which can be attributed
aligning with the required output. For example, suppose the to the nature of network-layer tunneling tools where not
traffic scheduler demands a packet to be sent at the moment, only data-carrying (e.g., clienthello, serverhello) but also TCP
but no application data is ready. In that case, the obfuscation control packets (e.g., SYN, ACK) of the encapsulated end-tolayer should still send a padding-only dummy packet, thereby end flow can be used to identify cross-layer RTT discrepancies,
capable of simulating both larger and smaller RTTs [17], [21]. as illustrated in Figure 10.

 VLESS is in the process of revamping their obfuscation However, extending the exploit to network-layer VPNs in
implementation to provide the flexibility necessary to support practice might not be feasible due to most VPNs configuring
an application-independent traffic scheduler [77]. A traffic themselves as the “default-gateway” on a user’s device, effecschedule that demands at least one send() operation every tively multiplexing multiple logical streams into one network
transport-layer RTT seconds would fundamentally eliminate flow. As previously discussed, this complicates the crossthe cross-layer RTT discrepancy pattern exploited in this correlation of application-layer RTTs and, therefore, reduces
work. Such an application-independent scheduler, however, detection rates (as highlighted in Figure 11 for OpenVPN with
introduces new questions – defining what constitutes a two coexisting flows). Yet, it’s important to note that most
“legitimate” shape for proxies to simulate, evaluating the VPN protocols lack any form of obfuscation to begin with and
performance implication of such scheduling, and assessing can be trivially detected by protocol parsers. Even VPNs that
whether a widely adopted schedule might itself converge into claim to be “obfuscated” have been shown to be vulnerable to
a pattern presenting new fingerprinting vulnerability – all more straightforward fingerprinting attacks that are orthogonal
remain open questions for future research. to packet timing, as demonstrated by prior work [30], [81].

 13
 VIII. C ONCLUSION [14] R. Ensafi, D. Fifield, P. Winter, N. Feamster, N. Weaver, and V. Paxson,
 “Examining how the Great Firewall discovers hidden circumvention
 In this paper, we examined the potential for exploiting a servers,” in Internet Measurement Conference. ACM, 2015. [Online].
timing-based fingerprint to detect traffic from obfuscated prox- Available: http://conferences2.sigcomm.org/imc/2015/papers/p445.pdf
ies. This fingerprint is created by the inherent misalignment [15] R. Ensafi, P. Winter, A. Mueen, and J. R. Crandall, “Analyzing
between transport- and application-layer sessions in proxy the Great Firewall of China over space and time,” Privacy
routing, which is reflected in the discrepancies between trans- Enhancing Technologies, vol. 2015, no. 1, 2015. [Online]. Available:
 https://censorbib.nymity.ch/pdf/Ensafi2015a.pdf
port and application RTTs. We detailed a possible exploit by
 [16] S. Feghhi and D. J. Leith, “A web traffic analysis attack using only
an on-path censor using this fingerprint to detect proxy traffic timing information,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
and demonstrated its general feasibility. We hope our study Security, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1747–1759, 2016.
draws the attention of the circumvention community to packet [17] E. Fenske and A. Johnson, “Security notions for fully encrypted
timing as an area of concern and leads to the development of protocols,” in Free and Open Communications on the Internet,
more sustainable countermeasures. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.petsymposium.org/foci/2023/
 foci-2023-0004.pdf
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [18] D. Fifield, “GoAgent Security Advisory — bamsoftware.com,” https:
 //www.bamsoftware.com/sec/goagent-advisory.html, 2014.
 The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for [19] ——, “Cyberoam firewall blocks meek by TLS signature —
their constructive feedback. We also thank Reethika Ramesh groups.google.com,” https://groups.google.com/g/traffic-obf/c/
for insightful discussions. This material is based upon work BpFSCVgi5rs, 2016.
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant [20] ——, Threat modeling and circumvention of Internet censorship. Uni-
Numbers CNS-2237552 and CNS-2141512. versity of California, Berkeley, 2017.
 [21] ——, “[tor-dev] The limits of timing obfuscation in obfs4 —
 R EFERENCES lists.torproject.org,” https://lists.torproject.org/pipermail/tor-dev/
 2017-June/012310.html, 2017.
 [1] “Censorship circumvention methods & software — ntc.party,” https:
 [22] ——, “Comments on certain past cryptographic flaws affecting
 //ntc.party/c/censorship-circumvention-software/11, 2020.
 fully encrypted censorship circumvention protocols,” Cryptology
 [2] “GitHub - net4people/bbs: Forum for discussing Internet censorship ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/1362, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
 circumvention — github.com,” https://github.com/net4people/bbs, 2021. //eprint.iacr.org/2023/1362
 [3] Alice, Bob, Carol, J. Beznazwy, and A. Houmansadr, “How [23] D. Fifield and L. Tsai, “Censors’ delay in blocking circumvention
 China detects and blocks Shadowsocks,” in Internet Measurement proxies,” in Free and Open Communications on the Internet.
 Conference. ACM, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://censorbib.nymity. USENIX, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/system/
 ch/pdf/Alice2020a.pdf files/conference/foci16/foci16-paper-fifield.pdf
 [4] Y. Angel, “Yawning Angel / obfs4 · GitLab — gitlab.com,” https:// [24] S. Frolov, J. Wampler, and E. Wustrow, “Detecting Probe-resistant
 gitlab.com/yawning/obfs4, 2019. Proxies,” in Network and Distributed System Security, 2020.
 [5] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, and K. Salamatian, “Early application identi-
 [25] S. Frolov and E. Wustrow, “The Use of TLS in Censorship
 fication,” in Proceedings of the 2006 ACM CoNEXT conference, 2006,
 Circumvention,” in Network and Distributed System Security. The
 pp. 1–12.
 Internet Society, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://tlsfingerprint.io/
 [6] K. Bock, G. Naval, K. Reese, and D. Levin, “Even censors have a static/frolov2019.pdf
 backup: Examining China’s double HTTPS censorship middleboxes,”
 [26] J. Geddes, M. Schuchard, and N. Hopper, “Cover your ACKs:
 in Free and Open Communications on the Internet. ACM, 2021.
 Pitfalls of covert channel censorship circumvention,” in Computer
 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3473604.3474559
 and Communications Security. ACM, 2013. [Online]. Available:
 [7] R. T. Braden, “RFC 1122: Requirements for Internet Hosts - Commu- https://www-users.cs.umn.edu/∼hopper/ccs13-cya.pdf
 nication Layers — datatracker.ietf.org,” https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
 html/rfc1122, 1989. [27] gfw report, “Sharing a modified Shadowsocks as well as our thoughts on
 the cat-and-mouse game · Issue-136 · net4people/bbs — github.com,”
 [8] I. S. Center, “Explicit Trusted Proxy in HTTP/2.0 or...not so much - https://github.com/net4people/bbs/issues/136, 2022.
 SANS Internet Storm Center — isc.sans.edu,” https://isc.sans.edu/diary/
 Explicit+Trusted+Proxy+in+HTTP2.0+or...not+so+much/17708, 2014. [28] W. P. M. Golda Benjamin, “Access Now — accessnow.org: Myanmar’s
 dangerous vpn ban,” https://www.accessnow.org/myanmar-vpn-ban/,
 [9] D. D. Clark, “RFC 813: Window and Acknowledgement Strategy in 2024.
 TCP — datatracker.ietf.org,” https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc813,
 1982. [29] Google, “Overview of CrUX: Chrome UX Report. Chrome for Developers — developer.chrome.com,” https://developer.chrome.com/docs/crux,
[10] J. R. Crandall, D. Zinn, M. Byrd, E. Barr, and R. East, “Concept-
 2021.
 Doppler: A weather tracker for Internet censorship,” in Computer
 and Communications Security. ACM, 2007, pp. 352–365. [Online]. [30] M. Hanlon, G. Wan, A. Ascheman, and Z. Durumeric, “Detecting
 Available: http://www.csd.uoc.gr/∼hy558/papers/conceptdoppler.pdf VPN traffic through encapsulated TCP behavior,” in Free and
 Open Communications on the Internet, 2024. [Online]. Available:
[11] W. De la Cadena, A. Mitseva, J. Hiller, J. Pennekamp, S. Reuter,
 https://www.petsymposium.org/foci/2024/foci-2024-0016.pdf
 J. Filter, T. Engel, K. Wehrle, and A. Panchenko, “TrafficSliver:
 Fighting Website Fingerprinting Attacks with Traffic Splitting,” in [31] N. P. Hoang, J. Dalek, M. Crete-Nishihata, N. Christin, V. Yegneswaran,
 Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer M. Polychronakis, and N. Feamster, “GFWeb: Measuring the Great
 and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’20. New York, NY, USA: Firewall’s Web censorship at scale,” in USENIX Security Symposium.
 Association for Computing Machinery, 2020. [Online]. Available: USENIX, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/system/
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3372297.3423351 files/sec24fall-prepub-310-hoang.pdf
[12] Z. Deng, Z. Liu, Z. Chen, and Y. Guo, “The random forest [32] N. P. Hoang, A. A. Niaki, J. Dalek, J. Knockel, P. Lin, B. Marczak,
 based detection of shadowsock’s traffic,” in Intelligent Human- M. Crete-Nishihata, P. Gill, and M. Polychronakis, “How great
 Machine Systems and Cybernetics. IEEE, 2017. [Online]. Available: is the Great Firewall? Measuring China’s DNS censorship,” in
 https://censorbib.nymity.ch/pdf/Deng2017a.pdf USENIX Security Symposium. USENIX, 2021. [Online]. Available:
[13] K. P. Dyer, S. E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, and T. Shrimpton, “Protocol https://www.usenix.org/system/files/sec21-hoang.pdf
 misidentification made easy with Format-Transforming Encryption,” [33] A. Houmansadr, N. Kiyavash, and N. Borisov, “Non-blind watermarking
 in Computer and Communications Security. ACM, 2013. [Online]. of network flows,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 22,
 Available: https://eprint.iacr.org/2012/494.pdf no. 4, pp. 1232–1244, 2013.

 14
[34] ihciah, “GitHub - ihciah/shadow-tls: A proxy to expose real tls on Security & Privacy. IEEE, 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
 handshake to the firewall — github.com,” https://github.com/ihciah/ //www.ieee-security.org/TC/SP2017/papers/586.pdf
 shadow-tls, 2021. [54] M. S. Rahman, P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, K. G. Gangadhara, and
[35] M. Jaber, R. G. Cascella, and C. Barakat, “Can we trust the inter-packet M. Wright, “Tik-tok: The utility of packet timing in website fingertime for traffic classification?” in 2011 IEEE international conference printing attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06421, 2019.
 on communications (ICC). IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–5. [55] R. Rambert, Z. Weinberg, D. Barradas, and N. Christin, “Chinese
[36] Jigsaw, “Shadowsocks resistance against detection and blocking,” wall or Swiss cheese? keyword filtering in the Great Firewall
 https://github.com/Jigsaw-Code/outline-server/blob/master/docs/ of China,” in WWW. ACM, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
 shadowsocks.md, 2023. //censorbib.nymity.ch/pdf/Rambert2021a.pdf
[37] J. Jung, V. Paxson, A. W. Berger, and H. Balakrishnan, “Fast portscan [56] R. Ramesh, R. S. Raman, A. Virkud, A. Dirksen, A. Huremagic, D. Fidetection using sequential hypothesis testing,” in IEEE Symposium on field, D. Rodenburg, R. Hynes, D. Madory, and R. Ensafi, “Network
 Security and Privacy, 2004. Proceedings. 2004. IEEE, 2004, pp. 211– Responses to Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine in 2022: A Cautionary Tale
 225. for Internet Freedom,” in 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
[38] D. Katira, G. Grover, K. Singh, and V. Bansal, “CensorWatch: On Security 23). Anaheim, CA: USENIX Association, 2023.
 the implementation of online censorship in India,” in Free and [57] R. Ramesh, P. Winter, S. Korman, and R. Ensafi, “CalcuLatency:
 Open Communications on the Internet, 2023. [Online]. Available: Leveraging Cross-Layer Network Latency Measurements to Detect
 https://www.petsymposium.org/foci/2023/foci-2023-0006.pdf Proxy-Enabled Abuse,” in 33nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
[39] E. Katz-Bassett, J. P. John, A. Krishnamurthy, D. Wetherall, T. An- Security 24). USENIX Association, 2024.
 derson, and Y. Chawathe, “Towards ip geolocation using delay and [58] refraction networking, “GitHub - refraction-networking/utls: Fork of
 topology measurements,” in Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCOMM the Go standard TLS library, providing low-level access to the
 conference on Internet measurement, 2006, pp. 71–84. ClientHello for mimicry purposes. — github.com,” https://github.com/
[40] H. Kim, K. C. Claffy, M. Fomenkov, D. Barman, M. Faloutsos, and refraction-networking/utls, 2021.
 K. Lee, “Internet traffic classification demystified: myths, caveats, [59] Z. Rosson, F. Anthonio, S. Cheng, C. Tackett, and A. Skok,
 and the best practices,” in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT “Internet shutdowns in 2022,” https://www.accessnow.org/
 conference, 2008, pp. 1–12. internet-shutdowns-2022/, 2023.
[41] C. Kwan, P. Janiszewski, S. Qiu, C. Wang, and C. Bocovich, [60] K. Ruth, A. Fass, J. Azose, M. Pearson, E. Thomas, C. Sadowski, and
 “Exploring simple detection techniques for DNS-over-HTTPS tunnels,” Z. Durumeric, “A world wide view of browsing the world wide web,” in
 in Free and Open Communications on the Internet. ACM, 2021. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Internet Measurement Conference, 2022,
 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3473604.3474563 pp. 317–336.
[42] B. Marczak, N. Weaver, J. Dalek, R. Ensafi, D. Fifield, S. McKune, [61] K. Ruth, D. Kumar, B. Wang, L. Valenta, and Z. Durumeric, “Toppling
 A. Rey, J. Scott-Railton, R. Deibert, and V. Paxson, “An analysis of top lists: Evaluating the accuracy of popular website lists,” in Proceed-
 China’s “Great Cannon”,” in Free and Open Communications on the ings of the 22nd ACM Internet Measurement Conference, 2022, pp.
 Internet. USENIX, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/ 374–387.
 system/files/conference/foci15/foci15-paper-marczak.pdf [62] shadowsocks.org, “Shadowsocks — A fast tunnel proxy that helps you
[43] A. Master and C. Garman, “A Worldwide View of Nation-state Internet bypass firewalls. — shadowsocks.org,” https://shadowsocks.org/, 2016.
 Censorship,” in Free and Open Communications on the Internet, [63] R. Sundara Raman, L. Evdokimov, E. Wurstrow, J. A. Halderman,
 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.petsymposium.org/foci/2023/ and R. Ensafi, “Investigating Large Scale HTTPS Interception in
 foci-2023-0008.pdf Kazakhstan,” in Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Internet Measurement
[44] mmmray, “SplitHTTP, Project X — xtls.github.io,” https://xtls.github. Conference, 2020.
 io/en/config/transports/splithttp.html, year = 2024. [64] trojan gfw., “Trojan Documentation — trojan-gfw.github.io,” https:
[45] H. Mohajeri Moghaddam, B. Li, M. Derakhshani, and I. Goldberg, //trojan-gfw.github.io/trojan/, 2023.
 “SkypeMorph: Protocol obfuscation for Tor bridges,” in Computer [65] M. C. Tschantz, S. Afroz, Anonymous, and V. Paxson, “SoK: Towards
 and Communications Security. ACM, 2012. [Online]. Available: Grounding Censorship Circumvention in Empiricism,” in 2016 IEEE
 https://www.cypherpunks.ca/∼iang/pubs/skypemorph-ccs.pdf Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2016.
[46] M. Nasr, A. Bahramali, and A. Houmansadr, “Deepcorr: Strong flow [66] v2ray, “VMess protocol — V2Fly.org — v2fly.org,” https://www.v2fly.
 correlation attacks on tor using deep learning,” in Proceedings of the org/en US/developer/protocols/vmess.html, 2023.
 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
 [67] R. Wails, G. A. Sullivan, M. Sherr, and R. Jansen, “On Precisely De-
 Security, 2018, pp. 1962–1976.
 tecting Censorship Circumvention in Real-World Networks,” in Network
[47] M. Nasr, A. Houmansadr, and A. Mazumdar, “Compressive traffic anal- and Distributed System Security, 2024.
 ysis: A new paradigm for scalable traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of [68] L. Wang, K. Dyer, A. Akella, T. Ristenpart, and T. E. Shrimpton,
 the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications “Seeing through network-protocol obfuscation,” in Proceedings of the
 Security, 2017, pp. 2053–2069. 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
[48] Net4People, “OpenVPN and WireGuard blocking reported in multiple Security, 2015.
 ISPs in Russia, 2023-08-07,” https://github.com/net4people/bbs/issues/ [69] M. Wang, A. Kulshrestha, L. Wang, and P. Mittal, “Leveraging strate-
 274, 2023. gic connection migration-powered traffic splitting for privacy,” arXiv
[49] ——, “Blocking of fully encrypted protocols (Shadowsocks, VMess) preprint arXiv:2205.03326, 2022.
 in Russia, targeting HTTPS traffic fingerprints,” https://github.com/ [70] Z. Wang, Y. Cao, Z. Qian, C. Song, and S. V. Krishnamurthy, “Your
 net4people/bbs/issues/363, 2024. state is not mine: A closer look at evading stateful Internet censorship,”
[50] net4people, “Is it possible to implement a man-in-the-middle (MITM) in Internet Measurement Conference. ACM, 2017. [Online]. Available:
 tool to bypass censorship? - Issue-373 - net4people/bbs — github.com,” http://www.cs.ucr.edu/∼krish/imc17.pdf
 https://github.com/net4people/bbs/issues/373, 2024. [71] A. T. Webb and A. N. Reddy, “Finding proxy users at the service using
[51] outlinevpn, “index/prefixing - outlinevpn — reddit.com,” https://www. anomaly detection,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Communications and
 reddit.com/r/outlinevpn/wiki/index/prefixing/, 2022. Network Security (CNS). IEEE, 2016, pp. 82–90.
[52] J. C. Park and J. R. Crandall, “Empirical study of a national-scale [72] P. Winter and S. Lindskog, “How the Great Firewall of China is
 distributed intrusion detection system: Backbone-level filtering of html blocking Tor,” in Free and Open Communications on the Internet.
 responses in china,” in 2010 IEEE 30th International Conference on USENIX, 2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/system/
 Distributed Computing Systems. IEEE, 2010, pp. 315–326. files/conference/foci12/foci12-final2.pdf
[53] P. Pearce, R. Ensafi, F. Li, N. Feamster, and V. Paxson, “Augur: [73] P. Winter, T. Pulls, and J. Fuss, “ScrambleSuit: A polymorphic
 Internet-wide detection of connectivity disruptions,” in Symposium network protocol to circumvent censorship,” in Workshop on

 15
 Privacy in the Electronic Society. ACM, 2013. [Online]. Available: Symbol Definition
 https://censorbib.nymity.ch/pdf/Winter2013b.pdf
 ∆direct difference between client transport-layer RTT
[74] M. Wu, J. Sippe, D. Sivakumar, J. Burg, P. Anderson, X. Wang, and application layer RTT in direct connection
 K. Bock, A. Houmansadr, D. Levin, and E. Wustrow, “How the great ∆proxy difference between client transport-layer RTT
 firewall of china detects and blocks fully encrypted traffic,” in 32th and application layer RTT in proxy connection
 USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), 2023. [Online]. T RT TAB transport layer round trip time between A and
 Available: https://people.cs.umass.edu/∼amir/papers/UsenixSecurity23 B
 Encrypted Censorship.pdf ART TAB application layer round trip time between A
[75] XTLS, “XTLS Vision, fixes TLS in TLS, to the star and beyond and B
 · XTLS/Xray-core,” https://github.com/XTLS/Xray-core/discussions/ RT Tdif f for a specific observation in a flow, defined as
 1295, 2022. ARRT − T RT T
[76] ——, “GitHub - XTLS/REALITY: THE NEXT FUTURE — W number of request response pairs included in
 github.com,” https://github.com/XTLS/REALITY, 2023. correlation
 S shift/delay in milliseconds applied to outgoing
[77] ——, “Xray, Penetrates Everything. Also the best v2ray-core, with series in cross-correlation
 XTLS support. Fully compatible configuration,” https://github.com/ T threshold over which we consider an RT Tdif f
 XTLS/Xray-core, 2024. inflated
[78] X. Xu, Z. M. Mao, and J. A. Halderman, “Internet censorship in China: Yi random variable for the ith observation of a
 Where does the filtering occur?” in Passive and Active Measurement flow, defined as in equation (1)
 Conference. Springer, 2011, pp. 133–142. [Online]. Available: H0 Null Hypothesis: the connection is direct
 https://web.eecs.umich.edu/∼zmao/Papers/china-censorship-pam11.pdf H1 Alternative Hypothesis: the apparent transport
[79] D. Xue, M. Kallitsis, A. Houmansadr, and R. Ensafi, “Fingerprinting layer is a proxy
 Obfuscated Proxy Traffic with Encapsulated TLS Handshakes,” in 33st θ0 prior conditional probability for the Null Hy-
 USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24). PHILADEL- pothesis, as defined in equation (2)
 PHIA, PA: USENIX Association, 2024. θ1 prior conditional probability for the Alternative
[80] D. Xue, B. Mixon-Baca, ValdikSS, A. Ablove, B. Kujath, J. R. Hypothesis, as defined in equation (2)
 Crandall, and R. Ensafi, “TSPU: Russia’s decentralized censorship
 system,” in Internet Measurement Conference. ACM, 2022. [Online]. TABLE IV: List of Symbols with Definitions
 Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3517745.3561461
[81] D. Xue, R. Ramesh, A. Jain, M. Kallitsis, J. A. Halderman, J. R.
 Crandall, and R. Ensafi, “OpenVPN is open to VPN fingerprinting,”
 in 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22). Boston,
 MA: USENIX Association, 2022. would likely be futile in preventing well-resourced adversaries
[82] S. Zander, T. Nguyen, and G. Armitage, “Self-learning ip traffic like nation-state censors from replicating the attack indepenclassification based on statistical flow characteristics,” in Passive and dently. Instead, we hope that open-sourcing the plugin could
 Active Network Measurement: 6th International Workshop, PAM 2005, allow protocol developers to observe the fingerprint in action
 Boston, MA, USA, March 31-April 1, 2005. Proceedings 6. Springer, and facilitate the development and testing of countermeasures.
 2005, pp. 325–328.
[83] “The Zeek Network Security Monitor,” https://zeek.org/, 2020.
[84] J. Zittrain and B. Edelman, “Internet filtering in China,” IEEE Internet
 B. Notation & Symbols
 Computing, 2003. Table IV defines the notation and symbols used in the
 paper.
 A PPENDIX
A. Ethics C. Dependence between RT Tdif f observations
 Foremost among the ethical concerns associated with this Previously, we assumed that sequential RT Tdif f observawork relates to the handling of real-user traffic, which we used tions, conditional on whether a connection is direct or proxied,
to empirically evaluate the specificity of the RT Tdif f finger- would independently exhibit similar probabilities of being
print. While our project was reviewed by our university’s IRB either inflated or matched. This assumption of independence,
and received a “Not Regulated” determination, we still took however, often does not align with real-world conditions.
certain procedural measures to minimize potential risks. We Factors like transient network conditions, server loads, or
note that all the processing of live user traffic was performed congestion can affect consecutive measurements under both
on a dedicated monitoring server managed by Merit Network, hypotheses. We note that in our approach, each correlation
which has well-established ethics and privacy protocols for window is determined by the number of request-response
such projects. The monitoring server received only mirrored pairs, rather than a fixed number of packets. This introduces
copies of the traffic, so that the actual routing and service variability in both the timing and the number of packets
quality of end-users remained unaffected. Furthermore, no raw contained in each observation, potentially reducing temporal
traffic data was recorded. Instead, we used Zeek with our correlations (compared to fixed sampling intervals).
plugin to parse packets and extract features: server port, TLS
 However, another form of dependence arises specifically
SNI (if applicable), and the sequence of packet timestamps,
 under the proxy scenario: if the additional path latency
directions, and sizes. We emphasize that no packet payload
 T RT TP W consistently exceeds the threshold T , then an
was ever stored or manually inspected by humans.
 inflated RT Tdif f is likely not a one-off occurrence but a per-
 The potential for exploitation by real-world adversaries is sistent feature throughout the session. In this case, dependence
a risk inherent in any security-focused study. We have initiated results to positive correlation among consecutive observations,
contact with developers of obfuscated proxies to disclose our which invalidates the last equality in (3). The computational
findings. Our decision to release Zeek plugin was made after complexity and data requirements to reliably estimate the full
careful consideration. We recognize that withholding the code chain joint probability, however, are not feasible. For this, we

 16
Fig. 12: Workflow. The monitoring continues until either Λ(Y ) ≥ η
or the connection terminates. ⋄

 ASN Percentage Organization
 13335 5.94% Cloudflare
 15169 4.24% Google Fig. 13: Comparing variability in RT Tdif f for ISP and multi-
 16509 3.20% Amazon plexed proxy flows. We use the ratio of the width of the confidence
 54113 2.04% Fastly interval (confidence level = .95) to the mean as a normalized measure
 16625 1.03% Akamai for variability.⋄
 60068 0.97% cdn77
 20940 0.90% Akamai
 32934 0.83% Facebook
 396982 0.64% Google F. Categorical False Positives with IMAP Traffic
 62713 0.54% PubMatic
 In our evaluation, we found that IMAP traffic could potentially become categorical false positives if the RT Tdif f
TABLE V: Top server ASNs for flows exhibiting low transport-delay fingerprint were to be deployed. To understand why IMAP traf-
(< 5ms) from proxy locations.⋄ fic disproportionately matches with the fingerprint, although
 privacy constraints prevent further inspection into false positive
 ISP flows, we were able to generate similar traffic from our
 own devices with the same heavy-hitter SNIs to three IMAP
define the dependency structure as a direct dependence on the
 email service providers. We found that for all three services,
immediately preceding observation (i.e., a first-order Markov
 actions such as fetching mailbox updates consistently result in
chain). Then, the probability priors to be estimated are:
 delays that substantially exceed those at the transport layer,
 P r[Yi = 0|Yi−1 = 0, H0 ] P r[Yi = 1|Yi−1 = 0, H0 ] which explains why IMAP traffic emerged as false positives
 P r[Yi = 0|Yi−1 = 1, H0 ] P r[Yi = 1|Yi−1 = 1, H0 ] (4) in our evaluation. See Table VI for IMAP examples.

and similarly for H1 . We estimate the transition probabilities
in a similar way using empirical data, but instead of independently analyzing each application-layer request-response pairs,
we aggregate them by connections they belong to and learn the
transition probabilities from consecutive pairs within the same
connection. Then, the calculation of the cumulative likelihood
ratio is updated as follows:
 N
 Pr[Y |H1 ] Pr[Y1 | H1 ] Y Pr[Yn | Yn−1 , H1 ]
 Λ(Y ) = =
 Pr[Y |H0 ] Pr[Y1 | H0 ] n=2 Pr[Yn | Yn−1 , H0 ]
 (5)

D. Distribution of Transport Delay from Proxy Locations
 Table V shows the top server ASNs for flows exhibiting low
(< 5ms) transport delay. We note that the prevalence of CDNs
mitigates the attack to some extent, as the connectivity they
provide reduces the additional delay caused by proxy routing.

E. The Effect of Multiplexing on Estimating RT Tdif f
 While connection multiplexing has shown to be able to
lower the detection rates, it might also introduce new types
of fingerprints. Figure 13 shows the normalized width of
confidence intervals of RT Tdif f for both the ISP traffic and
the multiplexed proxy traffic. We note that the variability
introduced by connection multiplexing could itself hold distinguishing power.

 17
 Time (s) tRTT (ms) aRTT (ms) Decrypted & Decoded Contents Comments
 Provider 1 IMAP
 0.00 – – TCP SYN –
 0.03 – – TCP SYN/ACK –
 0.04 27 30 Client Hello (SNI=apple.imap.mail.*.com) –
 0.07 – – Server Hello –
 0.11 – – Response: * OK Welcome! –
 0.14 51 51 Request: 1 CAPABILITY IMAP Client Capability Request
 0.20 – – Response: * CAPABILITY IMAP Server Capability Response
 0.43 – – Response: 1 OK CAPABILITY completed Completed Capability Request
 0.43 28 378 Request: 2 AUTHENTICATE XOAUTH2 Client Authentication Request
 0.81 – – Response: 2 OK [COMPRESS=DEFLATE] Authentication Response
 0.91 28 48 Request: 3 ID (”name” ”iPhone Mail” ”version” ...) Client ID Request
 0.96 – – Response: * ID (”version” ”1.1.22274” ”host” ...) Server ID Response
 1.20 – – Response: 3 OK ID completed Completed ID Request
 1.32 67 297 Request: 4 COMPRESS DEFLATE Deflate Compression Request
 1.61 – – Response: 4 OK COMPRESS DEFLATE active Deflate Compression Response
 1.72 28 501 Request: 5 LIST ”” ”*” RETURN (SPECIAL-USE STATUS (UNSEEN)) Mailbox Request
 2.22 – – Response: * LIST (Archive HasNoChildren) ”/” ”Archive” Mailbox Response
 ...... ......
 Provider 2 IMAP
 0.00 – – TCP SYN –
 0.03 – – TCP SYN/ACK –
 0.08 32 32 Client Hello (SNI=imap.*.com) –
 0.11 – – Server Hello –
 0.15 – – Response: * OK Welcome! –
 0.26 71 71 Request: 1 CAPABILITY IMAP Client Capability Request
 0.33 – – Response: * CAPABILITY IMAP Server Capability Response
 0.60 – – Response: 1 OK CAPABILITY completed Completed Capability Request
 0.72 73 431 Request: 2 AUTHENTICATE XOAUTH2 Client Authentication Request
 1.15 – – Response: 2 OK [COMPRESS=DEFLATE] Authentication Response
 1.16 33 67 Request: 3 ID (”name” ”iPhone Mail” ”version” ...) Client ID Request
 1.23 – – Response: * ID (”version” ”1.1.22274” ”host” ...) Server ID Response
 1.48 – – Response: 3 OK ID completed Completed ID Request
 1.50 71 308 Request: 4 COMPRESS DEFLATE Deflate Compression Request
 1.80 – – Response: 4 OK COMPRESS DEFLATE active Deflate Compression Response
 1.82 32 626 Request: 5 LIST ”” ”*” RETURN (SPECIAL-USE STATUS (UNSEEN)) Mailbox Request
 2.45 – – Response: * LIST (Archive HasNoChildren) ”/” ”Archive” Mailbox Response
 ...... ......
 Provider 3 IMAP
 0.00 – – TCP SYN –
 0.03 – – TCP SYN/ACK –
 0.04 20 20 Client Hello (SNI=imap.*.com) –
 0.06 – – Server Hello –
 0.11 – – Response: * OK * ready for requests from –
 0.15 23 46 Request: 1 CAPABILITY IMAP Client Capability Request
 0.20 – – Response: * CAPABILITY IMAP Server Capability Response
 0.21 24 480 Request: 2 AUTHENTICATE XOAUTH2 Client Authentication Request
 0.69 – – Response: * OK authenticated (Success) Authentication Response
 0.74 19 180 Request: 3 CAPABILITY IMAP Client Capability Request
 0.92 – – Response: * CAPABILITY 3 OK Success IMAP Server Capability Response
 0.95 20 182 Request: 4 ID (”name” ”iPhone Mail” ”version” ...) Client ID Request
 1.13 – – Response: * ID (”name” ”*” ”vendor” ”*” ...) Server ID Response
 1.15 21 181 Request: 5 COMPRESS DEFLATE Deflate Compression Request
 1.33 – – Response: 5 OK Success Deflate Compression Response
 1.35 19 441 Request: 6 LIST ”” ”*” RETURN (SPECIAL-USE STATUS (UNSEEN)) Mailbox Request
 1.79 – – Response: * LIST (HasNoChildren) ”/” ”Messages” Mailbox Response
 ...... ......

TABLE VI: Interaction with IMAP servers for providers 1, 2, and 3. For all three services, actions such as fetching mailbox updates consistently
result in delays that substantially exceed those at the transport layer. Note that it is hard to know precisely why IMAP leads to such delays
without visibility into the functioning of the back-end servers. However, this behavior seems to be associated with only IMAP (see Table III)
as no other protocol flows within the ISP traffic qualified to consistently show a significant delay difference.

 18