Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

TIMFuser: A multi-granular fusion framework for cyber threat intelligence
Chunyan Ma a,b , Zhengwei Jiang a,b , Kai Zhang a , Zhiting Ling a,b , Jun Jiang a,b , Yizhe You c ,
Peian Yang a ,∗, Huamin Feng b,d
a Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100085, China
b School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
c
 China Mobile Security Information Center, Beijing, 100053, China
d
 Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute, Beijing, 100070, China

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: Cyber attack campaigns with multiple technical variants are becoming increasingly sophisticated and diverse,
Cyber threat intelligence posing great threats to institutions and every individual. Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) offers a novel technical
TTP solution to transition from passive to active defense against cyber attacks. To counter these attacks, security
Multi-granular fusion
 practitioners need to condense CTIs from extensive CTI sources, primarily in the form of unstructured CTI
Attack behavior extraction
 reports. Unstructured CTI reports provide detailed threat information and describe multi-step attack behaviors,
Attack technique recognition
 which are essential for uncovering complete attack scenarios. Nevertheless, automatic analysis of unstructured
 CTI reports is challenging. Furthermore, manual analysis is often limited to a few CTI sources. In this paper,
 we propose a multi-granular fusion framework for CTIs from massive CTI sources, comprising a comprehensive
 pipeline with six subtasks. Many current CTI extraction systems are limited by mining intelligence from a single
 source, thereby leading to challenges such as producing a fragmented view of attack campaigns and lower
 value density. We fuse the attack behaviors and attack techniques of the attack campaigns using innovative
 and improved multi-granular fusion methods and offer a comprehensive view of the attack. TIMFuser fills
 a critical gap in the automated analysis and fusion of multi-source CTIs, especially in the multi-granularity
 aspect. In our evaluation of 739 real-world CTI reports from 542 sources, experimental results demonstrate
 that TIMFuser can enable security analysts to obtain a complete view of real-world attack campaigns, in terms
 of fused attack behaviors and attack techniques.

1. Introduction addresses to domain names, network or host artifacts, attack tools,
 and Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (TTPs). The bottom three
 In recent years, as cyberspace attacks and defense technologies levels primarily focus on Indicators of Compromise (IoCs), which are
continue to develop, the national-level confrontation capabilities in generally easy to acquire. In particular, IOCs lack the ability to describe
cyberspace have gained prominence. Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) the characteristics of attackers, which are closely connected to the
has emerged as an significant means of cyber confrontation between clues of the attack campaign. IOCs typically remain valid for a very
nations. An APT attack is a long-term and persistent cyber attack on a brief period, often less than 2 days (Iklody et al., 2018). Moreover,
specific target employing advanced and concealed attack methods (Ren studies indicate that attackers often change attack indicators, such as
et al., 2022). According to an APT trends report by Kaspersky (GREAT, malicious file hashes and hosted domains, to evade detection (Li et al.,
2023), APT attack methods continue to evolve and become more so- 2019a; Jo et al., 2022; Milajerdi et al., 2019). While TTPs describe
phisticated and diverse. With the growing defense challenges, there is a
 the high-level semantic context about APT campaigns, offering more
surge in demand for Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) in security analysis.
 value for practical APT detection (Cheng et al., 2023). Practically,
As an crucial proactive defense measure, CTI can provide robust data
 most TTPs are concealed within unstructured CTI reports generated
support across all stages of security analysis by integrating it into the
 by security experts through the analysis of malware or traffic in the
entire security detection cycle (Liao et al., 2016).
 wild, often requiring manual extraction by security experts. Given the
 According to the pyramid of pain model proposed by Bianco (2013),
CTI is categorized into six levels, ranging from file hashes and IP multi-source, heterogeneous, fragmented, and voluminous nature of

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: machunyan@iie.ac.cn (C. Ma), jiangzhengwei@iie.ac.cn (Z. Jiang), zhangkai0216@iie.ac.cn (K. Zhang), lingzhiting@iie.ac.cn (Z. Ling),
jiangjun860@iie.ac.cn (J. Jiang), youyizhe@chinamobile.com (Y. You), yangpeian@iie.ac.cn (P. Yang), fenghm@besti.edu.cn (H. Feng).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.104141
Received 12 January 2024; Received in revised form 25 September 2024; Accepted 30 September 2024
Available online 4 October 2024
0167-4048/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

cyber threat information, it presents a significant challenge for security (ATT&CK). We implement an innovative unsupervised fusion method.
analysts to effectively analyze and utilize CTIs. Hence, automating the Initially, we fuse attack behaviors across multiple CTI reports based on
analysis of TTPs hidden in the multi-source cyber threat information is the structural and semantic features between entities at the attack techcrucial. nique level. Subsequently, we identify the TTPs hidden in the attack
 Unstructured CTI analysis reports, a crucial CTI source, contain campaign reports (also known as CTI reports). Ultimately, we fuse TTPs
more comprehensive threat information and describe multi-step at- at the attack campaign level to provide a comprehensive view of the attack behaviors, which is essential to unveil complete attack scenarios. tack campaign. TIMFuser offers security analysts with a comprehensive
Recent studies (Milajerdi et al., 2019; Rani et al., 2023; You et al., view of attack campaigns for existing or emerging threats, ultimately
2022; Alam et al., 2023) have attempted to extract TTPs from CTI aiding in the prevention of potential attacks on their organizations.
reports and build attack behavior patterns, ultimately utilized for APT TIMFuser addresses a crucial gap in the automated analysis and fusion
detection. However, current TTPs extraction systems (Milajerdi et al., of multi-source CTIs, specifically in the multi-granularity aspect.
2019; Rani et al., 2023; You et al., 2022; Alam et al., 2023) are Although it sounds promising, solving the problem of multi-granulalimited by the challenge of single-source intelligence mining, leading to rity CTI fusion faces some challenges. First, CTI reports are written in
issues like missing attack semantic context and lower value density (Li an informal natural language format, which is complex, lengthy, and
et al., 2022). To give a reality, when security analysts are tracking an contains much information unrelated to the attack campaign. Second,
attack campaign, due to time constraints, they may manually retrieve Currently, there is a lack of publicly available datasets for the fusion
a limited number of CTI reports resulting in a restricted attack view of attack campaigns and techniques. Third, attack behavior knowledge
based on their understanding of the threat descriptions in those reports. is dispersed across multiple reports. While individual reports covering
TTPs obtained under such circumstances are inherently incomplete, only limited aspects of the attack behaviors, which are closely related to
consequently causing a significant occurrence of false positives during attack techniques. As a result, it is difficult to obtain a comprehensive
the actual APT detection process (Wei et al., 2021). Conversely, multi- TTP view for the attack campaign.
source CTIs enable security practitioners to have visibility into the To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to fuse
threat landscape and find clues to threat detection not seen in isolated CTIs across reports from the same attack campaign in a multi-granular
 manner. In short, our primary contributions can be summarized as
sources. Simultaneously, attack behaviors are closely linked to TTPs
 follows:
(also called attack patterns). For instance, the description of attack
behavior: ‘‘APT29 has used spearphishing emails with an attachment to • We propose TIMFuser, a multi-granular CTI fusion framework
deliver files with exploits to initial victims’’ (ESET, 2022). ‘‘APT29 uses capable of automatically parsing CTI reports and fusing CTIs from
spearphishing emails’’ is typically associated with ‘‘T1566.001 - Phish- multiple sources at both the attack technique and attack campaign
ing: Spearphishing Attachment ’’. Therefore, the completeness of attack level. Ultimately, TIMFuser yields a comprehensive TTPs view of
behaviors is an crucial prerequisite for ensuring the quality of TTPs the attack campaign. This can assist security analysts in making
fusion. security decisions.
 Previous studies are dedicated to extracting IOC-related attack be- • We provide a novel unsupervised attack behaviors fusion algohaviors from a single source (Gao et al., 2020; Liao et al., 2016; Liu rithm that fully considers the structural and semantic features
et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2020; Zhu and Dumitras, 2018). However, between entities. Compared with the mainstream methods, our
non-IoC related attack behaviors are also crucial in identifying TTPs. algorithm enhances the F1-scores of macro, micro and pairwise
Consider this description of attack behavior: ‘‘Crimson RAT adds Registry by 1.9%, 2.74%, and 5.49%. These improvements indicate that
Run keys to establish persistence’’ (Dedola, 2020). The attack behavior TIMFuser not only achieves better performance but also enhances
‘‘<Conficker RAT, adds, Registry Run keys>’’ corresponds to the ‘‘T1547 the reliability of the fused data, laying a solid foundation for the
- Boot or Logon Autostart Execution: Registry Run Keys/Startup Folder’’ fusion of TTPs.
technique. Missing non-IOC related attack behaviors will make it dif- • We present a new perspective of attack techniques fusion at the
ficult to detect the T1546 technique used by attackers. Mining from a attack campaign level employing set theory and similarity analsingle source and focusing on a single attack behavior type mining will ysis. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the attack techniques
lead to an incomplete view of TTPs. fusion by designing multiple tests. The ability to fuse techniques
 Currently, only a few studies (Li et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023) at this level ensures minimal information overlap while retaining
tackle the challenge of multi-source CTIs fusion. Li et al. (2022) propose critical insights, which is essential for creating a complete TTP
a fusion method for attack behaviors from multiple sources at the view.
attack technique level. However, the fusion of attack behavior is solely • We evaluate the effectiveness of TIMFuser on a real-world attack
based on the Levenshtein distance with character features, neglecting campaign dataset comprising 739 reports with 542 CTI sources.
the structural and semantic features. For example, ‘‘CVE-2021-44228 Experimental results demonstrate that TIMFuser outperforms the
(a Log4j-related vulnerability)’’ and ‘‘CVE-2021-44227 (a WordPress- state-of-the-art (SOTA) CTI fusion methods. We also discuss the
related vulnerability)’’ are fused due to their Levenshtein distance being benefit of TIMFuser through the case study.
less than the threshold. Guo et al. (2023) enhance the Levenshtein The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
distance method to fuse attack group entities and develop a lightweight provides a more detailed description of the background and motivation,
fusion framework for cybersecurity knowledge graphs. However, the and Section 3 introduces our multi-granular CTI fusion method. In
mentioned studies only take character-level features into account when Section 4, we present the experiment and analysis. Section 5 discusses
performing attack behaviors or attack groups fusion (limited to spe- this work and its some limitations. Section 6 provides the related work.
cific CTI types), neglecting structural and semantic features between Finally, we conclude the entire paper and propose future works in
entities. Section 7.
 To address these challenges, we present TIMFuser, a multi-granular
CTI fusion framework that concurrently addresses attack behaviors 2. Background and motivation
and TTPs. One approach to CTI fusion involves supervised learning.
However, as supervised learning requires a massive training corpus, This section first introduces some concepts of CTIs. Then, we discuss
the model’s performance is insufficient to adapt to the dynamic nature the issues of the automated analysis for CTI reports. Subsequently, we
of MITRE’s Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and Common Knowledge3 describe the background knowledge of the APT attack campaign, which
 poses the challenges for fusing the fragmented attack view. Finally,
 based on the background provided, we present a real-world attack
 3
 https://attack.mitre.org/ campaign as a motivating example.

 2
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

Fig. 1. The boxplot of token counts distribution. The 𝑋-axis means the CTI sources, and the 𝑌 -axis indicates the distribution of token counts. The line of box denotes the median.
The bottom whisker is the minimum token count, and the top whisker indicates the maximum token count, excluding outliers marked with small circles.

2.1. Preliminaries of CTI Additionally, through extensive analysis of numerous CTI reports, we
 observe a significant amount of irrelevant content (e.g., advertisements,
 Currently, most of the cyber threat detection approaches (e.g., Loki team profiles). These issues become increasingly critical during the
(Nextron Systems, 2023a), THOR Lite (Nextron Systems, 2023b), Fen- automated analysis of CTI reports. Without addressing these issues, the
rir,4 etc.) rely on fragmented views of cyber threats, such as suspicious availability of valuable information will be affected.
file or process names, IP addresses and domain names, to correlate
suspicious events. This approach lacks accuracy in revealing how the 2.3. Multi-stage APT attack campaign
threat unfolded, especially over long periods (weeks or even months).
Indeed, the relationships between IoC artifacts are closely related to A typical APT attack campaign comprises multiple stages and masthe attack behaviors (Milajerdi et al., 2019). Attack behaviors de- sive attack technique variants. The whole attack process is extremely
scribe the causal dependencies between system entities (e.g., processes, stealthy, long-lasting, and tailored to specific targets. APT groups flexfiles, sockets, etc., including but not limited to IoCs) that are the ibly change attack techniques, gain access to the internal network
subjects and objects of the actions. For instance, the sentence: ‘‘APT29 through persistent network penetration, and ultimately achieve the
used Rundll32.exe to execute payloads’’ can be processed by our sys- attack goal (Stojanović et al., 2020).
tem entity extractor to prune out the attack behavior ‘‘<APT28, use, Commonly, threat knowledge (e.g., malware-related) used in APT
Rundll32.exe>’’. Attack behavior graph (attack graph for short) is a attack campaigns is published in CTI reports along with various forgraph constructed based on the chronological order of the appearance mats, including natural language, structured, and semi-structured forms.
of attack behaviors in the information flow. To understand whether an organization is affected by APT attacks
 However, attack behaviors contain essential clues on the attack or is likely to be affected in the future, a security practitioner may
patterns. Attack patterns (TTPs) depict the methods used by attackers obtain some malicious samples in the wild or analyze CTI reports
to achieve a tactical goal and provide a high-level insight into the mo- to learn more about APT attack campaigns. Due to the reliance on
tivation behind an attack (Alam et al., 2023). For example, the attack a single intelligence source, the limitations of analytical capabilities,
behavior ‘‘<APT28, use, Rundll32.exe>’’ corresponds to ‘‘T1218.001 - and the aforementioned features of APT attack campaigns, security
System Binary Proxy Execution: Rundll32’’. MITRE ATT&CK enumer- practitioners or users obtain an extremely limited attack picture.
ates common attack patterns based on the analysis of the real-world
attack campaign with many unique techniques for some platforms 2.4. Motivating example
(e.g., Enterprise, Mobile, ICS).
 To illustrate the intuition, consider the following motivating ex-
2.2. CTI report ample. Fig. 2 provides a notable supply chain attack campaign called
 SolarWinds compromise conducted by APT29, which has caused incal-
 Many publicly available CTI reports are published in an unstruc- culable economic damage involving many industries (Fireeye, 2023).
tured format by the security vendors (e.g., Kaspersky, FireEye, Syman- After the C2 infrastructures of SolarWinds attack campaign were
tec). Common CTI reports, including APT reports and white papers, first seen in August 2019 (Unit42, 2020), different security vendors
aim to disclose the details of attack campaigns or malicious software (e.g., FireEye, checkpoint) and other CTI sources (formalized as
with in-depth insights and analysis. These CTI reports serve as valuable 𝑆1 , 𝑆2 , … , 𝑆𝑛 ) gradually disclosed their observations in the wild and
resources to help security operators make informed security decisions. share CTIs in the form of CTI reports with the security community
 We conduct a study on the token counts of open-source CTI reports at various time points. For the same attack campaign, different CTI
published by 10 leading security vendors, spanning the period from sources provide identical or complementary TTPs. For instance, 𝑆4
2008 to 2023. Fig. 1 reveals that the majority of CTI reports from (Volexity), 𝑆5 (CrowdStrike), and 𝑆7 (Microsoft) sources all
these CTI sources exceed 512 tokens, considering them as long texts. discovered that APT29 uses PowerShell to create new tasks on remote
Widely used models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) or RoBERTa (Liu machines, identify configuration settings, exfiltrate data, and execute
et al., 2019) are typically pretrained to process up to 512 tokens. This other commands (‘‘T1059.001 - Command and Scripting Interpreter: Powis problematic when feeding long reports directly into these models. erShell technique’’) (Cash et al., 2020; CrowdStrike, 2022; MSTIC, 2020).

 4 3
 https://github.com/Neo23x0/Fenrir https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/C0024/

 3
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

Fig. 2. A motivating example is the Solarwinds cyber attack campaign first observed in mid-December 2020.3 The top section illustrates the timeline of reports from 26 CTI
sources on the SolarWinds campaign. The lower left section indicates the attack tactics represented by different colors. The lower right section denotes the attack techniques of
different attack tactics disclosed by various CTI sources. Multiple CTI sources fuse to provide a complete view of the attack campaign.

However, regarding the ‘‘T1555.003 - Credentials from Web Browsers’’ report titles by the authors. This makes the data less comprehensive and
technique, only 𝑆5 detects that APT29 steals users’ saved passwords complete. For this reason, we develop two different high-performance
from Chrome (CrowdStrike, 2022). These fragmented and hidden TTPs crawlers that scrape from MITRE ATT&CK and the Internet, respecpose a significant challenge in constructing a comprehensive view of tively. In the crawling process, we apply several mechanisms to ensure
the attack campaign. coverage and reliability. More details are described as follows.
 Since ATT&CK is usually maintained by a specialized security team,
3. Methodology its timeliness and richness of content can be guaranteed. One crawler
 is responsible for scraping the procedure examples and external ref-
 This section introduces our proposed multi-granular fusion frame- erences of every sub-technique from ATT&CK. For another crawler,
work shown in Fig. 3. TIMFuser consists of six components: 1) multi- we focus on security and technology companies reporting security
source heterogeneous data collection, 2) data preprocessing, 3) rele- events to ensure quality. The crawler uses the breadth-first-search (BFS)
vant information identification, 4) attack graph extraction, 5) attack mechanism to start from a seed URL list. Some relevant pages may
technique identification, and 6) attack technique fusion. Multi-source contain the campaign-related keywords (the main topic of a CTI text)
heterogeneous data collection is responsible for collecting data from within the first 𝑛 words of an article (where 𝑛 < 100) (Alam et al.,
MITRE ATT&CK and the Internet, both containing rich multi-source 2023). If the page is relevant, the crawler will save the URL. During
data. To this end, we develop two high-performance crawlers. In the the crawling process, these two spiders utilize selenium (Muthukadan,
data preprocessing section, we design the detailed preprocessing steps 2023), a headless browser automation engine, to automatically access
to address CTI text complexity challenges. Relevant information iden- the URLs of web pages, and then uses BeautifulSoup (Richardson, 2023)
tification module removes CTI texts unrelated to the attack campaign to parse the web page content rendered by selenium. The raw text
and portions of text not strictly related to the attack behaviors. The format is converted by some open-source tools, such as pdfpulmer4
attack graph extraction resolves the attack behaviors in CTI texts, then and html2text.5 We simply clean the raw texts by removing the HTML
fuses these attack behaviors based on a novel fusion algorithm, and tags and images based on a heuristic approach. Once the raw texts
finally analyzes the temporal and causal order among attack behaviors are cleaned, we add them to the candidate text list. Finally, we have
(system events) for attack graph construction. The attack technique obtained over 10748 procedure examples and 739 CTI reports as candiidentification module recognizes all attack techniques related to the dates (e.g., white papers, security bulletins, APT reports, security blogs,
attack campaigns. The attack technique fusion is designed to fuse the etc.).
attack techniques from the previous module by using set theory and
similarity analysis. 3.2. Data preprocessing

3.1. Multi-source heterogeneous data collection After extracting the raw texts, we observe that they are not wellformatted. To address the CTI text complexity challenges and maximize
 To our knowledge, no publicly available multi-source dataset for the
same attack campaign exists. Furthermore, although open-source repositories of CTI reports are available, like APTnotes (Blanda, 2023), some 4
 https://github.com/jsvine/pdfplumber
 5
reports are easily overlooked due to the different naming forms of the https://github.com/aaronsw/html2text

 4
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Fig. 3. The overall framework of the proposed TIMFuser.

the effect of TIMFuser, we implement the following detailed data As illustrated in Fig. 4, we resolve the subject of the elliptical sentence
preprocessing procedures. as ‘‘UNC2452’’.
 Coreference resolution: We identify two types of coreference res-
3.2.1. Normalization olution in CTI reports.
 Normalization is mainly designed to transform sentences into a harmonized form. It consists of five subtasks: special characters removal, (1) Explicit coreference: Explicit coreference often employs proattack indicators reduction, passive-to-active verb conversion, and text nouns in place of the original entity to avoid repetition. For
segmentation. instance, in Fig. 4, pronoun ‘‘it’’ corresponds to the entity
 Special characters removal: It is worth noting that some CTI ‘‘UNC2452’’. For explicit coreference resolution, we utilize the
texts may contain special characters, such as non-ASCII characters. NeuralCoref7 model.
These special characters can cause confusion and inaccuracies in the (2) Implicit coreference: In contrast to explicit coreference, imsubsequent analysis. Therefore, the first step is to remove these special plicit coreference resolution tends to use certain words or phrases
characters. to substitute the previous entity. To ensure the broad compre-
 Attack indicators reduction: The authors of the CTI reports hensibility of CTI reports and meet the needs of different readers,
often rewrite certain attack indicators into another formation, con- CTI reports are written in a highly diverse style. Ambiguous synsidering that some users may accidentally click on the published onyms may appear in different reports. For example, C2, C&C,
attack indicators. For example, the malicious URL ‘‘http://www.test. Command and Control are different representations but refer to
com’’ is rewritten as ‘‘hxxp://www.test.com’’; the IP address the same entity. Additionally, some verbs like clone and spawn
‘‘191.101.78.189’’ is rewritten as ‘‘191.101.78[.]189’’. As part represent an action about a fork system call. The dependencies
of the normalization process, we reduce such attack indicators. among such entities cannot be recognized with common NLP
 Passive-to-active verb conversion: The passive voice can confuse models. Therefore, we construct mapping dictionaries based on
the SOTA NLP (Natural Language Processing) toolkits with the subject domain knowledge, aiming to map different synonyms of nouns
and object of the sentence. Therefore, we convert the passive voice into and verbs present in CTI reports to entities and verbs that may
the active form to facilitate the model in identifying the subject and be observed in the system audit logs. We construct dictionaries
object of the system call easily. For instance, ‘‘Emotet has been delivered of synonyms mapping for entities and verbs in Tables 1 and 2
by phishing emails containing attachments’’ be converted into ‘‘Phishing respectively. Given that the CAR (Cyber Analytics Repository)
emails containing attachments have delivered Emotet ’’. model (MITRE, 2023) of MITRE provides high-level modeling
 Text segmentation: The last step in the normalization process is and analysis, we consider the potential threat actions in the
text segmentation. We employ the NLTK6 library for both sentence CAR model shown in Table 3, such as email and file. For other
segmentation and word tokenization. types of verbs, we define a verb mapping dictionary through a
 comprehensive analysis of real-world CTI reports.
3.2.2. Resolution
 Unlike texts in the general domain, which follow specific grammatical rules (i.e., a sentence contains a subject–predicate–object structure 3.3. Relevant information identification
at least), CTI reports contain sufficient phrases that omit the subject.
We actively seek such cases. Once the subject is identified, we under- After preprocessing, we identify a considerable number of lengthy
take the coreference resolution task to reconcile explicit or implicit reports that are unrelated to attack campaigns. Moreover, some relereferences that pertain to the same entity into the actual object. vant CTI reports contain substantial statements (e.g. advertisements)
 Ellipsis subject resolution: Initially, we use the Part Of Speech unrelated to attack details. In this section, we initially identify long
(POS) and Dependency Parsing (DP) parsing toolkits to analyze the reports as security-related or non-security-related. Then, we focus on
sentence structure with an omitted subject. Upon detecting this type of extracting sentences that are pertinent to attack campaigns. This prosentence, we try to identify the potential subjects based on the distance cess is pivotal in simplifying the complexity and enhancing their overall
from the current sentence to the subject of the neighboring sentences. quality.

 6 7
 https://github.com/nltk https://github.com/huggingface/neuralcoref

 5
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Fig. 4. Resolution steps to turn a CTI report into a digestible form with ellipsis subject resolution and coreference resolution.

 Table 1 Table 3
 Mapping dictionary (part) for entity synonyms. CAR data model provided by ATT&CK.
 Entity Synonyms Object Action
 C&C C&C, C2, Command and Control, email block, delete, deliver, redirect,
 CC, CnC, CandC, . . . quarantine
 acl_modify, create, delete,
 %System32% %SYSTEM32%, <SYSTEM32>, file modify, read,
 SYSTEM32_, % SYSTEM32%, . . . timestomp, write
 process access, create, terminate
 %TEMP% %TEMP%, <TEMP>, TEMP_,
 registry add, key_edit, remove,
 % TEMP %, < TEMP >, . . .
 value_edit
 socker bind, close, listen
 %WINDOWS% %WINDOWS%, <WINDOWS>,
 WINDOWS_, . . .

 ... ... methods may lead the model to make erroneous judgments due to the
 loss of crucial information.
Table 2 To mitigate the above problem, we employ Longformer (Beltagy
Mapping Dictionary For Verb Synonyms. et al., 2020) to build the contextual representation for long CTI reports.
 Verb Synonyms Longformer utilizes the efficient self-attention that scales linearly with
 Write write, form , entrench, place, exfiltrate, deploy, the length of the input sequence. Unlike the typical self-attention
 implant, drop, install, putfile, compose, create, component, Longformer introduces the sparsity to the full self-attention
 copy, save, add, modify, append, timestomp, edit matrix through an ‘‘attention pattern’’, specifying pairs of input loca-
 Read survey, read, gather, download, navigate, locate, tions attending to one another. This approach combines a windowed
 get, acquire, check, detect, record, exfiltrate, local-context self-attention with end task-motivated global attention,
 extract, obtain, access encoding inductive bias about the task. The local attention contributes
 Unlink unlink, delete, clear, remove, erase, wipe, purge, to building the contextual representations, while the global attention
 expunge enables our model to construct full sequence representations. To train
 Send send, transfer, post, postsinformation, move, our model, we manually label a balanced dataset.
 transmit, deliver, push, redirect
 Receive receive, accept, take, get, collect 3.3.2. Relevant sentence recognition
 Connect connect, click, browse, portscan, bind, listen, To reduce the verbosity and capture the attack details in CTI reports,
 communicate we introduce the relevant sentence recognition task to distinguish
 Fork fork, clone, spawn, issue, set the sentences containing attack details. To do this, we need to con-
 EXEC use, execute, executed, run, launch, call, perform,
 struct a fine-grained representation of CTI text. The relevant sentence
 list, invoke, inject, open, target, resume recognition model is shown in Fig. 5. Currently, one of the best fine-
 Exit exit, terminate, stop, end, finish, break off, abort,
 grained representation models BERT is leveraged for contextual CTI
 conclude, block, quarantine, close text. To address the long-distance dependencies, we incorporate the
 MMAP allocate, assign
 BiLSTM (Bi-directional Long Short Term Memory) layer for contextual
 information extraction. Relevant text usually implies multiple concerns
 such as attack means, target, time, etc. We design a multi-head selfattention mechanism aimed at understanding the different types of
3.3.1. Relevant long text identification hidden contextual information. Finally, a linear layer and softmax layer
 We consider the relevant long text identification task as a binary are added for the final prediction.
classification problem, where texts are categorized as either securityrelated or non-security-related. Existing classification approaches for CTIs 3.4. Attack graph extraction
partition or shorten the long text into smaller sequences that fall
within the typical 512-token limit of BERT-style pretrained models. In the previous step, we recognized the relevant sentences from
For instance, some methods focus on the beginning or ending sections the relevant reports. The irrelevant sentences will be removed. Subseof a report, but this method is incapable of perceiving contextual quently, TIMFuser extracts the attack graph for every relevant report
information from the entire sequence. This limitation arises because the using the semantic role labeling (SRL) method and a predefined set
beginning or concluding parts of CTI reports usually contain general- of rules. In an ideal attack graph, nodes correspond to subjects and
ized background descriptions or irrelevant content. Consequently, such objects, while edges represent the verbs.

 6
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 obtained. Upon inspection, we find that some roles are not
 system entities (e.g., process, file, socket). For instance, ‘‘(Arg 0:
 MegaCortex, verb: logs, Arg 1: users, Arg 2: off the system)’’ obtained
 in Fig. 6 does not include the system entities. Consequently, we
 devise specific rules for detecting potential system entities within
 semantic roles. We eventually prune away those that are not
 system entities.
 (2) System actions transformation: Next, TIMFuser parses the
 verbs resulting from SRL. This is because some verbs are not
 the system call actions (e.g., fork, clone, write). Based on the
 verb synonyms mapping dictionary in Section 3.2.2, TIMFuser
 transforms the verbs into the system call actions. For example,
 download in Fig. 6 is transformed into read. If a verb is not a
 system call action, TIMFuser will prune away it.
 (3) Causal inference: After the previous steps, we can get massive
 ‘‘(Arg 0, verb, Arg 1)’’ tuples, which are considered as ‘‘(subject,
 action, object )’’ (also called attack behaviors). In this case, we are
 unable to know the direction of the information flow between
 subjects and objects. TIMFuser uses a mapping of system calls to
 infer the direction of system flows in the same way as Satvat
 et al. (2021). The mapping associates each system call with the
 Fig. 5. Relevant sentence recognition model.
 direction of the information flow. For instance, the fork system
 call implies the flow from subject to object, while the receive
 Table 4
 system call indicates flow direction from object to subject.
 Semantic role arguments and associated labels used in
 SRL (Palmer et al., 2005).
 Label Argument
 3.4.3. Attack behaviors fusion
 In this step, TIMFuser performs fusion at the attack technique
 ARG0 Agent
 ARG1 Patient
 level. The whole process involves the fusion of attack behaviors across
 ARG2 Instrument, Benefactive, Attribute multiple CTI sources. Several sources are used when constructing an
 ARG3 Starting point, Benefactive, Attribute attack graph, which possibly prompts entity (includes subject, object,
 ARG4 Ending point action) disambiguation and duplication (both called canonicalization)
 ARGM Modifier
 ignored in previous steps. As a result, it is essential to apply the fusion
 technique to address these matters.
 To further clarify the importance of addressing these issues, consider the following two triple extractions: ‘‘<APT29, exec, cmd.exe>’’,
 ‘‘<UNC2452, read, /etc/passwd>’’. Without considering ambiguity and
 redundancy, these extractions might be treated separately, leading
 to isolated nodes without connecting edges. However, ‘‘APT29’’ and
 ‘‘UNC2452’’ are perceived as the same entity. Another case involves
 Fig. 6. Semantic roles parsed by SRL. Words on the arch present the labels. entity canonicalization, such as ‘‘Sibot backdoor’’ versus ‘‘Sibot ’’, and
 ‘‘Equation group’’ versus ‘‘Equation’’. Such attack graphs will suffer from
 redundant facts. Previous entity canonicalization methods (Piplai et al.,
3.4.1. Semantic role labeling 2020; Li et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023) ignore such available side infor-
 SRL is an NLP task that aims to analyze the predicate-argument mation and perform canonicalization in isolation focusing only on the
structure within sentences by determining the semantic roles (called triples (e.g., based on edit distance). We use the contextual embedding
argument ) played by each word or phrase given a specific predicate. SRL and side information of entities to tackle this problem. The potential of
is typically designed to answer questions about basic event structures using contextual embedding to address the canonicalization problem
such as ‘‘who did what to whom when where and why’’. In essence, the has been demonstrated by Sarhan and Spruit (2021), Vashishth et al.
primary goal of SRL is to identify all component words filling semantic (2018).
roles for a predicate verb and then assign the semantic labels for each To be specific, we employ the fusion architecture (see Fig. 7) for
word or phrase in a sentence. Table 4 illustrates the correspondence the attack technique level fusion process. The architecture comprises
between labels and arguments. To provide an intuitive understanding of the following key components:
SRL, consider the example in Fig. 6. In this sentence, two verbs, downloads and logs, are present. The labels Arg 0, Arg 1 and Arg 2 denote the (1) Acquiring Side Information: We use the following side inforsubject, object, and indirect object of the respective verb. SRL detects the mation to get equivalent entities and actions.
possible arguments related to a verb and yields the final results: ‘‘(Arg 0:
MegaCortex, verb: downloads, Arg 1: launcher.doc)’’, ‘‘(Arg 0: MegaCortex, (a) Morphological Normalization (M-norm): A variety of
verb: logs, Arg 1: users, Arg 2: off the system)’’. morphological normalizations are used to recognize the
 To do this, we use a publicly available model (He et al., 2017). same entities, including tense recognition, pluralization,
This model incorporates highway bidirectional LSTMs with constrained capitalization, and other common features in natural landecoding and has been trained on a large corpus. Note that we do not guage descriptions.
retrain the model further, instead of using the output of the model (b) Entity Linking: Given a subject and object, we use the
directly. entity linker implemented by spaCy8 to link them (i.e. entity mentions) to the knowledge base such as Wikipedia,
3.4.2. SRL post-processing
 (1) System entities detection: After SRL processing, a substan-
 8
 tial number of component words for filling the roles may be https://spacy.io/

 7
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Fig. 7. Overview of the proposed attack behavior fusion method.

 etc. Through entity linking, ‘‘APT29’’ and ‘‘UNC2452’’ side information into the final objective function as follows.
 ∑ ∑
 are linked to the same entity ‘‘Cozy Bear’’. Such entity min𝜆𝑠𝑡𝑟 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0, 𝛾 + 𝜎(𝜂𝑗 ) − 𝜎(𝜂𝑖 ))
 𝛩
 mentions are potentially considered equivalent. 𝑖∈𝑋𝑝 𝑗∈𝑋𝑛

 (c) WordNet with Word-sense Disambiguation: Wordnet ∑ 𝜆𝑠𝑢𝑏,𝜃 ∑
 + ‖𝑒𝑠 − 𝑒′ ‖2
 |𝛷𝑠𝑢𝑏,𝜃 | ′ ‖ 𝑠‖
 (Miller, 1995) provides the possible synsets for a given 𝜃∈𝓁𝑠𝑢𝑏 | | 𝑠,𝑠 ∈𝛷𝑠𝑢𝑏,𝜃
 subject or object. For example, ‘‘variant’’ and ‘‘edition’’ ∑ 𝜆𝑜𝑏𝑗,𝜃 ∑
 + ‖𝑒𝑜 − 𝑒′ ‖2
 link to the same synset version.n.02 by using wordnet with | | ′ ‖ 𝑜‖ (2)
 𝜃∈𝓁𝑜𝑏𝑗 |𝛷𝑜𝑏𝑗,𝜃 | 𝑜,𝑜 ∈𝛷𝑜𝑏𝑗,𝜃
 | |
 word-sense disambiguation. If two entity mentions share ∑ 𝜆𝑎𝑐𝑡,𝜙 ∑
 + ‖𝑒 − 𝑒′ ‖2
 the same synset, they have strong evidence to be deemed | | ′ ‖ 𝑎 𝑎‖
 𝜙∈𝓁𝑎𝑐𝑡 |𝛷𝑎𝑐𝑡,𝜙 | 𝑎,𝑎 ∈𝛷𝑎𝑐𝑡,𝜙
 | |
 as the same entity. ∑ ∑ ∑
 + 𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑔 ( ‖𝑒 ‖2 + ‖𝑒𝑜 ‖2 + ‖𝑒𝑎 ‖2 ).
 (d) IDF Token Overlap: This criterion measures the degree ‖ 𝑠‖ ‖ ‖ ‖ ‖
 𝑠∈𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠 𝑜∈𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑠 𝑎∈𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑠
 of overlap of entity mentions. For example, ‘‘Cardinal 1
 𝜎(𝑥) = (3)
 RAT ’’ and ‘‘Cardinal are more likely to be recognized as 1 + 𝑒(−𝑥)
 the same entity. The degree of IDF token overlap can be
 𝜂𝑖 = 𝑒𝑇𝑎 (𝑒𝑠 ⋆ 𝑒𝑜 ) (4)
 defined as:
 ∑ Noting that, 𝛩 = {𝑒𝑠 }𝑠∈𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠 ∪ {𝑒𝑜 }𝑜∈𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑠 ∪ {𝑒𝑎 }𝑎∈𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑠 , denotes the
 −1
 𝑡∈𝑤(𝑚)∩𝑤(𝑚′ ) 𝑙𝑜𝑔(1 + 𝑓 (𝑡)) set of all subjects, objects and actions d-dimensional embeddings,
 𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑓 (𝑚, 𝑚′ ) = ∑ (1)
 𝑡∈𝑤(𝑚)∪𝑤(𝑚′ ) 𝑙𝑜𝑔(1 + 𝑓 (𝑡))
 −1 where subs, objs and acts are the set of all subjects, objects and
 actions in the input. 𝑋𝑝 , 𝑋𝑛 refer to the positive and negative
 where 𝑤(⋅) denotes the terms set for a subject or object, examples and 𝛾 > 0 specify the width of the margin. 𝓁𝑠𝑢𝑏 , 𝓁𝑜𝑏𝑗 ,
 excluding stop words. 𝑓 (⋅) is the document frequency of 𝓁𝑎𝑐𝑡 are the set of all types of subject, object, and action side
 information. For instance, 𝓁𝑠𝑢𝑏 ={Entity Linking, WordNet, . . . },
 a token from the terms set 𝑤(⋅).
 𝓁𝑎𝑐𝑡 ={ARI}. 𝛷𝑠𝑢𝑏,𝜃 , 𝛷𝑜𝑏𝑗,𝜃 , 𝛷𝑎𝑐𝑡,𝜃 specify the equivalence condi-
 (e) Association Rule Information (ARI): We use the statis- tions of subject, object, and action from the side information 𝜃
 tic rule to infer the equal actions. Specifically, two actions or 𝜙.
 𝑟 and 𝑟′ are equivalent if and only if both 𝑟 ⇒ 𝑟′ and 𝑟′ ⇒ 𝑟 To combine the expressive power of the tensor product with the
 efficiency and simplicity of TransE (Bordes et al., 2013), we use
 satisfy the support and confidence thresholds.
 the circular correlation of vectors to represent pairs of entities
 (2) Learning Embeddings: Some of the equivalent relations ob- as Eqs. (4) and (5), where ⋆ ∶ 𝑅𝑑 × 𝑅𝑑 → 𝑅𝑑 . In the last term,
 tained from different side information may be spurious, so we set we add the L2 regularization term to avoid overfitting.

 the penalizing factor for each side information as 𝜆𝑠𝑢𝑏∕𝑜𝑏𝑗∕𝑎𝑐𝑡,𝜃 . We ∑
 𝑑−1
 [𝑎 ⋆ 𝑏]𝑘 = 𝑎𝑖 𝑏𝑘+𝑖 𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑑 (5)
 optimize the objective function of CESI (Vashishth et al., 2018) 𝑖=0
 chosen for its effectiveness in tasks like entity canonicaliza-
 (3) Clustering Embeddings: After obtaining the embeddings learned
 tion in knowledge graph construction. Given that we only have in the previous step, we use the Hierarchical Agglomerative
 positive attack behaviors, we generate negative examples using Clustering (HAC) (Kobren et al., 2017) algorithm to identify
 heuristics such as the local closed world assumption. To rank similar subjects, objects, and actions in space based on the distance
 metric of cosine similarity. For example, a cluster comprises
 the probability of positive triples higher than the probability of
 ‘‘APT29’’, ‘‘Cozy Bear’’, ‘‘UNC2452’’, etc. Our choice behind HAC
 negative ones, we employ a pairwise ranking loss. Additionally, is motivated by the fact that it does not require prior knowledge
 we incorporate the reliability (by using a penalizing factor) of regarding the number of clusters and it can partition clusters

 8
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 based on semantic hierarchies, where each cluster corresponds Algorithm 1: Attack behaviors fusion
 to a set of semantically similar subjects, objects, and actions. Input: Dataset: Attack behaviors dataset (𝑋𝑝 ); Initialized model
 Additionally, it supports complete linkage clustering, similar parameters; Set the hyperparameters: the number of
 to the concept of farthest neighbor clustering. Initially, each epoch for training (𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑐ℎ𝑠), number of batch
 average embedding is a cluster on its own, and in each step, (𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒), distance threshold of HAC clustering (𝑑_𝑡).
 the two clusters having the smallest maximum pairwise distance Output: Trained embeddings for attack behaviors; Fused attack
 are merged. Compared to single and average linkage criterion, behaviors.
 complete linkage criterion can give smaller sized clusters. This 1 𝑆 ← ∅ // Initialize side information set
 is more reasonable for our canonicalization problem. 2 for x in 𝑋𝑝 do
 (4) Choosing Representative: In the next phase, we determine a 3 Acquire side information 𝑆𝑡 for a 𝑥;
 representative for each subject, object, and action cluster. For 4 𝑆 = 𝑆 ∪ 𝑆𝑡 ;
 each cluster, we calculate the mean of all elements’ embed- 5 end
 dings weighted by the number of occurrences of each element 6 Initialize embedding for 𝑋;
 in the input. The subject, object, and action that lie closest to 7 for e=1 to epochs do
 the weighted cluster mean is selected as a representative of 8 Shuffle X;
 the cluster. We formally define the equations for choosing a 9 for mini-batch 𝑏 in 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 do
 representative in the cluster 𝐶 as Eqs. (6) and (7), where 𝐶 10 Generate the negative samples 𝑋𝑛 from 𝑋;
 denotes any one cluster in the subjects, objects, or actions clusters. 11 Merge all the datasets: 𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋𝑛 ∪ 𝑋𝑏 ;
 ∑ 12 Given 𝑋𝑡 and 𝑆, compute gradient by using Eq. (2);
 𝑥∈𝐶 𝑒𝑥 ⋅ 𝑓 (𝑥) 13 Update the parameters of model;
 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛(𝐶) = ∑ (6)
 𝑥∈𝐶 𝑓 (𝑥) 14 end
 15 end
 𝑅𝑒𝑝(𝐶) = 𝑎𝑟𝑔 min ‖ ‖
 ‖𝑒𝑥 − 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛(𝐶)‖ (7)
 𝑥∈𝐶 16 Get the learned embeddings 𝐸;

 where 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛(⋅) denotes the weighted average embedding of a 17 𝑑_𝑚 ← 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑒; // Distance metric

 cluster. 𝑓 (⋅) is the document frequency of the subject, object, or 18 𝑙_𝑐 ← 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑒_𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑎𝑔𝑒; // Linkage criterion

 action, and 𝑅𝑒𝑝(⋅) refers to the representative of the cluster. 19 𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠 = 𝐻𝐴𝐶(𝐸, 𝑑_𝑚, 𝑙_𝑐,𝑑_𝑡);
 20 𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑝 ← ∅;
 (5) Constructing Attack Graphs: In the final step, we build the
 21 for c in clusters do
 attack graph, which can fuse multi-source attack behaviors together based on their correlations. This allows us to observe and 22 Get the average embedding of all elements in 𝑐 by using Eq.
 analyze the attack behaviors of malware or actors from a global (6);
 perspective. For each directed information flow between subject 23 Choose the representative (𝑐𝑟 ) of 𝑐 based on Eq. (7);
 𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐 24 𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑝 = 𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑝 ∪ 𝑐𝑟 .
 and object, we generate edge and node pairs (e.g., 𝐴𝑃 𝑇 29 →
 25 end
 𝑐𝑚𝑑.𝑒𝑥𝑒) as subgraphs at the sentence level. Currently, we only
 26 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡_𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑠(𝑋𝑝 );
 consider dependencies within a single source. Multi-source de-
 27 𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑒(𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑝 , 𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠, 𝑋𝑝 );
 pendencies will be established based on semantically similar
 28 𝐹 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑠(𝑋𝑝 , 𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠).
 nodes, i.e., the clusters obtained in the previous steps. we canonicalize each node and edge (action) using the representatives
 of clusters which include these nodes and edges. Naturally, we
 merge the similar nodes to fuse the subgraphs into a complete
 attack graph. embedding methods. Graph2vec, an unsupervised approach, transforms
 graphs into vector representations using a doc2vec-based technique. It
 In summary, the whole procedure of fusing attack behaviors is is trained to maximize the likelihood of predicting subgraphs within the
presented in Algorithm 1. For each technique, including the sub- input graph, and eventually, graphs with similar subgraphs and similar
techniques from MITRE ATT&CK, we construct the attack graphs de- structures have similar embeddings. We feed our constructed attack
noted as 𝐺𝑞 by using our fusion algorithm. To comprehend the TTPs graph dataset and node features (an output of Algorithm 1) into the
view of an attack campaign, we also build the attack graphs symbolized Graph2vec model and obtain vector representations from the hidden
as 𝐺𝑝 for all CTI reports related to the same attack campaign. layers. Subsequently, with 𝑧𝑝 and 𝑧𝑝 as the embeddings of 𝐺𝑝 and 𝐺𝑞 ,
 we use 𝐷(𝑧𝑝 , 𝑧𝑞 ) to quantify the distance of 𝐺𝑝 and 𝐺𝑞 following Eq. (8).
3.5. Attack technique identification
 𝑧𝑞 ⋅ 𝑧𝑝
 𝐷(𝑧𝑞 , 𝑧𝑝 ) = (8)
 The primary goal of attack technique identification is to identify ‖ ‖‖ ‖
 ‖𝑧𝑞 ‖ ‖𝑧𝑝 ‖
the TTPs associated with the attack campaign. Some prior research (Li ‖ ‖‖ ‖
et al., 2022) construct attack technique templates based on the ontology The graph matching function Eq. (9) is used to measure the matching
model. However, this approach has limitations in terms of feature degree of subgraphs based on a defined threshold 𝑡. If 𝑓 (𝑧𝑝 , 𝑧𝑞 ) = 1
richness and flexibility. Other studies (Alam et al., 2023; Abdeen et al., exists, then 𝐺𝑞 is a subgraph of 𝐺𝑝 . Otherwise, they do not conform to
2023; Grigorescu et al., 2022) utilize embedding models, capable of subgraph constraints.
 {
capturing the semantic similarity of attack behavior elements but lack- 1 𝑖𝑓 𝑓 𝐷(𝑧𝑞 , 𝑧𝑝 ) < 𝑡
ing in structural information. In this section, we adopt the graph 𝑓 (𝑧𝑞 , 𝑧𝑝 ) = (9)
 0 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
embedding approach to match 𝐺𝑞 with 𝐺𝑝 for TTPs identification.
 We model the attack technique recognition task as the subgraph
matching problem. So we need to represent the graph. Inspired by the 3.6. Attack technique fusion
Graph2vec (Narayanan et al., 2017) method, we depict the attack graph
as a document, illustrated in Fig. 8, where nodes correspond to words, Unlike the attack behavior, attack technique is a high-level CTI.
subgraphs represent sentence or paragraph sequences. For graphs 𝐺𝑝 Accordingly, we introduce a novel approach for attack technique fusion
and 𝐺𝑞 , we employ Graph2vec, one of the best performing graph at the level of the attack campaign. Inspired by Azevedo et al. (2019),

 9
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Algorithm 2: Attack technique fusion
 Input: Attack techniques and attack behaviors list
 𝑆𝑇 = {𝑆𝑇1 , 𝑆𝑇2 , ..., 𝑆𝑇𝑚 } and 𝑆𝑈 = {𝑆𝑈1 , 𝑆𝑈2 , ..., 𝑆𝑈𝑚 },
 disclosed by 𝑚 sources.
 Output: Enriched attack techniques <𝑇 𝐹 , 𝑈 𝐹 >.
 1 Function GetInd(𝐿, 𝑅, 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚): ⊳ Get index of item
 2 𝑥 ← 𝐿.𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥(𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚);
 3 𝑦 ← 𝑅.𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥(𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚);
 Fig. 8. Attack graph can be processed into a document.
 4 return 𝑥, 𝑦
 5 End Function
 6 𝑇 𝐹 ← ∅, 𝑈 𝐹 ← ∅; // Initialize empty sets
 7 for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑚 do
which aggregate and correlate different IoCs from various sources to
 8 𝑐𝑎𝑠𝑒_𝑐𝑢𝑟 = 𝐽𝑐 (𝑇 𝐹 , 𝑆𝑇𝑖 ); ⊳ Eq. (10)
generate enriched IoCs, we aggregate all attack techniques using set
 9 if 𝑐𝑎𝑠𝑒_𝑐𝑢𝑟 is 𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 1 then ⊳ 𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 1
theory and similarity measures analysis. That means an attack tech-
 10 𝑇 𝐹 ← 𝑇 𝐹 ∪ 𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑈 𝐹 ← 𝑈 𝐹 ∪ 𝑆𝑈𝑖 ;
nique can be conceptualized as a set whose elements are its attributes.
 11 else if 𝑐𝑎𝑠𝑒_𝑐𝑢𝑟 is 𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 4 then ⊳ 𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 4
The attributes are composed of tuples, like ‘‘<attack tactic, technique
 12 continue;
name>’’. For a CTI source 𝑆𝑖 , its disclosed attack techniques are:
 13 else
𝑆𝑇𝑖 = {< 𝑎𝑖,1 , 𝑡𝑖,1 >,< 𝑎𝑖,2 , 𝑡𝑖,2 >, . . . ,< 𝑎𝑖,𝑛 , 𝑡𝑖,𝑛 > }, 𝑆𝑇𝑖 ⊂ 𝑆𝑇 . To gain
 14 𝑐𝑠_𝑐𝑢𝑟 = 𝐶𝑠 (𝑇 𝐹 , 𝑆𝑇𝑖 ); ⊳ Eq. (11)
insights into the details of attack techniques, we record the attack
 15 if 𝑐𝑠_𝑐𝑢𝑟 == 1 then ⊳ 𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 3
behavior lists (i.e., usage) corresponding to attack techniques as 𝑆𝑈𝑖 =
 16 if 𝑇 𝐹 ⊃ 𝑆𝑇𝑖 then
{𝑢𝑖,1 , 𝑢𝑖,2 , … , 𝑢𝑖,𝑛 }, 𝑆𝑈𝑖 ⊂ 𝑆𝑈 , where 𝑢𝑖,1 refers to the usage list of
 17 for 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚 in 𝑆𝑇𝑖 do
< 𝑎𝑖,1 , 𝑡𝑖,1 >. During the process of attack techniques fusion, any two
 18 𝑥, 𝑦 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐼𝑛𝑑(𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑇 𝐹 , 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚);
different CTI sources, 𝑆𝑖 and 𝑆𝑗 , may exist in the following cases:
 19 𝑈 𝐹 [𝑦] ← 𝑆𝑈𝑖 [𝑥] ∪ 𝑈 𝐹 [𝑦];
 • Case 1: (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ∩ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 = ∅), 𝑆𝑇𝑖 and 𝑆𝑇𝑗 are unrelated; 20 end
 • Case 2: ((𝑆𝑇𝑖 ∩ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ≠ ∅) ∧ (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ⊄ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ∧ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ⊄ 𝑆𝑇𝑖 )), 𝑆𝑇𝑖 and 𝑆𝑇𝑗 21 else
 are related and two sets have complementary elements, in which 22 for 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚 in 𝑇 𝐹 do
 case union of two sets can result in a more comprehensive attack 23 𝑥, 𝑦 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐼𝑛𝑑(𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑇 𝐹 , 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚);
 techniques view about the same attack campaign; 24 𝑆𝑈𝑖 [𝑥] ← 𝑆𝑈𝑖 [𝑥] ∪ 𝑈 𝐹 [𝑦];
 • Case 3: ((𝑆𝑇𝑖 ∩ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ≠ ∅) ∧ (𝑆𝑇𝑖 ⊂ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ∧ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ⊂ 𝑆𝑇𝑖 )), in which 25 end
 instance one of two sets does not provide valuable information; 26 𝑈 𝐹 ← 𝑆𝑈𝑖 , 𝑇 𝐹 ← 𝑆𝑇𝑖 ;
 • Case 4: ((𝑆𝑇𝑖 ∩ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ≠ ∅) ∧ (𝑆𝑇𝑖 = 𝑆𝑇𝑗 )), 𝑆𝑇𝑖 and 𝑆𝑇𝑗 are equal. 27 end
 28 else ⊳ 𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 2
We employ the Jaccard index (Jaccard, 1912) described as 𝐽 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ) =
𝑆𝑇𝑖 ∩𝑆𝑇𝑗 29 𝛤 ← 𝑇 𝐹 ∩ 𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝛹 ← 𝑈 𝐹 ∩ 𝑆𝑈𝑖 ;
𝑆𝑇𝑖 ∪𝑆𝑇𝑗
 to calculate the similarity of two sets. 𝐽 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ) ∈ [0, 1]. The 30 for 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚 in 𝛤 do
higher 𝐽 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ), the more similar 𝑆𝑇𝑖 and 𝑆𝑇𝑗 are. The way to judge 31 𝑥, 𝑦 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐼𝑛𝑑(𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑇 𝐹 , 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚);
the above cases can be formalized as: 32 𝑆𝑈𝑖 [𝑥], 𝑈 𝐹 [𝑦] ← 𝑆𝑈𝑖 [𝑥] ∪ 𝑈 𝐹 [𝑦];
 ⎧𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 1 𝐽 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ) = 0 33 end
 ⎪ 34 𝑈 𝐹 ← 𝑆𝑈𝑖 ∪ 𝑈 𝐹 , 𝑇 𝐹 ← 𝑆𝑇𝑖 ∪ 𝑇 𝐹
𝐽𝑐 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ) = ⎨𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 4 𝐽 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ) = 1 (10)
 ⎪ 35 end
 ⎩𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 2 , 𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒 3 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
 36 end
To identify the Case 2 and Case 3, we define the contained similarity 37 end
metric as Eq. (11). When 𝐶𝑠 is 1, it means either one set is contained
in another one or both sets are identical (Case 3). Conversely, 𝑆𝑇𝑖 and
𝑆𝑇𝑗 fall into Case 2.
 𝑆𝑇𝑖 ∩ 𝑆𝑇𝑗 5179 are annotated as irrelevant. Additionally, we create gold clusters
𝐶𝑠 (𝑆𝑇𝑖 , 𝑆𝑇𝑗 ) = ( ) (11) to assess the performance of attack behaviors fusion. We label a total
 |
 𝑚𝑖𝑛 ||𝑆𝑇𝑖 || , |𝑆𝑇𝑗 of 1221 entity clusters. To explore the TIMFuser’s analytical capability
 |
 in the real-world attack campaign, we manually label the ground truth
 Based on the above analysis, we describe the process of attack
technique fusion in Algorithm 2. of the attack techniques and attack behaviors for the 11 CTI reports
 collected. Table 5 provides details about the dataset, including entities,
 dependencies, and techniques.
4. Evaluation

 In this section, we aim to test and evaluate the whole performance 4.2. Evaluation metrics
of TIMFuser.
 The relevance identification task is considered as a binary decision
4.1. Dataset problem, with outcomes categorized as positive or negative. We define
 the confusion matrix as illustrated in Table 6. 𝑇𝑝 (True positive) repre-
 To train a relevant long text identifier, we manually label the class sents the count of accurately classified samples with threat relevance.
for crawled long CTI reports, consisting of 516 attack campaign relevant Conversely, 𝐹𝑝 (False positive) signifies the misclassification of samreports or 223 irrelevant reports. For the relevant sentence classifier, we ples with threat irrelevance as relevant. Similarly, 𝑇𝑛 (True negative)
annotate a balanced dataset of 14204 sentences sampled from various corresponds to the number of samples correctly classified as threat
sources, categorized into two classes: attack behavior relevant and attack irrelevance, and 𝐹𝑛 (False negative) denotes the misclassification of
behavior irrelevant. In total, 10748 sentences are labeled as relevant, and samples with threat relevance as irrelevant. Based on the confusion

 10
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Table 5
 Statistical information of CTI reports from the real-world attack campaign.
 CTI Reports CTI Sources #Entities #Dependencies #Techniques
 Highly Evasive Attacker Leverages SolarWinds FireEye 52 7 17
 Supply Chain to Compromise Multiple Global
 Victims With SUNBURST Backdoor (CR1)
 Dark Halo Leverages SolarWinds Compromise Volexity 23 4 22
 to Breach Organizations (CR2)
 Early Bird Catches the Wormhole: Observations CrowdStrike 50 5 23
 from the StellarParticle Campaign (CR3)
 IRON RITUAL (CR4) MSTIC 8 2 4
 NOBELIUM targeting delegated administrative SecureWorks 6 3 1
 privileges to facilitate broader attacks (CR5)
 GoldMax, GoldFinder, and Sibot: Analyzing MSTIC 63 7 5
 NOBELIUM’s layered persistence (CR6)
 New SUNSHUTTLE Second-Stage Backdoor Mandiant 12 6 1
 Uncovered Targeting U.S.-Based Entity (CR7)
 Further TTPs associated with SVR cyber actors NCSC 15 3 7
 (CR8)
 SUNSPOT: An Implant in the Build Process (CR9) CrowdStrike 15 6 9
 SUNBURST Additional Technical Details (CR10) Mandiant 25 7 8
 SUNBURST, TEARDROP and the NetSec New CheckPoint 6 2 2
 Normal (CR11)

Table 6 in 𝐺. A hit within cluster 𝐶 indicates that two mentions refer to
Confusion matrix. the same gold entity.
 Actual Labels/Predicted Labels Relevance Irrelevance ∑ | ′ ′ |
 𝑐∈𝐶 |{(𝑣, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑔, ∃𝑔 ∈ 𝐺, ∀(𝑣, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑐}|
 Relevance 𝑇𝑝 𝐹𝑛 𝑃𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟 (𝐶, 𝐺) = ∑ (19)
 Irrelevance 𝐹𝑝 𝑇𝑛 𝑐∈𝐶 |𝑐| 𝐶2
 ∑ | ′ ′ |
 𝑐∈𝐶 |{(𝑣, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑔, ∃𝑔 ∈ 𝐺, ∀(𝑣, 𝑣 ) ∈ 𝑐}|
 𝑅𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟 (𝐶, 𝐺) = ∑ (20)
 𝑔∈𝐺 |𝑔| 𝐶2
matrix, we use the following metrics:
 4.3. Evaluation setup
𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝑇𝑝 ∕(𝑇𝑝 + 𝐹𝑝 ) (12)
 To assess the effectiveness of TIMFuser, we conduct a set of experiments. We compare the methods of each subtask in TIMFuser with
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = 𝑇𝑝 ∕(𝑇𝑝 + 𝐹𝑛 ) (13)
 existing mainstream models (See Section 4.4), setting parameters not
 mentioned to their default values.
 2 × 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 × 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
𝐹 1 − 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = (14)
 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 4.4. Results and analysis
 To evaluate the effect of attack behavior fusion in attack graph
extraction, we manually construct gold entity clusters. Note that we In order to explain the ability of TIMFuser more clearly and indo not evaluate actions fusion performance because all our actions are tuitively, we have designed five questions and provide in-depth anuniform. We use the evaluation metrics of Sarhan and Spruit (2021), swers. Especially, we also give the experimental analysis and ablation
i.e. macro, micro, and pairwise. We consider the precision, recall, and F1- evaluations.
score of these metrics. F1-score is defined in Eq. (14). The formalization Q1: How accurate is TIMFuser in identifying relevance from noisy
is as follows. Let 𝐶 represent the clusters produced by our fusion model, multi-sources data?
and 𝐺 be the gold standard clusters. We split the training set and the test set with a ratio of 3:1 for
 the relevance recognition task. For the relevant long text classification
 • Macro: Macro precision (𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 ) denotes the percentage of gensubtask, we use SOTA long text classification models as baselines to
 erated clusters linked to gold standard clusters. Macro recall
 prove our performance, including: (1) BERT (document truncation)
 (𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 ) is the inverse of 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 . (Devlin et al., 2018) truncates the long text to the first 512 tokens and
 |𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 ∶ ∃𝑔 ∈ 𝐺 ∶ 𝑔 ⊇ 𝑐| processes the truncated content; (2) BERT+TextRank (key sentence
 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 (𝐶, 𝐺) = (15)
 |𝐶| selection) ranks and select key sentences (up to 512 tokens); (3)
 BERT+Random (key sentence selection) (Park et al., 2022) selects
 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 (𝐶, 𝐺) = 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 (𝐺, 𝐶) (16) random sentences up to 512 tokens to augment the first 512 tokens;
 (4) ToBERT (segment representations) (Pappagari et al., 2019) splits
 • Micro: Micro precision (𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜 ) measures the purity of the clusters the input long text into shorter segments of 200 tokens to obtain a
 𝐶 under the assumption that the most frequent gold entity among representation for each of them.
 the mentions in a cluster is the correct entity. Micro recall (𝑅𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜 ) Fig. 9 shows the results of relevant long-text classification. Our
 is the inverse of 𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜 . method achieves the best performance with an improved F1-score
 1 ∑ of 6.31%. This demonstrates that TIMFuser can accurately identify
 𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜 (𝐶, 𝐺) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑔∈𝐺 |𝑐 ∩ 𝑔| (17) relevant information even from noisy multi-source data. This further
 𝑁 𝑐∈𝐶
 proves the effectiveness of our method. Since other baseline models
 𝑅𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜 (𝐶, 𝐺) = 𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜 (𝐺, 𝐶) (18) processing the truncated text or segmented representations may lose
 key information for classification, they have poor performance. We
 • Pairwise: Pairwise precision (𝑃𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟 ) quantifies the ratio of the choose the best method to train our model. During training, we use
 number of hits in 𝐶 to the total possible pairs in 𝐶. Pairwise recall a mini-batch size of 4 and train the model for 50 epochs. Following
 (𝑅𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟 ) is computed as the ratio of hits in 𝐶 to all possible pairs experimental comparisons, we ultimately select Cross Entropy as the

 11
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Table 8
 Results for the relevant sentence recognition subtask.
 Models Precision Recall F1-score
 SVM (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995) 87.65% 84.04% 85.80%
 MLP (Pouyanfar et al., 2018) 80.29% 88.89% 84.37%
 fastText (Joulin et al., 2017) 78.58% 72.81% 75.59%
 TextCNN (Kim, 2014) 90.22% 98.31% 94.09%
 BiLSTM (Li et al., 2019b) 94.20% 99.89% 96.96%
 Ours 𝟗𝟖.𝟖𝟖% 𝟗𝟗.𝟔𝟔% 𝟗𝟗.𝟐𝟕%

 Fig. 9. Results for the relevant long text classification subtask.

Table 7
Comparison results of different embedding method.
 Models Precision Recall F1-score
 Word2vec 76.12% 85.94% 80.73%
 Glove 77.82% 86.47% 81.92%
 BERT-base-cased 72.78% 94.87% 82.37%
 BERT-base-uncased 97.67% 94.23% 92.04%
 BERT-large-uncased 82.95% 94.70% 88.44% Fig. 10. F1-scores of TIMFuser for different epochs.
 RoBERTa-base 98.66% 99.66% 99.16%
 RoBERTa-large 𝟗𝟖.𝟖𝟖% 𝟗𝟗.𝟔𝟔% 𝟗𝟗.𝟐𝟕%

loss function, and Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) as the optimizer with
a learning rate of 3𝑒 − 5.
 Due to the superior results of the transformer models in the classification task (see Fig. 9), we finetune a series of large models including
variants (BERT-base-cased, BERT-base-uncased, BERT-large-uncased)
of BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), and variants (RoBERTa-base, RoBERTalarge) of RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2021) as encoders for the relevant sentence classification subtask. We compare them with classical word embedding models such as Word2vec (Wu et al., 2018), Glove (Wu et al.,
2018), etc. Comparative results in Table 7 demonstrate that RoBERTalarge achieves the best performance. This superior performance is Fig. 11. F1-scores of TIMFuser for different clustering thresholds.
mainly attributed to the dynamic mask mechanism of RoBERTa and
the vast corpus at the scale of billions, which may exhibit superior
generalization compared to other methods in the specific domain. We 5.49%, respectively. This is because we combine the side information
choose RoBERTa-large as our effective encoder to train our model. and learned embeddings (semantic and structural information). In con-
During training, the sequence length is set to 150 and the learning trast, Li et al. (2022) and Guo et al. (2023), relying on the edit distance
rate is set to 5𝑒 − 5. We still use Adam as the optimizer. The experi- method, consider only character features, which are less effective than
mental results (see Table 8) are compared with existing SOTA machine TIMFuser. Sarhan and Spruit (2021) use a clustering method for CTI
learning models such as support vector machines (SVM) (Cortes and fusion, but embeddings from other tasks cannot capture the equivalent
Vapnik, 1995) and deep learning methods (MLP (Pouyanfar et al., entities. Moreover, Sarhan and Spruit (2021) do not utilize side infor-
2018), fastText (Joulin et al., 2017), TextCNN (Kim, 2014), BiLSTM (Li mation. We replicate the approach of Sarhan and Spruit (2021), directly
et al., 2019b) stacked with RoBERTa-large embedding layer). From using embeddings from the relevant sentence recognition subtask, then
the comparison of different measures, our model outperforms other performing clustering to identify equivalent entities and actions. Addilearning methods, even though machine learning algorithms achieve tionally, We replicate the fusing methods of Li et al. (2022) and Guo
good precision. This indicates that TIMFuser can reduce the redundancy et al. (2023), separately adjusting the distance thresholds to 2 and
in CTI reports and capture critical attack details effectively. This suc- 5 (differing from the original work) and other details to achieve the
cess is greatly attributed to the powerful learning and representation optimal results. These findings highlight the significant contributions
capabilities of large language models. In the ablation assessment by of our side information and learned embeddings.
comparing with BiLSTM (Li et al., 2019b), we find that the attention Figs. 10 and 11 depict the trends of different metrics with varying
mechanism can improve the F1-score by 2.31%. epochs and thresholds of HAC clustering. During the training process,
 By removing CTI reports unrelated to attack campaigns and sen- as the number of training epochs increases, F1 gradually increases
tences that are not strictly relevant to attack behaviors, TIMFuser and eventually stabilizes. The F1-scores of macro, micro, and pairwise
ensures the performance of subsequent tasks. reach 93.36%, 94.66%, and 71.36%, respectively. It is noteworthy that
 Q2: Whether the attack behavior fusion module used to extract pairwise F1-score is relatively low, indicating that not all mentions of
attack graph is adequate and the best? entities in 𝐶 refer to the same gold entity. The distance threshold is
 We use glove to initialize embeddings for attack behaviors, as changed from [0.1, 0.6]. When the threshold is 0.1, TIMFuser achieves
shown in Algorithm 1. Table 9 presents the comparative results of the best results.
attack behaviors fusion with SOTA. Our method performs best with To explore the effect of side information, we conduct ablation
the F1-scores of macro, micro, and pairwise improved by 1.9%, 2.74%, experiments shown in Fig. 12 by using different variants of TIMFuser.

 12
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Table 9
 Comparison results for attack behavior fusion.
 Model Macro Micro Pairwise
 Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score
 Sarhan and Spruit (2021) 86.45% 87.38% 86.91% 76.74% 91.82% 83.61% 55.70% 80.57% 65.87%
 Li et al. (2022) 95.61% 87.66% 91.46% 89.45% 94.54% 91.92% 43.01% 92.73% 58.76%
 Guo et al. (2023) 65.22% 88.00% 74.92% 73.64% 95.33% 83.09% 46.32% 81.60% 59.09%
 TIMFuser (Ours) 98.29% 88.91% 𝟗𝟑.𝟑𝟔% 94.53% 94.79% 𝟗𝟒.𝟔𝟔% 57.82% 93.17% 𝟕𝟏.𝟑𝟔%

 Table 10
 Comparison results for F1-scores in attack graph extraction and attack techniques recognition.
 CTI Entities Dependencies Techniques
 reports
 EXTRACTOR AttacKG TIMFuser EXTRACTOR AttacKG TIMFuser AttacKG TIMFuser
 CR1 58.56% 54.89% 91.80% 30.77% 72.57% 93.33% 71.62% 88.04%
 CR2 58.02% 45.28% 94.11% 49.28% 76.92% 100.00% 64.24% 82.14%
 CR3 43.87% 46.02% 86.24% 77.48% 77.12% 90.91% 61.35% 78.03%
 CR4 50.00% 58.72% 77.78% 71.44% 63.22% 100.00% 63.32% 76.93%
 CR5 67.06% 53.33% 76.92% 33.33% 59.30% 80.00% 67.49% 79.65%
 CR6 35.40% 61.06% 84.27% 42.92% 71.89% 93.33% 67.57% 86.27%
 CR7 54.31% 56.78% 68.09% 46.52% 90.20% 92.31% 67.72% 80.90%
 CR8 48.74% 43.75% 76.47% 46.15% 62.86% 100.00% 49.69% 86.27%
 CR9 53.79% 57.12% 80.00% 52.52% 90.54% 100.00% 62.44% 87.53%
 CR10 45.65% 64.21% 65.31% 57.06% 64.80% 100.00% 67.80% 76.00%
 CR11 62.07% 47.65% 83.33% 51.50% 57.68% 100.00% 69.43% 85.33%
 Average 52.50% 53.53% 𝟖𝟎.𝟑𝟗% 50.82% 71.55% 𝟗𝟓.𝟒𝟒% 64.79% 𝟖𝟐.𝟒𝟔%
 F1-score

 of the same type into one entity and more details of the attack are
 missing (e.g., structural information), which results in a lower accuracy
 rate. on the other hand, AttacKG fuses entities and constructs attack
 graphs based on character features, thereby resulting in a high false
 positives rate. For instance, ‘‘APT28’’ and ‘‘APT29’’ are fused together
 due to their edit distance being less than a threshold, even though they
 belong to different attack groups. In contrast, TIMFuser improves the
 average F1-scores by 26.86% and 23.89%, respectively, compared to
 other baselines.
 These significant improvements highlight the effectiveness of TIM-
 Fuser in accurately identifying and representing entities and their
 dependencies within the attack graphs. This is crucial for security
 analysts, as it minimizes false positives in real-world attack scenarios.
 Q4: What is the performance of TIMFuser in identifying attack
 techniques from CTI reports?
 Fig. 12. Ablation experiments on side information of TIMFuser. To answer Q4, we evaluate the SOTA technique recognizer e.g.,
 AttacKG (Li et al., 2022), on the 11 CTI reports. It is noteworthy
 that AttacKG cannot recognize the sub-technologies. Nonetheless, we
 consider it correct when it can identify technologies associated with
When any one of the five side information is removed, F1-scores of
 the gold sub-technology. The last three columns in Table 10 summarize
macro, micro, and pairwise are all reduced. Notably, IDF token overlap
 the technique identification results. TIMFuser significantly outperforms
side information has the most significant effect on our model, with the
micro F1-score reduced by 3.72%. This is due to the fact that threat AttacKG in terms of the F1-score. This result makes sense as TIMdescriptions contain many overlapping entities, such as ‘‘cardinal rat ’’ Fuser considers the threat context and structure information of attack
versus ‘‘cardinal’’. behaviors. TIMFuser combines the contextual information of attack
 In conclusion, our method benefiting from side information can behaviors for effective identification, enhancing the accuracy of attack
improve performance. This not only reflects the effectiveness of our technique identification and further ensuring a more comprehensive
fusion approach but also emphasizes the practical significance of in- threat landscape.
corporating knowledge or side information into CTI. It assists in the Q5: Whether the attack technique fusion module used to construct
discovery of subtle relationships between attack behaviors, ultimately the complete view of attack campaign is adequate and optimal?
providing a more accurate representation of attack behaviors. In our attack techniques recognition subtask, we analyze the dis-
Q3: How accurate is TIMFuser in extracting attack graph from CTI tribution of attack techniques from different CTI sources. CrowdStrike,
reports? Volexity, FireEye offer the significant contributions, 32.32%, 22.22%,
 For the answer of Q3, we evaluate our method using the afore- and 17.17%, respectively. To evaluate the capability of our attack
mentioned 11 well-labeled CTI reports from the same attack cam- techniques fusion, we design a set of tests: (T1) combines all techpaign (e.g., Solarwinds). Comparing our F1-scores with SOTA methods niques from all CTI sources directly, (T2) eliminates duplicates based
(see Table 10) in entities and dependencies recognition, such as At- on T1. Compared to T2, TIMFuser can correlate the attack techniques
tacKG (Li et al., 2022), EXTRACTOR (Satvat et al., 2021), reveals that and generate the enriched (fused) attack techniques. we present the
AttacKG and EXTRACTOR have lower F1-scores in entities and de- counts of enriched attack techniques from the above three situations in
pendencies identification. EXTRACTOR aggregates all non-IoC entities Table 11. The count of fused attack techniques generated by TIMFuser

 13
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

Table 11 algorithms as needed to ensure the system can adapt to diverse attack
Tests for the attack techniques fusion. The last two rows indicate the counts of attack
 analysis tasks. Nonetheless, a comprehensive evaluation of TIMFuser
techniques and attack behaviors.
 across a broader range of attack scenarios is crucial to ensuring its
 Fused attack techniques Tests
 effectiveness in addressing various cyber threats.
 T1 T2 TIMFuser
 Large-scale multi-source data processing: TIMFuser faces chal-
 Techniques (𝑆𝑇 ) 80 61 61 lenges when processing large-scale multi-source data. Considering that
 Attack behaviors (𝑆𝑈 ) 456 421 263
 processing large-scale data may increase the time required for TIMFuser
 to collect and analyze data, this not only slows down the entire process
 but may also affect the timeliness of CTI (Ren et al., 2022). Maximizing
is small. This result makes sense as TIMFuser benefits from duplicates the timeliness of TIMFuser may result in collecting insufficient data. If
and correlation. This also demonstrates the effect of attack technique the time window for collecting data is too large, data would be suffifusion at the attack campaign level. cient, but the influence of TIMFuser on providing decision assistance
 To explore the quality of fused attack techniques produced by for security analysts would be small. To strike a balance between the
TIMFuser, we select five representatives of fused attack techniques for timeliness of CTI and the quality of CTI fusion, TIMFuser relies on a
analysis. Table 12 presents the descriptions of results. When analyzing seed URL list related to the specific attack campaign (usually manually
our enriched attack techniques, one observation that stands out is the curated), covering certain CTI sources, and employs a breadth-firstpotential they have in establishing connections between attack behav- search (BFS) algorithm to gather data. This approach ensures the
iors of the same attack technique released at different times (columns 3 abundance of data sources while reducing the occurrence of noisy data.
and 4 in Table 12), allowing the creation of a timeline for the evolution Simultaneously, it maintains the timeliness of the CTI, thereby improvof the exploration of the attack campaign or an attacker. As seen in ing the overall performance of TIMFuser. Furthermore, as the volume of
column 2, we can observe the establishment of connections between data increases, TIMFuser can enhance its ability to process large-scale
different attacks within the same attack techniques as a result of data by incorporating technologies such as distributed architectures.
changes in targets or multiple attacks. These connections are essential
to build a complete attack view for the attack campaign, enhancing the 6. Related work
understanding of attack patterns and their evolution.
 In this section, we mainly review previous work related to this paper
4.5. Case study from two aspects: CTI extraction and CTI fusion.

 In this section, we will discuss how TIMFuser benefits downstream 6.1. Cyber threat intelligence extraction
security tasks. Taking the Solarwinds attack campaign (mentioned in
Section 2.4) as an example, TIMFuser can quickly identify related Existing open-source systems for threat intelligence extracting prienriched attack techniques (including fused attack behaviors) from the marily focus on low-level IoCs (Gao et al., 2020; Liao et al., 2016;
massive CTI reports involved in this campaign. For instance, T1195.002 Liu et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2020; Zhu and Dumitras, 2018). While
- Subvert Trust Controls: Code Signing with fused attack behaviors IoCs are valuable for capturing localized and fragmented information
[𝑢14 , 𝑢15 , 𝑢16 , 𝑢17 , 𝑢21 ] (see Fig. 3) for tactic defense evasion, T1098.002 - about an attack, they suffer from being low-level and poorly corre-
Acquire Infrastructure: Domains with fused attack behaviors for privilege lated. Consequently, they lack the capability to unveil the complete
escalation. Once we obtain the comprehensive correlation information attack scenario and provide limited insights into how the attack is
of attack techniques and attack behaviors, we can construct a complete conducted. In contrast, attack behaviors play a pivotal role in revealing
attack graph denoted as provenance graph. Based on this provenance complete, multi-step attack scenarios and developing more robust degraph, we match it with a query graph constructed from system audit fense strategies. Currently, methods for attack behavior extraction can
logs for cyber threat hunting. Wei et al. (2021) demonstrate that incom- be classified into ontology model-based techniques, common machine
plete query graphs and provenance graphs are prone to cause higher learning-based methods, and deep learning-based approaches.
false positives during cyber threat hunting. Therefore, to some extent, Ontology model-based Techniques. Husari et al. (2017) propose
our complete attack graph can effectively reduce the false positive rate an approach called TTPDrill, which utilizes semantic dependencies
in threat hunting. We will verify this in our future work. and ontology databases to extract actions and map them to various
 In summary, TIMFuser fuses the technical-level and attack campa- attack patterns. Nevertheless, TTPDrill neglects certain attack behaviors
ign-level CTIs to facilitate the construction of a comprehensive view when addressing subordinate clause structures and compound sen-
(see Fig. 2) of the attack campaign. tences. Additionally, the ontology model cannot cover all undefined
 attack behaviors.
5. Discussion Machine Learning-based Methods. Zhu and Dumitraş (2016) propose an end-to-end automated feature engineering approach. This
 In this paper, we present a novel multi-granular CTI fusion frame- method aims to identify malware-related behaviors and map them to
work, TIMFuser, which parses CTI reports and fuses CTIs from mul- specific features, ultimately generating a semantic feature network. Gao
tiple sources at both the attack technique and attack campaign level et al. (2021) employ an unsupervised, lightweight natural language
with a high accuracy. However, there are some aspects for further pipeline processing technique. Specifically, they utilize regular expresimprovement. sions for extracting threat entities, followed by dependency parsing
 Real-time Processing: TIMFuser utilizes the pipelined structure, to identify relationships among these entities, thereby forming attack
which hinders the immediate generation of conclusive results, poten- behaviors. Husari et al. (2018) develop ActionMiner to extract lowtially limiting its application in specific scenarios. This constraint can level attack behaviors by utilizing information entropy and mutual
be alleviated in the future through the development of an end-to-end information. They finally link these attack behaviors to TTPs and the
framework. attack chain. However, ActionMiner relies on syntactic analysis and
 Attack Scenarios Evaluation: The current evaluation of TIMFuser lacks the subjects of attack behaviors, making it challenging to ensure
primarily relies on a restricted set of attack scenarios, potentially limit- content accuracy. Zhang et al. (2021) present the EX-Action framework,
ing its scalability in diverse attack scenarios. However, since TIMFuser which enhances the accuracy of attack behavior recognition through
is modular in design, users can adjust the selection of data sources, a weighted ensemble learning algorithm incorporating various types
set the analysis granularity, and modify the parameters of the fusion of features. Compared to ActionMiner and TTPDrill, EX-Action can

 14
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

 Table 12
 Analysis of fused attack techniques.
 Fused #Related Earliest Latest Span ↓
 attack techniques attack techniques attack behavior date attack behavior date
 T1560.001 3 2020∕12∕14 2022∕01∕27 409 days
 T1133 2 2021∕03∕04 2022∕01∕27 329 days
 T1098.002 2 2020∕12∕14 2021∕10∕25 315 days
 T1078 3 2020∕12∕13 2021∕05∕07 145 days
 T1053.005 3 2020∕12∕13 2021∕01∕11 29 days

not only identify and extract attack behaviors in complex sentence technique level using Levenshtein distance. Guo et al. (2023) enhance
structures and semantic relationships but also can recognize threat en- the Levenshtein distance method to fuse attack group entities. However,
tity associations with undefined relationships. Additionally, it performs these approaches only focus on character-level features during entity
well in terms of the number of attack behaviors extracted and the fusion for CTIs. In contrast, we implement a fine-grained approach
ability to maintain information in complex sentence structures. that considers both structural and semantic features for fusing attack
 Deep Learning-based Approaches. Satvat et al. (2021) introduce behaviors.
the EXTRACTOR system, designed for extracting attack behaviors from
open-source CTI reports and conducting cyber threat hunting. The 7. Conclusion
system employs a deep learning model based on semantic role labeling
to analyze complex sentence structures and infers facts like ‘‘who did In this paper, we propose TIMFuser, a multi-granular fusion framewhat to whom’’ ‘‘when’’ and ‘‘where’’. Additionally, Gao et al. (2022) work for CTIs across extensive reports, and evaluate its performance in
enhance their earlier work (Gao et al., 2021) by adopting a deep the real-world attack campaign. Experimental results demonstrate that
learning-based approach for extracting attack behaviors. Nevertheless, TIMFuser can enable security practitioners to obtain comprehensive
the use of pipelined processing may introduce an error propagation insights into the real-world attack campaigns. This includes fused attack
issue, leading to a higher occurrence of false positives in the extracted techniques and attack behaviors derived from the novel, enhanced, and
attack behaviors. multi-granular fuse method. For future work, we plan to leverage these
 fused CTIs for cyber threat detection.
6.2. Cyber threat intelligence fusion
 CRediT authorship contribution statement
 The effective utilization of CTI fundamentally relies on multi-source
heterogeneous fusion, aiming to correlate and fuse intelligence from Chunyan Ma: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology,
diverse sources using machine learning and other methods. This process Investigation, Conceptualization. Zhengwei Jiang: Writing – review
results in high-quality CTIs characterized by timeliness, accuracy, and & editing, Resources, Formal analysis. Kai Zhang: Resources, Forcompleteness. Recent research in CTI fusion has concentrated on three
 mal analysis. Zhiting Ling: Resources, Formal analysis. Jun Jiang:
phases: consistency analysis, duplicate removal, and entity fusion.
 Resources, Formal analysis. Yizhe You: Methodology, Investigation.
 Consistency Analysis. Ontology serves as the semantic foundation
 Peian Yang: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Methodology, Forfor communication and connectivity among different entities in the
 mal analysis. Huamin Feng: Writing – review & editing, Methodology,
same domain (Studer et al., 1998). Ontology construction is a crucial
 Formal analysis.
prerequisite for consistency analysis. Zhao et al. (2017) design a cybersecurity ontology model that maps CTIs from different sources into a
 Declaration of competing interest
unified representation. Furthermore, they establish the CTI integration
framework IntelMQ based on this ontology model and an open-source
 The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
CTI collection tool. Jo et al. (2020) employ a deep learning approach to
 cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
analyze the functional descriptions of malware. They find that there are
 influence the work reported in this paper.
syntactic and semantic inconsistencies in these functional descriptions
from multiple sources. To address this issue, they develop a consistency
detection system called GapFinder. Data availability
 Duplicate Removal. Duplicate removal constitutes another essential processing step in CTI fusion. Brown et al. (2015) utilize a rapid Data will be made available on request.
matching algorithm to precisely identify matching records from diverse CTI sources. Subsequently, they perform merging and dedupli- Acknowledgments
cation based on attributes, relationships, content, and other dimensions. Sun et al. (2021) initially conduct consistency analysis and This research is supported by the Youth Innovation Promotion
duplicate removal on CTIs from multiple sources. Subsequently, they Associationc, CAS (No. 2020166). This work is also supported by the
employ higher-order analysis techniques like support vector machine Program of Key Laboratory of Network Assessment Technology, the
(SVM) for cleaning, integration, and consolidation of CTIs. Finally, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Program of Beijing Key Laboratory of
the generated CTI records are normalized using Structured Threat Network Security and Protection Technology.
Information Expression (STIX) and are stored in a Neo4j database.
 Entity Fusion. Several studies (Modi et al., 2016; Azevedo et al., References
2019) have employed clustering for CTI fusion. Modi et al. (2016)
present an automated CTI fusion framework to aggregate isolated Abdeen, B., Al-Shaer, E., Singhal, A., Khan, L., Hamlen, K., 2023. Smet: Semantic
cyber events and correlate CTIs with similar content. Azevedo et al. mapping of cve to att&ck and its application to cybersecurity. In: IFIP Annual
(2019) utilize an enhanced clustering approach to aggregate similar Conference on Data and Applications Security and Privacy. Springer, pp. 243–260.
 Alam, M.T., Bhusal, D., Park, Y., Rastogi, N., 2023. Looking beyond iocs: Automat-
IOCs from diverse CTI sources and generate the enriched IOCs format. ically extracting attack patterns from external CTI. In: Proceedings of the 26th
Nevertheless, these methods perform CTI fusion in a coarse-grained International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses. pp.
way. Li et al. (2022) conduct the fusion of attack behaviors at the attack 92–108.

 15
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

Azevedo, R., Medeiros, I., Bessani, A., 2019. PURE: Generating quality threat intel- Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
 ligence by clustering and correlating OSINT. In: 2019 18th IEEE International arXiv:1412.6980.
 Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communica- Kobren, A., Monath, N., Krishnamurthy, A., McCallum, A., 2017. A hierarchical algotions/13th IEEE International Conference on Big Data Science and Engineering. rithm for extreme clustering. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International
 TrustCom/BigDataSE, IEEE, pp. 483–490. Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 255–264.
Beltagy, I., Peters, M.E., Cohan, A., 2020. Longformer: The long-document transformer. Li, V.G., Dunn, M., Pearce, P., McCoy, D., Voelker, G.M., Savage, S., 2019a. Reading the
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150. tea leaves: A comparative analysis of threat intelligence. In: 28th USENIX Security
Bianco, D., 2013. The pyramid of pain. Symposium. USENIX Security 19, pp. 851–867.
Blanda, K., 2023. Aptnotes. https://github.com/aptnotes/. Li, W., Gao, S., Zhou, H., Huang, Z., Zhang, K., Li, W., 2019b. The automatic
Bordes, A., Usunier, N., Garcia-Duran, A., Weston, J., Yakhnenko, O., 2013. Translating text classification method based on bert and feature union. In: 2019 IEEE 25th
 embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 26, International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems. ICPADS, IEEE, pp.
 1–9. 774–777.
Brown, S., Gommers, J., Serrano, O., 2015. From cyber security information sharing Li, Z., Zeng, J., Chen, Y., Liang, Z., 2022. AttacKG: Constructing technique knowledge
 to threat management. In: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on Information graph from cyber threat intelligence reports. In: European Symposium on Research
 Sharing and Collaborative Security. pp. 43–49. in Computer Security. Springer, pp. 589–609.
Cash, D., Meltzer, M., Koessel, S., Adair, S., Lancaster, T., Volexity Threat Research, Liao, X., Yuan, K., Wang, X., Li, Z., Xing, L., Beyah, R., 2016. Acing the ioc
 2020. Dark halo leverages SolarWinds compromise to breach organizations. game: Toward automatic discovery and analysis of open-source cyber threat
 https://www.volexity.com/blog/2020/12/14/dark-halo-leverages-solarwinds- intelligence. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
 compromise-to-breach-organizations/. and Communications Security. pp. 755–766.
Cheng, Z., Dai, R., Wang, L., Yu, Z., Lv, Q., Wang, Y., Sun, D., 2023. Ghunter: A Liu, Z., Lin, W., Shi, Y., Zhao, J., 2021. A robustly optimized BERT pre-training apfast subgraph matching method for threat hunting. In: 2023 26th International proach with post-training. In: China National Conference on Chinese Computational
 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design. CSCWD, IEEE, Linguistics. Springer, pp. 471–484.
 pp. 1014–1019. Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M.,
Cortes, C., Vapnik, V., 1995. Support-vector networks. Mach. Learn. 20, 273–297. Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V., 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
CrowdStrike, 2022. Early bird catches the wormhole: Observations from the Stel- approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
 larParticle campaign. https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/observations-from-the- Liu, J., Yan, J., Jiang, J., He, Y., Wang, X., Jiang, Z., Yang, P., Li, N., 2022. TriCTI: an
 stellarparticle-campaign/. actionable cyber threat intelligence discovery system via trigger-enhanced neural
Dedola, G., 2020. Transparent tribe: Evolution analysis, part 1. https://securelist.com/ network. Cybersecurity 5 (1), 8.
 transparent-tribe-part-1/98127/. Milajerdi, S.M., Eshete, B., Gjomemo, R., Venkatakrishnan, V., 2019. Poirot: Aligning
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber threat hunting. In: Proceedings
 bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810. of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security.
 04805. pp. 1795–1812.
ESET, 2022. Threat report T3 2021. https://web-assets.esetstatic.com/wls/2022/02/ Miller, G.A., 1995. WordNet: a lexical database for english. Commun. ACM 38 (11),
 eset_threat_report_t32021.pdf. 39–41.
Fireeye, 2023. Highly evasive attacker leverages SolarWinds supply chain MITRE, 2023. Data model. https://car.mitre.org/data_model/.
 to compromise multiple global victims with SUNBURST backdoor. https: Modi, A., Sun, Z., Panwar, A., Khairnar, T., Zhao, Z., Doupé, A., Ahn, G.J., Black, P.,
 //www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/evasive-attacker-leverages-solarwinds- 2016. Towards automated threat intelligence fusion. In: 2016 IEEE 2nd Intersupply-chain-compromises-with-sunburst-backdoor/. national Conference on Collaboration and Internet Computing. CIC, IEEE, pp.
Gao, Y., Li, X., Peng, H., Fang, B., Philip, S.Y., 2020. Hincti: A cyber threat intelligence 408–416.
 modeling and identification system based on heterogeneous information network. MSTIC, 2020. Analyzing solorigate, the compromised DLL file that started a
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 34 (2), 708–722. sophisticated cyberattack, and how Microsoft Defender helps protect customers.
Gao, P., Liu, X., Choi, E., Ma, S., Yang, X., Ji, Z., Zhang, Z., Song, D., 2022. ThreatKG: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/security/blog/2020/12/18/analyzing-
 A threat knowledge graph for automated open-source cyber threat intelligence solorigate-the-compromised-dll-file-that-started-a-sophisticated-cyberattack-andgathering and management. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10388. how-microsoft-defender-helps-protect/.
Gao, P., Shao, F., Liu, X., Xiao, X., Qin, Z., Xu, F., Mittal, P., Kulkarni, S.R., Song, D., Muthukadan, B., 2023. Selenium with Python. https://selenium-python.readthedocs.io/.
 2021. Enabling efficient cyber threat hunting with cyber threat intelligence. In: Narayanan, A., Chandramohan, M., Venkatesan, R., Chen, L., Liu, Y., Jaiswal, S.,
 2021 IEEE 37th International Conference on Data Engineering. ICDE, IEEE, pp. 2017. Graph2vec: Learning distributed representations of graphs. arXiv preprint
 193–204. arXiv:1707.05005.
GREAT, 2023. APT trends report Q1 2023. https://securelist.com/apt-trends-report-q1- Nextron Systems, 2023a. Loki - Simple IOC and YARA scanner. https://www.nextron-
 2023/109581/. systems.com/loki/.
Grigorescu, O., Nica, A., Dascalu, M., Rughinis, R., 2022. Cve2att&ck: Bert-based Nextron Systems, 2023b. THOR LITE, free IOC and YARA scanner. https://www.
 mapping of cves to mitre att&ck techniques. Algorithms 15 (9), 314. nextron-systems.com/thor-lite/.
Guo, Y., Liu, Z., Huang, C., Wang, N., Min, H., Guo, W., Liu, J., 2023. A framework Palmer, M., Gildea, D., Kingsbury, P., 2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus
 for threat intelligence extraction and fusion. Comput. Secur. 132, 103371. of semantic roles. Comput. Linguist. 31 (1), 71–106.
He, L., Lee, K., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., 2017. Deep semantic role labeling: What Pappagari, R., Zelasko, P., Villalba, J., Carmiel, Y., Dehak, N., 2019. Hierarchical
 works and what’s next. In: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the transformers for long document classification. In: 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech
 Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 473–483. Recognition and Understanding Workshop. ASRU, IEEE, pp. 838–844.
Husari, G., Al-Shaer, E., Ahmed, M., Chu, B., Niu, X., 2017. Ttpdrill: Automatic and Park, H.H., Vyas, Y., Shah, K., 2022. Efficient classification of long documents using
 accurate extraction of threat actions from unstructured text of cti sources. In: transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11258.
 Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference. pp. Piplai, A., Mittal, S., Joshi, A., Finin, T., Holt, J., Zak, R., 2020. Creating cyber-
 103–115. security knowledge graphs from malware after action reports. IEEE Access 8,
Husari, G., Niu, X., Chu, B., Al-Shaer, E., 2018. Using entropy and mutual information 211691–211703.
 to extract threat actions from cyber threat intelligence. In: 2018 IEEE International Pouyanfar, S., Sadiq, S., Yan, Y., Tian, H., Tao, Y., Reyes, M.P., Shyu, M.L., Chen, S.C.,
 Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics. ISI, IEEE, pp. 1–6. Iyengar, S.S., 2018. A survey on deep learning: Algorithms, techniques, and
Iklody, A., Wagener, G., Dulaunoy, A., Mokaddem, S., Wagner, C., 2018. Decaying applications. ACM Comput. Surv. 51 (5), 1–36.
 indicators of compromise. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11052. Rani, N., Saha, B., Maurya, V., Shukla, S.K., 2023. Ttphunter: Automated extraction
Jaccard, P., 1912. The distribution of the flora in the alpine zone. 1. New Phytol. 11 of actionable intelligence as TTPs from narrative threat reports. In: Proceedings of
 (2), 37–50. the 2023 Australasian Computer Science Week. pp. 126–134.
Jo, H., Kim, J., Porras, P., Yegneswaran, V., Shin, S., 2020. GapFinder: Finding Ren, Y., Xiao, Y., Zhou, Y., Zhang, Z., Tian, Z., 2022. Cskg4apt: A cybersecurity
 inconsistency of security information from unstructured text. IEEE Trans. Inf. knowledge graph for advanced persistent threat organization attribution. IEEE
 Forensics Secur. 16, 86–99. Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 35 (6), 5695–5709.
Jo, H., Lee, Y., Shin, S., 2022. Vulcan: Automatic extraction and analysis of cyber threat Richardson, L., 2023. BeautifulSoup. https://www.crummy.com/software/
 intelligence from unstructured text. Comput. Secur. 120, 102763. BeautifulSoup.
Joulin, A., Grave, E., Bojanowski, P., Mikolov, T., 2017. Bag of tricks for efficient Sarhan, I., Spruit, M., 2021. Open-cykg: An open cyber threat intelligence knowledge
 text classification. In: Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter graph. Knowl.-Based Syst. 233, 107524.
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers. pp. Satvat, K., Gjomemo, R., Venkatakrishnan, V., 2021. Extractor: Extracting attack
 427–431. behavior from threat reports. In: 2021 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
Kim, Y., 2014. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. In: Proceed- Privacy. EuroS&P, IEEE, pp. 598–615.
 ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Stojanović, B., Hofer-Schmitz, K., Kleb, U., 2020. APT datasets and attack modeling for
 EMNLP, pp. 1746–1751. automated detection methods: A review. Comput. Secur. 92, 101734.

 16
C. Ma et al. Computers & Security 148 (2025) 104141

Studer, R., Benjamins, V.R., Fensel, D., 1998. Knowledge engineering: Principles and Zhengwei Jiang received his Ph.D. degree from the University of Chinese Academy
 methods. Data Knowl. Eng. 25 (1–2), 161–197. of Sciences in 2014. He is currently a Senior Engineer at the Institute of Information
Sun, T., Yang, P., Li, M., Liao, S., 2021. An automatic generation approach of the Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and a professor at the School of Cyber
 cyber threat intelligence records based on multi-source information fusion. Future Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include
 Internet 13 (2), 40. cyber threat intelligence and cyber threat detection.
Unit42, 2020. SolarStorm supply chain attack timeline. https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.
 com/solarstorm-supply-chain-attack-timeline/.
Vashishth, S., Jain, P., Talukdar, P., 2018. Cesi: Canonicalizing open knowledge bases Kai Zhang received his Ph.D. degree from the School of Information and Communiusing embeddings and side information. In: Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide cation Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2020. His
 Web Conference. pp. 1317–1327. research interests include network security and machine learning.
Wei, R., Cai, L., Zhao, L., Yu, A., Meng, D., 2021. Deephunter: A graph neural
 network based approach for robust cyber threat hunting. In: Security and Privacy in
 Communication Networks: 17th EAI International Conference, SecureComm 2021,
 Zhiting Ling received her M.S. degree in Beijing Electronic Science and Technology
 Virtual Event, September 6–9, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 17. Springer, pp. 3–24.
 Institute in 2019. Her research interests include cyber space security and cyber threat
Wu, L., Yen, I.E.H., Xu, K., Xu, F., Balakrishnan, A., Chen, P.Y., Ravikumar, P.,
 intelligence.
 Witbrock, M.J., 2018. Word mover’s embedding: From Word2Vec to document
 embedding. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
 Natural Language Processing. pp. 4524–4534.
 Jun Jiang received his M.S. degree in Electronic Science and Technology from
You, Y., Jiang, J., Jiang, Z., Yang, P., Liu, B., Feng, H., Wang, X., Li, N., 2022.
 Beijing Jiaotong University in 2016. He is currently an Associate Senior Engineer at
 TIM: threat context-enhanced TTP intelligence mining on unstructured threat data.
 the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research
 Cybersecurity 5 (1), 1–17.
 interests include cyber space security and cyber threat intelligence.
Zhang, H., Shen, G., Guo, C., Cui, Y., Jiang, C., 2021. Ex-action: Automatically
 extracting threat actions from cyber threat intelligence report based on multimodal
 learning. Secur. Commun. Netw. 2021 (1), 1–12.
Zhao, Y., Lang, B., Liu, M., 2017. Ontology-based unified model for heterogeneous Yizhe You received his Ph.D. degree in University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
 threat intelligence integration and sharing. In: 2017 11th IEEE International He current works in China Mobile Security Information Center.
 Conference on Anti-Counterfeiting, Security, and Identification. ASID, IEEE, pp.
 11–15.
Zhao, J., Yan, Q., Li, J., Shao, M., He, Z., Li, B., 2020. TIMiner: Automatically extracting Peian Yang received his Ph.D. degree in the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
 and analyzing categorized cyber threat intelligence from social data. Comput. Secur. in 2018. He is currently an Associate Senior Engineer at the Institute of Information
 95, 101867. Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include cyber threat
Zhu, Z., Dumitraş, T., 2016. Featuresmith: Automatically engineering features for intelligence and cyber threat attribution.
 malware detection by mining the security literature. In: Proceedings of the 2016
 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. pp. 767–778.
Zhu, Z., Dumitras, T., 2018. Chainsmith: Automatically learning the semantics of Huamin Feng received his Ph.D. degree in 1984. He is currently a professor at the
 malicious campaigns by mining threat intelligence reports. In: 2018 IEEE European Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institution and a visiting professor at the
 Symposium on Security and Privacy. EuroS&P, IEEE, pp. 458–472. School of Cybersecurity, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research
 interests include cyber security situational awareness and Internet Measurement.
Chunyan Ma received her B.S. degree from Northwest Normal University in 2020.
She is presently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at the School of Cyber Security, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research interests include cyber threat
intelligence and cyber threat detection.

 17