IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 5012009

 ToCoAD: Two-Stage Contrastive Learning for
 Industrial Anomaly Detection
 Yun Liang , Zhiguang Hu , Junjie Huang , Donglin Di , Anyang Su , and Lei Fan , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Unsupervised industrial anomaly detection methods
can identify product defects in industrial images using only
normal samples for training. Existing approaches perform well
on public industrial image datasets but struggle with specific
anomaly types due to the domain gap between pretrained feature
extractors and target-specific domains. To tackle this issue, this
article presents a two-stage training strategy, called ToCoAD.
In the first stage, a discriminative network is trained by using
synthetic anomalies in a self-supervised learning manner. This
network is then utilized in the second stage to provide a
negative feature guide, aiding in the training of the feature
extractor through bootstrap contrastive learning. This approach
enables the model to progressively learn the distribution of
anomalies specific to industrial datasets, effectively enhancing
its generalizability to various types of anomalies. Extensive
experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed two-stage training strategy, and our model produces
competitive performance, achieving pixel-level AUROC scores of
98.21%, 98.43%, and 97.70% on MVTec AD, VisA, and BTAD,
respectively. Fig. 1. Existing methods rely on frozen pretrained feature extractors, which
 can lead to inaccuracies in anomaly detection. In contrast, our method utilizes
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, contrastive learning, indus- a two-stage training strategy to fine-tune the feature extractor under the
trial manufacturing, self-supervised learning, synthetic anomaly. contrastive learning paradigm.

 I. I NTRODUCTION
 unsupervised learning task. The objective is to train models
I NDUSTRIAL anomaly detection aims to identify defective products during quality inspection sessions within
the production process, intending to improve the yield rate.
 using only defect-free images, enabling them to detect and
 localize anomalous regions during the testing phase. Specifi-
Recently, interest in this field has surged due to the growing cally, during the training phase, only normal images are used to
demands of industrial development [1], [2], [3]. The anomaly train models in an unsupervised learning manner. For example,
detection models employ the image data of the sample, such feature embedding-based [4], [5], [6] methods typically use
as battery images captured from a fixed position or screw Gaussian distribution or normalizing flow (NF) [7] to model
images at various rotation angles, to determine whether the the distributions of normal samples, representing a normal
sample is anomalous or not and to localize the anomalies prototype or feature set. During the test phase, anomalies
within the image. Given the challenge of obtaining suffi- are identified by comparing the features of the test image
cient anomalous samples, the distribution of anomalies is with those in the coreset. On the other hand, reconstructiontypically nonestimable, making this scenario classified as an based [8], [9], [10] methods utilize a reconstruction network
 to generate an image that closely resembles the normal image
 Received 8 July 2024; revised 8 October 2024; accepted 4 November 2024. during training. Anomalies are then detected by analyzing the
Date of publication 26 February 2025; date of current version 11 March
2025. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Yi Qin. differences between the input image and the reconstructed
(Corresponding author: Lei Fan.) image during testing.
 Yun Liang, Zhiguang Hu, and Junjie Huang are with the College Existing anomaly detection methods, predominantly leverof Mathematics and Informatics, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou 510642, China (e-mail: yliang@scau.edu.cn; huzhiguang2000@ aging deep learning techniques [11], [12], have shown superior
stu.scau.edu.cn; junjie666@stu.scau.edu.cn). performance in industrial benchmarks [13]. As illustrated in
 Donglin Di is with Space AI, Li Auto, Beijing 101399, China (e-mail: Fig. 1, the majority of existing methods, including feature
didonglin@lixiang.com).
 Anyang Su is with the College of Software, Jilin University, Changchun embedding-based [4], [5], [6] and synthetic anomaly-based
130012, China (e-mail: aysu17@mails.jlu.edu.cn). methods [14], [15], [16], have attempted to train a classifier
 Lei Fan is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, The or discriminative network to identify anomalies by utilizing
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia (e-mail:
lei.fan1@unsw.edu.au). a pretrained truncated model for extracting features. How-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3545987 ever, it is challenging to accurately identify all anomalies,
 1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5012009 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

primarily due to the indistinguishability of frozen pretrained and then it is employed to facilitate the fine-tuning of
models from normal and anomalous features. This issue arises the extractor in the second stage.
from the domain gaps [17] between pretrained datasets (e.g., 2) We introduce a negative-guided contrastive learning
ImageNet [18]) and target-specific domains (i.e., industrial (NCL) paradigm, which utilizes the discriminative netimages). Specifically, the anomaly detection task is lim- work guiding negative bootstrap contrastive learning to
ited by two factors. First, the covariate shift phenomenon, fine-tune the feature extractor. A contrastive loss is introcaused by the domain gap between source and target data, duced to regularize negative bootstrap joint learning.
can hinder anomaly localization [19], making it difficult for 3) Our model shows competitive performance on three
a pretrained network to extract discriminative features for popular anomaly detection datasets. It achieves AUROC
anomalies. Second, the features learned during pretraining scores of 99.10%/98.21% (image-/pixel-level) on
are typically optimized for different tasks, but they may not MVTec AD, 95.35%/98.43% on VisA, and 97.70%
be fully suitable due to the imbalance between normal and (pixel-level) on BTAD.
anomalous samples [20]. For example, semantic segmentation
and image classification often use balanced datasets with II. R ELATED W ORK
predefined labels, whereas anomaly detection is formulated
in an unsupervised learning manner, and data deviating from A. Anomaly Detection
the normal distribution is treated as anomalous. Recently, Most anomaly detection methods utilize a feature extractor
reconstruction-based methods [8], [9] have been developed to pretrained on ImageNet [18] to obtain generalized featrain a decoder and feature extractor jointly by learning an tures. These methods can be classified into three types:
identical map between the input and output. However, the feature embedding-based, reconstruction-based, and synthetic
performance of these methods remains suboptimal, limited anomaly-based methods.
by the training overhead and the ability to reconstruct large 1) Feature Embedding-Based Methods: They typically utiareas of anomalies. Recently, the application of contrastive lize pretrained models to extract features and directly model
learning has demonstrated considerable progress in cross- the distributions using various machine learning techniques.
domain learning [21]. Fine-tuning the network using positive For example, PaDiM [5] decomposes the image into patches to
sample pairs or negative samples has been demonstrated to obtain a probabilistic representation of the normal class using
be effective in enhancing the network’s generalizability to multivariate Gaussian distributions. PatchCore [4] constructs
domain-specific datasets, indicating significant potential in the a memory bank for storing neighborhood-aware patch-level
field of anomaly detection as well. Contrastive learning has features. Some methods are based on NF [7] to conrecently proven effective for label-efficient fine-tuning [20], vert pretrained feature distributions into simple distributions.
[22]. It has the potential to mitigate domain gaps and help the CFLOW-AD [6] utilizes a pretrained encoder with multinetwork adapt to the target domain data. scale pyramid pooling to capture rich features and leverages
 In order to mitigate the domain gaps between source and conditional normalization flows to enhance anomaly detectarget data, and to fully utilize the advantages of contrastive tion efficiency. PyramidFlow [25] utilizes invertible pyramids
learning in unsupervised fine-tuning training, we propose and coupled pyramid blocks to localize anomalies through
a two-stage training strategy that incorporates a contrastive multiscale feature interaction. These methods use pretrained
learning framework to adapt to the target domain data by feature extractors, such as ResNet [26], WideResNet [27], and
learning robust features from target samples through self- EfficientNet [28] to extract features for modeling distributions.
supervised learning [23]. Specifically, we initially leverage a 2) Reconstruction-Based Methods: They assume that modfrozen feature extractor to obtain generalized features and train els trained on only normal samples cannot accurately
a discriminative network progressively to identify anomalies reconstruct anomalous regions, thus allowing for the localusing synthetic anomalous samples. In the second stage, the ization of anomalies by identifying differences between the
discriminate network is fixed to provide a negative guide, input and reconstruction results. For instance, RIAD [9] and
while a bootstrap contrastive learning is employed to fine-tune InTra [8] perform mask operations on normal samples, and
the feature extractor and contrastive learning network jointly. train reconstruction models to recover the masked regions.
This joint learning can be viewed as a form of adversarial DiffusionAD [29] uses a diffusion model [30] to reconstruct
learning [24] of defect and defect-free features, where normal normal samples as near-normal samples, and localizes anomafeatures are compactly enclosed and distinct from defective lous regions using a segmentation network.
features. Finally, the fine-tuned feature extractor is used to 3) Synthetic Anomaly-Based Methods: They formulate
extract patch features to construct a memory bank through unsupervised anomaly detection as a binary classification
coreset subsampling, and distance metrics between the test task, in which pseudo anomaly samples are generated to
sample features and the memory bank features are computed train the discriminative network for identifying anomalies.
to localize anomalies during the inference phase. CutPaste [16] employs an augmentation strategy where a
 Our contributions can be summarized as follows. smaller patch is replaced by other regions. DRAEM [14]
 1) We propose a two-stage training strategy to fine-tune the combines Perlin noise [31] and binarized masks of samples
 feature extractor to bridge the domain gap between pre- to generate anomalous images for training their discriminative
 trained and target features. In the first stage, a network networks. NSA [15] employs Poisson image editing techniques
 is progressively trained to localize anomalies coarsely, to achieve a seamless fusion of anomalies.
LIANG et al.: ToCoAD: TWO-STAGE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5012009

Fig. 2. Overview of ToCoAD. First, a synthetic anomaly image is generated by anomaly generator G to train a discriminative network D. Then, the feature
extractor F is fine-tuned jointly by contrastive learning network C and pretrained D using synthetic anomaly images and augmented image pairs.

 However, most of these methods [4], [5], [6], [32], [33], C denote the height, width, and the number of the channel
[34], [35] rely on feature extractors pretrained on Ima- of the image. For unsupervised anomaly detection, all images
geNet [18], leading to a domain gap between pretrained in Ttrain are categorized into normal (e.g., defect-free) images
features and industrial target features. To alleviate this prob- with c = 0, while Ttest may contain anomalous images with
lem, our ToCoAD employs a two-stage training approach c = 1 and a corresponding binary annotation y ∈ {0, 1} H ×W ×C
that uses positive and negative samples to jointly fine-tune indicating the anomalous regions. The normal images in the
the feature extractor, guiding it to acquire adaptive feature training set and the test set come from the same normal
representation capabilities. data distribution with similar sample characteristics, while the
 anomalous images deviate from these normal samples. The
 goal is to classify and localize anomalous regions in Ttest .
B. Contrastive Learning
 As shown in Fig. 2, we propose a two-stage training strategy
 Recently, contrastive learning [36], [37], [38] has played a to learn a feature representation adapted to the target data
significant role in self-supervised learning, offering a promis- distribution. The first stage is to train a discriminative network
ing paradigm for exploiting unlabeled data without the need to detect anomalies and localize anomalous regions coarsely.
for human annotations. The concept aims to enhance fea- It includes an anomaly generator G, a feature extractor F
ture consistency and obtain invariant feature representations and a discriminative network D. In the second stage, the
between different views of the same sample while preserving discriminative network pretrained in stage I is incorporated
the differences among other samples. For example, Sim- with the contrastive learning network C, and these networks
CLR [39] constructs positive pairs from the same sample are jointly trained in a bootstrap contrast learning manner.
and negative pairs from different samples, employing an Finally, a memory bank M is constructed for storing the
N-pair loss [40] to keep positive pairs close and negative pairs normal features, which is used to estimate the anomaly score
far away. BYOL [37] avoids prediction crashes and removes maps during the testing phase.
negative pairs by an exponential moving average model. Sim-
Siam [36] addresses the issue of collapsing solutions without A. Discriminative Network Pretraining
using negative samples by employing a stop-gradient (SG)
 Given the unavailability of anomalous samples for training
operation and a predictor.
 a discriminative network, we initially utilize an anomaly gen-
 Given the capability of contrastive learning methods to
 erator G to synthesize pseudo anomalies from the training set.
enable models to acquire robust and generalized feature rep-
 The generation of anomalies can be implemented in various
resentations [41], we propose a negative bootstrap contrastive
 forms by using self-supervised learning techniques [15], [16]
learning to fine-tune the feature extractor. Our approach uses
 or by injecting noises into normal images [14]. To obtain
augmented positive samples to train the model by learning
 discriminative representations of various artificial defects,
feature representations of normal samples while simultanewe employ widely used Perlin noise [31] as the anomaly
ously using synthetic anomaly samples to bootstrap the model,
 generator G, which synthesizes pseudo-anomaly samples by
ensuring its sensitivity to anomalous features.
 injecting Perlin noise into normal images. Anomalies synthesized using Perlin noise and texture images exhibit irregular
 III. M ETHOD geometric traits yet share similar variations with real-world
 Given a training set Ttrain comprising N images and a test anomalies in terms of color, shape, and location. These simset Ttest consisting of N ′ images, each image I ∈ R H ×W ×C ilarities allow the model to leverage synthetic anomalies as
corresponds to a binary label c = {0, 1} where H , W , and reference boundaries for learning the boundary outside the
5012009 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Fig. 4. Detailed structure of contrastive learning network C. A normal image
 I is augmented to obtain two views v 1 , v 2 , which are then passed through the
 feature extractor and a contrastive learning network to obtain the projected
 features z 1 , z 2 and predicted features p1 , p2 . The L cossim is calculated for two
 branches, one of which has no predictor branch applying the SG operation.
Fig. 3. Overview of anomaly generator G with Perlin noise. First, the
normal image I undergoes a random slight angle and 90◦ rotation to obtain
I R . Second, the Perlin noise P and the texture sample A are subjected to a
bitwise operation to generate the anomalous region A P . Finally, the anomalous pixel point classification with 1 for the anomalous category
region A P and the rotated image I R are fused to obtain the synthetic anomaly and 0 for the normal category. The focal loss [43] effectively
sample IG .
 addresses the sample imbalance problem in pixel-level oneclass classification. Upon completion of the discriminative
normal data. As a result, the model builds a more compact network training, the extracted feature map can coarsely
and refined representation of normal data, effectively distin- localize the probability of anomalies in the input image.
guishing between normal and anomalous data. In contrast to the end-to-end simultaneous training
 As shown in Fig. 3, random slight angle rotations and approach [14], [15] and the approach of training the backbone
{0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , 270◦ } rotations are applied to a base (nor- network before training the discriminative network [34], our
mal) image to enhance normal sample diversity. Perlin noise method first leverages the powerful feature representation
is then generated using a random seed, with its threshold capabilities of a pretrained network on ImageNet to train
adjusted to control the size, quantity, and position of the noise. an anomaly discriminative network, fostering coarse-grained
An additional texture dataset, like the Describable Textures localization capability. Subsequently, we use the discriminative
Dataset [42], is used as a reference to combine with normal network to reversely fine-tune the feature extraction network,
samples based on the Perlin noise mask, creating synthetic encouraging the latent space of normal samples more compact
anomalous regions. These regions are then pasted onto the base and reducing the domain gap in the feature extraction network.
image to form the synthetic anomaly image and corresponding
mask. Perlin noise is utilized to generate masks with varying B. Negative-Guided Contrastive Learning
shapes, sizes, and positions. These masks, when combined In stage II, the discriminative network D is employed
with random anomalous data, introduce a wide range of to train the feature extractor F and the contrastive learning
texture and color anomalies across different regions of the network C. Specifically, discriminative network D, pretrained
image. In addition, when applied to the edges of objects, the in stage I, acts as a guide for providing negative sample
masks not only introduce visual irregularities but also induce features in bootstrap learning. We employ the advanced Simshape distortions, altering the form and outline of the object. Siam [36] as the contrastive learning network C due to its
A normal image I ∈ Ttrain is passed through the anomaly simplicity and exceptional capability in achieving robust and
generator G to produce a pseudo-anomaly sample IG with an generalized feature representation. As shown in Fig. 4, for
anomaly mask yG ∈ {0, 1} H ×W ×C . A pseudo-anomaly dataset training the contrastive learning network C, a normal image I
can be obtained is augmented using a data augmentation set S (such as random
 crop, color jitter, and grayscale) to generate M different views
 TG = G(Ii ) ∀Ii ∈ Ttrain (1)
 v 1 , . . . , v M . We begin by randomly cropping the image using
where i = {1, . . . , N } denotes the index in the training set. a scale factor ranging from 0.2 to 1 to obtain image patches.
 Then, each pseudo-anomaly image is used to train the Next, Gaussian filtering with a standard deviation of σ =
discriminative network D, where the pretrained feature extrac- 0.1− 2.0 is randomly applied to these patches, allowing certain
tor is fixed during the early stages of model training. The features to emerge in different states. Finally, to reduce the
architecture of the discriminative network is symmetric with model’s reliance on image orientation and mitigate directional
the feature extractor, such as the WideResNet50 [27]. This bias, we apply a random horizontal flip with a probability
network operates by successively up-sampling and splicing of p = 0.5 to the patches. These views are fed into the
the extracted features to finally output a feature map ŷ G as a feature extractors F to extract features from different layers,
predicted mask with the same dimensions as the input image which are considered as generic feature representations from
IG . The training loss L dis is computed as a normal image, and these features contain both the low-level
 texture detail feature representation and the high-level abstract
 L dis = L focal ( ŷ G , yG ) = −αt (1 − pt )γ log( pt ) (2)
 semantic feature representation.
where αt is the scaling factor associated with the category t, γ For constructing contrastive instance pairs, we take an input
is an adjustable parameter, and pt corresponds to the predicted image I with two augmented views v 1 and v 2 (M set 2). As an
LIANG et al.: ToCoAD: TWO-STAGE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5012009

example, the features f 1 are extracted from v 1 using feature where E(·) is the Euclidean distance and Nb is the b-nearest
extractor F and then are passed into the projector and predictor neighbor coresets of c∗ in the memory bank. Finally, the
sequentially to obtain z 1 and p1 , respectively. Then, the cosine image-level anomaly score is calculated by the maximum
similarity loss can be obtained anomaly score for all patches in the image.
 p1 z2
 D( p1 , z 2 ) = − · (3)
 ∥ p1 ∥2 ∥z 2 ∥2 IV. E XPERIMENTS
where ∥·∥2 denotes the L2 distance of an output feature. A. Experimental Settings
Following previous work [36], [41], the SG operation is
employed to halt the gradient propagation of z 1 and z 2 , effec- 1) Datasets: We use the MVTec AD [13], VisA [45], and
tively preventing collapsing solutions. Since D is asymmetric, BTAD [46] datasets for our experiments.
the average bidirectional similarity between f 1 and f 2 is MVTec AD consists of 15 categories including five types of
computed to maintain equilibrium, as shown below texture and ten types of object, and comprises 3629 training
 images and 1725 test images. VisA contains 12 subsets with
 1 1
 L cossim ( f 1 , f 2 ) =
 D( p1 , SG(z 2 )) + D( p2 , SG(z 1 )). (4) a total of 10 821 images, of which 9621 are normal images
 2 2 and 1200 are anomalous images. The dataset is comprised of
 When generating M augmented samples from each normal three categories: single-object images, multiobject images, and
sample, the symmetric cosine similarity loss is computed as printed circuit boards. BTAD consists of three industrial prod-
 M M ucts, ranging in size from 600 × 600 to 1600 × 1600 pixels.
 2 XX
 L sym = L cossim ( f i , f j ) It includes 1799 images and 1031 images for training and
 M(M − 1) i j̸=i testing, respectively.
 M XM  2) Evaluation Metrics: Since determining of normal and
 D p j , SG(z i ) + D pi , SG z j
  
 X
 = . (5) anomalous samples is regarded as a binary classification probi j̸=i
 M(M − 1) lem, we use the area under the receiver operating characteristic
 For synthetic anomaly sample, we obtain its pseudo- curve (AUROC) metric to evaluate the anomaly detection peranomaly mask yG′ and predictive feature map ŷ ′G , and compute formance. Following the previous studies [4], [5], we calculate
the focal loss L neg = L focal ( ŷ ′G , yG′ ) as (2). The training loss the image-level and pixel-level AUROC scores for detection
in the second training stage is shown as and segmentation performance, respectively.
 3) Implementation Details: We used a WideResNet50 [27]
 L ncl = λ · L sym + (1 − λ) · L neg (6) pretrained on ImageNet [18] as the feature extractor.
we followed the previous methods [14], [34], where λ is a An inverse WideResNet50 is utilized as the discriminahyperparameter used to balance the two losses. tive network, operated with up-sampling, concatenating,
 and dimension compression operations. For the contrastive
 learning network, we performed adaptive average pooling
C. Memory Modeling and Anomaly Detection
 operations on the feature maps of each layer and then fed
 During the inference phase, we utilize the feature extractor them to the projector and predictor, respectively. The projector
as a backbone to extract adapted features from various layers. and predictor consist of a three-layer and one-layer MLP,
These features are then compressed into a memory bank via respectively. During training, we removed the gradient of only
the coreset selection [4]. To concurrently harvest shallow tex- the projector branch, and the projectors of both branches
ture information and deep semantic content, features extracted shared the weights. For the contrastive learning network,
from both layers 2 and 3 are aggregated to derive a compre- we used the same approach as [36] to construct two cropped
hensive feature for each image. These features are then used to images as positive samples. In building the memory bank,
construct the original memory bank M O . To minimize storage we employed a coreset subsampling percentage of 0.1 to obtain
and computation overhead, we use the greedy coreset sampling a compact one.
algorithm to identify the most representative features. This In the discriminative network pretraining (DNP) training
results in a sampled memory bank M obtained by solving phase, we used the Adam optimizer with an initial learning
the following equation using iterative greedy approximation rate of 0.0001. In the NCL training phase, we used the
suggested in [44] stochastic gradient descent optimizer with a weight decay of
 M∗ = arg min max min ∥m − n∥2 . (7) 0.0001 and a momentum of 0.9, and employed the cosine
 M⊂M O m∈M O n∈M annealing algorithm to adjust the learning rate. For all classes
 When testing an input image It ∈ Ttest , the pixel-level of the MVTec AD dataset and the VisA dataset, we trained
anomaly score st is calculated by the maximum Euclidean 100 epochs in the first stage and another 100 epochs in the
distance between its adapt patch features pt and its nearest second stage. For the BTAD dataset, we trained 150 epochs
normal adapted features coreset c∗ from memory bank M in the second stage.

 st′ = min E pt , c ∗
 
 (8)
 c∗ ∈M B. Experiment Results and Analysis
 !
 exp(st′ ) 1) Performances on MVTec AD: We evaluated the anomaly
 st = 1 − P st′ (9)
 c′ ∈Nb (c∗ ) exp(E( pt , c ))
 ′
 detection performance of our proposed model compared to
5012009 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE I
 I MAGE -L EVEL AND P IXEL -L EVEL AUROC (%) ON MVT EC AD DATASET

 TABLE II
 I MAGE -L EVEL AND P IXEL -L EVEL AUROC (%) ON V IS A DATASET

advanced methods [4], [5], [6], [25], [32], [33], [34], [47], the top three for both textures and objects by narrowing
[48]. the domain and allowing for the extraction of anomalous
 As shown in Table I, our models achieved the best results discriminative features. We visualized some representative
for at least seven categories in image-level anomaly detection, samples for anomaly localization in the upper two rows of
with five of them reaching 100%, and produced the best Fig. 5, where we can observe that our models can accurately
AUROC scores of 99.10% at the image-level and 98.21% localize anomalous regions on samples. We further presented
at the pixel-level compared to advanced methods. However, quantitative visualization results of our approach compared to
the image-level results for some categories, such as cable, existing methods, as illustrated in Fig. 6(a). For example, in the
carpet, grid, pill, and screw, were nearly 1% below the best capsule and pill examples, our model accurately localized the
results. This could be attributed to that only the features at anomalies, whereas DeSTSeg [34] and other methods failed.
different local regions of the image are used for fine-tuning, It demonstrates that our method exhibits higher sensitivity
which makes the model less sensitive to subtle color variations to anomalous regions while effectively reducing background
in the anomaly image. By leveraging local information, the interference.
model is better able to capture important, detailed features 2) Performances on VisA: We evaluated our proposed
that are crucial for identifying anomalies. While contrastive method and the existing methods [4], [6], [14], [35], [47] on
learning may reduce sensitivity to subtle color variations, the VisA dataset, as illustrated in Table II. Our model achieved
this tradeoff allows the model to focus on more significant 95.06% image-level AUROC score and 98.40% pixel-level
irregularities, such as structural and textural anomalies, which AUROC score based on CutPaste, while it achieved 95.35%
are more common in real-world scenarios. This approach image-level AUROC score and 98.43% pixel-level AUROC
enhances the model’s ability to detect and analyze domain- score based on Perlin noise. In particular, our model produced
specific defects, ultimately improving overall performance. the highest image-level and pixel-level AUROC scores in
Regarding pixel-level anomaly localization performance, our three categories of VisA (Capsules, PCB1, and PCB4), due
method achieved optimal performance for the tile category and to the extraction of adaptive features. However, the results for
was within 0.7% of the best performance across almost all Macaroni2 were lower compared to advanced methods. This
categories. In terms of average metrics, our model achieved discrepancy is primarily due to the fact that only some regions
LIANG et al.: ToCoAD: TWO-STAGE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5012009

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD, U SING D IFFERENT H IERAR -
 CHY L EVELS IN NCL T RAINING P HASE

 TABLE V
Fig. 5. Visualizations of MVTec AD and VisA. The upper two rows are A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD, U SING O NLY NCL (CLderived from the MVTec AD, whereas the lower two rows are derived from O NLY ), W ITH B OTH DNP AND NCL
the VisA.

 TABLE III
 P IXEL -L EVEL AUROC (%) ON BTAD DATASET

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT L OSS F UNCTION S ETTINGS

were used for fine-tuning but the global positional features of
regions within the entire image are missed. This limitation led
to the misclassification of positional variations as anomalies.
In the lower two rows of Fig. 5, we additionally visualized better pixel-level localization. As shown in Fig. 7, anomalous
some typical samples of VisA. regions were more clearly highlighted when both methods
 3) Performances on BTAD: We calculated the pixel-level were used, as the feature extractor learned more robust,
AUROC scores of the three categories and then obtained the generalized representations and reduced domain gap.
average score. We compared our proposed model with existing c) Loss function: This study was conducted to explore
methods [4], [5], [46], [47], [49], [50], as shown in Table III. the effect of different settings on the loss function while
While using Perlin noise as the anomaly generator, our model utilizing CutPaste as an anomaly generator. Table VI reported
achieved the best 97.70% in average pixel-level AUROC score. the results of using cross-entropy (CE) loss and focal loss
 4) Ablation Study: We explored the optimal configuration for different values of the hyperparameter λ. We observed
of our proposed method. We illustrated the anomaly generator that, when λ is set to 0.5, a balance was achieved between
we used in our experiments. the positive sample learning process and the negative sample
 a) Contrastive learning network: This study was per- bootstrap learning process, and the model using focal loss
formed to determine the optimal hierarchy levels for the outperformed the counterpart when using CE loss. It can be
contrastive learning network. Table IV showed the results of demonstrated that focal loss can fully consider the imbalance
ablation studies with different hierarchy levels when using between normal and anomalous samples. The hyperparametric
CutPaste as an anomaly generator. We noticed that the model ablation results when using focal loss as L dis are depicted in
using the features extracted from layers 3 and 4 achieved Fig. 6(b). When α = 0.5 and γ = 2, the best image-level
the best performance among all the results, which means that and pixel-level AUROCs were 98.82% and 98.13%, as this
the positive sample comparison learning process requires rich configuration provides an improved balance between normal
semantic information. Using only layer 4 lacked sufficient and anomalous samples. When α and γ are set to different
detail, while combining layers 2 and 3, without layer 4, values, the effect showed minor fluctuations due to the focus
produced lower results due to insufficient high-level semantics. on anomalous samples.
In summary, rich deep semantic information is crucial for d) Synthetic anomaly strategies: We compared three
representing semantic features effectively. common methods as the anomaly generator: random
 b) Two-stage training strategy: We conducted experi- patches [16], random seamless patches [15], and Perlin
ments to investigate the role of DNP and NCL while using noise [31]. The first two methods produce anomalies that
Perlin noise as an anomaly generator, with results shown in are closer to the normal sample distribution, while the latter
Table V. When only NCL was applied, the model trained generates anomalies with greater diversity in shapes. As shown
solely on augmented normal samples performed poorly due to in Table VII, our methods incorporating Perlin noise achieved
the absence of explicit negative sample guidance. Combining the best AUROCs of 99.10% at the image-level and 98.21%
both DNP and NCL, the model leveraged both negative and at the pixel-level. We considered that it is mainly attributed
positive samples to fine-tune the feature extractor, leading to to the diversity of the shape and distribution of the anomalies
5012009 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 6. (a) Anomaly samples with heatmaps on MVTec AD. The first two columns show the defect image and the corresponding mask, and the other
columns are the methods’ heatmaps. (b) Visualizations of different hyperparameters of L dis on MVTec AD. The horizontal and vertical axis represents α and
performance, respectively, and the lines in various colors denote different values of γ .

 TABLE VII smaller feature extractors. However, it has some limitations.
 A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD U SING First, to fully leverage the feature representation capability
 D IFFERENT A NOMALY G ENERATORS
 of the pretrained network, it requires two separate training
 sessions, extending the overall training time. Second, inference
 relies on memory bank feature matching, which slows down
 as the number of stored features increases, making it less
 suitable for real-time tasks. As shown in Figs. 5 and 6(a),
 our method remains susceptible to background interference,
 exhibiting subtle yellow regions appearing on the heat map.
 To address these limitations, future research could prioritize
 reducing resource consumption and lightweighting models.
 First, eliminating redundant background features can significantly decrease training time and storage requirements,
Fig. 7. Visualizations of results with the two-stage training strategy. From as different sample backgrounds contribute minimally to
left to right, the original image, the ground truth, the result without two-stage defect detection. Second, leveraging smaller models through
training (pretrained), and the result with two-stage training (fine-tuned). techniques, like lightweighting or distillation, helps mitigate
 training costs. Finally, adopting incremental learning enables
 TABLE VIII efficient updates using small data batches as new information
 A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD U SING D IFFERENT in industrial production.
 F EATURE E XTRACTION N ETWORKS

 V. C ONCLUSION
 To bridge the domain gap between the pretrained and
 target-specific features for industrial anomaly detection tasks,
 we proposed a novel two-stage training strategy, named
 ToCoAD. In the first stage, a discriminative network is trained
generated by Perlin noise, enhancing the coarse localization to coarsely localize anomalies. In the second stage, the
and bootstrap learning ability of the discriminative network. pretrained discriminative network is used to provide negativee) Feature extraction network: We investigated the guided information, and the contrastive learning network along
impact of different feature extraction networks on model with the feature extractor are jointly fine-tuned. Extensive
performance, using Perlin noise as an anomaly genera- experiments were conducted to verify the superior perfortor, as shown in Table VIII. The best image-level and mance of our proposed models, achieving 99.10% image-level
pixel-level AUROCs were 99.10% and 98.21% while using AUROC and 98.21% pixel-level AUROC on the MVTec AD
WideResNet50. The performance of WideResNet101 [27] is dataset, 95.35% image-level AUROC and 98.43% pixel-level
comparable to that of WideResNet50, but it requires more AUROC scores on the VisA dataset, and 97.70% pixel-level
computational resources. When employing ResNet50 [26] AUROC on the BTAD dataset.
instead of WideResNet50, there was a slight decline in
performance due to the simpler network architecture, but R EFERENCES
the discrepancy from the optimal outcome remains rela- [1] X. Tao, X. Gong, X. Zhang, S. Yan, and C. Adak, “Deep learning for
 unsupervised anomaly localization in industrial images: A survey,” IEEE
tively modest. Moreover, the smaller network requires fewer Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–21, 2022.
computational resources, thereby enhancing the feasibility of [2] J. Liu et al., “Deep industrial image anomaly detection: A survey,” Mach.
deployment on compact devices. Intell. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 104–135, Feb. 2024.
 f) Discussion: The proposed approach uses a two-stage [3] L. Fan, Y. Ding, D. Fan, D. Di, M. Pagnucco, and Y. Song, “GrainSpace:
 A large-scale dataset for fine-grained and domain-adaptive recognition of
training strategy, enabling efficient fine-tuning with minimal cereal grains,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
resource usage and negligible performance loss when using (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 21116–21125.
LIANG et al.: ToCoAD: TWO-STAGE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION 5012009

 [4] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and [27] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” 2016,
 P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in arXiv:1605.07146.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, [28] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for conpp. 14318–14328. volutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019,
 [5] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch dis- pp. 6105–6114.
 tribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,” [29] H. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Wu, and Y.-G. Jiang, “DiffusionAD: Normin Proc. ICPR. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021, pp. 475–489. guided one-step denoising diffusion for anomaly detection,” 2023,
 [6] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time arXiv:2303.08730.
 unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional nor- [30] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
 malizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
 (WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107. [31] K. Perlin, “An image synthesizer,” ACM SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph.,
 [7] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normal- vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 287–296, Jul. 1985.
 izing flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), vol. 37, 2015, [32] D. Kim, C. Park, S. Cho, and S. Lee, “FAPM: Fast adaptive patch
 pp. 1530–1538. memory for real-time industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE
 [8] J. Pirnay and K. Chai, “Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection,” Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2023,
 in Proc. ICIAP. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 394–406. pp. 1–5.
 [9] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting [33] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
 for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021, one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Art. no. 107706. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[10] L. Fan, Y. Ding, M. Pagnucco, and Y. Song, “Patch-wise augmentation [34] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
 for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
 Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2024, pp. 5425–5429. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
[11] L. Fan, A. Sowmya, E. Meijering, and Y. Song, “Cancer survival pre- Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
 diction from whole slide images with self-supervised learning and slide [35] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
 consistency,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1401–1412, via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
 May 2023. [36] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
[12] D. Di et al., “Generating hypergraph-based high-order representations in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit.,
 of whole-slide histopathological images for survival prediction,” IEEE Jun. 2021, pp. 15750–15758.
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5800–5815, [37] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent—A new approach to self-
 May 2023. supervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
[13] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
 vol. 33, 2020, pp. 21271–21284.
 comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 [38] S. Asgarian et al., “Multiview contrastive learning for unsupervised
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 domain adaptation in brain-computer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 Jun. 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
 Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
[14] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively
 [39] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
 trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Proc. ICCV, 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
[15] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
 anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” in [40] K. Sohn, “Improved deep metric learning with multi-class N-pair loss
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, objective,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 29, 2016, pp. 1857-1865.
 2022, pp. 474–489. [41] H. Wang, E. Ahn, and J. Kim, “A dual-branch self-supervised repre-
[16] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self- sentation learning framework for tumour segmentation in whole slide
 supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. images,” 2023, arXiv:2303.11019.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, [42] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi,
 pp. 9664–9674. “Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
[17] H. Nam, H. Lee, J. Park, W. Yoon, and D. Yoo, “Reducing domain gap Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 3606–3613.
 by reducing style bias,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [43] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 8690–8699. dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
[18] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet: Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
 A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. [44] O. Sener and S. Savarese, “Active learning for convolutional neural
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 248–255. networks: A core-set approach,” 2017, arXiv:1708.00489.
[19] M. Wang and W. Deng, “Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey,” [45] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spot-
 Neurocomputing, vol. 312, pp. 135–153, Oct. 2018. the-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
[20] S. Li et al., “Unsupervised finetuning,” 2021, arXiv:2110.09510. segmentation,” in Proc. ECCV. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022,
[21] M. Thota and G. Leontidis, “Contrastive domain adaptation,” in Proc. pp. 392–408.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), [46] P. Mishra, R. Verk, D. Fornasier, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti,
 Jun. 2021, pp. 2209–2218. “VT-ADL: A vision transformer network for image anomaly detection
[22] X. Xu et al., “Revisiting pretraining for semi-supervised learning and localization,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Symp. Ind. Electron. (ISIE),
 in the low-label regime,” Neurocomputing, vol. 565, Nov. 2023, Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
 Art. no. 126971. [47] N. Cohen and Y. Hoshen, “Sub-image anomaly detection with deep
[23] Y. Tian, C. Sun, B. Poole, D. Krishnan, C. Schmid, and P. Isola, “What pyramid correspondences,” 2020, arXiv:2005.02357.
 makes for good views for contrastive learning,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, [48] Z. Zhang, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Sun, and X. Chen, “Indus-
 May 2020, pp. 6827–6839. trial anomaly detection with domain shift: A real-world dataset and
[24] C.-H. Ho and N. Nvasconcelos, “Contrastive learning with adversarial masked multi-scale reconstruction,” Comput. Ind., vol. 151, Oct. 2023,
 examples,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 17081–17093. Art. no. 103990.
[25] J. Lei, X. Hu, Y. Wang, and D. Liu, “PyramidFlow: High-resolution [49] Y. Zheng, X. Wang, R. Deng, T. Bao, R. Zhao, and L. Wu, “Focus
 defect contrastive localization using pyramid normalizing flow,” in Proc. your distribution: Coarse-to-fine non-contrastive learning for anomaly
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo.
 pp. 14143–14152. (ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for [50] W. Shin, J. Lee, T. Lee, S. Lee, and J. P. Yun, “Anomaly detection
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. using score-based perturbation resilience,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 23372–23382.