9832 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Toward Open-World Network Intrusion Detection
 via Open Recognition and Inspection
Lei Du , Yuhan Chai , Yan Jia, Binxing Fang , Member, IEEE, Hao Li , and Zhaoquan Gu , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Deep learning is promising in open-world network I. I NTRODUCTION
intrusion detection, but current deep learning-based methods
mainly focus on open recognition with properties that may
not always hold and significantly neglect the inspection of
unknown samples, increasing open space risks and manual
 D EEP learning has been widely used in securing computer
 networks and endpoint devices against cyber attacks,
 including network intrusion detection [10], [17], [50], malware
inspection overhead for deployed models. To address these detection [14], [24], [35], log anomaly detection [9], [37],
challenges in real-world environments, we propose a novel system, [51], and advanced persistent threat detection [1], [25], [46].
ORI, designed to tackle two critical tasks: 1) open recognition, As a critical component of cybersecurity, network intrusion
including classifying known class samples while recognizing detection plays a vital role in analyzing network traffic behavunknown ones, and 2) inspection, involving further inspecting
samples recognized as unknown. Specifically, we reformulate ior to identify potential intrusion attempts and provide early
open recognition as a binary classification task and propose warnings. Heretofore, researchers have applied deep learninga density-based method to recognize low-density samples as based models for network intrusion detection systems and
unknown while classifying known class samples with a closed- consistently achieved satisfactory performance [20]. Unforworld classifier, thereby minimizing the risk associated with tunately, the superior performance of learning-based deep
open spaces. To reduce the inspection overhead of samples models typically works under the closed-world assumption
recognized as unknown, we treat unknown sample inspection
as a constrained clustering task, using a few manually inspected that all types of attacks expected at inference would appear
samples as constraints, and then assign labels to the remaining in training [40]. This assumption is inherently vulnerable
unknown samples via clustering. We evaluate our system against and often violated in an open-world environment as the real
established open recognition and unknown sample inspection network environment changes dynamically over time. Such
baselines through extensive experiments on three public datasets. changes include the natural evolution of benign applications,
Additionally, we simulated a security analyst inspecting unknown
 mutations in known attack vectors, the proliferation of new
samples labeled by ORI. The experimental results demonstrate
that ORI accurately classifies known class samples, recognizes benign applications, and the emergence of previously unknown
unknown samples, and effectively labels samples recognized vulnerabilities [36]. As a result, deep models may confidently
as unknown, enhancing both open recognition and inspection misclassify any unknown sample (whether benign or attack
capabilities. behaviors) encountered in the future into the known classes,
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection, open world net- which causes serious failures to the deployed models [12].
work intrusion, open recognition, unknown sample inspection. Recently, several works have been proposed to tackle network intrusion detection in an open-world environment, which
 Received 16 December 2024; revised 14 July 2025; accepted 1 September can generally be divided into two solutions. The first focuses
2025. Date of publication 10 September 2025; date of current version
23 September 2025. This work was supported in part by Shenzhen Science
 on recognizing or rejecting unknown samples without further
and Technology Program under Grant KJZD20231023094701003, in part by analysis of the samples recognized as unknown [5], [47],
the Major Key Project of Pengcheng Laboratory under Grant PCL2024A05, [49], while the second concentrates on updating the deep
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant model through periodic retraining or incremental learning with
62372137, in part by the Tertiary Education Scientific Research Project of
Guangzhou Municipal Education Bureau under Grant 2024312279, and in labeled unknown samples [19], [21], [55]. These solutions
part by the Opening Project of Science and Technology on Communication utilize multiple properties to recognize unknown samples,
Networks Laboratory under Grant FFX24641X007. The associate editor such as the reconstruction error of sample features [47] or
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Dr. Ashok Kumar Das. (Corresponding author: Zhaoquan Gu.) the distance between samples and known class centroids
 Lei Du, Binxing Fang, and Zhaoquan Gu are with the School of Com- [49]. However, these properties may not always hold and
puter Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, significantly increase the risk of open spaces. Moreover, most
Guangdong 518055, China, and also with the Department of New Networks, Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China (e-mail: works focus on updating deep models rather than inspecting
21b951040@stu.hit.edu.cn; fangbx@cae.cn; guzhaoquan@hit.edu.cn). unknown samples, resulting in substantial labeling overhead
 Yuhan Chai is with the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced when preparing samples for updates [6], [8]. Only previous
Technology, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (email:chaiyuhan@gzhu.edu.cn).
 work has attempted to inspect unknown samples by clustering
 Yan Jia is with the College of Computer Science, National the samples with the estimated number of classes [55]. As
University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e- illustrated in Fig. 1, in the open-world environment, realmail:jiayan2020@hit.edu.cn). time captured samples recognized as unknown require further
 Hao Li is with Kunlun Digital Technology Company Ltd., Beijing 100010,
China (e-mail:cuclihao@cuc.edu.cn). inspection at security operations centers. Nevertheless, a sig-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3608666 nificant error in estimating the number of classes undermines
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
DU et al.: TOWARD OPEN-WORLD NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA ORI 9833

 aims to minimize the labeling overhead, thereby reducing the
 inspection effort for security companies.
 We conduct extensive experiments on three publicly available attack detection datasets to evaluate the performance of
 ORI. We compare ORI with four open recognition baselines
 in two experimental settings: pseudo multi-class classification and multi-class classification, and four unknown sample
 inspection baselines across two scenarios: with and without
 known classes present in samples recognized as unknown. We
 Fig. 1. Open recognition and inspection of samples. also conduct ablation experiments on open recognition and
 unknown sample inspection of ORI. In addition, we present a
 case study simulating a security analyst inspecting the labeling
the effectiveness of this method. Hence, the urgent priority results of unknown samples provided by ORI. Experimental
for advancing open-world network intrusion detection is to results demonstrate that ORI outperforms currently related
develop a novel solution that recognizes unknown samples and baselines in both open recognition and unknown sample
inspects samples recognized as unknown. inspection, underscoring its effectiveness as a promising solution.
A. Challenges In summary, the main contributions of this paper are:
 • We propose an open-world network intrusion detection
 In short, tackling open recognition1 and unknown samsystem that can classify known class samples, recognize
ple inspection in open-world network intrusion detection is
 unknown samples, and inspect samples recognized as
non-trivial and faces three major challenges. (1) How to
 unknown. (§III-A)
learn generalizable feature representations: Deep models are
 • We propose a novel density-based method for open-world
typically trained on known class data, which can lead to
 network intrusion recognition, which recognizes unknown
overfitting known classes and poor generalization to encounsamples based on the distribution density of known class
tered unknown samples [13]. (2) How to minimize open
 data in reliable regions. (§III-B)
space risk: In the inference stage, test samples can appear
 • To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to
anywhere in latent feature space, which raises the probability
 explore unknown sample inspection through constrained
of misrecognition by deep models and increases the risk
 clustering with a few labeled samples, significantly reducassociated with open space [16], [41]. (3) How to efficiently
 ing the manual labeling budget. (§III-C)
inspect unknown samples: Inspecting unknown samples case
by case is labor-intensive and time-consuming, and with the The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
continuous emergence of unknown samples, promptly labeling Section II, we outline the background of open-world network
all samples becomes impractical [15]. intrusion and define the problem scope of the work. Then,
 we present our system in detail in Section III, followed
 by a comprehensive evaluation in Section IV. We review
B. Our Work related work in Section V and provide several discussions in
 In light of the mentioned challenges, we develop an open- Section VI. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VII.
world network intrusion detection system, ORI (short for
Open Recognition and Inspection), for known class classifica- II. BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM S COPE
tion, unknown sample recognition, and further inspection and In this section, we provide the background of deep
labeling of samples recognized as unknown. (1) To address learning-based network intrusion detection in an open-world
the first challenge, we train a representation network with environment and define the scope of our problem.
supervised contrastive learning to map samples of the same
class into a compact feature space that supports the system
 A. Open-World Network Intrusion Detection
construction by non-parametric methods. (2) To address the
second challenge, we formulate unknown sample recognition Deep learning-based models for network intrusion detection
as a binary classification task, where samples with low density in an open-world environment must effectively classify known
relative to the training data are recognized as unknown, class samples, recognize unknown samples, inspect samples
which helps the system distinguish between known class recognized as unknown, and update the deep models with
data and unknown samples during testing, thereby enabling the recently inspected ones [4], [31], [55]. Although considthe classification of known class samples while reserving erable efforts have been made in these areas, research has
unknown samples for further inspection. (3) To address the last often been conducted independently, with only a few works
challenge, we treat the inspection of unknown samples as a integrating multiple capabilities. With extensive research and
constrained clustering task. By using a few inspected unknown development, the classification of known class samples has
samples as constraints, the system can assign labels to the significantly advanced [20]. However, most methods rely on a
remaining unknown samples through clustering. The design closed-world assumption [41].
 1) Threat Model: In the context of network intrusion detec-
 1 This paper refers to known class classification and unknown sample tion, a well-trained closed-world deep detection model may be
recognition as open recognition. vulnerable to unknown samples, which forces deep models to
9834 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

misclassify unknown samples as one of the known classes, • Unknown sample inspection: fθ is also utilized to devise
leading to significant failures in real-world deployments. Such an unknown sample inspection module, where M samples
unknown samples can emerge from three sources: unknown from U are selected for manual inspection by security
class samples not present during training, known class sam- analysts, and then labels are assigned to the remaining
ples deviating from the expected distribution, and adversarial unknown samples through clustering. The inspected sam-
 U = (xi , yi ) | yi ∈ {Y
 ˚
samples deliberately manipulated by the attacker [43]. We ples e ekn ∪ Y eun } include new class
primarily focus on the first type, while the other types will samples (xi , yi ), where yi ∈ Yun ⊂ Yun , and previously
 e
be deferred to future work. known class samples (x j , y j ), where y j ∈ Y
 ekn ⊂ Ykn .
 Recent work has explored open recognition in a pseudo To enhance the representation of U, the representation
multi-class classification setting, which utilizes classifier confi- network fθ can be trained from scratch with Dkn and U,
dence [18], feature reconstruction errors [47], and the distances reparameterized by ϕ.
between feature vectors and class centroids [49], [55] to
recognize unknown samples while classifying known sam- III. M ETHODOLOGY
ples. However, these methods have weaknesses since such
properties are not foolproof. Other works have investigated In this section, we develop an open-world network intruupdating deep models through periodic retraining or incre- sion detection system, ORI (short for Open Recognition and
mental learning with labeled unknown samples [8], [55], Inspection), to tackle open recognition and unknown sample
but it is impractical due to the resource-intensive and time- inspection, which consists of two modules. To facilitate underdemanding nature of labeling [45]. Prior work [55] inspects standing, we provide an overview with a simplified example
unknown samples with minimal overhead through clustering, in §III-A to illustrate the workflow of ORI and present the
but significant errors in estimating the number of classes details of each module in §III-B and §III-C.
hinder its effectiveness. While incremental updating of deep
models is a valuable research topic, it is beyond the scope of A. Overview and Simplified Example
this work. We design our system based on the observation that a
 2) Our Goal: We aim to develop an open-world network representation network can serve as a non-parametric nearest
intrusion detection system that tackles open recognition and neighbor classifier without imposing distributional assumpunknown sample inspection toward more realistic scenarios. tions about the underlying feature space. Many previous works
Our system is designed to meet the following requirements: in network intrusion detection leverage this characteristic when
 • Support fine-grained class definitions: By incorporating developing deep models [32], [49]. This insight inspired us to
 detailed attack type definitions for both normal and attack separate the learning of feature representations for network
 classes, our system enables administrators to configure traffic from the development of decision processes for open
 more flexible security policies and enhance detection recognition and unknown sample inspection.
 capabilities. As shown in Fig. 2, our system performs in an online
 • Efficient unknown sample inspection: The system is fashion, continuously recognizing and inspecting samples from
 intended to inspect only a limited number of unknown an internal network. These samples are either classified into
 samples, reducing the overhead for security analysts. known classes or recognized as unknown. In practice, the number of samples recognized as unknown may vary depending
 on the network environment and the intensity of cyber attacks.
B. Problem Formulation Hence, unknown samples are typically inspected periodically
 Formally, let Dkn = {(xi , yi ) | yi ∈ Ykn } represent the training or when the number of samples reaches a predefined threshold.
data collected from an internal network (e.g., an enterprise In this example, assume we have collected training data with
network), where each sample is a bi-flow or a session between known classes {N1 , N2 , A1 , A2 }. After some time, test samples
two hosts. Here, yi is the label of xi , and Ykn includes all A3
 {x1N1 , x2N2 , x3N2 , x4A1 , x5A2 , x6N3 , x7N4 , x8N4 , x9N4 ,x10 A3
 , x11 A3
 , x12 A3
 , x13 ,
known classes {N1 , . . . , Nn , A1 , . . . , Aa }, with normal classes A4 A4
 x14 , x15 } are captured in real time from the internal network.
{N1, . . . , Nn } and attack classes {A1 , . . . , Aa }. As the real net- Here, xij denotes the i-th sample with the ground truth label
work environment changes over time, test samples Dun = j, and the labels are inaccessible.
{xi | yi ∈ {Ykn ∪ Yun }} are captured in real-time. These test The ORI procedure consists of four main steps. Initially,
samples˚ may include known classes Ykn , unknown normal we train a representation network fθ to extract feature vectors
classes Nn+1 , . . . , Nn+b ⊂ Yun , and unknown attack classes of the training data. In step , we leverage these feature
 Aa+1 , . . . , Aa+m ⊂ Yun . Suppose fθ is a representation
˚
 vectors to construct a known class or closed-world classifier
network trained with Dkn , parameterized by θ, and the security for classifying the test samples. Clearly, test samples from
company can afford to label M samples. unknown classes are misclassified as known classes. For
 • Open recognition: The representation network fθ is instance, an unknown sample x6N3 is misclassified as e y6N2 . Then,
 leveraged to build an open recognition module. This in step , we propose a density-based method for recognizing
 module recognizes test samples in Dun from Yun as samples that do not belong to the training data distribution.
 unknown (indicated by the masked True) while continuing This method formulates a binary classification task, where test
 to classify test samples from Dun that belong to Ykn into samples with low density in the feature space of the training
 y ∈ Ykn . The samples recognized as unknown are denoted data are masked as unknown. Intuitively, recognizing unknown
 by U, where |Dun | , |U|. samples at the density distribution level is more effective.
DU et al.: TOWARD OPEN-WORLD NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA ORI 9835

 Fig. 2. Overview and illustration of ORI with an example.

Nevertheless, insufficient information in the training data may Algorithm 1 Open Recognition
lead to the misrecognition of some test samples. As shown in Input: Training data Dkn , test samples Dun , the pre-trained
 A4
Fig. 2, an unknown sample x15 can be incorrectly recognized representation network fθ , the number of local samples
as a known class sample, while a known class sample x2N2 k1 , and the number of reliable samples k2 .
can be wrongly marked as unknown. In step , we train Output: Known class predictions Y e and unknown samples U.
a representation network fφ to obtain more tailored feature B Collect feature vectors Zkn of Dkn by fθ .
vectors for samples recognized as unknown. We then select 1: for index i = 1 to |Dkn | do
a few representative unknown samples for manual inspection 2: Zkn (z1 , . . ., zi ) ← fθ (xi )/||( fθ (xi ))||2
by security analysts. Analysts inspect the selected samples 3: end for
case by case and identify new classes. For example, samples B Construct a classifier for known classes.
x6N3 , x9N4 and x10
 A3
 are selected and inspected, and new classes 4: KNN = KNeighborsClassifier(Zkn , Ykn )
A1 , N1 , and N2 are recorded. Ideally, clustering samples into
 e f f B Construct a recognizer for unknown samples.
several clusters and selecting representatives from each cluster 5: for index i = 1 to |Zkn | do
for labeling would accurately label unknown samples, but this Zk1 (zi ) ← ||z
 6:
 Pi −1 z||2 , z ∈ Zkn
is not the case. Therefore, in step , we propose a constrained 7: ρ(zi ) ← k11 kj=1 d(z j , zi ), z j ∈ Zk1 (zi )
clustering method for labeling uninspected unknown samples. 8: end for
 P|Zkn |
This method used manually labeled samples and recorded new 9: δ ← |Z1 | i=1 ρ(zi )
 kn
classes as constraints to label the remaining unknown samples 10:
through clustering. Finally, the ORI procedure concludes by B Classify test samples as known classes or unknown.
combining the results of open recognition and unknown sam- 11: for index i = 1 to |Dun | do
ple inspection to assess the current cybersecurity situation. 12: zi ← fθ (xi )/||( fθ (xi ))||2
 13: Zk1 (zi ) ← ||zi − z||2 , z ∈ Zkn
 14:
B. Open Recognition ( Pk 1
 The open recognition module in this work aims to classify Unknown if i=1 1(d(z j , zi ) ≤ δ) ≤ k2 ,
 yi ←
 e
known class samples and recognize unknown samples. The Known otherwise, classification by KNN.
process of open recognition is shown in Algorithm 1.
 15: end for
 1) Representation Learning: We utilize a representation
network trained with supervised contrastive learning [28] to
extract feature vectors of the input sample. This method is
motivated by two key aspects. First, supervised contrastive Here, Bkn ⊂ Dkn , and Nkn (i) are the indices of other samples
learning has been demonstrated to effectively map data from with the same label as xi in the mini-batch Bkn . The feature
the same class into a compact feature space. Second, the vector of xi denoted by zi , is given by zi = fθ (xi ) ∈ Rm ,
representation network can serve as a robust nearest neigh- where fθ is the representation network. The indicator function
bor classifier, which suggests that non-parametric clustering is represented by 1, and τ ∈ R+ is a scalar temperature
methods perform well within its feature space. parameter.
 Formally, let xi be a randomly selected sample from a mini- 2) Known Class Classification: Given the feature represenbatch Bkn . We optimized fθ over the training data Dkn by tations of the training data, we classify test samples into known
minimizing the supervised contrastive loss as follows: classes using the k-nearest neighbors (KNN) algorithm with
 exp zi · z j /τ
  majority voting instead of performing on parametric methods.
 X 1 X
 L (θ) = − log P (1) KNN is an instance-based learning method that directly stores
 i∈B
 kn
 |Nkn (i)|
 j∈Nkn (i) n 1[n,i] exp (zi · zn /τ) the training data without a training stage. We extract feature
9836 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

vectors for the train data using the representation network 4) Theoretical Analysis: Assume the local density distribufθ , denoted as Zkn = (z1 , z2 , . . .), where each feature vector tions for known class data (kn) and unknown samples (un) as
z = fθ (x)/|| fθ (x)||2 is normalized. By leveraging the feature follows:
vectors Zkn and the corresponding ground truth labels Ykn , we
construct a classifier for known class classification. ρ(z∗ )|y = 0 ∼ N(µkn , σ2kn )
 In the inference stage, we derive the normalized feature vec- ρ(z∗ )|y = 1 ∼ N(µun , σ2un ) (5)
tor z∗ for a test sample x∗ and calculate the Euclidean distance
 where µ and σ represent the mean and variance of the
between z∗ and the feature vectors in Zkn . By employing these
 local density, respectively. By applying Bayes’ theorem, the
distances, we identify the labels of the k nearest neighbors
 probability that z∗ belongs to known classes is given by:
Yk (x∗ ) = (y1 , . . . , yk ). The predicted label e
 y for the test sample
x∗ is then determined by majority voting: p̂kn (z∗ ) · p(y = 0)
 p̂(y = 0|ρ̂(z∗ )) = (6)
 k
 p̂kn (z ) · p(y = 0) + p̂un (z∗ ) · p(y = 1)
 ∗

 where p̂kn (z∗ ) = p(ρ̂(z∗ ) | y = 0) and p̂un (z∗ ) = p(ρ̂(z∗ ) | y = 1)
 X
 y = arg max
 e 1[y j = y] (2)
 y
 j=1 are the probability distribution of the local density ρ̂(z∗ ) for
 known class data and unknown samples, respectively. As k1
Here, y j ∈ Yk (x ) and 1[y j = y] is an indicator function
 ∗
 increases, the local density estimate ρ̂(z∗ ) converges to the true
that returns 1 if y j = y, and 0 otherwise. Note that while
 local density ρ(z∗ ):
we recommend non-parametric methods in ORI, parametric
methods are not excluded for classifying known classes. lim ρ̂(z∗ ) = ρ(z∗ ) = E[ρ̂(z∗ )] (7)
 k1 →∞
 3) Unknown Sample Recognition: Deep models trained on
known class data often struggle to generalize to unknown and the variance of the local density estimate can be approxsamples. To tackle this issue, we formalize unknown sample imated as:
recognition as a binary classification task, where samples from 1 k
 1 X
known classes are marked as False and unknown samples are Var[ρ̂(z∗ )] = Var[d(zi , z∗ )] (8)
True. Leveraging the compact feature space learned by the k1 2 i=1
representation network, we propose a density-based method Hence, selecting an appropriate k1 can ensure that the
to recognize unknown samples. For each sample x∗ in the variance of the local density estimate is slight enough to
training data, we index the corresponding feature vector z∗ , accurately and reliably reflect the actual global density. Morecalculate the distances to the feature vectors in Zkn , and select over, choosing a suitable k2 can guarantee sufficient samples
the k1 nearest neighbors Zk1 (z∗ ) to calculate the local density in the known class data to satisfy the density condition,
of the sample x∗ : thereby minimizing the open space risk and enhancing the
 1 k open recognition accuracy.
 1 X
 ρ(z∗ ) = d(z, z∗ ), z ∈ Zkn (3)
 k1
 i=1 C. Unknown Sample Inspection
 ∗ ∗
Here, d(z, z ) is the Euclidean distance between z and z . We In the unknown sample inspection module, we further
then calculate the global density based on the local densities inspect samples recognized as unknown provided by the open
of all training data, and establish a distance threshold δ to recognition module while maintaining limited overhead for
define the reliable region. This threshold δ ensures a high local manual inspection.
density for known class data while maintaining a low density 1) Relearning Representations: The existing representation
for unknown samples. Since z∗ is a normalized feature vector network fθ , which is trained solely on known class data,
in Rm , the reliable region corresponds to the area on the m- inherently generates biased representations for unknown samdimensional unit hyper-sphere within a Euclidean distance of ples. To mitigate this issue and improve the representation of
δ from the center z∗ . unknown samples, we introduce a new representation network
 In the inference stage, we first derive the normalized feature fϕ . This representation network fϕ is jointly trained with
vector z∗ for a test sample x∗ , then identify the k1 near- supervised contrastive learning on the known class data and
est neighbors Zk1 (z∗ ) by calculating the Euclidean distance reconstruction learning for all samples. Formally, we optibetween z∗ and the feature vectors in Zkn . We generalize the mized fϕ over both the known class data Dkn and the unknown
reliable region to the test sample x∗ by counting the number samples U by minimizing the following objective function:
of training data within this region. If at least k2 samples from
the k1 nearest neighbors lie within the distance threshold δ, L(ϕ)
the test sample x∗ is recognized as known; otherwise, it is 1 X
 = (1 − λ) x j ||22
 ||x j − e
recognized as unknown: |B| j∈B
 k1
 exp zi · z j /τ
 
 X 1 X
 +λ
 X
 1(d(z j , z ) ≤ δ) ≤ k2 , z j ∈ Zk1 (z )
 ∗ ∗
 (4) − log P (9)
 i=1 i∈Bkn
 |Nkn (i)|
 j∈Nkn (i) n 1[n,i] exp (zi · zn /τ)

where 1 is the indicator function that returns 1 if the specified where λ is a weight coefficient, and B ⊂ (Dkn ∪ U). x j is the
condition is met and 0 otherwise, and k2 is the number of original input sample, and ex j is its reconstruction. The first
reliable samples. term corresponds to the reconstruction loss, which minimizes
DU et al.: TOWARD OPEN-WORLD NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA ORI 9837

the mean squared error between x j and e x j for the samples in Algorithm 2 Unknown Sample Inspection
the mini-batch B. The second term is supervised contrastive Input: Unknown samples U, the pre-trained representation
loss, which incorporates prior knowledge into semantically network fϕ , and the number of inspected samples M.
meaningful representations, thereby helping to mitigate over- Output: The number of classes K, the labeled samples e U.
fitting to known classes. B The feature vectors Zun of U are extracted by fϕ .
 2) Representative Sample Inspection: Since unknown sam- 1: for index i = 1 to |U| do
ples may continuously emerge, comprehensively and promptly 2: Zun (z1 , . . ., zi ) ← fϕ (xi )/||( fϕ (xi ))||2
inspecting all unknown samples is impractical in real-world 3: end for
environments. Therefore, we select a few representative sam- 4:
ples from unknown samples for manual inspection and B Select representative samples.
labeling by security analysts. These representative samples 5: S, ZS ← sampleSelector(U, Zun , M)
need to satisfy two criteria: First, the number of selected 6: K, YS ← Inspection of S by security analysts.
samples should be small (M  |U|) to ensure that security 7:
companies can afford the overhead of manual inspection. B Assign labels for U \ S
Second, the selected samples should be diverse to cover all 8: for each Pclass i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., K} do
potential unknown classes, hence M should be at least equal j∈Z [1[i=y] ] z j
 9: ci ← |ZSS[1[i=y] ]| , y ∈ YS B Initialize centroids.
to the number of ground truth classes.
 10: end for
 To achieve this, we employ two selection strategies: random
 11: Initialize iteration counter iter ← 0 and convergence flag
sampling and k-means sampling. In random sampling, we
 convergence ← false.
randomly selected M samples from the unknown samples.
 12: while iter < T and ¬convergence do
In k-means sampling, we first cluster the feature vectors of
unknown samples using k-means, and the number of clusters is 13: for each index j ∈ U \ S do
set to M. We select the sample closest to each cluster centroid 14: di( j) ← ||z j − ci ||2 , i = 1, . . ., K
based on the Euclidean distance between the feature vectors 15: Y
 eun (e y j , . . .) ← arg min di( j)
 y1 ,e
 i
and centroids. Then, security analysts inspect the selected M 16: end for
samples, providing feedback with the ground truth labels YS 17: U ← {(x j , y j )|x j ∈ U, y j ∈ {YS ∪ Y
 e eun }}
of the selected unknown samples S, as well as the estimated 18: Set convergence ← true
number of classes K. 19: for each class i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., K} do
 3) Label Assignment: To avoid additional manual inspec- 20: B Update centroids.
tion overhead, we treat the labeling of the remaining unknown ci ← |Zun [11[i=y] ]| j∈Zun [1[i=y] ] z j , y ∈ {YS ∪ Y
 P
 21: eun }
samples as a constrained clustering task. Specifically, the 22: if centroids have changed then
number of clusters is set to the estimated number of classes 23: convergence ← false
K, with the constraint that samples from the same class in 24: end if
the labeled samples S × YS are consistently grouped into the 25: end for
same cluster. The optimization objective of clustering under 26: iter ← iter + 1
these constraints is expressed as: 27: end while
 K X
 X
 J = ||zi − c j ||22
 j=1 zi ∈C j (lines 19-25). This process repeats until either iter reaches the
 s.t. ∀t, ∃ j such that zi ∈ C j , ∀zi with label t. (10) maximum limit T or the centroids stabilize (lines 12-27).

where zi denotes a sample in cluster C j , and c j denotes the IV. E VALUATION
 j-th centroid. In this section, we first present the experimental setup
 We implement this idea by modifying the k-means++ algo- (§IV-A). We then evaluate the effectiveness of ORI with
rithm [2], as shown in Algorithm 2. Initially, the K centroids several baseline methods (§IV-B), followed by a detailed
are calculated as the average of the feature vectors for each analysis of ORI, including ablation studies (§IV-C) and an
class in YS , where ci is the centroid of i-th cluster. (lines 8- examination of various factors (§IV-D). Finally, we provide a
10). The clustering process then assigns labels to the remaining use case to simulate security analysts inspecting the unknown
unknown samples. We initialize the iteration counter iter to 0 sample labeling results of ORI (§IV-E).
and the convergence flag convergence to false (line 11). For
each sample x∗ in the remaining unknown samples U \ S,
we calculate the Euclidean distances to the K centroids and A. Experimental Setup
assign the label with the nearest centroid (lines 13-16). Once 1) Datasets: We evaluate ORI using two public datasets:
all unknown samples are labeled, they form the set of labeled USTC-TFC2016 [44] and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 [38], both are
unknown samples e U (line 17), and the flag convergence is set widely used in network intrusion detection research. The
to true (line 18). Then, the centroids are updated based on e U, USTC-TFC2016 dataset contains 20 types of network traffic,
with the constraint that samples from the same class in S ×YS half of which represent normal activity and the other half
remain in the same cluster. If the centroids change, the flag represent activity generated by malware. Following [55], we
convergence is reset to false; otherwise, it remains unchanged extracted byte features from the first 784 bytes of each
9838 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE I For unknown sample inspection, we evaluate two scenarios.
 C LASS S TATISTICS OF THE DATASETS U SED IN T HIS W ORK In the first scenario, the unknown samples consist of both
 ground truth unknown classes and misclassified known classes,
 representing a more realistic and challenging setting. In both
 scenarios, security analysts inspect a subset of unknown samples to define constraints for assigning labels to the remaining
 unknown samples through clustering.
 3) Metrics: We use multi-class classification accuracy to
 evaluate the open recognition performance, where samples
 from unknown classes are treated as a single unknown class.
 We also measure the known class accuracy in a closedworld environment, where unknown samples are excluded
 during testing. In addition, we calculate the Weighted Average
 F1-score (WAF), which weights the F1-score of each class
 according to its sample proportion relative to the total number
 of samples. Given the significant class imbalance between
 known class data and unknown samples, we also compute a
 variant of this metric, the Weighted Average F1-score for the
 unknown class (U-WAF).
 For the inspection of unknown samples, we report the
 estimated number of unknown classes to provide security
 analysts with insights into the diversity and potential risk
 levels of these samples. Clustering accuracy is also evaluated
 by comparing the ground truth labels yi with deep model
 predictions eyi as follows:
 |e
 U|
 1 X
 Cluster Accuracy = max 1 {yi = p (e
 yi )}
 p∈P(Yun ) |U|
 e
 i=1
 where P(Yun ) represents the set of all permutations of class
 labels for the unknown samples e U. The permutation yielding
 the maximum value is calculated by the Hungarian optimal
flow. The original CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset captures vari- assignment algorithm [27].
ous types of network traffic from hundreds of hosts in an 4) Implementation Details: We implemented ORI with
internal network, including multiple malicious classes and PyTorch, Scikit-learn and Faiss. The representation networks,
one normal class. We extracted statistical features from the fθ and fϕ , are based on MLP and autoencoder architecflows in this dataset by using the CICFlowMeter tool. Since tures with layers configured as 784-512-128-32-8 for the
CSE-CIC-IDS2018 only provides one normal class without USTC-TFC2016 dataset, 83-64-32-16-8 for the CIC-IDS2018
fine-grained labels, we excluded the normal class and supple- dataset and 30-64-32-16 for the TON-IoT dataset. The ReLU
mented the dataset with normal traffic from USTC-TFC2016, activation function is applied to each hidden layer. Both
which we refer to as CIC-IDS2018. Note that the version of the representation networks are trained for 100 epochs with a
CICFlowMeter used in this work was modified as described in batch size of 256, and optimized with the Adam optimizer
[11]. Moreover, we use the TON-IoT dataset [33], an Internet [26]. For both tasks, the learning rate for fθ is set to 0.001
of Things network security dataset, to evaluate ORI. This for USTC-TFC2016, 0.005 for CIC-IDS2018 and 0.007 for
dataset includes one normal class and nine attack classes, with TON-IoT, while for fϕ , the learning rates are 2e-4, 9e-4 and
samples from each class comprising 30 statistical features. 8e-4, respectively. In open recognition, the number of nearest
 2) Evaluation Protocols: For open recognition, a deep neighbors k is set to 25, the number of local neighbors k1 to
model is trained solely on samples from known classes, while 50, and the number of reliable samples k2 to 5. The number
testing includes both known and unknown class samples. The of inspected samples M is set to 100 for unknown sample
class statistics used for evaluation are shown in TABLE I. inspection. We used a default temperature parameter τ of 0.07
We considered two evaluation settings: pseudo multi-class as provided in [28], and a weight λ of 0.1.
classification and multi-class classification. In the multi-class 5) Baselines: We evaluate the open recognition perforclassification setting, fine-grained labels are also provided mance of ORI in the pseudo multi-class classification setting
for the normal class. The known class data were randomly on the USTC-TFC2016, CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT datasets,
split into training and testing samples with an 8:2 ratio, and in the multi-class classification setting with the first two
and all unknown class samples were included in the testing datasets. Since no prior work has explored open recognition
samples. In the inference stage, the deep model classifies for network intrusion in a multi-class classification setting,
known class samples and recognizes unknown class samples we adapt three existing network intrusion open recognition
in an open-world environment, where the latter are inspected methods (CVAE-EVT [47], OCN [55] and CADE [49]) from
with minimal manual overhead. the original pseudo multi-class classification setting to a
DU et al.: TOWARD OPEN-WORLD NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA ORI 9839

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF ORI W ITH O PEN R ECOGNITION BASELINES ON THE USTC-TFC2016 AND CIC-IDS2018 DATASETS

multi-class classification setting, serving as baselines for open TABLE III
recognition evaluation. In addition, we use Maximum Soft- P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF ORI W ITH O PEN R ECOGNITION
max Probability (MSP) [18] as an open recognition baseline, BASELINES ON THE TON-I OT DATASET
which is widely used in non-security applications. CVAE-
EVT enforces conditional reconstruction constraints and
approximates the score distribution for known and unknown
classes using extreme value theory modeling to optimize open
recognition. OCN learns compact representations by jointly
optimizing three loss functions and utilizes the nearest class
mean classifier with a fixed percentile distance threshold for
detecting unknowns. CADE extends OCN with explicit distance estimation for known classes, incorporating contrastive
learning to compare samples in feature space and detect
outliers based on the median absolute deviation distance. MSP We can see that MSP demonstrates very low open recognicalculates a confidence score based on the maximum value of tion accuracy and U-WAF scores in both settings, consistently
the softmax posterior distribution, which is trained with cross- ranking within the bottom two on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset
entropy loss in a closed-world environment. and last on the CIC-IDS2018 dataset. This result can be
 We also evaluate ORI against four unknown sample inspec- attributed to the fact that the deep model produces a highly
tion baselines: two hierarchical clustering methods (BIRCH overconfident posterior distribution, even for unknown samples
[53] and FINCH [39]), one partition-based clustering method far from the softmax decision boundary. As a result, a large
(k-means [2]), and one semantic embedding clustering method number of unknown samples are misclassified as known
(OCN [55]). BIRCH is a memory-efficient method suitable for classes.
large datasets that constructs a clustering feature tree to facili- By modeling the reconstruction error of features, CVAEtate the clustering process. FINCH is a parameter-free method EVT improves open recognition performance over MSP. The
that clusters samples according to the first nearest neighbor of accuracy of open recognition is increased by 0.72% to 1.59%
each sample. OCN, similar to ORI, first estimates the number on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset and 4.04% to 19.83% on the
of classes with DBSCAN, then clusters the unknown samples CIC-IDS2018 dataset under different settings. Similarly, Uusing k-means with the estimated number of classes. K-means WAF scores show significant improvement, with the smallest
is a popular partition-based method, and we used the ground gain being 4.31% on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset in a multitruth number of classes for comparison. class classification setting. However, this method relies on the
 assumption that known class samples produce lower reconstruction errors than unknown samples. While this assumption
B. Effectiveness may seem reasonable, it is challenging to reconstruct complex
 1) Open Recognition Performance: We adapted and re- known class samples, such as the USTC-TFC2016 and TONimplemented four open recognition baselines to evaluate IoT datasets.
the performance of ORI in two settings. Table II presents Non-parametric methods OCN, CADE and ORI outperform
a comparison of the open recognition results under the both MSP and CVAE-EVT, except for OCN in the multi-class
pseudo multi-class and multi-class classification settings on the classification setting on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. Although
USTC-TFC2016 and CIC-IDS2018 datasets. Table III provides using multiple loss functions to train the representation neta comparison of the open recognition results in the pseudo work, OCN fails to learn effective feature representations for
multi-class classification settings on the TON-IoT dataset. the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. CADE achieves the best open
9840 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF ORI W ITH U NKNOWN S AMPLE I NSPECTION BASELINES ON THE USTC-TFC2016 AND CIC-IDS2018 DATASETS

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF ORI W ITH U NKNOWN S AMPLE A BLATION C OMPARISON OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN O PEN R ECOGNITION .
 I NSPECTION BASELINES ON THE TON-I OT DATASET R ESULTS ON THE USTC-TFC2016, CIC-IDS2018 AND TON-I OT
 DATASETS , W ITH k1 = 50 AND k2 = 5

recognition performance among the baselines by leveraging
contrastive loss and reconstruction loss. In addition, both
OCN and CADE use similar strategies to identify unknown second only to ORI. Its clustering accuracy surpasses that of
samples by measuring the distance between the feature vector FINCH and BIRCH in the “All” scenarios of three datasets
of the sample and the centroid of known classes. These but degrades in the “Unknown” scenarios of the CIC-IDS2018
experimental results show that the training data distribution dataset. These results indicate that while k-means is effective
affects the recognition performance of these methods, while with the ground truth classes, accurately estimating the number
ORI effectively alleviates this problem. of classes for unknown samples remains difficult.
 ORI significantly improves open recognition performance, By estimating the number of classes before clustering, OCN
outperforming the most competitive baseline CADE by 1.08% exhibited high error rates in the estimated number of classes,
to 1.92% on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset and by 0.91% to particularly in the “All” scenario on three datasets, leading to a
3.21% on the CIC-IDS2018 dataset under different settings, significant increase in error relative to BIRCH. Although OCN
and by 10.50% on the TON-IoT in the pseudo multi- outperformed FINCH and BIRCH in the “All” scenario for
class classification setting. These results show that ORI clustering accuracy, it ranked last in the “Unknown” scenario.
achieves superior open recognition performance by combining These results show that over-estimating the number of classes
supervised contrastive learning with non-parametric density impacts clustering accuracy and increases inspection overhead.
estimation, thereby effectively recognizing unknown samples ORI consistently provides superior detection performance
while accurately classifying samples of known classes. on three datasets when using two ways to select representative
 2) Unknown Sample Inspection Performance: For a fair samples. Both ORIk-means and ORIrandom show comparable
comparison in unknown sample inspection, we applied ORI performance in estimating the number of classes and clustering
to recognize unknown samples and used the feature vectors accuracy in both scenarios. ORIk-means excelled in estimatextracted by fϕ for all baselines. As mentioned earlier, we ing the number of classes, while ORIrandom achieved better
evaluate two scenarios: one where the samples recognized as clustering accuracy. These results indicate that by incorpounknown include known classes (denoted as “All”) and one rating reconstruction learning on all samples and constrained
without known classes (denoted as “Unknown”). clustering, ORI effectively focuses on unknown samples and
 As shown in TABLE IV and V, the hierarchical clustering leverages prior knowledge, ultimately achieving the best permethods FINCH and BIRCH accurately estimated the number formance in estimating the number of classes and clustering
of classes in most scenarios on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset accuracy.
but struggled with the CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT datasets.
Among the clustering accuracy, these two methods performed
worst in the “All” scenario. It can shed light on the sensitivity C. Ablation
of hierarchical clustering methods to noise, such as known 1) Unknown Sample Recognition: To evaluate the effecclass samples misclassified as unknown. tiveness of our open recognition module, we conduct ablation
 When the number of unknown classes is assumed to experiments in a multi-class classification setting on the
be known, k-means demonstrates competitive performance, USTC-TFC2016 and CIC-IDS2018 datasets, and in a pseudo
DU et al.: TOWARD OPEN-WORLD NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA ORI 9841

 To provide a more intuitive understanding of how feature
 representations affect unknown sample recognition by DE, we
 present a visualization in Fig. 3. The figure displays the violin
 plots of the nearest neighbor density distribution of known
 classes in the training data, as well as known and unknown
 classes in the test samples in CADE and ORI. In the feature
 space of ORI, the density distribution of training data and
 test samples for known classes is dense and consistent, while
 the density distribution of unknown samples is sparse and
 distinct. In contrast, CADE does not clearly separate known
 and unknown classes in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, leading
 to poor open recognition performance compared to ORI.
 2) Unknown Sample Inspection: To verify the effectiveness of feature representation and constrained clustering in
 the unknown sample recognition module, we conducted four
 ablation experiments on all datasets in the more realistic “All”
 scenario with ORIk-means . The comparison results are shown in
 TABLE VII.
 In experiment (a), using the original feature vectors
 extracted by the feature network fθ yields the most accurate
 estimated number of classes but obtains the lowest clustering
 accuracy for all datasets. Conversely, experiment (b) demonstrates that the accuracy of the estimated number of classes
 decreases on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, while the clustering
Fig. 3. Violin plots of the nearest neighbor density distributions for known
and unknown classes in the latent spaces of CADE and ORI on the USTCaccuracy improves on all datasets. This result indicates that
TFC2016, CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT datasets. incorporating reconstruction loss enhances the feature representation of unknown samples in the learned representation
 network.
multi-class classification setting on the TON-IoT dataset, by Experiment (d) introduces joint optimization, we can
comparing the open recognition accuracy before and after observe a notable improvement in the performance of
removing key components. Specifically, we analyze two main unknown sample inspection, surpassing the clustering accucomponents, including supervised contrastive learning (SCL) racy achieved when contrastive loss and reconstruction error
for the representation network and density estimation (DE) are used independently. These results suggest that jointly
for recognizing unknown samples. As shown in TABLE VI, optimizing the feature representation network strengthens the
both components significantly enhance open recognition per- representation of unknown samples by integrating prior knowlformance on three datasets. After ablation, open recognition edge from the training data.
accuracy drops considerably, while the accuracy for known In experiment (c), where clustering constraints are removed,
classes declines only slightly. we use k-means to cluster unknown samples based on the
 Without SCL, the representation network is trained with previously estimated number of classes. Comparing the results
contrastive learning and reconstruction loss, corresponding of experiments (c) and (d) reveals that our complete method
to the most competitive baseline CADE. The results show outperforms in clustering accuracy, with improvements of
a marked decrease in open recognition accuracy, with a 3.52% on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, 4.31% on the CICminor reduction in known class accuracy, suggesting that SCL IDS2018 dataset and on 9.44% the TON-IoT dataset. This
strengthens the ability of the representation network to dis- comparison confirms that constrained clustering is crucial for
tinguish between known and unknown classes. Furthermore, correcting samples incorrectly clustered by k-means, highlight-
SCL plays a critical role in both classifying known classes and ing the importance of constrained clustering in our method.
recognizing unknown samples.
 Without DE, unknown samples are recognized by calculat- D. Sensitivity
ing the distance between feature vectors and class centroids, 1) The Number of Local Samples k1 and Reliable Samples
as in the baseline methods CADE and OCN. In this ablation, k2 : We evaluate the effect of varying the number of local
we use the 95% percentile as the threshold for each class. As samples k1 and reliable samples k2 on open recognition
shown in TABLE VI, removing DE results in a substantial performance. Recall that k1 represents the number of nearest
reduction in open recognition accuracy across three datasets, neighbor samples retrieved from the training data, while k2
with a 4.64% drop on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, a 3.59% denotes the number of neighbor samples required to determine
drop on the CIC-IDS2018 dataset and a 14.09% drop on the if a test sample belongs to a known class. We varied k1 across
TON-IoT dataset. The result demonstrates that our proposed values (50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 175, and 200) and selected
density-based open recognition method effectively reduces the k2 from a different range (5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 50).
open space risk of misclassifying unknown samples as known Fig. 4 shows the open recognition accuracy of our method
classes and vice versa. under these configurations.
9842 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE VII
A BLATION C OMPARISON OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN U NKNOWN S AMPLE I NSPECTION . R ESULTS ON THE USTC-TFC2016, CIC-IDS2018 AND TON-I OT
 DATASETS W ITH k-M EANS S AMPLING , AND THE N UMBER OF I NSPECTED S AMPLES I S 100

 Fig. 4. Performance comparison for different values of k1 and k2 on the USTC-TFC2016, CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT datasets with α = 100%.

 performance. We set four sampling ratio values (10%, 25%,
 50%, and 100%), with a fixed 5:1 ratio between the number of
 local samples k1 and reliable samples k2 . Fig. 5 (a)-(c) shows
 the open recognition accuracy results across these sampling
 ratios. The open recognition accuracy remains relatively stable
 across varying random sampling ratios when k1 is small on the
 USTC-TFC2016 dataset. In the CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT
 datasets, open recognition accuracy decreases as the sampling
 ratio decreases and k1 increases. Fig. 5(d) further illustrates the
 effect of different sampling ratios and k1 values on inference
 speed. Notably, k1 changes do not significantly affect inference
 speed at 10% and 25% sampling ratios. However, the inference
 speed decreases as k1 increases when using the entire training
 data.
Fig. 5. Comparison with the effects of different k1 and sampling ratios α. 3) The Number of Inspected Samples M: We evaluate
In (a), (b) and (c), we present the open recognition accuracy on the USTC- how varying the number of inspected samples M influences
TFC2016, CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT datasets, and in (d), we compare the
inference speed per 100 samples on the CIC-IDS2018 dataset.
 unknown sample inspection. We considered M values of
 (50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, and 500). Fig. 6 presents the
 clustering accuracy and estimated number of class results.
 In the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, performance improvements As shown in Fig. 6 (a), (c) and (e), clustering accuracy
are generally observed along the diagonal, indicating that improves significantly on three datasets with a few inspected
as the number of local samples increases, a corresponding samples. When the number of inspected samples exceeds 100,
increase in reliable samples is needed for optimal results. the results become more variable. In the USTC-TFC2016
In the CIC-IDS2018 dataset, improvements are concentrated dataset, an increase in the number of inspected samples
in the lower left corner, suggesting that a higher number of leads to a decline in clustering performance, whereas in the
local samples reduces the need for reliable samples. This CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT datasets, accuracy continues to
difference is because the CIC-IDS2018 dataset has 5.4 × more improve but eventually stabilizes as the number of inspected
training data than the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. The results samples grows. The results indicate that ORI benefits from a
also indicate that ORI exhibits excellent stability and enhanced limited number of inspection samples for labeling unknown
open recognition performance when sufficient training data is samples. However, the clustering accuracy did not improve
available. when the number of samples exceeded a certain threshold.
 2) Sampling Ratio α: We also examine the impact of It can be seen in Fig. 6 (b), (d) and (f) that as
varying random sampling ratios α on open recognition the number of inspected samples increases, the estimated
DU et al.: TOWARD OPEN-WORLD NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA ORI 9843

Fig. 6. Comparison of the effect of different M values and sampling strategies.
We report the clustering accuracy and estimated number of classes for the
USTC-TFC2016 dataset in (a) and (b), the CIC-IDS2018 dataset in (c) and
(d), and the TON-IoT dataset in (e) and (f), respectively.

 Fig. 7. Comparison of actual cluster accuracy, estimated cluster accuracy,
number of unknown classes K gradually approaches the and inspection efforts on the USTC-TFC2016, CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT
ground truth value. For instance, ORIk-means accurately esti- datasets, with unknown samples ranked by their distance to the corresponding
mates the number of unknown classes when 100 inspected centroid.
samples in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. In ORIrandom , the
estimated number of classes stabilizes once the number of
 accuracies differ slightly, the estimated result is still valuable
inspected samples exceeds 200.
 for identifying high-confidence labeled samples. For instance,
 in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, the accuracy of the top 40% of
E. Real-World Inspection intervals ranged from 60% to 100%, and in the CIC-IDS2018
 dataset, the accuracy of the top 80% of intervals consistently
 To effectively utilize labeled samples, it is essential to
 exceeded 70%. In the TON-IoT dataset, the accuracy of more
evaluate the labels of unknown samples to estimate the noise
 than the top 50% of intervals consistently exceeded 80%.
ratio in the labeled data or to maximize the selection of
 By aggregating the estimated accuracy for each interval,
correctly labeled samples. Given the labeled samples in the
 we simulate the effort required to label all samples accurately.
“All” scenario, we simulate a security analyst to inspect the
 The results show that the ratio of inspected unknown samples
labeling results. Since the labeling results may not perfectly
 increased as the interval accuracy dropped below 100% on
match the ground truth labels, it is essential to rank the samples
 three datasets. Notably, in the CIC-IDS2018 dataset, the estito prioritize those with high-confidence labels. Specifically, we
 mated accuracy for the first 38 intervals is 100%, matching the
sort the samples by their distances from the cluster centers
 ground truth accuracy, which dramatically reduces the effort
and divide them into equal-sized intervals. For each interval,
 required by security analysts and allows them to focus on
a subset of samples from each interval is then inspected by
 more challenging samples. The analysis demonstrates that the
security analysts to estimate the labeling accuracy of the
 inspection results of ORI for unknown samples are effective,
interval. We also introduce an unknown sample inspection
 enabling security analysts to quickly identify high-quality
ratio to quantify the effort needed to ensure that all sample
 labeled samples and significantly reduce manual inspection
labels are entirely accurate. The effort for each interval is
 overhead.
defined as the total number of samples in the interval when
its clustering accuracy is below 100%.
 V. R ELATED W ORK
 We conduct an experimental analysis on three datasets using
ORIk-means . The samples are divided into 100 intervals, with A. Network Intrusion Detection
ten samples selected from each interval for inspection. Fig. 7 Network intrusion detection is dedicated to identifying
shows the ground truth clustering accuracy, the estimated attacks in network traffic. Traditional methods primarily rely
clustering accuracy for each interval, and the ratio of accu- on generating specific detection rules for known attack patrately labeled samples. In the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, the top terns, which are then applied to intrusion detection systems,
40% of intervals achieved an accuracy above 60%, while in such as Snort or Suricata, to discover malicious activities
the CIC-IDS2018 dataset, up to 80% of intervals exhibited in real time [3], [30], [42], [52]. While these rules can be
high labeling accuracy. Although the estimated and actual highly accurate for identifying known attacks, they often face
9844 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

challenges when detecting unknown attacks or variants of known attacks and misrecognizing unknown attacks. OCN [55]
known attacks designed to evade detection. developed an open set classifier using convolutional neural
 Deep learning-based network intrusion detection has been networks for feature representation, which further employs
explored to tackle unknown attacks, involving two stages: a class means classifier for classifying known class samples
feature engineering and model building. Feature engineering and rejecting unknown ones. CADE [49] extended feature
refers to extracting features from network traffic, such as representation learning by incorporating reconstruction and
extracting statistical features from flows [38] or transform- contrastive losses, using the mean absolute distance to identify
ing flows into images [44], [48]. Although different feature samples that deviate from training data.
engineering methods significantly impact the performance of Most studies have focused on pseudo multi-class classificadeep models, this work does not focus on comparing existing tion, and no existing methods tackle multi-class classification
methods or developing new ones. There are various types open recognition in network intrusion detection. While CVAEof deep models built to meet different security needs, which EVT groups normal samples into fine-grained classes through
can be broadly categorized into anomaly detection models, clustering, our work explores using fine-grained data with
binary classification models, pseudo multi-class classification ground truth labels. The comparison results indicate that existmodels, and multi-class classification models. Mirsky et al. ing open recognition methods are inferior to ORI, primarily
[32] proposed Kitsune, which utilizes an ensemble autoen- due to their lack of adaptability to the underlying training
coder network to distinguish between normal and abnormal distribution, which increases the risk of open space.
traffic patterns through anomaly scores. Han et al. [22] intro- 3) Unknown Sample Inspection. The inspection of unknown
duced an online evolutionary anomaly detection framework samples is still an emerging area. Most existing methods
that mitigates noise and dynamically updates model parame- assume that security analysts can individually inspect and
ters. Although these anomaly detection models can identify label a few samples recognized as unknown, which is then
unknown attacks, they often lead to a high rate of false used to enhance the performance of deep models [19], [49].
positives. Ding et al. [7] used a generative adversarial network However, this assumption is impractical since labeling is
to create diverse attack data, enhancing classification accuracy. labor-intensive and time-consuming, and unknown samples
Hu et al. [23] proposed an early and accurate detection continuously emerge. In contrast, we aim to inspect and
method using flow graphs and graph2vec for classification, label all unknown samples with minimal overhead. Zhang
while Zhang et al. [54] proposed Metis, which employs byte- et al. [55] proposed clustering in semantic space using metric
level tagging and semi-supervised knowledge distillation to distances of unknown samples, initially employing DBSCAN
enhance network rule processing. However, these methods are to estimate the number of classes, followed by k-means clusdesigned for static environments and cannot recognize and tering. However, this method faces challenges in accurately
inspect unknown samples. estimating class numbers, which can affect clustering accuracy.
 Our work focuses on open-world network intrusion recog- In comparison, ORI simplifies the process by selecting a few
nition and inspection. To our knowledge, most existing work unknown samples for inspection, subsequently using these
primarily focuses on open recognition while paying little inspected samples as constraints to assign labels for the
attention to the inspection of unknown samples. The OCN remaining unknown samples via clustering. We hope our work
[55]used a distance-based method for open set recognition to draws strong attention to the importance of unknown sample
identify unknown attacks and then cluster unknown samples by inspection in network security.
estimating the number of classes. However, due to limitations
in effectively modeling known class data and significant errors VI. D ISCUSSION
in estimating the number of classes, OCN performs signifi-
 A. Feature Extraction and Open Recognition
cantly worse than ORI in both open recognition and unknown
sample detection. As discussed in Section IV-B, the selection of feature
 extraction methods significantly influences the performance
B. Open Recognition of network intrusion detection models in open-world environments. Although prior studies have extensively assessed
 Recent advances in open-world network intrusion detection these methods in closed-world assumptions, their effectiveinclude open set recognition and concept drift detection. Han ness in open-world environments remains largely unexplored.
et al. [19] introduced OWAD, an open-world anomaly detec- Hence, it is crucial to comprehensively evaluate various feation framework that employs permutation tests to detect drifted ture extraction methods to develop more robust open-world
anomalous samples by comparing distributional differences network intrusion detection models. In addition, given the
between training data and incoming data. Ping and Ye [34] great potential of large language models (LLMs) in network
proposed OpenIDS for open set network intrusion detection security, it is also worth paying attention to developing openin a binary classification setting, which uses a minimum- world network intrusion detection models with LLMs.
maximum autoencoder to distinguish between known and
unknown samples and integrates a pseudo-extreme value
machine. However, these methods often fail to provide detailed B. Incremental Updates
attack information, which hinders timely responses in practical The incremental updating of deep models is critical for
scenarios. CVAE-EVT [47] formalized fine-grained open set achieving continuous detection of network intrusions in opennetwork intrusion detection as a two-stage problem, optimizing world environments. As shown in Section IV-E, by simulating
two scores to minimize risks associated with misclassifying a security analyst inspecting labeled unknown samples, we
DU et al.: TOWARD OPEN-WORLD NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA ORI 9845

 dynamic threshold adjustment strategy to enable the system
 to adaptively select optimal parameters for different traffic
 distributions in future work. Second, we propose that unknown
 sample inspection is a one-shot process, and labeling accuracy
 does not improve with the increasing number of inspected
 samples. However, inspecting unknown samples may be an
 iterative retrieval process in practice. A more effective strategy
 is to use active learning techniques [29] to enhance the
 inspection of unknown samples.
Fig. 8. Known class and open recognition accuracies with various perturbation
ratios on the USTC-TFC2016, CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT datasets. VII. C ONCLUSION
can obtain samples with many noisy labels and only a few In this paper, we develop a novel network intrusion detection
correctly labeled samples. Since the incremental update of system, ORI, to classify known class samples, recognize
deep models is beyond the scope of this work, we plan to unknown samples and inspect samples recognized as unknown.
supplement our system in the future by retraining deep models ORI introduces several techniques: 1) a novel density-based
using samples with noisy labels, incrementally updating deep method for unknown sample recognition guarantees that ORI
models with a few correctly labeled samples, and adapting to can accurately identify unknown samples based on the known
the distribution changes of normal data [19]. In addition, as data distribution. 2) a constrained clustering method to help
network traffic distributions change over time, we will explore security analysts label all unknown samples with limited manintegrating a drift detection module with incremental learning ual inspection overhead. Experimental results show that ORI
or streaming clustering methods to dynamically update the rep- outperforms existing baseline methods in open recognition and
resentation network or clustering results, thereby maintaining unknown sample inspection. We also analyze the unknown
sensitivity to emerging attack patterns. sample labeling results provided by ORI to support future
 model updates.
C. Adversarial Attacks R EFERENCES
 Adversarial samples pose a critical challenge to machine [1] A. Alshamrani, S. Myneni, A. Chowdhary, and D. Huang, “A survey
learning–based network intrusion detection systems, as they on advanced persistent threats: Techniques, solutions, challenges, and
can manipulate the predictions of well-trained models by research opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 2,
injecting deliberately crafted perturbations into network traffic. pp. 1851–1877, 2nd Quart., 2019, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2019.2891891.
 [2] D. Arthur and S. Vassilvitskii, “K-means++: The advantages of careful
These perturbations are typically generated using gradient- seeding,” in Proc. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, Apr. 2007,
based methods. However, such techniques do not apply to pp. 1027–1035.
ORI, which predominantly relies on the density distribution of [3] L. Alcantara, G. Padilha, R. Abreu, and M. d’Amorim, “Syrius: Synthesis of rules for intrusion detectors,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 71, no. 1,
samples within the feature space. To assess ORI’s resilience pp. 370–381, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TR.2021.3061297.
against adversarial samples, we generated adversarial samples [4] A. Bendale and T. Boult, “Towards open world recognition,” in Proc.
that lie between known and unknown classes. For example, IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Boston, MA, USA,
 Jun. 2015, pp. 1893–1902.
to generate the adversarial sample xadv from a known sample [5] S. Cruz, C. Coleman, E. M. Rudd, and T. E. Boult, “Open set intrux, we first identify the reference sample xre f with the shortest sion recognition for fine-grained attack categorization,” in Proc. IEEE
latent distance to x in the unknown sample dataset Dun . Then, Int. Symp. Technol. Homeland Secur. (HST), Apr. 2017, pp. 1–6, doi:
 10.1109/THS.2017.7943467.
we perturb x incrementally by replacing its feature values with [6] Y. Chai, L. Du, J. Qiu, L. Yin, and Z. Tian, “Dynamic prototype network
the corresponding feature values of xre f , making the smallest based on sample adaptation for few-shot malware detection,” IEEE
possible change while ensuring that the perturbations remain Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4754–4766, May 2023,
meaningful. To quantify the perturbation, we use the ratio of doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2022.3142820.
 [7] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN:
the distance between xadv and x as a measure of the pertur- Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for netbation. We set the range of perturbation size as 10%, 20%, work intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
30%, 40%, 50% and 60%. As shown in Fig. 8, it can be seen pp. 1156–1167, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2023.3331240.
 [8] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, and Y. Jia, “A few-shot classthat both known class accuracy and open recognition accuracy incremental learning method for network intrusion detection,” IEEE
decrease as the perturbation ratio increases, particularly in the Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2389–2401, Apr. 2024,
CIC-IDS2018 and TON-IoT datasets. We conclude that ORI is doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3332284.
 [9] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
vulnerable to adversarial examples, and defense mechanisms and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
against such attacks need to be explored in future work. SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
 [10] T. E. T. Djaidja, B. Brik, S. M. Senouci, A. Boualouache, and Y. Ghamri-
 Doudane, “Early network intrusion detection enabled by attention
D. Limitations and Future Work mechanisms and RNNs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
 pp. 7783–7793, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3441862.
 Our work has some limitations. First, the hyperparameters [11] G. Engelen, V. Rimmer, and W. Joosen, “Troubleshooting an intruof ORI for recognizing unknown samples are determined sion detection dataset: The CICIDS2017 case study,” in Proc. IEEE
experimentally, including the number of local samples k1 and Secur. Privacy Workshops (SPW), May 2021, pp. 7–12, doi: 10.1109/
the number of reliable samples k2 . Given the hyperparam- SPW53761.2021.00009.
 [12] C. Geng, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Recent advances in open set
eter sensitivity analysis in Section IV-D, we will explore recognition: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43,
automatic tuning via a held-out validation set or develop a no. 10, pp. 3614–3631, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2020.2981604.
9846 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[13] C. Gao, G. Huang, H. Li, B. Wu, Y. Wu, and W. Yuan, “A comprehensive [35] J. Qiu, J. Zhang, W. Luo, L. Pan, S. Nepal, and Y. Xiang, “A survey
 study of learning-based Android malware detectors under challenging of Android malware detection with deep neural models,” ACM Comput.
 environments,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Lisbon, Surv., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1–36, Nov. 2021.
 Portugal, Feb. 2024, pp. 1–13, doi: 10.1145/3597503.3623320. [36] E. M. Rudd, A. Rozsa, M. Günther, and T. E. Boult, “A survey of stealth
[14] H. Gao, S. Cheng, and W. Zhang, “GDroid: Android malware detection malware attacks, mitigation measures, and steps toward autonomous
 and classification with graph convolutional network,” Comput. Secur., open world solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 2,
 vol. 106, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 102264. pp. 1145–1172, 2nd Quart., 2017, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2016.2636078.
[15] J. L. Guerra, C. Catania, and E. Veas, “Datasets are not enough: Chal- [37] H. Studiawan, F. Sohel, and C. Payne, “Anomaly detection in operating
 lenges in labeling network traffic,” Comput. Secur., vol. 120, pp. 1–17, system logs with deep learning-based sentiment analysis,” IEEE Trans.
 Sep. 2022. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2136–2148, Sep. 2021,
[16] J. Gama, I. Žliobaité, A. Bifet, M. Pechenizkiy, and A. Bouchachia, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2020.3037903.
 “A survey on concept drift adaptation,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 46, [38] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 no. 4, pp. 1–37, Apr. 2014. a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
[17] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2018, pp. 108–116.
 E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, [39] S. Sarfraz, V. Sharma, and R. Stiefelhagen, “Efficient parameter-free
 systems and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28, clustering using first neighbor relations,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Feb. 2009, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2008.08.003. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 8934–8943.
 [40] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
[18] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassified
 learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in Proc. ICLR,
 Privacy, Oakland, CA, USA, May 2010, pp. 305–316, doi: 10.1109/
 2017, pp. 1–11.
 SP.2010.25.
[19] D. Han et al., “Anomaly detection in the open world: Normality shift [41] W. J. Scheirer, A. de Rezende Rocha, A. Sapkota, and T. E. Boult,
 detection, explanation, and adaptation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. “Toward open set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
 Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18. Intell., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1757–1772, Jul. 2013, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
[20] J. Halvorsen, C. Izurieta, H. Cai, and A. Gebremedhin, “Applying gen- 2012.256.
 erative machine learning to intrusion detection: A systematic mapping [42] R. Uetz, M. Herzog, L. Hackländer, S. Schwarz, and M. Henze, “You
 study and review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1–33, Oct. cannot escape me: Detecting evasions of SIEM rules in enterprise
 2024, doi: 10.1145/3659575. networks,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Security Symp., Philadelphia, PA,
[21] J. Henrydoss, S. Cruz, E. M. Rudd, M. Gunther, and T. E. Boult, USA, Apr. 2024, pp. 5179–5196.
 “Incremental open set intrusion recognition using extreme value [43] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou,
 machine,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), “MANDA: On adversarial example detection for network intrusion
 Aug. 2017, pp. 1089–1093, doi: 10.1109/ICMLA.2017.000-3. detection system,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20,
[22] S. Han et al., “Log-based anomaly detection with robust feature extrac- no. 2, pp. 1139–1153, Mar. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3148990.
 tion and online learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, [44] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 pp. 2300–2311, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3053371. classification using convolutional neural network for representation
[23] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
 early and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717, doi: 10.1109/ICOIN.2017.7899588.
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023, doi: [45] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network
 10.1109/TIFS.2023.3318960. intrusion detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans.
[24] J. Jeon, B. Jeong, S. Baek, and Y.-S. Jeong, “Static multi feature-based Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020, doi: 10.1109/
 malware detection using multi SPP-net in smart IoT environments,” TIFS.2020.2991876.
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 2487–2500, 2024, doi: [46] J. Yang, Q. Zhang, X. Jiang, S. Chen, and F. Yang, “Poirot: Causal
 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3350379. correlation aided semantic analysis for advanced persistent threat
[25] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, “MAGIC: detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
 Detecting advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation pp. 3546–3563, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2021.3101649.
 learning,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Security Symp., Philadelphia, PA, USA, [47] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional
 Apr. 2024, pp. 5197–5214. variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage
[26] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion
 in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2015, pp. 1–15. detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553,
[27] H. Kuhn, “The Hungarian method for the assignment problem,” Naval 2021, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3083422.
 Res. Logistics Quart., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 83–97, 1955. [48] J. Yang, H. Li, S. Shao, F. Zou, and Y. Wu, “FS-IDS: A framework for intrusion detection based on few-shot learning,” Comput.
[28] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. NIPS, 2020,
 Secur., vol. 122, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 102899, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2022.
 pp. 18661–18673.
 102899.
[29] Y. Kim, G. Dán, and Q. Zhu, “Human-in-the-loop cyber intrusion [49] L. Yang et al., “CADE: Detecting and explaining concept drift samdetection using active learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, ples for security applications,” in Proc. USENIX Secur., Mar. 2021,
 vol. 19, pp. 8658–8672, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3434647. pp. 2327–2344.
[30] S. Lee et al., “LARGen: Automatic signature generation for mal- [50] C. Zhang, D. Jia, L. Wang, W. Wang, F. Liu, and A. Yang, “Comparative
 wares using latent Dirichlet allocation,” IEEE Trans. Dependable research on network intrusion detection methods based on machine
 Secure Comput., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 771–783, Sep. 2018, doi: 10.1109/ learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 102861, doi:
 TDSC.2016.2609907. 10.1016/j.cose.2022.102861.
[31] T. Lu and J. Wang, “DOMR: Toward deep open-world mal- [51] N. Zhao et al., “An empirical investigation of practical log anomaly
 ware recognition,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint
 pp. 1455–1468, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2023.3338469. Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New
[32] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An York, NY, USA, Aug. 2021, pp. 1404–1415, doi: 10.1145/3468264.
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in 3473933.
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, 2018, [52] R. Zhang, M. Tong, L. Chen, J. Xue, W. Liu, and F. Xie,
 pp. 1–15. “CMIRGen: Automatic signature generation algorithm for malicious
[33] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. H. Den network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy
 Hartog, “ToN IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for stan- Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), Mali, Dec. 2020, pp. 736–743, doi:
 dardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data 10.1109/TRUSTCOM50675.2020.00101.
 sets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022, [53] T. Zhang, R. Ramakrishnan, and M. Livny, “BIRCH: An efficient data
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3085194. clustering method for very large databases,” ACM Sigmod Record,
[34] G. Ping and X. Ye, “Open-set intrusion detection with Min- vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 103–114, doi: 10.1145/235968.233324.
 Max autoencoder and pseudo extreme value machine,” in Proc. [54] Z. Zhang et al., “Metis: Understanding and enhancing in-network regular
 Int. Jt. Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2022, pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/ expressions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Processing Syst., vol. 36, 2023,
 IJCNN55064.2022.9892858. pp. 77867–77881.
DU et al.: TOWARD OPEN-WORLD NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA ORI 9847

[55] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, and M. Song, “A scalable network intrusion Binxing Fang (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
 detection system towards detecting, discovering, and learning unknown degree in computer science and technology from
 attacks,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1649–1665, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1984, and
 Jun. 2021, doi: 10.1007/s13042-020-01264-7. the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
 from Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China,
 in 1989. He is currently a Professor with the School
 of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, and also with
 Lei Du received the master’s degree from Hebei the Department of New Networks, Pengcheng Lab-
 University of Science and Technology in 2021. He oratory, Shenzhen. His current research interests
 is currently with the School of Computer Science include computer networks, information and netand Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, work security, and artificial intelligence security. He is also a member of
 Shenzhen, China. He is also with the Pengcheng Chinese Academy of Engineering, Beijing.
 Laboratory, Shenzhen. His research focuses on
 cyberspace security, machine intelligence, and openworld learning.

 Hao Li received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
 electronics and communication engineering from the
 Communication University of China in 2015 and
 2018, respectively. He was a Senior Engineer at
 the National Key Laboratory of Advanced Communication Networks before 2025 and is currently
 Yuhan Chai received the Ph.D. degree from an Artificial Intelligence Expert at Kunlun Digital
 the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technol- Technology Company Ltd. His research interests
 ogy, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China, in include artificial intelligence and its security, digital
 2023. She is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher rights management, cloud computing security, and
 at the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technol- attribute-based encryption.
 ogy, Guangzhou University. Her research interests
 include cybersecurity, malware detection, and software supply chain security.

 Zhaoquan Gu (Member, IEEE) received the
 bachelor’s and Ph.D. degrees in computer science
 from Tsinghua University in 2011 and 2015, respec-
 Yan Jia is a Professor with the College of Computer tively. He was a Professor and the Associate Dean
 Science, National University of Defense Technol- of the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Changsha, China. As a Principal Investigator, ogy (CIAT), Guangzhou University, China. He is
 she has undertaken more than 20 national projects, currently a Professor with the School of Computer
 including the National Key Project of the 863 Pro- Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Techgram and the National Natural Science Foundation nology, Shenzhen, China. He is also a Professor
 of China. Her research interests cover big data with the Department of New Networks, Pengcheng
 analysis, artificial intelligence, online social network Laboratory, Shenzhen. His research interests include
 analysis, and security situation awareness and anal- cyberspace security, cyber range, big data analysis, and artificial intelligence
 ysis in cyberspace. security.