4322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Towards Unsupervised Time-Series Anomaly
 Detection for Virtual Cloud Networks
 Zixuan Ma , Chen Li , Kun Zhang , and Bibo Tu

 Abstract—Virtual cloud network (VCN) is a fundamental cloud communication traffic between EPs, called east-west traffic,
resource for endpoints (VMs or containers) to communicate and traffic received and sent at the EP side to communicate
with each other and with the outside. Anomaly detection, a key with the outside of the cloud, called north-south traffic. VCN
security approach for VCNs, faces serious challenges: 1) Current supports efficient and scalable data transfer and is the key
feature models are difficult to apply to VCNs with significant differences from traditional networks. 2) Current anomaly detection link for businesses in the cloud to interact with each other
models lack the adaptability to learn multiple normal patterns and with the outside world. Therefore, the security of VCNs
simultaneously. The need to train a dedicated model for each is critical. Unfortunately, VCNs have become the target of a
endpoint causes serious scalability problems in VCNs. 3) Current variety of attacks [2], including attacks launched externally
anomaly detection models have difficulty addressing the complex against VCNs, such as DDoS, brute force exploits, etc., and
temporal dependency and non-stationarity of VCNs. To address lateral movement attacks launched internally by compromised
these challenges, we propose a new multilevel feature model
MFM and a new unsupervised time-series anomaly detection
 EPs to expand the compromised surface, such as port scanning,
model GTGmVAE. By combining the basic features with the ransomware viruses, etc. These attacks cause serious consetopology features specifically designed for VCNs, MFM effectively quences, such as leaking critical data and disrupting cloud
characterizes the patterns of VCNs. GTGmVAE combines the services, resulting in significant losses. Therefore, intrusion
new local-global feature extractor with the latent space following detection for VCNs has become a key approach to securing
a Gaussian mixture distribution to achieve the strong adaptability the cloud.
to learn multiple normal patterns simultaneously, and achieves Currently, related work implements intrusion detection for
the strong temporal modeling capability to effectively address
the complex temporal dependency and non-stationarity of VCNs
 VCNs using signature based [3], [4] and supervised classificaby adequately modeling the global temporal dependencies of tion based [2], [5] methods. Unfortunately, these methods are
the input samples and latent variables. Extensive experiments difficult to actually apply to VCNs: signature based methods
on the VCN anomaly detection dataset CIC-IDS2018 and the need to rely on a large number of known anomalous samples
time-series anomaly detection benchmark dataset SMD show that to form “signatures” and use these signatures to match samples
GTGmVAE with MFM achieves the desirable performance, and to detect attacks, while supervised methods need to learn both
GTGmVAE outperforms all nine representative state-of-the-art normal and anomalous samples in order to find the decision
detection models.
 boundary between them. However, it is extremely difficult to
 Index Terms—Virtual cloud network, anomaly detection, cloud collect a sufficient number of representative anomalous samsecurity, network security, time-series data. ples with rich categories due to the diversity of attacks faced
 by VCNs. Meanwhile, signature based methods and supervised
 I. I NTRODUCTION methods are usually unable to identify attack categories that
 LOUD computing [1] is a cornerstone of the modern are not in the training set. More seriously, VCNs are also
C digital economy, enabling applications to be deployed,
managed and scaled with great flexibility and efficiency. As
 exposed to unknown novel attacks, which cannot be identified
 by the above methods because they rely on existing anomalous
the fundamental resource of the cloud, the network in the samples. In contrast, unsupervised methods only learn the
cloud is a virtual network implemented through virtualization behavior pattern of normal samples, and any samples that
technologies for containers or VMs (commonly referred to as deviate from the normal behavior pattern are considered as
endpoints, EPs) to communicate with each other and with the anomalous. Therefore, unsupervised methods fundamentally
outside of the cloud, which can be referred to as the virtual avoid the above problems. Theoretically, it is capable of
cloud network (VCN). VCN consists of two types of traffic: detecting any category of attack, including novel attacks. In
 this paper, we focus on the unsupervised detection method for
 Received 24 May 2024; revised 21 February 2025; accepted 4 April 2025. VCNs and try to learn only normal patterns and monitor for
Date of publication 16 April 2025; date of current version 29 April 2025. This deviations from the normal patterns to detect attacks. This is
work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program
of China under Grant 2023YFB3106303. The associate editor coordinating the
 known as anomaly based intrusion detection (hereafter referred
review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Ning Zhang. to as VCN anomaly detection). Although several methods
(Corresponding author: Chen Li.) have been proposed for VCN anomaly detection, based on the
 The authors are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese observation and analysis of the characteristics of VCNs and
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, the summary of the related work, we argue that VCN anomaly
China (e-mail: mazixuan@iie.ac.cn; lichen@iie.ac.cn; zhangkun@iie.ac.cn; detection still faces the following key challenges:
tubibo@iie.ac.cn). Challenge 1 (C1): Design the scalable and temporally
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at continuous feature model with the key consideration
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2025.3561672, provided by the authors.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3561672 of the uniqueness of VCNs to effectively characterize
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS 4323

the network patterns of VCNs. VCNs are dominated by different EPs, thus failing to achieve the desirable detection
east-west traffic [6], which is significantly different from non- performance.
cloud networks dominated by north-south traffic, and poses the Challenge 3 (C3): Design the anomaly detection model
challenge of effectively characterizing the uniqueness of the with sufficient temporal modeling capability to cope with
network patterns of VCNs. However, current network traffic the complex temporal dependency and temporal nonfeature models [7], [8], [9], [10] mainly focus on non-cloud stationarity of VCNs. Network traffic is typically time-series
networks and are difficult to apply to VCNs. Meanwhile, cur- data, and the network patterns of VCNs have the complex
rent mainstream flow-based feature models [8], [9], [10] face temporal dependency, typically including: 1) trending, e.g. the
the scalability challenge when used in VCNs typically contain- steady increase and decrease of the business traffic carried
ing large numbers of EPs: they need to maintain all the stateful by EPs; 2) periodicity: the stable periodic traffic patterns
flows for each EP to compute flow-level features. However, due to fixed business logics, e.g. the backend EP receives
this not only leads to rapid growth of the state table with large the frontend request and then triggers the invocation of the
computational and memory overheads [11], but also requires database. The complex temporal dependency of VCNs poses a
the traffic to be redirected to a dedicated middlebox for stateful challenge to the anomaly detection model’s temporal modeling
flow processing, which suffers from low scalability, single capability, and insufficient such capability or even ignoring
point of failure, increased latency, and reduced throughput, and the temporal dependency will make it difficult to characteris infeasible in real clouds [2]. In addition, flow-based feature ize the network patterns of VCNs. However, current related
models focus on internal features of a single flow and construct work either ignores the temporal dependency [7], [20] or
temporally uncorrelated samples, and thus cannot be used by has insufficient capability to model it [12], [13], [14], [15],
anomaly detection models to model the complex temporal [16], [17], [18], [19], [21], [22], thus failing to achieve the
dependency of VCNs (see Challenge 3). Therefore, it is nec- desirable detection performance. On top of that, VCNs also
essary to fully consider the uniqueness of VCNs to effectively exhibit temporal non-stationarity, i.e., the network patterns of
characterize their network patterns, to design stateless feature a single EP have multiple temporal dependencies that change
models for VCNs to cope with the scalability problem, and to dynamically over time. Typical examples include: 1) EPs
construct temporally continuous feature samples for temporal hosting cloud services have different network patterns during
modeling. day and night due to different user activities; 2) dynamic
 Challenge 2 (C2): Design the anomaly detection model changes in network patterns due to business adjustments and
with sufficient adaptability to learn the multiple heteroge- upgrades of EPs; and 3) EPs (e.g. VMs) running different
neous normal patterns of VCNs simultaneously to address applications simultaneously have different network patterns at
the key scalability problem. EPs oriented to different services different times. This poses the further challenge of requiring
have different network patterns. For example, the periodic peak not only that the model has the adaptability in C2, but also that
traffic of Web EP vs. the uniform traffic of Database EP; and it is able to accurately capture the dynamic changes in network
the uniform high traffic of Streaming Media Service EP vs. patterns while effectively modeling the complex temporal
the random burst traffic of File Storage Service EP. Due to the dependency. However, current related work either lacks the
heterogeneity of the network patterns of different EPs, current adaptability [7], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19] or fails to
network anomaly detection methods have to follow the “one- accurately capture the dynamic changes in network patterns
to-one” strategy by constructing and maintaining an exclusive and effectively model the complex temporal dependency [12],
model for each EP that learns its normal network patterns. [13], [20], [21], [22], thus failing to achieve the desirable
However, given the typically large number of EPs in VCNs detection performance.
and the high computational resources required by the detection To address the above challenges, we model VCN anomaly
models (typically deployed on dedicated hardware, e.g., GPU), detection as an unsupervised time-series anomaly detection
this approach would incur huge training, inference, and model problem and apply the “one-to-many” strategy. Based on this,
maintenance overheads, and thus has serious scalability issues we propose a new unsupervised time-series VCN anomaly
in VCNs. For example, for a VCN containing 1,000 EPs, 1,000 detection method that consists of two parts:
models need to be trained, maintained and loaded separately (1) A new Multilevel Feature Model (MFM) for VCN
and simultaneously on GPUs for online inference. In addition, anomaly detection. MFM includes three levels of fea-
EPs generated in batch, e.g. by dynamic scaling, are identical tures, besides the basic packet frequency and throughput
in business patterns and therefore have similar network pat- features, new topology features are proposed based
terns, and it is wasteful to train separate exclusive models for on the observation and analysis of the uniqueness of
them. Therefore, there is a need to apply a new “one-to-many” VCNs. By combining the multilevel features, MFM
[12], [13] strategy for VCN anomaly detection, where models provides a comprehensive and accurate characterization
are trained on samples from multiple EPs to simultaneously of the network patterns of VCNs. Meanwhile, MFM
learn their normal network patterns. Only one trained model requires only simple packet header statistics to achieve
needs to be loaded for online detection, and samples from stateless EP-level feature construction and constructs
multiple EPs can be detected simultaneously. This effectively temporally continuous samples for temporal modeling
solves the key scalability problem. However, applying the using the time window. Therefore, MFM can effectively
“one-to-many” strategy poses a key challenge to the model’s address C1.
adaptability: current anomaly detection models [7], [14], [15], (2) A new Global Temporal Dependency Gaussian mixture
[16], [17], [18], [19] lack sufficient adaptability to simultane- Dynamic Variational Auto-Encoder (GTGmVAE) model
ously identify and learn multiple normal network patterns of for unsupervised time-series VCN anomaly detection,
4324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 which contains several innovations: a) GTGmVAE contains a new local-global feature extractor that can
 effectively extract and integrate the implicit structural
 features of the input samples from both local and global
 perspectives. This can effectively improve the model’s
 Fig. 1. VCN anomaly detection framework.
 representation capability and make the model better
 learn the distribution of the input samples, thus improvthe representation capability provided by the new feature
 ing the model’s adaptability and temporal modeling
 extractor, GTGmVAE is able to simultaneously learn the
 capability. b) GTGmVAE contains a new global tempomultiple network patterns of different EPs and effectively
 ral dependency Gaussian mixture inference network, and
 cope with the temporal non-stationarity of VCNs.
 a new global latent-space temporal dependency Gaussian
 (3) We conduct extensive experiments (§ V) on the VCN
 mixture generation network. GTGmVAE achieves strong
 anomaly detection dataset CIC-IDS2018 [23] and the
 temporal inference capability by capturing the global
 time-series anomaly detection benchmark dataset SMD
 temporal dependency of the input samples, and strong
 [15], which fully illustrate the effectiveness of GTGtemporal sample generation capability by capturing the
 mVAE and MFM in VCN anomaly detection: a)
 global temporal dependency of the latent variables. This
 GTGmVAE outperforms all nine state-of-the-art repcan effectively improve the capability to model the comresentative methods in the comparison experiments,
 plex temporal dependency of VCNs, and help improve
 illustrating its advantages in temporal modeling capathe model’s adaptability and the capability to cope
 bility and adaptability; b) ablation experiments on
 with the temporal non-stationarity of VCNs. Meanwhile,
 GTGmVAE illustrate the effectiveness of each compo-
 GTGmVAE makes the latent variable follow a Gaussian
 nent in GTGmVAE; c) ablation experiments on MFM
 mixture distribution, which is more adaptive than a
 illustrate the effectiveness of each level of features in
 single distribution: different network patterns can be
 MFM; and d) time efficiency experiments illustrate that
 corresponded to different categories of the latent variable
 GTGmVAE and MFM can meet the real-time detection
 distributions, and the categories of the distributions to
 requirement.
 which the latent variables belong are inferred based on
 the global temporal dependency of the input samples to
 accurately capture the dynamic changes of the network II. P RELIMINARIES
 patterns. Therefore, GTGmVAE is able to model both A. Problem Definition
 the multiple network patterns of different EPs as well Since the “one-to-many” strategy [12], [13]
 ˚ is used, the samas the multiple network patterns of a single EP. Taken ple sequence of n-th EP is defined as xn = x1,n , x2,n , · · · , xT,n ,
 together, GTGmVAE can effectively address C2 and C3. where n = 1, · · · , N, N is the number of EPs, and T is the
 Our contributions are as follows: sequence length of xn . The observation sample at time t is
 xt,n ∈ Rv , where v is the dimension of the sample, i.e., the
 (1) We propose a new multilevel feature model MFM (§ III)
 number of features of the feature model. Time-series anomaly
 for VCN anomaly detection, which requires only simple
 detection for VCNs is defined as a task that determines
 packet header statistics for the stateless EP-level feawhether a specific sample xt,n from a specific EP is anomalous
 ture construction, and contains three levels of features:
 or not. On top of that, the “one-to-many” strategy means that
 packet frequency features, throughput features, and new
 the model is trained on samples from all N EPs to obtain
 topology features designed for the uniqueness of VCNs.
 a unified model, and then it is used to determine whether
 Combined with the multilevel features, MFM provides
 any of the samples from any of the N EPs is anomalous or
 a comprehensive and accurate characterization of the
 not. In contrast, the traditional “one-to-one” strategy involves
 network patterns of VCNs.
 training N exclusive models for N EPs, and n-th model can
 (2) We propose a new unsupervised time-series anomaly
 only be used to determine whether the sample from n-th EP is
 detection model GTGmVAE (§ IV) for VCN anomaly
 anomalous or not. Note that in the following description, for
 detection: a) GTGmVAE contains a new feature extracsimplicity, we refer to xt,n simply as xt .
 tor that can adequately extract and integrate the implicit
 structural features of the input samples from both
 global and local perspectives to effectively improve the B. Overview of the Framework
 model’s representation capability and better implement The anomaly detection framework (Fig. 1) is divided into
 the temporal modeling. b) GTGmVAE has a strong three parts. 1) Data pre-processing. VCN traffic is natural timetemporal modeling capability. By fully capturing the series data, so we first slice it using the time window. Second,
 global temporal dependency of the input samples and we compute features for the traffic in each time window using
 latent variables, GTGmVAE obtains the strong temporal the proposed MFM (§ III) to construct temporally continuous
 inference capability and temporal generation capability. training and test samples for each EP. Finally, we normalize
 c) GTGmVAE has a strong adaptability. By making the the samples using MinMax to facilitate model training and
 latent variable follow a Gaussian mixture distribution inference. 2) Offline training. We feed the preprocessed trainand based on the global temporal dependency of the ing samples into the proposed GTGmVAE (§ IV) for training.
 input samples to accurately infer the distribution cate- 3) Online detection. We use the trained model to infer the
 gories of the latent variables, on top of which combining anomaly score of the samples from each EP online and use
 the model’s strong temporal modeling capability with the threshold to determine whether they are anomalies.
MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS 4325

C. VAE and Dynamic Variants TABLE I
 Variational auto-encoder (VAE) [24] is a deep generative BASIC F REQUENCY F EATURES IN THE F IRST L EVEL
model consisting of an inference network and a generation
network. Inference network aims to map the input x to a latent
space and the distribution (usually Gaussian) of the latent
variable z is parameterized as the mean µ and variance σ2 .
This can be denoted as qφ (z|x). Generation network aims to
reconstruct the input x from z sampled from the latent space,
denoted as pθ (x|z). The ability of VAE to capture the intrinsic
pattern of the input by learning its latent representation makes
it particularly suitable for anomaly detection: anomalies often
significantly differ from normal samples in patterns, and by
comparing the reconstruction loss of the samples, VAE can
effectively identify anomalies. The loss function of VAE is addition, MFM requires only simple packet header statistics
shown below and consists of two parts: the log-likelihood to enable the stateless feature construction, thus avoiding the
of the reconstructed x measures the reconstruction effect, use of dedicated middleboxes for stateful flow processing. In
while the KL divergence measures the difference between the summary, MFM can effectively address C1.
encoded latent distribution and the prior distribution.
 L(θ, φ; x) = Eqφ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) − KL qφ (z|x) ||pθ (z)
   
 (1) A. Level 1: Packet Frequency Features
 Dynamic variants of VAE have been extensively studied for We use the approach of Aldribi et al. [18] to construct the
processing time-series data. They usually involve modifica- packet frequency features, including basic frequency, load and
tions to the structure of VAE, such as introducing recurrent entropy features. Specifically, assume that the IP address of
structures (e.g., RNN) into VAE for temporal modeling. the EP for which features are constructed is eip. The network
The most typical work is VRNN [14], which uses RNN flow of eip can be divided into two categories based on
to temporally model the input sequence x and the latent its directions. The egress flow is represented by the tuple
variable sequence z, i.e., ht = RNN (xt , zt , ht−1 ), and infers (eip, sp, dip, d p) (protocol is ignored in the representation
the posterior distribution qφ (zt |xt , ht−1 ) of the latent variable for convenience, same below), where sp is the source port,
zt based on the temporal hidden variable ht−1 . Generation dip is the destination IP, and dp is the destination port.
network samples zt from pθ (zt |ht−1 ) and implements the recon- The ingress flow is represented by the tuple (sip, sp, eip, d p),
struction pθ (xt |zt , ht−1 ) in combination with ht−1 . Therefore, where sip is the source IP, sp is the source port, and dp is the
VRNN is not only able to learn the latent representation of destination port. Note that the definition of such a flow requires
the input, but also to capture its evolution over time, thus only simple packet header statistics and avoids maintaining
enabling temporal modeling. The loss function of VRNN is flow state, i.e., it is stateless. Let PC out (t, ∆t) and PC in (t, ∆t)
similar to that of VAE at each time t. We can conclude represent the number of packets in the egress/ingress flow at
from the design of VRNN that modifying the structure of time (t, t + ∆t), and the size of the time window is ∆t, then
VAE to enable temporal modeling requires implementing the basic frequency features are defined as shown in table I.
temporal modeling of the input sequence x and the latent Based on basic frequency features, frequency load features
variable sequence z, and making the model reconstruct the calculate the ratio between the corresponding ingress and
sequence x. egress frequency features: LF j, j0 (t) = f jout in
 0 (t)/ f j (t). Each row
 in
 in table I represents the corresponding f j (t) and f jout 0 (t).
 III. M ULTI -L EVEL F EATURE M ODEL (MFM) Based on basic frequency features, frequency entropy fea-
 This section details the proposed new multilevel feature tures calculate the randomness P of the packet frequency, which
model MFM specifically designed for VCN anomaly detection, is defined as: HF f (t) = − ( fi / f )log2 ( fi / f ), where i reprewhich combines three levels of features. First, we use the i
 sents the variable in basic frequency features. For example,
feature construction approach of Aldribi et al. [18] to construct in
 consider f sip,eip (t), where eip is fixed since we construct feathe packet frequency features as Level 1 features. Since Level tures for the EP corresponding to eip, but sip is not fixed and
1 features only consider the packet count information, which
 ! f sip,eip , t) =
 in
 can have multiple values. ! Therefore we have HF(
is too homogeneous, we further propose the new throughput
features as Level 2 features. Level 1 and 2 features characterize −
 P in
 f sip,eip / ( f sip,eip
 P in in
 ) log2 f sip,eip / ( f sip,eip
 P in
 ) .
the basic patterns of general networks, which is similar to the sip sip sip
current feature models [2], [7], but is not sufficient for VCN The above three features characterize the normal patterns of
anomaly detection as described in C1. Therefore, by observing the packet frequency and are used as Level 1 features in MFM.
and analyzing the uniqueness of VCNs, we propose the new Among them, basic frequency features assume that the packet
topology features as Level 3 features. Combined with the frequency should be stable, load features assume that the ratio
multilevel features, MFM can comprehensively and accurately between ingress and egress packet frequency should be stable,
characterize the network patterns of VCNs. Meanwhile, MFM and entropy features assume that the packet frequency should
constructs the temporally continuous feature samples for EPs have low randomness to distinguish from attacks with high
using the time window to allow anomaly detection models randomness (e.g. DDoS). However, Level 1 features are not
to model the complex temporal dependency of VCNs. In sufficient as they only consider the packet count information.
4326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE II
 BASIC T HROUGHPUT F EATURES IN THE S ECOND L EVEL

 Fig. 2. Comparison of the normal and anomalous behaviors of the microservice application Sock Shop [26]. (a) is the connection topology graph of the
 microservice orders in a normal situation, and (b) is the connection topology
 graph with three examples of attacks. Red nodes are internal EPs launching
B. Level 2: Throughput Features the attacks and external attackers. Red lines represent attacks.
 To further comprehensively and accurately characterize the
basic patterns of VCNs, we extend Level 1 features and
propose the throughput features as Level 2 features. Similarly,
it consists of basic throughput, throughput load and throughput
entropy features. Let FLout (t, ∆t) and FLin (t, ∆t) represent the
flow length (i.e., sum of packet size) of the egress/ingress flow
at time (t, t + ∆t), and the size of the time window is ∆t, the
basic throughput features are defined as shown in table II.
 Based on basic throughput features, throughput load features
calculate the ratio between the corresponding ingress and
 Fig. 3. Comparison of the normal and anomalous behaviors of VMs in the
egress throughput features: LT j, j0 (t) = tpout in
 j0 (t)/tp j (t). Each cloud [18]. (a) is the connection topology graph of VM8 in a normal situation,
row in table II represents corresponding tpinj (t) and tpout j0 (t). and (b) is the connection topology graph with three real-world attacks. Red
 Based on basic throughput features, throughput entropy nodes are external attackers. Red lines represent attacks.
features calculate the randomness ofPthe flow  throughput,
which is defined as: HT tp (t) = − tpi /tp log2 tpi /tp ,
 
 i
 connection topology graph of the containerized microservice
where i represents the variable in basic throughput features. orders in the classic microservice application Sock Shop [26].
 Throughput features assume that the throughput and its Fig. 2(a) is the connection topology graph of orders in a norload and entropy of different levels of flows should be stable. mal situation, which has a stable pattern as the business logic
Compared to Level 1 features that only consider packet count is fixed. In contrast, Fig. 2(b) shows the connection topology
information, it can effectively distinguish anomalies in packet graph containing three assumed attack examples, where O 1
size, e.g. the packet from brute force attacks has a different size is the attack launched by compromised orders to other EPs
from the packet from normal business traffic. By combining within Sock Shop (with which orders should not communicate
Level 1 and 2 features that consider the flow length and packet in the business logic), O2 is the attack from outside the cloud to
count of different levels of flows, we can comprehensively and the inside, and O3 is the attack launched by other compromised
accurately characterize the basic patterns of VCNs. EPs in the cloud (e.g. the microservice catalogue) to orders.
 Fig. 3 shows the real connection topology graph of VM8 on
 the first day from ISOT-CID dataset [18]. VM8 has a stable
C. Level 3: Topology Features topology graph pattern in a normal situation (Fig. 3(a)). In
 Level 1 and 2 features ignore the uniqueness of VCNs, contrast, the topology graph changes significantly when realso they are still insufficient for VCN anomaly detection as world attacks occur (Fig. 3(b)), including O 1 attacks launched
described in C1. Therefore, by observing, analyzing and by an external attacker on VM8, leading to the compromise
summarizing the network patterns of VCNs, we identify the of VM8; O 2 a port scanning attack launched by VM8 on VMs
uniqueness of VCNs: VCNs are dominated by east-west traffic 7, 9 and 10, and O 3 a DoS attack launched by VM8 on VM4.
typically generated by accesses between services hosted by Based on the above observations, we arrive at the key
EPs [2], [18], [23], [25], such as invocations between the insight: characterizing the relatively stable normal patterns of
containerized microservices and accesses between the frontend the EP’s connection topology graph can effectively discrimand backend hosted by VMs. Since the business logic is fixed, inate between normal and anomalous behaviors. Therefore,
the connection behavior of an EP, i.e., the edges contained we propose the topology features as Level 3 features, which
by that EP in the connection topology graph, should have a characterize the EP’s connection topology graph from different
stable baseline pattern. In contrast, the connection behavior perspectives in as simple a way as possible to avoid additional
of an EP will deviate from the baseline when attacks occur, computational overhead. Specifically, the network flows that
including: when this EP is exposed to external DDoS attacks eip receives and sends out during a time window of time
or internal lateral movement attacks such as port scanning t and length ∆t can be denoted as Fout (t, ∆t) and Fin (t, ∆t).
from compromised EPs, or when this EP is compromised and We further determine whether the traffic belongs to inside or
launches lateral movement attacks against other EPs. outside the cloud, i.e., whether it is east-west (ew) traffic or
 We further illustrate this with two examples in microservices north-south (ns) traffic, based on the dip and sip. Finally, we
(container cloud) and VM cloud respectively. Fig. 2 shows the obtain four types of flows: Fout ew
 (t, ∆t), Fout
 ns
 (t, ∆t), Fin
 ew
 (t, ∆t)
MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS 4327

 TABLE III
 T OPOLOGY F EATURES

 Fig. 4. Network structure of GTGmVAE. (a) Inference network. (b) Generation network.

and Finns
 (t, ∆t). On top of that, topology features simply and
effectively characterize the EP’s connection topology graph by
counting the number of different types of flows and the ratios
between them, which are defined as shown in table III. In
addition, in some special cases, distributed applications may
be deployed in non-VCNs, such as deploying internal business
systems in a private data center or deploying small applications
in a LAN environment. These special networks may exhibit
uniqueness similar to that of VCNs. However, such cases are Fig. 5. Probabilistic graphical model of GTGmVAE. (a) Inference network.
usually rare. Meanwhile, MFM is theoretically applicable. (b) Generation network.

 used to infer the latent variable sequence z. Combined with
D. Feature Computation its probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(a)), we give the joint
 Having defined MFM, we now define how the features are probability distribution of the inference network:
computed. For a time period T, we slice it by continuous and
 qφ (z1:T , e1:T , c1:T |x1:T , z0 )
disjoint time windows and compute all the features in each
time window (t, t + ∆t), totalling 91 dimensions. Finally, we = qφ (z1:T |e1:T , c1:T , x1:T , z0 )qφ (c1:T |x1:T , e1:T )qφ (e1:T |x1:T )
obtain a series of temporally continuous samples for training T
 Y
and online detection. From the specific definition of MFM, = qφ (zt |zt−1 , et , ct , xt ) qφ (ct |xt , et )qφ (et |x1:T ) (2)
we can see that MFM only requires statistics on flow tuples t=1
(i.e., (eip, sp, dip, d p) or (sip, sp, eip, d p)) and packet sizes in In the following, we describe the computational process
the packet headers, and therefore no stateful flow processing based on the structure of the inference network (Fig. 4(a)).
is required. We further discuss the flexibility and challenges 1) Local-Global Feature Extractor: In VAE [24] and
of deploying MFM in the cloud in § VI-A. dynamic VAE (e.g., VRNN [14]), the input sample x is
 processed via multiple fully connections (also known as the
 IV. VCN A NOMALY D ETECTION M ODEL GTG M VAE multilayer perceptron, MLP) to: 1) extract features from input
 This section details the proposed new VCN anomaly detec- samples to obtain high-level representations while eliminating
tion model GTGmVAE. It consists of a new global temporal feature redundancy; and 2) compress dimension to facilitate
dependency Gaussian mixture inference network, which con- subsequent latent variable inference and temporal modeling.
tains a new feature extractor, and a new global latent-space However, given the high-dimensional nature of the samples,
temporal dependency Gaussian mixture generation network. this approach ignores the implicit structural features of input
 samples, thus affecting subsequent operations; and makes the
 model lack the sufficient representation capability, preventing
A. Global Temporal Dependency Gaussian Mixture Inference it from achieving desirable adaptability. Some advanced work
Network [12], [27] uses the one-dimensional convolutional neural net-
 This section details the proposed new global temporal work (1D CNN) to extract the implicit structural features.
dependency Gaussian mixture inference network, which is However, due to the limitations of convolutional operations,
4328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 deterministic input samples and stochastic latent variables,
 and their interactions will degrade the modeling performance.
 In oder to obtain a strong temporal modeling capability to
 effectively address C3, we aim to obtain the global temporal
 dependency of sequence b x, which can fully exploit the
 information about the current time sample b xt itself, the past
 and the future to better infer zt . Moreover, the temporal
 modeling of the deterministic state b xt and the stochastic state
 zt is separated (§ IV-A.4). Specifically, from the knowledge of
 the probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(a)), it is known that
 the temporal hidden variable sequence e = {e1 , e2 , · · · , eT } is
 calculated from all b xt (i.e., qφ (et |x1:T )), and is thus able to
 model the global temporal dependency, which is achieved by
 the new Global Temporal Dependency Encoder (GTDE) in
 Fig. 6. Network structure of the Local-global Feature Extractor (LGFE). Fig. 4(a). GTDE is stacked by several Transformer Encoder
 Blocks [28], and through the self-attention mechanism, it
 can effectively capture the global temporal dependencies of
they can only process local features and ignore the global samples in b xt with each other, and process long sequences
perspective. better than RNN, thus effectively modeling the complex
 Therefore, we propose a new Local-global Feature Extractor temporal dependency of VCNs. The computational procedure
(LGFE) (Fig. 6). Specifically, each sample xt ∈ Rv in the input of GTDE is as follows:
sequence x is a v-dimensional vector. We use each xt as an (
input vector to LGFE, i.e., din = v. First, xt is processed by x, i=1
 xinput = i−1
 i b
 (3)
n layers of 1D CNN, and the parameters of each layer are e , i>1
(ki , si , ci ), representing its kernel size, step size, and output
 ai = MultiHeadAttntion xinput i
 , xinput
 i
 , xinput
 i
 
 (4)
channels, where si > 1, and ci gradually increases. This can:
 anorm = LayerNorm a + xinput
 i i i
 
1) effectively extract and integrate local features of xt , and (5)
2) reduce the length of the token sequence (from din to dn ) e = LayerNorm FeedFoward anorm + anorm
 i i i
  
 (6)
while increasing the dimension of each token (from 1 to cn ),
which can effectively reduce the computational overhead of the By cyclically performing the above computational procedure
subsequent global feature processing while representing token N times, we take the final eN as the global temporal hidden
over a larger feature space to increase the richness of feature variable sequence e = {e1 , e2 , · · · , eT }.
representation. Then, we perform the layer normalization on 3) Inference of Indicator Variable c: To learn the multhe output of n-th layer 1D CNN and obtain a token sequence tiple normal network patterns of different EPs as required
of length dn and dimension cn . To process global features, by the “one-to-many” strategy in C2, and to cope with the
we use Transformer Encoder [28], which effectively extracts temporal non-stationarity in C3, we need to accurately perglobal features and enhances representation capability through ceive different normal network patterns. Inspired by GmVAE
a self-attention mechanism. Similarly, we obtain the processed [20] and SGmVRNN [12], we denote the categories of the
token sequence by stacking k Transformer Encoder Blocks, latent variable distributions corresponding to different normal
whose dimension is still (dn , cn ). We perform the reshape patterns by introducing an indicator variable c, and capture
operation on the token sequence to transform it into a vector the different normal patterns by inferring the categories of c.
of (dn × cn , 1) and obtain the output vector b xt with dimension Specifically, c is a one-hot vector and follows a Categorical
(dout , 1) by an MLP ((dn × cn ) → (dinner ) → (dout )), where distribution with parameter π ∈ R+ K×1
 , i.e., c ∼ Cat(π). Since
dinner ≥ dn × cn , dout < din . Here MLP has the effect of changes in the normal network patterns of EPs are temporally
further integrating global and local features and performing correlated, to accurately infer the indicator variable ct , we need
dimension compression. Finally, we combine local and global to consider not only the current time sample b xt , but also the
perspectives to achieve feature extraction and integration of xt global temporal dependency between b xt and other samples in
and obtain its compressed representation b xt , which is able to x. However, existing work either ignores temporal dependency
 b
(a) fully extract and integrate the features of input samples [20] or considers only the historical information while ignoring
and eliminate feature redundancy; (b) contribute to better the future information [12]. Therefore, to fully consider the
subsequent latent variable inference and temporal dependency global temporal dependency of b xt to accurately infer ct , we
modeling; and (c) effectively improve the representation capa- use the global temporal hidden variable sequence e obtained in
bility of GTGmVAE to achieve the desirable adaptability. § IV-A.2, where et represents the global dependency between
 2) Global Temporal Dependency Encoder: Having xt and other samples in b
 b x. Specifically, ct is calculated by:
 x = xb1 , xb2 , · · · , xbT ,
 ˚
obtained the compressed representation b πt = Softmax MLP Concat b xt , et
 
 (7)
GTGmVAE further models its temporal dependency. Current
 ct = GumbleSoftmax (πt ) (8)
dynamic VAEs such as VRNN [14] and SGmVRNN [12]
usually implement temporal modeling via RNN, but they have where we need to obtain the discrete distribution variable ct .
two problems: (a) RNN only consider historical information However, since it is unable to backpropagate the gradient
and cannot obtain the global temporal dependency; (b) using directly from the discrete distribution, the Gumble-Softmax
the same RNN to model temporal dependencies of both trick [29] is introduced here to approximate the discrete
MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS 4329

distribution, whose differentiability guarantees that parameter × pθ (ct ) pθ (ht |ht−1 , xt ) (12)
optimization can be performed by backpropagation.
 where p (ct ) is a Uniform distribution. In the following, we
 4) Inference of Latent Variable z: Since we introduce the
 describe the computational process based on the structure of
indicator variable c to indicate the distribution category of
 the generation network (Fig. 4(b)).
the latent variable z, the prior distribution of z is extended
 1) Prior of Latent Variable z: Since we introduce the
to a Gaussian mixture distribution (§ IV-B.1). Accordingly,
 indicator variable c and make the latent variable z dependent
the posterior distribution of z also depends on c and is
 on c (§ IV-A.3), z follows a Gaussian mixture distribution:
extended to a Gaussian mixture distribution. Combining the
 K
knowledge of the probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(a)) X
 p (zt ) = πk N zt |µt,k , diag σ2t,k
 
and Fig. 4(a), it is known that the variational posterior of (13)
the current time latent variable zt is inferred from four parts: k=1
(a) the previous time latent variable zt−1 , which introduces K
 πk = 1. Combining the knowledge of the proba-
 P
its own temporal dependency for the variational posterior where
 k=1
inference of z. Meanwhile, the temporal dependency of the bilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(b)) and Fig. 4(b), it is known
stochastic sequence z is modelled separately from that of the that the prior of the current time latent variable zt is calculated
deterministic sequence b x to avoid mutual influence. Specifi- from three parts: (a) the nonlinear temporal dependency factor
cally, for zt−1 , we obtain its nonlinear temporal dependency t−1 of previous time latent variable zt−1 , which is the same
 zd
factor by zd t−1 = Tanh (Linear (zt−1 )) and use z d t−1 to infer the as § IV-A.4. (b) Historical factor ht−1 , which captures the
posterior of zt . (b) The current time input b xt , which introduces historical temporal information of input sequence b x using
information of the current time sample for variational infer- LSTM, i.e., ht = LSTM b xt , ht−1 . Note that we cannot model
ence. (c) The current time global temporal hidden variable the global temporal dependency of b x here (the reconstruction
et , which represents the global temporal dependency of the of bxt in § IV-B.2 is similar): the global temporal information
input sequence b x to accurately infer the posterior of zt . (d) The contains information of b xt itself, which causes the model to
current time indicator variable ct , which indicates the category reconstruct b xt , and results in the KL divergence
 xt using only b
of the posterior distribution of zt , thus providing GTGmVAE of the posterior and prior of zt becoming 0, leading to model
with the adaptability to model different normal patterns. Taken failure. (c) The current time indicator variable ct , which
together, the variational posterior of zt is calculated by: indicates the category of the prior distribution of zt , thus
 µφ,zt = MLP Concat zd providing GTGmVAE with the adaptability to model different
 xt , et , ct
 t−1 , b
 
 (9)
 normal patterns. Taken together, the prior of zt is calculated
 σφ,zt = Softplus MLP Concat zd xt , et , ct
 t−1 , b
 
 (10) by:
 zt = µφ,zt + σφ,zt · t , t ∼ Uniform(0, 1) (11)
 µθ,zt = MLP Concat zd t−1 , ht−1 , ct
 
 (14)
where φ represents the parameters of the inference network. σθ,zt = Softplus MLP Concat zd t−1 , ht−1 , ct
 
 (15)
By concatenating the one-hot vector ct , it can achieve the effect
of switching [12] using MLP, which determines the parameter where θ represents the parameters of the generation network.
category (µ and σ) of the Gaussian distribution to which zt The temporal modeling of b x and the prior z is also separated
belongs. Here we use the re-parameterization trick [24] of to avoid mutual influence. By simultaneously considering the
sampling from the posterior distribution of the latent space three factors, GTGmVAE can accurately select the Gaussian
to obtain the specific posterior latent variable zt to enable distribution category via ct using b xt and its global temporal
backpropagation. By simultaneously considering the four fac- dependency, and integrate the historical temporal information
tors, GTGmVAE can model the temporal dependency of the of the latent variable and input sequences, thus achieving
posterior latent variable and the global temporal dependency strong adaptability and temporal modeling capability.
of the input sequences to achieve strong temporal modeling 2) Reconstruction of Input Sequence x: Combining the
capability and accurate posterior variational inference of the knowledge of the probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(b)) and
latent variable, with adaptability to different normal patterns. Fig. 4(b), it is known that the reconstruction of the current
 time sample xt0 is generated from three parts: (a) Historical
 information ht−1 of the input sequence b x. (b) The current
B. Global Latent-Space Temporal Dependency Gaussian time latent variable zt . (c) The global temporal dependency
Mixture Generation Network factor dzt of zt , which is obtained by the new Global Temporal
 This section details the proposed new global latent-space Dependency Decoder (GTDD). Similar to GTDE, GTDD is
temporal dependency Gaussian mixture generation network, stacked by several Transformer Encoder Blocks [28], and
which is used to generate the sequence xT0 . Combined with through the self-attention mechanism, it can effectively capture
its probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(b)), we give the joint the global temporal dependency of zt in sequence z with each
probability distribution of the generation network: other. The computational procedure of GTDD is as follows:
 (
 0
 , z1:T , dz1:T , h1:T , c1:T |x1:T , z0 , h0 i=1
 
 pθ x1:T z,
 zinput = i−1
 i
 (16)
 = pθ x1:T
 0
 |z1:T , dz1:T , h0:T −1 pθ dz1:T |z1:T dz , i > 1
  

 × pθ (z1:T |h0:T −1 , c1:T , z0 ) pθ (c1:T ) pθ (h1:T |x1:T , h0 ) ai = MultiHeadAttntion ziinput , ziinput , ziinput
 
 (17)
 T
 anorm = LayerNorm a + zinput
 i i i
 
 Y (18)
 = pθ xt0 |zt , dzt , ht−1 pθ dzt |z1:T pθ (zt |zt−1 , ht−1 , ct )
  
 dz = LayerNorm FeedFoward anorm + anorm
 i i i
  
 t=1
 (19)
4330 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

By cyclically performing the above computation N times, E. Characteristics and Advantages of GTGmVAE
we take the final d˚zN as the global temporal dependency
factor sequence dz = dz1 , dz2 , · · · , dzT . By introducing dz , the 1) Strong Feature Extraction and Integration Capability:
global temporal dependency of the latent space can be fully Through the proposed new LGFE, GTGmVAE can effectively
considered during reconstruction, which effectively improves combine global and local perspectives to extract and integrate
the capability of GTGmVAE to generate temporal samples. the features of input samples, which can help the model
Let xt0 follow a Gaussian distribution, we have: to learn the distribution to which the input samples belong
 more efficiently, thus contributing to the subsequent latent
    variable inference and temporal dependency modeling, as
 xt0 ∼ N µθ,xt0 , diag σ2θ,xt0 (20) well as effectively enhancing the representation capability of
 µθ,xt0 = DCNN MLP Concat zt , dzt , ht−1
 
 (21) GTGmVAE to achieve the desired adaptability.
 VAE [24] and its dynamic variants (e.g., VRNN [14])
 σθ,xt0 = Softplus DCNN MLP Concat zt , dzt , ht−1
 
 (22) typically compress the dimension of input samples through
 fully connection networks, resulting in a large amount of
Here DCNN is a one-dimensional deconvolutional neural net- implicit structural information being discarded, which negawork that can help to better generate structured samples [12]. tively affects subsequent latent variable inference and temporal
By simultaneously considering the three factors, GTGmVAE dependency modeling. Some advanced work [12], [27] uses
fully incorporates the global temporal dependency of the latent 1D CNN to extract features from the input samples. However,
variable sequence z and the historical information of the input this approach is still insufficient: due to the limitation of
sequence bx when generating the reconstructed samples xt0 , thus convolutional operations, it can only process the local features,
achieving a strong temporal sample generation capability. and thus remains unable to fully extract and integrate the
 implicit structural information. In contrast, the LGFE included
 in GTGmVAE achieves a strong feature extraction and inte-
C. Model Training gration capability by serially combining the 1D CNN and the
 Transformer Encoder, first extracting the low-level implicit
 According to the probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5),
 structural features of the input samples from a local perspecthe prior distribution of c is pθ (ct ), the variational postive, and then further extracting and integrating the high-level
terior distribution is qφ (ct |x1:T ), the prior distribution of
 features of the input samples from a global perspective.
z is pθ (zt |zt−1 , x<t , ct ), the variational posterior distribution
is qφ (zt |zt−1 , x1:T , ct ), the generation distribution of x is 2) Strong Temporal Modeling Capability: In the inference
pθ (xt |z1:T , x<t ). Consistent with VAE, our goal is to maxi- network, GTGmVAE accurately infers the latent variables
mize the log-likelihood of the observation sample xt while based on the global temporal dependency of input sequences,
minimizing the KL divergence between the variational pos- and the temporal modeling of latent variables and input
terior distribution qφ (zt , ct |zt−1 , x1:T ) and the prior distribution sequences are performed separately to avoid the negative
pθ (zt , ct |zt−1 , x<t ). Below is the loss function of GTGmVAE, effects due to the interaction between stochastic latent varithe specific calculation of it is in Supplementary Appendix. ables and deterministic input sequences. In the generation
 network, GTGmVAE improves the ability of temporal sample
 generation by combining the global temporal dependency of
 L (θ, φ; xt )
 latent variables with the historical information of input sample
 = Eqφ (zt ,ct |zt−1 ,x1:T ) log pθ (xt |z1:T , x<t )
  
 sequences.
 − KL qφ (zt , ct |zt−1 , x1:T ) ||pθ (zt , ct |zt−1 , x<t )
 
 Existing representative VAE-based time-series anomaly
 = Eqφ (zt ,ct |zt−1 ,x1:T ) log pθ (xt |z1:T , x<t )
   detection methods [12], [14], [15], [16], [19] typically model
 the temporal dependency of input sequences via RNN or
 − Eqφ (ct |x1:T ) KL qφ (zt |zt−1 , x1:T , ct )||pθ (zt |zt−1 , x<t , ct )
  
  LSTM, but this can only model the historical temporal infor-
 − KL qφ (ct |x1:T ) ||pθ (ct ) (23) mation, ignores the global temporal dependency, and performs
 poorly on long sequences. Meanwhile, in the above methods,
 LSTM-VAE [19] does not model the temporal dependency
D. Anomaly Detection of stochastic latent variables and ignores the temporal dependency of potential representations of the input sequences,
 GTGmVAE learns the normal network patterns of EPs resulting in poor performance [16]. While the other methods
during training. Therefore, with the same assumption as in model the temporal dependency of stochastic latent variables,
the previous work on anomaly detection, the more the input they use the same RNN or LSTM to process both stochastic
sample of an EP matches the normal network patterns of that latent variables and deterministic input sequences simultane-
EP, the higher the probability of its reconstruction. We use the ously, leading to negative effects. Finally, none of the above
reconstruction probability S t of the sample xt as its anomaly methods further consider the temporal dependency of latent
score to judge whether it is anomalous or not: variables in the generation stage, which is very effective in
 improving the model’s ability to generate temporal samples.
 S t = log pθ (xt |z1:T , x<t ) (24) Compared to VAE-based time-series anomaly detection
 models, Transformer-based time-series anomaly detection
The sample xt is considered anomalous if S t falls below the models [13], [17], [21], [22] use Transformer [28] to model
specified threshold. Similar to previous work, we use POT the input sequence, effectively capturing its global tempo-
[15], [30] to implement automatic threshold selection. ral dependency. However, Transformer-based methods are
MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS 4331

typically deterministic and cannot model the stochasticity of A. Experimental Setup
the data like VAE-based methods, and thus lack the robustness
 1) Datasets: Currently, there are two representative public
to cope with uncertainty in the time-series data, which can
 VCN anomaly detection datasets: CIC-IDS2018 [23] and
affect the accuracy of the anomaly detection, especially con-
 ISOT-CID [18]. CIC-IDS2018 was constructed by building
sidering that VCNs have complex temporal non-stationarity.
 a VCN on AWS and collecting 10 days of traffic for each
 We can see that GTGmVAE combines the advantages
 EP. According to the official records, there are 14 EPs (see
of both VAE-based and Transformer-based methods: it both
 Supplementary Appendix for details) that suffered attacks,
considers the temporal modeling of stochastic variables and
 i.e. have anomalous samples, and thus only these 14 EPs can
captures the global temporal dependency using Transformer.
 be used for evaluation. CIC-IDS2018 covers the main types of
In addition, GTGmVAE effectively solves the above problems
 attacks faced by VCNs, including external north-south attacks
faced by current time-series anomaly detection models through
 against EPs, and internal east-west lateral movement attacks
posterior inference based on the global temporal dependency
 launched by compromised EPs against other EPs. We cannot
of input sequences, separated temporal modeling of deteruse ISOT-CID for evaluation for the following reasons: 1)
ministic and stochastic variables, and generation of temporal
 ISOT-CID has two phases. The traffic collection of Phase1
samples combining the global temporal dependency of latent
 uses random sampling, where each collection randomly lasts
variables. Therefore, compared to existing methods, GTGmfrom 2 s to 12 s and is repeated every 80 s. This disrupts
VAE can effectively model the complex temporal dependency
 the temporal continuity of the original traffic, making the
and non-stationarity of VCNs to cope with C3.
 model unable to perform temporal modeling; 2) The number
 3) High Adaptability: Current time-series anomaly detecof available EPs in Phase2 is only 5, which is insufficient to
tion models [14], [15], [16], [19] typically make the latent
 evaluate model’s adaptability. More importantly, phase2 lacks
variable obey a single diagonal Gaussian distribution, which
 the main attacks faced by VCNs such as external north-south
limits their adaptability to learn different normal patterns.
 DDoS and internal east-west attacks. In addition, to further
GmVAE [20] and SGmVRNN [12] achieve “one-to-many”
 validate GTGmVAE, we also evaluated it on a time-series
adaptability to learn different normal patterns by making
 anomaly detection benchmark dataset SMD [15]. Despite
the latent variable obey a Gaussian mixture distribution, and
 being orientated towards a different scenario, SMD has similar
introducing the indicator variable to denote the distribution
 properties to VCN anomaly detection: it contains time-series
category of the latent variable corresponding to the different
 KPI data of 28 different servers and can be used to evaluate
normal patterns. However, they either neglect to capture the
 the model’s adaptability and temporal modeling capability.
temporal dependency of input sequences [20], or rely on
 We use the proposed MFM to construct continuous samples
only the historical information rather than the global tembased on the fixed and disjoint time window for the 14 EPs
poral information to determine the category of the indicator
 in CIC-IDS2018, with a dimension of 91 and a time window
variable [12]. Given that VCNs contain multiple EPs with
 size of 3 s. For each EP’s samples in a day, its first anomalous
different patterns and have temporal non-stationarity, these
 sample appears basically near 50% of all samples. Therefore,
methods ignore the dependencies between the input sample
 all continuous samples before the first anomalous sample are
and other samples in the sequence, and thus fail to accurately
 used for training. If the first anomalous sample is located in the
capture the dynamic change in the category of the indicator
 last 50% samples in a day, the first 50% samples are used for
variable.
 training. The remaining samples of the day are used for test.
 In contrast, GTGmVAE not only introduces the Gaussian
 For each EP, its 10-day training and test samples are spliced
mixture distributed latent variable, but also accurately infers
 separately. Therefore, the length of training sets after division
the category of the indicator variable based on the global
 is less than the length of test sets, and they all have temporal
temporal dependency of input sequences, thus accurately capcontinuity. To address C2, we use “one-to-many” strategy, i.e.,
turing the dynamic changes in the category of the indicator
 splice the samples from all 14 EPs in CIC-IDS2018 to form a
variable. Combined with the expressiveness of LGFE and
 training set, train a model, and evaluate it on test sets of each
strong temporal modelling capability, GTGmVAE is able to
 EPs. SMD is treated similarly using ‘one-to-many” strategy.
model the normal patterns of different EPs simultaneously, as
well as multiple different normal patterns contained in one EP 2) Evaluation Metrics: We use the most commonly
due to temporal non-stationarity, to effectively cope with C2. used metrics for unsupervised time-series anomaly detection,
 including Precision, Recall and F1-score. F1-score balances
 Precision and Recall and is currently the most concerned met-
 V. E VALUATION ric for unsupervised time-series anomaly detection. We follow
 This section provides a detailed evaluation of the pro- the point adjustment approach [31] taken by the vast majority
posed anomaly detection model GTGmVAE and the feature of unsupervised time-series anomaly detection methods, i.e.,
model MFM. First, we describe the experimental setup. an anomalous segment is considered to be correctly detected if
Second, we compare GTGmVAE with nine representative any one of anomalies in it is detected. All experiments are onestate-of-the-art models to validate its performance. Third, off effort and repeated 10 times to report the average metrics.
we conduct comprehensive ablation experiments to demon- 3) Compared Methods: We compared nine representative
strate the effectiveness of each component in GTGmVAE state-of-the-art unsupervised anomaly detection methods: 1)
and the effectiveness of each level features in MFM. Forth, VRNN [14]: extends VAE using RNN to make it capawe evaluate the online detection efficiency of the proposed ble of temporal modeling. 2) GmVAE [20]: improves the
models. Finally, the experiments of hyper-parameters are in adaptability of VAE by making the latent variable follow a
Supplementary Appendix. Gaussian mixture distribution. 3) OmniAnomaly [15]: a robust
4332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

stochastic RNN-based time-series anomaly detection model. TABLE IV
4) SDFVAE [16]: a robust static and dynamic factorized VAE R ESULTS OF C OMPARISON OF GTG M VAE W ITH N INE R EPRESENTATIVE
for time-series anomaly detection. 5) TranAD [17]: a time- S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS
series anomaly detection model based on Transformer and
adversarial training. 6) Anomaly Transformer [21]: a timeseries anomaly detection model based on Transformer and
association discrepancy. 7) SGmVRNN [12]: a time-series
anomaly detection model combining VRNN and GmVAE with
temporal modeling capability and adaptability. 8) PUAD [13]:
a time-series anomaly detection model combining Transformer
and prototype learning with temporal modeling capability and
adaptability. 9) DCDetector [22]: a time-series anomaly detection model based on Transformer and contrastive learning.
 The above methods are not only the recent state-of-theart, but also representative in feature extraction capability,
temporal modelling capability and “one-to-many” adaptability.
(a) For feature extraction capability, SGmVRNN and SDFVAE λ of 5.0 and a rate of decrease of 0.1 per epoch up to a
use CNN to replace the fully connection networks in VAE minimum value of 0.1. For SMD, the probability p associated
for dimension compression and feature extraction, which can with the initial threshold used in POT is set to 0.003. For
extract and integrate the implicit features of input samples CIC-IDS2018, as the percentage of anomalous samples varies
from a local perspective. In addition, to further improve the considerably between EPs, the value of p is 0.15 for EP1,
representativeness of the compared methods, the implementa- 0.07 for EP2, 0.01 for EP4 and 0.015 for EP3 and EP5-
tions of VRNN and GmVAE adopt the SGmVRNN approach, EP14. We present further experiments and discussion of the
i.e., 1D CNN is used to improve performance. (b) For temporal main hyper-parameters in the Supplementary Appendix. For
modelling capability, all of the above methods except GmVAE GTGmVAE and all comparison methods, we uniformly use
have good temporal modelling capability. Among them, the model of the last epoch for test. This removes setup bias
VRNN, SDFVAE, OmniAnomaly and SGmVRNN are the cur- and ensures fairness of comparisons. Meanwhile, in “one-torent representative VAE-based time-series anomaly detection many” training, we cannot find a uniform epoch for N EPs:
models that can adequately represent the stochastic nature of the optimal training epoch may be different for each EP. Also,
time-series data; while TranAD, Anomaly Transformer, PUAD this approach is the uniform and standard approach adopted by
and DCDetector are the current representative Transformer- SGmVRNN [12], which proposed the “one-to-many” method.
based time-series anomaly detection models. Compared to For GTGmVAE and all comparison methods, we use POT
the VAE-based methods, they can better model temporal with uniform parameters to determine thresholds on the test
dependency from a global perspective and can better process set. Typically, POT thresholds are determined on the training
long sequences. (c) For adaptability, GmVAE, SGmVRNN set [15]. However, in “one-to-many” task, POT thresholds are
and PUAD are the representative methods that make the determined on the test set [12]. This is because in “one-tomodel obtain “one-to-many” adaptability by making the latent many” task, we splice the training data of multiple EPs and
variables obey the Gaussian mixture distribution and intro- evaluate the test set of each EP separately. Therefore, we
ducing the prototype learning, respectively. Also, Anomaly cannot determine a uniform threshold or determine thresholds
Transformer and DCDetector find the discrepancies between for each EP separately on such a training set. Meanwhile, this
the sample and others in the sequence rather than just learning approach does not rely on labels, does not affect the trained
normal patterns, thus achieving a degree of adaptability along model, and is able to adaptively adjust the threshold according
with the temporal modeling capability. In summary, these to the dynamic changes in distributions of the current sample,
nine methods are both advanced and representative, and are thus better adapting to the temporal non-stationarity of VCNs.
therefore able to comprehensively demonstrate the advantages 5) Experimental Platform: All experiments are conducted
of GTGmVAE. on a server with Intel Xeon Gold 5120 * 2 CPU, 128 GB
 RAM and Nvidia Tesla T4 * 2 GPU. MFM and GTGmVAE
 4) Hyper-Parameters: Since CIC-IDS2018 and SMD differ are implemented using Python 3.7.10 and PyTorch 1.9.0.
in the sample dimensions (91 vs 38), the parameters of
LGFE are different: For CIC-IDS2018, (ki , si , ci ) are (3, 3, 8),
(3, 3, 16), (2, 2, 32), the number of Transformer Encoder B. Comparison Experiments
Blocks is 1 with heads of 2, dk and dv of 16. For SMD, The comparison results of GTGmVAE with nine represen-
(ki , si , ci ) are (2, 2, 8), (2, 2, 16), (2, 2, 32), the number of Trans- tative state-of-the-art methods are shown in table IV. The
former Encoder Blocks is 2 with heads of 2, dk and dv of 16. “one-to-many” strategy is used for all methods. As the main
The output dimension of LGFE is 20. For GTDE and GTDD, metric, the highest F1 score of all methods is shown in bold.
the number of Transformer Encoder Blocks is 6 with heads of GTGmVAE achieves the highest F1-score on both CIC-
8, dk and dv of 64. The dimension d of the latent variable z IDS2018 and SMD. For CIC-IDS2018, GTGmVAE combined
is 10. The dimension (i.e., K) of the indicator variable c is 5. with MFM achieves the highest and desirable F1 score
The Adam optimizer is used with learning rate of 0.0002. The (0.9465), fully demonstrating the effectiveness of GTGmVAE
number of epochs is 20, the batch size is 512, and the sequence and MFM in VCN anomaly detection, and the advantages of
length T is 20. Gumbel-Softmax has an initial temperature GTGmVAE in temporal modeling and adaptability. Therefore,
MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS 4333

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 R ESULTS OF THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON GTG M VAE R ESULTS OF THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON MFM

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT F EATURE M ODELS ON EP3

MFM and GTGmVAE can effectively address C1, C2 and
C3. For SMD, GTGmVAE achieves the highest F1-score
(0.9412). Considering that SMD is one of the most commonly
used benchmark datasets for time-series anomaly detection
with similar properties to VCN anomaly detection, this fully
demonstrates the advantages of GTGmVAE in temporal modeling and adaptability, and its robustness to different tasks.
 TABLE VIII
 The following is a specific analysis of the methods com-
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT F EATURE M ODELS ON EP4
pared. Of the methods compared, all except GmVAE have
the temporal modeling capability. The importance of considering temporal modeling in C3 is well demonstrated by the
comparison with GmVAE. In contrast, the comparison with
methods other than GmVAE demonstrates the advantages of
GTGmVAE in terms of the temporal modeling capability and
the adaptability. In addition, SGmVRNN, PUAD, Anomaly
Transformer and DCDetector all have both the temporal
modeling capability and the adaptability to different normal capability to model complex temporal dependencies), so Type1
patterns. However, their adaptability and temporal modeling still has a degree of adaptability and its performance is only
capabilities are insufficient to meet the requirements of VCN slightly degraded. The fully connection in Type2 is used in
anomaly detection. By comparing with these methods, it is VAE and its variants (e.g., VRNN), which just simply reduces
well demonstrated that GTGmVAE not only has the better the input’s dimension, losing the implicit feature information.
adaptability to address C2, but also has the better temporal The 1D CNN in Type3 comes from advanced methods [12],
modeling capability to effectively model the complex temporal [27] and has a better feature extraction capability, thus slightly
dependency of VCNs and more effectively capture and model improving the performance compared to Type2. However,
the temporal non-stationarity to address C3. compared to the proposed LGFE, 1D CNN only processes the
 local features and ignores the global features. In addition, both
C. Ablation Study for Detection Model GTGmVAE Type2 and Type3 reduce the model’s representation capability
 and therefore its adaptability. As a result, their performance
 To validate each component in GTGmVAE, we conduct the
 is both degraded. The capability to generate temporal samples
following extensive ablation experiments. Type1: Replace the
 in Type4 is reduced, which degrades the performance. Type5
latent variable distribution from a Gaussian mixture distribufurther replaces all the global temporal dependency modeling
tion to a single Gaussian distribution. Type2: Replace LGFE
 with the historical temporal dependency modeling on Type4,
with full connections. Type3: Replace LGFE with 1D CNN.
 reducing both the inference and generation capabilities and
Type4: Remove the modeling of the global temporal depenfurther degrading the performance. This demonstrates the
dency of latent variables in generation network. Type5: Further
 advantages of the global temporal dependency modeling for
replace the modeling of the global temporal dependency with
 the inference of the indicator and latent variables and the genthe modeling of the historical temporal dependency on Type4.
 eration of temporal samples. The performance is significantly
Type6: Disregard the modeling of the temporal dependency.
 degraded in Type6 as no temporal modeling is considered at
 Type1 is used to validate the effect of using the Gaussian
 all. This demonstrates the importance of modeling the complex
mixture distribution on model’s adaptability. Type2-3 are used
 temporal dependency of VCNs highlighted in C3.
to validate the proposed LGFE. Type4-6 are used to validate
the proposed optimizations of GTGmVAE in temporal modeling. The results of the ablation study are shown in table V. D. Ablation Study for Feature Model MFM
 The performance of Type1 is degraded due to its reduced To validate the effectiveness of each level features in MFM,
adaptability. Note that besides using the Gaussian mixture dis- we uniformly conduct ablation experiments using GTGmVAE
tribution, GTGmVAE also improves the adaptability through for each level features, and the results are shown in table VI.
LGFE (improves the model’s representation capability) and the The feature model of Aldribi et al. [18] is representative in
global temporal dependency modeling (improves the model’s VCN anomaly detection task and is used to construct Level 1
4334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE IX TABLE X
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT F EATURE M ODELS ON EP2 D ETECTION L ATENCY FOR D IFFERENT S IZED BATCH

 other hand, has greater stealth and attack capability due to its
features in MFM. However, since only the packet frequency
 multi-threading, scripting support and automation, and thus
is considered, this feature model cannot comprehensively
 is more difficult to detect. However, both attacks lead to
characterize the basic network patterns of VCNs, resulting
 significant changes in the connection topology graph of the EP
in poor detection performance. Meanwhile, despite designing
 (mainly in malicious external nodes and edges). Therefore, by
the egress entropy features, Aldribi et al. only consider the
 effectively characterizing the connection topology graph of EP,
ingress direction while ignoring the egress entropy features
 the complete MFM with the addition of Level 3 features can
when actually constructing feature samples for the detection
 effectively distinguish the above attacks compared to Level
model, and therefore ignore characterizing the randomness
 1+ Level 2 features. As shown in table IX, the F1-score
of the traffic sent out from EPs, which we experimentally
 for EP2 is significantly improved from 0.4128 to 0.9615.
demonstrate to be important for detecting attacks launched by
 Meanwhile, from an overall perspective, as shown in table
compromised EPs. Specifically, we use EP3 and EP4 in CIC-
 VI, the incorporation of topology features in MFM leads
IDS2018 as examples for our study. After being compromised,
 to a significant performance improvement over Level 1 and
EP3 and EP4 launch port scanning attacks to other normal
 2 features, especially in terms of the better differentiation
EPs in the same network segment (usually as the first step
 of anomalous samples, resulting in an improvement of 0.07
of the lateral movement attack), randomly probing for ports
 in Recall, leading to a higher F1-score. This confirms the
that could be used for the attack. Since the feature model of
 validity of our observation, analysis and derived insight of the
Aldribi et al. ignores entropy features in the egress direction
 uniqueness of VCNs. The comparison of the four experiments
to characterizing the randomness of the traffic sent out from
 fully demonstrates the effectiveness of MFM in addressing C1
EPs, it is difficult to distinguish such attacks, and thus the
 and the effectiveness of each level of features in MFM.
F1-scores for EP3 and EP4 are 0.5243 and 0.4660, respectively
(as shown in table VII and table VIII). In contrast, we take into
account the egress entropy features when constructing Level E. Efficiency and Scalability of Online Detection
1 features, so that Level 1 features provide better detection In this section, we evaluate the efficiency and scalability
performance than Aldribi et al., which results from being of the real-time online detection of GTGmVAE, and the
able to more effectively detect lateral movement attacks from efficiency of the feature computation for MFM.
compromised EPs. As shown in table VII and table VIII, the As we use the “one-to-many” strategy, a trained model
F1-scores for EP3 and EP4 are significantly higher when using can be used for online detection of multiple different EPs
Level 1 features, and are 0.8034 and 0.7951, respectively. simultaneously. Given the parallelization nature of dedicated
 Further, due to the more comprehensive characterization of hardware GPUs mainly used for the model inference, online
the basic network patterns of VCNs from both the throughput detection of multiple EPs can be performed in parallel by
and frequency perspectives, Level 1 and 2 features provide combining their samples into the same Batch, which greatly
better performance than Level 1 features alone. This is mainly improves the scalability. For example, for 512 EPs, we can
due to the better differentiation of anomalous samples and load a trained model using only one GPU, feed the samples
generation of normal samples through the more comprehensive of these EPs as a Batch of size 512 and perform inference.
characterization, resulting in an improvement of 0.0122 in In contrast, the “one-to-one” strategy requires 512 exclusive
Recall and 0.0085 in Precision, leading to a higher F1-score. models to be trained for 512 EPs and fed through 512 GPUs
 Finally, the complete MFM incorporates key topology fea- for inference, and each model can only be fed one sample at
tures on top of Level 1 and 2 features to comprehensively a time, which is obviously inefficient and wasteful. Under the
and accurately characterize the network patterns of VCNs by “one-to-many” strategy, we evaluate the inference efficiency
considering the uniqueness of VCNs. CIC-IDS2018 covers for three scenarios: 1) one sample at a time (Batch size = 1); 2)
the main types of attacks faced by VCNs, including attacks 512 samples at a time (Batch size = 512); 3) 1024 samples at
launched externally against internal EPs, and lateral movement a time (Batch size = 1024). The results are shown in table X.
attacks launched from internal compromised EPs. As described Even with the consideration of the scalability for practical
in § III-C, these attacks will result in significant changes to the detection, the detection latency of GTGmVAE is still very low
stable normal patterns of the EP’s connection topology graph. even when 512/1024 EPs are detected simultaneously (0.1958
Specifically, we take EP2 as an example for our study. EP2 s and 0.3636 s), which can clearly meet the requirement for
suffers from two typical DDoS attacks: LOIC (Low Orbit Ion real-time online detection with the time window size of 3 s.
Cannon) and HOIC (High Orbit Ion Cannon) [23]. Among Besides the inference efficiency of GTGmVAE, for real-time
them, LOIC mainly sends a large number of TCP, UDP and detection, we also need to focus on the feature computation
HTTP requests to overwhelm the target EP, but usually relies efficiency of MFM. In this paper, we use Python to implement
on a single client to launch the single attack. HOIC, on the feature computation for CIC-IDS2018 in a single-threaded
MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS 4335

manner. Since no flow states need to be maintained and only overhead and improves real-time detection through fixed time
a few packet header fields need to be counted, the average windows and non-stateful feature computation.
time to compute features for constructing a sample is 0.0233
s. Therefore, with the time window size of 3 s, our detection
 B. Discussions on GTGmVAE
model GTGmVAE and feature model MFM can clearly meet
the requirement for real-time online detection. In addition, 1) Coarse-Grained Detection: Given the wide variety of
MFM can easily compute features directly using the statistics attacks and unknown new attacks faced by VCNs, unsuperfrom the cloud built-in virtual switch [32] (§ III-D). Therefore, vised methods are more suitable than supervised methods.
implementing feature computation inside the cloud platform However, as with typical unsupervised anomaly detection
will maximize the efficiency. We make it our future work. models, GTGmVAE can only detect anomalous behavior that
 deviates from the normal pattern and cannot make further
 VI. D ISCUSSION judgments about the anomalies, such as the type of attack.
 Combined with the fixed time-window design of MFM, GTG-
A. Discussions on MFM mVAE is capable of fast coarse-grained anomaly detection and
 1) Flexibility and Challenges of Deploying MFM in VCNs: is suitable for use in alert systems or preliminary screening
The traffic statistics required for MFM are available in different phases, and needs to be complemented with other methods
ways in VCNs. If a virtual switch with statistics capabilities (e.g., classification models) to make further judgements on
is built into the cloud (for example, the cloud virtual switch anomalies.
VFP [32] directly provides statistics on flow tuples, packet 2) Interpretability Challenges: GTGmVAE introduces
frequency and throughput), MFM can directly utilize these Gaussian mixture distributed latent variables and models
statistics. Even if such switches are not deployed in the global temporal dependencies of input and latent variable
cloud, in a VM cloud, we can develop plugins on the host’s sequences, which improves the model’s adaptability and
virtual switch (e.g., Open vSwitch [33]) to obtain the required temporal modelling capability. However, this also leads to
packet information, while in a container cloud, the required challenges for typical interpretability methods (e.g., LIME
packet information can be captured by plugging the eBPF [34], SHAP [35]) in explaining the internal mechanisms of
program into the host. The above approaches do not require GTGmVAE, e.g., the diversity of the Gaussian mixture disthe deployment of specialized network middleware and the tribution makes local modelling difficult; and the complex
traffic redirection, and do not lead to significant overheads long-range nonlinear relationships of time-series data make it
compared to traditional stateful flow processing. In summary, difficult for these methods to capture. Therefore, it is necessary
the core idea of MFM is to characterize VCNs in a non-stateful to consider improving the interpretability methods for VCN
manner using only simple packet header information, and thus anomaly detection, such as sampling different distributions and
it is very flexible: the information required for MFM can be slicing the input sequences into time series, to cope with these
obtained in different types of clouds, either through virtual challenges.
switches or eBPF programs. In addition, MFM is essentially a 3) Dataset Limitation: Due to dataset limitation, we can
theoretical contribution, whereas in actual large-scale clouds, it currently only evaluate the “one-to-many” adaptability of
may face deployment challenges such as interface compatibil- GTGmVAE on CIC-IDS2018, which contains 14 EPs. Howity of virtual switches, and architectural design for distributed ever, despite the small number of EPs, the effectiveness of
implementations, etc. In future studies, we aim to validate and GTGmVAE in improving the scalability can be validated:
optimize the implementation details of MFM in real clouds GTGmVAE that considers adaptability achieves higher per-
(with or without the switches that natively support statistical formance compared to other representative state-of-the-art
functions), and assess the possible deployment challenges and methods. Meanwhile, in the ablation experiments, models
system overheads at different scales. without the design of adaptability (Type1, 2 and 3) all per-
 2) MFM Vs. End-to-End Methods: Although end-to-end form worse than GTGmVAE. We also conduct additional
methods have become an important trend in deep learning, experiments on the SMD dataset with more servers (28 in
however, manually designed MFMs still have the following total) to further validate the scalability of GTGmVAE on a
advantages over end-to-end methods where the raw traffic data larger dataset. Finally, a key design of GTGmVAE to improve
is fed directly into a deep model: (a) Targeted extraction of scalability is to make the latent variable obey a Gaussian
key features: VCN traffic has complex temporal dependencies mixture distribution, which intuitively reflects how the model
and needs to be characterized in multiple dimensions (e.g. learns different patterns by categorizing the input samples and
frequency, throughput, topology, etc.). These key features are corresponding to different Gaussian distribution components of
implicit in the raw data and have temporal relationships. In the latent space. Theoretically, in VCNs with more EPs, we
addition, VCN traffic contains large redundant data (noise). can adjust the number of categories of the Gaussian mixture
End-to-end methods are difficult to capture key features and distribution to improve the scalability. In the future, we will
are susceptible to noise interference, while manually designed try to evaluate the scalability of GTGmVAE in a larger scale
MFMs can target and filter the most discriminative key fea- scenario.
tures from multiple dimensions. (b) Real-time detection and
computational overhead: Anomaly detection systems require VII. R ELATED W ORK
fast decisions. End-to-end methods can incur a large computational burden due to redundancy and noise in raw data, A. Feature Model
affecting the real-time and scalability of detection. In contrast, 1) Flow-Based Feature Model: Representative flow-based
manually designed MFM effectively reduces computational feature models include NSL-KDD [8], NB15 [9], and
4336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

CICFlowMeter [10]. NSL-KDD and NB15 are classical intru- representative state-of-the-art methods [12], [13], [14], [15],
sion datasets with self-contained flow-based feature models. [16], [17], [21], [22] in § V-A. Among them, VRNN [14],
While CICFlowMeter is the latest flow-based feature model OmniAnomaly [15], SDFVAE [16], and SGmVRNN [12]
and contains more and finer-grained flow-level features. How- achieve temporal modeling capabilities through recurrent
ever, as mentioned in C1, these feature models cannot cope structures (e.g., RNN) on VAE, while PUAD [13], TranAD
with the scalability challenge and ignore the uniqueness of [17], Anomaly Transformer [21] and DCDetector [22] achieve
VCNs. In contrast, MFM addresses the scalability challenge time-series anomaly detection by combining Transformer with
through non-stateful feature computation and combines multi- adversarial training, contrastive learning, and prototype learnlevel features to comprehensively and accurately characterize ing. In addition, SGmVRNN, PUAD, Anomaly Transformer
VCNs. and DCDetector have the adaptability to different normal
 2) Time-Window Based Feature Model: The feature model patterns besides the temporal modeling capability. In § IV-E,
in Kitsune [7] is similar to Level 1 and 2 features in MFM we analyze these methods in feature extraction capability,
and can meet the scalability requirements of C1. However, temporal modelling capability, and adaptability, and discuss
it lacks the consideration for VCNs and thus is unsuitable the differences and advantages of GTGmVAE over them.
for VCN anomaly detection. Aldribi et al. [18] proposed Compared to the proposed GTGmVAE, these models either
a representative feature model for VCN anomaly detection. lack the sufficient adaptability or lack the sufficient temporal
However, as described in § III-B and § III-C, it only considers modeling capability to effectively cope with C2 and C3, and
the packet frequency and ignores the uniqueness of VCNs. thus perform poorly in VCN anomaly detection.
Compared to the above methods, MFM characterizes VCNs
more comprehensively and accurately by introducing topology VIII. C ONCLUSION
features that consider the uniqueness of VCNs. PrivateEye [2]
 In this paper, we propose a new multilevel feature model
proposed a feature model for detecting compromised cloud
 MFM and a new unsupervised time-series anomaly detection
VMs. However, it is designed for supervised classification and
 model GTGmVAE for VCN anomaly detection. Of these,
mainly characterizes the malicious behaviors of compromised
 MFM incorporates the topology features that are specifically
VMs, introducing the prior knowledge of attacks. Therefore,
 designed for the uniqueness of VCNs and the packet frequency
it is not effective when used for unsupervised anomaly detecand throughput features that characterize the basic network
tion, which focuses on learning normal patterns rather than
 patterns of VCNs, and is therefore able to comprehensively
recognizing predefined attacks. In addition, PrivateEye argues
 and accurately characterize VCNs. GTGmVAE effectively
that the compromised VMs differ from normal VMs in their
 improves the representation capability through a new localconnection patterns, which shares commonalities with our
 global feature extractor, achieves the strong temporal modeling
insight into the uniqueness of VCNs. However, we provide
 capability by modeling the global temporal dependency of
a more generalizable insight based on the property that the
 the input samples and latent variables, and combines the
east-west traffic that dominates VCNs comes from the stable
 Gaussian mixture distributed latent space with its strong
business logic: Any malicious behavior, including attacks from
 temporal modeling capability and representation capability to
both external and internal sources against normal EPs (VMs
 achieve the strong adaptability, therefore being able to learn
or containers), and attacks launched by the compromised
 the normal patterns of multiple EPs simultaneously and to
EPs against other EPs, can cause the connection patterns
 effectively address the complex temporal dependency and nonof these normal or compromised EPs to deviate from the
 stationarity of VCNs. Extensive experiments on the VCN
baseline, while PrivateEye only considers compromised VMs.
 anomaly detection dataset CIC-IDS2018 and the time-series
In contrast, MFM has better generality and can be better
 anomaly detection benchmark dataset SMD show that GTGapplied to unsupervised anomaly detection.
 mVAE with MFM achieves the desirable performance, and
 GTGmVAE outperforms all nine representative state-of-the-
B. Detection Model art detection models. For future work, we consider evaluating
 Kitsune [7] is a representative unsupervised intrusion detec- the challenges of deploying MFM in different types of clouds
tion method in resource-constrained environments (e.g., IoT) and evaluating GTGmVAE in larger scale scenarios.
using a set of auto-encoders. PrivateEye [2], SCAE [5] and
Aldribi et al. [18] are representative VCN intrusion detection R EFERENCES
methods using stacked contractive autoencoders with SVM, [1] The Nist Definition of Cloud Computing, Nat. Inst. Standards Technol.,
random forest and change point detection, respectively. How- Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2011, doi: 10.6028/nist.sp.800-145.
ever, they are either supervised [2], [5] or lack the necessary [2] B. Arzani et al., “PrivateEye: Scalable and privacy-preserving compromise detection in the cloud,” in Proc. 17th USENIX Symp. Networked
temporal modeling capability and adaptability [7], [18], mak- Syst. Design Implement. (NSDI), Feb. 2020, pp. 797–815.
ing them difficult to apply to VCN anomaly detection. In [3] B. I. Santoso, M. R. S. Idrus, and I. P. Gunawan, “Designing network
contrast, GTGmVAE is unsupervised and has strong temporal intrusion and detection system using signature-based method for promodelling capability and adaptability obtained via global tem- tecting OpenStack private cloud,” in Proc. 6th Int. Annu. Eng. Seminar
 (InAES), Aug. 2016, pp. 61–66.
poral dependency modelling and Gaussian mixture distributed [4] C. Mazzariello, R. Bifulco, and R. Canonico, “Integrating a network
latent space, which can cope with C2 and C3. IDS into an open source cloud computing environment,” in Proc. 6th
 Recently, unsupervised time-series anomaly detection mod- Int. Conf. Inf. Assurance Secur., Aug. 2010, pp. 265–270.
els have been widely studied, which have the temporal [5] W. Wang, X. Du, D. Shan, R. Qin, and N. Wang, “Cloud intrusion detection method based on stacked contractive auto-encoder and
modeling capability for the time-series data to achieve support vector machine,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 10, no. 3,
good detection performance. We have introduced recent pp. 1634–1646, Jul. 2022.
MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS 4337

[6] Cisco. (2016). Cisco Global Cloud Index: Forecast and Methodology. [32] D. Firestone, “VFP: A virtual switch platform for host sdn in the public
 [Online]. Available: https://virtualization.network/Resources/ cloud,” in Proc. 14th USENIX Symp. Networked Syst. Design Implement.
 Whitepapers/0b75cf2e-0c53-4891-918e-b542a5d364c5 white-paper- (NSDI), Mar. 2017, pp. 315–328.
 c11-738085.pdf [33] Linux Found. Open Vswitch. Accessed: Feb. 15, 2025. [Online]. Avail-
[7] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An able: http://www.openvswitch.org/
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in [34] M. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should I trust you?’:
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15. Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. Conf. North
[8] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Demonstrations, 2016,
 analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. pp. 1135–1144.
 Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., Jul. 2009, pp. 1–6. [35] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
[9] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Red
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” Hook, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 4768–4777.
 in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[10] Can. Inst. for Cybersecurity. (2022).Cicflowmeter. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.unb.ca/cic/research/applications.html
[11] T. Dargahi, A. Caponi, M. Ambrosin, G. Bianchi, and M. Conti, “A
 survey on the security of stateful SDN data planes,” IEEE Commun. Zixuan Ma received the B.S. degree in computer
 Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1701–1725, 3rd Quart., 2017. science and technology from Nanjing University of
[12] L. Dai et al., “Switching Gaussian mixture variational RNN for anomaly Information Science and Technology in 2019. He is
 detection of diverse CDN websites,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. currently pursuing the dual Ph.D. degree with the
 Commun., May 2022, pp. 300–309. Institute of Information Engineering (IIE), Chinese
[13] Y. Li, W. Chen, B. Chen, D. Wang, L. Tian, and M. Zhou, “Prototype- Academy of Sciences (CAS), and the University of
 oriented unsupervised anomaly detection for multivariate time series,” Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS). His research
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2023, pp. 1–18. interests include cloud network security, intent-based
[14] J. Chung, K. Kastner, L. Dinh, K. Goel, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, networks, software-defined networking, and micro-
 “A recurrent latent variable model for sequential data,” in Proc. Annu. segmentation.
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Jan. 2015, pp. 1–9.
[15] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
 Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[16] L. Dai et al., “SDFVAE: Static and dynamic factorized VAE for
 anomaly detection of multivariate CDN KPIS,” in Proc. Web Conf.,
 2021, pp. 3076–3086. Chen Li received the Ph.D. degree in computer
[17] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer system architecture from the Institute of Information
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. Engineering (IIE), Chinese Academy of Sciences
 VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022. (CAS), in 2023. She is currently an Engineer with
[18] A. Aldribi, I. Traoré, B. Moa, and O. Nwamuo, “Hypervisor-based IIE, CAS. Her current research interests include
 cloud intrusion detection through online multivariate statistical change cloud data center security.
 tracking,” Comput. Secur., vol. 88, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 101646.
[19] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[20] N. Dilokthanakul et al., “Deep unsupervised clustering with Gaussian
 mixture variational autoencoders,” 2016, arXiv:1611.02648.
[21] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–20.
[22] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual Kun Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly security from the Institute of Information Engineerdetection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery ing (IIE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
 Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045. in 2024. She is currently a Senior Engineer with
[23] Can. Inst. for Cybersecurity. (2018).CSE-CIC-IDS2018 on AWS. IIE, CAS. Her research interests include operating
 [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2018.html system and virtualization security.
[24] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in
 Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2013, pp. 1–14.
[25] X. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Lin, X. Wang, and J. H. Chen, “Automatic policy
 generation for inter-service access control of microservices,” in Proc.
 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., Jan. 2021, pp. 3971–3988.
[26] Weaveworks.Sock Shop: A Microservice Demo Application. Accessed:
 Mar. 1, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/microservicesdemo/microservices-demo
[27] Y. Su et al., “Detecting outlier machine instances through Gaussian
 mixture variational autoencoder with one dimensional CNN,” IEEE
 Trans. Comput., vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 892–905, Apr. 2022.
[28] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, Bibo Tu received the Ph.D. degree in computer
 pp. 1–15. system architecture from the Institute of Computing
[29] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparametrization with Technology (ICT), Chinese Academy of Sciences
 gumble-softmax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017, pp. 1–13. (CAS), in 2009. He is currently a Researcher with
[30] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detec- IIE, CAS, and a Professor with the School of Cyber
 tion in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sci-
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075. ences (UCAS). His current research interests include
[31] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto- cloud data center security, trusted computing, and
 encoder for seasonal KPIs in Web applications,” in Proc. World Wide software defined security.
 Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.