IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025 14615

 Tracking Vehicles in Cooperative Intelligent
 Transportation Systems: Attacks, Defense
 Solutions, and Future Directions
 Fadlallah Chbib , Sherali Zeadally , Senior Member, IEEE, Ahmad Fadlallah ,
 Rida Khatoun, and Ali El Attar, Member, IEEE

 Abstract— The Cooperative Intelligent Transportation System
(C-ITS) is vital in enhancing road safety, improving traffic efficiency, and increasing user comfort for pedestrians and drivers.
However, as vehicle communications evolve, security threats
that aim to undermine critical security services, such as data
confidentiality, integrity, and privacy, have become crucial issues
that must be addressed. Privacy, the freedom from interference
or intrusion, is also considered one of the most significant
challenges in computer networks and connected vehicles. Privacy
in C-ITS can be protected by preventing both the collection
of personal information and the tracking of vehicles by malicious users. Tracking is often achieved through the periodic
transmission of Cooperative Awareness Messages (CAMs), which
contain spatio-temporal information such as position and speed.
We investigate key tracking-related critical issues in intelligent
connected vehicles. We highlight current security challenges and
attacks that lead to the unauthorized tracking of connected cars.
We discuss various defense solutions proposed in the literature
to address these challenges. We classify these solutions into
two groups: general (addressing eavesdropping, Sybil, etc.) and
pseudonym change (addressing correlation, swap, silent periods,
and mix-zones). Finally, we explore robust future strategies to
prevent tracking attacks on the C-ITS. Fig. 1. C-ITS communication types.

 Index Terms— Cooperative intelligent transportation systems
(C-ITS), vehicle communication, privacy, tracking.
 (e.g., Road Side Units (RSU), On-Board Units (OBU),
 I. I NTRODUCTION and hand-held devices) of the ITS ecosystem which have

I NTELLIGENT Transportation Systems (ITS) have witnessed significant advances in enhancing the safety and
comfort of drivers and pedestrians over the last decade.
 resulted in C-ITS. This cooperation involves direct Device-to-
 Device (D2D) communication between all these components,
 namely, Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle-to-Infrastructure
These advances are partly due to the increased cooperation (V2I), Vehicle-to-Pedestrian (V2P) and Vehicle-to-Network
between the devices embedded in the various components (V2N) (Fig. 1) [1]. The communication between a vehicle
 and the other elements of the C-ITS ecosystem is called V2X
 Received 26 October 2024; revised 18 April 2025 and 4 June 2025;
accepted 6 June 2025. Date of publication 18 July 2025; date of current (Vehicle-to-Everything). The two core technologies behind
version 21 October 2025. The Associate Editor for this article was A. Petrillo. V2X direct communications are dedicated Short-Range Com-
(Corresponding author: Sherali Zeadally.) munications (DSRC) and cellular networks (C-V2X) [2], [3].
 Fadlallah Chbib and Rida Khatoun are with the Département Informatique et
Réseaux (INFRES), Polytechnic Institute of Paris, Télécom Paris, 91300 Paris, From a market perspective, the global market for connected
France (e-mail: fadlallah.chbib@telecom-paris.fr; Rida.khatoun@ cars is expected to reach 361 billion dollars by 2030 [4]. Autotelecom-paris.fr). mobile manufacturers such as BMW, Toyota, and others spend
 Sherali Zeadally is with the College of Communication and Information,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506 USA, and also with the billions of dollars on software development, connected car
Vice presidency for Scientific Research and Innovation, Imam Abdulrah- technology, and establishing technology centers (for example,
man Bin Faisal University (IAU), Dammam 31441, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: the BMW Group Future Mobility Center). Future connected
szeadally@uky.edu).
 Ahmad Fadlallah is with the Computer Science Department, University cars will have onboard computers that will allow them to
of Sciences and Arts in Lebanon (USAL), Beirut 1002, Lebanon (e-mail: communicate with various entities. This communication will
a.fadlallah@usal.edu.lb). enable multiple functions, such as emergency and information
 Ali El Attar is with the Faculty of Computer Studies, Arab Open University
(AOU), Beirut 2058, Lebanon (e-mail: aattar@aou.edu.lb). assistance, remote diagnostics, traffic updates, and vehicle-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3581355 to-vehicle communication. In addition, connected cars will
 1558-0016 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
14616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

allow the creation of intelligent transport systems that can samples with different pseudonyms. If the challenges above
improve traffic flow and reduce road congestion. Mercedes- are not addressed, an adversary can track vehicles in the
Benz is an example of a car manufacturer offering its users long term. If the adversary can cover a vast area and collect
a range of online services. These services provide drivers a significant number of location samples, the adversary can
with information and assistance, including traffic updates, develop detailed location profiles. Such a scenario is plausible
emergency assistance, and other features [5]. The highly as [10] shows and presents a scenario wherein an adversary
dynamic connections and the time sensitivity that character- collects messages, namely pseudonymous location samples in
ize these communications make them attractive targets for a particular area. The adversary could link data under several
attackers. For this reason, companies are working to improve pseudonyms for the specific vehicle. Thus, an attacker can
security measures to guarantee better authentication, integrity, seriously threaten the privacy of the vehicular network user’s
and privacy. Furthermore, as vehicles collect more data and location. Hence, vehicle tracking cannot be prevented even
become more connected, customers’ concerns about trusting when pseudonyms are changed [11]. To minimize continuvehicle stakeholders with their personal information have ous tracking, some researchers recommended using position
increased [6]. This trust is critical for stakeholders. Many privacy techniques such as random silent periods [12] and
important companies (e.g., ESCRYPT in Germany) provide Mix-Zones [13], [14].
robust automotive security systems. However, additional levels We summarize the contributions of this paper as follows:
of trust must be achieved to establish robust privacy and • We present a comprehensive survey of vehicle tracking
security rules for customer personal information and track- in cooperative intelligent transportation systems.
ing. Information privacy, often understood as controlling how • We highlight the main tracking issues and describe curpersonal data is collected, used, and shared [7], is crucial in rent tracking attacks and their challenges. To counter
this context. Personal information includes, but is not limited these attacks and address the issues highlighted, the paper
to, a driver’s name, address, email address, location, or any presents a complete analysis and classification of the
other data that can be linked back to an individual (e.g., credit available defense mechanisms proposed in the literature.
card numbers, telephone numbers, biometric data). Privacy is • Finally, we provide some recommendations and future
a critical concern which must be protected in the environ- perspectives for privacy-preserving schemes in C-ITS.
ment of connected vehicles. Protecting tracking information We organize the rest of the paper as follows. Section II
is another challenge to preserve consumers’ privacy. In V2V presents the related works that have been thoroughly studied
communications, vehicles use different techniques to share and published in the literature. Section III provides some
information and build a cooperative environment between background information on C-ITS with a focus on security
RSUs and vehicles. This information can be used to track requirements. Section IV describes the security tracking
users. For example, using identification keys, the Tire Pressure attacks faced by connected cars. Section V presents defense
Monitoring System (TPMS) recognizes the car’s tires. Each solutions to prevent tracking attacks. Finally, section VII
tire is connected to an Electronic Control Unit (ECU) inside makes some concluding remarks. Additionally, Table I
the intravehicle network; its ID and pressure are sent to the presents a list of acronyms used in this paper.
corresponding ECU every 6 seconds. Tires are kept in cars
for extended periods, so TPMS messages are traceable and II. R ELATED W ORKS
used to locate the car. In [7], the authors demonstrated that a The privacy of connected cars has been widely studied in
vehicle can be traced using the IDs of its two tires. Vehicles various surveys and publications [15], [16], [17], [18]. These
on the road can be recognized only with prior knowledge of studies cover various aspects of security such as challenges,
their tire IDs by collecting TPMS status messages. taxonomies of attacks, and defense mechanisms. Some surveys
 Most security solutions in C-ITS applications rely on are solely concerned with privacy [8], [19], [20], [21], while
vehicles periodically transmitting unencrypted Cooperative others are concerned with both security and privacy [18],
Awareness Messages (CAMs). CAMs frequently save times- [22], [23]. There is no survey known to date that focuses
tamps, IDentity (ID), location, and speed. The use of ID raises specifically on vehicle tracking, which is the main contribution
the possibility that external eavesdroppers might trace cars of this work. In this paper, we identify critical trackingby joining consecutive messages with the same ID, revealing related issues, discuss current tracking attacks and challenges,
the vehicle’s whole travel path. To prevent this, researchers and present a comprehensive analysis and classification of
proposed providing cars with pseudonyms (instead of real available defense mechanisms. Table II covers current surveys
identifiers). Vehicles, however, could still be tracked due to on connected car security issues and their main contributions.
the spatio-temporal information. One solution to overcome
this issue is to use many pseudonyms for each car (each III. C OOPERATIVE I NTELLIGENT T RANSPORTATION
of which is only used for a limited and/or context-specific S YSTEMS - BACKGROUND
period of time) and switch between them regularly [8], [9]. This section presents an overview of C-ITS from different
This does not entirely protect the privacy of tracking infor- perspectives: standardization, components, and applications.
mation. Many challenges must still be addressed to protect
information, such as the widespread transmission of messages A. C-ITS General Overview
(10 messages/sec for traffic safety) containing precise position 1) C-ITS Communication Patterns: The communication
and time data and the linkability of pseudonymous location technologies utilized in C-ITS enable connections between
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14617

 TABLE I • Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I): V2I communication facil-
 L IST OF ACRONYMS itates the wireless data exchange between vehicles and
 roadside infrastructure, such as traffic signals, road sensors, and digital signage. The infrastructure gathers
 information on traffic conditions, road hazards, and environmental factors, while the V2I system transmits this
 data to vehicles in real time. This seamless communication improves traffic efficiency, improves safety, and
 helps autonomous driving. V2I relies on technologies
 like Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC),
 cellular networks (e.g., 5G), and Wi-Fi to enable fast and
 reliable data transmission [28].
 • Vehicle-to-Pedestrians (V2P): V2P communication refers
 to direct connections between a vehicle and one or more
 nearby pedestrians. This type of communication can also
 be extended to other potentially dangerous road users,
 such as cyclists. V2P communication, which can be
 accomplished directly or via a network infrastructure,
 allows vehicles and pedestrians to receive warnings of
 each other’s presence. Vehicles can be warned of potentially hazardous road users, such as pedestrians, and
 pedestrians can be warned of approaching vehicles [29].
 • Vehicle-to-Network (V2N): V2N communication (also
 referred to as Vehicle-to-Cloud (V2C)) can connect
 vehicles to cloud-based services and data centers,
 allowing for a wide range of applications. This includes
 over-the-air software updates for vehicle systems, realtime traffic management, remote diagnostics, and fleet
 management [30].
 2) C-ITS Components: C-ITS incorporates two critical
 components: the OBU and RSU.
 • OBU: An OBU is a device installed in every vehicle to
 enable communication with other vehicles and (RSUs).
 It comprises several components: sensors, storage, and
 a network device. The sensors (e.g., Global Positioning Sensor (GPS)) gather information transmitted to the
 OBU. The OBU processes and collects the data contained
 in messages, which it then wirelessly transmits to neighboring vehicles and RSUs [15], [31].
 • RSU: An RSU is a stationary device typically positioned
 along roads or in specific locations, such as intersections or parking lots [32]. It is equipped with a DSRC
 network device and the ability to communicate with
 the infrastructure network. The RSU has several key
 functions, including expanding the communication range
various elements, including vehicles, infrastructures, pedestri- of VANETs by transmitting messages to other OBUs
ans, and cloud computing platforms. These C-ITS communi- and RSUs, executing safety applications such as traffic
cations are responsible for establishing connections between reports or accident warnings, and connecting OBUs to
vehicles and other entities, such as infrastructure, pedestrians, the Internet.
other vehicles, and networks [15], [25], [26], [27]. 3) C-ITS Applications: Initially, implementing connected
 • Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V): V2V communication allows vehicles aimed to improve road safety and efficiency by reducvehicles with V2V technology to exchange information ing the probability of accidents. These networks serve various
 about other vehicles’ speeds and locations over a range functions today and can be classified into three major catecomparable to Wi-Fi. This information alerts drivers to gories: safety, traffic management, and comfort, as Figure 2
 potential hazards, reducing accidents and traffic conges- shows. Next, we present a brief overview of each type of
 tion. Within a 300-meter range, V2V communication application with relevant examples.
 allows vehicles to detect hazardous traffic conditions, • Safety applications: The goal of these applications is to
 terrain concerns, and weather-related threats. decrease the occurrence of accidents and improve the
14618 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE II
 OVERVIEW OF THE L ATEST S URVEY A RTICLES ON C ONNECTED C AR S ECURITY

 management. These applications aim to optimize traffic
 flow and routes, resulting in shorter travel times, and
 lower fuel consumption and emissions [33]. Furthermore,
 these services can help to reduce the number of accidents
 caused by congested traffic. The benefits of these
 applications extend beyond road safety, making them a
 valuable tool for improving transportation efficiency.
 • Comfort service applications: The primary objective of
 these applications is to provide comfort and convenience
 to drivers and passengers. These applications include
 access to the Internet, multimedia services, messaging,
Fig. 2. C-ITS applications. games, and radio channels. This can be achieved through
 V2I communications, allowing full business services to be
 safety of drivers and passengers. This is achieved by accessible from within vehicles [27], [34]. Additionally,
 allowing each vehicle to instantly provide a warning when V2V communications can facilitate file sharing and video
 a dangerous event is detected, using techniques such as streaming, making extended trips more enjoyable [35].
 seat vibrations, tones, visual displays, or a combination
 of these indicators, as Fig. 2 shows. In an accident,
 the affected vehicle can continuously transmit critical B. Communication Model and Standards
 situation information to nearby cars. The cooperation of vehicles from different manufacturers
 • Traffic management applications: C-ITS services include requires standardizing inter-vehicle and intra-vehicle commuapplications other than road safety, such as traffic nications. Standardization in C-ITS, as in any other domain,
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14619

Fig. 3. Data created and stored in cars.

ensures interoperability, supports the corresponding regulations and legislation, and, from a business point of view,
expands the related markets [36]. The standardization bodies in Fig. 4. CAM format.
Europe, namely, the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI), and in the US, the Society of Automotive
Engineers (SAE), in conjunction with the Institute of Electri- for road safety and efficiency, namely the CAMs [42] and
cal and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) have published several Decentralized Environmental Notification Messages (DENMs)
standards covering different aspects of C-ITS which include [43]. DENMs provide early warnings about potentially critical
architecture, messaging, management, access technologies, road and traffic events designed to enhance travel safety [44].
networking, security, and so on [2] and [37]. Each vehicle transmits CAMs periodically (1-10 times per
 From a global perspective, the most widely known V2X- second). These CAMs provide kinematic data (such as vehicle
related standardization organizations are from the US (e.g., length and height) and movement information (e.g., position
IEEE and SAE) and EU (ETSI Cooperative-ITS). From a and speed). The type of information CAMs carry and their
technology perspective, the standards that are commonly used frequency makes them vital for tracking-related aspects. The
are 802.11-based standards (e.g., IEEE 802.11p [38], [39]) and CAM includes a header and a body (Fig. 4) [45]. The
cellular-based standards (e.g., Cellular-V2X [3], [40]). The header contains message-specific information such as message
IEEE 802.11p standard specifically defines the physical and identifier and generation time. The body includes information
data link layers for C-ITS (Cooperative Intelligent Transport about the ITS station that sent the message:
Systems) nodes, facilitating communication between vehicles 1) Station ID: identifies the sending ITS station.
and infrastructure. Data can be grouped as follows: location 2) Station characteristics: indicates the kind of ITS station
data, sensor data, biometric data, and behavioral data (Fig. 3). (mobile, private, and so on).
 • Location data: This data includes longitude, latitude, 3) Reference position: represents the longitude, latitude,
 GPS signal, and GPS time generated by GPS devices and direction of the reference position (e.g., south,
 embedded in vehicles or by location-based services on north).
 mobile phones. While data from GPS devices are stored The primary use of CAM, as its name indicates, is for coopin the Electronic Control Unit (ECU), data from mobile erative awareness, i.e., to keep vehicles aware of the presence
 phones is generally stored locally on the phone or in cloud and conditions of other traffic lanes, thus preventing potential
 services. This data gives a complete and detailed record of accidents [42]. CAMs must be processed by each receiving
 a driver’s movements over time, raising privacy concerns. vehicle, which makes it possible to track the movement and the
 • Sensor data: Fuel flow, intake air temperature, C O2 state of the CAM senders. Many applications rely on vehicle
 emission, and vehicle Revolutions Per Minute (RPM) are trajectories of successive CAMs to detect traffic patterns.
 examples of this type of data [41]. ECU collects data
 from vehicle sensors and stores it.
 • Biometric data: This is data about the driver’s biological
 C. Security in Vehicular Networks
 features (e.g. face, fingerprint, signature). Biometric iden- The security of the different exchanges in C-ITS has been
 tification systems collect and store data from in-vehicle addressed by various standardization organizations [46], [47],
 sensors. [48], [49]. The security services that must be ensured in
 • Behavior data: This data includes the driver’s attention, C-ITS for the comfort and safety of passengers and drivers
 speed, steering, and braking behaviors along with other include [20], [50], [51]:
 diagnostic data used to provide new safety features. It is 1) Authentication: is recognized as the primary line
 recorded by the in-car data recorder or stored in the of defense against a variety of C-ITS threats [50].
 manufacturer’s servers. Authentication confirms the identity of communication
 The various types of information are exchanged through participants and protects sensitive information by avoiddifferent “standardized” messages (depending on the geo- ing any unauthorized access [20]. Authentication is a
graphic region we have mentioned previously). In particular, critical feature that must be carefully examined during
ETSI defines different kinds of application-level messages the design and implementation stages. Key management
14620 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 and distribution must be accurate and efficient to satisfy messages using asymmetric techniques and digital signature
 authentication requirements. algorithms. Recent advances in lightweight cryptography assist
 2) Integrity: guarantees that the original message is in meeting the real-time constraints of C-ITS. Digital certifinot altered while being transmitted, preventing the cates are used, which usually need the deployment of a Public
 unauthorized modification, creation, or deletion of Key Infrastructure (PKI)1 to manage the different credentials
 data [52]. It is critical in vehicular networks to (i.e., certificates) of the C-ITS entities [63].
 verify that the message is not altered throughout its The traditional PKI does not address privacy because a
 transmission, whether accidentally by degradation digital certificate contains the identity of its owner in general,
 factors like fading and noise or intentionally by which is not needed to ensure the trustworthiness of a message
 an attacker. Error detection/correction codes and/or in V2X communications. It is sufficient to ensure that a “valid”
 cryptographic primitives must be introduced to achieve participant has transmitted a message to trust it. A privacythis goal. Integrity should also be ensured at the preserving certificate (used for digital signature) should not
 system level, where each device/component must include any information that can be used as a link to the
 operate as intended. System integrity breaches primarily identity of a particular vehicle or driver.
 result from malware injection at various entry points,
 including V2X communication interfaces, in-vehicle
 networks (e.g., CAN bus), infotainment systems, and D. Privacy in Vehicular Networks
 compromised diagnostic tools. As we previously, privacy is a fundamental security
 3) Availability: guarantees that such networks and applica- requirement in vehicular networks; any solution, whether
 tions continue functioning in the presence of malicious security-oriented or not, must be privacy-preserving by design.
 conditions [53]. Improving the ability to obtain data The privacy requirements in vehicular communication systems
 by/from vehicles is critical in a highly dynamic C-ITS include [20], [64]:
 environment; the network should be responsive in real- 1) Minimum disclosure: Minimize the amount of user infortime. Under typical operating conditions, it is difficult mation disclosed for basic functionality in vehicular
 to achieve continuous availability. When a temporary communications.
 outage occurs through one part of the network, it is 2) Anonymity: The message’s origin (i.e., the sender) must
 critical that connectivity activities continue and that be kept anonymous among possible senders, also known
 the vehicles remain unaware of any problems. Services as the message’s anonymity group. However, anonymity
 must be provided at all times [54]. is conditional on accountability (i.e., non-repudiation),
 4) Data confidentiality: verifies that no unauthorized so trusted authorities should always validate identity
 entities receive the information. Privacy is often resolution.
 considered a sub-category of confidentiality, but given 3) Unlinkability: It should not be possible to link the
 its importance in vehicular networks, a separation is relations between items of interest, such as messages,
 made between data confidentiality and privacy [55]. actions, and/or subjects. Any information in vehicular
 In other words, data confidentiality can be ensured networks becomes privacy-relevant when connected to
 through traditional encryption algorithms, while privacy an identifiable person. Linkability can be direct or tranrequires more complex schemes. sitive (chain of linkable elements).
 5) Privacy: Privacy generally includes control over 4) Distributed resolution authority: In a distributed
 one’s information and deciding who can access or resolution system, the authorities work collaboratively
 process one’s data for whatever purpose [56]. In to establish the link between the anonymous credential
 C-ITS, privacy refers to the ability to protect all the and the individual’s identity. The process typically
 personal information related to the driver, vehicle, and involves cryptographic techniques, such as zeropassengers, including their identity, location, and so on. knowledge proofs or secure multi-party computation,
 We discuss privacy aspects further in section III-D. to ensure privacy and prevent unauthorized access to
 6) Non-repudiation: A vehicle that sent a message should sensitive information.
 not be able to deny that it sent that message. Such a 5) Perfect forward secrecy: Generates new keys for each
 requirement is essential when an exchange can have session so that if one session key is compromised, the
 financial implications (e.g., requesting a paid service). confidentiality of other sessions is not affected [65].
Ensuring the security requirements above must address the In C-ITS, when resolving the credential of an identity,
inherent characteristics of vehicular networks. Designing perfect forward secrecy is guaranteed not to expose any
security solutions for such a constrained context remains information that would compromise the unlinkability of
a significant challenge. Traditional security algorithms and additional credentials of the same user.
protocols must be carefully chosen and adapted. Clean-slate The privacy aspects (and consequently the related issues) in
approaches might sometimes be needed when existing solu- C-ITS can be classified into three categories [66]:
tions fail to meet the requirements. The reliability of the
messages exchanged in V2X communications is critical, espe- 1 Although some PKI-less architectures [57], [58], [59], [60], [61], [62] have
cially when dealing with safety applications. This can be been proposed in the literature but standard security architectures are mostly
achieved by ensuring the integrity and authenticity of the PKI-based [48].
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14621

 • Identity privacy: deals with the privacy of the participant’s signatures to create on-the-fly pseudonym keys, allowing users
 real-world identity. Participants can be drivers, passen- to stay anonymous on the network. In this technique, a user
 gers, pedestrians, and so on. joins a group and is provided with the group’s public key,
 • Behavioral privacy: refers to the privacy of data that which is used to authenticate their communication quickly.
 describes participants’ characteristics (individually or as The developers minimized the storage required to develop this
 a group) and actions within the C-ITS, thus protecting technique using group public keys. The usage of group keys,
 them from being profiled. on the other hand, may result in major security breaches.
 • (Geo) Location privacy: refers to the privacy of location If opponents obtained access to the group keys, they might
 and space. A participant’s right is to move within the authenticate their messages.
 C-ITS boundaries without worrying about exposing their 2) Pseudonym Change Mechanisms: Using a single
 location information. Tracking a user mainly depends on pseudonym is not enough to protect the vehicle/driver’s prithe privacy of the location information; thus, this category vacy. When a vehicle uses one pseudonym certificate during
 will be the focus for the rest of this paper. its lifetime, an adversary who monitors the certificate at
Privacy in C-ITS is achieved through the use of pseudonym various locations can track its location by linking the different
certificates.2 Pseudonyms are public-key certificates not con- messages. In other words, pseudonyms can protect identity
taining identifying information about a vehicle or user identity. privacy but cannot guarantee location privacy.
They pseudonymize the vehicle/user to prevent location and A key factor in ensuring location privacy is to provide
identity tracking [69]. a vehicle with a batch of pseudonyms and to change the
 1) Pseudonym Generation Mechanisms: Several research pseudonym in use frequently. Vehicles should be able to
works [58], [68] have proposed techniques to generate download a new pseudonyms’ set prior to the exhaustion
pseudonyms. These mechanisms can be either centralized or of the current set. The authors of [48] provide more details
distributed. about the C-ITS security architecture. Most privacy-preserving
 The authors of [68] proposed a pseudorandom approach schemes adopt this approach but differ in the pseudonym
where each user is assigned a pseudorandom ID that change strategy.
remains anonymous from all other vehicles. A vehicle creates In [70], the authors proposed a detailed taxonomy of the
pseudonyms with the help of an RSU in its neighborhood so different strategies proposed in the literature. Other classificathat the RSU does not gain any information about the true tions also exist [69]. Next, we present a simple classification
identity of the node. The authors also proposed a revocation that presents an overview of well-known pseudonym change
scheme that allows trusted authorities to successfully reveal the strategies, which we will address later from an attack and
identity of a malicious node and revoke it using revocation lists defense perspective.
in case of any dispute. The pseudorandom keys are generated a) Parameter-based change: vehicles can change the
using Pseudonymous Authentication with Conditional Privacy pseudonyms based on certain parameters (such as time, num-
(PACP), a new mechanism proposed by the authors. When ber of messages, and traveled distance). A parameter can have
a user registers a vehicle, the user is issued a ticket with a a fixed value or a random value (fixed value with a certain
unique ID used to authenticate the vehicle and generate a random interval around it). Fig. 5 illustrates an example where
pseudorandom key. While this system is useful, it has a large a pseudonym is changed based on the number of messages
overhead and is vulnerable to identity theft because malicious signed using that pseudonym. Each vehicle checks if the
nodes can copy the ticket obtained from the automobile messages signed with the current pseudonym are above the
department. threshold. If so, the pseudonym and station ID are changed,
 In [58], the authors proposed a Secure and Authenticated and messages are sent with the new pseudonym.
Key Management Protocol (SAKMP). SAKMP is a manage- b) Context-based change: In a context-based change
ment technology that distributes public keys based on the strategy, pseudonyms are altered based on specific conditions,
user’s geographic position. The key is generated using a which can be either vehicle-centric or external to the vehicle.
method that ensures each key is distinct and is based on the Vehicle-centric conditions refer to factors related to the vehicle
position and user’s ID. GPS is used to get the position of itself, such as its speed exceeding a certain limit, dropping
the users. For the method to create unique keys, a 3D location below a particular threshold, or changing direction. On the
should be built. The secret is to use the x, y, and z coordinates. other hand, external conditions involve factors (e.g., the den-
This technique offers a secure connection between the RSU sity of cars in the vehicle’s vicinity, the presence of roadside
and the OBU and it depends on the position and a complex units (RSUs), and variations in network signal strength)
key generation function. Thus, it would be difficult to use in outside the vehicle.
V2V communications. Like all other symmetric encryption- c) Silent period: The authors of [71] proposed the conbased systems, a large number of keys introduces a significant cept of the silent period which is the time between using old
overhead, particularly for V2V communications. To ensure and new pseudonyms, where a station is not permitted to reveal
secure communication in C-ITS, the authors of [62] proposed either the old or new pseudonym. A silent period makes it
a pseudonym-based authentication technique. They used group difficult to determine the time and/or location of a pseudonym
 change. Since the silence interval affects the temporal con-
 2 Very few research articles have suggested alternatives to pseudonyms [10], nection between two independently received pseudonyms and
[67], [68]. distorts the place and time where a pseudonym changed,
14622 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 Fig. 7. Mix Zone.

 changed its address to A’ or B’ because car 1 can reach both
 positions E P1 and E P2 from D P1 due to the silence period
 introduced during the traveling time.
 d) Mix zones: the authors of [72] introduced the concept
Fig. 5. Counting-based pseudonym change mechanism. of mix-zone. A mix zone is a geographically specified area
 in which no location-aware applications are running, i.e.,
 wherein vehicles do not exchange any location-aware message
 which makes vehicle movements untraceable in this zone.
 All the vehicles in this area are “mixed” so an attacker
 cannot determine when the vehicle he/she is tracking left the
 area. Fig 7 illustrates that the mix-zone is typically placed at
 intersections or social locations with high traffic and covers
 multiple entrances and exits. In practice, when approaching
 a mix-zone, cars would stop transmitting CAMs and keep
 the radio silent within it. Cars will restart the transmission
 of CAM messages after exiting the mix zone. Multiple mixzones approaches [73], [74], [75], [76], [77], [78] have been
Fig. 6. Silent period pseudonym change. proposed in the literature and we discuss them in section V.
 e) Pseudonyms swap: This mechanism swaps certificates
 between two cars traveling nearby. When a pseudonym certifiit becomes difficult to associate two independently received cate is used by a car, this certificate is swapped with another
pseudonyms with the same station. car’s certificate. A tracker is confused because the former car
 In Fig. 6, car 1 passes from the top to the bottom. In the will not be the owner of the previous pseudonym certificate.
meantime, car 2 moves from the bottom right corner to This swap must be recorded on the PKI. This mechanism
the top left. Both cars update their addresses before going ensures privacy and introduces another pseudonym certificatesilent. The rectangle depicts the silent time. Car 1 reaches change method. It also reduces the pseudonym certificate costs
the silent period’s border with Disappearing Time (DT1 ) and for drivers. Fig 8 shows that, if the time is greater than the
Disappearing Position (D P1 ), whereas car 2 at DT2 and D P2 . minimum N and the car has a new neighbor, it changes the
Here, we expect that the two cars will reach the border at pseudonym and station ID and sends the CAM.
the same time (DT1 = DT2 ). Both nodes stop transmitting
packets during the period of silence. After a silent period,
 IV. T RACKING ATTACKS
cars (1,2) resume frame transmission. The tracking system
monitors a novel trace with address A’ Emerging Time (E T1 ) With a market expected to be worth $68.0 billion by
and Emerging Position (E P1 ), as well as another novel trace 2026, [79], intelligent transportation systems are attracting the
with address B’ Emerging Position (E P2 ) and Emerging Time attackers’ attention (regardless of their motives). The research
(E T2 ). The tracking technique is aware that car 1’s address literature [71], [80], [81] identified many potential attacks that,
was modified during the silent period. Therefore, because while currently theoretical, still pose a risk. However, realthe tracking system identifies two new addresses A’ and B’ world attacks have occurred in recent years, as noted in [82].
generated after the silent period, it cannot verify if car 1 This section focuses on a specific type of ITS attack that
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14623

 identities, an attacker can trick other vehicles into believing
 there is traffic congestion, causing them to reroute to track
 them [85], [86].
 3) Malware Attacks: Vehicles in C-ITS are often equipped
 with infotainment systems that usually come with pre-installed
 applications but are open for installing third-party applications
 on handheld devices (e.g., tablets and smartphones). This
 makes it possible to install malicious software (i.e., malware), which, depending on their type and payload, can pose
 significant security threats. Moreover, by exploiting certain
 vulnerabilities in the infotainment system, an attacker can gain
 access to the Controller Area Network (CAN) bus, which
 raises safety concerns for drivers and passengers [87]. Such
 attacks have been demonstrated in production vehicles as
 in [88]. As in traditional computer networks, some malware
 can propagate to other “vulnerable” vehicles connected to
 the infected one. In a tracking attack, malware (e.g., adware,
 spyware) can be used to steal location information, thereby
 allowing the attacker to track the victim’s vehicle [54].
 4) Correlation Attacks: A correlation attack is a type of
 general attack against anonymity services that can be applied
Fig. 8. Pseudonym swap technique. to vehicular networks [89]. This attack involves eavesdropping
 to determine the location of a station by measuring the
 Radio Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) of frames received
targets the privacy of ITS users’ positions: tracking attacks. from the station. Frequent MAC address broadcasts give
Such attacks target the vehicle’s security and entail tracking sufficient temporal and spatial tracking precision [80]. The
information at different times (generation, processing, trans- station uses a periodic pseudonym update strategy similar to
mission) [83]. We can broadly categorize attacks that target that defined in the Bluetooth anonymity mode [71]. Bluetracking into general attacks and attacks against pseudonym tooth anonymity mode helps prevent position tracking by
change mechanisms (e.g., silent periods, mix-zones). frequently changing the active device address. However, given
 sufficient temporal and spatial accuracy, an attacker could
 correlate two pseudonyms broadcasted at different times by
A. General Tracking Attacks the same vehicle. As the time between stations changing their
 General tracking attacks are those that, in addition to target- pseudonyms may be short, the temporal correlation could be
ing the privacy of the location data, also allow an attacker to used. If the station continues in the same direction and at
track vehicles. The most widely known attacks in this category the same speed as it did previously, spatial correlation can be
are: used. Correlation attacks get simpler as the distance between
 1) Eavesdropping Attacks: Eavesdropping, in general, aims vehicles increases, the speed of a vehicle decreases, and the
to steal confidential data. In the context of tracking, it involves precision of determining its location increases. For instance,
monitoring the wireless network, analyzing the packets or the authors of [90] proposed a new MAC layer linking attack
messages that are transmitted, and examining their contents to that can correlate a vehicle’s old and new pseudonyms by
capture the position data and thus be able to track the vehicle’s studying its transmission properties.
movements [67]. For example, the authors of [11] proposed
an anonymous periodic messaging vehicle tracking system in
which the attacker model eavesdrops on all network messages. B. Attacks Against Parameter-Based Change Mechanisms
While it may be challenging for an outside attacker to cover In [10], the authors considered the case of a time-based
the entire network, this model still applies to cases where the pseudonym change where vehicles change their pseudonyms
attacker has compromised the deployed RSUs. every 10 seconds. They proposed a model where an
 2) Sybil Attacks: They are commonly used in peer-to- attacker can collect inter-vehicle communication messages,
peer networks wherein the attacker has greater control over notably pseudonymous position data. They investigated
the network due to many “fake” users [84]. In C-ITS, in a how effectively an attacker can create location profiles and
Sybil attack, a vehicle pretends to have multiple identities; demonstrated that he/she can monitor vehicles and their
it uses these different identities while sending messages to drivers with near-perfect precision.
other vehicles to change the routing path. The receiving In [11], the authors proposed a different tracking techvehicles cannot verify if the received messages are from nique called Nearest Neighbor Probabilistic Data Association
one vehicle or multiple vehicles [82]. From a tracking per- (NNPDA). Even with dense networks and numerous CAMs,
spective, a Sybil attack could be used to direct traffic in a it is possible to achieve real-time tracking. The tracking
specific direction. By sending multiple messages with different precision achieved raises concerns about location privacy
14624 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

approaches and pseudonyms change regulations, which have These vehicles are excluded by setting a maximum deviation
been extensively researched in the literature [68], [70]. It is for the direction vector of the vehicles in the form of an angle.
necessary to secure and protect not only pseudonyms or gen- The simulation results for different ITS city scenarios (Berlin,
uine identities but also vehicle data transmitted via beacons. New York, and Puebla) showed a higher percentage of 57.87%
 The authors of [91] examined a pseudonym-changing tech- for the simple attack and 78% for advanced attacks.
nique that was proposed by the European C-ITS platform. 2) Attacks Against Mix Zones: Pseudonym-change schemes
By using this technique, they simulated a realistic urban traffic based on mix-zones are also prone to attacks. The authors
scenario in Luxembourg. In general, it is more difficult to con- of [81] presented two classes of attacks targeting such
nect pseudonyms with basic traffic information in a real-city schemes: simple and advanced.
traffic scenario. However, the connection of pseudonyms is The authors presented a simple attack scenario where an
improved by considering additional static information (such as attacker tracks vehicles across a mix-zone by linking entering
the vehicle’s width and length) from the V2X communication, and exiting vehicles and calculating each entering vehicle’s
which makes it possible to track cars and create mobility exact exit point and exit time. Several parameters should be
profiles. Therefore, the number of cars in the area and, taken into consideration to calculate the time expected for the
in particular, their characteristics, as well as the attacker’s vehicle to exit the mix-zone (Equation (5)):
ability to observe, have a significant impact on the level of 1) The distance traveled is equal to twice the radius R of
location privacy. the mix-zone.
 1) Attacks on Silent Period: Silent periods have been intro- 2) The street speed limit Vspeed is the average speed.
duced to increase location privacy and thus the complexity of 3) The f t factor is used to account for the possibility
tracking attacks by adding ambiguity to identifying the time that the attacker’s overly optimistic estimate of the time
and/or location of a pseudonym modification. Different kinds required to pass through the mix-zone is too restricted
of attacks have been proposed in the literature [71], [81] on due to traffic lights or other vehicles’ access rights
silent-period-based mechanisms. interfering with and slowing vehicles down (Fig 7).
 In [81], the authors presented an attack scenario where the
attacker’s objective is to estimate the travel distance of the 2R
 tex pected = ft (5)
vehicle during the silent period. The expected distance dist is Vspeed
calculated by multiplying the silent period time (tsp ) with the To obtain a more accurate estimate of the target vehicle,
street speed limit Vs as Equation (1) shows. we should consider additional information. Vehicle drivers
 dist = tsp ∗ Vs (1) prefer to travel on larger roads at higher speeds. The likelihood
 of a vehicle downgrading from a larger to a smaller street
The authors used a modifier named f d to consider cars that is lower than in the reverse scenario. Nonetheless, when a
travel slower than anticipated due to heavy traffic. Equation (2) vehicle exits the mix-zone onto a street that is smaller than
determines the car distance traveled. the one it entered, the street size weight W s, which is a value
 ranging from 0 to 1, has a negative impact on subsequent
 dact = tsp ∗ Vs ∗ f d (2)
 calculations Ws ∈ [0, 1]. Another observation is that cars
A Scor e is assigned to each potential car by compar- usually drive straight through intersections rather than turning.
ing the actual distance dact to the expected distance dist To accommodate for this tendency, the attacker incorporated
(Equation (3)): another factor, the road turning-weight Wt ∈ [0, 1]). The
 level of the modifier varies depending on the location of the
 Scor e = |dist − dact| (3) mix zone and the vehicle trajectory. If the vehicle makes a
 turn, it is low; if it continues straight through the intersection,
Each vehicle’s score is computed and the vehicle with the
 it is high. Using these modifiers, a score for each conceivable
lowest score is selected. The data used in this attack (speed,
 vehicle is then generated, as Equation (6) shows:
position) is included in the CAMs sent.
 In [81], the authors presented a more complex attack on Scor e = (1 − Ws )(1 − Wt )|texit − tenter − tex pected | (6)
the silent period. They developed a sophisticated attack to
determine the precise location (x) of a vehicle after a silent Ultimately, the car with the lowest computed score is chosen.
period during which vehicles typically do not change direction In the advanced attack, the entrance and exit points and
frequently. To perform this attack, they employed a vector that their related lanes taken by vehicles are numbered in order
included the vehicle’s direction of travel and the anticipated to create a complex attack, as Fig. 7 shows. A comparison
distance it would cover during the silent period. The effective- is made between a vehicle that enters the mix-zone at lane a
ness of the attack is determined by calculating the difference with position x and another vehicle that exits the mix-zone at
between the estimated position (E x ) and the actual position lane b with position y. An attacker is aware of the typical trip
(l) of the vehicle as represented by Equation (4): time txa,yb from lane a of position x to lane b of position y
 as well as the probability Pxa,yb that a vehicle uses to cross
 Scor e = |E x − l| (4) this route. The Scor e is computed by Equation (7):
The authors also considered the scenario where vehicles are Pxa,yb
 Scor e = (1 − ) × (|texit − tenter − txa,yb |) (7)
near the expected point but traveling in the incorrect direction. 2
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14625

The time interval between a vehicle’s entry at lane a with
position x (at tenter ) and its potential exit at lane b with
position y (texit) is compared with the average time t xa, yb
as we have previously outlined in a basic attack scenario.
The attacker chooses the vehicle with the smallest computed
Scor e.
 Finally, a basic attack aims to determine the expected travel
time based on the radius (R) and street speed (Vspeed ). This
means that if vehicles enter through the same entrance, their
expected travel time will be identical. In contrast, an advanced
attack attempts to identify the effect of distinct paths by using
the average travel time txa . Both attacks face difficulty in
calculating the estimated travel time if the travel duration of
vehicles is excessively scattered or polarized. The simulation
results obtained showed a success rate of up to 40% in simple Fig. 9. BP Neural Network.
attacks and up to 63% in advanced attacks on mix zones for
three different cities (Berlin, New York, and Puebla).
 In [92], the authors demonstrated that the estimated travel
time in the simple and advanced attacks for tracking is
insufficient [81]. As a result, they solved this problem by differentiating the travel time from one vehicle from another by
considering vehicle and traffic conditions following parameters
such as entrance point, exiting point, and entrance lane, as well
as context information to compute the estimated time of the
target vehicle through the mixed zone.
 1) Pen : entrance point
 2) Pex : exit point
 3) L en : entrance lane
 4) L ex : exit lane
 5) Vent : entrance vehicle
 6) Vext : exit vehicle
 7) Nb f : number of vehicles before entrance
 8) Na f : number of vehicles after exit
The authors of [92] proposed a new vehicle tracking technique
based on the Back Propagation Neural Network (BPNN) [93].
Theoretically, under the right conditions of structure and
weights, the BPNN technique can estimate any non-linear
continuous function. The architecture comprises three layers,
the first of which is the input layer which contains various Fig. 10. Tracking Model.
factors (Pen , Pex , L en , L ex , Vent , Vext , Nb f , Na f ), the second
is the hidden layer (empirical formula), and the third is the
output layer (expected time) tex as Fig 9 shows. The time (tex ) two new attackers: the BP Neural based Simple attacker and
required for a vehicle to cross a mix-zone can be described the BP Neural based Advanced attacker.
using Equation 8: Scor e = (1 − Ws )(1 − Wt )|texit − tenter − texnn | (9)
 Pxa,yb
 tex = (Pent , Pext , L ent , L ext , Vent , Vext , Nb f , Na f ) (8) Scor e = (1 − ) × (|texit − tenter − texnn |) (10)
 2
For each vehicle that leaves the mix-zone after the target When identifying the correct exiting car, only cars that exit
vehicle enters, they considered it as the object vehicle being the mix-zone after the target car has entered it and within
monitored. This allows them to determine all the necessary 5 times the average pass time are considered. This is because
input parameters required to train the time prediction model. it is unlikely that any car will remain in the mix-zone for this
The output (texnn ) of the BPNN model is the estimated time time. This time-gating approach improves the effectiveness
it takes for the two vehicles to pass each other (when the of tracking without significantly lowering the tracking rate.
target vehicle and the object vehicle come into proximity or Once the scores have been calculated using equation 9 or
encounter each other while traveling on the road) as Fig 10 equation 10, the car with the smallest score is selected. The
shows. To improve the simple and advanced tracking attack real IDs of the resulting enter-exit car pairs are compared to
techniques, the terms tex pected and txa,yb are replaced with evaluate the attack (Fig. 10). If the IDs of the two cars match,
texnn resulting in two new equations (Eq. 9 and Eq. 10) for the attack is deemed successful. Formally, the tracking rate is
14626 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

as follows: Equation (11) shows the tracking rate T rack rate : senders. However, the authors noted that this approach could
 PN still be susceptible to link attacks, potentially compromising
 attack
 T rack rate = i=0 (11) system security. They emphasized that message authentication
 N and sender identity verification improvements are essential for
Equation (12) shows the formula for identifying the attack: safety applications to address these vulnerabilities effectively.
 ( 2) Defense Against Sybil Attacks: The authors of [96]
 0, if I Din ̸ = I Dout
 Attack = (12) proposed a system for detecting and tracking sybil vehicles
 1, if I Din = I Dout through a collaborative effort among RSUs. In their approach,
 The authors of [92] thoroughly examined the limitations three RSUs employ triangulation to determine node positions,
in the BPNN-based model and found that its inefficiencies which are then shared between RSUs to check for conflicting
are largely because of many factors used in neural network locations and identify any malicious (i.e., sybil) vehicles. They
prediction. To address these issues, they investigated the rela- can detect the trajectory and various identities of sybil vehicles
tionship between these factors and the training aim (i.e., car’s by creating a list of detected vehicles and tracking their
pass time), simplifying the factors and customizing the neural pattern of presence in each RSU’s coverage zone. Furthermore,
network topology (good self-adaptation and its advantage in RSUs validate messages against sybil nodes and use digital
solving multi-input fitting problems). They demonstrated that signatures to reduce the impact of false messages in the
their customized time prediction model was more effective network.
and produced superior tracking outcomes (the performance In [97], the authors proposed an intrusion detection system
of the model in accurately predicting or estimating the car’s that uses a signature-based approach and the plausibility conpass time). The simulation results obtained showed an average cept for detecting fake car movement information. The concept
success tracking rate equal to 81.52%. of plausibility [98] involves evaluating the reliability of vehicle
 movement information based on various factors, such as speed,
 V. D EFENSE S CHEMES AGAINST T RACKING ATTACKS direction, location, or behavior. By comparing the observed
 data with the signatures or motion patterns of the original
 This section presents anti-tracking methods for vehicular
 vehicle, the system can determine if the information is likely
networks (Table IV). We classify them using the same classito be fake or has been manipulated. The intrusion detection
fication criteria for the attacks we discussed in section IV.
 system can detect false congestion attacks (sybil attacks) and
 denial of service attacks, even when a valid movement is used.
A. Defense Against General Attacks This technique can identify a single fake car.
 Vehicular networks can be protected against general attacks In [99], the authors developed a presence evidence sysused for tracking purposes using the same “general” defense tem to detect Sybil attacks using position verification. They
mechanisms. For instance, eavesdropping can be prevented employed a RANdom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC)-based
by enforcing the confidentiality of sensitive data through method [100] to improve the car’s location estimation by
encryption. Sybil attacks can be thwarted by implementing analyzing the car’s signal-strength distribution. RANSAC is
strong authentication mechanisms. In this section, we present an outlier detection method commonly used in computer
defense solutions that are more “customized” for vehicular vision. The presence evidence system determines the estimated
networks. location of a claimer car that sends a beacon message at a
 1) Defense Against Eavesdropping Attacks: Cui et al. [94] beacon interval for adjacent discovery.
proposed a privacy-preserving approach for car location utilizing the concepts of k-anonymity and path confusion. Cars can
create dynamic virtual locations in response to their surround- B. Protecting Pseudonym Change Schemes
ings to deceive information about their driving path, thereby The authors of [83] proposed random encryption periods in
enhancing privacy. They employed the entropy of anonymity mix-zone. Every OBU is given a global symmetric key, that it
set (a measure of uncertainty in identifying a specific car uses to enter an encrypted zone where a certificate update for
among a collection of vehicles; a higher entropy denotes more pseudonym change is executed. To avoid semantic connection,
confidentiality) and tracking success ratio (a lower tracking which refers to the ability to link old and new pseudonyms
success ratio suggests that the privacy-preserving scheme is based on identifiable patterns such as vehicle speed, direction,
effective at preventing accurate tracking of vehicles) as criteria or behavior, this strategy requires cars to change lanes, directo determine the degree of privacy. The results showed that tion, or speed while altering their pseudonyms, which makes
their proposed scheme increased the entropy of the anonymity it hard to achieve this scheme in practice. Since the technique
set by 100% when compared with other schemes while permits any OBU to terminate encryption periods, an internal
decreasing the tracking ratio to 1%. adversary might utilize this to diminish the anonymity set,
 The authors of [95] developed a privacy-preserving location putting user privacy at risk. Furthermore, the technique adds
strategy that utilizes a filter to differentiate between real and significant complexity to key management: for each revocation
fake messages, incorporating the concept of Chaff messages. activity, a novel symmetric key must be provided to all legal
The Chaff technique helps protect the content of transmitted cars in the network.
messages from eavesdroppers by adding fake data, making 1) Defense Against Correlation Attacks: The authors
it more difficult to trace or link messages to their original of [101] proposed a vehicular PKI-based system that protects
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14627

user privacy by avoiding the linking of pseudonyms according results showed that these methods significantly enhance prito pseudonym timing data. However, a new Media Access vacy compared to traditional pseudonym-changing schemes.
Control (MAC) transmission correlated attack (an attack In [104], the authors proposed a pseudonym-based scheme
that exploits patterns in MAC layer transmission to correlate that integrates pseudonym-swapping and pseudonym-changing
transmissions from the same vehicle) [90] can still be launched strategies to enhance location privacy for connected car users.
to compromise location privacy. The authors of [90] proposed This approach employed two types of pseudonyms: nona MAC layer Attack Resistant Pseudonym (MARP) technique swappable and swappable, enabling secure, RSU-independent
for beacon broadcasting in vehicular networks. Initially, they pseudonym swaps while addressing revocation failures and
identified the new MAC layer context linking attack enabled reputation attacks. During registration, each vehicle receives
by inconsistent pseudonym changes and periodic MAC layer one non-swappable pseudonym and several swappable ones.
operations used in this technique and then examined the Swappable pseudonyms are used for signing and authentiattack using both Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) and cating beacon messages, while non-swappable ones enable
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) based protocols. secure exchanges without RSUs. After pseudonym swaps,
With MARP, vehicles change their pseudonyms and time vehicles report their updated vehicle-pseudonym mapping to
slots by negotiating with their neighbors to build mix the certification authority via a secure transport protocol upon
zones depending on their current pseudonym age. Vehicles connecting to the network. In [105], the authors expanded
re-arrange their transmission slots at random when changing this work by integrating both pseudonym change and swap
pseudonyms to remain unlinkable to the adversaries. The strategies, removing the need for preloaded pseudonyms and
time is utilized for communication between vehicles and utilizing reusable long-term certificates. This revision enabled
RSUs or Trusted Authorities (TAs). This communication may RSU-independent pseudonym swapping while still adhering
involve requesting pseudonyms or receiving the Certificate to VANET security requirements. Like the [104] approach,
Revocation List (CRL) from the TA. When a mix-zone vehicles are assigned both non-swappable and swappable
is built, vehicles become unidentifiable by cooperatively pseudonyms, using the former for secure exchanges and the
releasing their transmission slots and old pseudonyms. In this latter for signing messages. After each pseudonym swap,
way, the pseudonyms are rendered unlikable. vehicles report the updated pseudonyms to the certification
 2) Collaborative Protection Schemes: Based on real-time authority, enhancing the system’s security and privacy.
variables such as traffic density, vehicle speed, and infras- 3) Protecting Silent Period Based Schemes: The orgatructure availability, the author of [102] proposed a new nized location-independent radio silences, which are related
Pseudonym Change Scheme (PCS) that maximizes when, to the notions of random silent periods [71] and Swing &
where, and how frequently vehicles change their pseudonyms. Swap [106], allow vehicles to stop transmitting CAMs for an
The problems associated with existing PCSs include pre- arbitrary period of time before altering their pseudonyms.
dictable triggers (such as pre-defined time intervals, events that The concept of silent period [71] (that we discussed in
occur at regular intervals, or fixed-distance-based triggers) that section III-D.2 causes vehicles to stop sending any locationjeopardize privacy, reliance on radio silence, and the depletion related information while changing the pseudonyms to add
of pseudonyms. They recommended using traffic patterns and ambiguity to the identification of the location and time of a
vehicle environments to overcome these challenges, allow- pseudonym change). In the initial model for the silent period,
ing for simultaneous pseudonym changes with unpredictable, the duration of the silent period is fixed for all cars (i.e.,
dynamic triggers to optimize anonymity. The main contribu- the constant silent period). The tracking technique involves
tions of [102] include an on-demand pseudonym generation comparing the order of the Emerging Times (ET) (the earliest
and authentication mechanism to prevent depletion, a three-tier time when the tracking system monitored a specific car with
architecture for coordinating changes within a Road Side Unit its new pseudonym) of two cars with their new pseudonyms to
(RSU) coverage area, and a context-aware PCS that removes the Disappearing Times DT (the latest time when the tracking
the need for radio silence while avoiding predictable triggers. system monitored a specific car with its old pseudonym) of
The authors of [103] proposed two pseudonym exchange algo- those with their old pseudonyms. The assumption is that if a
rithms to enhance vehicle privacy by preventing adversaries car disappears with an old pseudonym and re-emerges with
from linking a vehicle’s pseudonyms over time. The Trigger- a new pseudonym, it is the same car. As Fig 6 shows, the
Based Exchange Algorithm initiates pseudonym exchanges technique described in this figure assumes that the time a
based on specific conditions, such as entering high-traffic car reaches a silent period is a reliable indicator of its ET.
areas or detecting tracking attempts. Once initiated, the vehicle However, this assumption may not always hold, especially if
sends a request to a RSU, which validates the request and the silent period duration is variable. If a car with identity
forwards it to the certificate authority for processing. The A reaches the silent period at an earlier time than another
RSU-Assisted Exchange Algorithm requires vehicles to submit car with identity B, the system may infer that the ET of
pseudonym exchange requests to the RSU, which authenticates A is earlier than that of B. However, this inference may
the requests and coordinates with the Certificate authority to not be accurate if the duration of the silent period is not
enable secure information exchange. Both algorithms sought fixed and can vary from car to car. For example, if A has a
to make pseudonym exchanges unpredictable, thereby improv- shorter silent period duration than B, it may emerge earlier
ing privacy while reducing the computational and storage than B even if its emerging time is later. To address this
burden on vehicles and the certificate authority. Simulation issue, the authors of [71] proposed using a variable length
14628 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE III
 N ORMAL AND M ALICIOUS B EHAVIOR

 ranges of their ETs overlap. However, it is important to note
 that no tracking technique is perfect, and there may still be
 cases where an adversary can link pseudonyms to individual
 cars.
 The authors of [107] demonstrated how to change
 a pseudonym successfully and developed an effective
 pseudonym-changing technique to strengthen users’ location
Fig. 11. Variable silent period scheme. privacy in C-ITS. They developed a unique tracking attack
 known as the cheating attack, which is designed to undermine the performance of the suggested pseudonym change
silent period. This approach involves randomizing the length of approach. In a cheating attack, the attacker creates CAMs with
the silent period for each car, which can help reduce the risk of the change flag set to “1” to trick other cars into thinking it
inferring incorrect ETs based on the timing of the silent period. wants to alter its pseudonym when it actually does not. As a
However, even with a variable duration silent period, there may result, a car searching for the trigger considers the attacker
still be cases where the tracking system cannot link a detected among the discovered neighbors and changes the pseudonym.
pseudonym to the correct car. For example, if the range of the Table III demonstrates how normal and malicious cars react
emerging times for two cars overlaps, the system may not be to a change in the pseudonym. The normal car enters a silent
able to distinguish between them based solely on the timing period and changes its pseudonym, whereas the malicious car
of their pseudonyms. In such cases, additional information or (cheater) does the opposite, making it always linkable. This
context may be needed to correctly identify the car associated behavior decreases the anonymous set size and makes the
with a particular pseudonym. The silent period is determined linking of pseudonyms easier.
by a random variable varying between [T 2min , T 2max ] as To counteract this threat, they proposed a cheating detection
Fig. 11 shows. When the ranges of the emerging times of two system to identify hostile cheating vehicles.
cars overlap, issues such as misidentification or ambiguity in Some approaches use a silent period jointly with other
associating the pseudonym with the correct vehicle may arise. mechanisms to ensure vehicles’ location privacy and thus
These challenges could lead to incorrect tracking or difficulty counter-tracking attacks. Sampigethaya et al. [12] addressed
in linking the pseudonym to the right car. In this scenario, the the issue of permitting any vehicle to establish unlinkability
temporal relation between the ET and DT of the two cars may between two or more of its locations in the presence of
become obscure, making it difficult for the tracking technique adversary tracking. Unlike prior location privacy approaches
to link the old pseudonym of a car to its new one. To address in mobile networks, the authors studied the limitations prothis challenge, the authors recommend that the silent period vided by vehicular mobility and vehicular applications within
used for tracking should include both constant and variable vehicular networks. Specifically, they examined how the moveperiods. The constant period helps to mix the spatial relation ment patterns and operational constraints of vehicles, such as
between a car’s emerging and disappearing points whereas the limited control over routing decisions and physical mobility,
variable period helps to mix the temporal relation between affect the feasibility and effectiveness of location privacy
the car’s DT and ET. The use of a constant period helps solutions. They developed a solution that accounts for these
to mix the spatial relation between the car’s emerging and limitations and effectively protects location privacy. They
disappearing points by adding noise to the location data. This concluded that vehicle group navigation can provide location
can help prevent an adversary from accurately identifying the privacy in C-ITS, and to mitigate vehicle tracking, they present
car’s path based on the sequence of its pseudonyms. The CARAVAN. This location privacy approach combines group
use of a variable period helps to mix the temporal relation navigation with a random silent time augmentation technique.
between the car’s disappearing time and emerging time by The author of [108] proposed a new algorithm for managrandomizing the duration of the silent period. This can prevent ing pseudonym certificate switching periods between cars to
an adversary from accurately inferring the car’s emerging time prevent trackers from obtaining drivers’ traces. The proposed
based on the timing of its pseudonym. By including both algorithm executes a short time using a common pseudonym
constant and variable periods in the silent period, the tracking certificate before switching to a new one. During this time,
technique makes it more difficult for an adversary to link the cars sign their messages on the shared pseudonym certificate.
old pseudonym of a car to its new one, even in cases where the The proposed algorithm guarantees that as many vehicles as
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14629

possible change their pseudonym certificates during the same unlinkability, the authors of [111] demonstrated the following
slot time, increasing tracker confusion. They assumed that all security and privacy flaws in [95]: attackers may insert fake
cars involved acted appropriately, and they did not investigate certificates, affecting the legitimacy of filters and updates, and
misbehavior scenarios in the proposed work. the insertion may be denied. To solve these challenges, the
 4) Protecting Mix-Zones Schemes: One possible real-time authors of [111] developed a Vehicular Public-Key Infrastruclocation privacy strategy in transportation systems is the mix ture (VPKI) approach. First, they used a modified version of
zone. This method prevents users from tracking attacks by the technique devised by [112] to create mutual authentication
disrupting the continuity of position disclosure and altering without disclosing the real identity. Each vehicle’s messages
pseudonyms. The authors of [76] proposed the MixGroup are signed with a unique pseudo-identity “certificate” to
strategy, which includes social locations and other events accomplish this. Second, unlike the [95] technique, they used
where a car can face many other cars. The cars in the Mix- an adaptive filter to reduce the impact of false positives on the
Group communicate with one another to decide if they want entire filter. Additionally, only RSUs send updates and sign
to participate in the pseudonym change procedure. In [77], the fresh fingerprints to prevent any modifications to the filter.
authors developed an alternative method to construct mix-zone The authors of [113] proposed a privacy security mechanism
wherein cars build the mix-zone using the radio silence method that relies on altering pseudonyms based on the car’s speed
if their speeds remain under a threshold point for a specific and position within or outside established mix-zones. The
period. Several current techniques [92], [94] study the location results obtained demonstrate that the proposed approach is
and the timing for the pseudonym change. The authors of [78] an effective mechanism for protecting car drivers’ location
focused on devising techniques for pseudonym change with information.
dynamically determined mix zones. They used the age of
the pseudonym as the most important feature in changing VI. F UTURE D IRECTIONS
pseudonyms. If the pseudonym age exceeds some threshold, The future of privacy in connected cars depends on the
it attempts to change its pseudonym. The authors of [109] adoption of multi-layered security techniques that integrate
proposed a Cryptographic MIX-zone (CMIX) approach for decentralized systems, AI, privacy-preserving communication
providing location privacy at road intersections. The RSU protocols, and cryptographic innovations. Strong, secure syssecurely distributes a symmetric key to any incoming car in tems that can prevent tracking while maintaining the benefits
CMIX to create a mix zone. That symmetric key encrypts of connected and autonomous mobility could be developed
all information exchanged in a mix-zone. Furthermore, all using emerging technologies like blockchain, Federated Learncars in the mix-zone must alter their pseudonym certificates. ing (FL), and quantum encryption. Collaboration between
Due to the forced certificate change and the random direction technology companies, manufacturers, and government regulachange of every car at crossing points, an adversary on the tors will be crucial to ensuring that these concepts are feasible,
roadside cannot link a certificate to a specific car thereby scalable, and widely accepted.
providing location privacy. The aggregation of CMIX over
the vehicular network creates a mix network, which improves
location privacy. A. Federated Learning (FL)
 The authors of [110] proposed a Pseudonym Change Federated learning is a cutting-edge Machine-Learning
Protocol (PCP) to enhance vehicle location privacy. This (ML) technique that enables linked vehicles to jointly build
protocol enables vehicles to independently generate legitimate a common prediction model while maintaining the privacy
pseudonym certificates without the assistance of Road and decentralization of their data. This technique holds great
Side Units (RSUs). Additionally, vehicles can judge the promise for improving security and privacy in connected
circumstances for changing a pseudonym and get the required automotive systems, especially when it comes to preventing
information through V2V communication, thereby enhancing tracking [117], [118]. Federated learning allows models to be
the security of the pseudonym change process. trained across multiple vehicles or Intrusion Detection Systems
 In [108] the authors proposed a new pseudonym-change (IDS) without the need to share raw data, thus mitigating
algorithm. In particular, a vehicle obtains a pool of Pseudonym the privacy issues associated with conventional centralized
Certificates (PC) and a Common Pseudonym Certificate (CPC) learning methods. More precisely, in federated learning, the
that is utilized by all cars after it has registered with a Trusted model is trained locally on each vehicle’s data. Only the model
Authority (TA). A car switches its pseudonym certificate when updates (called gradients) are sent to a central server. Data is
it encounters one or more other vehicles while traveling. The aggregated later to improve a global model, which could be
authors of this paper proposed a protocol that allows several an interesting solution that complies with the General Data
cars to switch PCs simultaneously while traveling close to one Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the European Union. The
another; however, there may be some delays. Before upgrading benefits of Federated Learning for connected vehicles can be
their pseudonyms, all of the nearby cars briefly utilize the summarized as follows:
CPC. In [95], the authors developed a privacy-preserving • Decentralized data processing: Instead of sending data to
location strategy that utilizes a filter to differentiate between a central server, federated learning keeps the data on the
real and fake messages, incorporating the concept of Chaff individual vehicles. This minimizes the possibility that
messages. However, the authors noted that this approach unauthorized parties will intercept or track sensitive data,
could still be susceptible to link attacks. To get complete such as the exact locations or driving patterns.
14630 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 TABLE IV
 OVERVIEW OF S OLUTIONS FOR M ITIGATING T RACKING ATTACKS FOR C ONNECTED C ARS
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14631

 • Enhanced anonymity: Federated learning inherently sup- authors of [125] developed a novel gradient sparsification
 ports data privacy because the individual datasets used for framework for secure aggregation called SparseSecAgg.
 training are never exposed to the central server or other In [126], the authors proposed a novel secure aggregavehicles. This reduces the likelihood of vehicles being tion scheme for Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning
 tracked through their data. (PPFL) in Industry 5.0 ecosystems. It addresses chal-
 • Reduced risk of data breaches: Federated learning does lenges such as heterogeneous data and communication
 not require centralized data storage. This reduces the bottlenecks by using a self-attention-based neural network
 attack surface that hackers can target and minimizes the to distill and aggregate data, thereby reducing communipossibility of significant data breaches that can reveal cation overhead and enhancing efficiency.
 private data about user behavior and car positions.
 • Deployment of federated learning: Deploying federated
 learning in C-ITS with intermittent connectivity requires B. Quantum Encryption
 a robust, flexible approach that guarantees efficiency, Quantum encryption presents an innovative way of protectprivacy, and uninterrupted learning. A hierarchical feder- ing communications in connected cars, addressing the pressing
 ated learning framework, where Roadside Units (RSUs) need for strong privacy protection. Quantum encryption can
 act as intermediary aggregators, allows vehicles to share significantly reduce tracking concerns by providing unbreakthe local model’s updates periodically by transmitting able security, guaranteeing anonymity, and promoting collabthem to a central cloud or Multi-Access Edge Com- orative intelligence without sacrificing privacy [127], [128].
 puting (MEC) system when network conditions permit. • Secure communication channels: Quantum encryption
 To address the challenges of unpredictable connectivity, enables the safe creation and exchange of cryptographic
 Asynchronous Federated Learning (AFL) [119] enables keys between vehicles and the infrastructure. With the
 updates whenever a vehicles establishes a connection. help of quantum key distribution, vehicles may create
 It employs adaptive weighting to prioritize contributions secure channels for transmitting sensitive data (such as
 from reliable sources. Privacy protection is enhanced position or navigation information) without running the
 through Differential Privacy (DP), which, rather than risk of being intercepted or tracked.
 adding excessive artificial noise, leverages inherent com- • Collaborative learning with security: Quantum encrypmunication noise. This approach dynamically fine-tunes tion can enable collaborative ML among vehicles while
 Differential Privacy (DP) mechanisms to enhance security ensuring that individual data contributions remain private.
 while preserving model performance. Gradient sparsi- Vehicles can securely share insights (e.g., traffic confication, quantization, and secure aggregation further ditions, hazards) without exposing their exact locations
 increase efficiency while reducing communication costs or personal information. Future research could explore
 and maintaining privacy. To handle data heterogene- integrating post-quantum cryptographic protocols with
 ity, vehicles also maintain personalized models, while existing vehicular networks to build resilient systems that
 Roadside Units (RSUs) compile information to enhance can withstand not only conventional cyber-attacks but also
 global updates. This guarantees a learning system that is potential quantum-based threats. This would create safer,
 more robust and flexible. Ultimately, this comprehensive more effective, and privacy-preserving vehicle networks
 strategy enables the deployment of privacy-preserving, by paving the way for a new generation of intelligent
 communication-efficient, and robust federated learning in transportation systems that are highly collaborative and
 C-ITS, even in environments with variable connectivity. inherently secure.
 Choosing the right framework is crucial for achieving • Integration of Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) in
 optimal model outcomes in federated learning. There connected vehicles ecosystem: Addressing cybersecurity
 are numerous tools and platforms for federated learning risks posed by future quantum attacks is essential as
 such as TensorFlow Federated (TFF) [120], NVIDIA we enter the era of quantum computing. The Internet
 FLARE (NVIDIA Federated Learning Application Run- of Vehicles (IoV) must implement cryptographic prototime Environment) [121], FedLab [122], and so on. cols aligned with the Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC)
 Each of these frameworks offers unique features that standards set by the National Institute of Standards
 supports different aspects of federated learning, making and Technology (NIST) to ensure long-term security
 the selection of the appropriate one vital for success- [129], [130]. PQC currently relies on lattice-based crypful implementations. However, secure aggregation for tography, which uses complex mathematical structures
 federated learning faces significant challenges, including formed by combining sets of vectors in large spaces.
 high communication and computational overheads, and NIST has recently published encryption and signature
 vulnerabilities to privacy attacks. To address these issues, standards designed to withstand quantum attacks, includvarious solutions have been proposed in the literature. ing FIPS 203 (Module-Lattice-Based Key-Encapsulation
 For instance, [123] proposed SAFELearn, which utilizes Mechanism for encryption), FIPS 204 (Module-Lattice-
 Secure Multi-Party Computation (MPC) and Homomor- Based Digital Signature Algorithm for digital signatures),
 phic Encryption (HE). In [124], the authors proposed and FIPS 205 (Stateless Hash-Based Digital Signature
 Secure Aggregation and Efficient Verification (SAEV) for Algorithm for hash-based signatures). To strengthen the
 privacy-preserving federated learning. Additionally, the security of the connected vehicle ecosystem, we must
14632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 integrate PQC into security protocols across various and proposed in the current literature. Additionally, we recomcomponents, including On-Board Units (OBUs), Secure mended future directions to mitigate tracking attacks. Future
 Elements (SEs), Electronic Control Units (ECUs), Road- research on connected vehicles should adopt multi-layered
 side Units (RSUs), cameras, radar, LiDAR systems, and security strategies integrating decentralized systems, artificial
 more. intelligence, and cryptographic innovations. Emerging technologies such as blockchain, Federated Learning (FL), and
C. Integration of Blockchain for Decentralized Privacy quantum encryption can enhance privacy protection while
Management maintaining the benefits of connected mobility. We hope this
 survey provides valuable insights for researchers working on
 Blockchain provides a strong foundation for improving pri- privacy and vehicle tracking within C-ITS.
vacy in networks of connected cars. Many of the vulnerabilities
that permit tracking attacks can be fixed by their decentralized, ACKNOWLEDGMENT
transparent, and secure nature, enabling intelligent transporta-
 The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their valution systems that are safer and more reliable [131], [132].
 able comments which helped them improve the content,
 • Balancing audibility and privacy: Blockchain could be
 organization, and presentation of this work.
 employed to create immutable audit trails that record
 the issuance and usage of vehicle identifiers, helping to R EFERENCES
 ensure transparency and privacy compliance. To prevent
 [1] K. Ansari, “Joint use of DSRC and C-V2X for V2X commusetting up a new tracking channel, this must be done nications in the 5.9 GHz ITS band,” IET Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 carefully. Future research must examine how anonymity vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 213–224, Feb. 2021. [Online]. Available:
 might be maintained while preventing unauthorized track- https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/itr2.12015
 [2] S. Zeadally, M. A. Javed, and E. B. Hamida, “Vehicular commuing by utilizing blockchain’s transparency. nications for ITS: Standardization and challenges,” IEEE Commun.
 • Combining mix-zones and pseudonym changes with Standards Mag., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 11–17, Mar. 2020.
 blockchain: Traditional methods of preventing tracking [3] K. Sehla, T. M. T. Nguyen, G. Pujolle, and P. B. Velloso, “Resource
 allocation modes in C-V2X: From LTE-V2X to 5G-V2X,” IEEE
 include mix-zones and changing the pseudonym. By doc- Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8291–8314, Jun. 2022.
 umenting the times and locations of pseudonym changes, [4] B. Propfe, D. Kreyenberg, J. Wind, and S. Schmid, “Market penblockchain can increase transparency by making sure that etration analysis of electric vehicles in the German passenger car
 these changes are coordinated and unpredictable, which market towards 2030,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, vol. 38, no. 13,
 pp. 5201–5208, May 2013.
 makes tracking more challenging. Future research must [5] (2013). Mercedes-benz is Starting a Europe-wide Cooperation Project.
 examine how blockchain technology might be integrated [Online]. Available: https://group.mercedes-benz.com/innovation/
 with current privacy procedures. This would allow for case/connectivity/europe-wide-cooperation-car-to-x.html
 [6] R. Hussain, J. Lee, and S. Zeadally, “Trust in VANET: A survey of
 the safe and random changing of pseudonyms without current solutions and future research opportunities,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 disclosing the true identities of the cars involved. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 2553–2571, May 2021.
 • Accountability without centralized control: Current cen- [7] I. Rouf et al., “Security and privacy vulnerabilities of in-car wireless
 networks: A tire pressure monitoring system case study,” in Proc.
 tralized systems can suffer from data breaches or misuse USENIX Secur. Symp., vol. 10, Aug. 2010, p. 21.
 by the central authority itself. Blockchain makes it more [8] J. Petit, F. Schaub, M. Feiri, and F. Kargl, “Pseudonym schemes in
 difficult for any one party to abuse data for tracking vehicular networks: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17,
 by enabling a decentralized method wherein no single no. 1, pp. 228–255, 1st Quart., 2014.
 [9] D. Reid, “An algorithm for tracking multiple targets,” IEEE Trans.
 entity controls the entire network. Decentralized oversight Autom. Control, vol. AC-24, no. 6, pp. 843–854, Dec. 1979.
 techniques, in which the network as a whole cooper- [10] B. Wiedersheim, Z. Ma, F. Kargl, and P. Papadimitratos, “Privacy
 atively enforces privacy regulations, could be explored in inter-vehicular networks: Why simple pseudonym change is not
 enough,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Wireless Demand Netw. Syst. Services
 and implemented in future systems. Any attempt by an (WONS), Feb. 2010, pp. 176–183.
 entity to violate these guidelines (for example, by tracking [11] K. Emara, W. Woerndl, and J. Schlichter, “Vehicle tracking using
 cars without authorization) would be documented on the vehicular network beacons,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int. Symp. World
 Wireless, Mobile Multimedia Netw. (WoWMoM), Jun. 2013, pp. 1–6.
 blockchain, and appropriate remedial measures may be
 [12] K. Sampigethaya, L. Huangy, M. Li, R. Poovendran, K. Matsuuray, and
 initiated immediately. K. Sezaki, “Caravan: Providing location privacy for vanet,” in Proc.
 ESCAR, 2005, p. 29.
 [13] M. Khodaei and P. Papadimitratos, “Cooperative location privacy in
 VII. C ONCLUSION vehicular networks: Why simple mix zones are not enough,” IEEE
 C-ITS is a critical component in modernizing and improving Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 7985–8004, May 2021.
 [14] C. Kalaiarasy, N. Sreenath, and A. Amuthan, “Location privacy presertransportation systems. It leverages advanced communication vation in VANET using mix zones – a survey,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
technologies to enable vehicles, infrastructure, and users to Comput. Commun. Informat. (ICCCI), Jan. 2019, pp. 1–5.
exchange real-time information. However, several essential [15] S. Zeadally, R. Hunt, Y.-S. Chen, A. Irwin, and A. Hassan, “Vehicular
 ad hoc networks (VANETS): Status, results, and challenges,” Telecomconcerns of security, such as confidentiality, availability, and mun. Syst., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 217–241, Aug. 2012.
privacy, must be addressed to ensure safety in C-ITS. This [16] E. C. Eze, S. Zhang, and E. Liu, “Vehicular ad hoc networks
paper presents an in-depth survey of recent research on (VANETs): Current state, challenges, potentials and way forward,” in
privacy, particularly regarding vehicle tracking, highlighting Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Autom. Comput., Sep. 2014, pp. 176–181.
 [17] M. Azees, P. Vijayakumar, and L. J. Deborah, “Comprehensive surcurrent threats and challenges. We analyzed and classified vey on security services in vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IET Intell.
existing tracking defense solutions that have been discussed Transp. Syst., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 379–388, 2016.
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14633

 [18] M. Dibaei et al., “An overview of attacks and defences on intelligent [41] J. Guerrero-Ibá nez, S. Zeadally, and J. Contreras-Castillo, “Sensor
 connected vehicles,” 2019, arXiv:1907.07455. technologies for intelligent transportation systems,” Sensors, vol. 18,
 [19] L. Benarous, S. Zeadally, S. Boudjit, and A. Mellouk, “A review of no. 4, p. 1212, Apr. 2018.
 pseudonym change strategies for location privacy preservation schemes [42] Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS);Vehicular Communications;Basic
 in vehicular networks,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1–37, Set of Applications;part 2: Specification of Cooperativeawareness
 Aug. 2025. Basic Service, ETSI Standard EN 302 637-2, 2019.
 [20] D. Manivannan, S. S. Moni, and S. Zeadally, “Secure authentica- [43] A. Baiocchi and I. Turcanu, “A model for the optimization of beacon
 tion and privacy-preserving techniques in vehicular ad-hoc networks message age-of-information in a VANET,” in Proc. 29th Int. Teletraffic
 (VANETs),” Veh. Commun., vol. 25, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 100247. Congr. (ITC 29), vol. 1, Sep. 2017, pp. 108–116.
 [21] M. A. Ferrag, L. Maglaras, and A. Ahmim, “Privacy-preserving [44] Intelligent Transport Systems (its); Vehicular Communications; Basic
 schemes for ad hoc social networks: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Set of Applications; Part 3: Specifications of Decentralized Environ-
 Tuts., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 3015–3045, 4th Quart., 2017. mental Notification Basic Service, ETSI Standard EN 302 637-3, 2019.
 [22] Z. Lu, G. Qu, and Z. Liu, “A survey on recent advances in vehicular [45] A. Vinel, L. Lan, and N. Lyamin, “Vehicle-to-vehicle communication
 network security, trust, and privacy,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., in C-ACC/platooning scenarios,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 8,
 vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 760–776, Feb. 2019. pp. 192–197, Aug. 2015.
 [46] IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments-security
 [23] C. Bernardini, M. R. Asghar, and B. Crispo, “Security and privacy in
 Services for Applications and Management Messages, IEEE Standard
 vehicular communications: Challenges and opportunities,” Veh. Com-
 1609.2-2013, 2016, pp. 1–240.
 mun., vol. 10, pp. 13–28, Oct. 2017.
 [47] IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments
 [24] H. Lu and J. Li, “Privacy-preserving authentication schemes for vehic-
 (WAVE)—Certificate Management Interfaces for End Entities, IEEE
 ular ad hoc networks: A survey,” Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput.,
 Standard Std 1609.2.1-2020, 2022, pp. 1–261.
 vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 643–655, 2016.
 [48] Intelligent Transport Systems (its); Security; its Communications Secu-
 [25] D. Yu and Y. Ko, “FFRDV: Fastest-ferry routing in DTN-enabled rity Architecture and Security Management; Release 2, ETSI Standard
 vehicular ad hoc networks,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Adv. Commun. TS 102 940, 2021.
 Technol., vol. 2, Feb. 2009, pp. 1410–1414. [49] Intelligent Transport Systems (its);Security; Trust and Privacy Man-
 [26] S. Maaloul, H. Aniss, M. Kassab, and M. Berbineau, “Classification agement; Release 2, ETSI Standard TS 102 941, 2021.
 of C-ITS services in vehicular environments,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, [50] M. S. Sheikh and J. Liang, “A comprehensive survey on VANET
 pp. 117868–117879, 2021. security services in traffic management system,” Wireless Commun.
 [27] S. A. A. Shah, E. Ahmed, M. Imran, and S. Zeadally, “5G for vehicular Mobile Comput., vol. 2019, pp. 1–23, Sep. 2019.
 communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 111–117, [51] J. Contreras-Castillo, S. Zeadally, and J. A. Guerrero-Ibañez, “Inter-
 Jan. 2018. net of Vehicles: Architecture, protocols, and security,” IEEE Internet
 [28] P. Singh, P. Khanna, and S. Kumar, “Communication architecture for Things J., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3701–3709, Oct. 2018.
 vehicular ad hoc networks, with blockchain security,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [52] M. N. Mejri, J. Ben-Othman, and M. Hamdi, “Survey on VANET secu-
 Comput., Autom. Knowl. Manage. (ICCAKM), Jan. 2020, pp. 68–72. rity challenges and possible cryptographic solutions,” Veh. Commun.,
 [29] R. Q. Malik, K. N. Ramli, Z. H. Kareem, M. I. Habelalmatee, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 53–66, Apr. 2014.
 A. H. Abbas, and A. Alamoody, “An overview on V2P communication [53] Y. Qian and N. Moayeri, “Design of secure and application-oriented
 system: Architecture and application,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Eng. VANETs,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Spring), May 2008,
 Technol. Appl. (IICETA), Sep. 2020, pp. 174–178. pp. 2794–2799.
 [30] J. Martín-Pérez et al., “Dimensioning V2N services in 5G networks [54] L. Pan, X. Zheng, H. X. Chen, T. Luan, H. Bootwala, and L. Batten,
 through forecast-based scaling,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 9587–9602, “Cyber security attacks to modern vehicular systems,” J. Inf. Secur.
 2022. Appl., vol. 36, pp. 90–100, Oct. 2017.
 [31] Q. Yang, L. Wang, W. Xia, Y. Wu, and L. Shen, “Development of [55] M. Hataba, A. Sherif, M. Mahmoud, M. Abdallah, and W. Alasmary,
 on-board unit in vehicular ad-hoc network for highways,” in Proc. Int. “Security and privacy issues in autonomous vehicles: A layer-based
 Conf. Connected Vehicles Expo (ICCVE), Nov. 2014, pp. 457–462. survey,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 3, pp. 811–829, 2022.
 [32] S. Al-Sultan, M. M. Al-Doori, A. H. Al-Bayatti, and H. Zedan, “A [56] N. Liu, A. Nikitas, and S. Parkinson, “Exploring expert perceptions
 comprehensive survey on vehicular ad hoc network,” J. Netw. Comput. about the cyber security and privacy of connected and autonomous
 Appl., vol. 37, pp. 380–392, Jan. 2014. vehicles: A thematic analysis approach,” Transp. Res. F Traffic Psy-
 [33] M. Lee and T. Atkison, “VANET applications: Past, present, and chol. Behav., vol. 75, pp. 66–86, Nov. 2020. [Online]. Available:
 future,” Veh. Commun., vol. 28, Apr. 2021, Art. no. 100310. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1369847820305386
 [34] F. Domingos, L. Villas, and A. Boukerche, “Data communication in [57] C. Zhang, X. Lin, R. Lu, and P.-H. Ho, “RAISE: An efficient
 VANETs: Survey, applications and challenges,” Ad Hoc Networks, RSU-aided message authentication scheme in vehicular communivol. 44, pp. 90–103, Sep. 2016. cation networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., May 2008,
 pp. 1451–1457.
 [35] W. Guo, L. Huang, L. Chen, H. Xu, and J. Xie, “An adaptive
 [58] H. Tan, M. Ma, H. Labiod, A. Boudguiga, J. Zhang, and
 collision-free MAC protocol based on TDMA for inter-vehicular com-
 P. H. J. Chong, “A secure and authenticated key management protocol
 munication,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process.
 (SA-KMP) for vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65,
 (WCSP), Oct. 2012, pp. 1–6.
 no. 12, pp. 9570–9584, Dec. 2016.
 [36] A. Festag, “Standards for vehicular communication—From ieee [59] P. Kamat, A. Baliga, and W. Trappe, “An identity-based security
 802.11p to 5g,” E I Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik, vol. 132, framework for VANETs,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Veh. Ad Hoc
 pp. 409–416, Jun. 2015. Netw. New York, NY, USA: ACM, Sep. 2006, pp. 94–95, doi:
 [37] D. Eckhoff, N. Sofra, and R. German, “A performance study of 10.1145/1161064.1161083.
 cooperative awareness in ETSI ITS G5 and IEEE WAVE,” in Proc. [60] C. Li, M. Hwang, and Y. Chu, “A secure and efficient commu-
 10th Annu. Conf. Wireless Demand Netw. Syst. (WONS), Banff, AB, nication scheme with authenticated key establishment and privacy
 Canada, Mar. 2013, pp. 196–200. preserving for vehicular ad hoc networks,” Comput. Commun.,
 [38] K. Sjoberg, P. Andres, T. Buburuzan, and A. Brakemeier, “Cooperative vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 2803–2814, Dec. 2007. [Online]. Available:
 intelligent transport systems in Europe: Current deployment status https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140366407005154
 and outlook,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 89–97, [61] P. P. Tsang and S. W. Smith, “PPAA: Peer-to-peer anonymous authenti-
 Jun. 2017. cation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Appl. Cryptography Netw. Secur., Jan. 2008,
 [39] R. Molina-Masegosa, J. Gozalvez, and M. Sepulcre, “Comparison pp. 55–74.
 of IEEE 802.11p and LTE-V2X: An evaluation with periodic and [62] G. Calandriello, P. Papadimitratos, J.-P. Hubaux, and A. Lioy, “Efficient
 aperiodic messages of constant and variable size,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, and robust pseudonymous authentication in VANET,” in Proc. 4th ACM
 pp. 121526–121548, 2020. Int. Workshop Veh. Ad Hoc Netw., Sep. 2007, pp. 19–28.
 [40] K. Abboud, H. A. Omar, and W. Zhuang, “Interworking of DSRC and [63] B. Lonc, F. Haidar, and D. M. Filatov, “Cooperative ITS security
 cellular network technologies for V2X communications: A survey,” standards: Implementation, assessment and next challenges,” in Proc.
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 9457–9470, Dec. 2016. ITS Eur. Congr., Nov. 2020.
14634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 26, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

 [64] F. Schaub, Z. Ma, and F. Kargl, “Privacy requirements in vehicu- [86] Y. Zhu et al., “Sybil attacks detection and traceability mechanism based
 lar communication systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Eng., on Beacon packets in connected automobile vehicles,” Sensors, vol. 24,
 Aug. 2009, pp. 139–145. no. 7, p. 2153, Mar. 2024.
 [65] H. Krawczyk, Perfect Forward Secrecy. Boston, MA, USA: Springer [87] K. Fysarakis, I. Askoxylakis, V. Katos, S. Ioannidis, and L. Marinos,
 U.S., 2005, pp. 457–458, doi: 10.1007/0-387-23483-7_298. “Security concerns in co-operative intelligent transportation systems,”
 [66] D. Hahn, A. Munir, and V. Behzadan, “Security and privacy issues in in Intrusion Detection and Prevention for Mobile Ecosystems, 6000,
 intelligent transportation systems: Classification and challenges,” IEEE pp. 487–522.
 Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 181–196, Apr. 2021. [88] A. Greenberg. (Jul. 2015). Hackers Remotely Kill a
 [67] R. Lu, X. Lin, T. H. Luan, X. Liang, and X. Shen, “Pseudonym Jeep on the Highway-with Me in It. [Online]. Available:
 changing at social spots: An effective strategy for location privacy https://www.wired.com/2015/07/hackers-remotely-kill-jeep-highway/
 in VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 86–96, [89] Y. Zhu, X. Fu, B. Graham, R. Bettati, and W. Zhao, “Correlation-based
 Jan. 2012. traffic analysis attacks on anonymity networks,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
 [68] D. Huang, S. Misra, M. Verma, and G. Xue, “PACP: An effi- Distrib. Syst., vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 954–967, Jul. 2010.
 cient pseudonymous authentication-based conditional privacy protocol
 [90] Z. Liu, Z. Liu, L. Zhang, and X. Lin, “MARP: A distributed MAC
 for VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 12, no. 3,
 layer attack resistant pseudonym scheme for VANET,” IEEE Trans.
 pp. 736–746, Sep. 2011.
 Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 869–882, Jul. 2020.
 [69] Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Security; Pre-standardization
 [91] S. Escher, M. Sontowski, K. Berling, S. Köpsell, and T. Strufe,
 Study on Pseudonym Change Management, ETSI Standard TR 103
 “How well can your car be tracked: Analysis of the European C-
 415, 2018.
 ITS pseudonym scheme,” in Proc. IEEE 93rd Veh. Technol. Conf.,
 [70] M. Babaghayou, N. Labraoui, A. A. Abba Ari, N. Lagraa,
 Apr. 2021, pp. 1–6.
 and M. A. Ferrag, “Pseudonym change-based privacy-preserving
 schemes in vehicular ad-hoc networks: A survey,” J. Inf. Secur. [92] L. Hou, N. Yao, Z. Lu, F. Zhan, and Z. Liu, “Tracking based mix-zone
 Appl., vol. 55, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 102618. [Online]. Available: location privacy evaluation in VANET,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214212620307833 vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 10957–10969, Oct. 2021.
 [71] L. Huang, K. Matsuura, H. Yamane, and K. Sezaki, “Enhancing [93] R. R. Asaad and R. I. Ali, “Back propagation neural network(BPNN)
 wireless location privacy using silent period,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless and sigmoid activation function in multi-layer networks,” Academic J.
 Commun. Netw. Conf., vol. 2, Jun. 2005, pp. 1187–1192. Nawroz Univ., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 216–221, Nov. 2019.
 [72] A. R. Beresford and F. Stajano, “Location privacy in pervasive com- [94] J. Cui, J. Wen, S. Han, and H. Zhong, “Efficient privacy-preserving
 puting,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 46–55, Jan. 2003. scheme for real-time location data in vehicular ad-hoc network,” IEEE
 [73] F. Scheuer, K. Plößl, and H. Federrath, “Preventing profile generation in Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3491–3498, Oct. 2018.
 vehicular networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Comput., [95] C. Vaas, M. Khodaei, P. Papadimitratos, and I. Martinovic, “Nowhere to
 Netw. Commun., Oct. 2008, pp. 520–525. hide? Mix-zones for private pseudonym change using chaff vehicles,”
 [74] A. R. Beresford and F. Stajano, “Mix zones: User privacy in location- in Proc. IEEE Veh. Netw. Conf. (VNC), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–8.
 aware services,” in Proc. 2nd IEEE Annu. Conf. Pervasive Comput. [96] M. Kabbur and V. A. Kumar, “MAR_Sybil: Cooperative RSU based
 Commun. Workshops, Jun. 2004, pp. 127–131. detection and prevention of Sybil attacks in routing process of VANET,”
 [75] J. Freudiger, R. Shokri, and J. Hubaux, “On the optimal placement J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 1427, no. 1, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 012009.
 of mix zones,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Privacy Enhancing Technol. Symp. [97] N. Bißmeyer, C. Stresing, and K. M. Bayarou, “Intrusion detection
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2009, pp. 216–234. in VANETs through verification of vehicle movement data,” in Proc.
 [76] R. Yu, J. Kang, X. Huang, S. Xie, Y. Zhang, and S. Gjessing, IEEE Veh. Netw. Conf., Dec. 2010, pp. 166–173.
 “MixGroup: Accumulative pseudonym exchanging for location privacy [98] S. K. Dhurandher, M. S. Obaidat, A. Jaiswal, A. Tiwari, and A. Tyagi,
 enhancement in vehicular social networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable “Securing vehicular networks: A reputation and plausibility checks-
 Secure Comput., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 93–105, Jan. 2016. based approach,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops, Dec. 2010,
 [77] A. Boualouache and S. Moussaoui, “TAPCS: Traffic-aware pseudonym pp. 1550–1554.
 changing strategy for VANETs,” Peer Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 10, no. 4, [99] B. Yu, C.-Z. Xu, and B. Xiao, “Detecting Sybil attacks in VANETs,”
 pp. 1008–1020, Jul. 2017. J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 746–756, Jun. 2013.
 [78] Y.-S. Chen, T.-T. Lo, C.-H. Lee, and A.-C. Pang, “Efficient pseudonym [100] O. Kaspi, A. Yosipof, and H. Senderowitz, “Random sample conchanging schemes for location privacy protection in VANETs,” in Proc. sensus (RANSAC) algorithm for material-informatics: Application to
 Int. Conf. Connected Vehicles Expo (ICCVE), Dec. 2013, pp. 937–938. photovoltaic solar cells,” J. Cheminformatics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–15,
 [79] MarketsAndMarkets. (Apr. 2022). Intelligent Transportation Sys- Dec. 2017.
 tem Market by Offering, System (advanced Traffic Management
 [101] M. Khodaei, H. Jin, and P. Papadimitratos, “SECMACE: Scalable and
 Systems, Its-enabled Transportation Pricing Systems, and Othrobust identity and credential management infrastructure in vehicular
 ers), Application and Geography (2021–2026). [Online]. Availcommunication systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 19,
 able: https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/intelligentno. 5, pp. 1430–1444, May 2018.
 transport-systems-its-market-764.html
 [102] I. Saini, S. Saad, and A. Jaekel, “A comprehensive pseudonym changing
 [80] M. Porter et al., “Detecting deception attacks on autonomous vehicles
 scheme for improving location privacy in vehicular networks,” Internet
 via linear time-varying dynamic watermarking,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Things, vol. 19, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100559.
 Control Technol. Appl. (CCTA), Aug. 2020, pp. 1–8.
 [81] A. Tomandl, F. Scheuer, and H. Federrath, “Simulation-based evalua- [103] S. Wang, N. Yao, N. Gong, and Z. Gao, “A trigger-based pseudonym
 tion of techniques for privacy protection in VANETs,” in Proc. IEEE exchange scheme for location privacy preserving in VANETs,” Peer
 8th Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Comput., Netw. Commun. (WiMob), Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 11, pp. 548–560, May 2018.
 Oct. 2012, pp. 165–172. [104] A. P. Mdee, M. T. R. Khan, J. Seo, and D. Kim, “Infrastructure-
 [82] N. Huq, R. Vosseler, and M. Swimmer, “Cyberattacks against independent pseudonym swap protocol for vehicular networks,” in
 intelligenttransportation systems: Assessing future threats to its,” Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Future Netw. (ICUFN), Jul. 2022,
 TrendMicro, Tech. Rep., 2017. pp. 351–356.
 [83] A. Wasef and X. Shen, “REP: Location privacy for VANETs using [105] A. P. Mdee, S. J. Khan, M. T. Raza, and D. Kim, “Security comrandom encryption periods,” Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 15, no. 1, pliant and cooperative pseudonyms swapping for location privacy
 pp. 172–185, May 2009. preservation in VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 8,
 [84] B. Hammi, Y. M. Idir, S. Zeadally, R. Khatoun, and J. Nebhen, pp. 10710–10723, Aug. 2023.
 “Is it really easy to detect Sybil attacks in C-ITS environments: A [106] M. Li, K. Sampigethaya, L. Huang, and R. Poovendran, “Swing &
 position paper,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, swap: User-centric approaches towards maximizing location privacy,”
 pp. 18273–18287, Oct. 2022. in Proc. 5th ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., Oct. 2006,
 [85] M. L. Valarmathi, A. Meenakowshalya, and A. Bharathi, “Robust pp. 19–28.
 Sybil attack detection mechanism for social networks—A survey,” in [107] I. Khacheba, M. B. Yagoubi, N. Lagraa, and A. Lakas, “Location
 Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Commun. Syst. (ICACCS), vol. 1, privacy scheme for VANETs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Sel. Topics Mobile
 Jan. 2016, pp. 1–5. Wireless Netw. (MoWNeT), May 2017, pp. 1–6.
CHBIB et al.: TRACKING VEHICLES IN C-ITS: ATTACKS, DEFENSE SOLUTIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 14635

[108] B. Moussaoui, N. Chikouche, and H. Fouchal, “An efficient privacy [121] Nvidia Flare. Accessed: Jun. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available:
 scheme for C-ITS stations,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 107, Apr. 2023, https://developer.nvidia.com/flare
 Art. no. 108613. [122] D. Zeng, S. Liang, X. Hu, H. Wang, and Z. Xu, “FedLab: A flexible
[109] J. Freudiger, M. Raya, M. Félegyházi, P. Papadimitratos, and J. Hubaux, federated learning framework,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 24, no. 100,
 “Mix-zones for location privacy in vehicular networks,” in Proc. ACM pp. 1–7, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/22-
 Workshop Wireless Netw. Intell. Transp. Syst. (WiN-ITS), Jan. 2007. 0440.html
[110] X. Deng, T. Gao, N. Guo, C. Zhao, and J. Qi, “PCP: A pseudonym [123] H. Fereidooni et al., “SAFELearn: Secure aggregation for private
 change scheme for location privacy preserving in VANETs,” Entropy, federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Secur. Privacy Workshops (SPW),
 vol. 24, no. 5, p. 648, May 2022. May 2021, pp. 56–62.
[111] M. S. Al-Marshoud, A. H. Al-Bayatti, and M. S. Kiraz, “Improved [124] J. Wang, R. Wang, L. Xiong, N. Xiong, and Z. Liu, “SAEV: Secure
 chaff-based CMIX for solving location privacy issues in VANETs,” aggregation and efficient verification for privacy-preserving federated
 Electronics, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 1302, May 2021. learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp. 39681–39696,
[112] B. Wang, Y. Wang, and R. Chen, “A practical authentication framework Dec. 2024.
 for VANETs,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2019, pp. 1–11, May 2019. [125] I. Ergün, H. U. Sami, and B. Güler, “Communication-efficient
[113] I. Sh. Shaleesh, A. A. Almohammedi, N. I. Mohammad, and secure aggregation for federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Global
 A. Muneer, “Vehicle location privacy protection mechanism based on Commun. Conf., May 2022, pp. 3881–3886, doi: 10.1109/GLOBElocation and velocity,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Decis. Aid Sci. Appl. (DASA), COM48099.2022.10001481.
 Mar. 2022, pp. 800–803. [126] J. Zhang, X. Li, K. Gu, W. Liang, and K. Li, “Secure aggre-
[114] D. Anurag, S. Ghosh, and S. Bandyopadhyay, “GPS based vehicular gation in heterogeneous federated learning for digital ecosystems,”
 collision warning system using IEEE 802.15.4 MAC/PHY standard,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1995–2003,
 in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Telecommun., Oct. 2008, pp. 154–159. Nov. 2023.
[115] R. K. Schmidt, T. Leinmüller, E. Schoch, A. Held, and G. Schäfer, [127] J. Kim, “Quantum federated learning for vehicular computing scenar-
 “Vehicle behavior analysis to enhance security in vanets,” in Proc. 4th ios,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. Converg. (ICTC),
 IEEE Vehicle Vehicle Commun. Workshop, Jul. 2008, pp. 1–11. Oct. 2023, pp. 168–172.
[116] B. Ying, D. Makrakis, and H. T. Mouftah, “Dynamic mix-zone for [128] Y. Kwak et al., “Quantum distributed deep learning architectures: Modlocation privacy in vehicular networks,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, els, discussions, and applications,” ICT Exp., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 486–491,
 no. 8, pp. 1524–1527, Aug. 2013. Aug. 2022.
[117] V. P. Chellapandi, L. Yuan, C. G. Brinton, S. H. Żak, and Z. Wang, [129] A. T. Olutimehin, S. A. Joseph, A. J. Ajayi, O. C. Metibemu,
 “Federated learning for connected and automated vehicles: A survey A. Y. Balogun, and O. O. Olaniyi, “Future-proofing data: Assessof existing approaches and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, ing the feasibility of post-quantum cryptographic algorithms to
 vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 119–137, Nov. 2023. mitigate ‘harvest now, decrypt later’ attacks,” SSRN Electron. J.,
[118] S. Savazzi, M. Nicoli, M. Bennis, S. Kianoush, and L. Barbieri, Feb. 2025.
 “Opportunities of federated learning in connected, cooperative, and [130] G. Alagic et al., “Status report on the first round of the additional
 automated industrial systems,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 59, no. 2, digital signature schemes for the nist post-quantum cryptography
 pp. 16–21, Feb. 2021. standardization process,” NIST, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, Tech. Rep. IR
[119] A. Forootani and R. Iervolino, “Asynchronous federated learning: 8528, 2024, vol. 8528.
 A scalable approach for decentralized machine learning,” 2024, [131] A. Aggarwal, S. Gaba, J. Kumar, and S. Nagpal, “Blockchain and
 arXiv:2412.17723. autonomous vehicles: Architecture, security and challenges,” in Proc.
[120] B. Yurdem, M. Kuzlu, M. K. Gullu, F. O. Catak, and M. Tabassum, 5th Int. Conf. Comput. Intell. Commun. Technol. (CCICT), Jul. 2022,
 “Federated learning: Overview, strategies, applications, tools pp. 332–338.
 and future directions,” Heliyon, vol. 10, no. 19, Oct. 2024, [132] B.-G. Jeong, T.-Y. Youn, N.-S. Jho, and S. U. Shin, “Blockchain-based
 Art. no. e38137. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ data sharing and trading model for the connected car,” Sensors, vol. 20,
 science/article/pii/S2405844024141680 no. 11, p. 3141, Jun. 2020.