PDF Download
 3719027.3765073.pdf
 27 February 2026
 Total Citations: 0
 Total Downloads: 2252
 .
 .
 Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3719027.3765073

 .
 .
 .
 .
 RESEARCH-ARTICLE
 Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traﬀic under

 .
 .
 Published: 22 November 2025
 Dynamic Network Conditions

 .
 .
 Citation in BibTeX format

 YUQI QING, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

 .
 .
 CCS '25: ACM SIGSAC Conference on
 Computer and Communications Security
 .
 QILEI YIN, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China October 13 - 17, 2025
 .
 XINHAO DENG, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
 Taipei, Taiwan

 .
 .
 Conference Sponsors:
 .
 XIAOLI ZHANG, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China SIGSAC
 .
 PEIYANG LI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
 .
 ZHUOTAO LIU, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
 .
 View all
 .
 .
 Open Access Support provided by:
 .
 George Mason University
 .
 Tsinghua University
 .
 University of Science and Technology Beijing
 .
 Beijing Institute of Technology
 .
 CCS '25: Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (November 2025)
 hps://doi.org/10.1145/3719027.3765073
 ISBN: 9798400715259
.
 Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traffic
 under Dynamic Network Conditions
 Yuqi Qing Qilei Yin Xinhao Deng
 INSC, Tsinghua University Zhongguancun Laboratory INSC, Tsinghua University
 Beijing, China Beijing, China Beijing, China
 qyq21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn yinql@zgclab.edu.cn xinhaodeng.thu@gmail.com

 Xiaoli Zhang Peiyang Li Zhuotao Liu
 University of Science and Technology INSC, Tsinghua University INSC, Tsinghua University
 Beijing, China Beijing, China Beijing, China
 xiaoli.z@ustb.edu.cn peiyangli.20@gmail.com zhuotaoliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

 Kun Sun Ke Xu∗ Qi Li∗
 IST, George Mason University DCST, Tsinghua University & INSC, Tsinghua University &
 Fairfax, Virginia, USA Zhongguancun Laboratory Zhongguancun Laboratory
 ksun3@gmu.edu Beijing, China Beijing, China
 xuke@tsinghua.edu.cn qli01@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract CCS Concepts
Most existing DL-based encrypted traffic classification methods suf- • Security and privacy → Network security.
fer performance degradation in real-world deployments due to dynamic network conditions, e.g., network environment changes and Keywords
traffic obfuscation. Dynamic network conditions cause encrypted Encrypted Traffic Classification; Deep Learning; Detection
traffic to exhibit distinct feature patterns during training and testing phases. To address this issue, we propose MetaTraffic, a novel ACM Reference Format:
and general DL training framework built upon meta-learning that Yuqi Qing, Qilei Yin, Xinhao Deng, Xiaoli Zhang, Peiyang Li, Zhuotao Liu,
 Kun Sun, Ke Xu, and Qi Li. 2025. Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying
enhances the performance of supervised DL models designed for
 Encrypted Traffic under Dynamic Network Conditions. In Proceedings of the
encrypted traffic classification against dynamic network conditions. 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security
Our key observation is that the traffic of the same network behav- (CCS ’25), October 13–17, 2025, Taipei. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages.
iors share the same semantic features even under different network https://doi.org/10.1145/3719027.3765073
conditions, which can be considered as stable feature representations. Therefore, MetaTraffic helps DL models learn stable feature
representations by minimizing the discrepancies in how the mod-
 1 Introduction
els represent traffic features under different network conditions, With the widespread adoption of encrypted protocols, the prothereby achieving robust classification under dynamic network portion of encrypted traffic has surged dramatically. For examconditions. We implement MetaTraffic based on meta-learning with ple, approximately 97% of the world’s top 100 websites now use
three innovative facilitate modules to enhance its performance. HTTPS [63]. Encrypted traffic classification, which identifies the
We evaluate MetaTraffic using three public datasets and three new category of applications or behaviors that generate traffic withlarge-scale encrypted traffic datasets that cover multiple types of out decrypting its payload, is essential for security and managenetwork conditions. Experimental results show that, under dynamic ment tasks such as intrusion detection [1, 2], user action identificamultiple types of network conditions, our framework improves the tion [10, 11], and application behavior analysis [22, 42].
accuracy of DL models by 8.94% and the F1-Macro score by 12.55%, Most existing encrypted traffic classification methods [15, 23,
while existing robust training methods decrease the accuracy by 39, 47, 52, 53, 56, 72, 73, 76] are based on supervised deep learning
28.85% and the F1-Macro score by 33.52%. (DL) models and have been extensively studied. However, their
 performance often degrades when deployed in real-world networks
 due to dynamic network conditions, which lead to discrepancies be-
∗ also with State Key Laboratory of Internet Architecture
 tween the features observed during training and those encountered
 after deployment. For example, training and newly incoming encrypted traffic may originate from different hosts, traverse different
 network environments, and be obfuscated by different strategies.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. These factors undermine the generalizability of the DL models
CCS ’25, Taipei and result in higher classification errors. Recently, robust train-
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1525-9/2025/10 ing methods [3, 48, 64, 67, 78] have been proposed to improve the
https://doi.org/10.1145/3719027.3765073 performance of DL models. They augment new traffic subject to

 3563
CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei Yuqi Qing et al.

specific network conditions for DL model training. Unfortunately, enabling them to generate stable feature representations for previthese methods are only effective when the incoming and training ously unseen encrypted traffic after deployment rather than simply
traffic is under the same network conditions. Moreover, they can for the training traffic.
only withstand the impact of a specific type of network condition. We choose three public datasets and collect three new datasets to
Although Rosetta [64] and TrafCL [67] demonstrate robustness perform extensive evaluations. Overall, we collected over 880,000
against varying network environment conditions, they struggle encrypted traffic flows from 20 cloud servers across five countries
to generalize to traffic patterns arising from heterogeneous host Each new dataset is collected under three types of different network
conditions. In real-world scenarios, encrypted traffic might be af- conditions: (i) the encrypted traffic is generated by different hosts,
fected by multiple network conditions simultaneously, which poses (ii) the encrypted traffic is transmitted through different network ena significant challenge to existing approaches. vironments, and (iii) the encrypted traffic is obfuscated by different
 To address the aforementioned issue, we propose MetaTraffic, a strategies. To the best of our knowledge, the three datasets are the
novel and general DL training framework built upon meta-learning first large-scale encrypted traffic datasets generated under multiple
that improves the performance of supervised DL models designed types of network conditions. We evaluate our framework’s perforfor encrypted traffic classification under dynamic network condi- mance under dynamic single type and multiple types of network
tions. Our key observation is that the traffic of the same network conditions using both public and newly collected datasets.
behaviors shares the same semantic features even under different The contributions of this paper are fourfold:
network conditions, which can be considered as stable feature repre- • We propose a novel DL training framework, MetaTraffic, to imsentations. Therefore, we aim to help DL models learn stable feature prove the classification performance of any supervised DL modrepresentations by minimizing the discrepancies in how the mod- els designed for encrypted traffic classification under dynamic
els represent traffic features under different network conditions, network conditions.
thereby achieving robust classification. • Our framework enables DL models to generate stable feature
 In particular, we devise MetaTraffic based on meta-learning with representations for encrypted traffic under dynamic network
three innovative modules. First, MetaTraffic divides the training conditions, ensuring accurate classification. This is achieved by
dataset into multiple tasks, each of which consists of training and minimizing the discrepancies in how DL models represent traffic
testing subsets that differ in network conditions, to simulate the features under different network conditions.
variability between model training and deployment environments. • We release three large-scale encrypted traffic datasets1 , which
For each task, a task-specific temporary DL model is trained on comprise over 880,000 flows and incorporate three common types
the corresponding training subset. Here, we design a class-aware of network conditions. To the best of our knowledge, these are
representation augmentation module that adds class-aware and the first publicly available encrypted traffic datasets generated
stochastic noise into the feature representations during their train- under multiple types of network conditions.
ing phase, mitigating the negative impacts of easy training traffic • We prototype MetaTraffic and evaluate its performance on three
samples on the temporary models’ representation capabilities. Sec- public datasets and our newly collected datasets. The experimenond, with the constructed temporary models, MetaTraffic calculates tal results show that our framework can improve the DL models’
the feature representation discrepancy between the training and accuracy by 8.94% and F1-macro score by 12.55% on average untesting subsets of each task as the task’s loss. A cluster-based rep- der dynamic multiple types of network conditions, while existing
resentation alignment module is proposed here to accurately and robust training methods decrease the accuracy by 28.85% and
efficiently calculate the discrepancy. It applies an adaptive cluster- F1-macro score by 33.52%.
ing algorithm to automatically identify a small number of highly
representative feature representations for traffic samples exhibiting diverse behaviors, intended for discrepancy calculation. Third,
 2 Problem Statement
MetaTraffic jointly optimizes the original DL model based on all This paper aims to develop a training framework that can improve
tasks’ losses to minimize the feature representation discrepancy. We the performance of any supervised DL models designed for endesign an adaptive task weight allocation module to accelerate the crypted traffic classification under dynamic network conditions.
convergence of the DL model while preventing it from overfitting These DL models require a certain amount of encrypted traffic
to specific tasks. It continuously evaluates the DL model’s optimiza- 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 for training to classify the newly incoming traffic 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 (also
tion progress by measuring the loss variations in successive training referred to as testing traffic). In real-world networks, both 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛
iterations and allocates adaptive task weights that align with the and 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 are subject to diverse network conditions. Since the promodel’s optimization requirements at different optimization stages. cess of collecting 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 is controlled, we can identify the specific
MetaTraffic optimizes the DL model iteratively. The DL model from network conditions that affect 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 in advance, i.e., the network
the previous iteration is used in the next iteration to construct tem- conditions that affect 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 are known. However, the dynamic
porary models and is further optimized based on new task losses. nature of network conditions results in inconsistencies between
Upon convergence, the DL model learns to generate stable feature the specific network conditions affecting testing encrypted traffic
representations for encrypted traffic under dynamic network condi- and those influencing training encrypted traffic. Moreover, multiple
tions and can be deployed for robust classification after fine-tuning types of network conditions may impact both 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 and 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡
on all training traffic. We implement MetaTraffic based on metalearning because it can enhance DL models’ generalization ability, 1 The collected encrypted traffic datasets and the source code of our framework are in
 https://github.com/XXnormal/MAML-Training-ETC

 3564
Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traffic under Dynamic Network Conditions CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei

simultaneously. In this paper, we consider three common types of Dynamic Network Condition Type
 Applicnetwork conditions that can alter the features of encrypted traffic: Method Network Network
 Host Obfuscation ability
 Conditions Environment
• Encrypted traffic is generated by different hosts. Different Rosetta[64] % % ! % %
 hosts often vary in hardware, operating systems, and encryp- TrafCL[67] % % ! % %
 tion protocols, which leads to generating encrypted traffic with 2DA[78] % % ! % %
 dissimilar features. For instance, since the TLS 1.3 encryption NetAugment[3] % ! ! % %
 protocol has fewer handshake rounds than TLS 1.2, the encrypted AAAttack[48] % % ! ! %
 traffic generated by hosts adopting TLS 1.3 has a smaller hand- Ours ! ! ! ! !
 shake data size features [12]. Table 1: The comparison between existing robust training
• Encrypted traffic is transmitted through different network methods and our framework. Dynamic Network Conditions
 environments. The link layer, network layer, and transport indicates the method’s effectiveness when the training and
 layer protocols, along with their configurations, often vary across testing encrypted traffic is subject to inconsistent network
 different network environments, rendering the encrypted traffic conditions. Network Condition Type indicates the method’s
 transmitted through different network environments exhibiting resistance to a specific network condition type. Applicability
 distinct features. For instance, a larger maximum transmission means whether the method can be applied to any supervised
 unit (MTU) setting can increase the maximum packet size per DL models for encrypted traffic classification.
 flow while reducing the number of packets [64]. Due to common
 network operations such as routing selection and load balancing,
 network traffic is often transmitted through different network
 environments at different times.
 Train with support set from all conditions
• Encrypted traffic is being obfuscated by different strate- 𝜙
 𝜙
 gies. Traffic obfuscation refers to the process of concealing the Performance loss on all scenarios
 𝜙
 category information of encrypted traffic by actively altering Optimize the original model with the loss
 ⋯
 its features. Numerous traffic obfuscation strategies have been
 proposed to prevent the identification of malicious encrypted
 traffic or users’ web browsing behaviors. These strategies modify Figure 1: The process of the Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
 traffic features in various ways, such as by injecting dummy pack- algorithm.
 ets [24, 30, 46] or regularizing traffic of different categories into
 similar transmission patterns [5, 6, 13, 19, 26, 61]. Each strategy
 typically includes multiple parameter settings to adjust the de- DL models. We compare our work with existing robust training
 gree of feature alteration. As a result, encrypted traffic obfuscated methods in Table 1.
 using different strategies and parameter settings often exhibits
 distinct feature patterns. 3 Preliminary: Meta-Learning
The dynamic, multiple types of network conditions result in train- Meta-learning is an effective training method that enables DL moding and testing encrypted traffic of the same category exhibiting els to achieve good generalization ability across various learning
dissimilar feature patterns. As a result, the DL models that are tasks. We illustrate the core idea of meta-learning by introducing the
trained on 𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 usually perform poorly on 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 . Our framework classical Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) algorithm [21]
aims to improve the DL models’ performance on 𝐷𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 only using and show its process in Figure 1. Specifically, the input of MAML
𝐷𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 , regardless of their architectures or the features they used. is an untrained DL model 𝜙 0 and multiple datasets, each of which
 Our objective is also to address the shortcomings of existing is regarded as a specific learning task. In the first iteration, one or
robust training methods [3, 48, 64, 67, 78]. First, we consider clas- several tasks are selected, and an independent temporary model is
sifying encrypted traffic under dynamic network conditions, in constructed for each selected task by training 𝜙 0 on a support set
which the training and testing encrypted traffic is subject to incon- and is evaluated on a query set, where the two sets are disjoint and
sistent network conditions. This is a more realistic yet challenging both are randomly selected from the dataset corresponding to the
scenario, whereas existing studies assume that training and testing task. Then, the original 𝜙 0 (i.e., before temporary model construcencrypted traffic share the same known network conditions. Second, tion) is optimized based on the performance of each constructed
we consider that network conditions may come in various types, temporary model. The optimized model in the first iteration, dewhereas previous studies are only capable of defending against spe- noted as 𝜙 1 , serves as the input for the second training iteration, i.e.,
cific single types of network conditions in most cases. Additionally, a new temporary model is created based on 𝜙 1 , and its performance
we also consider applicability. Existing robust training methods will be used to optimize 𝜙 1 . Once the DL model has converged, it
only augment new encrypted traffic in specific feature formats, re- will perform well on different tasks. Moreover, since meta-learning
stricting their use to DL models specifically tailored to these feature does not directly optimize the DL model using the existing data of
formats. For example, Rosetta [64] and NetAugment [3] are limited all tasks (i.e., it optimizes based on the performance of temporary
to augmenting new encrypted traffic in packet length sequence models), it prevents the DL model from overfitting to the existing
formats. In contrast, our framework does not rely on augmenting data, thereby improving its generalization ability for previously
new traffic and can enhance the performance of any supervised unseen data [4, 17, 36].

 3565
CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei Yuqi Qing et al.

 Meta-learning has been widely adopted in various domains, representation discrepancy calculation. The adaptive task weight
such as few-shot classification [8, 31], personalized recommen- allocation module continuously evaluates the optimization process
dation [18, 69], and robot manipulation [28, 58]. In this paper, we of the DL model and allocates adaptive task weights to accelerate
divide training encrypted traffic under different known network its convergence while preventing overfitting.
conditions into many pairs of condition-disjoint training and testing
subsets. Each pair serves as an independent task that simulates sce- 4.2 Training Task-specific Temporary Models
narios where DL models encounter encrypted traffic under dynamic MetaTraffic constructs a temporary model for each task using the
network conditions. Thus, by optimizing the DL model through task’s training samples and either the initial, untrained DL model
meta-learning on these tasks, the DL model will learn to generate (in the first iteration) or the optimized DL model from the previous
stable feature representations for both training traffic and newly iteration (in subsequent iterations). In particular, let 𝐷𝑡𝑟 be the
incoming traffic, thereby ensuring accurate classification results training subset of a task and (𝑥, 𝑦) be an encrypted training traffic
upon deployment under dynamic network conditions. sample belonging to it, where 𝑥 and 𝑦 denote the features and class
 label, respectively, the temporary model’s initial parameters (also
4 Methodology be denoted as 𝜙) are copied from the initial, untrained DL model or
 the optimized DL model from the previous iteration. Then, we can
4.1 Overview apply the traditional supervised training method [34] to update the
To achieve robust encrypted traffic classification under dynamic temporary model’s parameters:
network conditions, MetaTraffic helps DL models learn stable fea- ∑︁
ture representations by minimizing the discrepancies in how the 𝜙 ∗ = 𝜙 − 𝜂 1 ∇𝜙 L (C(Z(𝑥; 𝜙); 𝜙), 𝑦), (1)
models represent traffic features under different network condi- (𝑥,𝑦) ∈𝐷𝑡𝑟
tions. Typically, a DL model designed for classification tasks con- where 𝜙 ∗ is the updated parameters, L (·) is the classification loss
sists of multiple layers: the former layers process the raw features function (e.g., the cross entropy), 𝜂 1 is the learning rate, Z(·) and
of data into representations that encapsulate essential attributes, C(·) are the outputs of the feature representation and classification
while the latter layers learn classification knowledge from these layers of the model, respectively.
representations to categorize testing samples. With stable feature However, this straightforward strategy has a critical drawback:
representations, the classification knowledge learned by the DL easy training traffic samples may limit the representation capability
model from training traffic can be effectively applied to classify of the temporary model. Easy samples are those with features that
testing traffic, regardless of how its features vary under dynamic directly infer the class label, such as malicious encrypted traffic
network conditions, thereby ensuring accurate results. containing specific handshake metadata rarely observed in normal
 We show the training process of MetaTraffic in Figure 2. In partic- traffic [27]. They can lead the temporary model to rely solely on
ular, MetaTraffic randomly divides the training dataset into multiple specific features that directly infer the class label rather than explortasks, each of which consists of training and testing subsets that ing the intrinsic correlations among all features to generate feature
differ in network conditions. The initial untrained DL model used representations. Consequently, the representation capability of the
for encrypted traffic classification is denoted as 𝜙. In the first itera- temporary model becomes constrained, making it inadequate for
tion, an independent temporary model 𝜙 ∗ is constructed for each producing accurate representations when all features undergo sigtask by training 𝜙 on the task’s training subset. Next, the feature nificant changes due to dynamic network conditions. Furthermore,
representations of all training and testing traffic samples in each since the DL model is optimized based on the temporary model’s
task are obtained using the corresponding temporary model, and performance, its representation capability will also be restricted.
the discrepancy between them is calculated as the task’s loss. Then To overcome the above issue, we design a class-aware repre-
𝜙 is jointly optimized based on the losses of all tasks. The optimized sentation augmentation module. It directly adds noise to the fea-
𝜙 is used in the next training iteration to construct the temporary ture representations generated by the temporary model during its
models, further optimized based on newly calculated task losses, training phase. The noise directly enhances the diversity of the
and the cycle continues. Once the DL model converges after mul- generated feature representations, particularly for monotonous featiple iterations, the optimized model can generate stable feature ture representations corresponding to easy training traffic samples.
representations for encrypted traffic under dynamic network con- Note that the temporary model performs classification based on its
ditions. Finally, the DL model is fine-tuned using all training traffic generated feature representations. Therefore, diverse feature reprebefore being deployed for encrypted traffic classification. sentations increase the classification difficulty for the temporary
 To facilitate the training process, MetaTraffic includes three mod- model, preventing it from relying solely on specific features to genules: the class-aware representation augmentation module, the erate feature representations with insufficient information. Instead,
cluster-based representation alignment module, and the adaptive they encourage the temporary model to explore the intrinsic corretask weight allocation module. The class-aware representation aug- lations among all features, producing feature representations with
mentation module introduces class-aware and stochastic noise into richer information for more accurate classification, i.e., enhancing
the feature representations during the training of temporary mod- the model’s representation capability. Furthermore, compared to
els to enhance their representation capabilities. The cluster-based traditional data augmentation methods used to enhance feature
representation alignment module automatically identifies a small representation diversity [7, 25], our module does not incur addinumber of highly representative feature representations using an tional training overhead because it does not synthesize any new
adaptive clustering algorithm for accurate and efficient feature training samples.

 3566
Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traffic under Dynamic Network Conditions CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei

 Model Training All training traffic
 Representation Calculating task-specific 𝓛𝟏 Jointly optimizing original
 Fine-tuning Training task-specific 𝒵!𝒵𝒵
 ∗𝒵∗!∗∗
 !!!
 𝒵!!∗ : 𝒵 Cond. 1-N
 layers 𝒵 !!!
 𝓛𝟐
 Enhancing temporary models representation discrepancy as losses 𝒵!%∗: model by task-specific losses
 Classification 𝒞!!∗!!∗!∗ ∗ ∗∗∗
 𝒞!𝒞!∗𝒞!
 𝜙%𝜙𝜙𝜙 𝒞

 ⋯
 layers 𝒞 $""
 𝒵!&∗:
 𝓛𝑻
 Cond. 1 DL model 𝜙 𝑇 temporary models Optimized model
 under different network conditions

 Class-aware Representation Cluster-based Representation Adaptive Task Weight
 Disturbance-
 Condition-
 Cond. 2
 Augmentation Alignment Allocation
 disjoint
 disjoint Task2
 Task1 Training traffic Testing traffic
 Training traffic sets

 randomly split

 Add stochastic noise Add class-aware noise Training subset r
 ite ≈ 1 ⋅ ∇ℒ! + 0 ⋅ ∇ℒ" Cond. 1-N Cond. ?
 Training subset xt 1 𝜙
 ne iter te

 representation space
 representation space Adaptive a
 Cond. 3 allocight

 Deployment
 we Goal1: Accelerate
 monoclustering ℒ# convergence
 𝜙#∗ 𝒵

 …
 ℒ$
 tonous 𝜙$∗
 Goal: Efficient 𝜙 alloca
 Stable
 Testing subset weighte
 alignment t
 …

 mono- iter N ∇ℒ ! -∇ℒ % representation
 tonous nex 𝜙 $
 Cond. N t it Fine-tuned 𝒞
 er Goal2: Prevent
 Testing subset overfitting
 𝑇 tasks Goal: Intra-class diversity Same class

 Figure 2: The overview of MetaTraffic.

 Our module utilizes existing methods [9, 37, 59] to generate these the pre-defined representation layers. For example, the representatwo types of noise. In particular, let the class label set of all training tion layer of the FS-Net model [40] is designed as the intermediate
samples be 𝐶 and the output of the feature representation layers layer between its encoder and decoder modules. Otherwise, we
of the temporary model be 𝑑-dimensional vectors. In each training consider the last fully connected layer as the classification layer
iteration of the temporary model, our representation augmentation and all preceding layers as the representation layers, as [78] does.
method works as follows: 1) it obtains the original feature representations of all training samples from the output of the temporary
model’s representation layers; 2) it calculates the variance of all 4.3 Calculating Task-specific Representation
training samples belonging to each class in each dimension of the Discrepancy
representation vectors and denote it as 𝜎 𝑦2 = {𝜎 𝑦2 0 , ..., 𝜎 𝑦2 |𝐶 | }, where For each task, MetaTraffic obtains the feature representations of all
𝜎 𝑦2𝑖 ∈ R1×𝑑 represents the variance information of all samples be- traffic samples in the training and testing subsets using the conlonging to the 𝑖-th class; 3) For each training sample (𝑥, 𝑦), it adds structed temporary model corresponding to this task and calculates
noises on its original feature representation 𝑧 to create a new e 𝑧: the discrepancy between them as the task’s loss. To achieve this
 goal, a straightforward loss function design is to calculate the sum
 𝑧 = 𝛼 ⊙ 𝑧 + 𝛽 + 𝛾,
 e (2) of the distances between each pair of feature representations belonging to the same class from the training and the testing subsets,
where 𝛼 ∼ N (1, 𝜆1 · 𝐼 ), 𝛽 ∼ N (0, 𝜆2 · 𝐼 ) and 𝛾 ∼ N (0, 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔(𝜎 𝑦2 )),
 respectively. However, its time complexity is 𝑂 (𝑛 2𝑑), where 𝑛 is the
and 𝜆1 and 𝜆2 are two hyper-parameters; 4) The new feature reprenumber of samples in each class and 𝑑 denotes the dimensionality
sentations of all training samples are input into the classification
 of feature representation, which significantly increases the training
layers of the temporary model to calculate the classification loss
 overhead. A widely used alternative design [17, 55, 70] is to obtain
and update the parameters of the temporary model:
 the mean feature representation vector (i.e., the prototype) of each
 class and calculate the sum of the distances between prototypes.
 ∑︁
 𝜙 ∗ = 𝜙 − 𝜂 1 ∇𝜙 L (C(e𝑧 ; 𝜙), 𝑦). (3)
 (𝑥,𝑦) ∈𝐷𝑡𝑟
 However, in certain encrypted traffic classification tasks, traffic samples that represent diverse behaviors may be labeled as the same
 Note that we add two types of noise to the feature representation class. For example, the traffic generated by various users accessing
of each training sample. The 𝛾 noise is sampled from a multivari- different types of websites may all be labeled as normal. This leads
ate normal distribution with a zero-mean vector and a covariance to significant variations in feature representations within the same
matrix formed by the variance information of the feature repre- class. A coarse-grained single prototype is insufficient to represent
sentations of the samples belonging to the same class. This design these varying feature representations, which results in the singleavoids generating noise located in the distribution area of feature prototype-based loss function design being unable to calculate the
representations of other class samples, i.e., maintaining the seman- discrepancy between feature representations accurately.
tic integrity of each class in the training subset, enhancing the To overcome the above limitations, we design a cluster-based
diversity of feature representations without preventing the tempo- representation alignment module. It utilizes an adaptive clustering
rary model from learning incorrect classification knowledge. The algorithm, i.e., DP-Means [33], to automatically identify a small
𝛼 and 𝛽 noise is sampled from two other normal distributions to number of highly representative feature representations for traffic
further increase the diversity of feature representations, and we samples exhibiting diverse behaviors in each class, thereby enabling
usually set 𝜆1, 𝜆2 to small values. In this paper, we implement our accurate and efficient discrepancy calculation. In a nutshell, the
method with 𝜆1 = 𝜆2 . DP-Means method fits all input data into a Gaussian mixture dis-
Identifying the representation layers. For a supervised DL tribution and calculates the lower bound of the distance between
model used for classifying encrypted traffic, if its representation two data points belonging to different Gaussian distributions as
layers are explicitly defined in its design, we obtain the feature the threshold of determining whether a data point belongs to an
representations of each encrypted traffic sample from the output of existing cluster. Therefore, the DP-Means method can automatically

 3567
CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei Yuqi Qing et al.

identify the minimum number of compact clusters that encapsulate Algorithm 1: Class Prototype Identification
all input data without knowing the number of clusters in advance, Data: feature representation set 𝑍 , hyper-parameter 𝜎, class
where each cluster corresponds to an independent Gaussian distri- label set 𝐶
bution, and its Gaussian center can accurately represent all the data Result: prototype set 𝑃 (𝑐 ) = {𝜇𝑖 } for each class 𝑐
within the cluster. Moreover, compared with other typical cluster- // calculate cluster threshold
ing methods such as DBSCAN [20] and hierarchical clustering [29], 1 𝜌 ← the mean of the standard deviations of all feature
which have a time complexity larger than 𝑂 (𝑛 2𝑑), the DP-Means representations
method is significantly more efficient with a time complexity of  in 𝑍 oneach dimension
 2 𝜆 ← −2𝜎 log (1+𝜌/𝜎 1
only 𝑂 (𝑛𝑘𝑑), where 𝑘 represents the maximum number of clusters ) 𝑑/2
belonging to each class and 𝑑 denotes the dimensionality of the // clustering all samples with the threshold
feature representation, respectively. Since 𝑘 ≪ 𝑛 in most cases, 3 𝑃
 (𝑐 ) ← {center of all vectors in class 𝑐} for all 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶;
𝑂 (𝑛𝑘𝑑) is considerably smaller than 𝑂 (𝑛 2𝑑), making DP-Means a 4 for (𝑧, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑍 do
more efficient choice. 5 if distance between 𝑧 and any center in 𝑃 (𝑐 ) > 𝜆 then
 In particular, we use DP-Means to cluster the feature represen- 6 𝑃 (𝑦) ← 𝑃 (𝑦) + {𝑧} // create new cluster
tations of all traffic samples in the training and testing subsets,
 7 end
respectively, while ensuring that the feature representations within
 8 end
each cluster belong to the same class and calculate the Gaussian
center of each cluster as a prototype of the corresponding class. We // calculate Gaussian center as class prototype
 9 for 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 do
show the process in Alg.1. By using these few but highly representative prototypes, we can efficiently and accurately compute their 10 for 𝜇𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 (𝑐 ) and (𝑧 𝑗 , 𝑦 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝑍 with 𝑦 𝑗 = 𝑐 do
 N (𝑧 𝑗 |𝜇𝑖 ,𝜎 )
discrepancy as the loss of the task. We denote the set of prototypes 11 𝜋𝑖 𝑗 ← Í
 (𝑐 ) 𝜇 ∈𝑃 (𝑐 )
 N (𝑧 𝑗 |𝜇,𝜎 )
for class 𝑐 obtained from the training and testing subsets as 𝑃𝑡𝑟
 (𝑐 ) 12 end
and 𝑃𝑡𝑒 respectively and calculate the discrepancy between these nÍ 𝜋 𝑧 o
 𝑃 (𝑐 ) ← Í𝑗 𝜋 | 𝑖 = 1, · · · , |𝑃 (𝑐 ) |
 𝑖𝑗 𝑗
 13
prototypes from two different aspects as the task’s loss L: 𝑗 𝑖𝑗

 1 ∑︁ 14 end
 2
 L𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 = E (𝑐 ) (𝑐 ) log ||𝜇𝑖 − 𝜇 𝑗 || , (4)
 |𝐶 | 𝑐 𝜇𝑖 ∈𝑃𝑡𝑟 ,𝜇 𝑗 ∈𝑃𝑡𝑒

 generalization ability, i.e., only capable of generating stable repre-
 𝑑 (𝜇 1, 𝜇2 ) = 𝐾𝐿(C(𝜇 1 )||C(𝜇 2 )) + 𝐾𝐿(C(𝜇 2 )||C(𝜇 1 )), (5)
 sentations for encrypted traffic belonging to specific tasks rather
 1 ∑︁ than a variety of scenarios.
 L𝑠𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐 = E (𝑐 ) (𝑐 ) 𝑑 (𝜇𝑖 , 𝜇 𝑗 ), (6)
 |𝐶 | 𝑐 𝜇𝑖 ∈𝑃𝑡𝑟 ,𝜇 𝑗 ∈𝑃𝑡𝑒 To accelerate the optimization of the DL model while preventing
 it from overfitting to specific tasks, we design an adaptive task
 L = 𝜔 1 · L𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 + 𝜔 2 · L𝑠𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐 , (7) weight allocation module. Its core idea is to continuously evaluate
where 𝐾𝐿(𝑝 ||𝑞) = 𝑝 log(𝑝/𝑞) and 𝜔 1, 𝜔 2 are weight parameters. the optimization progress of the DL model and allocate task weights
 The L𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 term quantifies the content discrepancy between that align with the model’s optimization requirements at different
prototypes, while the L𝑠𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠 term captures the semantic dis- optimization stages. Typically, in the early optimization stage, due
parity between prototypes, i.e., whether they can be classified into to the DL model’s limited representation capability, the loss of each
the same class by the temporary model. This loss design ensures task tends to fluctuate significantly between consecutive training
that, upon optimization, the DL model produces feature representa- iterations. Thus, higher weights should be assigned to high-loss
tions for encrypted traffic affected by different network conditions tasks to accelerate the optimization process. In the later optimizathat are both content- and semantically similar, i.e., stable feature tion stage, as the DL model’s representation capability improves,
representations. the loss of each task tends to exhibit only minor variations between
 training iterations. Thus, the weights should be more evenly dis-
4.4 Jointly Optimizing DL Model tributed across tasks to prevent the DL model from overfocusing
MetaTraffic jointly optimizes the DL model in the original state on high-loss tasks. In particular, assume there are 𝑇 tasks in total
(i.e., before temporary model construction) based on the loss of and we denote the loss of 𝑡-th task in the 𝑒-th training iteration of
all tasks, enabling it to generate stable feature representations. A our framework as L𝑡𝑒 , the weight vector 𝑊 𝑒 for each task in this
straightforward joint optimization approach is to calculate the sum iteration is computed by:
  ′
of the second-order derivatives of each task’s loss with respect to 𝑊 𝑒 = Softmax 𝑤 𝑒 · L1𝑒 , . . . , 𝑤 𝑒 · L𝑡𝑒 , (8)
the DL model parameters, using this as the optimization gradient.
However, this approach overlooks the fact that tasks may contribute 𝑇
 !
 𝜂 3 ∑︁  𝑒 −1 
differently to the DL model’s representation capability due to each 𝑤 𝑒 = 𝑤 𝑒 −1 · 1 − arg tan L𝑡 − L𝑡𝑒 , (9)
 𝑇 𝑡 =1
task containing different training and testing samples. To accelerate
the optimization process, greater weights can be assigned to tasks where 𝜂 3 is the learning rate for updating 𝑤 and the weight in the
with higher losses. Nevertheless, this strategy risks causing the first training iteration, i.e, 𝑤 1 , is a pre-defined hyper-parameter.
DL model to overfit to high-loss tasks, thereby compromising its Note that the optimization process is evaluated based on L𝑡𝑒 −1 − L𝑡𝑒 ,

 3568
Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traffic under Dynamic Network Conditions CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei

i.e., loss variation in successive training iterations. Our design en- Dataset Network Condition Type(s) Number of flows
sures that when loss variations are significant during the early Application
 Different Hosts 3,023,734
optimization stage, larger weight coefficients 𝑤 are obtained, allow- -Host
ing tasks with higher losses to receive greater weights. In the later DoHBrw
 Different Network Environments 4,985
optimization stage, as loss variations become smaller, our design -NetEnv
decreases the weight coefficients, thereby minimizing the differ- Tor
 Different Obfuscation Events 105,730 × 13
ences between task weights. With the weight vector 𝑊 , the update -Obfuscation
of the DL model in the 𝑒-th training iteration is as follows: Application
 Different Hosts,
 Different Network Environments, 281,935 × 13
 𝑇 -ALL
 𝑒 𝑒 −1
 ∑︁
 𝑒 Different Obfuscation Events
 𝜙 =𝜙 − 𝜂2 𝑊 [𝑡] · ∇𝜙 L𝑡𝑒 , (10)
 Different Hosts,
 𝑡 =1 DoHBrw
 Different Network Environments, 631,700 × 13
 -ALL
where 𝜂 2 is the hyper-parameter of the learning rate. Note that L𝑡𝑒 Different Obfuscation Events
is computed based on 𝜙𝑡∗ , while 𝜙𝑡∗ is obtained by performing first- Tor Different Hosts & Network Environments,
 149,701 × 13
order optimization on 𝜙. Thus, ∇𝜙 L𝑡𝑒 is the second-order derivative -ALL Different Obfuscation Events
of L𝑡𝑒 with respect to 𝜙. When the DL model converges after mul- Table 2: The network conditions affecting each public and
tiple iterations, it can generate stable feature representations for newly collected dataset, as well as the number of network
encrypted traffic under dynamic network conditions. Finally, we flows they include. Each newly collected dataset contains
fine-tune it using all training traffic, and then it can be deployed for both the original unobfuscated traffic and the traffic obfusrobust encrypted traffic classification. The entire training process cated by 12 obfuscation events.
of our framework is shown in Alg.2.

 Algorithm 2: Meta learning-based robust training of classifying encrypted traffic produced by different applications
 Input: initial DL model 𝜙 0 , 𝑇 training tasks {(𝐷𝑡𝑟 , 𝐷𝑡𝑒 )} under dynamic host conditions.
 Output: converged DL model 𝜙 • DoHBrw-NetEnv [64] is generated by replaying the normal and
 𝑒
1 while 𝜙 is not converged do malicious DNS over HTTPS (DoH) traffic, which is extracted
2 𝑒 ← 𝑒 + 1; from the CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 dataset [45], in three differ-
3 for 𝑡-th task with subsets (𝐷𝑡𝑟 , 𝐷𝑡𝑒 ) do ent network environments: China-to-China(cn2cn), China-to-
4 for every temporary model training epoch do Korea(cn2kr), and China-to-United States(cn2us). We use this
5 Perturbate features in 𝐷𝑡𝑟 with Eq.(2); dataset to evaluate the performance of identifying malicious encrypted traffic under dynamic network environment conditions.
6 Train temporary model 𝜙𝑡∗ with Eq.(3);
 • Tor-Obfuscation [56] contains Tor-encrypted traffic generated by
7 end
 (𝑐 ) (𝑐 )
 accessing 95 websites using the Tor browser. We apply four repre-
 8 Cluster 𝑃𝑡𝑟 and 𝑃𝑡𝑒 for each 𝑐 with Alg.1; sentative encrypted traffic obfuscation methods, including WTF-
 9 Calculate meta-loss L𝑡𝑒 through Eq.(4)-(7); PAD [30], FRONT [24], TrafficSliver [13], and RegulaTor [26],
10 end where each strategy is with three different parameter settings
11 Optimize the parameter 𝑤 with Eq.(9); individually, to perform traffic obfuscation, resulting in Tor traffic
12 Calculate the weight of each task with Eq.(8); affected by 12 different obfuscation events. Note that each obfus-
13 Update the 𝜙 𝑒 with Eq.(10); cation event, comprising one strategy and one parameter setting,
14 end
 is considered a network condition. The parameter settings for
 𝑒 each obfuscation strategy are listed in Table 3. We use this dataset
15 Finetune 𝜙 ← 𝜙 with all training data;
 to evaluate the performance of classifying the websites visited
 via Tor traffic under dynamic obfuscation conditions.
 Newly Collected Datasets. To comprehensively evaluate the per-
5 Evaluation formance of classifying various encrypted traffic under dynamic
In this section, we evaluate our training framework with three single type and multiple types of network conditions, we collect
public datasets and three newly collected datasets. We also compare three new datasets. Specifically, we deploy four cloud servers in
its performance with several SOTA robust training methods. each of the following five countries: Japan (JP), the United States
 (US), the United Kingdom (UK), South Africa (SA), and Australia
5.1 Experimental Setup (AU). Then, we collect new datasets by replaying existing encrypted
Public Datasets. We choose three public encrypted traffic datasets traffic between cloud servers or using these servers to collect new
for evaluation, each is subject to a specific single type of network encrypted traffic in the wild. Moreover, we use the same 12 obfuscondition. We show their information in Table 2. They have been cation events as in the Tor-Obfuscation dataset to obfuscate the
widely used in existing studies [14, 49, 50, 54, 56, 57, 64, 71, 74]. newly collected traffic. As shown in Table 2, these datasets include:
• Application-Host [74] contains encrypted traffic generated by • Application-ALL is created by replaying the original encrypted
 hundreds of applications on 177 hosts using 5 operating systems: traffic from the Application-Host dataset [74], generated by dif-
 Android 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. We use it to evaluate the performance ferent hosts, in four different network environments, and further

 3569
CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei Yuqi Qing et al.

 Obfuscation Strategy Three parameter settings Cloud Server Pair JP-US JP-UK JP-SA JP-AU

 WTFPAD normal, normal/2, normal×2 Throughput(bps) 1.01G 584M 737M 835M
 #Retransmission 1005 12 70 2799
 FRONT start_padding_time = 0, 7, 8
 Latency(ms) 161 230 198 114
 TrafficSliver bi-direction, weighted_random, batch_weighted_random
 RegulaTor budget = 260, 520, 780
 Table 4: The differences in network environments between
 different cloud server pairs.
Table 3: The parameter settings of each obfuscation strategy.
The normal represents the default probability that WTF-
PAD inserts dummy packets, while normal/2 and normal×2 ARES [15], to evaluate their performance in the presence of dymeans half and double the default probability, respectively. namic network conditions, with or without our framework. Specifi-
The start_padding_time represents the time when FRONT cally, DF utilizes a multi-layer convolutional neural network (CNN),
starts inserting dummy packets. The three parameters of where its CNN layers function as feature representation layers,
TrafficSliver represent three regularization algorithms used and its final fully connected layer serves as the classification layer.
by this strategy. The budget represents the overhead limit of ARES employs a Transformer-based architecture, with its preceding
obfuscation imposed by RegulaTor. Transformer layers handling feature representation and its final
 fully connected layer performing classification. Both models are
 directly applicable to various encrypted traffic classification tasks.
 obfuscating it. We randomly select a cloud server in each country Baselines. We first choose three SOTA robust training methods
 and replay the encrypted traffic between cloud servers in Japan as baselines, including Rosetta [64], NetAugment [3] (NA), and
 and the United States (JP-US), Japan and the United Kingdom Augmentation-Assisted Attack (3A) [48]. These methods aim to im-
 (JP-UK), Japan and South Africa (JP-SA), and Japan and Australia prove the performance of DL models in classifying encrypted traffic
 (JP-AU), respectively. We replay 56,387 encrypted traffic flows in real-world networks. They augment new training traffic affected
 between each pair of servers. The encrypted traffic replayed be- by specific known network conditions and use the new traffic to
 tween different cloud server pairs traverses different network train the DL model. We also introduce the SelfReg method [32] as
 environments. We show the throughput, number of retransmis- another baseline. SelfReg is a general approach for enhancing the rosion packets, and latency between different server pairs in Table 4 bustness of DL models against feature fluctuations, typically caused
 to indicate their differences. We use this dataset to evaluate the by data collected under varying conditions, and has been widely
 performance of classifying encrypted traffic produced by different applied across numerous domains. [16, 35, 41, 60, 65, 68, 75, 77]. It
 applications under dynamic network environments, obfuscation, incorporates additional regularization terms into the loss function.
 and multiple types of network conditions. Additionally, we construct two new baselines by combining the
• DoHBrw-ALL is created by replaying the original normal and above methods: 3A+Rosetta+SelfReg, and 3A+NA+SelfReg. The imthree types of malicious DoH traffic from the CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw- plementations of all baselines with the two DL models are described
 2020 dataset [45] between the same four cloud server pairs used in Appendix A. Note that all baselines and our framework do not
 in the Application-ALL dataset and further obfuscating it. The change the architectures of the DL models for encrypted traffic
 original DoH traffic is generated by four different DNS servers, classification.
 including AdGuard, Cloudflare, Google, and Quad9, which can be Implementation. We implement our training framework using
 regarded as different hosts. We replay 126,340 encrypted traffic Python 3.10.13, NumPy 1.26.3, Pytorch 2.1.2, and Cuda 12.6. The
 flows between each pair of servers. We use this dataset to eval- default hyper-parameters of our framework are listed in Table 5.
 uate the performance of identifying various types of malicious Besides, we apply a grid search to find the suitable learning rates,
 encrypted traffic under dynamic hosts, obfuscation, and multiple i.e., 𝜂 1,2,3 , for different DL models and datasets. The baselines are
 types of network conditions. implemented based on their publicly available codes, and their
• Tor-ALL is created using 20 cloud servers to capture real Tor default parameters are applied. We run our framework and all
 traffic, which is then further obfuscated. We installed the Tor baselines on a Linux server (6.5.0-41-generic) with Intel(R) Xeon(R)
 browser of version 13.0.10 and 13.5 on these cloud servers as Gold 6258R CPU and NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU.
 Tor clients, configuring them to access the top 100 websites on
 the Alexa Top list while recording the generated Tor traffic. The Module Hyper-parameter Description

 collection process lasted from June to August 2024, accumulating Class-aware 𝜆1 = 1 standard deviations of
 Representation Augmentation 𝜆2 = 1 Gaussian noise in augmentation
 149,701 Tor flows in total. Note that each Tor client establishes
 standard deviation of
 an independent circuit for data transmission, meaning that Tor Cluster-based
 𝜎=5 Gaussian distribution satisfied
 Representation Alignment
 traffic generated by different hosts is also transmitted through dis- by each prototype cluster
 tinct network environments, i.e., host and network environment Adaptive Task
 𝑤 =1
 initial value of
 Weight Allocation the coefficient for task loss
 conditions vary simultaneously. We use this dataset to evaluate
 the performance of classifying the websites visited via Tor traffic Table 5: Hyper-parameter settings of our framework.
 under dynamic multiple types of network conditions.
DL models for Encrypted Traffic Classification. We choose two Metirc. We use two widely adopted metrics for classification perrepresentative supervised DL-based encrypted traffic classification formance evaluation: accuracy (𝐴𝑐𝑐) and F1-macro (𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 ). Let
methods that utilize different DL models, including DF [56] and 𝑇 𝑃𝑐 , 𝐹 𝑃𝑐 ,𝑇 𝑁𝑐 , 𝐹 𝑁𝑐 be the number of true-positive, false-positive,

 3570
Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traffic under Dynamic Network Conditions CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei

true-negative, and false-negative samples with each class 𝑐 in the combinations, each time using the unobfuscated traffic collected
class label set 𝐶 respectively, we can obtain 𝑃𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 = |𝐶1 | 𝑐 𝑇 𝑃𝑇𝑐 +𝐹
 𝑃𝑐 from one new network environment (i.e., JP-US, JP-UK, JP-SA, or
 Í
 𝑃𝑐
 JP-AU) for testing while training on the unobfuscated traffic from
and 𝑅𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 = |𝐶1 | 𝑐 𝑇 𝑃𝑇𝑐 +𝐹𝑃𝑐
 Í
 𝑁𝑐 , then 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 are calcu- other new environments. The performance is shown in Figure 3b.
lated as follows:
 Note that we do not evaluate the baseline NA and 3A+NA+SelfReg
 Í on the DoHBrw-NetEnv dataset. This is because this dataset only
 𝑐 (𝑇 𝑃𝑐 + 𝑇 𝑁𝑐 )
 𝐴𝑐𝑐 = Í (11) provides the packet length sequences of the encrypted traffic with-
 𝑐 (𝑇 𝑃𝑐 + 𝑇 𝑁𝑐 + 𝐹 𝑃𝑐 + 𝐹 𝑁𝑐 ) out directions, while NA requires the packet directions as features.
 𝑃𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 · 𝑅𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 Specifically, our framework enhances the 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DL
 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 = 2 · (12) models by an average of 8.90% and 8.84%, respectively. In contrast,
 𝑃𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 + 𝑅𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜
 the baselines reduce 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 by an average of 35.21% and
 37.25%, respectively.
5.2 Performance under Dynamic Single Type of Dynamic Obfuscation Conditions. We use the Tor-Obfuscation,
 Network Conditions Application-ALL, and DoHBrw-ALL datasets to perform evaluation
We evaluate the performance of our framework and all baselines and construct four training and testing traffic combinations for
under dynamic single-type of network conditions in this section. each dataset. For the Tor-Obfuscation dataset, in each combination,
For each network condition type, we use the encrypted traffic corre- we select all obfuscation events belonging to a specific obfuscation
sponding to different conditions of this type as the training and test- strategy (i.e., WTFPAD, FRONT, TrafficSliver, or RegulaTor) and
ing traffic, and ensure that the conditions affecting the testing traffic one event from each of the other strategies and use the obfuscated
are unseen in the training traffic. The DL model is trained on the traffic under these events for testing. The obfuscated traffic under
training traffic using its original training method, our framework, all other events is used for training. For the Application-ALL and
and each baseline separately, and then evaluated on the testing traf- DoHBrw-ALL dataset, we extract training and testing traffic from
fic. To eliminate experimental bias, we construct multiple different the obfuscated encrypted traffic of the original environment using
combinations of training and testing traffic for each dataset, where the same method as the Tor-Obfuscation dataset. The performance
three independent experiments are conducted for each combination. is shown in Figure 3c. Our training framework enhances the 𝐴𝑐𝑐
Note that each DL model uses the features directly extracted from and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DL models by an average of 5.96% and 7.59%, rethe encrypted traffic, formatted according to the model’s require- spectively. In contrast, the baselines reduce 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 by an
ments, with no additional preprocessing. The sizes of all training average of 38.71% and 42.64%, respectively.
and testing traffic combinations are listed in Appendix B. We report Overall, our framework enhances the performance of two DL
the average performance across all combinations and experiments models across all datasets and dynamic single types of network
as the final result. conditions. It achieves an average improvement of 9.91% in 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and
Dynamic Host Conditions. We use the Application-Host and 10.63% in 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 , demonstrating its effectiveness in improving
DoHBrw-ALL dataset to perform evaluation and construct four the robustness of DL models against dynamic network conditions.
training and testing traffic combinations for each dataset. In par- In contrast, the baselines lead to performance degradation in most
ticular, for the Application-Host dataset, we categorize all hosts cases, causing an average reduction of 34.69% in 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 38.71% in
into four host groups based on their OS versions (i.e., Android 6 & 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 . This is because the baselines rely on augmenting new en-
7, 8, 9, and 10). In each combination, the traffic generated by one crypted traffic impacted by specific network conditions to train DL
host group is used for testing, while the traffic generated by the models, which makes DL models more prone to classifying based on
other groups is used for training. For the DoHBrw-ALL dataset, we the unique feature patterns induced by those network conditions.
extract training and testing traffic from the unobfuscated encrypted However, testing encrypted traffic often exhibits distinct feature
traffic of the original environment. This is to reduce the impacts patterns that are absent in the training traffic under dynamic netof other types of network conditions. In each combination, we use work conditions. Thus, the classification knowledge learned from
the traffic from a particular DNS server (i.e., AdGuard, Cloudflare, the augmented encrypted traffic becomes ineffective, ultimately
Google, or Quad9) for testing while training on the traffic from impairing the DL models’ performance. Our framework overcomes
other DNS servers. We show the performance of our framework this issue by creating tasks that simulate testing encrypted trafand the baselines in Figure 3a. Our framework enhances the 𝐴𝑐𝑐 fic with previously unseen feature patterns and enabling the DL
and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DL models (i.e., DF and ARES) by an average of model to generate stable feature representations for such tasks. To
14.87% and 15.46%, respectively, while the baselines reduce 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and further verify this point, we visualize the feature representations
𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 by an average of 30.17% and 36.23%, respectively. generated by the DF model in the Dynamic Host Conditions exper-
Dynamic Network Environment Conditions. We utilize the iment. Specifically, we train the DF model using encrypted traffic
DoHBrw-NetEnv and Application-ALL dataset to perform eval- from hosts running Android 8, 9, and 10, with and without our
uation. In particular, for the DoHBrw-NetEnv dataset, we con- framework, while traffic from hosts running Android 6&7 is used
struct two training and testing combinations, where the encrypted for testing. We then randomly select 2,000 encrypted traffic samtraffic collected in the cn2us and cn2kr network environments is ples belonging to the applications “WiFi Master Key” and “TikTok”
separately used for testing, while the encrypted traffic collected from both the training and testing sets, obtain their corresponding
from other network environments is used for training. For the feature representations, project them to one-dimensional space us-
Application-ALL dataset, we create four training and testing traffic ing the t-SNE method [44], and show their density distributions

 3571
 CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei Yuqi Qing et al.

  ' ) ' ) ' )  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6  ' ) ' ) ' )  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6  ' ) ' ) ' )  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6      
      
      
  Q J D O L Q J  D O $ L Q F F
  R U L R U L
  J L R U L   D O $ F F
   $ F F     
          
                    
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
          
     
         
  2 X U V
  2 X U V  2 X U V    
         
   
           
            
   
                
       
         
            
   
              
        
      
    
          
    
       
         
         
   
                
    
       
           
    
               
        
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
               
        
       
    
     
         
  6 H O 6 H O  I H J
  5 I H J
  I 5 6 H O  5 H J           
      
    
           
        
              
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
                
    
        
   
                
    
       
           
               
    
        
       
           
    
       
    

 Acc  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 Acc  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 Acc  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
     
         
  5 R V H W
  5 R V H W  W D  W D  W D        
  5 R V H W    
   
                      
      
                    
   
                      
   
                               
    
      
       
   
                
    
       
                
   
                              
    
      
               
    
      
       
   
                              
    
      
       
   
                     
   
         
    
        
  1 $ 1 $ 1 $            
   
                      
   
                   
   
      
    
                
   
                       
   
                      
   
                      
   
                
    
       
                 
   
                      
   
                             
    
      
       
   
         
     
          
   $  $  $            
   
                    
       
                 
   
                      
   
                               
    
      
       
   
                
    
       
                 
   
                      
   
                     
   
                     
      
                    
   
                     
   
                     
   
         
     
          
   $  5 R V H W
   $  5 R V H W
  $  5 R V H W  W D  6 H O
  W D  6 H O
  W D  6 H O  5 I H J
  I 5 I H J  5 H J            
   
                      
   
                       
   
                      
   
                       
   
                      
   
                
    
                 
        
      
                    
   
                     
   
                     
   
                              
    
      
       
   
                     
   
         
     
          
   $  1 $  6 H O
   $  1 $  6 H O
   $  1 $  6 H O  5 I H J
  I 5 I H J  5 H J        
   
      
    
                
   
                       
   
                      
   
                       
   
                      
   
                              
    
      
       
   
                     
   
                      
   
                     
   
                     
   
         
      
           
      
           
  Q J D O L Q J  D O L ) Q   D O )   )      
  R U L R U L
  J L R U L          
                    
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
          
     
         
  2 X U V
  2 X U V    
  2 X U V         
   
           
            
   
                
    
            
            
   
                
    
       
           
    
       
         
         
   
                
    
       
           
    
            
            
   
                
    
       
           
    
            
            
   
                
    
       
    
     
         

 F1macro  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 F1macro
 F1macro  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
  6 H O 6 H O  I H J
  5 I H J
  I 5 6 H O  5 H J           
      
    
                
   
                 
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
    
       
           
                
    
        
   
                     
   
                
               
    
        
       
           
    
       
    
     
         
  5 R V H W
  5 R V H W  W D  W D  W D        
  5 R V H W    
   
                      
      
                    
   
                      
   
                               
    
      
       
   
                
    
       
                
   
                              
    
      
               
    
      
       
   
                              
    
      
       
   
                     
   
         

   , P S U R Y H P H Q W
    
        
  1 $ 1 $ 1 $            
   
                      
   
                   
   
      
    
                
   
                       
   
                      
   
                      
   
                     
   
                     
   
                      
   
                             
    
      
       
   
         
     
          
   $  $  $            
   
                    
       
                 
   
                      
   
                               
    
      
       
   
                
    
       
                 
   
                      
   
                     
   
                     
      
                    
   
                
    
                
        
   
         
     
          
   $  5 R V H W
   $  5 R V H W
  $  5 R V H W  W D  6 H O
  W D  6 H O
  W D  6 H O  5 I H J
  I 5 I H J  5 H J            
   
                      
   
                       
   
                      
   
                       
   
                      
   
                
    
                 
        
      
                    
   
                     
   
                     
   
                              
    
      
       
   
                     
   
         
     
          
   $  1 $  6 H O
   $  1 $  6 H O
   $  1 $  6 H O I 5 I H J
  5 I H J
  5 H J            
   
                      
   
                       
   
                      
   
                       
   
                       
   
                               
    
      
       
   
                      
   
                       
   
                      
   
                      
   
          
      
           
  Q    +
  Q  R + Q V  R W + V R W  V U W Z U  Z $ U  / Z $ /  / $ / / /
    Q    +
  Q  R + Q V  R W + V R W  V U W Z U  Z $ U  / Z $ /  / $ / / /
    1  H  W
  1  (  H 1 Q W ( H Y Q W ( Y Q W Y L R W Q L R  W $ Q L R  / $ Q /  / $ / / /  1 H  W
  1  (  H 1 Q W ( H Y Q W ( Y Q W Y L R W Q L R  W $ Q L R  / $ Q /  / $ / / /  V  F  D
  V  W L V D R F W Q L D R W Q L R Q W L R W Q L R  W $ Q L R  / $ Q /  / $ / / / U Z U  Z $ U  / Z $ /  / $ / / /
  F  V  F  D
  V  W L V D R F W Q L D R W Q L R Q W L R W Q L R  W $ Q L R  / $ Q /  / $ / / / U Z U  Z $ U  / Z $ /  / $ / / /
  F
  L  R  L  R  L  R
  F D F W  D F W  D W  R + R + R +  %  %  %  L  R  L  R  L  R
  F D F W  D F W  D W  R + R + R +  %  %  %    
  U Z U Z U Z  L F D L F D L F D    
  U Z U Z U Z  L F D L F D L F D  X  X  X
  E I  E I  E I  F D F D F D  +  +  +  %  %  %  X  X  X
  E I  E I  E I  F D F D F D  +  +  +  %  %  %
  $ S $ S S O $ L S S O L S O L  '  '  '  $ S $ S S O $ L S S O L S O L  '  '  '  ' R ' + R ' % + R % + %  $ S $ S S O $ S S O  S O  ' R ' + R ' % + R % + %  $ S $ S S O $ S S O  S O  7 R 7 U  R 2 7 U  R 2 U  2  $ S $ S S O $ L S S O L S O L  ' R ' R ' R  7 R 7 U  R 2 7 U  R 2 U  2  $ S $ S S O $ L S S O L S O L  ' R ' R ' R

 (a) Host (b) Network Environment (c) Traffic Obfuscation

 Figure 3: The performance of our framework and baselines under dynamic network conditions of different single types. The
 upper and lower subfigures show the original 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DF and ARES under dynamic conditions across the datasets,
 respectively, as well as the performance improvements after applying our framework and baselines.

 WIFI Key, Android 8/9/10
 5.3 Performance under Dynamic Multiple
 WIFI Key, Android 6/7
 Tik Tok, Android 8/9/10
 Tik Tok, Android 6/7
 Types of Network Conditions
 We evaluate the performance of our framework and all baselines
 WIFI Key, Android 8/9/10
 WIFI Key, Android 6/7
 under dynamic multiple types of network conditions in this section.
 Tik Tok, Android 8/9/10
 Tik Tok, Android 6/7 The experimental method is consistent with that in § 5.2. Besides,
 we divide all hosts in the Application-ALL dataset into two Android
 host groups based on their OS versions (i.e., Android 6 & 7 & 8,
 9 & 10), the four new network environments for traffic replaying
 into two groups (i.e., JP-SA & JP-UK, JP-US & JP-AU), the four DNS
 servers in the DoHBrw-ALL dataset into two DNS server groups
 Figure 4: Visualization of feature representations generated
 (i.e., AdGuard & Cloudflare, Google & Quad9), all the cloud servers
 by the DF Model (trained with or without MetaTraffic) uninto two groups based on their locations (i.e., SA & UK, US & AU),
 der dynamic host conditions. Encrypted traffic from hosts
 and the four obfuscation strategies into two groups (i.e., RegulaTor
 running Android 8, 9, and 10 is used for training, while traf-
 & WTFPAD, FRONT & TrafficSliver). We use these disjoint groups
 fic from hosts running Android 6&7 is used for testing. We
 to create training and testing traffic combinations under dynamic
 randomly select 2,000 traffic samples associated with the apmultiple types of network conditions. The sizes of all training and
 plications “WiFi Master Key” and “TikTok” from both the
 testing traffic combinations are listed in Appendix B.
 training and testing sets, extract their feature representa-
 Dynamic Host and Network Environment Conditions. The
 tions, project them into one-dimensional space using the
 Application-ALL, DoHBrw-ALL, and Tor-ALL datasets are used to
 t-SNE method, and display their density distributions.
 perform evaluation. In particular, for the Application-ALL dataset,
 we create four training and testing traffic combinations, each time
 selecting the unobfuscated traffic from one Android host group and
 one new network environment group for testing while training
 in Figure 4. It can be seen that, for encrypted traffic belonging to on the unobfuscated traffic from other groups. Based on the DNS
 the same application categories but subject to different host con- server groups, we create four training and testing traffic combiditions, the feature representations generated by the original DF nations for the DoHBrw-ALL dataset using the same method as
 model differ significantly. In contrast, the DF model trained using the Application-ALL dataset. Besides, for the Tor-ALL dataset, we
 our framework produces more consistent representations, demon- construct two training and testing traffic combinations, each time
 strating that our framework enables DL models to generate stable using the unobfuscated traffic collected by Tor browsers (version
 feature representations across varying network conditions.

 3572
 Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traffic under Dynamic Network Conditions CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei

  ' ) ' ) ' ) ' )  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6  ' ) ' ) ' ) ' )  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6  ' ) ' ) ' ) ' )  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6     
  ' ) ' ) ' ) ' )  $ 5 ( 6
  $ 5 ( 6      
      
      
  J L Q R U L
  R U L R U L  J  $ D O L Q F F
  J D O L Q R U L   $ D O F F
  J  $ D O L Q F F   $ F F
     
               
                    
               
          
               
               
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
               
               
          
               
               
          
               
               
          
          
          
          
     
     
          
     
  2 X U V
  2 X U V  2 X U V
  2 X U V
       
    
    
    
          
          
      
   
      
        
        
          
    
             
         
      
   
      
        
        
          
    
          
          
         
      
              
           
       
           
           
       
           
           
       
           
         
      
   
          
           
        
       
       
       
       
       
              
       
       
       
       
       
       
              
       
       
            
     
      
   
      
   
       
     
          
     
  I 5 6 H O
  6 H O 6 H O  I 5 6 H O
  H J  H J  H J   
  I 5   
  I 5 H J    
        
        
    
       
    
    
    
        
           
        
       
              
       
       
           
            
    
                 
           
     
                
           
    
               
            
    
               
           
    
             
        
      
   
      
              
           
       
             
           
     
                
           
       
       
       
       
       
           
           
       
              
        
       
       

 Acc  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 Acc  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 Acc  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 Acc  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
     
          
     
  5 R V H W
  5 R V H W  W D 5 R V H W
  5 R V H W W D  W D    
  W D       
         
         
      
       
    
    
     
         
      
       
    
    
     
         
             
       
     
              
       
    
    
     
           
           
    
    
     
                  
           
     
                
               
    
                  
             
    
                
            
    
               
              
    
                
               
    
                  
           
     
              
           
         
                  
           
     
                     
       
     
            
    
        
    
  1 $    
  1 $ 1 $ 1 $        
         
            
      
        
         
           
        
           
     
         
             
        
     
              
           
         
         
      
       
    
    
     
         
             
       
     
              
       
    
    
     
                  
           
     
              
           
         
         
             
        
     
              
           
         
         
             
        
     
              
           
         
         
             
        
     
                     
       
     
            
     
          
     
   $    
   $  $  $        
         
         
        
          
       
             
           
     
             
                 
     
              
           
         
         
      
       
    
    
     
         
             
       
     
            
       
        
       
                
       
     
            
       
       
       
              
       
       
       
       
       
       
              
       
       
       
       
       
       
              
       
       
              
       
       
       
     
          
     
   $  5 R V H W
   $  5 R V H W
  $  5 R V H W  W D  6 H O
  W D  6 H O
   $  5 R V H W  I W 5 D  6 H O
  W D  6 H O I 5 H J
  H J  I 5    
  I 5 H J  H J    
    
    
     
         
      
       
    
    
     
           
           
         
    
                  
           
     
              
           
         
           
        
           
     
         
             
        
     
              
       
    
    
     
                  
             
    
                
            
       
           
             
     
                
               
    
                  
           
     
              
           
         
                  
           
     
                     
       
     
            
     
          
     
   $  1 $  6 H O
   $  1 $  6 H O
   $  1 $  6 H O  I 5 H J
  I 5 H J
   $  1 $  6 H O  I 5    
  I 5 H J  H J       
         
            
      
        
         
         
      
       
    
    
     
                  
           
     
              
       
    
    
     
         
      
       
    
    
     
         
             
       
     
              
       
    
    
     
                  
             
    
                
          
         
                  
             
    
                
               
    
                  
           
     
              
           
         
                  
           
     
                     
       
     
            
      
            
      
      
            
      
  J L Q R U L
  R U L R U L  J  D O
  ) L Q  J  D O
  J D O L Q R U L  ) L Q   D O
  )   )                                                        
               
          
     
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
               
               
          
          
          
          
          
               
               
          
          
          
          
     
     
          
     
  2 X U V
  2 X U V  2 X U V
  2 X U V       
    
    
    
          
          
      
   
      
         
           
      
   
      
   
         
               
   
      
         
          
   
             
   
           
         
      
      
   
        
               
       
           
            
       
           
           
       
           
         
      
   
          
           
        
       
       
       
       
       
              
       
       
         
       
      
   
      
            
         
      
   
      
            
         
      
   
      
   
       
     
          
     

 F1macro  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 F1macro  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 F1macro  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
 F1macro  , P S U R Y H P H Q W
  I 5 6 H O
  6 H O 6 H O  I 5 6 H O
  H J  H J  H J   
  I 5   
  I 5 H J    
        
           
    
        
        
             
    
           
     
                   
       
    
        
        
           
    
                 
           
     
             
              
    
    
           
           
    
    
           
           
       
           
           
       
           
           
       
       
         
       
     
                
           
       
       
       
       
       
              
        
       
              
       
       
       
     
          
     
  5 R V H W
  5 R V H W  W D 5 R V H W
  5 R V H W W D  W D    
  W D       
         
         
      
       
    
    
     
         
      
       
    
    
     
         
             
       
     
              
       
    
    
     
           
           
    
    
     
                  
           
     
                
               
    
                  
           
     
              
           
         
                  
           
     
              
       
    
    
     
                  
           
     
              
           
         
         
             
        
     
                     
       
     
            
    
        
    
  1 $    
  1 $ 1 $ 1 $        
         
         
        
          
       
             
           
     
             
                 
     
              
           
         
         
      
       
    
    
     
         
             
       
     
              
       
    
    
     
                  
           
     
              
           
         
         
             
        
     
              
           
         
         
             
        
     
              
           
         
         
             
        
     
                     
       
     
            
     
          
     
   $    
   $  $  $        
         
            
    
        
        
        
        
             
     
             
                 
     
                
            
       
             
           
     
             
                 
     
            
       
       
       
        
                 
     
              
       
   
      
   
          
           
        
       
       
       
       
       
              
    
    
       
       
       
       
       
              
    
    
       
        
               
       
       
     
          
     
   $  5 R V H W
   $  5 R V H W
  $  5 R V H W  W D  6 H O
  W D  6 H O
   $  5 R V H W  W D  6 H O
  I W 5 D  6 H O
  H J
  I 5 H J  I 5    
  I 5 H J  H J       
         
           
          
         
    
           
        
            
    
             
                 
     
                
             
     
                
             
     
             
                 
     
              
       
       
     
                     
       
     
              
       
    
    
     
                  
             
    
                
               
    
             
                 
     
                
             
     
             
                 
     
                     
       
     
            
     
          
     
   $  1 $  6 H O
   $  1 $  6 H O
   $  1 $  6 H O  I 5 H J
  I 5 H J
   $  1 $  6 H O  H J    
  I 5    
  I 5 H J        
          
          
               
          
          
               
          
                         
          
          
               
          
          
               
          
                         
          
           
              
          
                     
         
                
            
        
                          
    
                
              
          
                     
    
                   
              
          
                         
          
                 
        
          
        
      
            
      
  Q    $
  Q  /  $ / Q /  $ / Q /  $ U / Z /  U / $ Z /  U $ Z / /  U $ Z / /  R $ / U  / R $ / U /  R $ / U /  R $ / U /  $ / / /  Q   $ Q  /  $ / Q /  $ / Q /  $ U / Z /  U / $ Z /  U $ Z / /  U $ Z / /  R $ / U  / R $ / U /  R $ / U /  R $ / U /  $ / / /  Q    $
  Q  /  $ / Q /  $ / Q /  $ U / Z /  U / $ Z /  U $ Z / /  U $ Z / /  $ / / /  Q    $
  Q /  $ / Q /  $ / Q /  $ U / Z /  U / $ Z /  U $ Z / /  U $ Z / /  $ / / /  Q    $
  Q  /  $ / Q /  $ / Q /  $ U / Z /  U / $ Z /  U $ Z / /  U $ Z / /  $ / / /  Q    $ Q  /  $ / Q /  $ / Q /  $ U / Z /  U / $ Z /  U $ Z / /  U $ Z / /  $ / / /  R U  R $ U /  R $ / U /  R $ / U /  $ / / /  R U  R $ U /  R $ / U /  R $ / U /  $ / / /
  F D W F L R D W F L R D W F L R D W L R + % + % + % + %  7  7  7  7  F D W F L R D W F L R D W F L R D W L R + % + % + % + %  7  7  7  7  F D W F L R D W F L R D W F L R D W L R + % + % + % + %  S S S O L F S D S O L W F S L R D S O L W F S L R D O L W F L ' R D W R L ' R + R % ' + R % ' + R % + %  S S S O L F S D S O L W F S L R D S O L W F S L R D O L W F L ' R D W R L ' R + R % ' + R % ' + R % + %  S S S O L F S D S O L W F S L R D S O L W F S L R D O L W F L ' R D W R L ' R + R % ' + R % ' + R % + %  7  7  7  7  7  7  7  7
  $ S $ S S O L $ S S O L $ S S O L  S O L  ' R ' R ' R ' R  $ S $ S S O L $ S S O L $ S S O L  S O L  ' R ' R ' R ' R  $ S $ S S O L $ S S O L $ S S O L  S O L  ' R ' R ' R ' R  $  $  $  $  $  $  $  $  $  $  $  $

 (a) HOS+ENV (b) HOS+OBF (c) ENV+OBF (d) HOS+ENV+OBF

 Figure 5: The performance of our framework and baselines under dynamic network conditions of different multiple types. The
 upper and lower subfigures show the original 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DF and ARES under dynamic conditions across the datasets,
 respectively, as well as the performance improvements after applying our framework and baselines. HOS, ENV, and OBF
 represent host, network environment, and obfuscation conditions, respectively.

 13.5) installed on one cloud server group for testing, while the unob- DoHBrw-ALL dataset, four training and testing traffic combinations
 fuscated traffic collected by Tor browsers (version 13.0.10) installed are constructed in the same method. The performance is shown
 on the other cloud server group is for training. The performance of in Figure 5c. Specifically, our training framework enhances the
 our framework and the baselines is shown in Figure 5a. Specifically, 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DL models by an average of 5.55% and 5.65%,
 our training framework enhances the 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DL mod- respectively. In contrast, the baselines reduce 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 by
 els by an average of 10.38% and 14.85%, respectively. In contrast, an average of 14.88% and 20.18%, respectively.
 the baselines reduce 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 by an average of 43.73% and Dynamic Host, Network Environment and Obfuscation Con-
 45.91%, respectively. ditions. We use the Tor-ALL dataset to perform evaluation and
 Dynamic Host and Obfuscation Conditions. Then we use the construct four training and testing traffic combinations. In each
 Application-ALL and DoHBrw-ALL dataset to perform evaluation. combination, we use the obfuscated traffic belonging to one strat-
 For the Application-ALL dataset, we create four training and testing egy group, collected by Tor browsers (version 13.5) installed on one
 traffic combinations based on the obfuscated encrypted traffic of cloud server group for testing, while the obfuscated traffic belongthe original environment, each time selecting the obfuscated traffic ing to the other strategy group, collected by Tor browsers (version
 belonging to one Android host group and four random obfuscation 13.0.10) installed on the other cloud server group is for training. The
 events within one obfuscation strategy group for testing, while performance is shown in Figure 5d. Our framework enhances the
 training on the obfuscated traffic belonging to other host groups 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DL models by an average of 12.78% and 21.89%,
 or obfuscation events. Based on the DNS server groups, we create respectively. In contrast, the baselines reduce 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 by
 four training and testing traffic combinations for the DoHBrw-ALL an average of 44.15% and 53.28%, respectively.
 dataset using the same method as the Application-ALL dataset. Our framework consistently improves the performance of two
 As shown in Figure 5b, our training framework enhances the 𝐴𝑐𝑐 DL models across all datasets and various dynamic network conand 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DL models by an average of 7.06% and 7.80%, re- ditions. It achieves an average improvement of 8.94% in 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and
 spectively. In contrast, the baselines reduce 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 by an 12.55% in 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 , indicating the effectiveness of our framework in
 average of 12.6% and 14.71%, respectively. improving the robustness of DL models against dynamic multiple
 Dynamic Network Environment and Obfuscation. We use types of network conditions. The effectiveness of our framework
 the Application-ALL and DoHBrw-ALL datasets to perform eval- stems from its ability to construct tasks that simulate testing enuation. For the Application-ALL dataset, we create four training crypted traffic with previously unseen feature patterns, which often
 and testing traffic combinations, each time selecting the obfuscated occur under dynamic network conditions of multiple types. In conencrypted traffic from one new network environment group and trast, the baselines result in performance degradation in most cases,
 four random obfuscation events within a particular obfuscation with an average reduction of 28.85% in 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 33.52% in 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 .
 strategy group for testing while training on the obfuscated traffic
 from other new environment groups or obfuscation events. For the

 3573
 CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei Yuqi Qing et al.

 original DF/ARES Ours No AUG No CLS No TWA Application-Host DoHBrw-NetEnv Tor-Obfuscation

 Application-Host DoHBrw-NetEnv Tor-Obfuscation DF ARES DF ARES DF ARES
 1.00
 0.95
 0.60
 0.75 0.75
 0.90

 Acc
 0.70 0.55 0.50
 0.85
Acc

 0.65 0.80 0.25
 0.50
 0.75 0.00
 0.60
 0.70 0.45 1.00
 DF ARES DF ARES DF ARES
 0.75

 F1macro
 0.95
 0.60
 0.50
 0.75 0.90
 0.55 0.25
F1macro

 0.70 0.85
 0.00
 0.65 0.80 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 3 4 5 6 7 3 4 5 6 7 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
 0.50
 0.60 0.75 λ1,2 λ1,2 σ σ w w
 0.70 0.45
 DF ARES DF ARES DF ARES
 Figure 7: 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of DF and ARES that trained using
 Figure 6: 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of the DF and ARES trained by our our framework with different hyper-parameter values.
 complete framework and the variants. Ours, No AUG, No
 CLS, No ATS represent our complete framework, the variant without the class-aware representation augmentation 1.2, 1.4 for 𝜆1 (= 𝜆2 ), 3, 4, 6, 7 for 𝜎, and 0.6, 0.8, 1.2, 1.4 for 𝑤. We
 module, the variant without the cluster-based representation also adopt the three public datasets and the same method as in
 alignment module and the variant without the adaptive task § 5.2 to conduct experiments of dynamic single type of network
 weight allocation module, respectively. The dashed lines rep- conditions for performance evaluation. Note that when evaluating
 resent the DL model’s original performance. our framework with a specific hyper-parameter value, all other
 hyper-parameters are set to their default values in Table 5.
 5.4 Evaluating Individual Component As shown in Figure 7, our framework only exhibits slight perfor-
 In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the three modules mance fluctuations across different hyper-parameter values. Specifin our framework individually. To achieve this, we create three new ically, after being trained using our framework with different hypervariants of our framework by replacing each of the three modules parameter values, the standard deviations of the average 𝐴𝐶𝐶 and
 with alternative designs, evaluate their performance, and compare 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of the two DL models (i.e., DF and ARES) across three
 it with the performance of the complete framework. Specifically, to public datasets are 0.005, 0.016, 0.014, and 0.006, 0.015, 0.019, reassess the effectiveness of the class-aware representation augmen- spectively. This indicates that our framework’s good performance
 tation module, we create a variant, No AUG, that directly constructs stems from its innovative design rather than parameter tuning.
 the temporary model without adding noise to the feature representations. For the cluster-based representation alignment module, we 6 Discussion
 design a variant, No CLS, which uses the mean feature representa- Training Acceleration. Compared to traditional supervised DL
 tion vector of each class (i.e.,, without clustering) as its prototype training methods, our framework requires more time. This is prifor discrepancy calculation. Additionally, to evaluate the adaptive marily because it involves multiple iterations, during which tasktask weight allocation module, we introduce another variant, No specific temporary models are constructed, and task losses are
 ATS, that assigns equal weight to each task during the DL model calculated to optimize the DL model. We evaluate the training time
 optimization. Using the three public datasets and the same method of our framework when applied to the DF model using the DoHBrwdescribed in § 5.2, we conduct experiments under dynamic single NetEnv dataset under dynamic network environment conditions.
 type of network conditions for performance evaluation. The training time of our framework is about 500s, whereas the su-
 As shown in Figure6, we can see that removing any module pervised training method used by the original DL model takes about
 from our framework will result in a non-negligible performance 150s. We argue that these additional training overheads are acceptdegradation. Overall, compared with our complete framework, the able in practice, as our framework delivers significant performance
 𝐴𝑐𝑐 and 𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜 of the two DL models (i.e., DF and ARES) trained improvements, e.g., the accuracy of the DF model improved from
 by these three variants decrease by 7.19% and 8.10% on average 0.837 to 0.922. Furthermore, two strategies can be applied to acceleracross all datasets, respectively. These experimental results demon- ate training. First, we can parallelize the processes of constructing
 strate that the three modules we designed significantly enhance our task-specific temporary models and calculating task-specific losses.
 framework’s capability to generate stable feature representations, Second, we can implement the annealing method [51] to dynamenabling more accurate classification of encrypted traffic. ically adjust the learning rates for both the temporary and DL
 models, i.e., set higher learning rates in initial iterations to acceler-
 5.5 Parameters Deep Dive ate training and gradually reduce them in subsequent iterations to
 Our framework has several hyper-parameters, i.e., 𝜆1 (= 𝜆2 ) in ensure the generalization capability.
 task-specific temporary model training, 𝜎 in task-specific loss cal- Training Traffic Collection. Our framework requires training
 culating, and 𝑤 in jointly DL model optimizing, and we evaluate encrypted traffic subject to different known network conditions
 its performance under different hyper-parameter values in this to construct multiple tasks. When the number of known network
 section. Specifically, we choose four different values for each hyper- conditions affecting the training traffic decreases, the number of
 parameter around its default value in Table 5, including 0.6, 0.8, tasks we can construct decreases, resulting in a slight decline in

 3574
Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traffic under Dynamic Network Conditions CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei

our framework’s performance. For example, in the dynamic net- encrypted traffic affected by specific known network conditions
work environment conditions experiment of the Application-ALL to train the DL model. For instance, TrafCL [67] targets network
dataset, the accuracy of the DL model trained by our framework environments with increased packet loss rates in encrypted traffic
declines from 0.869 to 0.836 when the number of network condi- and augments new traffic by randomly discarding packets from the
tions affecting training traffic decreases from 3 to 2. However, we original encrypted traffic. Rosetta [64] focuses on network environargue that collecting encrypted traffic subject to diverse known ments employing different underlying layer protocols, e.g., 3G and
network conditions is not a challenge in practice. For instance, we 4G, and augments new encrypted traffic by merging, reordering,
can deploy multiple cloud servers in various countries to collect and duplicating packets from the original encrypted traffic. Besides,
new encrypted traffic or replay existing traffic. Even in extreme Qian et al. [48] aim to defend the WTFPAD and Walkie-Talkie obfuscases where encrypted traffic can only be collected under a single cation strategies. They augment new training traffic through direct
network condition, we can apply existing robust training meth- obfuscation of the original traffic using these two strategies. Howods [3, 48, 64, 67, 78] to augment new traffic subject to different ever, these methods become ineffective under network conditions,
network conditions. The collected and augmented encrypted traffic in which the training and testing encrypted traffic is subject to
can then be used to construct tasks. inconsistent network conditions, and they can only defend specifc
Classifying New Traffic Classes. Supervised DL models require single types of network conditions in most cases.
a sufficient number of training samples for each known traffic class.
However, in real-world networks, new traffic classes continuously
 8 Conclusion
emerge, and we often can access only a few training samples (i.e.,
few-shot classification) or none at all (i.e., zero-shot classification). We propose a novel DL training framework MetaTraffic to improve
Our framework can facilitate DL models in classifying these new the classification performance of any supervised DL models detraffic classes. Specifically, in few-shot classification scenarios, our signed for encrypted traffic classification under dynamic network
framework can prevent DL models from overfitting to the feature conditions. This framework enables DL models to generate stable
patterns of known classes, thus enhancing their generalization feature representations for encrypted traffic under different netcapability [38]. As a result, DL models can quickly adapt to new work conditions, thereby ensuring accurate classification under
traffic classes using only a small number of training samples. In dynamic network conditions. Additionally, we also release three
zero-shot classification scenarios, our framework can enable DL new large-scale encrypted traffic datasets featuring multiple types
models to distinguish between known and novel traffic classes. of network conditions. The experimental results show that, under
To achieve this, we need to introduce an additional class in the dynamic multiple types of network conditions, our framework imtraining dataset to represent new traffic classes and incorporate the proves the DL models’ accuracy by 8.94% and F1-macro score by
distinction between known and new classes into the learning task of 12.55% on average, while existing robust training methods decrease
MetaTraffic. We leave the evaluation of MetaTraffic’s performance the accuracy by 28.85% and F1-macro score by 33.52%.
in classifying new traffic classes as future work.
 9 Acknowledgements
7 Related Work We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful feedback.
 The research is supported in part by the National Natural Sci-
DL-based Encrypted Traffic Classification. Most encrypted trafence Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62132011, 62425201,
fic classification methods [15, 23, 39, 43, 47, 52, 53, 56, 62, 66, 72, 73,
 62472247, 62502473, and 62302452, and the China Postdoctoral
76] are built upon supervised DL models. These methods utilize
 Science Foundation under Grant 2025M771583, as well as a CIE-
DL models with different architectures to extract various types
 Smartchip research grant. The corresponding author of this paper
of essential information from the features of encrypted traffic as
 is Qi Li.
classification knowledge, and they generally perform well in laboratory settings. For instance, FS-Net [40] uses an autoencoder
architecture combined with gated recurrent units (GRU) to extract References
the temporal relationships within the packet length sequence of [1] Blake Anderson and David McGrew. 2016. Identifying encrypted malware traffic
 with contextual flow data. In AISec workshop 2016.
encrypted traffic, obtaining a True Positive rate of 99.14% when [2] Blake Anderson and David McGrew. 2017. Machine learning for encrypted
classifying the encrypted traffic of different applications. DF [56] malware traffic classification: accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity.
adopts a multi-layer CNN architecture to incorporate the spatial In KDD ’17.
 [3] Alireza Bahramali, Ardavan Bozorgi, and Amir Houmansadr. 2023. Realistic
correlations of encrypted traffic, achieving over 98% accuracy on a Website Fingerprinting By Augmenting Network Traces. In CCS ’23.
Tor traffic dataset. ARES [15] uses a Transformer architecture to in- [4] Yogesh Balaji, Swami Sankaranarayanan, and Rama Chellappa. 2018. Metareg:
tegrate the global correlations between local features of encrypted Towards domain generalization using meta-regularization. NeurIPS (2018).
 [5] Xiang Cai, Rishab Nithyanand, and Rob Johnson. 2014. Cs-buflo: A congestion
traffic, achieving an F1-score of 0.907 on a multi-tab Tor traffic traf- sensitive website fingerprinting defense. In WPES ’14.
fic. However, these methods often face performance degradation in [6] Xiang Cai, Rishab Nithyanand, Tao Wang, Rob Johnson, and Ian Goldberg. 2014.
 A systematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting
real-world networks due to dynamic network conditions. defenses. In CCS ’14.
Robust Training for DL-based Encrypted Traffic Classifica- [7] Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall, and W Philip Kegelmeyer.
tion. Several robust training methods have been proposed to im- 2002. SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling technique. JAIR (2002).
 [8] Yinbo Chen, Zhuang Liu, Huijuan Xu, Trevor Darrell, and Xiaolong Wang. 2021.
prove the performance of DL models in classifying encrypted traffic Meta-baseline: Exploring simple meta-learning for few-shot learning. In ICCV
in real-world networks. In general, these methods augment new ’21.

 3575
CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei Yuqi Qing et al.

 [9] Zitian Chen, Yanwei Fu, Yinda Zhang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Xiangyang Xue, and Leonid [40] Chang Liu, Longtao He, Gang Xiong, Zigang Cao, and Zhen Li. 2019. FS-Net: A
 Sigal. 2019. Multi-level semantic feature augmentation for one-shot learning. TIP Flow Sequence Network For Encrypted Traffic Classification. In INFOCOM ’19.
 (2019). [41] Chen Liu, Bo Li, Jun Zhao, Weiwei Feng, Xudong Liu, and Chunpei Li. 2023.
[10] Mauro Conti, Luigi Vincenzo Mancini, Riccardo Spolaor, and Nino Vincenzo A2-CLM: Few-Shot Malware Detection Based on Adversarial Heterogeneous
 Verde. 2015. Analyzing android encrypted network traffic to identify user actions. Graph Augmentation. TIFS (2023).
 TIFS (2015). [42] Junming Liu, Yanjie Fu, Jingci Ming, Yong Ren, Leilei Sun, and Hui Xiong. 2017.
[11] Mauro Conti, Luigi V Mancini, Riccardo Spolaor, and Nino Vincenzo Verde. 2015. Effective and real-time in-app activity analysis in encrypted internet traffic
 Can’t you hear me knocking: Identification of user actions on android apps via streams. In KDD ’17.
 traffic analysis. In ACM CODASPY ’15. [43] Ya Liu, Xiao Wang, Bo Qu, and Fengyu Zhao. 2024. ATVITSC: A novel encrypted
[12] Cas Cremers, Marko Horvat, Jonathan Hoyland, Sam Scott, and Thyla van der traffic classification method based on deep learning. TIFS (2024).
 Merwe. 2017. A Comprehensive Symbolic Analysis of TLS 1.3. In CCS ’17. [44] Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008. Visualizing data using t-SNE.
[13] Wladimir De la Cadena, Asya Mitseva, Jens Hiller, Jan Pennekamp, Sebastian JMLR (2008).
 Reuter, Julian Filter, Thomas Engel, Klaus Wehrle, and Andriy Panchenko. 2020. [45] Mohammadreza MontazeriShatoori, Logan Davidson, Gurdip Kaur, and
 TrafficSliver: Fighting Website Fingerprinting Attacks with Traffic Splitting. In Arash Habibi Lashkari. 2020. Detection of DoH Tunnels using Time-series
 CCS ’20. Classification of Encrypted Traffic. DASC (2020).
[14] Xinhao Deng, Qi Li, and Ke Xu. 2024. Robust and Reliable Early-Stage Website [46] Andriy Panchenko, Lukas Niessen, Andreas Zinnen, and Thomas Engel. 2011.
 Fingerprinting Attacks via Spatial-Temporal Distribution Analysis. In CCS ’24. Website fingerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks. In WPES
[15] Xinhao Deng, Qilei Yin, Zhuotao Liu, Xiyuan Zhao, Qi Li, Mingwei Xu, Ke Xu, ’11.
 and Jianping Wu. 2023. Robust Multi-tab Website Fingerprinting Attacks in the [47] Julien Piet, Aashish Sharma, Vern Paxson, and David Wagner. 2023. Network
 Wild. In IEEE SP ’23. Detection of Interactive { SSH } Impostors Using Deep Learning. In USENIX
[16] Mirabelle Dib, Sadegh Torabi, Elias Bou-Harb, Nizar Bouguila, and Chadi Assi. Security ’23.
 2022. Evoliot: A self-supervised contrastive learning framework for detecting [48] Yuwen Qian, Guodong Huang, Chuan Ma, Ming Ding, Long Yuan, Zi Chen,
 and characterizing evolving iot malware variants. In CCS ’22. and Kai Wang. 2024. Enhancing Resilience in Website Fingerprinting: Novel
[17] Qi Dou, Daniel Coelho de Castro, Konstantinos Kamnitsas, and Ben Glocker. Adversary Strategies for Noisy Traffic Environments. TIFS (2024).
 2019. Domain generalization via model-agnostic learning of semantic features. [49] Yuqi Qing, Qilei Yin, Xinhao Deng, Yihao Chen, Zhuotao Liu, Kun Sun, Ke Xu,
 NeurIPS (2019). Jia Zhang, and Qi Li. 2024. Low-quality training data only? A robust framework
[18] Zhengxiao Du, Xiaowei Wang, Hongxia Yang, Jingren Zhou, and Jie Tang. 2019. for detecting encrypted malicious network traffic. In NDSS ’24.
 Sequential scenario-specific meta learner for online recommendation. In KDD [50] Mohammad Saidur Rahman, Mohsen Imani, Nate Mathews, and Matthew Wright.
 ’19. 2021. Mockingbird: Defending Against Deep-Learning-Based Website Finger-
[19] Kevin P Dyer, Scott E Coull, Thomas Ristenpart, and Thomas Shrimpton. 2012. printing Attacks With Adversarial Traces. TIFS (2021).
 Peek-a-boo, I still see you: Why efficient traffic analysis countermeasures fail. In [51] L.M. Rasdi Rere, Mohamad Ivan Fanany, and Aniati Murni Arymurthy. 2015.
 IEEE SP ’12. Simulated Annealing Algorithm for Deep Learning. Procedia Computer Science
[20] Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al. 1996. A density- (2015).
 based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In [52] Vera Rimmer, Davy Preuveneers, Marc Juarez, Tom Van Goethem, and Wouter
 KDD ’96. Joosen. 2017. Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning. In NDSS
[21] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2017. Model-agnostic meta- ’17.
 learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In ICML ’17. [53] Meng Shen, Zhenbo Gao, Liehuang Zhu, and Ke Xu. 2021. Efficient fine-grained
[22] Yanjie Fu, Hui Xiong, Xinjiang Lu, Jin Yang, and Can Chen. 2016. Service usage website fingerprinting via encrypted traffic analysis with deep learning. In IWQOS
 classification with encrypted internet traffic in mobile messaging apps. TMC ’21.
 (2016). [54] Meng Shen, Kexin Ji, Zhenbo Gao, Qi Li, Liehuang Zhu, and Ke Xu. 2023. Subvert-
[23] Zhuoqun Fu, Mingxuan Liu, Yue Qin, Jia Zhang, Yuan Zou, Qilei Yin, Qi Li, and ing website fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation. In USENIX
 Haixin Duan. 2022. Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based network Security ’23.
 analysis. In RAID ’22. [55] Yang Shu, Zhangjie Cao, Chenyu Wang, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long.
[24] Jiajun Gong and Tao Wang. 2020. Zero-delay Lightweight Defenses against 2021. Open domain generalization with domain-augmented meta-learning. In
 Website Fingerprinting. In USENIX Security ’20. CVPR ’21.
[25] Ian J Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, [56] Payap Sirinam, Mohsen Imani, Marc Juarez, and Matthew Wright. 2018. Deep Fin-
 Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative adversarial gerprinting: Undermining Website Fingerprinting Defenses with Deep Learning.
 nets. NeurIPS (2014). In CCS ’18.
[26] James K Holland and Nicholas Hopper. 2022. RegulaTor: A Straightforward [57] Payap Sirinam, Nate Mathews, Mohammad Saidur Rahman, and Matthew Wright.
 Website Fingerprinting Defense. PETS (2022). 2019. Triplet Fingerprinting: More Practical and Portable Website Fingerprinting
[27] Arthur S. Jacobs, Roman Beltiukov, Walter Willinger, Ronaldo A. Ferreira, Arpit with N-shot Learning. In CCS ’19.
 Gupta, and Lisandro Z. Granville. 2022. AI/ML for Network Security: The Emperor [58] Zhiqiang Tang, Peiyi Wang, Wenci Xin, Zhexin Xie, Longxin Kan, Muralidharan
 has no Clothes. In CCS ’22. Mohanakrishnan, and Cecilia Laschi. 2023. Meta-learning-based optimal control
[28] Lars Johannsmeier, Malkin Gerchow, and Sami Haddadin. 2019. A framework for soft robotic manipulators to interact with unknown environments. In ICRA
 for robot manipulation: Skill formalism, meta learning and adaptive control. In ’23.
 ICRA ’19. [59] Riccardo Volpi, Pietro Morerio, Silvio Savarese, and Vittorio Murino. 2018. Ad-
[29] Stephen C Johnson. 1967. Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika (1967). versarial feature augmentation for unsupervised domain adaptation. In CVPR
[30] Marc Juarez, Mohsen Imani, Mike Perry, Claudia Diaz, and Matthew Wright. ’18.
 2016. Toward an efficient website fingerprinting defense. In ESORICS ’16. [60] Ning Wang, Shanghao Shi, Yimin Chen, Wenjing Lou, and Y Thomas Hou. 2025.
[31] Siavash Khodadadeh, Ladislau Boloni, and Mubarak Shah. 2019. Unsupervised FeCo: Boosting intrusion detection capability in IoT networks via contrastive
 meta-learning for few-shot image classification. NeurIPS (2019). learning. TDSC ’25 (2025).
[32] Daehee Kim, Youngjun Yoo, Seunghyun Park, Jinkyu Kim, and Jaekoo Lee. 2021. [61] Tao Wang and Ian Goldberg. 2017. Walkie-talkie: an efficient defense against
 SelfReg: Self-Supervised Contrastive Regularization for Domain Generalization. passive website fingerprinting attacks. In USENIX Security ’17.
 In ICCV ’21. [62] Wei Wang, Ming Zhu, Jinlin Wang, Xuewen Zeng, and Zhongzhen Yang. 2017.
[33] Brian Kulis and Michael I. Jordan. 2012. Revisiting k-means: new algorithms via End-to-end encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution
 Bayesian nonparametrics. In ICML ’12. neural networks. In ISI ’17.
[34] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning. nature [63] Zihao Wang, Kar Wai Fok, and Vrizlynn LL Thing. 2022. Machine learning for
 (2015). encrypted malicious traffic detection: Approaches, datasets and comparative
[35] Wooju Lee, Dasol Hong, Hyungtae Lim, and Hyun Myung. 2024. Object-aware study. Computers & Security (2022).
 domain generalization for object detection. In AAAI ’24. [64] Renjie Xie, Jiahao Cao, Enhuan Dong, Mingwei Xu, Kun Sun, Qi Li, Licheng
[36] Da Li, Yongxin Yang, Yi-Zhe Song, and Timothy Hospedales. 2018. Learning to Shen, and Menghao Zhang. 2023. Rosetta: Enabling Robust TLS Encrypted
 generalize: Meta-learning for domain generalization. In AAAI ’18. Traffic Classification in Diverse Network Environments with TCP-Aware Traffic
[37] Pan Li, Da Li, Wei Li, Shaogang Gong, Yanwei Fu, and Timothy M Hospedales. Augmentation. In USENIX Security ’23.
 2021. A simple feature augmentation for domain generalization. In ICCV ’21. [65] Yi Xie, Jiahao Feng, Wenju Huang, Yixi Zhang, Xueliang Sun, Xiaochou Chen,
[38] Bo Liu, Hao Kang, Haoxiang Li, Gang Hua, and Nuno Vasconcelos. 2020. Few-shot and Xiapu Luo. 2024. Contrastive fingerprinting: A novel website fingerprinting
 open-set recognition using meta-learning. In CVPR ’20. attack over few-shot traces. In WWW ’24.
[39] Chang Liu, Longtao He, Gang Xiong, Zigang Cao, and Zhen Li. 2019. Fs-net: A [66] Shi-Jie Xu, Guang-Gang Geng, Xiao-Bo Jin, Dong-Jie Liu, and Jian Weng. 2022.
 flow sequence network for encrypted traffic classification. In INFOCOM ’19. Seeing traffic paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features.

 3576
Training Robust Classifiers for Classifying Encrypted Traffic under Dynamic Network Conditions CCS ’25, October 13–17, 2025, Taipei

 TIFS (2022). using their original supervised training methods. When implement-
[67] Xiaodu Yang, Sijie Ruan, Jinyu Li, Yinliang Yue, and Bo Sun. 2024. TrafCL: Robust ing 3A+Rosetta+SelfReg and 3A+NA+SelfReg, we first augment new
 Encrypted Malicious Traffic Detection via Contrastive Learning. In CIKM ’24.
[68] Cheol-Hwan Yoo, Jang-Hee Yoo, Ho-Won Kim, and ByungOk Han. 2023. Pointing training traffic using 3A. Then, we further augment the training
 gesture recognition via self-supervised regularization for asd screening. In ICCV traffic using Rosetta or NA and use it to pretrain the representa-
 ’23.
[69] Runsheng Yu, Yu Gong, Xu He, Yu Zhu, Qingwen Liu, Wenwu Ou, and Bo An. 2021.
 tion layers of DF and ARES. Finally, we fine-tune the classification
 Personalized adaptive meta learning for cold-start user preference prediction. In layers of DF and ARES using the original training traffic and their
 AAAI ’21. supervised training method. The regularization terms in SelfReg
[70] Xi Yu, Shinjae Yoo, and Yuewei Lin. 2024. CLIPCEIL: Domain Generalization
 through CLIP via Channel refinement and Image-text alignment. NeurIPS (2024). are incorporated into the loss functions during both the pretraining
[71] Tahmina Zebin, Shahadate Rezvy, and Yuan Luo. 2022. An Explainable AI-Based and fine-tuning steps.
 Intrusion Detection System for DNS Over HTTPS (DoH) Attacks. TIFS (2022).
[72] Haozhen Zhang, Le Yu, Xi Xiao, Qing Li, Francesco Mercaldo, Xiapu Luo, and
 Qixu Liu. 2023. Tfe-gnn: A temporal fusion encoder using graph neural networks B The Sizes of All Training and Testing Traffic
 for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification. In WWW ’23. Combinations
[73] Jielun Zhang, Fuhao Li, Feng Ye, and Hongyu Wu. 2020. Autonomous unknownapplication filtering and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier update. In INFOCOM For each dataset in each dynamic network condition experiment, we
 ’20. construct a training and testing encrypted traffic combination. The
[74] Shuang Zhao, Shuhui Chen, Fei Wang, Ziling Wei, Jincheng Zhong, and Jianbing Liang. 2023. A Large-Scale Mobile Traffic Dataset For Mobile Application traffic in each combination is randomly selected from the dataset
 Identification. Comput. J. (2023). according to the settings of the corresponding dynamic network
[75] Jingnan Zheng, Jiahao Liu, An Zhang, Jun Zeng, Ziqi Yang, Zhenkai Liang, and condition experiment (see § 5.2 and § 5.3). The sizes of these com-
 Tat-Seng Chua. 2024. MaskDroid: Robust Android Malware Detection with
 Masked Graph Representations. In ASE ’24. binations are presented in Table 6.
[76] Wenbo Zheng, Chao Gou, Lan Yan, and Shaocong Mo. 2020. Learning to classify:
 A flow-based relation network for encrypted traffic classification. In WWW ’20.
 Network Condition Dataset Training Size Testing Size
[77] Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Feng Yu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. 2021.
 Graph contrastive learning with adaptive augmentation. In WWW ’21. Dynamic Host Application-Host 6000 2000
[78] Yehonatan Zion, Porat Aharon, Ran Dubin, Amit Dvir, and Chen Hajaj. 2024. Conditions DoHBrw-ALL 6000 2000
 Enhancing Encrypted Internet Traffic Classification Through Advanced Data Dynamic Network DoHBrw-NetEnv All All
 Augmentation Techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16539 (2024). Environment Conditions Application-ALL 6000 2000
 Tor-Obfuscation 33250 28500
 Dynamic Obfuscation
A The Implementation of Baselines Conditions
 Application-ALL 7000 6000
 DoHBrw-ALL 7000 6000
The Rosetta and NA methods first augment new encrypted traffic Application-ALL 8000 8000
 Dynamic Host and Network
data and use it to pretrain the representation layers of DL mod- Environment Conditions
 DoHBrw-ALL 8000 8000
els in an unsupervised manner. Consequently, when training DF Tor-ALL 12000 12000

and ARES with these methods, we follow this procedure and then Dynamic Host and Application-ALL 10000 10000
 Obfuscation Conditions DoHBrw-ALL 10000 10000
fine-tune the classification layers of DF and ARES using the origi-
 Dynamic Network Environment Application-ALL 10000 10000
nal training traffic and their original supervised training method. and Obfuscation Conditions DoHBrw-ALL 10000 10000
The 3A method does not include a pretraining step; instead, it di- Dynamic Host,
rectly performs supervised training on DL models using both the Network Environment, Tor-ALL 30000 30000
 and Obfuscation Conditions
augmented and original training traffic. We follow this procedure
when using 3A to train DF and ARES. Additionally, SelfReg im- Table 6: The sizes of all training and testing traffic combiproves DL models by incorporating regularization terms into the nations. The "Training/Testing Size" refers to the size of the
loss functions. Therefore, we integrate these regularization terms training/testing traffic flows. The "All" means "All traffic that
into the original loss functions of DF and ARES and train them satisfies conditions".

 3577