This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 1

 Unmasking the Internet: A Survey of
 Fine-Grained Network Traffic Analysis
 Yebo Feng, Jun Li, Jelena Mirkovic, Cong Wu, Chong Wang, Hao Ren, Jiahua Xu, and Yang Liu

 Abstract—Fine-grained traffic analysis (FGTA), as an ad- usually only take higher-layer measures (e.g., encryption,
vanced form of traffic analysis (TA), aims to analyze network anonymization, etc.) to preserve the user privacy regardless
traffic to deduce fine-grained information on or above the of leaving traceable patterns on lower layers, analyzers can
application layer, such as application-layer activities, fine-grained
user behaviors, or message content, even in the presence of traffic capture network features from the lower layers to infer higherencryption or traffic obfuscation. Different from traditional TA, layer knowledge in communication [3], even in the presence
FGTA approaches are usually based on complicated processing of message encryption. Such a process is called traffic analysis
pipelines or sophisticated data mining techniques such as deep (TA), a technique widely used in today’s Internet.
learning or high-dimensional clustering, enabling them to dis- TA has been studied for decades, with myriad systems,
cover subtle differences between different network traffic groups.
Nowadays, with the increasingly complex Internet architecture, tools, and algorithms [4]–[10] developed to serve different
the increasingly frequent transmission of user data, and the types of purposes, such as traffic measurement, traffic engiwidespread use of traffic encryption, FGTA is becoming an neering, anomaly detection, and network surveillance. In early
essential tool for both network administrators and attackers to development of TA, traditional TA approaches were mainly
gain different levels of visibility over the network. It plays a designed for basic network traffic measurement/forecast [11]–
critical role in intrusion and anomaly detection, quality of experience investigation, user activity inference, website fingerprinting, [13], anomaly detection [14], and coarse-grained traffic claslocation estimation, etc. To help scholars and developers research sification [15]. These approaches are usually rule-based,
and advance this technology, in this survey paper, we examine statistics-based, sketch-based [16], [17] or clustering-based,
the literature that deals with FGTA, investigating the frontier can separate traffic of different network protocols or condevelopments in this domain. By comprehensively surveying duct basic modeling of traffic flow changes. Later, with the
different approaches toward FGTA, we introduce their input
traffic data, elaborate on their operating principles by different advancement of the Internet and the growing complexity of
use cases, indicate their limitations and countermeasures, and network traffic, a deeper level of network visibility became
raise several promising future research avenues. necessary. For instance, application-layer visibility is crucial
 Index Terms—Network traffic, traffic analysis, traffic classifi- for measuring application usage, conducting application secucation, traffic monitoring, fine-grained traffic analysis, intrusion rity inspections, and monitoring fine-grained network events.
detection, user behavior identification. Similarly, visibility above the application layer is vital for
 modeling user behavior, analyzing user experiences, and performing content analysis. As a result, researchers and devel-
 I. I NTRODUCTION opers are evolving traditional TA into the more sophisticated

I N the context of Internet, protocols and applications are
 usually built upon hierarchical models [1] (e.g., TCP/IP
and OSI), where the communication functions of a telecomfine-grained traffic analysis (FGTA), enabling the extraction
 of more granular insights from network traffic data. In this
 paper, we define FGTA as a type of advanced TA techniques
munication or computing system are categorized into several that focus on deducing information on or above the application
abstraction layers. Higher layers only encapsulate high-level layer from network traffic data. These processes utilize only
methods, protocols, and specifications, operating with the link-layer or network-layer traffic data and are applicable
support of lower layers [2]. With such design, program- regardless of whether the traffic data is encrypted.
mers can easily develop interoperable Internet applications As a subset of TA, FGTA is mainly different from traditional
regardless of diverse underlying protocols and technologies. TA in the following ways:
However, this convention also makes cross-layered network • The most essential difference is the output of analysis.
analysis feasible. As developers of higher layer applications Traditional TA can coarsely distinguish or model traffic from different types of protocols (e.g., HTTPS vs.
 Yebo Feng, Cong Wu, Chong Wang, Hao Ren, and Yang Liu are with SMPT), communication methods (e.g., VPN vs. Tor), or
the College of Computing and Data Science (CCDS), Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, 639798 (E-mail: {yebo.feng, cong.wu, chong.wang, networking models (e.g., peer-to-peer vs client-server),
yangliu}@ntu.edu.sg and hao.ren@ieee.org). generating coarse-grained traffic statistics, traffic flow
 Jun Li is with the Computer Science Department, University of Oregon, models, or traffic classification results. However, FGTA
Eugene, OR, 97403, USA (E-mail: lijun@cs.uoregon.edu).
 Jelena Mirkovic is with the Information Sciences Institute, Univer- aims to analyze traffic at a finer granularity, providing
sity of Southern California, Marina del Rey, CA, 90292, USA (E-mail: fine-grained analysis results on or above the application
mirkovic@isi.edu). layer, such as traffic from different application-layer ac-
 Jiahua Xu is with the Computer Science Department, University College
London, UK (Email: jiahua.xu@ucl.ac.uk). tivities (e.g., Twitter posting vs. Twitter reading), different
 Corresponding author: Hao Ren. groups of application users (e.g., online social network

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 2

 (OSN) bots vs. normal users), or different user content I. Introduction V. Use Cases and Representative Approaches
 II. Related Work
 (e.g., the visiting of a specific website). Intrusion/anomaly detection
 III. Traffic Input
 • The analysis pipelines of traditional TA and FGTA are
 Quality of experience measurement
 Traffic data acquiring
 often, but not always, distinct. FGTA, aiming at gen- Passive Network Traffic
 and active observation Packet-level capture Application identification
 erating more granular information, usually have more TA point engines
 Flow-level Device identification
 complicated and sophisticated analysis pipelines. For IV. Methodology
 Location inference
 example, some FGTA approaches takes traditional TA as
 Pipeline Feature extraction Intrinsic feature
 a prerequisite step to “preprocess” the traffic before the Application usage inference
 Derived feature
 final inference, such as a FGTA approach that tries to Website fingerprinting

 identify the web page the user is visiting needs to first Classification and prediction approach
 VI. Limitations
 leverage traditional TA to extract all the web browsing Traditional statistical approach
 VII. Countermeasures
 traffic. Rule-based approach

 • As for analysis algorithms, compared to traditional TA Probabilistic approach Network-layer countermeasures

 Surprised machine learning
 approaches, most FGTA approaches depend on more Application-layer countermeasures
 Unsupervised machine learning
 sophisticated modeling, classification, or prediction meth-
 Hybrid approach VIII. Future Research Direction
 ods, such as deep machine learning or high-dimensional IX. Conclusion
 clustering, to tackle the challenging fine-grained analysis Evaluation metrics Classification efficacy
 Acronyms
 Efficiency
 tasks. On the other hand, traditional TA, dealing with Acknowledgements
 Other metrics
 more straightforward tasks, can utilize a number of dif- References

 ferent analytical methods, such as rule-based, statistics-
 Fig. 1: The paper organization and snapshots of proposed
 based, or soft-computing-based approaches.
 taxonomies.
 With the increasingly complex Internet architecture, increasingly frequent transmission of user data, and the widespread
use of traffic encryption [6], FGTA is becoming a more and of keywords and keyword combinations to broadly identify
more important research topic. Compared with traditional TA, potentially relevant literature1 . Subsequently, we manually
FGTA can reveal more information from network traffic and review the content of these works to ensure their relevance to
can achieve high efficacy even in various complicated network FGTA. This survey primarily focuses on literature published
environments [18]. Besides, as network traffic data become within the last two decades, specifically from 2004 to 2024.
more easily accessible than before, the applicable scenarios of This time frame was deliberately chosen to capture both the
FGTA are more extensive compared with directly analyzing foundational theories and the latest advancements in FGTA.
traffic content. Furthermore, FGTA is efficient and portable in Our analysis of the literature is conducted in a two-stage
discovering application-layer knowledge [19]–[21]. By analyz- process: firstly, an initial review is conducted to assess the
ing a small amount of metadata or statistical information of relevance, quality, and alignment of the sources with the
traffic, FGTA can obtain almost the same level of visibility as objectives of our survey; secondly, we perform an in-depth
decoding large amount of message content. Therefore, FGTA review of these sources to identify their key contributions,
has a wide range of usage scenarios. As for network manage- methodologies, limitations, experimental setups, results, etc.
ments, FGTA can help measure application usage [22], detect The methodology we adopted aims to strike a balance between
complicated network intrusions or anomalies [23], investigate comprehensiveness and depth. By doing so, we ensure that
edge user experience [24], etc. As for the attacker side, FGTA our survey not only covers the most pertinent literature in the
can help eavesdrop on private information of users [25], model field of FGTA but also provides a thorough analysis of the
user behaviors [26], estimate user locations [27], etc. Studying most significant contributions within this domain.
FGTA is essential for comprehensive network inspection, The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We first
safeguarding information transmission, and precise network introduce related work and compare existing surveys to our
configuration. work in Section II. We then discuss the input data of FGTA
 (i.e., network traffic data) and its collection in real-world
 In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive examination environments in Section III. Next, in Section IV, we discuss
of over 300 pieces of literature related to FGTA. Our se- and summarize the methodologies of FGTA, including their
lection criteria encompassed sources from academic journals, operating pipelines, feature extraction methods, classification
academic conference proceedings, workshop papers, industry approaches, and evaluation metrics. Besides, we elaborate on
reports, preprint papers, etc. We prioritized academic publi- frontier developments of FGTA by their use cases in Section V.
cations that have made significant theoretical and practical We then point out the limitations of existing FGTA in Seccontributions to the field of FGTA, published in reputable tion VI and introduce the countermeasures in Section VII.
venues (e.g., ACM Computing Surveys, ACM CCS, Usenix In addition, based on our observations and reflections on
Security, NDSS, ACM IMC, etc.), or have been widely cited.
We search the literature from popular academic databases, 1 The keywords include but are not limited to: fine-grained traffic analsuch as IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital Library, SpringerLink, Sci- ysis, fine-grained network traffic classification, traffic-based user behavior
 inference, application-layer behavior modeling with network traffic, website
enceDirect, etc., and search engines, such as Google Scholar, fingerprinting, user location estimation with network traffic, detailed network
Microsoft Academic, Google, etc. We employ a diverse set traffic classification, etc.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 3

 G: partially included;
 TABLE I: Overview of related literature (#: not included; # : included).
 Subjects covered
 Ref. Year Summary Focus
 General Traffic Counter-
 FGTA
 TA capture measure
This paper 2025 A survey of FGTA, which aims to analyze network traffic to FGTA #
 G
 deduce information related to high-layer activities, fine-grained
 user behaviors, or application-layer message content.
[17] 2023 A survey of sketch-based traffic analysis using sliding windows, Sketch-based TA #
 G # G
 # #
 including their fundamental principles, primary use cases, advantages, and limitations.
[28] 2023 A review of the literature on network traffic prediction, including Network traffic #
 G # G
 # #
 experiments based on real data sets to compare the various prediction
 approaches directly in terms of fitting quality and computational
 costs.
[18] 2022 A recent survey on achievements in machine learning-powered Machine- #
 G G
 # #
 G G
 #
 encrypted traffic analysis, including the workflow, feature extrac- learning-based
 tion, and algorithms. encrypted TA
[29] 2022 A survey that consists of an analysis of IoT traffic data acquisition Machine- # G
 # #
 approaches, a classification of public datasets, a literature evalua- learning-based
 tion of IoT traffic processing, and a comparison of ML approaches IoT TA
 for IoT device classification.
[30] 2022 A survey of deep neural network (DNN) architectures commonly DNN-based traf- #
 G # G
 # #
 used in the traffic flow prediction literatures, categorizes and fic prediction
 describes the literatures themselves, and presents an overview of
 the commonalities and differences among different works.
[6] 2021 A survey of literature that deals with network traffic analysis Encrypted TA G
 # G
 # #
 and inspection after the ascent of encryption in communication
 channels.
[31] 2021 An extensive analysis of the communications channels of 32 IoT IoT TA #
 G #
 G #
 G #
 consumer devices, including traffic measurement and modelling.
[32] 2020 A survey that looks at the emerging trends of network traffic IoT TA #
 G G
 # #
 classification in IoT and the utilization of traffic classification in
 its applications. It also compares the legacy of traffic classification
 methods.
[5] 2019 A survey that mainly focuses on approaches and technologies to General TA G
 # #
 manage the big traffic data, additionally briefly discussing big data
 analytics (e.g., machine learning) for the sake of TA.
[33] 2018 A review of works that contributed to the network traffic analysis Mobile device G
 # #
 G G
 #
 targeting mobile devices, including a systematic classification of TA
 such works according to their goal, traffic capture point, and
 targeted platforms.
[7] 2018 A systematic review based on the steps to achieve traffic clas- Machine- #
 G #
 G # #
 sification by using machine learning techniques, including their learning-based
 workflow, feature extraction, deployment, etc. TA
[34] 2016 An examination of the literature on analyses of mobile traffic Mobile device #
 G G
 # #
 collected by operators within their network infrastructure. TA
[35] 2015 A survey of approaches for classification and analysis of encrypted Encrypted TA #
 G #
 G # #
 traffic, including widespread encryption protocols and payload and
 feature-based classification approaches.
[36] 2014 A survey in which a complete and thorough analysis of the Payload-based #
 G # G
 # #
 most important opensource deep packet inspection modules is TA
 performed.
[37] 2013 A survey of peer-to-peer traffic detection and classification, with P2P TA G
 # # # #
 an extended review of the related literature.
[38] 2009 A survey explains the main techniques and problems known in the General TA # #
 field of IP traffic analysis and focuses on application detection.
[39] 2009 A report attempts to provide an overview of some of the widely General TA G
 # # # #
 used network traffic models, highlighting the core features of the
 model and traffic characteristics they capture best.

this field, we propose some avenues for future research in II. R ELATED W ORK
Section VIII, thereby helping future academics and developers
to advance FGTA. In the end, we conclude this paper in In this section, we introduce related work on TA and
Section IX. To our best knowledge, this paper is the first compare our paper with them. Table I summarizes the most
survey paper that focuses on FGTA and compares the state- related and representative ones.
of-the-art approaches in this field. Figure 1 illustrates the Our work differs from existing survey works regarding TA
organization of this survey paper and give snapshots of the in the following aspects:
proposed taxonomies. • we have a clear and focused survey topic: the whole paper
 focuses on FGTA, which aims to analyze network traffic
 to only deduce fine-grained outputs, such as information

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 4

 related to high-layer application activities, fine-grained A. Passive and Active TA
 user behaviors, or application-layer message content. Notably, no other related survey papers, including [17], [18], TA can be generally classified into passive and active
 and [29], have FGTA as their primary focus; approaches based on the way they collect network traffic
 • to investigate FGTA comprehensively, our paper utilizes data [41], [42].
 multiple methodologies, including literature survey, sum-
 Passive TA approaches involves monitoring and analyzing
 marization, and taxonomization, to cover different related
 network traffic without altering or injecting any data into
 subjects, such as traffic capture, application identificathe network [42], [43]. It relies solely on the observation of
 tion, website fingerprinting, countermeasures, etc. Most
 existing traffic flows. Typically, passive TA approaches consist
 existing related survey papers only cover a subset of the
 of capturing packets, logging traffic patterns, and analyzing
 aforementioned topics;
 these logs to infer information. Such approach offer several
 • although studied for many years, TA is still iterating
 advantages. First of all, passive TA approaches are nonrapidly and continuously, especially for FGTA. Compared
 intrusive. Since they do not interfere with the network, they
 with other earlier literature, this paper sorts out and
 are less likely to be detected by users or security mechanisms.
 examine the most recent development of FGTA at the
 Furthermore, passive TA approaches do not add additional
 time of writing this paper.
 load to the network, making them suitable for continuous
 In the early development of TA (i.e., before 2010), the monitoring. However, passive TA approaches may not capture
survey papers in this field mainly focus on coarse-grained all relevant information, particularly in cases of encrypted
traditional TA [38]–[40], including protocol-level traffic clas- or obfuscated traffic. Additionally, as they rely on existing
sification, TA approaches based on deep packet inspection traffic flows, passive TA approaches cannot proactively test or
(DPI), distinguishing server or peer-to-peer nodes from clients, measure specific aspects of network performance or behavior,
and coarse grained application identifications. making them inherently reactive.
 Later, due to increasingly diverse web-applications and
widespread use of traffic encryption, there is an increasing Active TA approaches involve actively injecting data into the
need for more sophisticated TA approaches to monitor and network to provoke responses, which are then analyzed to gain
analyze the modern networks. Meanwhile, the evolution of insights into the network’s behavior and performance [44],
classification algorithms and easy access to big data also [45]. Active TA approaches may include techniques such as
effectively stimulate the development of TA. Therefore, survey sending probe packets [46], watermarking existing traffic [47]–
papers began to examine works that leverage big data [5], [49], performing packet timing analysis, or conducting specific
machine learning [7], or efficient data structures [17] to tackle tests to measure latency, throughput, and other metrics. Com-
TA. pare to passive TA approaches, active TA approaches offer sev-
 On the other hand, the network is also becoming more and eral advantages. First, active TA approaches can provide more
more specialized, which has spawned many TA approaches detailed and precise information, especially about specific
with specific design goals. To track such a trend, many of the network conditions and device status. Besides, By generating
recent survey papers only investigate a certain type of TA ap- traffic, active TA approaches can test scenarios and conditions
proaches, such as TA for Internet of things (IoT) devices [31], that may not naturally occur, allowing for more thorough
[32], encrypted TA [6], [18], TA for mobile devices [33], [34], analysis. However, the act of injecting traffic can be detected
among others. Similar to these papers, our work focuses on a by network users and security mechanisms, potentially leading
new and specific topic—FGTA, which means our paper only to countermeasures [50]. Active TA approaches also add addifocus on the TA approaches that input conventional network tional load to the network, which can affect performance and
traffic data but generate fine-grained inference outputs (e.g., may not be suitable for continuous monitoring. Furthermore,
fine-grained user behaviors and application message content). active TA approaches require additional network infrastructure
This direction has not been systematically studied before. and resources to operate, such as a traffic encoder to inject or
 watermark traffic flows and a traffic decoder to identify marked
 III. T RAFFIC I NPUT traffic flows. This makes active TA approaches less applicable
 Similar to traditional TA, FGTA approaches utilize the same in real-world scenarios.
type of network traffic data from some vantage points in the In the context of FGTA, passive TA approaches are more
network as input to synthesize knowledge. Network traffic commonly used due to their non-intrusive nature, ability to
data refers to the information exchanged between devices on continuously delve into network traffic data, and their focus
a computer network. Such data can be in diverse formats and on user-behavior-centric analysis models. In contrast, active
include a wide range of information, such as communication TA approaches are rarely employed in FGTA as they are
logs, packet headers, and payload. The network traffic data is designed for measuring specific network conditions, endpoint
the inference object for all TA approaches. In this section, device status, or the accessibility of network services, and
we introduce different types of traffic capture engines by focus less on undisturbed user behavior, which is the core of
the way they collect network traffic data, compare different FGTA. Therefore, throughout this paper, we primarily focus on
types of network traffic data, and survey their usabilities. We passive TA approaches. In this section, we specifically discuss
also introduce these traffic capture engines’ deployments and the network traffic input by passive TA approaches rather than
application scenarios in FGTA. active TA approaches.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 5

 multiple observation points is that it allows distributed or
 Observation Point cooperative TA, where multiple analyzers can collaborate
 to analyze traffic data and synthesize more comprehensive
 ... knowledge [55]–[57]. For example, analyzers can choose to
 Observation
 upload only extracted features or intermediate results to a
 Point
 ... ... central server to reduce the burden of data transmission or
 enhance the privacy of the data [58]; researchers can also
(a) The observation point is the leverage federated learning techniques to train a global model
gateway of the network. The (b) The observation point is in without sharing sensitive traffic data [59]–[62]. However, these
traffic capture engine can collect the network. The captured traffic
bidirectional traffic data. can be asymmetric.
 approaches are costly to implement and often impractical
 due to real-world constraints, making them seldom used in
Fig. 2: Network visibility with different observation locations. practice, particularly in the context of FGTA.

B. Network Observation Point C. Traffic Data Acquiring
 The observation point of the traffic capture engine will Since the birth of the Internet, various traffic capture engines
significantly impact the integrity of the captured data and the have been developed to log traffic information. TA approaches
network visibility. Different observation points are suitable for can further leverage these “log information” to measure netdifferent types of TA tasks. work events, detect anomalies, and analyze network behaviors.
 The optimal observation point for most FGTA tasks is at Based on different information captured, these traffic capture
the network gateway (as shown in Figure 2a), as it provides engines can be classified into either packet-level or flowfull visibility into communication sessions between two nodes. level [4].
The gateway allows for the capture of complete inbound 1) Packet-level capture: Packet-level capture is widely used
and outbound traffic, which is essential for FGTA. Although in local networks and endpoint devices. As its name states, it
such a bidirectional traffic dataset is suitable to infer the copies or makes a snapshot of all the network packets that pass
interactions between the observed network and rest of the by the network interface and forwards the collected data to a
Internet, analyzers cannot learn about the traffic in the rest collector. The agent that takes charge of the capture is called a
of the Internet according to this dataset. packet-level traffic capture engine or a “sniffer”, which can be
 Sometimes, the observation point can be in the middle of the either software-based (e.g., Snoop [63], Wireshark [64], etc.)
network (illustrated in Figure 2b), especially when the traffic or hardware-based (e.g., Sniffer InfiniStream [65]). It can be
capture engine is deployed by an ISP or IXP. In this case, the as simple as an IP table rule on a route that copies all the
capture engine is able to collect a large amount of traffic that traffic to a cloud disk besides normal forwarding.
pass by it. However, it also raises the following concerns: Packet-level capture can collect raw network traffic, contain-
 • Due to asymmetric packet routing [51], in-network ob- ing both packet headers and packet payloads. Theoretically,
 servation point sometime may only capture traffic in one it can support all types of FGTA tasks by logging all the
 direction (illustrated in Figure 2b). information flowing through the network, making it an ideal
 • It cannot guarantee the integrity of captured traffic for a input source for FGTA. However, in most cases, packet-level
 long period because of the deployment of various traffic traffic capture might not be the right solution to deploy for the
 engineering techniques [52], [53]. The routing path for following reasons:
 any packet can be dynamic in today’s networks. • Packet-level traffic capture is expensive, not only because
Therefore, in-network observation points may be more suitable the interface needs to copy all the packets that pass by
for traditional TA tasks such as Internet measurement and it, but also because the interface needs to forward all
network-layer anomaly detection. As for FGTA, many ap- the captured traffic to an analysis node through a link.
proaches (e.g., user behavior inference, website fingerprinting) All these operations will double the workload of the
prefer to use the gateway-based observation point to capture network interface and occupy a considerable amount of
more complete traffic data from endpoints. However, wherever link bandwidth. Packet-level traffic capture is therefore
the observation point is located, it is difficult to capture all the not scalable.
relevant traffic in the network. • The information contained in packet-level traffic data
 To capture comprehensive traffic data from the network with is sometimes an “overkill” for TA, as many TA apcomplex topology, we can deploy multiple observation points proaches only require statistical information from the
at different vantage points if conditions permit. By using a pool packet headers to complete the analysis. Moreover, user
of metering processes to collect network packets at multiple messages, website content, and video streaming are usuobservation points, optionally filter them and aggregate infor- ally contained in packet payloads in encrypted forms,
mation about these packets, a traffic exporter can gather each making most information captured in packet-level traffic
of the observation points together into an observation domain meaningless for all TA approaches.
and sends this information to a traffic capture engine [54]. • Packet-level traffic may contain sensitive information
Then we can obtain relatively comprehensive network traf- (i.e., payload) of users. Thus, network service providers
fic data without redundancy. Another benefit of deploying are cautious about capturing and analyzing such data.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 6

 Workflow without traffic capture engines with packet sampling, it becomes feasible to capture and store
 traffic flows at an ISP or IXP scale, thereby extending the
 Forward/ Traffic
 Ingress Port Forward Ingress Port
 Drop Forwarding usage scenarios of TA. As we can see from a study, NetFlow
 only occupies around 15% of the router/switch’s CPU load
 Forward All Packets Workflow with when capturing sampled network traffic [73]. Compared with
 Cflowd as the
 Sample? traffic capture packet-level traffic capture that sometimes may double the
 engine
 Copy of Packet Headers system overhead and link usage, flow-level traffic capture is a
 huge improvement regarding efficiency and deployability.
 Header Information New or
 Processing and Existing New Add Entry However, flow-level traffic capture has a notable
 Flow Cache Updating Flow?
 drawback—it reduces the visibility of network traffic
 Existing
 by providing only metadata and aggregated statistical
 information rather than details of individual packets. This
 Flow Cache
 Update Entry Collector Port limitation is particularly problematic for FGTA, as many
 approaches rely on inter-packet information, such as packet
Fig. 3: Workflow of a network interface when Cflowd serves interval times. To address this issue, the lifecycle of each
as the traffic captured engine. flow in traffic capture engines can be shortened, allowing
 flows to be generated more frequently and thereby improving
 network visibility.
 2) Flow-level capture: To address the aforementioned issues of packet-level traffic captures and make traffic cap- D. Widely used traffic capture engines
turing affordable, scalable, and practical for network service Here, we introduce widely-used traffic capture engines in
providers, researchers and developers have proposed myriad academia and industry (Table II shows comparisons of them).
flow-level traffic capture engines. 1) Packet-level traffic capture engines: Back in the early
 In flow-level traffic capture systems, the capture engines days of Internet, developers had realized the importance of
no longer copy or make snapshots of each packet, instead, capturing network packets for troubleshooting. Thus, Tcpthey first aggregate relevant packets into a flow and then dump [80], a software-based packet-level traffic capture engine
capture metadata or statistical information to represent that (sniffer), was proposed in 1988. It allows users to store and
flow. Here, the concept of flow has been around for a long display TCP/IP and other packets being transmitted or received
time. Typically, a flow can be identified by either a 5-tuple over a network. Nowadays, Tcpdump has been ported to
(i.e., source IP address, source TCP/UDP port, destination several operating systems (e.g., Unix with libpcap library,
IP address, destination TCP/UDP port, and IP protocol) or a Windows with WinPcap) and is still frequently used in network
3-tuple (i.e., source IP address, destination IP address, and studies. Similar software-based sniffers were also proposed
IP protocol) [66]. However, with the development of flow to meet different needs. For example, Snoop [63], a simple
capture engines, researchers have proposed many other formal packet capture tool that is bundled on Solaris operating system;
and informal definitions of network traffic flows (e.g., RFC Wireshark [64], a free packet capture and analysis software
2722 [67], RFC 3697 [68], RFC 3917 [69], etc.). In this paper, that not only supports multiple operating systems (e.g., Linux,
we define a network traffic flow as a sequence of relevant Solaris, Windows, FreeBSD, Mac OS, etc.), but also comes
network packets from a source to a destination for the same with a user-friendly interface; PF RING [81], a high speed
application. In most instances, the network system will process packet capture library that can turn a commodity PC into an
packets within a flow in the same manner. Besides, each efficient and cheap network measurement box suitable for both
application-layer behavior will generate one or multiple flows packet capture and TA. As for routers and switches, traffic
in both directions. mirroring [83]–[85] is also well-studied, with many software
 By capturing traffic at flow-level, traffic capture engines no or hardware-based approaches [65], [86] proposed to support
longer suffer from high system overhead and high bandwidth real-time packet capture for enterprise-level networks.
usage. Figure 3 illustrates the workflows of a network interface However, as capturing the entire packet is expensive and
with and without Cflowd as the flow-level traffic captured sometimes impractical, people began to make a snapshot of
engine [70]. Unlike packet-level traffic capture that will copy each packet rather than storing it entirely. The most frequentlyand forward any packet entirely to the collector port, flow- used approach is sFlow [79], an industrial method (defined in
level traffic capture only copies information from headers to RFC 3176 [79]) originally developed by InMon Inc., to capture
assemble traffic flows. The volume of data to process is then packet-level snapshot from switches and routers. Compared
largely reduced in such a procedure. According to existing to previous packet-level traffic capture engines, sFlow offers
literature [71], NetFlow, the most frequently used flow-level several features that make it an ideal input for most FGTA
traffic capture engine, only creates 1-1.5% of throughput approaches:
(without sampling) on the interface it is exported on [72]. • Without capturing the entire packet, sFlow can just copy
With a great deal of data reduction, network administrators can the first N bytes of a packet to save computing and
store, process, inspect and analyze large amounts of network transmission resource. This is especially useful for TA
data efficiently. Furthermore, when combining this procedure tasks as packet payloads are useless in such scenarios

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 7

 G: partially supported; #: not
TABLE II: Comparisons of selected widely-used traffic capture engines ( : fully supported; #
supported.).
 Traffic Open
 Layer Hardware
 Capture Data Captured Granularity or Sampling
 (OSI) Acceleration
 Engine Proprietary
 Flow-level
 SNMP [74] High-level statistical information about the interface. Open 2, 3 # #
 (aggregated)
 IPFIX [75] Metadata and statistical information about the flow. Flow-level Open 3, 4
NetFlow v9 [76] Metadata and statistical information about the flow. Flow-level Proprietary 3, 4
NetFlow v5 [77] Metadata and statistical information about the flow. Flow-level Proprietary 3, 4
 Argus [78] Metadata and statistical information about the flow. Flow-level Open 2, 3, 4 #
 Partially
 sFlow [79] Complete packet headers and partial packet payloads. Packet-level 2-7
 Open
 Tcpdump [80] Network information passing through the observation point. Packet-level Open 2-7 # #
 Wireshark [64] Network information passing through the observation point. Packet-level Open 2-7 # #
 PF RING [81] Network information passing through the observation point. Packet-level Open 2-7 G
 #
 Netmap [82] Network information in the memory of the observation point. Packet-level Open 2-7 G
 #

 but the entire packet headers are still preserved for fine- bidirectional monitoring approach, NetFlow is a unidirectional
 grained analysis. flow monitor, reporting flow information of each direction
 • As an industrial standard, sFlow is compatible on many of conversations independently. This feature allows NetFlow
 different platforms of network switches and routers and to have a finer granularity than Argus. Since NetFlow was
 utilizes a dedicated chip built into the devices to operate, developed by Cisco, it is bundled with most Cisco routers
 which removes the burden of the CPU and memory of and switches, making it the object of imitation of the entire
 the router or switch when capturing the traffic. industry. Following NetFlow, many similar systems were pro-
 • By introducing time-based or packet-based sampling posed by both research institutions and commercial companies,
 techniques, sFlow can capture traffic on all interfaces such as Cflowd [70], J-Flow [88], NetStream [89], Remote
 simultaneously at wire speed. Network Monitoring (RMON) [90], etc. NetFlow itself also
 has evolved into different variations. The most famous one is
Therefore, sFlow can reach a good balance between data
 Internet Protocol Flow Information Export (IPFIX) [75], an
integrity and velocity for FGTA—being able to capture all
 IETF protocol built upon NetFlow v9.
the packet headers and simultaneously create less burden on
the router or switch. The most recent development of traffic capture and traffic
 handling have been mainly focusing on the velocity issue.
 2) Flow-level traffic capture engines: Flow-level traffic Researchers have proposed multiple approaches to capture
capture engines also have a long history. Back in 1984, large volume of network traffic at line speed without having
the Audit Record Generation and Utilization System (Argus any effect on data plane. For example, Netmap [82] a memoryflow [78]) was proposed as the first implementation of network based framework that enables commodity operating systems
flow monitoring, and is still an ongoing open source network to handle millions of packets per seconds without the support
flow monitor project now. Argus can monitor all network traf- of custom hardware; eXpress Data Path (XDP) [91], a fast
fic, including Internet Protocol (IP) traffic, data plane, control programmable packet processing approach based on the operplane and management plane. It captures much of the packet ating system kernel, supports high speed packet logging and
dynamics and semantics in each flow, providing reachability, processing; hXDP [92], an efficient software network packet
availability, connectivity, duration, rate, load, delay metrics processing approach written in extended Berkeley Packet
for all network flows. It also captures most attributes that are Filter (eBPF) on Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA)
available from the packet headers [87]. Later, in 1988, Simple network interface controllers (NICs); NetSeer [93], a flow
Network Management Protocol (SNMP) [74] was proposed as event telemetry (FET) monitor, which aims to discover and
a component of the Internet Protocol Suite as defined by the record all performance-critical events on the programmable
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Unlike Argus flow data plane. However, these approaches do not alter the FGTA
that provides rich information about ongoing traffic, SNMP pipeline; they simply enhance the speed of infrastructure for
only provides statistical information per interface, such as link capturing and processing network traffic, without modifying
utilization, interface bandwidth, and some other information the captured data itself.
if the device provides. SNMP is thus less applicable in TA
compared with Argus, especially in the domain of FGTA.
 With rapid development and popularization of the Internet, IV. M ETHODOLOGY
the industry had realized the importance of flow-level traffic In this section, we delve into the methodology of FGTA
capture engine and many solutions were proposed. The most and explore this field from the perspectives of data processing
typical example is NetFlow [76], so far the most widely- pipelines, feature extraction approaches, classification & preused flow-level capture engine with many TA approaches diction approaches, and evaluation metrics. These components
built upon. Just like Argus, NetFlow uses a flow record to are integral to the success of FGTA and play crucial roles in
represent a set of packets. However, unlike Argus, which is a achieving accurate results.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 8

 (GDPR) compliance [95], or compressing the data for
 Traffic collection Preprocessing efficient storage.
 After the preprocessing step, FGTA approaches usually
 Feature Extraction move to feature extraction, which refers to the process of
 selecting and transforming raw network traffic data into a set
 Training of relevant features that are suitable for machine learning,
 Future steps
 Inference inference, or other analysis steps. For both traditional TA
 (e.g., access
 (e.g., classification)
 control) and FGTA approaches, the feature extraction is a particularly
 important step for representing the ongoing network events and
Fig. 4: The most widely-used processing pipeline for FGTA, achieving accurate results. However, compared with traditional
which consists of three key steps: preprocessing, feature TA approaches, FGTA approaches may require more sophisextraction, and classification. ticated feature extraction steps as they often need to extract
 more detailed information from the raw traffic data. We further
 Traffic collection discuss more details about feature extraction in Section IV-B.
 FGTA
 After relevant features are extracted, FGTA approaches are
 Traffic matching
 Rules typically ready for inference. The inference goals of these
 Future steps
 (e.g., access
 approaches can vary, including identifying specific network
 control) events, classifying traffic flows based on different application
 behaviors, detecting network anomalies, or predicting specific
Fig. 5: Example of a simplified FGTA data processing pipeline, future network traffic. We further discuss the use cases of
which is used when the target traffic pattern is distinct or well- FGTA approaches in Section V. The inference results of FGTA
defined. approaches can be used for a variety of purposes, including
 network monitoring, access control, device management, data
 center protection, etc. However, regardless of the inference
A. Pipeline
 goal, the inference step of FGTA always operates in the
 The process of generating fine-grained analysis results from form of fine-grained classification or prediction. For example,
raw network traffic collected from network infrastructures typ- classifying outlier traffic flows from normal traffic flows (i.e.,
ically involves several necessary steps. These data processing anomaly detection), or classifying traffic flows according to
procedures are known as the FGTA pipeline. Different FGTA different applications (i.e., application identification). Thereapproaches may have different pipelines, with different steps fore, we use the term classification and prediction to refer to
and different orders. In this subsection, we discuss three types the inference step of FGTA approaches. Compared traditional
of FGTA pipelines (illustrated in Figure 5, 4, and 6). TA approaches, FGTA approaches may require more sophis-
 Figure 4 depicts a commonly adopted pipeline for FGTA. ticated classification and prediction approaches as they often
This pipeline is also prevalent in traditional TA methodolo- need to classify or predict more detailed information from
gies as it offers a complete and versatile framework for the extracted features. These advancements may include more
processing of network traffic data. Regardless of whether the sophisticated machine learning algorithms, more sophisticated
input traffic is in flow-level or packet-level format, it usually statistical modeling, or more complicated rule-based matchcannot be directly processed by analysis algorithms. Therefore, ing. Section IV-C discusses the classification and prediction
similar to traditional TA pipeline, the first step of this FGTA approaches used in FGTA.
pipeline is usually to preprocess the raw traffic data. The The previously mentioned pipeline outlines the general steps
preprocessing step typically involves the following tasks: for FGTA approaches. However, depending on the specific
 • Data decoding: the raw network traffic data is usually goals, system design, and operational environments, the FGTA
 encoded in a format that is not easily processable (e.g., pipeline can be simplified or extended, with specific steps
 binary format or encrypted form). This task converts the omitted or added.
 raw traffic data into a readable and processable form. Figure 5 illustrates a simplified FGTA pipeline, where the
 • Data cleaning: the raw traffic data may contain some raw network traffic data is directly used for rule-based traffic
 noise, invalid data, or control messages. This task extracts pattern matching. A short data processing pipeline is very
 only the valuable data for further analysis. efficient to operate and can still generate accurate results if the
 • Data refactoring: this task refactors the raw network pre-defined matching rules are simple and effective. It is useful
 traffic data and make it suitable for the subsequent when target traffic pattern is distinct or well-defined (i.e.,
 analysis or maintenance. For example, indexing the raw location inference [27]). This simplified pipeline is widelytraffic data by socket pairs, or converting the flow records used in traditional TA approaches due to the simplicity of the
 to a B tree structure [94]. target traffic pattern. For example, sketch-based approaches
 • Other tasks necessary for subsequent steps: depending utilize probabilistic data structures (e.g., hash-based methods)
 on different FGTA pipelines, there may be other tasks to directly match and measure incoming traffic’s statistics with
 necessary for subsequent steps. For example, extracting low overheads and high throughput [96]–[101]. However, these
 marked packets from the raw traffic data, anonymizing the approaches can only coarsely distinguish or measure traffic
 raw traffic data for General Data Protection Regulation from different types of devices, protocols, or distinguishable

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 9

 Flow record Derived flow point
 Traffic collection Preprocessing

 Input flow
 records
 Classification 1

 Session assembly Flow points
 Visualization from flow
 records
 Feature extraction

 Session 1 Session 2
 Training
 Future steps
 (e.g., access Classification 2 Aggregated
 control) sessions

Fig. 6: Example of a more complicated FGTA data processing time
pipeline, which is used when the target traffic pattern is not
directly distinguishable. Fig. 7: Example of a session assembly procedure, where
 relevant flow records are aggregated into a traffic session to
 represent a network event.
applications, serving as a tool for large-scale network measurement or a prerequisite step for more sophisticated FGTA approaches. To generate fine-grained, application-layer inference traffic flows into sessions based on the timing or the
results, such a simplified pipeline is inadequate. Additional intervals of ongoing network traffic.
 • Clustering-based session assembly: this approach utidata processing steps are needed to more thoroughly analyze
the traffic data for digging the hidden fine-grained information. lize clustering algorithms to group traffic flows into
 sessions.
 To infer high-level, fine-grained information from content-
 • Index-based session assembly: this approach aggregates
agnostic network traffic data, many FGTA approaches tend to
 traffic flows into sessions by specific indexes (e.g., socket
employ more complicated pipelines to mine hidden and hardpair, packet ID ranges, time to live (TTL), etc).
to-dig knowledge. These complicated pipelines are not widely
 • Rule-based session assembly: this approach aggregates
seen in traditional TA approaches due to the simplicity of
 traffic flows based on pre-defined rules (e.g., rules on the
the target traffic pattern and added computational complexity.
 hash value of packet payload, rules on TCP flags, etc.).
Figure 6 illustrates such an example. Many application usage
inference approaches apply similar pipelines [26], [102], [103] The session assembly step is rare in traditional TA approaches.
because they need to extract features and classify traffic for After sessions are assembled, representative features can be
multiple times at different phases to derive detailed user properly extracted and forwarded to next steps for fine-grained
behavior information of specific applications. The sample classifications or predictions.
pipeline include two different analysis phases, with one for
narrowing down the analysis scope and the other for generating B. Feature extraction
fine-grained analysis results. More importantly, this pipeline Feature extraction is a term refers to the process of selecting
re-assemble traffic flows into sessions (some papers may call and generating relevant features from the raw data in order to
them transactions [21] or bursts [22], [104]) before extracting create a representation that can be used for machine learning,
features for the final classification. This step is very helpful for statistical modeling, or other analysis procedures [105]. It is
digging fine-grained behavior information from the traffic data an essential step for both traditional TA approaches and FGTA
because the target network behavior or event usually consist of approaches. In the context of TA, feature extraction involves
multiple packets or traffic flows. Simply analyzing the network inspecting network traffic data to identify relevant features
traffic flow by flow or packet by packet may not be able that can be used for the corresponding classification tasks.
to capture the whole picture of the ongoing network events. This process typically involves techniques such as packet
Therefore, session assembly is used to aggregate adjacent, inspection, data fusion, and statistical modeling to identify
relevant, or similar traffic data into an analysis unit, which and derive patterns or characteristics in the data that are
is a more representative data structure to present the ongoing relevant to the specific inference goal. Recently, the rise of
network events and makes it easier for FGTA approaches deep learning techniques has enabled numerous approaches
to infer fine-grained application-layer information. Figure 7 to automatically extract or select features from preprocessed
illustrates an example of session assembly [103], where flow data inputs or extensive feature sets [106]–[108]. However,
records are divided into flow points and then aggregated into considerations of efficiency, efficacy, explainability, and the
sessions according to the traffic density. Based on current complexity of network traffic data mean that many FGTA
literature, the following approaches are commonly used for approaches continue to depend on meticulously crafted feasession assembly: ture extraction techniques to generate features for subsequent
 • Time-based session assembly: this approach aggregates analytical steps. The resulting set of features will be used as

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 10

TABLE III: Examples for intrinsic and derived features for assembly, statistical modeling, etc., to fetch these derived
FGTA. features. Such processes are time-consuming and may require
Category Example significant computational resources. As time-sensitive tasks,
Intrinsic Flow-level Packet-level
 it is vital for FGTA procedures to be efficient and scalable,
 feature
 Flow size, number of packets, TCP flag, ToS, packet size,
 thereby outputting analysis results in a timely manner. Thus,
 AS number, protocol type, packet interval, carefully selecting and generating necessary features is a
 flow duration, etc. first n bytes of the payload, etc. critical step for all FGTA approaches.
 Derived Flow/packet-based Session-based
 feature
 Session duration,
 Interval deviation, size deviation,
 interval distribution,
 density distribution, session image, C. Classification and prediction approach
 normalized session vector,
 inbound/outbound packet ratio,
 packet similarity, etc.
 round-way communication number, The key step of FGTA is to classify the target network traffic
 etc.
 from others or to predict the target network traffic’s behavior.
 Designing a proper classification or prediction approach determines the efficacy and performance of FGTA approaches. In
input to the classification or prediction models to generate many cases, constructing a classification or prediction model
the analysis output. In contrast to traditional TA methods, requires labeled data. In the context of FGTA, labeled data
FGTA often necessitates more advanced and intricate feature refers to network traffic data that has been manually labeled
extraction techniques. This is because FGTA aims to deduce or annotated with ground truth information. This ground truth
detailed application-layer information from raw traffic data, information typically includes information such as the applicarequiring a more insightful and informative representation of tion type, user behavior type, or whether the traffic is generated
the network traffic data. by malicious behavior or not. Obtaining labeled data can
 Due to the nature of network traffic collection, all the be a challenging and resource-intensive process. It typically
extracted features can be categorized into two types: intrinsic requires a significant amount of manual effort and expertise to
features and derived features. Intrinsic features are directly accurately label network traffic data. Researchers may be able
contained in the raw network traffic data, such as packet to automate the labeling process with the help of other statelength, packet header fields, etc. The process of fetching intrin- of-the-art classification approaches, but the accuracy of labels
sic features is simple and straightforward. The analysis system may not be ideal [112]. On the other hand, some classification
can directly select, slice, or generate intrinsic features from the and prediction approaches can be trained without labeled data
raw data, requiring little to no additional processing. On the or with other forms of prior knowledge. In the remaining of
other hand, derived features are not directly contained in the this subsection, we discuss the classification and prediction
raw network traffic data. They are generated by applying some approaches that are commonly used in FGTA approaches
data processing techniques to the raw data, such as statistical (summarized in Table IV).
modeling, feature transformation, information assembly, data 1) Traditional statistical approach: Traditional statistical
fusion, etc. Typically, traditional TA methods more commonly approaches leverage statistical properties, statistical models or
utilize intrinsic features, while FGTA approaches tend to rely some other mathematical methods to identify subtle differon derived features. This preference is attributed to their ences or patterns in different groups of network traffic [123].
differing analysis objectives, granularity, and efficiency goals. Typical examples of statistical approaches include distribution
 Table III lists some typical examples of intrinsic and derived fitting [113], logistic regression [114], linear regression [23],
features. Different features are suitable for different FGTA etc. Traditional statistical approaches are widely used in
tasks. Typically, some relatively easy FGTA tasks may only traditional TA tasks because they are explainable, easy to
require intrinsic features to operate. For example, some appli- implement, usually efficient to operate, and good at tackling
cation identification or anomaly detection approaches can gen- relatively easy tasks. However, as FGTA tasks becoming more
erate accurate results by directly inputting intrinsic features. and more challenging, traditional statistical approaches are not
Because the network traffic of such applications or anomalies sufficient to identify subtle differences in network traffic. Thus,
can already be distinguishable by intrinsic features [20], [109], traditional statistical approaches are gradually replaced by
[110]. However, some more complex FGTA tasks may require more sophisticated classification approaches, such as machine
derived features for finer granularity analysis, especially for learning approaches. Still, traditional statistical approaches
tasks that infer detailed, application-layer user behaviors [22], are commonly used in feature extraction, pre-analysis, and
[103], [111]. The target network traffic of these FGTA tasks pre-classification. For example, many FGTA approaches use
is less distinguishable and may only show obvious patterns traditional statistical approaches to narrow down the analysis
with sophisticated feature engineering techniques. We discuss scope before fine-grained analysis, thereby reducing the commore details about suitable features for different FGTA tasks putational complexity of the subsequent procedures [113].
in Section V. 2) Rule-based approach: Rule-based approaches are based
 Although derived features are more powerful than intrinsic on a set of pre-defined rules that are manually designed by
features in mining fine-grained information from network experts to locate the target network traffic group [124]. Before
traffic data, they are also more complex and expensive to defining the classification rules, the experts usually need a
generate. One may need to apply sophisticated data processing thorough understanding of the target network traffic and the
techniques, such as traffic buffering, data fusion, session network environment. Typical examples of classification rules

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 11

 TABLE IV: Summary of widely-used classification and prediction approaches in FGTA.
 Representative
 Category Description Pros Cons Use in FGTA Reference
 algorithms/approaches
Traditional Leverage statistical properties Distribution fitting, regres- Explainable, easy to imple- Poor efficacy especially when Limited [23], [113], [114]
statistical or statistical models for FGTA sion, variance matching, etc. ment, and efficient to handle the FGTA task is challenging.
approach tasks. large amounts of network traffic.
Rule-based Utilize a set of pre-defined Session signatures, traffic Explainable, easy to imple- It is usually challenging to Limited [19], [24], [115]
approach rules to locate the target net- thresholds, predefined packet ment, controllable, and effi- define rules for FGTA tasks.
 work traffic group. For FGTA header fields, etc. cient to handle large amounts Poor efficacy and poor flexitasks, the rules can be compli- of network traffic. bility.
 cated.
Probabilistic Approaches based on proba- Bayesian classifier, Markov Flexibility, adaptability, and Complexity, sensitivity to as- Popular [109], [116], [117]
approach bility theories to analyze net- model, HMM, etc. ease of use. sumptions, limited accuracy,
 work traffic at a fine granular- and relatively poor explainity. ability.
Supervised ML methods that rely on la- KNN, SVM, LSTM, trans- Great efficacy, ease of use, Limited explainability, over- Most popular [118]–[120]
machine beled network traffic data to former, few shot learning, etc. and good flexibility. fitting, dependency on highlearning learn knowledge, which can quality labeled data, limited
 be used for network traffic scalability, and requiring relclassifications or predictions. atively long training time.
Unsupervised ML methods that do not re- K-means, PCA, DBSCAN, Discovering unknown patterns Limited result interpretability, Popular [103], [121], [122]
machine quire labeled training data and etc. in network traffic data, flex- limited efficacy, poor scalabillearning can discover patterns and rela- ibility, no labels needed, and ity in inference, and overfittionships in the network traffic no training time. ting.
 data on its own.
Hybrid Combine multiple different Ensemble model, semi- Inherits advantages of multi- Complicated to design, and Popular [20], [113], [122]
approach approaches for better perfor- supervised machine learning, ple classification or prediction computationally expensive.
 mance in FGTA. combining statistical approaches.
 approaches with rule-based
 approaches, etc.

include session signatures [24], traffic thresholds [115], pre- adapted to changes in traffic patterns over time, allowing
defined packet header fields [19], etc. Similar to traditional them to detect new or previously unseen threats.
statistical approaches, rule-based approaches are explainable, • Ease of use: with the support of various libraries, probeasy to implement, and efficient to operate, thereby being abilistic approaches are relatively easy to implement
widely used in traditional TA tasks. However, in the era and does not require extensive domain knowledge or
of FGTA, the analysis tasks are in finer granularity and expertise.
becoming more and more challenging. Thus, the pre-defined However, probabilistic approaches feature the following disrule sets are becoming larger, more complex, making them advantages, resulting limited performance and application
more difficult to define, verify, and maintain. Moreover, the especially in complicated FGTA tasks (e.g., user behavior
rule-based approaches are not able to adapt to the dynamic inference):
network environment, which is a common feature of modern • Complexity: probabilistic approaches are usually compunetworks. Therefore, in recent trends, rule-based approaches tationally expensive, especially when the network traffic
are less used in FGTA tasks. But they are still powerful tools in data is large and complex.
some specific FGTA tasks, pre-classification, and accelerating • Sensitivity to assumptions: probabilistic approaches are
the analysis process. sensitive to the assumptions (labels) made during model
 3) Probabilistic approach: Probabilistic approaches are training or development, and incorrect assumptions can
based on probability theory and statistical inference to identify lead to inaccurate results.
the target network traffic group [125]. They model the traffic • Limited accuracy: probabilistic approaches may not
data probabilistically for classification tasks. For instance, achieve the highest accuracy compared to other more
typical probabilistic approaches like Bayesian classifier [126], advanced methods, such as deep learning, in some scenar-
Markov model [127], or hidden Markov model (HMM) [128] ios. Also, they are relatively weak in handling nondiscrete
are widely used to model network traffic first. These models data.
can then be utilized to identify traffic patterns of specific • Explainability: probabilistic approaches may not provide
applications, protocols, anomaly, or behaviors. Benefitting as much interpretability as other methods, making it
from the following advantages, a variety of FGTA approaches difficult to understand how the models arrived at their
have been proposed based on probabilistic approaches to tackle conclusions.
different FGTA tasks [109], [116], [117]: 4) Supervised machine learning: Supervised machine
 • Flexibility: probabilistic approaches can be used to model learning is a widely used machine learning method that can
 a wide range of traffic patterns and behaviors. Besides, be applied to almost any FGTA tasks with reliable prior
 they can tolerate noise and uncertainty in the data, knowledge [18]. In supervised machine learning, a classifier
 making them powerful tools for analyzing complex and is trained using a labeled training dataset that includes known
 heterogeneous traffic data. classification labels. The trained classifier is then used to
 • Adaptability: probabilistic approaches can be easily classify or detect anomalies in new traffic data. Supervised ma-

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 12

chine learning approaches typically involve two main phases: • Dependency on labeled data: supervised machine learning
training and inference. During the training phase, the classifier requires high-quality labeled training data, which can
is trained on the labeled dataset (i.e., labeled network traffic) be time-consuming and expensive to collect, making
to learn the relationship between the input features and the them less effective than unsupervised or semi-supervised
classification labels. The inference phase involves using the methods in some cases.
trained classifier to infer the classification labels of ongoing • Limited scalability: many supervised machine learning
network traffic. approaches may not scale well to extremely large or
 With decades of development, researchers have proposed a complex datasets. Both the training and inference phases
variety of supervised machine learning approaches [129], from may be computationally expensive.
traditional machine learning methods, such as k-nearest neigh- 5) Unsupervised machine learning: Unlike supervised mabor (KNN), decision tree, Support Vector Machine (SVM), to chine learning, unsupervised machine learning is a machine
advanced deep learning methods [130], [131], such as multi- learning method that does not require labeled training data
layer perceptron (MLP), recurrent neural network (RNN), and can discover patterns and relationships in the data on
long short-term memory (LSTM). Recently, there has been its own [144]. Unsupervised machine learning algorithms
a notable surge in applying state-of-the-art machine learning typically involve clustering [145] or dimensionality reductechniques to FGTA. These include few-shot learning [132]– tion [146] techniques that can help identify similarities and
[135], which achieves commendable accuracy with minimal differences between traffic flows. These algorithms do not
training network traffic data; transformers [136], [137], known directly output labeled classification results, but can be used
for their superior pattern recognition capabilities and scalabil- to group similar traffic flows together or identify anomalous
ity in training; transfer learning [138], [139], which utilizes traffic flows that do not fit into any of the existing clusters.
knowledge from other tasks or domains to enhance FGTA Widely used unsupervised machine learning algorithms inperformance with limited training traffic data; and online learn- clude K-means [147], DBSCAN, principal component analysis
ing [140], a dynamic approach where the model continually (PCA) [148], hierarchical clustering [149], etc.
updates and refines its parameters with incoming network
 Unsupervised machine learning algorithms feature the foltraffic streams, enabling real-time adaptation to evolving netlowing advantages in FGTA:
work traffic patterns. Each of the proposed supervised machine
learning approaches has its own advantages and disadvantages, • Discovering unknown patterns: unsupervised machine
making them suitable for different FGTA tasks. Selecting the learning approaches can identify previously unknown
most suitable supervised machine learning approach is the patterns and behaviors in the traffic data, which can be
key to designing an effective ML-based FGTA approach. We useful for detecting new or emerging threats.
discuss more details about the ML algorithm select by use • Flexibility: unsupervised machine learning approaches

case in Section V. can be more flexible and adaptable than supervised ma-
 Overall, due to the following advantages, supervised ma- chine learning as they do not require labeled data, making
chine learning approaches are the most widely used ap- them easy to work with a wide variety of traffic datasets.
proaches in FGTA [23], [118]–[120]: • No training time: unsupervised machine learning approaches usually takes zero training time, making them
 • High accuracy: supervised machine learning can achieve
 more efficient than supervised machine learning aphigh accuracy in FGTA, especially when compared to
 proaches regarding model development.
 other methods.
 • Ease of use: on the one hand, supervised machine learn- They also inevitably have the following disadvantages:
 ing approaches are relatively easy to implement, with • Limited result interpretability: interpreting the results
 supports of various libraries and tools [141]–[143]. On of the clustering or dimensionality reduction algorithms
 the other hand, they do not require extensive domain used in unsupervised machine learning can be difficult
 knowledge or expertise to manually identify distinguish- without prior domain knowledge.
 able rules or patterns. • Limited accuracy: unsupervised machine learning may
 • Flexibility: supervised machine learning approaches can not achieve the same level of accuracy as supervised
 be used to model a wide range of traffic patterns and machine learning, especially when dealing with complex
 behaviors. or noisy traffic datasets.
However, supervised machine learning approaches also have • Scalability in inference: although taking no time for
many shortcomings that limit their performance and use cases training, some unsupervised machine learning algorithms
in FGTA tasks: are computationally expensive in the inference phase,
 • Limited explainability: many supervised machine learn- which can limit their scalability.
 • Overfitting: unsupervised machine learning models can
 ing algorithms, such as DNN, can be difficult to interpret,
 which can limit their usefulness in some applications, also suffer from overfitting or underfitting, which can
 especially in anomaly or attack detection. result in poor performance on certain datasets.
 • Overfitting: supervised machine learning models can In conclusion, unsupervised machine learning is a powerful
 overfit to the training data, which can result in poor tool for FGTA, but it may have limitations in terms of result inperformance on new data. terpretability and accuracy. Due to such natures, unsupervised

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 13

TABLE V: Widely used metrics that indicate the classification 1) Classification efficacy: The most important evaluation
efficacy for FGTA, where T P denotes the number of true metrics for FGTA are to indicate the classification efficacy,
positives, T N denotes the number of true negatives, F P They measure the accuracy of the proposed approach in classidenotes the number of false positives, and F N denotes the fying the target traffic flows. The classification efficacy is wellnumber of false negatives. defined in the domain of data mining [150]. It can be measured
 Metric Description Calculation by true positive rate (TPR), true negative rate (TNR), positive
 TPR The probability that an actual positive will test positive, TP
 T P +F N
 predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), false
 the key metric that indicates the sensitivity or true positive negative rate (FNR), FPR, false discovery rate (FDR), false
 rate of an analysis, reflects the FGTA approach’s ability
 to correctly identify those with the condition. omission rate (FOR), F1 score (F1), accuracy (ACC), receiver
 TNR The probability that an actual negative will test negative. TN
 T N +F P operating characteristic (ROC), area under the curve (AUC),
 PPV The probability that an item with a positive test result is TP
 T P +F P etc. Table V lists the calculations and descriptions of these
 truly positive.
 TN
 metrics. For specific FGTA tasks, some metrics may be more
 NPV The probability that an item with a negative test result is
 truly negative.
 T N +F N
 important than others. For example, in anomaly or attack
 FNR The probability of positives which yield negative out- FN
 F N +T P
 detections, FPR and FNR are more important than PPV and
 comes, an important metric especially in anomaly or attack
 detection.
 NPV because FPR determines the false alarm rate, reflecting
 FPR The probability of negatives which yield positive out- FP the usability of proposed approaches, and FNR determines the
 F P +T N
 comes, one of the most important metrics that indicates the miss rate, reflecting the detection effectiveness of proposed
 usability of the FGTA approach. A high false positive rate
 (FPR) can lead to a large number of false alarms, forcing approaches. FGTA is usually a high-throughput analysis task.
 network administrators to ignore the analysis results.
 FP
 Given its substantial volume of input, even a relatively small
 FDR The probability that an item with a positive test result is
 truly negative.
 F P +T P
 FPR or FNR can be magnified, resulting in numerous false
 FOR The probability that an item with a negative test result is FN
 F N +T N
 alarms or overlooked detections. This situation places network
 truly positive. administrators in a challenging position, where they might
 2T P
 F1 The harmonic mean of precision (PPV) and recall (TPR),
 indicating a balance between the accuracy of positive
 2T P +F P +F N have to disregard the analysis results or risk allowing excessive
 predictions and the completeness of positive case iden- malicious traffic through the network. While in tasks such as
 tification.
 T P +T N
 webpage fingerprinting, PPV and NPV are more important
 ACC How close a given set of analysis results are to their T P +T N +F P +F N
 true value, the most widely used metric that indicates the than FPR and FNR because PPV and NPV are more relevant
 overall reliability of the FGTA results in reflecting the
 actual situation. to the classification efficacy.
 ROC A graph showing the performance of a classification model Through TPR and FPR. 2) Efficiency: Efficiency is another important evaluation
 at all classification thresholds, key to understanding and
 adjusting the trade-off between true positive rate and false
 metric for FGTA, which is usually measured by the time cost
 positive rate to reach the best analysis performance for the of finishing analyzing a certain amount of traffic flows by the
 FGTA approach.
 proposed approach. In addition to accuracy and other perfor-
 AUC The area under the entire ROC curve. Through ROC.
 mance metrics, the time cost can have a significant impact on
 the proposed approach’s practicality and applicability. In realmachine learning approaches are not widely used in tasks such world scenarios, the majority of FGTA tasks are performed
as anomaly detection and attack detection [103], [121]. on a large amount of traffic flows in real time. Therefore,
 6) Hybrid approach: Hybrid approaches combine the ad- the bottom line of these FGTA tasks is to reach the line
vantages of multiple classification approaches to achieve better speed in processing traffic flows. Here, the line speed refers to
adaptability, explainability, or performance. People can use the maximum speed at which a FGTA approach can process
different approaches as different procedures in the FGTA incoming traffic data without dropping or losing packets. It is
pipeline, enhancing the feature extraction or pre-classification typically measured in terms of bits per second (bps) or packets
phase, or simply use an ensemble classification model to per second (pps).
increase the robustness. For example, combining supervised To increase efficiency, many FGTA approaches optimize the
and unsupervised machine learning approaches for semi- feature extraction procedure, classification algorithms, or the
supervised traffic classification [20], combining statistical general pipeline. Some approaches also choose to design dedapproaches with machine learning approaches better FGTA icated hardware architectures to accelerate the FGTA process.
performance [113], or utilizing a variety of approaches in the For example, FlowLens [151] utilizes programmable switch
FGTA pipeline for more comprehensive attack coverage [122]. to support ML-based flow classification at hardware level,
 Although hybrid approaches can usually achieve better making ML-based flow classification efficient enough to catch
performance, they are more complex to design and assemble. up with line-speed traffic. We discuss more details about this
Besides, hybrid approaches are usually more computationally issue in Section V.
expensive than using single approaches. 3) Other metrics: According to different use cases, FGTA
 approaches may need to consider many other metrics, such
 as the memory cost, the storage cost, compatibility, stability,
D. Evaluation metrics etc. For example, FGTA-based intrusion detection approaches
 In FGTA, evaluation metrics are important measures of the may need to consider the explainability of the outputs to
performance, efficiency, and usability of proposed approaches. help network administrators understand the logic behind the
In this section, we discuss some commonly used evaluation detection results, thereby facilitating the network security
metrics. management with confidence [152]. The explainability here

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 14

 for testing, we cannot directly compare their detailed perfor-
 Fine-Grained Traffic Analysis (FGTA) mance. Therefore, system overheads are estimated based on
 the complexity of their pipelines, feature extraction methods,
 Used by and algorithms. Similarly, their real-time analysis capabilities
 are estimated based on their operational mechanisms and the
 processing time data listed in the papers (if available). For
 papers that do not explicitly mention the time needed for anal-
 Network Administrator/ Side-Channel Attacker
 analyst
 ysis, we estimate the time based on their input data, method-
 Application
 Identification ologies, or other related data. Thus, the real-time analysis
 Intrusion/Anomaly Location capabilities listed in the tables are only rough estimates based
 Detection Inference
 Device on specific settings in the papers, which may vary in different
 Identification
 Quality of environments. In the comparisons, approaches that can deliver
 Website
 Experience
 Measurement
 Application Fingerprinting results within a minute with sufficient computational resources
 Usage
 Inference
 are considered real-time; those requiring certain amount of
 flow-level data or traffic session completion are deemed partially real-time (e.g., 1-10 minutes); and approaches needing
 Fig. 8: A taxonomy for FGTA by use case. a long time (e.g., over 10 minutes) to collect enough data or
 the entire dataset for offline analysis (e.g., clustering-based
 approaches) are classified as not real-time.
not only refers to the reason why the FGTA approach generates
a certain output but also refers to the mitigation costs, network A. Attack/Anomaly Detection
situations, confidence level, etc. In addition, some FGTA
 TA approaches are widely used by both the industry
approaches may need to consider the privacy of the users
 and academia to detect anomalies or attacks. With more
for compliance with certain regulations (e.g., GDPR [95] and
 than two decades of research, we have seen a myriad of
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) [153]). In such
 solutions (e.g., [160]–[163]) targeting at different types of
cases, they may not able to collect, store, or process certain
 threats. However, as network attacks become increasingly
types of network traffic data directly, such as the payload
 sophisticated, detection approaches based on traditional TA
of network packets. Thus, developers need to select suitable
 are gradually becoming insufficient to address modern threats,
metrics for specific use cases.
 particularly those occurring at or above the application layer.
 For example, traditional TA approaches may excel at detecting
 V. U SE C ASES AND R EPRESENTATIVE A PPROACHES conventional DDoS attacks but often fall short in identifying
 application-layer anomalies, such as online social network
 As discussed in Section I, FGTA has a wide range of bots or data exfiltration. Therefore, researchers began adopting
uses. FGTA can be leveraged by both attackers and network FGTA to model endpoints’ or users’ behaviors to detect such
administrators, for both illegal purposes and social good. attacks/anomalies. In this subsection, we elaborate on FGTA-
Attackers can leverage FGTA to eavesdrop on user activities based attack/anomaly detection approaches, introducing their
online [114], [118], [154], stealing sensitive information and applicable scenarios and operation mechanisms (Table VI
raising significant privacy concerns. By analyzing even en- shows an overview).
crypted traffic patterns, they can infer user behaviors and pref- 1) Intrusion detection: Many FGTA approaches focus on
erences, posing threats to both individual and organizational detecting complicated intrusions in the network by examining
security. This highlights the need for effective countermeasures the characteristics of the underlying network traffic. Most of
to prevent the misuse of FGTA technologies. On the other them apply machine learning models to perform the detection.
hand, people can leverage FGTA to detect network anoma- Amoli et al. [121] leveraged an unsupervised machine learnlies [103], [155], [156] or better manage the network [24], ing model (i.e., density-based spatial clustering of applications
[157]. This has also been widely practiced in the industry. For with noise (DBSCAN)) to distinguish subtle differences beexample, Kentik [158] provides a network traffic intelligence tween historic traffic and intrusion traffic. Their approach is
platform that can help network administrators detect network able to detect zero-day and complex attacks without much
anomalies, optimize networks, and perform fine-grain network prior knowledge of these attacks. Papadogiannaki et al. [174]
troubleshooting. Palo Alto Networks [159] provides a network generated traffic signatures from packet metadata sequences
traffic analysis platform that can help network administrators and then used these to detect intrusions in the UNSW-NB15
detect intrusions in fine granularity. dataset [175].
 According to their use cases, we propose a taxonomy for Many researchers also focus on utilizing supervised deep
FGTA approaches (illustrated in Figure 8). In the remainder learning models to detect intrusions. Tang et al. [110] extracted
of this section, we review representative FGTA approaches six basic features from traffic flows and trained a DNN
across different categories, examining their goals, operation model with the NSL-KDD dataset to detect intrusions. Shone
mechanisms, performance, and key differences. We have also et al. [122] first leveraged nonsymmetric deep autoencoder
summarized some of the comparisons in Table VI, VIII, IX, (NDAE) for unsupervised feature learning. Then, they imand X. Notably, since most existing works do not provide code plemented stacked NDAEs with GPU-based architectures for

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 15

 G: partially supported;
TABLE VI: Comparisons of selected attack/anomaly detection approaches (#: not supported; # :
supported).
 System Real-Time Real-World
 Category Approach Year Goal of Analysis Feature Method
 Overhead Analysis Evaluation
 Amoli et al. [121] 2016 Mail-bomb, SSH-process- Flow-level traffic feature DBSCAN Medium # (∼10 mins) #
 Intrusion table, botmaster, etc. such as duration, number of
 Detection packets, smallest packet size,
 largest packet size, etc.
 Tang et al. [110] 2016 R2L, U2R, Probe, DoS Duration, protocol type, src DNN High # (∼1-5 mins)
 G #
 bytes, dst bytes, count, srv
 count
 Shone et al. [122] 2018 R2L, U2R, Probe, DoS, guess Features extracted with NDAE NDAE for unsupervised fea- High # (∼1-5 mins)
 G #
 password, portsweep, buffer ture learning, stacked NDAEs
 overflow, etc. for detection
 Mirsky et al. [155] 2018 Video injection, ARP MitM, Damped incremental statistics Kitsune’s core algorithm (Kit- High (0.1-10 secs)
 OS scan, etc. and 23 other features from NET), a type of autoencoders
 packet-level data
 Han et al. [164] 2023 Normality shift detection. Features appeared in the Detect shift statistically High
 Unauthenticated OSPF, P2P datasets through hypothesis testing;
 traffic, MS SQL Stack BO, log tackle normality shifts by
 anomaly, advanced persistent optimizations and restricting
 threat (APT), etc. model parameter updating.
 Ullah et al. [165] 2024 Infiltration, brute force, DoS, Features extracted from net- Transformer-based transfer High # (∼1-5 mins)
 G #
 etc. work packets and selected by learning, Synthetic Minority
 the CNN model. Oversampling Technique
 (SMOT), convolutional neural
 network (CNN), and LSTM.
 Feng et al. [152] 2024 Explainable and adaptive Different feature sets for dif- KNN with k-dimensional tree Low (<10 secs)
 DDoS detection ferent types of DDoS, mainly and grid optimization
 statistical features.
 Shabtai et al. [166] 2014 Malicious attacks or mas- 2 best feature subsets selected Linear regression, decision Medium # (mostly <10 mins)
 G G
 #
 Malware querading/injected mobile ap- from 20 manually defined fea- table, SVM for regression,
 Detection plications ture subsets of various sizes Gaussian processes for
 regression, isotonic regression,
 and decision/regression tree
 Wang et al. [167] 2016 Android malware such Six TCP flow features and four C4.5 decision tree Low #
 as plankton, FakeInstall, HTTP request features
 FakeRun, MobileTx, etc.
 Lashkari et al. [168] 2017 Malicious and masquerading 24 features extracted from Random forest, KNN, decision Medium # (∼1-5 mins)
 G G
 #
 applications such as Airpush, both packet and flow-level tree, random tree, and regres-
 Kemoge, AVpass, FakeAV, etc. traffic sion
 Anderson et al. [23] 2017 Detecting malicious, encrypted 22 and 319 data features in Linear regression, logistic re- High # (<5 mins)
 G
 malware network traffic the standard and enhanced fea- gression, decision tree, random
 ture set extracted from Net- forest, SVM, and MLP
 Flow and IPFIX data
 Piskozub et al. [169] 2021 Malware detection and classifi- Flow duration, round-trip time, A combination of denoising High # (∼1-5 mins)
 G G
 #
 cation, including adware, ran- IP protocol used, connection autoencoders and DNN classisomware, trojan, virus, and towards local or public IP, fiers
 worm. destination port, packets sent,
 bytes sent, packets received,
 bytes received, sent packet
 payload entropy, and received
 packet payload entropy.
 Data Ren et al. [170] 2016 Cross-platform information Raw network packets with Decision tree, AdaBoost, bag- Medium (<1 min)
Exfiltration leak identification payload ging, blending, and Naı̈ve
 Detection Bayes
 Continella et al. [171] 2017 PII leakage detection, even in Raw network packets with Behavior modeling and differ- Low # (∼98 mins) G
 #
 the presence of obfuscation payload ential analysis
 techniques
 Rosner et al. [156] 2019 Information leaks in TLS- A feature space that includes Trace alignment, phase detec- Low #
 G #
 encrypted network traffic observations about individual tion, feature selection, feature
 packets and sequences of probability distribution estimapackets; additional features tion and entropy computation
 from the phase detection and
 the full original traces.
 Willems et al. [172] 2023 Data exfiltration as occurring Average packet count and re- The anomaly detector is High #
 G #
 in ransomware attacks quest entropy per session, av- composed of an ensemble
 erage session duration, pay- layer with multiple
 load size, time between se- autoencoders and a Threshold
 quential sessions, and weights. Checker.
 Feng et al. [103] 2021 Online social network bot de- Traffic fingerprint images con- DBSCAN, CNN High # (∼1-5 mins)
 G
 Others tection verted from NetFlow data
 Coulter et al. [173] 2019 A data-driven cyber security Statistical features extracted A variety of classification ap- High #
 system that can identify high- from the network traffic and proaches
 level application-layer attacks content (optional)
 or anomalies such as Twitter
 spam
 Feng et al. [113] 2022 Cryptojacking activity Packet size, timing, direction, LSTM High # (≥5 mins)
 G #
 and protocol from sFlow data

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 16

quick and accurate intrusion detection on labeled datasets of user private information across applications. These two
(i.e., KDD Cup ’99 and NSL-KDD). Mirsky et al. [155] approaches do not only leverage network traffic, but their ideas
monitored the statistical patterns of network traffic and de- inspired a lot of subsequent work in this domain.
signed an ensemble of neural networks called autoencoders to Later, researchers began to investigate purely using network
collectively differentiate between normal and abnormal traffic traffic to profile application usage and report possible data
patterns. Their approach is able to detect various attacks (e.g., exfiltration. Razaghpanah et al. [178] monitored network comvideo injection, ARP MitM, OS scan, etc.). Besides, unlike munications on mobile phones from user-space. The proposed
many other approaches that are only evaluated in closed-world approach facilitates user-friendly, large-scale deployment of
environments, this approach was tested with a real-world test mobile traffic measurements and services to illuminate mobed. bile application performance, privacy and security. Song et
 2) Malware detection: Today’s malware is becoming more al. [179] proposed a VPN-based approach to detect sensitive
and more challenging to be detected by traditional TA due to information leakage Le et al. [180] proposed AntMonitor,
traffic hiding and the increasing adoption of traffic encryption. which passively monitors and collects packet-level measure-
FGTA could be an ideal tool to detect such malware. ments from Android devices to provide a fine-grained analysis.
 Shabtai et al. [166] proposed a framework for malware By inspecting the network traffic data, it can provide users
detection on Android platforms. It can identify attacks or with control over how their data is shared by applications.
masquerading applications installed on a mobile device and Ren et al. [170] proposed ReCon, a cross-platform system
injected applications with malicious code by semi-supervised that reveals personally identifiable information (PII) leaks by
machine-learning methods. Wang et al. [167] leveraged a inspecting network packets and gives users control over them
machine learning algorithm (i.e., C4.5 decision tree) in ana- without requiring any special privileges or custom operating
lyzing mobile traffic, which is capable of identifying Android system (OS). The authors leveraged the Weka data mining
malware with high accuracy—more than 98%. tool [181] to train classifiers that predict PII leaks. Continella
 Later, some researchers collectively evaluated the efficacy et al. [171] proposed an approach to privacy leak detection
of different machine learning models in detecting malware. that is resilient to obfuscation techniques (e.g., encoding,
Lashkari et al. [168] detected malicious and masquerading ap- formatting, encryption). To achieve the goal, the authors first
plications with five different classifiers—random forest, KNN, established a baseline of the network behavior of applications,
decision tree, random tree, and regression. They found that and then utilized black-box differential analysis on application
these models can achieve similar performances in malware de- usages.
tection. Besides, they published a labeled dataset that contains However, the aforementioned approaches still require inboth benign Android applications and injected applications’ spections on traffic content to detect data exfiltration. The ideal
network traffic. Anderson et al. [23] designed and carried out FGTA-based solution should be content-agnostic. In 2019,
experiments that show how six machine learning algorithms Rosner et al. [156] presented a black-box approach for detect-
(e.g., linear regression, logistic regression, decision tree, ran- ing and quantifying side-channel information leaks in TLSdom forest, SVM, and MLP) perform when confronted with encrypted network traffic. Given a user-supplied profilingreal network data. They found the random forest ensemble input suite in which some aspect of the inputs is marked as
classifier to be the most robust for the domain of malware secret, it combines network trace alignment, phase detection,
detection. feature selection, feature probability distribution estimation
 3) Data exfiltration detection: FGTA can also be used in and entropy computation to quantify the amount of informadetecting data exfiltration, thereby protecting personal sen- tion leakage that is due to network traffic.
sitive data from leakage. Different from directly detecting 4) Others: A few research works have been focusing on usanomalies or attacks, approaches in this domain usually profile ing FGTA to detect other types of application-layer anomalies.
user behaviors or model normal application usage to identify By harnessing the power of machine learning on big data, such
abnormal data transfer. approaches can model fine-grained application-layer anomalies
 Wei et al. [176] proposed ProfileDroid, which is the first only with flow-level traffic or packet headers. For example,
approach to profile mobile application at four layers: (a) static, BotFlowMon [21], [103] detects online social network bot
or application specification, (b) user interaction, (c) operating traffic by converting NetFlow records to images and training a
system, and (d) network. At network-layer, this approach can CNN-based classification model; Coulter et al. [173] proposed
capture essential characteristics of application communica- a data-driven cyber security system that can detect Twitter
tions, including but not limited to the ratio of incoming traffic spam or other high-level application-layer anomalies through
and outgoing traffic, number of distinct traffic sources, traffic machine-learning-based flow analysis; Feng et al. [113], [182]
intensity, the percentage of HTTP and HTTPS traffic, etc. detects cryptojacking traffic by inferring the hash rate stability
The profiling information can help identify inconsistencies with cryptomining traffic in sFlow format. Table VI lists their
and surprising behaviors, thereby detecting data exfiltration. analysis features and methodologies.
A similar work is TaintDroid [177]. It leverages dynamic
information-flow tracking to identify private data leaks of
Android applications. The authors indicated that network B. Fine-Grained Quality of Experience Investigation
traffic is useful to help monitor the behavior of popular third- Fine-grained quality of experience (QoE) measures how the
party Android applications and discover potential misuse cases specific web service is experienced by individual users at the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 17

edge of the network [183], thereby providing a more user- TABLE VII: Comparisons of selected fine-grained QoE invescentric perspective on network performance for network trou- tigation approaches.
bleshooting, configuration, and optimization. It is an essential Approach Goal Method Feature
approach for internet service provider (ISP)s to provide high- [194] Identify QoE degra- Random forest Three feature sets sequality services to the network users. dation in YouTube lected by informa-
 In traditional TA, three techniques servers similar purposes: tion gain.

quality of service (QoS) [184]–[186], network traffic predic- [195] Estimate QoE in Random forest, J48, Five hand-crafted
 YouTube Naı̈ve Bayes, OneR, feature sets
tion [28], [30], [139], and traditional QoE. However, they and SMO
address the network performance issue from different angles. [196] Estimate video Decision tree A packet-level
QoS refers to the network parameter settings configured by streaming QoE over feature set extracted
 HTTPS and QUIC from network and
service providers to deliver various levels of service to their protocols transport-layers
customers, which focuses on the network service quality from [157] Estimate QoE in Random forest and Three feature sets
the perspectives of overall network rather than individual YouTube linear regression (inbound, outbound,
users. Network traffic predictions aim to predict the future net- and inbound + outbound)
work traffic flow based on historical data, thereby helping net-
 [24] Estimate mobile Traffic fingerprinting Packet size and timwork administrators to allocate network resources efficiently or ABR video with chunk sizes ing
configure the network in a more suitable way. Network traffic adaptation behavior
 over HTTPS and
predictions can be achieved through machine learning [187]– QUIC protocols
[189], statistical models [190], SARIMA models [191], etc.
We can see that both QoS and network traffic prediction are
more network-centric and focus on aggregated user traffic, three key influence factors (i.e., stalling, the average video
while fine-grained QoE emphasizes individual users’ detailed quality, and the quality variations). The authors demonstrated
network experiences, focusing on user-centric, application- that it can detect QoE problems with an accuracy of 92% by
layer information extraction. evaluating this approach using collected traffic At the same
 On the other hand, plenty of works have been proposed to year, Orsolic et al. [195] also studied using different machine
conduct QoE investigations with traditional TA (e.g., [183], learning algorithms (i.e., random forest, J48, Naı̈ve Bayes,
[192], [193]). They can roughly classify network traffic into OneR, and Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO)) to detect
several groups (e.g., video, voice, data transfer, etc.) using YouTube QoE issues under different bandwidth scenarios. In
statistical, DPI-based, or rule-based approaches and measure 2019, Khokhar et al. [157] proposed the first work that not only
the service experience according to some metrics. However, can identify YouTube QoE issues related to objective factors
such approaches may not be able to tackle today’s increasingly (e.g., startup delay, stalling, resolution change, etc.), but also
complicated network traffic, since different types of traffic may can identify QoE issues related to the subjective Mean Opinion
be encrypted by different protocols (e.g., HTTPS, Quick UDP Score (MOS).
Internet Connection (QUIC)) and sent from different devices Mazhar et al. [196] further extends QoE investigation to all
(e.g., IoT, smartphone, server) by different applications. Be- encrypted video streaming traffic (transferred over HTTPS or
sides, service providers may want to conduct more granular QUIC) by using a classification model trained by a decision
management of network traffic. For example, residential areas’ tree. They demonstrated that their approach is able to achieve a
network administrators may want to increase the priority of 90% classification accuracy for HTTPS and an 85% classificavideo streaming traffic related to YouTube for certain users; tion accuracy for QUIC Xu et al. [24] infers mobile Adaptive
network administrators of companies may want to ensure the Bitrate (ABR) video adaptation behavior using packet size and
quality of online meeting traffic for some offices. Therefore, timing information in encrypted environments.
over the past ten years, researchers have started leveraging
FGTA to infer detailed user information at or above the
application layer, enabling QoE investigations with greater C. Website Fingerprinting
precision and finer granularity. Website fingerprinting (WFP) is used to identify what web
 Usually, fine-grained QoE investigations are performed in page the user is visiting, even in the presence of traffic entwo steps: cryption or encrypted tunnels established by Tor [197], [198],
 1) Extract the target traffic using traffic classification. Shadowsocks (i.e., a popular secure socks5 proxy) [199],
 2) Measure the extracted traffic to check if it meets certain VPN, etc. It is a FGTA technique that widely-used by atcriteria. tackers to eavesdrop on user activities or content online. In
Some approaches may combine these two steps into one and this subsection, we survey and compare well-known WFP
directly identify potential QoS/QoE problems. Table VII shows approaches (Table VIII), elaborating on the history of WFP
a comparison of some selected QoE methods. and investigating its capability.
 In 2016, Dimopoulos et al. [194] proposed a random- 1) Early development of WFP: WFP has a long history. The
forest-based detection model to identify QoE issues related to early WFP attacks simply focused on using data sizes to infer
YouTube video streaming. By selecting three sets of features the URL the user is visiting through encrypted SSL connecwith information gain, the proposed model is able to directly tions. Back in 1998, Mistry et al. [200] demonstrated that the
detect different levels of QoE degradation that is caused by size of HTML files is a critical feature to specific web pages.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 18

 G: partially supported;
 TABLE VIII: Comparisons of selected WFP approaches (#: not supported; # : supported).
 System Real-Time Effectiveness
 Approach Year Method Feature
 Overhead Analysis
 HTTP/1.1 VPN Tor Multi-tab
 Mistry et al. [200] 1998 Size matching Size of HTML file Low (few milliseconds) # # # #
 Sun et al. [201] 2002 Similarity score calculation (Jac- HTTP object count, sizes, etc. Low (few milliseconds) #
 G # # #
 card’s coefficient)
 Bissias et al. [115] 2005 Cross correlation of two value se- Packet size and inter-arrival time Low G
 # #
 G # #
 quences distributions
Liberatore et al. [202] 2006 Similarity score calculation (Jac- Direction and length for each Low G
 # # #
 card’s coefficient) packet
 Herrmann et al. [203] 2009 Multinomial Naı̈ve Bayes Frequency distribution of the IP Low (∼10 secs) # #
 packet size
Panchenko et al. [204] 2011 SVM Volume, time, and direction of the Medium (few milliseconds) #
 G #
 traffic
 Cai et al. [116] 2012 Damerau-Levenshtein distance and Packet size, time, and direction Medium #
 Hidden Markov Model
 Wang et al. [205] 2014 KNN A large feature set generated from Medium (∼0.1 secs) #
 packet-level traffic
 Hayes et al. [206] 2016 Random decision forests Features selected by gini coeffi- Low (∼0.1 secs) G
 #
 cient
 Rimmer et al. [207] 2017 SDAE, CNN, and LSTM Automatically learned feature sets High (<5 secs) #
 from packet-level network traffic
 Sirinam et al. [208] 2018 CNN Packet-level traffic data High #
 Sirinam et al. [209] 2019 N-shot learning with triplet net- Selected by a neural-network- High #
 works based feature selector
 Yin et al. [25] 2021 Split point finding and Packet size, time, and direction Low (∼2-6 secs)
 BalanceCascade-XGBoost
 Wang et al. [210] 2022 DNN ensemble Total number of packet, incoming High # (∼5 mins)
 G #
 packets, outgoing packets, and the
 ratio of quintuplets, along with the
 DAE feature vector.
 Deng et al. [211] 2023 A multi-classifier framework based CNN-based local feature extraction High (0.26-0.42 secs)
 on a novel transformer model

They proposed an attack that simply uses the transmitted data Tor Network

volumes to identify certain websites. Although this attack is
 Middle
not feasible anymore after the launch of connection pipelining OR

and connection parallelization by HTTP 1.1 (RFC 2616 [212]),
this research inspired many other WFP studies in the next two
 Exit
decades. In 2002, Hintz [213] defined “fingerprints” of web- Entry
 OR

sites as the histograms of transferred files’ sizes. He recorded Tor User WFP Onion Relay
 Attack (OR) Internet
some website fingerprints and successfully recognize some Middle
 OR
websites transferred through HTTPS with these fingerprints.
However, Hintz’s WFP attack only works for a small number Encrypted Traffic
of websites. Later, Sun et al. [201] extends size-based WFP Adversary
 Unencrypted Traffic
to thousands of websites. They proposed a WFP approach
based on Jaccard’s coefficient, which can correctly identify Fig. 9: Threat model for WFP attacks over Tor network.
75% of the websites in their collected dataset. However, a
common drawback of file-based attacks is that they cannot
tackle traffic hidden in encrypted tunneling protocols (e.g., utilized to enhance website fingerprinting. In addition, the
VPN, OpenSSH), not to mention Tor. ordering information is effective for WFP even under traffic
 2) Defeat encrypted tunnel: To extend WFP to handle morphing. By calculating the Levenshtein distance between
encrypted tunneling protocols, multiple “more advanced” WFP different network traffic, their approach can perform WFP
approaches had been proposed. Both Bissias et al. [115] and over OpenSSH for 2,000 profiled websites. The identification
Liberatore et al. [202] proposed improved forms of WFP. accuracy of the proposed scheme reaches 81%, which is 11%
Rather than using the data size as the feature, they extract better than the approach proposed by Liberatore et al. [202].
sets of traffic patterns from encrypted IP packet headers, such 3) WFP in Tor era: To safeguard personal information and
as packet inter-arrival time, size, etc. These approaches have avoid Internet censorship in an increasingly dangerous network
some efficacy in identifying websites transferred by encrypted environment, many people began to use The Onion Router
tunneling services. However, the accuracies of page identifi- (Tor), a free and open-source software for enabling anonymous
cation is still not ideal in reality. In 2009, by using packet- communication, to visit the Internet. Different from traditional
level features, Herrmann et al. [203] proposed a multinomial encrypted tunneling protocols, Tor reroutes Internet traffic
Naı̈ve Bayes classifier that can identify up to 97% of web through a worldwide, volunteer overlay network, consisting of
requests on a sample of 775 sites and over 300,000 real- more than six thousand relays [215], for concealing a user’s
world traffic dumps recorded over a two-month period. The actual location and Internet usage from anyone conducting
authors demonstrate that this approach is effective in tackling network surveillance or TA.
website traffic in encrypted tunnels. Lu et al. [214] pointed Figure 9 illustrates the operation model of Tor. To protect
out that packet ordering information, though noisy, can be user’s identity, each Tor user creates an encrypted virtual

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 19

tunnel to its destination through a chain of several volunteer Wang et al. [219] described how they collect the training
nodes—onion relays (ORs). According to their positions in dataset in a much more thorough manner than previous works.
the virtual tunnel, ORs can be classified into entry OR, middle They gathered the data in different Tor settings and with
OR, and exit OR. Each of the ORs only knows its predecessor different defense approaches. Later, Panchenko et al. [221]
and its successor [216]. When forwarding network traffic, the collected the first Internet-scale WFP dataset to develop and
user’s network packets will be encrypted in multiple layers evaluate WFP comprehensively. Based on the dataset, they
and each of the ORs can only decrypt one layer of encryption. proposed CUMUL, a web page classifier that has a higher
Thus, Tor ensures that none of the ORs in the circuit knows the recognition rate and a smaller computational overhead than
user and its destination at the same time. Besides, to prevent previous approaches. They also demonstrated that although
TA, the user data is encapsulated in chunks of a fixed size, CUMUL is more efficient and superior in terms of detection
called cells, before transmission [217]. The WFP attacks above accuracy, still, it cannot scale when applied in realistic settings.
are thus ineffective against Tor network, as they rely heavily As for WFP feature set, Cai et al. [222] systematically anaon packet-size-related features. lyzed previous WFP approaches to understand which traffic
 Indeed, it is almost impossible to find any useful knowledge features convey the most information; Hayes et al. [206]
inside a Tor network. However, the virtual tunnel between the utilized the gini coefficient index to select a feature set and
Tor user and the entry OR does provide attackers with an designed a random decision forests classifier based upon them;
interface and makes WFP possible (illustrated in Figure 9). Wang et al. [223] evaluated the classification accuracy of each
 In 2011, Panchenko et al. [204] are the first to demonstrate feature category by using KNN.
that it is feasible to use WFP to identify web pages visited In the recent five years, the development of WFP has been
by Tor users. They trained a SVM classifier with features focusing on conducting attacks in the presence of effective
extracted from volume, time, and direction of network packets, countermeasures, with little encrypted data, or under comwith a classification accuracy of 55% when testing with their plicated circumstances [25], [210], [211]. Many of recent
web page dataset. Panchenko et al. are also the first to evaluate approaches also investigated the applicability of deep learning
their WFP attack in a real-world setting. The result shows techniques in WFP. Rimmer et al. [207] trained three classithat their approach is able to achieve a true positive rate fication model with Stacked Denoising Autoencoder (SDAE),
of up to 73% and a false positive rate of 0.05%. Based on CNN, and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) respectively.
this work, a significant amount of improved WFP approaches These deep learning models are capable of automatically
were proposed to use different algorithms and features (e.g., learning the best features to conduct WFP. The authors
VNG++ [218], Hidden Markov Models [116], Levenshtein- further demonstrated that automatically-created features are
like distance [219], etc.) to tackle web page identification more effective especially in tackling constantly changing web
in Tor. In 2014, Wang et al. [205] proposed a KNN WFP content. In 2018, Sirinam et al. [208] presents a very powerful
classifier and applied it on a large feature set with weight WFP attack—Deep Fingerprinting (DF). By employing a CNN
adjustment. Their approach achieved an accuracy of 91% in model with a sophisticated architecture design, the authors
a closed-world setting and a true positive rate of 85% for a claim that this attack can defeat many WFP countermeasures
false positive rate of 0.6% when testing with more than 5,000 (e.g., WTF-PAD [224] and Walkie-Talkie [223]) and works
background pages in a real-world setting. well in very complicated real-world scenarios (95% accuracy
 Nevertheless, these WFP approaches still have some ob- for 20,000 URLs in a real-world setting). Sirinam et al. [209]
vious flaws according to an evaluation made by Juarez et further proposed an approach based on N-shot learning with
al. [220]: triplet networks in 2019, which can achieve decent efficacy
 with relatively small training data. Besides these approaches,
 • Previous WFP attacks assume single-tab browsing behav- Abe et al. [225] also applied SDAE in WFP; Bhat et al. [226]
 ior of users. However, multi-tab browsing is widely used leveraged ResNets [227], a CNN architecture, to reach high
 in reality. success rates in WFP; Oh et al. [228] used unsupervised DNN
 • WFP attacks highly depend on the coverage of training
 to generate low-dimensional features and trained different
 dataset, but existing datasets cannot include web page machine learning classification models based upon them. In
 traffic from all versions of Tor browser, user habits, or 2021, Wang et al. [229] leveraged adversarial domain adaption
 user locations. (a transfer learning technique) to achieve high WFP accuracy
 • Previous WFP attacks cannot detect dynamic or perwith little encrypted data; Yin et al. [25] proposed a WFP atsonalized web pages, as they traffic of these pages is tack that is able to identify websites in multi-tab environments,
 polytropic. which means it can achieve usable accuracies regardless of
 • Many countermeasures for WFP have been proposed
 the number of simultaneously opened web pages; Hoang et
 (which will be discussed later in Section VII), making al. [230] found that even in the presence of domain name
 many of the previous WFP attacks non-effective. encryption technologies or content delivery network (CDN),
To further increase the success rate of WFP attacks and WFP based on IP addresses is still feasible. They exploited
defeat countermeasures, researchers began to collect more the complex structure of most websites, which load resources
comprehensive training datasets, use more complicated feature from several domains besides their primary one, and further
sets, and apply more sophisticated classification algorithms for applied the generated domain fingerprints to conduct WFP at
WFP. large.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 20

 Observation Point However, in 2015, Ateniese et al. [27] demonstrated that it is
 For Location
 LBS Inference BTS User A actually feasible under certain assumptions.
 Nowadays, location-based applications (LBA), such as
 Facebook, Yelp, Google Map, etc., are widely used. These
 LBAs obtain user locations through location-based services
 (LBS). LBS providers usually use a base transceiver station
 (BTS) to locate a user and send real-time location information
 to the user. Ateniese et al. proposed an approach (illustrated
Fig. 10: Operation model for geographical location inference. in Figure 10) that simply monitors the traffic between the
 BTS and the LBS to identify user locations. They found that
 different locations will trigger LBS packets of different sizes.
D. Location Inference An adversary can potentially create a location knowledge base
 of different locations’ packet sizes and their corresponding
 Location inference is a widely studied topic by computer timestamps to conduct geographical location inference. Still,
scientists. We have seen myriad works focusing on using social this approach has many limitations (e.g., low accuracy, difficult
network information [231], [232], smartphone accelerome- to build the location knowledge base at large, etc.). This work
ter [233], image content [234], etc. to infer users’ locations. is more about demonstrating the feasibility of geographical
Over the past decade, some researchers have begun utilizing location inference with FGTA than launching a full-fledged,
FGTA for location inference, which involves extracting and ready-to-use approach.
analyzing location-related features from network traffic generated by relevant applications. The location we discuss here
can be either a geographical location or a contextual location, E. Device/OS Identification
the later one means the type of location the user is sending Traditional TA has long been employed to identify user
packets from, such as an airport, a campus, or a residential devices or the OSes running on them. For instance, in 2003,
building. This subsection examines inference approaches for Lippmann et al. [240] focused on analyzing TCP and IP
these two types of locations. packet metadata to distinguish different OSes. However, these
 1) Contextual location inference: The intuition behind con- traditional approaches typically provided identification at a
textual location inference with FGTA is straightforward— coarse granularity, such as determining the device type (e.g.,
users from different types of locations tend to generate differ- smartphone, PC, server) or OS type (e.g., Windows, Linux,
ent traffic because they need to use different web applications Android). As the variety and complexity of user devices and
at different locations. Besides, different locations (e.g., cam- OSes have grown, the demand for more precise device and
pus, company, residential area) may process network traffic in OS identification has significantly increased. Achieving this
different manners. Contextual location inference using FGTA level of precision is challenging, as it often requires inferring
aims to measure and analyze sets of network traffic and infer subtle application-layer details from network traffic to identify
where these sets of traffic are coming from. specific device or OS models. To address these challenges,
 Back in 2009, Trestian et al. [235] conducted a detailed researchers have turned to FGTA, exploring whether specific
study on applications accessed by users at different locations. traffic patterns can be correlated with particular OSes’ or de-
They demonstrated that users are more likely to show interest vices’ application behaviors. This approach not only identifies
in a particular class of applications than others at certain broad device or OS types but also enables the pinpointing of
locations, which is irrespective of the time of day. They specific device models or OS versions, particularly for diverse
indicated that we can further use the traffic generated by these IoT and mobile devices. In this subsection, we introduce such
applications to identify the type of locations (e.g., work versus FGTA approaches that deal with device/OS identification.
home). In 2014, Das et al. [154], [236] collected around 100 1) OS identification: Chen et al. [241] perform OS iden-
GBs of real-world network traffic from more 1700 users at dif- tification and detection of NAT and tethering (i.e., multiple
ferent types of locations (e.g., cafeteria/restaurant, university devices sharing the Internet connection of a mobile device,
campus, airport/travel, etc.). By measuring and analyzing this which can lead to multiple OSes sharing a single IP address)
dataset, Das et al. selected sets of features for packet-level, by inspecting TCP/IP headers of packet traffic. They leverage
flow-level traffic and built a decision-tree-based classification a probability-based method by applying the Naı̈ve Bayes
model to predict contextual location with an overall accuracy classifier to effectively combine multiple features (e.g., TTL
of 87%. Later, a few similar works also demonstrated that value, IP ID monotonicity, TCP timestamp, clock frequency,
mobile traffic from different cellular towers [237]–[239] tends etc.), thereby fingerprinting and recognizing different OSes in
to have different characteristics. different environments. Laštovička et al. [242] also proposed
 The drawback of contextual location inference is that it an OS identification method by constructing a decision tree
only works on a group of network traffic sending from many with the TLS handshake, HTTP headers, and TCP/IP features.
endpoints. It cannot infer a device’s contextual location by However, these approaches cannot distinguish between minor
only analyzing its own network traffic. versions of the same OS. To tackle this problem, Ruffing et
 2) Geographical location inference: Purely using network al. [243] identify different versions of smartphone OSes by
traffic to infer a user’s geographical location seems impossible. using the frequency spectrum of packet timing from encrypted

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 21

traffic. By identification through correlations of the feature- Later, Karagiannis et al. proposed BLINC [249], which not
extracted spectra, the authors demonstrate that even a network only looks at port-based features, but also inspects the host’s
traffic input of 30 seconds can be enough for high-accuracy social behavior and its community behavior to determine the
identification results. applications. Bernaille et al. [250] observe the sizes of the
 2) IoT device identification: Compared with OS identifica- first few packets of an SSL connection to identify the web
tion, IoT device identification can be more challenging due to application, which can achieve an accuracy of more than 85%.
the complexity of their network environments and the devices’ There are also many machine-learning-based traditional TA
wide variety. Lopez-Martin et al. [244] extract a time-series approaches [15], [251]–[253] that classify application traffic
feature vectors from network traffic, where each element of the according to protocol-level traffic patterns.
time-series vector contains the features of a packet in the flow. However, application identification using traditional TA
They then proposed a classifier that is based on both a RNN struggles to adapt to the modern network environment and
model and a CNN model to separate heterogeneous IoT traffic distinguish between applications with similar purposes due to
using the features. Meidan et al. [245] collected and labeled the following reasons:
network traffic from nine distinct IoT devices (e.g., baby • Traditional TA can primarily identify high-level protocols
monitor, motion sensor, printer, security camera, etc.), PCs, (e.g., HTTP, HTTPS, SMTP, POP3) and a limited set of
and smartphones. They then utilized a multi-stage machine- commonly used applications with distinct traffic patterns
learning-based classifier to classify traffic of IoT devices in (e.g., MySQL, BitTorrent, MSN). However, many modern
two phases. In the first stage, the classifier can distinguish applications, such as payment apps, share similar opertraffic between IoT and non-IoT devices. In the second stage, ational protocols and appear indistinguishable based on
the classifier can further identify traffic from different IoT transport-layer features alone.
devices. The authors demonstrate that their approach is able • Traditional TA lacks application-layer awareness, which
to classify IoT traffic with an accuracy of 99.281%. is crucial for large-scale and fine-grained application
 However, these two researches do not consider complicated identification.
network environments (e.g., smart homes, enterprises, and
cities) of IoT devices. Sivanathan et al. [246] addressed this Today’s network environments are far more complex, and
challenge by developing a robust framework for IoT device application ecosystems have become increasingly diverse and
traffic classification with a multi-stage machine-learning-based intricate. To address these challenges, researchers and develalgorithm. The authors instrumented a smart environment with opers have begun utilizing FGTA to analyze distinctions at
28 different IoT devices that consist of spanning cameras, or above the application layer, enabling precise identification
lights, plugs, motion sensors, appliances, and health-monitors. of specific applications amidst diverse traffic from various
They then collected and synthesized network traffic traces devices. In this subsection, we collectively introduce FGTA
from this infrastructure for a period of six months. By extract- approaches that serve the purpose of application identification
ing statistical features such as activity cycles, port numbers, (Table IX shows an overview).
signaling patterns, and cipher suites from the traffic and using 1) Application identification for general-purpose devices:
Naı̈ve Bayes and random forest as the identification models, General-purpose devices, such as personal computers and
they are able to classify heterogeneous IoT devices with an servers, support the operation of countless web applications.
accuracy over 99%. Yao et al. [247] further proposed an end- Recently, FGTA-based application identification for generalto-end IoT traffic classification method that eliminates the purpose devices focuses on identifying more specific applicamulti-stage classification for high accuracy and efficiency. It tions in more complicated network environments.
relies on a deep-learning-aided capsule network to construct Chen et al. proposed Seq2img [254], an application traffic
an efficient classification mechanism that integrates feature classification framework based on an online CNN model.
extraction, feature selection, and classification model. One Seq2img employs a data fusion method based on Reproducing
drawback of these approaches is that their evaluations are all Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) to convert flow sequences into
based on closed-world datasets, which may not be able to images, which can fully capture the static and dynamic behavprecisely reflect their true efficacy in the real world. iors of different applications. Then, Seq2img utilizes a CNN
 model to recognize network traffic of popular applications,
 such as Facebook, Instagram, Wechat, etc.
F. Application Identification Rezaei et al. [111] investigated using a few labeled, sampled
 Using the network traffic from a device to identify the ap- packet-level datasets to train a comprehensive application
plications that are running on the device, even in the presence identification model. They first pre-train a CNN-based model
of traffic encryption, is one of the most classic use cases of on a large unlabeled dataset, where the input is the time series
TA. Decades ago, people have investigated using traditional features of a few sampled packets. Then, the learned weights
TA approaches to coarsely classify traffic from different ap- are transferred to a new CNN model that is re-trained on
plications or application types. Before 2000, many researchers a small labeled dataset. They demonstrated that this semisimply used traffic ports to identify some popular applications supervised approach achieves almost the same accuracy as
that have well-established ports (e.g., port 443 for HTTPS, port a fully-supervised method with a large labeled dataset. The
110 for POP3). Port-based approaches fail for most emerging proposed approach is able to identify applications like Google
applications such as gaming, streaming, and messaging [248]. Drive, Google Doc, Google Search, Google Music, etc.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 22

 G: partially supported;
TABLE IX: Comparisons of selected FGTA approaches for application identification (#: not supported; #
 : supported).
 System Real-Time Real-World
 Category Approach Year Target Application Traffic Feature Method
 Overhead Analysis Evaluation
App Identification Chen et al. 2017 Instagram, Skype, Images converted from flow RKHS-based data fusion High #
 G #
 for [254] Facebook, Wechat, sequences and CNN
General-Purpose Youtube, etc.
 Devices Rezaei et al. 2018 Google Drive, Youtube, Time series features ex- Semi-supervised CNN High #
 G #
 [111] Google Docs, Google tracted from sampled pack-
 Search, Google Music, etc. ets
 Lotfollahi et al. 2020 Vimeo, YouTube, Normalized features CNN and SAE High #
 [120] VoipBuster, Spotify, Netflix, extracted from packet
 Hangouts, Facebook, etc. headers
 (with or without VPN)
 Zhao et al. 2024 Google Home, email, Protocol-agnostic per- Random convolution kernel High (few seconds) #
 [255] streaming, P2P, Tor, etc. (in packet feature sequences transformations and metacomplicated environments) learning
 Wang et al. 2015 Snapchat, Tencent QQ, Statistical features from Random forest Low # (∼300 secs)
 G G
 #
 [256] Mint, Tinder, YouTube, etc. packets (e.g., STD time,
 Mobile App average size, STD size,
 Identification etc.)
 Alan et al. 2016 1595 applications on four Features from TCP/IP head- Jaccard’s coefficient and Medium (∼2-16 secs) G
 #
 [109] different devices ers (e.g., packet size, timing, Naı̈ve Bayes
 direction)
 Taylor et al. 2016 110 most popular applica- Two sets of features from SVM and random forest Medium (2 secs-2 hours) G
 #
 [257] tions in Google Play Store flow-level traffic-flow vector and statistical features
 Aceto et al. 2018 49 mobile applications (i.e., Statistical features (e.g., A multi-classification (viz. Medium (∼5 secs) #
 [258] QQ, SayHi, eBay, 6Rooms, packet length, percentiles, fusion) model consists of
 NetTalk, PureVPN, etc.) deviation, etc.) for Naı̈ve Bayes, random forest,
 incoming, outgoing, and SVM, and decision tree
 bidirectional packets
 Aceto et al. 2019 Facebook, Facebook Mes- Automatically-extracted Multiple machine learning High (few seconds) #
 [119] senger, and other 49 apps on features using neural models (e.g., CNN, LSTM,
 both Android and IOS networks MLP, etc.)
 Van et al. [20] 2020 More than 1M apps from Packet and flow-level fea- A semi-supervised finger- High # (∼300 secs)
 G #
 three datasets tures selected by adjusted printing with destinationmutual information based clustering, browser
 isolation, and pattern recognition
 Pham et al. 2021 101 popular Android apps 63 features extracted from Deep graph convolution High # (≤5 mins)
 G G
 #
 [259] packets and flows, including neural network
 aggregate, statistical, temporal, categorical features.
Decentralized App Shen et al. 2019 Aragon, Bancor, Canwork, 57 features of packet KNN, SVM, and random Medium # (few minutes)
 G G
 #
 Identification [104] Chainy, Cryptopepes, lengths, 72 features of forest
 Eth town, Etheremon, etc. bursts, and 54 features of
 time series, fused by kernel
 functions
 Aiolli et al. 2019 BTC.com. BitPay, Bread, Vectors of statistical SVM and random forest Medium #
 G #
 G
 [260] Wirex, Copay, etc. features about the packet
 length from traffic flow
 Shen et al. 2021 Closed-World setting: Traffic Interaction Graph, Graph neural network High #
 G #
 G
 [261] the top 40 DApps on which is capable of re- (GNN) with MLP
 Ethereum; Open-World serving information such as
 setting: randomly selected packet direction, length, or-
 1,260 DApps on Ethereum. dering, and bursts.

 In 2020, Lotfollahi et al. [120] proposed an application YouTube, etc., with an accuracy of more than 87.23%. They
identification method that can work in both VPN and non- demonstrate that by using the mobile applications the privacy
VPN networks. After extracting features from packet headers, of the user is more at risk compared to using online services
they used both CNN and stacked autoencoder (SAE) to train through browsers on mobile devices.
the classification models. Evaluation results show that this Many researchers also studied application identification on
approach can achieve a recall score of 0.98 in application Android platform. Inspired by some WFP approaches (Secidentification tasks. tion V-C), Alan et al. [109] use Jaccard’s coefficient and Naı̈ve
 2) Mobile application identification: With the raising of Bayes to analyze features (e.g., packet size, timing, direction)
mobile network, mobile application identification becomes from TCP/IP headers to identify 1595 applications on four
an emerging research topic in recent years. Unlike general- different devices. Taylor et al. [257] proposed AppScanner,
purpose devices, mobile devices are less regularized in port a framework that can automatically fingerprint and identify
usage. In addition, a wide variety of mobile applications may Android applications from their encrypted network traffic.
utilize some common libraries in communication, generating The authors extracted two sets of features (i.e., flow vector
similar network traffic patterns. Thus, mobile application iden- and statistical features) from flow-level network traffic and
tification can be more challenging. implemented this approach using both SVM and random
 Wang et al. [256] use random forest algorithm to analyze forest algorithms. The evaluations show that AppScanner can
packet-level traffic in wireless networks. Their approach is able identify the 110 most popular applications in Google Play
to detect the usage of 13 selected popular mobile applications Store with more than 99% accuracy. In the next year, Taylor et
on IOS platform, such as Snapchat, Tencent QQ, Mint, Tinder, al. further extended AppScanner in a follow-up research [262].

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 23

They investigated how application fingerprints change over analyzed the network traffic of encrypted messaging services
time, across different devices, and across different application such as Apple iMessage. The authors demonstrated that an
versions. eavesdropper can learn information about user actions (e.g.,
 Recently, many similar works (e.g., [20], [119], [258], control, read, start, stop, image, and text), the language of
[263]) have been proposed to enhance the efficacy, efficiency, messages, and even the length of those messages with greater
and coverage of mobile application identifications. than 96% accuracy simply by observing the sizes of encrypted
 3) Application identification on other platforms: A few packets. They used three algorithms to perform the inference—
researches have been focusing on identifying decentralized linear regression, Naı̈ve Bayes, and rule lookup table. Howapplications on blockchain systems. Shen et al. [104] proposed ever, they only evaluated their approach in closed-world enan encrypted traffic classification of decentralized applications vironments with a small dataset. Fu et al. [117] extended the
(e.g., Cryptopepes, Matchpool, Lordless, etc.) on Ethereum inference to more messaging applications (i.e., Wechat and
with features like packet lengths, bursts, and time series. Aiolli WhatsApp) and more activities (e.g., stream video call, news
et al. [260] focused on identifying user activities on Bitcoin feed, location sharing, etc.). By segmenting Internet traffic into
wallet applications (e.g., BTC.com, Bitcoin Wallet, Coinbase, sessions with a number of dialogs, extracting discriminative
etc.). The authors used SVM and random forest models to features from the perspectives of packet length and time delay,
conduct the identification. and leveraging multiple machine learning models to conduct
 We also studied the application identification approaches for the classification, the proposed approach can achieve 96% and
IoT devices. However, as each IoT device is usually bundled 97% accuracy in WeChat and WhatsApp respectively. Liu
with an IoT application, the identification of IoT application et al. [26] further extended the inference coverage to more
is equal to the identification of IoT devices in most cases. OSN applications (e.g., Facebook, Wechat, and WhatsApp)
Therefore, we introduce these approaches in Section V-E (IoT and evaluated their approach in a real-world environment
device identification). with real-time traffic data streaming. Real-world evaluation
 is essential to reveal the true performance and efficacy of
 application usage approaches, but many approaches were only
G. Application Usage Inference
 evaluated through closed-world off-line cases, leaving the
 Application usage inference aims to analyze encrypted inference throughput and abilities to handle noise mysteries.
network traffic to identify certain application events, infer user Feng et al. [103], [271] developed and evaluated their OSN
behaviors, and measure specific service usage. It is one of usage inference approach in a larger network environment—a
the most challenging FGTA tasks, as it not only classifies the campus network. Although their approach is mainly built for
network traffic that is associated with different applications, social bot detection, it can identify some commonly seen user
device, or web pages, but also leverages the traffic patterns to activities (i.e., posting, reading, liking, etc.) on Twitter and
recognize the application-layer activities that users conducted Facebook.
with the applications, devices, or web pages. Therefore, many 2) Streaming service usage inference: There are a few
application usage inference approaches may take extra steps works focusing on leveraging FGTA to extract behavioral
(e.g., clustering, pre-filtering, etc.) to narrow down the scope information from network traffic of streaming service (e.g.,
before the final traffic classification. Besides, they need to VoIP, audio streaming, and video streaming). Researchers have
perform traffic segmentation to locate different traffic bursts, demonstrated the feasibility of revealing voice information
where each burst represents a group of adjacent packets that from encrypted VoIP conversations or identifying encrypted
support an application event. video streams [6].
 In this subsection, we introduce representative application Wright et al. [265] demonstrated that when the audio is
usage inference approaches, demonstrating their applicable encoded using variable bit rate codecs, the lengths of encrypted
scenarios and methodologies (Table X shows a comparison). VoIP packets can be used to identify the phrases spoken within
 1) Messager/Online social network usage inference: User a call. By leveraging a HMM, the authors indicated that an
activities on messaging or OSN applications are very private eavesdropper can identify phrases from a standard speech
and sensitive. However, although being encrypted, a third party corpus within encrypted calls with an average accuracy of
can still infer the rough messaging/OSN activities that users 50%, and with accuracy greater than 90% for some phrases.
have performed only through content-agnostic network traffic Schuster et al. [22] demonstrated that many video streams are
data. uniquely characterized by their burst patterns, and classifiers
 Back in 2009, Schneider et al. [270] investigated OSN based on CNN models can accurately identify these patterns
usages from the perspective of network traffic for four dif- given very coarse network measurements. The authors only exferent platforms—Facebook, LinkedIn, Hi5, and StudiVZ. tracted features from flow attributes, such as inbound/outbound
The authors studied how users actually interact with OSNs bytes per second, inbound/outbound packet per second, and
by extracting clickstreams from passively monitored network inbound/outbound average packet length. They have examined
traffic. They found that different OSN operations (e.g., login, this approach on Netflix, YouTube, Amazon, and Vimeo.
open friend list, logout, select profile, etc.) will trigger statis- 3) General-purpose application usage inference: The aptically different network traffic. This research later led many proaches discussed in this subsection aim at inferring all types
researchers to dig deeper into using the traffic differences to of application-layer events rather than only recognizing certain
classify different user actions on OSNs. Coull et al. [264] event categories.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 24

 G: partially supported;
TABLE X: Comparisons of selected application usage inference approaches (#: not supported; # :
supported).
 System Real-Time Real-World
 Category Approach Year Analysis Object Feature Method
 Overhead Analysis Evaluation
 Coull et al. [264] 2014 Apple iMessage: Payload length and the Linear regression, Naı̈ve Medium (few seconds) #
 language, control, read, message length; a binary Bayes, and rule lookup ta-
 Messager/OSN
 start, stop, image, text, feature vector of packet ble
 etc. length and direction pairs
 Fu et al. [117] 2016 Wechat and WhatsApp: Discriminative features Traffic segmentation with Medium # (few minutes)
 G G
 #
 stream video call, news from the perspectives of hierarchical clustering and
 feed, location sharing, etc. packet length and time thresholdingheuristics;
 delay HMM-based classifier.
 Liu et al. [26] 2017 Facebook, Wechat, and A selected feature set ex- A recursive time continu- Medium #
 G
 WhatsApp: short video, tracted from traffic packet ity constrained K-means
 video call, text, picture, sequences by a Maximiz- clustering algorithm for
 etc. ing Inner activity similar- traffic flow segmentation
 ity and Minimizing Dif- and a random forest clasferent activity similarity sifier for segmented traffic
 measurements. classification.
 Feng et al. [103] 2021 Facebook and Twitter: Images converted from Clustering-based traffic High G
 # (∼1-5 mins)
 post, chat, read, etc. NetFlow records segmentation; CNN
 Wright et al. [265] 2008 Identify the phrases spo- The lengths of encrypted HMM Medium #
 Streaming Service
 ken within a call from a VoIP packets
 standard speech corpus.
 Schuster et al. [22] 2017 Identify the videos Time series data of the Time-based burst; CNN High # (few minutes)
 G #
 streamed by YouTube, following flow attributes:
 Netflix, Amazon, and down/up/all bytes per
 Vimeo. second, down/up/all
 packet per second, and
 down/up/all average
 packet length.
 Conti et al. [266] 2015 User activities in Gmail, Features from TCP/IP Dynamic time warping, Medium (∼5 secs) #
 General-Purpose Facebook, Twitter, Tum- packet fields (e.g., IP random forest, and a hiblr, Dropbox, etc. address, port number, erarchical clustering algopacket size, direction, and rithm called agglomeratiming) tive
 Saltaformaggio et al. [267] 2016 User activities on Android Features extracted from IP A K-means clustering Medium (0.25-1.5 secs) G
 #
 and IOS platforms packet headers, divided by model and an SVM
 behavior measurements (a model
 small time window)
 Papadogiannaki et al. [19] 2018 User activities (e.g., Customizable A pattern language Low (few seconds)
 voice call, video call, to identify application
 messaging, etc.) in events, rule mining
 popular Over-The-Top
 mobile applications (e.g.,
 WhatsApp, Skype, Viber,
 etc.)
 Yan et al. [268] 2018 Red packet transactions Overall statistics, packet Threshold-based traffic Medium (∼6 secs) #
 and fund transfers in length, number of TCP segmentation, random
 Others
 Wechat handshakes, inbound and forest
 outbound statistics
 Wang et al. [269] 2019 Classify specific actions Overall statistics of the Threshold-based traffic Medium # (∼1 min)
 G #
 (e.g., transfer payment, packet length, range statis- segmentation, hierarchical
 transfer receipt, QR code tics of the packet length, identification with random
 payment, etc.) on the mo- flow statistics, incoming forest, AdaBoost, GBDT,
 bile payment application, and outgoing statistics. and XGBoost
 and then detect the detailed steps (e.g., click the
 button, receive the fund,
 open the red packet, etc.)
 within the action
 Jiang et al. [114] 2019 Application usage Statistic features of flow Threshold-based traffic Medium #
 G #
 information (e.g., reading burst segmentation, logistic
 documents, surfing webs, regression, SVM, GBDT,
 editing documents, etc.) random forest
 on remote desktop
 Wang et al. [118] 2020 Identify DApp (e.g., Selected DApps features, Random forest, decision Low (few seconds) #
 Superrare, Editional, John behavior-sensitive tree, and GBDT
 Orion Young, etc.) user features, and improved
 behaviors (e.g., open inter-arrival time series
 DApps, open market,
 view detail, etc.)

 Conti et al. [266], [272] analyzed encrypted mobile traffic within the dataset. However, this approach was not evaluto infer user actions on Android devices, such as email ated in real-world environments. In 2016, Saltaformaggio et
exchange, posting a photo online, publishing a tweet, etc. al. [267] proposed NetScope, a framework that can perform
They extracted features from TCP/IP packet fields (e.g., IP robust inferences of user activities for both Android and
address, port number, packet size, direction, and timing) and IOS devices by only inspecting IP packet headers. NetScope
use a random forest to perform the inference. They trained leverages a K-means model and an SVM model to learn
and evaluated their approach using a dataset that is associated and detect network traffic generated by different application
with several Android applications with diverse functionalities, behaviors. By testing the approach in a lab environment, the
such as Gmail, Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr and Dropbox. authors demonstrated that despite the widespread use of fully
The evaluation results demonstrate that it can achieve more encrypted communication, NetScope can distinguish subtle
than 95% of accuracy and precision for most of the actions traffic behavioral differences between user activities (e.g.,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 25

 of real-world scenarios. It is actually impossible to collect
 a dataset to cover all possible scenarios. Take the WFP
 attack discussed in Section V-C as an example, as shown in
 Figure 11, state-of-the-art datasets from public repositories can
 only cover less than 0.001% of all websites around the world.
 FGTA approaches built upon such datasets then have little
 effect in practice. Furthermore, network traffic of websites,
 applications, or OSes is dynamic. For instance, the layouts
 of Facebook websites have been changed for several times
 since its birth, and so has the network traffic associated
 Fig. 11: Training data coverage for WFP.
 with Facebook. Therefore, a FGTA approach that worked
 before may no longer be effective, if we do not update its
Instagram browse versus post, Yelp browse versus search, classification model with the latest training datasets.
Facebook feed versus post, etc.). Papadogiannaki et al. [19]
further pushed application usage inference to a much larger B. Uncertainties in Real-world Environments
scale. They proposed OTTer, a highly scalable engine that
 As can be seen from our previous discussion (Section IV-D
identifies fine-grained user actions (e.g., voice call, video call,
 and Section V), many approaches were only evaluated in
messaging, etc.) in popular Over-The-Top mobile applications,
 closed-world environments, which means they were only
such as WhatsApp, Skype, Viber, and Facebook Messenger
 tested with a small amount of labeled traffic, with a little
with encrypted network traffic connections. By evaluating
 noise or without noise. Such closed-world evaluations cannot
OTTer is a real-world test bed, the authors demonstrated that
 objectively reveal the efficacy of proposed approaches in the
it can operate at traffic loads with an average of 109 Gbps.
 real world. Network traffic in real-world environments can be
 4) Others: There are a few application usage inference
 very quite different from traffic in laboratory environments:
approaches tackling different problems. For instance, Yan et
 • Real-world network configurations can be complicated,
al. [268] segmented the network traffic into several bursts
and trained a random forest model to identify red packet with traffic going through network address translation
transactions and fund transfers in Wechat; Wang et al. [269] (NAT)s, Wi-Fi connections, or special middle boxes. All
proposed an approach to identify the mobile payment appli- these factors can significantly change the original traffic
cations from traffic data, then classify specific actions (e.g., characteristics.
 • Edge users have different habits of using web applicatransfer payment, transfer receipt, QR code payment, etc.)
on the mobile payment application, and finally, detect the tions. Some may send traffic with VPN, Shadowsocks,
detailed steps (e.g., click the button, receive the fund, open or Tor. Although many FGTA approaches claim to be
the red packet, etc.) within the action; Jiang et al. [114] effective even with traffic tunneling techniques, many
studied encrypted remote desktop traffic and found that an researchers found their efficacy will actually be reduced
eavesdropper can reveal application usage information (e.g., under such circumstances [273].
 • The ratio of different network traffic in the real world is
reading documents, surfing webs, editing documents, etc.) due
to side-channel privacy leakage; Wang et al. [118] aimed different from that in the laboratory environment, making
at identifying DApp (e.g., Superrare, Editional, John Orion accuracies obtained from closed-world evaluations hardly
Young, etc.) user behaviors (e.g., open DApps, open market, representative.
view detail, etc.) on Ethereum by using random forest, decision Therefore, real-world evaluations or large-scale pilot studies
tree, and gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT). are essential for developing and polishing a usable FGTA
 approach.
 VI. L IMITATIONS
 While FGTA approaches appear potent in deducing diverse C. False Alarms
high-level, nuanced behaviors, it is important to acknowledge
 FGTA aims to identify specific types of user activities from
their limitations. In practice, many FGTA approaches often
 network traffic. Usually, the analysis object only occupies a
fall short of their theoretical promises, with their effectiveness
 very tiny proportion of the whole traffic (e.g., less than 0.01%).
contingent on a multitude of conditions. This section is ded-
 Thus, a very small false positive rate can be amplified in
icated to a thorough discussion of the inherent limitations of
 deployment when facing massive traffic, making the proposed
FGTA.
 FGTA approach hardly usable. For example, if a packet-level
 FGTA approach has a false positive rate of 0.1%, then it will
A. Coverage of Training Data generate around 100 false alarms for every 100,000 negative
 As most FGTA approaches are based on machine learning packets. Even for a small ISP, its traffic volume can easily
algorithms or prior knowledge about specific traffic, the effi- reach 100,000 packets in less than 1 second. Therefore, the
cacy of such approaches is highly dependent on the coverage FGTA approach will generate around 100 false alarms every
of training datasets or rules learned beforehand. Unfortunately, second, which is unacceptable for most network administraexisting datasets or rules can only represent a small fraction tors. In real-world scenarios, an excess of false alarms can

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 26

either cause too many collateral damages or force network •Upgrading the network infrastructure to support highadministrators to ignore all alarms, which will make the FGTA speed traffic capture and processing. Employing hardware
approach useless. acceleration, such as GPUs, FPGAs, or programmable
 switches, to enhance the computational efficiency of the
 analysis engine.
D. Integrity of Network Traffic
 • Optimizing the analysis algorithms to reduce computa-
 As discussed in Section III, guaranteeing the integrity of tional complexity and memory requirements.
real-world network traffic data presents significant challenges. • Separating the traffic collection and analysis processes to
Various factors contribute to this uncertainty. For instance, traf- distribute the computational load. For example, network
fic routing often exhibits asymmetry, resulting in the collected service providers can outsource the traffic analysis to
data representing predominantly one-directional information. cloud-based services, such as AWS or Kentik, to deploy
Furthermore, traffic data is frequently sampled, driven by FGTA solutions without upgrading their infrastructure.
performance optimization or storage constraints. Additionally, Additionally, the nature of the input traffic data, in terms of
packet loss, which can occur due to network congestion or granularity or volume, plays a crucial role in the performance
other factors, further compromises the reliability of the traffic of FGTA approaches. For instance, analyzing packet-level
data. This compromised data integrity inevitably diminishes input typically demands more computational resources comthe effectiveness of current FGTA methodologies. In many pared to processing flow-level data, given the same throughput.
cases, it can render them ineffective, as they are typically This is because packet-level analysis entails a more detailed
trained and tested on the assumption of complete and unaltered examination of each data packet. While adopting flow-level
traffic data. Such a limitation is especially severe for FGTA input for analysis can mitigate some of this computational burapproaches that are based on deep learning algorithms as they den, it comes with trade-offs. Primarily, it tends to diminish the
are very sensitive to the integrity of training data. accuracy of FGTA methodologies. Moreover, certain FGTA
 tasks are infeasible at the flow level due to the less granular
E. Traffic Obfuscation nature of the data. This reduction in granularity potentially
 limits the scope of analysis and the depth of insights that
 The previous subsection explored the impact of network
 can be derived. Therefore, the choice of input data granularity
traffic data integrity and correctness on the efficacy of FGTA
 is a trade-off between computational overhead and analysis
approaches. This vulnerability can be exploited by adversaries
 granularity.
to camouflage their network activities and circumvent FGTA
screening. Adversaries might employ various obfuscation techniques, such as introducing noise (e.g., dummy packets) into G. Scalability
their traffic, deliberately delaying packets, or manipulating As network traffic continues to grow exponentially, scalapacket aggregation. These tactics are not only straightforward bility emerges as a significant challenge for FGTA methodfor adversaries to implement, but they also tend to be highly ologies. The task of analyzing and processing such immense
effective in evading detection [205], [223], [274]. volumes of data can overburden computational resources,
 We delve into these traffic obfuscation strategies in greater thereby impeding the ability to conduct real-time analysis. This
detail in Section VII, offering a comprehensive analysis of challenge is particularly acute for FGTA strategies reliant on
their implementation and effectiveness. deep learning algorithms, known for their intensive computational demands. Consequently, deploying FGTA at an internetwide scale remains unfeasible. Presently, only organizations
F. Performance Overhead
 with substantial computational capabilities and budgets can
 In our exploration of various FGTA approaches, particu- afford to implement FGTA for analyzing segments of their
larly those leveraging advanced techniques such as machine network traffic, serving specific objectives. Looking ahead, it’s
learning and high-dimensional clustering, we have identified an unresolved question whether the scalability of FGTA will
significant computational overhead as a primary limitation. be able to keep pace with the relentless growth of network
This overhead arises from the complexity and computational traffic.
demands of these methods, which can be attributed to the
following factors: VII. C OUNTERMEASURES
 • The traffic capture engine introduces considerable over- The growing capabilities of FGTA have brought about
 head to the network infrastructure, particularly in systems significant advancements in network monitoring, intrusion
 lacking hardware acceleration support. detection, and user behavior analysis. However, these same
 • Sophisticated analysis techniques, such as deep learning capabilities pose severe privacy risks if misused. Attackers
 algorithms, impose substantial computational demands. can exploit FGTA to infer sensitive user activities, preferences,
 • The memory and storage requirements for storing, buffer- and even identities, undermining both individual privacy and
 ing, and processing large volumes of network traffic data organizational security. The increasing prevalence of encrypted
 are often significant. traffic further exacerbates these concerns, as FGTA techniques
To mitigate these performance overheads, the following opti- can bypass traditional privacy-preserving measures by anamization directions can be employed: lyzing metadata and traffic patterns. Given these risks, it is

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 27

TABLE XI: Comparisons of selected well-known FGTA countermeasures (None: 0; Low: 0-30%; Medium: 30%-60%; High:
more than 60%).
 Category Approach Usage Scenarios Time Overhead Bandwidth Overhead Additional Requirements
 Pinheiro et al. [275] All web applications None Medium Middlebox and SDN controller
 FRONT and GLUE [276] Tor None Low None
 Traffic morphing [277] All web applications None Low Knowledge about other traffic classes
 Network- Walkie-Talkie [223] Web browsing Medium Low Knowledge about some web traffic
 Layer WTF-PAD [224] Web browsing None Low None
 Liberatore et al. [202] All web applications None High None
 BuFLO [218] Web browsing High High Network Transfer with fixed rates
 TrafficSliver [216]
 Tor None None Multiple entry ORs in Tor network
 (network-layer mode)
 HTTPOS [278] Web browsing None Low None
Application-
 TrafficSliver [216]
 Layer Tor None None Multiple entry ORs in Tor network
 (L7 mode)
 Server-side: Server-side:
 Medium; Medium;
 LLaMA and ALPaCA [279] Tor None
 Client-side: Client-side:
 Low Low

imperative to explore and implement effective countermea- Among all the network-layer countermeasures, traffic obfussures to prevent the misuse of FGTA. This section offers an cation is the most classic approach. Back in 2006, Liberatore
in-depth analysis of such countermeasures, evaluating their et al. [202] leveraged per-packet padding (i.e., increasing
effectiveness and exploring diverse application scenarios. the bytes of packets) in an attempt to defeat host profiling
 In Section VI, we delved into the limitations of FGTA system. They found that per-packet padding is reasonably
approaches. It became evident that the integrity and accuracy effective, which can lower predictive accuracy to less than
of network traffic data play crucial roles in determining the 8% with a cost of increasing traffic volume by 145%. Howeffectiveness of FGTA strategies. Based on this idea, internet ever, per-packet padding cannot defend against many WFP
users, whether with legitimate or illegitimate intentions, can attacks [206], [218] because this approach still preserves some
employ a variety of data modification tactics to evade the key traffic features that can help classify the traffic. To fix the
screening by FGTA systems. Illegitimate users might use these drawbacks, WTF-PAD [224] extends per-packet padding to
methods to remain undetected while engaging in malicious link-based padding to modify more traffic features. It detects
activities, whereas legitimate users might adopt them to disrupt large time gaps between packets and covers them by adding
FGTA and safeguard their privacy. dummy packets. Further, to obscure traffic bursts, it also adds
 Naı̈ve countermeasures send individual or aggregated traf- delays between packets to make them statistically different.
fic through encrypted channels to escape the inferences of Due to its low computational overhead and time overhead,
traditional TA approaches, such as VPN, Shadowsocks, and WFP-PAD has been used in many real-world FGTA defense
Tor. However, these approaches are proven to be vulnerable systems [284], [285]. Still, WTF-PAD leaks a portion of
to many FGTA approaches [280]–[283]. Therefore, people information in transmission and can be broken by some FGTA
began to modify the features of traffic flows to perturb FGTA approaches [208], [286]. Gong et al. [276] proposed FRONT
approaches’ classification models. Such perturbations can be and GLUE. FRONT focuses on obfuscating the trace front
conducted from either network layer or application layer [216]. with dummy packets. It also randomizes the number and dis-
Table XI shows a comparison of some well-known counter- tribution of dummy packets to impede the attacker’s inferring
measure approaches, where the time overhead and bandwidth process. GLUE adds dummy packets between separate traces
overhead are assessed based on the results reported in the so that they appear to the attacker as a long consecutive trace,
original papers as well as our analysis of the methodological making the attacker unable to find the start or end points.
details of these approaches.
 Compared with traffic obfuscation that freely modifies traffic features, traffic confusion mimic other groups of traffic
 to let FGTA approaches generate wrong outputs, which is
A. Network-layer Countermeasures
 sometimes more effective, especially when defending against
 Network-layer FGTA countermeasures directly modifying WFP attacks. Wright et al. proposed traffic morphing [277].
the network traffic by adding padding packets, changing It can thwart statistical TA approaches by morphing one
packet bytes, or delaying existing packets, thereby obfuscating class of traffic to look like another class using convex opspecific features that FGTA approaches rely on, making the timizations. Although it cannot defend against some types
current traffic look like other activities’, or regularizing the of FGTA approaches [206], [218], this approach inspired
traffic patterns of different applications [276]. Such approaches many subsequent countermeasure approaches. For example,
usually come with some side effects. They might increase the Glove [274] first leverages a clustering algorithm to group
overheads of the network system, including time overhead, web pages with similar traffic, and then inserts only a small
bandwidth overhead, and potentially computational overhead. amount of dummy traffic to hide the web page traffic in a close

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 28

group; Supersequence [205] also clusters network traffic traces et al. [275] implement a middlebox to modify the outbound
of different web pages and extracts the shortest common su- and inbound traffic’s packet size. They also leverage an SDN
persequence to cover current web traffic; Walkie-Talkie [223] application to obtain information of network traffic from
modifies the browser to communicate in half-duplex mode both sides (source and destination) to manage the size-based
(buffer traffic and send in bursts) rather than the usual full- padding mechanism.
duplex mode (immediately send available data). By combining
with dummy packets, Walkie-Talkie can modify the traffic of B. Application-layer Countermeasures
monitored sensitive pages and benign non-sensitive pages, so
that each page’s packet sequences are exactly the same (each Unlike network-layer countermeasures that directly modpacket has the same timing, length, direction and sequence ify network traffic to cover user activities, application-layer
number). However, a traffic-confusion-based approach requires countermeasures use dummy applications to generate unneca priori knowledge about popular web pages’ network traffic. essary traffic, thereby indirectly perturbing FGTA approaches.
It cannot tackle traffic of dynamic content or unpredictable However, most application-layer countermeasures are limited
activities. Moreover, such approaches can lead to noticeable in covering traffic of web pages being visited.
computational overhead. Panchenko et al. [204] proposed a browser plug-in that
 Another obfuscation direction is to regularize the network adds traffic noise by loading another random web page in
traffic, making different groups of traffic have relatively uni- parallel. However, it may fail to defend against some WFP
form patterns. For instance, Buffered Fixed-Length Obfusca- attacks if users lower the page loading frequency to decrease
tion (BuFLO) [218] obfuscates page transmissions by sending the bandwidth overhead [205]. Another Tor-based counterpackets of a fixed size at a fixed interval and using dummy measures approach [291] randomizes the order of requests
packets to both fill in and potentially extend the transmission. for embedded website content and the pipeline size (i.e., the
Thus, the traffic generated by different websites has a similar number of requests processed in parallel) to perturb WFPs.
continuous traffic flow. However, BuFLO can cause very high Cherubin et al. [279] propose LLaMA and ALPaCA, defenses
time and bandwidth overhead, sometimes can even bring con- for client side and server side. LLaMA reorders outgoing
gestion problems to the network [116]. To alleviate the prob- HTTP requests by randomly delaying them and adding dummy
lem, Congestion-Sensitive BuFLO (CS-BuFLO) [287] was HTTP requests. On the server side, ALPaCA conducts traffic
proposed to vary the packet transmission rate. Tamaraw [222] morphing by padding web objects of a page and inserting
achieves a better security/bandwidth trade-off by using smaller invisible dummy web objects. The three methods above only
fixed packet sizes and treating incoming and outgoing packets work in Tor environments.
differently to avoid unnecessary padding and dummy traffic. HTTP Obfuscation (HTTPOS) [278] is countermeasure that
DynaFlow [288] morphs packets into fixed bursts, dynamically can be used in environments other than Tor. By modifying
changes packet inter-arrival times to generate constant traffic HTTP requests and basic TCP features, it manipulates four
flows, and pads the number of bursts. Theoretically, DynaFlow fundamental network flow features, including packet size, web
leads to less network overhead compared with BuFLO, CS- object size, flow size, and timing of packets. It can also modify
BuFLO, and Tamaraw. and reorder HTTP headers and insert dummy HTTP requests.
 Another general countermeasure is TrafficSliver’s application-
 The recent development of FGTA countermeasures mainly
 layer defense [216]. This approach is on the client side. By
focuses on two aspects:
 sending single HTTP requests for different web objects over
 1) The countermeasure should lead to nearly zero overhead distinct Tor entry nodes, this application-layer defense can
 to both the data plane and the endpoints. reduce the detection rate of WFP classifiers by almost 50
 2) The countermeasure should be applicable to various web percentage points.
 applications (e.g., web page visiting, video streaming,
 VoIP, etc.) and scenarios. VIII. F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTION
For instance, Henri et al. [289] split traffic exchanged between Despite decades of development, FGTA continues to offer
the user and Tor nodes over two different, unrelated network substantial opportunities for further advancement, enhanceconnections (e.g., DSL, Wi-Fi, or cellular networks) to protect ment, and exploration. In this section, we outline potential
against FGTA by a malicious ISP; TrafficSliver [216] limits research directions based on our analysis of recent trends, exthe data a single observation point can observe and distorts isting literature, industry implementations, and key challenges
repeatable traffic patterns exploited by FGTAs with user- that remain unaddressed in this domain.
controlled splitting of traffic over multiple Tor entry nodes.
TrafficSliver also offers an application-layer solution, which
will be discussed in Section VII-B; Wang [290] points out that A. Improvement of Analysis Efficacy and Coverage
an attacker may only need to successfully identify a single web FGTA has been used in many subfields of computer netpage (which they define as the one-page setting) in reality, and work, including attack detection, traffic measurement, sidea WFP countermeasure must still thwart that attempt. Based channel attack, network management, etc. Researchers have
on this assumption, Wang fortifies WFP countermeasures by constructed myriad analysis models and collected plenty of
exploring randomness and regularization options for several datasets specifically for different categories of tasks. But there
existing countermeasures. To protect IoT networks, Pinheiro are still many use cases or scenarios that have not been

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 29

comprehensively covered by existing approaches. For instance, We believe designing and implementing new FGTA apwith the rise of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and au- proaches that can work under these circumstances are directonomous vehicles, there have been initiatives to adapt FGTA tions worthy of future research.
for unique applications like UAV anomaly detection [292],
[293] and the protection of autonomous vehicles [294], [295]. D. Integrating FGTA into Other Analytical Systems
However, this area of research is still in its infancy, characterized by a limited number of studies. Furthermore, as new Information contained in network traffic is essentially limapplications, attack vectors, and communication protocols con- ited. Even though FGTA can already reveal considerable
tinue to emerge, the capacity of existing FGTA methodologies amount of information, the detailed behavior models of endto effectively manage contemporary traffic challenges may be points are still hidden behind the curtain. To more comprehenlimited. Therefore, researchers can gather more updated traffic sively investigate the network situation, researchers can try
datasets to enhance the coverage of existing FGTA approaches, to combine FGTA with information from other dimensions
so that they can be used in more types of tasks and scenarios. (e.g., application-layer activities, server specifics, hardware
 In addition, the efficacy of many current FGTA approaches conditions, etc.), which can provide a better situational awareare not ideal for real-world deployments. Depending on the ness. So far, there are a few researches that combine TA
observation points, FGTA approaches may easily see millions with information from other layers for more accurate atof traffic flows over a short time period in the real world. tack/anomaly detection and timely threat response (e.g., [296]–
Under such circumstances, an FGTA approach could generate [298]). Researchers can push this idea forward by further
large numbers of false positives or false negatives, even if integrating FGTA into this idea.
it achieves more than 95% accuracies in closed-world eval- Furthermore, cyber threat intelligence (CTI) [299], allowuations. Thus, increasing the efficacy of FGTA is a timeless ing entities to share attack/anomaly information with trusted
topic for researchers and developers. partners and peers, is becoming a powerful tool to quickly
 and accurately tackle intractable attacks. By embedding results
 from FGTA into CTI systems, participating entities can raise
B. Evaluation Enhancement
 awareness of the current situation, thereby more quickly
 As we elaborate in Section VI, current closed-world evalua- responding to incoming attacks. Designing attack defense
tion methods are far away from revealing an FGTA approach’s systems with both FGTA and CTI is thus a promising research
real capability and many open-world evaluations are not very direction.
standardized and effective [273]. It is therefore suitable to
propose a new, operable, and effective evaluation paradigm for
FGTA. Such an evaluation paradigm should contain a testing E. Cutting Edge Technologies for FGTA
dataset similar to a real-world test case in terms of volume, With advancements in cutting-edge technologies, FGTA
environment, and data distribution. Simultaneously, the dataset has the potential for significant enhancements across varishould have comprehensive labels for almost all traffic flows, ous dimensions. For instance, ET-BERT [137] utilizes connot only for analysis targets. This can be achieved by either cepts from natural language processing (NLP) to process
constructing a large scale sandbox to simulate and collect all TA. This approach involves pre-training deeply contextualized
types of traffic from a white box view, or collect a large-scale, datagram-level representations using extensive unlabeled data
real-world traffic dataset and carefully label it using knowledge sets. Subsequently, the pre-trained model can be fine-tuned
of endpoints from all perspectives. Besides, the testing data with a minimal set of task-specific labeled data, catering
portion that is visible to the observation point should be to specific FGTA tasks. The recent surge in popularity of
consistent with the real-world deployment conditions. large language models, exemplified by ChatGPT [300], has
 opened up new avenues for enhancing FGTA. By fine-tuning
C. Dealing with Complex Network Environments these advanced models with specialized TA datasets, we can
 systematically decode and understand the narratives embedded
 In real-world deployments, the network environments and
 within network traffic data.
configurations can be different from researchers’ assumptions.
 In the future, we anticipate the emergence of more sophisti-
The following factors were not widely discussed in previous
 cated technologies geared towards understanding, processing,
papers, but can be common for network service providers.
 and integrating knowledge. Researchers are encouraged to ap-
 • Many observation points can only see asymmetric netply these advancements to FGTA, with the aim of broadening
 work traffic, which can challenge most FGTA approaches. the scope of this domain. Such integration is expected to not
 • Some networks are composed of multiple subnets, includonly enhance performance but also significantly improve the
 ing but not limited to wireless network, optical network, explainability and adaptability of FGTA methodologies.
 or radio frequency network. Traffic flows collected from
 such a network can have different delays and congestion
 control mechanisms. Tackling this type of traffic can be F. Enhancing the Explainability of FGTA
 challenging. Explainability plays a pivotal role in the practical im-
 • Due to deployments of modern traffic engineering ap- plementation of FGTA [301]. An FGTA method that offers
 proaches, traffic captured from some observation points is clear explainability greatly assists network administrators by
 dynamic [52], posing difficulties to many FGTA methods. enabling them to: (1) grasp the underlying analysis procedure

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 30

and its logic; (2) efficiently verify the analysis outcomes, ACRONYMS
which aids in reducing false alarms and bolstering confidence
in the results; and (3) gain a deeper understanding of the
network’s situation, leading to more informed and effective
network management decisions.
 Although some rule-based and statistical FGTA approaches ABR Adaptive Bitrate
demonstrate satisfactory performance in terms of explainabil- ACC accuracy
ity [19], [114], the majority of FGTA techniques heavily rely APT advanced persistent threat
on machine learning, with only a limited number emphasizing AUC area under the curve
explainability [152], [164], [302]. On the other hand, a range BTS base transceiver station
of general explainable machine learning techniques have been CCPA California Consumer Privacy Act
proposed, as documented in several studies [303]–[307]. In CDN content delivery network
theory, these techniques could be adapted for use in various CNN convolutional neural network
machine learning-based solutions. However, the specific ex- CTI cyber threat intelligence
plainability requirements in FGTA often differ from those in DNN deep neural network
other fields, which can make the direct application of these DPI deep packet inspection
existing techniques challenging. Additionally, their adoption F1 F1 score
in FGTA has been limited, possibly due to issues related to FDR false discovery rate
algorithmic suitability, performance, scalability, among other FGTA fine-grained traffic analysis
factors. FNR false negative rate
 It is therefore essential to develop novel explainable ma- FOR false omission rate
chine learning techniques that are specifically tailored for FPR false positive rate
FGTA. Such techniques should be designed to address the GBDT gradient boosting decision tree
unique challenges and requirements of FGTA, while also offer- GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
ing satisfactory performance in terms of accuracy, efficiency, GNN graph neural network
and scalability. HMM hidden Markov model
 IoT Internet of things
 IX. C ONCLUSION ISP internet service provider
 With the increasing complexity of network transmission KNN k-nearest neighbor
technology, FGTA is becoming a crucial tool to gain a finer LBA location-based applications
granularity of visibility on or above the application layer LBS location-based services
from the network traffic. From the perspective of attackers, LSTM long short-term memory
FGTA approaches can be used to analyze the content-agnostic MLP multi-layer perceptron
metadata and statistical information of network traffic to infer NAT network address translation
the website visited by users, estimate locations of traffic NDAEnonsymmetric deep autoencoder
sender, or decode the video content streamed in the link. NLP natural language processing
As for the network administrators, FGTA approaches can NPV negative predictive value
be used to detect application-layer threats even with layer OS operating system
3 or layer 4 data, investigate quality of experience without OSN online social network
collecting sensitive user data, or perform fine-grained traffic PCA principal component analysis
measurement to better configure the network. PII personally identifiable information
 In this paper, we analyze literature that deal with FGTA to PPV positive predictive value
help researchers and developers learn the latest developments QoE quality of experience
in this area. After comparing different FGTA approaches by QoS quality of service
their methodologies and use cases, we found that most existing QUIC Quick UDP Internet Connection
approaches are based on deep learning or high-dimensional RKHS Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
clustering. They are effective in capturing the subtle differ- RNN recurrent neural network
ences between network traffic generated by different activities. ROC receiver operating characteristic
However, many FGTA approaches still come with limitations SAE stacked autoencoder
related to training data coverage, traffic data availability, high SMO Sequential Minimal Optimization
false positive rates, real-world usability, etc. In addition, edge SMOTSynthetic Minority Oversampling Technique
users of the network can adopt a variety of countermeasures SVM Support Vector Machine
to defend against FGTA, with some overheads regarding TA traffic analysis
network bandwidth and delay. Researchers can further research TNR true negative rate
and develop this domain to increase the coverage of FGTA, TPR true positive rate
make FGTA more practical in complex real-world network TTL time to live
environments, enhance the robustness of FGTA, and reduce UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
the overheads of FGTA approaches. WFP website fingerprinting

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 31

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS [16] S. Li, L. Luo, D. Guo, Q. Zhang, and P. Fu, “A survey of sketches in
 traffic measurement: Design, optimization, application and implemen-
 The authors would like to thank Zhangxiang Hu, Lei Jiao, tation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07214, 2020.
Yingjiu Li, and Thanh Nguyen from the University of Oregon [17] Z. Zeng, L. Cui, M. Qian, Z. Zhang, and K. Wei, “A survey on sliding
for their constructive suggestions on this work. window sketch for network measurement,” Computer Networks, vol.
 226, p. 109696, 2023.
 This research / project is partially supported by the Na- [18] M. Shen, K. Ye, X. Liu, L. Zhu, J. Kang, S. Yu, Q. Li, and
tional Research Foundation, Singapore, and the Cyber Security K. Xu, “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic analysis:
Agency under its National Cybersecurity R&D Programme A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
 pp. 1–1, 2022.
(NCRP25-P04-TAICeN). Any opinions, findings and conclu- [19] E. Papadogiannaki, C. Halevidis, P. Akritidis, and L. Koromilas, “Otter:
sions or recommendations expressed in this material are those A scalable high-resolution encrypted traffic identification engine,”
of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of National in International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions, and
 Defenses. Springer, 2018, pp. 315–334.
Research Foundation, Singapore and Cyber Security Agency [20] T. van Ede, R. Bortolameotti, A. Continella, J. Ren, D. J. Dubois,
of Singapore. M. Lindorfer, D. Choffnes, M. van Steen, and A. Peter, “Flowprint:
 This work is also partially supported by the Natural Sci- Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting on encrypted network traffic,” in Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS),
ence Foundation of Sichuan Province (Grant No. 2024NS- vol. 27, 2020.
FSC1450). [21] Y. Feng, J. Li, L. Jiao, and X. Wu, “BotFlowMon: Learning-based,
 This material is also based upon work partially supported content-agnostic identification of social bot traffic flows,” in 2019 IEEE
by Ripple under the University Blockchain Research Initiative Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS), June
 2019, pp. 169–177.
(UBRI) [308]. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or [22] R. Schuster, V. Shmatikov, and E. Tromer, “Beauty and the burst:
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the Remote identification of encrypted video streams,” in 26th {USENIX}
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Ripple. Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 17), 2017, pp. 1357–1374.
 [23] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted
 malware traffic classification: accounting for noisy labels and non-
 R EFERENCES stationarity,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International
 Conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 2017, pp. 1723–
 [1] C. A. Sunshine, Computer network architectures and protocols. 1732.
 Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. [24] S. Xu, S. Sen, and Z. M. Mao, “Csi: Inferring mobile abr video
 [2] Wikipedia, “Internet protocol suite,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ adaptation behavior under https and quic,” in Proceedings of the
 Internet protocol suite, date of visit: 2021-10-05. Fifteenth European Conference on Computer Systems, 2020, pp. 1–16.
 [3] J.-F. Raymond, “Traffic analysis: Protocols, attacks, design issues,
 [25] Q. Yin, Z. Liu, Q. Li, T. Wang, Q. Wang, C. Shen, and Y. Xu, “Autoand open problems,” in Designing Privacy Enhancing Technologies.
 mated multi-tab website fingerprinting attack,” IEEE Transactions on
 Springer, 2001, pp. 10–29.
 Dependable and Secure Computing, 2021.
 [4] C. So-In, “A survey of network traffic monitoring and analysis tools,”
 [26] J. Liu, Y. Fu, J. Ming, Y. Ren, L. Sun, and H. Xiong, “Effective and
 Cse 576m computer system analysis project, Washington University in
 real-time in-app activity analysis in encrypted internet traffic streams,”
 St. Louis, 2009.
 in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on
 [5] A. D’Alconzo, I. Drago, A. Morichetta, M. Mellia, and P. Casas, “A
 knowledge discovery and data mining, 2017, pp. 335–344.
 survey on big data for network traffic monitoring and analysis,” IEEE
 [27] G. Ateniese, B. Hitaj, L. V. Mancini, N. V. Verde, and A. Villani,
 Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 16, no. 3, pp.
 “No place to hide that bytes won’t reveal: Sniffing location-based
 800–813, 2019.
 encrypted traffic to track a user’s position,” in International Conference
 [6] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
 on Network and System Security. Springer, 2015, pp. 46–59.
 traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
 Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2021. [28] G. O. Ferreira, C. Ravazzi, F. Dabbene, G. C. Calafiore, and M. Fiore,
 [7] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar, “Forecasting network traffic: A survey and tutorial with open-source
 “Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network comparative evaluation,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 6018–6044, 2023.
 traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Communications [29] H. Jmila, G. Blanc, M. R. Shahid, and M. Lazrag, “A survey of smart
 Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2018. home iot device classification using machine learning-based network
 [8] V. Paxson, “Bro: a system for detecting network intruders in real-time,” traffic analysis,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 97 117–97 141, 2022.
 Computer networks, vol. 31, no. 23-24, pp. 2435–2463, 1999. [30] D. A. Tedjopurnomo, Z. Bao, B. Zheng, F. M. Choudhury, and A. K.
 [9] H. Kim, K. C. Claffy, M. Fomenkov, D. Barman, M. Faloutsos, and Qin, “A survey on modern deep neural network for traffic prediction:
 K. Lee, “Internet traffic classification demystified: myths, caveats, Trends, methods and challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
 and the best practices,” in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT and Data Engineering, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1544–1561, 2022.
 conference, 2008, pp. 1–12. [31] T. Wu, F. Breitinger, and S. Niemann, “Iot network traffic analysis:
[10] J. C. Guevara, R. da S. Torres, and N. L. da Fonseca, “On the Opportunities and challenges for forensic investigators?” Forensic
 classification of fog computing applications: A machine learning Science International: Digital Investigation, vol. 38, p. 301123, 2021.
 perspective,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
 159, p. 102596, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect. S2666281721000214
 com/science/article/pii/S1084804520300709 [32] H. Tahaei, F. Afifi, A. Asemi, F. Zaki, and N. B. Anuar, “The rise of
[11] A. Sang and S.-q. Li, “A predictability analysis of network traffic,” traffic classification in iot networks: A survey,” Journal of Network and
 Computer networks, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 329–345, 2002. Computer Applications, vol. 154, p. 102538, 2020. [Online]. Available:
[12] A. Lakhina, K. Papagiannaki, M. Crovella, C. Diot, E. D. Kolaczyk, and https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084804520300126
 N. Taft, “Structural analysis of network traffic flows,” in Proceedings [33] M. Conti, Q. Q. Li, A. Maragno, and R. Spolaor, “The dark side(-
 of the joint international conference on Measurement and modeling of channel) of mobile devices: A survey on network traffic analysis,” IEEE
 computer systems, 2004, pp. 61–72. Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2658–2713,
[13] J. Mirkovic, Y. Feng, and J. Li, “Measuring changes in regional 2018.
 network traffic due to covid-19 stay-at-home measures,” arXiv preprint [34] D. Naboulsi, M. Fiore, S. Ribot, and R. Stanica, “Large-scale mobile
 arXiv:2203.00742, 2022. traffic analysis: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
[14] P. Barford, J. Kline, D. Plonka, and A. Ron, “A signal analysis of vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 124–161, 2016.
 network traffic anomalies,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGCOMM [35] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey of methods
 Workshop on Internet measurement, 2002, pp. 71–82. for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,” International Journal
[15] J. Erman, M. Arlitt, and A. Mahanti, “Traffic classification using clus- of Network Management, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 355–374, 2015.
 tering algorithms,” in Proceedings of the 2006 SIGCOMM workshop [36] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Muller, and K. Hanssgen,
 on Mining network data, 2006, pp. 281–286. “A survey of payload-based traffic classification approaches,” IEEE

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 32

 Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1135–1156, [60] Y. Liu, J. James, J. Kang, D. Niyato, and S. Zhang, “Privacy-preserving
 2014. traffic flow prediction: A federated learning approach,” IEEE Internet
[37] J. a. V. Gomes, P. R. M. Inácio, M. Pereira, M. M. Freire, and of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7751–7763, 2020.
 P. P. Monteiro, “Detection and classification of peer-to-peer traffic: [61] J. Pei, K. Zhong, M. A. Jan, and J. Li, “Retracted: Personalized
 A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 45, no. 3, jul 2013. [Online]. federated learning framework for network traffic anomaly detection,”
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2480741.2480747 2022.
[38] A. Callado, C. Kamienski, G. Szabo, B. P. Gero, J. Kelner, S. Fernan- [62] V. Perifanis, N. Pavlidis, R.-A. Koutsiamanis, and P. S. Efraimidis,
 des, and D. Sadok, “A survey on internet traffic identification,” IEEE “Federated learning for 5g base station traffic forecasting,” Computer
 Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 37–52, 2009. Networks, vol. 235, p. 109950, 2023.
[39] B. Chandrasekaran, “Survey of network traffic models,” Waschington [63] “Solaris snoop packet sniffer,” http://www.softpanorama.org/Net/
 University in St. Louis CSE, vol. 567, 2009. Sniffers/snoop.shtml, accessed: 2022-02-10.
[40] A. Erramilli, M. Roughan, D. Veitch, and W. Willinger, “Self-similar [64] A. Orebaugh, G. Ramirez, and J. Beale, Wireshark & Ethereal network
 traffic and network dynamics,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 90, no. 5, protocol analyzer toolkit. Elsevier, 2006.
 pp. 800–819, 2002. [65] “Data sheet of sniffer infinistream,” http://mavin.com/pictures/
[41] A. Cecil, “A summary of network traffic monitoring and analysis InfiniStream.pdf, accessed: 2022-02-10.
 techniques,” Computer systems analysis, pp. 4–7, 2006. [66] M. Bagnulo, P. Matthews, and I. van Beijnum, “Stateful nat64: Network
[42] V. Mohan, Y. J. Reddy, K. Kalpana et al., “Active and passive network address and protocol translation from ipv6 clients to ipv4 servers,”
 measurements: a survey,” International Journal of Computer Science Tech. Rep., 2011.
 and Information Technologies, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 1372–1385, 2011. [67] N. Brownlee, C. Mills, and G. Ruth, “Traffic flow measurement:
[43] M. Abbasi, A. Shahraki, and A. Taherkordi, “Deep learning for Architecture,” RFC 2722, Tech. Rep., 1999.
 network traffic monitoring and analysis (ntma): A survey,” Computer [68] J. Rajahalme, A. Conta, B. Carpenter, and S. Deering, “Ipv6 flow label
 Communications, vol. 170, pp. 19–41, 2021. specification,” RFC3697, 2004.
[44] A. Bates, B. Mood, J. Pletcher, H. Pruse, M. Valafar, and K. Butler, [69] J. Quittek, T. Zseby, B. Claise, and S. Zander, “Requirements for ip
 “Detecting co-residency with active traffic analysis techniques,” in flow information export (ipfix),” RFC 3917 (informational), Tech. Rep.,
 Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Workshop on Cloud computing security 2004.
 workshop, 2012, pp. 1–12. [70] D. W. McRobb, “Cflowd design,” CAIDA, Sept, 1998.
[45] A. Iacovazzi, S. Sarda, and Y. Elovici, “Inflow: Inverse network flow [71] R. Hofstede, P. Čeleda, B. Trammell, I. Drago, R. Sadre, A. Sperotto,
 watermarking for detecting hidden servers,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2018- and A. Pras, “Flow monitoring explained: From packet capture to data
 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2018, pp. analysis with netflow and ipfix,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
 747–755. Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2037–2064, 2014.
[46] M. Gregorczyk, P. Żórawski, P. Nowakowski, K. Cabaj, and W. Mazur- [72] J. Lee, “Calculating netflow volume,” https://www.plixer.com/blog/
 czyk, “Sniffing detection based on network traffic probing and machine calculating-netflow-volume/, posted: 2013-03-26.
 learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 149 255–149 269, 2020. [73] B.-Y. Choi and S. Bhattacharyya, “On the accuracy and overhead
[47] X. Wang, S. Chen, and S. Jajodia, “Network flow watermarking attack of cisco sampled netflow,” in Proceedings of ACM SIGMETRICS
 on low-latency anonymous communication systems,” in 2007 IEEE Workshop on Large Scale Network Inference (LSNI), 2005, pp. 1–6.
 Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP’07). IEEE, 2007, pp. 116– [74] C. Hare, “Simple network management protocol (snmp).” 2011.
 130. [75] B. Claise, B. Trammell, and P. Aitken, “Specification of the ip flow in-
[48] A. Iacovazzi and Y. Elovici, “Network flow watermarking: A survey,” formation export (ipfix) protocol for the exchange of flow information,”
 IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 512– pp. 2070–1721, 2013.
 530, 2016. [76] B. Claise, G. Sadasivan, V. Valluri, and M. Djernaes, “Cisco systems
[49] L. Zhang, Y. Kong, Y. Guo, J. Yan, and Z. Wang, “Survey on network netflow services export version 9,” 2004.
 flow watermarking: model, interferences, applications, technologies and [77] “Netflow v5 formats,” https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/npi/1.3.0?topic=
 security,” IET Communications, vol. 12, no. 14, pp. 1639–1648, 2018. versions-netflow-v5-formats, accessed: 2022-03-14.
[50] X. Fu, B. Graham, R. Bettati, and W. Zhao, “Active traffic analysis [78] “Argus project,” https://openargus.org/, date of visit: 2021-11-25.
 attacks and countermeasures,” in 2003 International Conference on [79] P. Phaal, S. Panchen, and N. McKee, “Rfc3176: Inmon corporation’s
 Computer Networks and Mobile Computing, 2003. ICCNMC 2003. sflow: A method for monitoring traffic in switched and routed net-
 IEEE, 2003, pp. 31–39. works,” 2001.
[51] Y. He, M. Faloutsos, S. Krishnamurthy, and B. Huffaker, “On routing [80] “Tcpdump & libpcap,” https://www.tcpdump.org/, accessed: 2022-02-
 asymmetry in the internet,” in GLOBECOM’05. IEEE Global Telecom- 10.
 munications Conference, 2005., vol. 2. IEEE, 2005, pp. 6–pp. [81] ntop, “Pf ring documentation,” https://www.ntop.org/guides/pf ring/,
[52] N. Wang, K. H. Ho, G. Pavlou, and M. Howarth, “An overview of accessed: 2022-02-12.
 routing optimization for internet traffic engineering,” IEEE Communi- [82] L. Rizzo, “netmap: a novel framework for fast packet i/o,” in 21st
 cations Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 36–56, 2008. USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 12), 2012, pp. 101–
[53] I. F. Akyildiz, A. Lee, P. Wang, M. Luo, and W. Chou, “A roadmap 112.
 for traffic engineering in sdn-openflow networks,” Computer Networks, [83] J. Rasley, B. Stephens, C. Dixon, E. Rozner, W. Felter, K. Agarwal,
 vol. 71, pp. 1–30, 2014. J. Carter, and R. Fonseca, “Planck: Millisecond-scale monitoring and
[54] B. Trammell and E. Boschi, “An introduction to ip flow information control for commodity networks,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Comexport (ipfix),” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. munication Review, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 407–418, 2014.
 89–95, 2011. [84] J. Svoboda, I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil et al., “Network monitoring ap-
[55] Y. Yu, C. Qian, and X. Li, “Distributed and collaborative traffic proaches: An overview,” Int J Adv Comput Netw Secur, vol. 5, no. 2,
 monitoring in software defined networks,” in Proceedings of the third pp. 88–93, 2015.
 workshop on Hot topics in software defined networking, 2014, pp. 85– [85] L.-M. Wang, T. Miskell, J. Morgan, and E. Verplanke, “Design of a
 90. real-time traffic mirroring system,” in 2021 IFIP/IEEE International
[56] D. Fernández, X. M. da Silva, F. J. Nóvoa, F. Cacheda, and V. Carneiro, Symposium on Integrated Network Management (IM). IEEE, 2021,
 “Using collaborative filtering in a new domain: traffic analysis,” in pp. 793–796.
 Proceedings of the 4th Spanish Conference on Information Retrieval, [86] “ProfiShark Network TAPs,” https://www.profitap.com/
 2016, pp. 1–8. profishark-network-taps/, 2019, accessed: 2022-02-11.
[57] L. Lu, Z. Huan, X. Zhang, L. Qi, S. Chen, and Y. Wu, “Collaborative [87] Wikipedia, “Argus – audit record generation and utilization system,”
 network traffic analysis via alternating direction method of multipliers,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argus %E2%80%93 Audit Record
 in 2018 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Computer Supported Generation and Utilization System, accessed: 2022-02-11.
 Cooperative Work in Design ((CSCWD)). IEEE, 2018, pp. 547–552. [88] Í. Cunha, F. Silveira, R. Oliveira, R. Teixeira, and C. Diot, “Uncovering
[58] M. Burkhart, Enabling collaborative network security with privacy- artifacts of flow measurement tools,” in International Conference on
 preserving data aggregation. ETH Zurich, 2011, vol. 125. Passive and Active Network Measurement. Springer, 2009, pp. 187–
[59] Y. Zhao, J. Chen, D. Wu, J. Teng, and S. Yu, “Multi-task network 196.
 anomaly detection using federated learning,” in Proceedings of the 10th [89] Huawei, “Configuration guide - network management and monitorinternational symposium on information and communication technol- ing,” https://support.huawei.com/enterprise/en/doc/EDOC1000178174/
 ogy, 2019, pp. 273–279. 986bf11e/overview-of-netstream, accessed: 2022-02-11.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 33

 [90] S. Waldbusser, R. Cole, C. Kalbfleisch, and D. Romascanu, “Intro- defined networking,” in 2016 international conference on wireless
 duction to the remote monitoring (rmon) family of mib modules,” networks and mobile communications (WINCOM). IEEE, 2016, pp.
 RFC3577, Network Working Group, 2003. 258–263.
 [91] T. Høiland-Jørgensen, J. D. Brouer, D. Borkmann, J. Fastabend, [111] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
 T. Herbert, D. Ahern, and D. Miller, “The express data path: Fast just a few labels: A semi-supervised approach using sampled packets,”
 programmable packet processing in the operating system kernel,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09761, 2018.
 Proceedings of the 14th international conference on emerging network- [112] F. Gringoli, L. Salgarelli, M. Dusi, N. Cascarano, F. Risso, and
 ing experiments and technologies, 2018, pp. 54–66. K. Claffy, “Gt: picking up the truth from the ground for internet traffic,”
 [92] M. S. Brunella, G. Belocchi, M. Bonola, S. Pontarelli, G. Siracusano, ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 39, no. 5, pp.
 G. Bianchi, A. Cammarano, A. Palumbo, L. Petrucci, and R. Bifulco, 12–18, 2009.
 “{hXDP}: Efficient software packet processing on {FPGA}{NICs},” [113] Y. Feng, J. Li, and D. Sisodia, “Cj-sniffer: Measurement and contentin 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Imple- agnostic detection of cryptojacking traffic,” in Proceedings of the
 mentation (OSDI 20), 2020, pp. 973–990. 25th International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and
 [93] Y. Zhou, C. Sun, H. H. Liu, R. Miao, S. Bai, B. Li, Z. Zheng, Defenses, 2022, pp. 482–494.
 L. Zhu, Z. Shen, Y. Xi et al., “Flow event telemetry on programmable [114] M. Jiang, G. Gou, J. Shi, and G. Xiong, “I know what you are doing
 data plane,” in Proceedings of the Annual conference of the ACM with remote desktop,” in 2019 IEEE 38th International Performance
 Special Interest Group on Data Communication on the applications, Computing and Communications Conference (IPCCC). IEEE, 2019,
 technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer communication, pp. 1–7.
 2020, pp. 76–89. [115] G. D. Bissias, M. Liberatore, D. Jensen, and B. N. Levine, “Privacy
 [94] D. Comer, “Ubiquitous b-tree,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vulnerabilities in encrypted http streams,” in International Workshop
 vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 121–137, 1979. on Privacy Enhancing Technologies. Springer, 2005, pp. 1–11.
 [95] P. Voigt and A. Von dem Bussche, “The eu general data protection
 [116] X. Cai, X. C. Zhang, B. Joshi, and R. Johnson, “Touching from a disregulation (gdpr),” A Practical Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer Intertance: Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proceedings of
 national Publishing, vol. 10, no. 3152676, pp. 10–5555, 2017.
 the 2012 ACM conference on Computer and communications security,
 [96] Q. Huang, X. Jin, P. P. Lee, R. Li, L. Tang, Y.-C. Chen, and
 2012, pp. 605–616.
 G. Zhang, “Sketchvisor: Robust network measurement for software
 packet processing,” in Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM [117] Y. Fu, H. Xiong, X. Lu, J. Yang, and C. Chen, “Service usage
 Special Interest Group on Data Communication, 2017, pp. 113–126. classification with encrypted internet traffic in mobile messaging apps,”
 [97] T. Yang, J. Jiang, P. Liu, Q. Huang, J. Gong, Y. Zhou, R. Miao, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2851–
 X. Li, and S. Uhlig, “Elastic sketch: Adaptive and fast network-wide 2864, 2016.
 measurements,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the ACM [118] Y. Wang, Z. Li, G. Gou, G. Xiong, C. Wang, and Z. Li, “Identifying
 Special Interest Group on Data Communication, 2018, pp. 561–575. dapps and user behaviors on ethereum via encrypted traffic,” in
 [98] Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, C. Ma, S. Chen, and O. O. Odegbile, “Generalized International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communication
 sketch families for network traffic measurement,” Proceedings of the Systems. Springer, 2020, pp. 62–83.
 ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems, vol. 3, [119] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “Mimetic: Mono. 3, pp. 1–34, 2019. bile encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,”
 [99] K. Yang, S. Long, Q. Shi, Y. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Wu, T. Yang, and Z. Jia, Computer networks, vol. 165, p. 106944, 2019.
 “Sketchint: Empowering int with towersketch for per-flow per-switch [120] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and
 measurement,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic
 2023. classification using deep learning,” Soft Computing, vol. 24, no. 3, pp.
[100] R. Miao, Y. Zhang, Z. Zheng, R. Wang, R. Zhang, T. Yang, Z. Liu, 1999–2012, 2020.
 and J. Jiang, “Cocosketch: High-performance sketch-based measure- [121] P. V. Amoli, T. Hamalainen, G. David, M. Zolotukhin, and
 ment over arbitrary partial key query,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on M. Mirzamohammad, “Unsupervised network intrusion detection sys-
 Networking, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 2653–2668, 2023. tems for zero-day fast-spreading attacks and botnets,” JDCTA (Inter-
[101] H. Namkung, Z. Liu, D. Kim, V. Sekar, and P. Steenkiste, national Journal of Digital Content Technology and its Applications,
 “Sketchovsky: Enabling ensembles of sketches on programmable vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–13, 2016.
 switches,” in 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design [122] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning apand Implementation (NSDI 23), 2023, pp. 1273–1292. proach to network intrusion detection,” IEEE transactions on emerging
[102] Y. Feng, J. Luo, C. Ma, T. Li, and L. Hui, “I can still observe topics in computational intelligence, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, 2018.
 you: Flow-level behavior fingerprinting for online social network,” in [123] K. Park and W. Willinger, “Self-similar network traffic: An overview,”
 GLOBECOM 2022-2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference. Self-Similar Network Traffic and Performance Evaluation, pp. 1–38,
 IEEE, 2022, pp. 6427–6432. 2000.
[103] Y. Feng, J. Li, L. Jiao, and X. Wu, “Towards learning-based, content- [124] W. Duch, R. Setiono, and J. M. Zurada, “Computational intelligence
 agnostic detection of social bot traffic,” IEEE Transactions on Depend- methods for rule-based data understanding,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
 able and Secure Computing, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2149–2163, 2021. vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 771–805, 2004.
[104] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and Y. Liu, “Encrypted [125] N. Alon and J. H. Spencer, The probabilistic method. John Wiley &
 traffic classification of decentralized applications on ethereum using Sons, 2016.
 feature fusion,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 27th International Symposium on [126] I. Rish et al., “An empirical study of the naive bayes classifier,” in
 Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–10. IJCAI 2001 workshop on empirical methods in artificial intelligence,
[105] I. Guyon, S. Gunn, M. Nikravesh, and L. A. Zadeh, Feature extraction: vol. 3, no. 22, 2001, pp. 41–46.
 foundations and applications. Springer, 2008, vol. 207.
 [127] M. H. Davis, Markov models & optimization. CRC Press, 1993,
[106] S. Khalid, T. Khalil, and S. Nasreen, “A survey of feature selection and
 vol. 49.
 feature extraction techniques in machine learning,” in 2014 science and
 information conference. IEEE, 2014, pp. 372–378. [128] L. Rabiner and B. Juang, “An introduction to hidden markov models,”
[107] R. Zebari, A. Abdulazeez, D. Zeebaree, D. Zebari, and J. Saeed, ieee assp magazine, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 4–16, 1986.
 “A comprehensive review of dimensionality reduction techniques for [129] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends, perspecfeature selection and feature extraction,” Journal of Applied Science tives, and prospects,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 255–260, 2015.
 and Technology Trends, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 56–70, 2020. [130] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” nature, vol. 521,
[108] P. Dhal and C. Azad, “A comprehensive survey on feature selection in no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
 the various fields of machine learning,” Applied Intelligence, pp. 1–39, [131] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep learning. MIT
 2022. press, 2016.
[109] H. F. Alan and J. Kaur, “Can android applications be identified using [132] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, and T. Lu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting
 only tcp/ip headers of their launch time traffic?” in Proceedings of attack with cluster adaptation,” Computer Networks, vol. 229, p.
 the 9th ACM conference on security & privacy in wireless and mobile 109780, 2023.
 networks, 2016, pp. 61–66. [133] H. Zou, J. Su, Z. Wei, S. Chen, and B. Zhao, “An efficient cross-
[110] T. A. Tang, L. Mhamdi, D. McLernon, S. A. R. Zaidi, and M. Ghogho, domain few-shot website fingerprinting attack with brownian distance
 “Deep learning approach for network intrusion detection in software covariance,” Computer Networks, vol. 219, p. 109461, 2022.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 34

[134] M. Chen, Y. Wang, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting attack [156] N. Rosner, I. B. Kadron, L. Bang, and T. Bultan, “Profit: Detecting and
 with meta-bias learning,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 130, p. 108739, quantifying side channels in networked applications.” in NDSS, 2019.
 2022. [157] M. J. Khokhar, T. Ehlinger, and C. Barakat, “From network traffic
[135] P. Liu, L. He, and Z. Li, “A survey on deep learning for website measurements to qoe for internet video,” in 2019 IFIP Networking
 fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 26 033– Conference (IFIP Networking). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–9.
 26 047, 2023. [158] Kentik, “Kentik—the network observability platform,” https://www.
[136] M. Li, D. Han, D. Li, H. Liu, and C.-C. Chang, “Mfvt: an anomaly kentik.com/, accessed: 2023-12-05.
 traffic detection method merging feature fusion network and vision [159] P. A. Networks, “Hunt down and stop tomorrow’s threats,
 transformer architecture,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communica- today—analyze network traffic with best-in-class machine
 tions and Networking, vol. 2022, no. 1, p. 39, 2022. learning and analytics,” https://www.paloaltonetworks.com/cortex/
[137] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “Et-bert: A network-traffic-analysis, accessed: 2023-12-05.
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers [160] Z. M. Fadlullah, T. Taleb, N. Ansari, K. Hashimoto, Y. Miyake,
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Y. Nemoto, and N. Kato, “Combating against attacks on encrypted pro-
 Conference 2022, ser. WWW ’22. New York, NY, USA: Association tocols,” in 2007 IEEE International Conference on Communications.
 for Computing Machinery, 2022, p. 633–642. [Online]. Available: IEEE, 2007, pp. 1211–1216.
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3485447.3512217 [161] T. Taleb, Z. M. Fadlullah, K. Hashimoto, Y. Nemoto, and N. Kato,
[138] D. A. Bierbrauer, M. J. De Lucia, K. Reddy, P. Maxwell, and N. D. “Tracing back attacks against encrypted protocols,” in Proceedings of
 Bastian, “Transfer learning for raw network traffic detection,” Expert the 2007 international conference on Wireless communications and
 Systems with Applications, vol. 211, p. 118641, 2023. mobile computing, 2007, pp. 121–126.
[139] C. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Qiao, D. Yuan, and M. Zhang, “Deep transfer [162] Y. Feng and J. Li, “Toward explainable and adaptable detection and
 learning for intelligent cellular traffic prediction based on cross-domain classification of distributed denial-of-service attacks,” in International
 big data,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 37, Workshop on Deployable Machine Learning for Security Defense.
 no. 6, pp. 1389–1401, 2019. Springer, 2020, pp. 105–121.
[140] A. Shahraki, M. Abbasi, A. Taherkordi, and A. D. Jurcut, “A compar- [163] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A
 ative study on online machine learning techniques for network traffic survey,” ACM computing surveys (CSUR), vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58,
 streams analysis,” Computer Networks, vol. 207, p. 108836, 2022. 2009.
[141] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, [164] D. Han, Z. Wang, W. Chen, K. Wang, R. Yu, S. Wang, H. Zhang,
 S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard et al., “Tensorflow: a system for Z. Wang, M. Jin, J. Yang et al., “Anomaly detection in the open world:
 large-scale machine learning.” in Osdi, vol. 16, no. 2016. Savannah, Normality shift detection, explanation, and adaptation,” in 30th Annual
 GA, USA, 2016, pp. 265–283. Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2023.
[142] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, [165] F. Ullah, S. Ullah, G. Srivastava, and J. C.-W. Lin, “Ids-int: Intrusion
 T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al., “Pytorch: An detection system using transformer-based transfer learning for imbalimperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” Advances anced network traffic,” Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 10,
 in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019. no. 1, pp. 190–204, 2024.
[143] Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick, [166] A. Shabtai, L. Tenenboim-Chekina, D. Mimran, L. Rokach, B. Shapira,
 S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell, “Caffe: Convolutional architecture for and Y. Elovici, “Mobile malware detection through analysis of deviafast feature embedding,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international tions in application network behavior,” Computers & Security, vol. 43,
 conference on Multimedia, 2014, pp. 675–678. pp. 1–18, 2014.
[144] M. Alloghani, D. Al-Jumeily, J. Mustafina, A. Hussain, and A. J. [167] S. Wang, Z. Chen, L. Zhang, Q. Yan, B. Yang, L. Peng, and Z. Jia,
 Aljaaf, “A systematic review on supervised and unsupervised machine “Trafficav: An effective and explainable detection of mobile malware
 learning algorithms for data science,” Supervised and unsupervised behavior using network traffic,” in 2016 IEEE/ACM 24th International
 learning for data science, pp. 3–21, 2020. Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[145] M. Usama, J. Qadir, A. Raza, H. Arif, K.-L. A. Yau, Y. Elkhatib, [168] A. H. Lashkari, A. F. A. Kadir, H. Gonzalez, K. F. Mbah, and A. A.
 A. Hussain, and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Unsupervised machine learning for Ghorbani, “Towards a network-based framework for android malware
 networking: Techniques, applications and research challenges,” IEEE detection and characterization,” in 2017 15th Annual conference on
 access, vol. 7, pp. 65 579–65 615, 2019. privacy, security and trust (PST). IEEE, 2017, pp. 233–23 309.
[146] L. Van Der Maaten, E. Postma, J. Van den Herik et al., “Dimensionality [169] M. Piskozub, F. De Gaspari, F. Barr-Smith, L. Mancini, and
 reduction: a comparative,” J Mach Learn Res, vol. 10, no. 66-71, p. 13, I. Martinovic, “Malphase: Fine-grained malware detection using
 2009. network flow data,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Asia Conference
[147] J. A. Hartigan and M. A. Wong, “Algorithm as 136: A k-means on Computer and Communications Security, ser. ASIA CCS ’21.
 clustering algorithm,” Journal of the royal statistical society. series New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021,
 c (applied statistics), vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 100–108, 1979. p. 774–786. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3433210.
[148] G. H. Dunteman, Principal components analysis. Sage, 1989, no. 69. 3453101
[149] F. Murtagh and P. Contreras, “Algorithms for hierarchical clustering: an [170] J. Ren, A. Rao, M. Lindorfer, A. Legout, and D. Choffnes, “Recon:
 overview,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowl- Revealing and controlling pii leaks in mobile network traffic,” in
 edge Discovery, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 86–97, 2012. Proceedings of the 14th Annual International Conference on Mobile
[150] J. Lever, “Classification evaluation: It is important to understand both Systems, Applications, and Services, 2016, pp. 361–374.
 what a classification metric expresses and what it hides,” Nature [171] A. Continella, Y. Fratantonio, M. Lindorfer, A. Puccetti, A. Zand,
 methods, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 603–605, 2016. C. Kruegel, and G. Vigna, “Obfuscation-resilient privacy leak detection
[151] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. Ramos, for mobile apps through differential analysis.” in NDSS, 2017.
 and A. Madeira, “Flowlens: Enabling efficient flow classification for [172] D. Willems, K. Kohls, B. van der Kamp, and H. Vranken,
 ml-based network security applications,” in Proceedings of the 28th “Data exfiltration detection on network metadata with autoencoders,”
 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (San Diego, CA, Electronics, vol. 12, no. 12, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
 USA, 2021. //www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/12/12/2584
[152] Y. Feng, J. Li, D. Sisodia, and P. Reiher, “On explainable and adaptable [173] R. Coulter, Q.-L. Han, L. Pan, J. Zhang, and Y. Xiang, “Datadetection of distributed denial-of-service traffic,” IEEE Transactions driven cyber security in perspective—intelligent traffic analysis,” IEEE
 on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2211–2226, transactions on cybernetics, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 3081–3093, 2019.
 2024. [174] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “Acceleration of intrusion de-
[153] P. Bukaty, The california consumer privacy act (ccpa): An implemen- tection in encrypted network traffic using heterogeneous hardware,”
 tation guide. IT Governance Ltd, 2019. Sensors, vol. 21, no. 4, p. 1140, 2021.
[154] A. K. Das, P. H. Pathak, C.-N. Chuah, and P. Mohapatra, “Privacy- [175] R. Moustafa and J. Slay, “A comprehensive data set for network
 aware contextual localization using network traffic analysis,” Computer intrusion detection systems,” School of Engineering and Information
 Networks, vol. 118, pp. 24–36, 2017. Technology University of New South Wales at the Australian Defense
[155] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An Force Academy Canberra, Australia, UNSW-NB15, 2015.
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in [176] X. Wei, L. Gomez, I. Neamtiu, and M. Faloutsos, “Profiledroid: Multi-
 Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium, 2018. layer profiling of android applications,” in Proceedings of the 18th

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 35

 annual international conference on Mobile computing and networking, [198] M. Perry, “Experimental defense for website
 2012, pp. 137–148. traffic fingerprinting,” https://blog.torproject.org/
[177] W. Enck, P. Gilbert, S. Han, V. Tendulkar, B.-G. Chun, L. P. Cox, experimental-defense-website-traffic-fingerprinting/, posted: 2011-09-
 J. Jung, P. McDaniel, and A. N. Sheth, “Taintdroid: an information- 05.
 flow tracking system for realtime privacy monitoring on smartphones,” [199] “Shadowsocks - a fast tunnel proxy that helps you bypass firewalls,”
 ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), vol. 32, no. 2, pp. https://shadowsocks.org/, accessed: 2022-02-11.
 1–29, 2014. [200] S. Mistry and B. Raman, “Quantifying traffic analysis of encrypted
[178] A. Razaghpanah, N. Vallina-Rodriguez, S. Sundaresan, C. Kreibich, web-browsing.” 1998, project paper.
 P. Gill, M. Allman, and V. Paxson, “Haystack: In situ mobile traffic [201] Q. Sun, D. R. Simon, Y.-M. Wang, W. Russell, V. N. Padmanabhan, and
 analysis in user space,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.01419, pp. 1–13, L. Qiu, “Statistical identification of encrypted web browsing traffic,” in
 2015. Proceedings 2002 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE,
[179] Y. Song and U. Hengartner, “Privacyguard: A vpn-based platform 2002, pp. 19–30.
 to detect information leakage on android devices,” in Proceedings [202] M. Liberatore and B. N. Levine, “Inferring the source of encrypted http
 of the 5th Annual ACM CCS Workshop on Security and Privacy in connections,” in Proceedings of the 13th ACM conference on Computer
 Smartphones and Mobile Devices, 2015, pp. 15–26. and communications security, 2006, pp. 255–263.
[180] A. Le, J. Varmarken, S. Langhoff, A. Shuba, M. Gjoka, and [203] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting:
 A. Markopoulou, “Antmonitor: A system for monitoring from mobile attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial
 devices,” in Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on naı̈ve-bayes classifier,” in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM workshop on
 Crowdsourcing and Crowdsharing of Big (Internet) Data, 2015, pp. Cloud computing security, 2009, pp. 31–42.
 15–20. [204] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website finger-
[181] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and I. H. printing in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proceed-
 Witten, “The weka data mining software: an update,” ACM SIGKDD ings of the 10th annual ACM workshop on Privacy in the electronic
 explorations newsletter, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 10–18, 2009. society, 2011, pp. 103–114.
[182] Y. Feng, D. Sisodia, and J. Li, “Poster: Content-agnostic identification [205] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Efof cryptojacking in network traffic,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM fective attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in
 Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2020, pp. 23rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 14), 2014, pp.
 907–909. 143–157.
[183] S. Khirman and P. Henriksen, “Relationship between quality-of-service [206] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “k-fingerprinting: A robust scalable weband quality-of-experience for public internet service,” in In Proc. of the site fingerprinting technique,” in 25th USENIX Security Symposium
 3rd Workshop on Passive and Active Measurement, vol. 1, 2002. (USENIX Security 16), 2016, pp. 1187–1203.
[184] X. Xiao and L. M. Ni, “Internet qos: A big picture,” IEEE network, [207] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. Van Goethem, and W. Joosen,
 vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 8–18, 1999. “Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” 2017.
[185] M. Karakus and A. Durresi, “Quality of service (qos) in software [208] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
 defined networking (sdn): A survey,” Journal of Network and Computer Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
 Applications, vol. 80, pp. 200–218, 2017. Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
[186] S. K. Keshari, V. Kansal, and S. Kumar, “A systematic review of Communications Security, 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
 quality of services (qos) in software defined networking (sdn),” Wireless [209] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet
 Personal Communications, vol. 116, no. 3, pp. 2593–2614, 2021. fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with
[187] J. Bi, X. Zhang, H. Yuan, J. Zhang, and M. Zhou, “A hybrid predic- n-shot learning,” in Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference
 tion method for realistic network traffic with temporal convolutional on Computer and Communications Security, 2019, pp. 1131–1148.
 network and lstm,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and [210] Y. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Guo, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “Snwf: website
 Engineering, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1869–1879, 2021. fingerprinting attack by ensembling the snapshot of deep learning,”
[188] A. Montieri, G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 17, pp.
 A. Pescapè, “Packet-level prediction of mobile-app traffic using mul- 1214–1226, 2022.
 titask deep learning,” Computer Networks, vol. 200, p. 108529, 2021. [211] X. Deng, Q. Yin, Z. Liu, X. Zhao, Q. Li, M. Xu, K. Xu, and J. Wu,
[189] D. Andreoletti, S. Troia, F. Musumeci, S. Giordano, G. Maier, and “Robust multi-tab website fingerprinting attacks in the wild,” in 2023
 M. Tornatore, “Network traffic prediction based on diffusion convolu- IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2023, pp.
 tional recurrent neural networks,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2019 - IEEE 1005–1022.
 Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM [212] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, and
 WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 246–251. T. Berners-Lee, “Rfc2616: Hypertext transfer protocol–http/1.1,” 1999.
[190] I. Lohrasbinasab, A. Shahraki, A. Taherkordi, and A. Delia Jurcut, [213] A. Hintz, “Fingerprinting websites using traffic analysis,” in Interna-
 “From statistical-to machine learning-based network traffic prediction,” tional workshop on privacy enhancing technologies. Springer, 2002,
 Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, vol. 33, pp. 171–178.
 no. 4, p. e4394, 2022. [214] L. Lu, E.-C. Chang, and M. C. Chan, “Website fingerprinting and iden-
[191] L. Tang, J. Li, H. Du, L. Li, J. Wu, and S. Wang, “Big data in tification using ordered feature sequences,” in European Symposium on
 forecasting research: a literature review,” Big Data Research, vol. 27, Research in Computer Security. Springer, 2010, pp. 199–214.
 p. 100289, 2022. [215] S. J. Murdoch and R. N. Watson, “Metrics for security and performance
[192] T. Hoßfeld and A. Binzenhöfer, “Analysis of skype voip traffic in umts: in low-latency anonymity systems,” in International Symposium on
 End-to-end qos and qoe measurements,” Computer Networks, vol. 52, Privacy Enhancing Technologies Symposium. Springer, 2008, pp. 115–
 no. 3, pp. 650–666, 2008. 132.
[193] F. Agboma, M. Smy, and A. Liotta, “Qoe analysis of a peer-to-peer [216] W. De la Cadena, A. Mitseva, J. Hiller, J. Pennekamp, S. Reuter, J. Filtelevision system,” in Proceedings of IADISInt. Conf. on Telecommu- ter, T. Engel, K. Wehrle, and A. Panchenko, “Trafficsliver: Fighting
 nications, Networks and Systems, 2008, pp. 365–382. website fingerprinting attacks with traffic splitting,” in Proceedings of
[194] G. Dimopoulos, I. Leontiadis, P. Barlet-Ros, and K. Papagiannaki, the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
 “Measuring video qoe from encrypted traffic,” in Proceedings of the Security, 2020, pp. 1971–1985.
 2016 Internet Measurement Conference, 2016, pp. 513–526. [217] R. Dingledine and N. Mathewson, “Tor protocol specification,” https:
[195] I. Orsolic, D. Pevec, M. Suznjevic, and L. Skorin-Kapov, “Youtube //gitweb.torproject.org/torspec.git/tree/tor-spec.txt, date of visit: 2021-
 qoe estimation based on the analysis of encrypted network traffic using 10-05.
 machine learning,” in 2016 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps). [218] K. P. Dyer, S. E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, and T. Shrimpton, “Peek-a-boo,
 IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6. i still see you: Why efficient traffic analysis countermeasures fail,” in
[196] M. H. Mazhar and Z. Shafiq, “Real-time video quality of experience 2012 IEEE symposium on security and privacy. IEEE, 2012, pp.
 monitoring for https and quic,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2018-IEEE Con- 332–346.
 ference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2018, pp. 1331–1339. [219] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Improved website fingerprinting on tor,” in
[197] D. McCoy, K. Bauer, D. Grunwald, T. Kohno, and D. Sicker, “Shining Proceedings of the 12th ACM workshop on Workshop on privacy in
 light in dark places: Understanding the tor network,” in International the electronic society, 2013, pp. 201–212.
 symposium on privacy enhancing technologies symposium. Springer, [220] M. Juarez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Diaz, and R. Greenstadt, “A critical
 2008, pp. 63–76. evaluation of website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proceedings of the 2014

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 36

 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, [242] M. Laštovička, S. Špaček, P. Velan, and P. Čeleda, “Using tls finger-
 2014, pp. 263–274. prints for os identification in encrypted traffic,” in NOMS 2020-2020
[221] A. Panchenko, F. Lanze, J. Pennekamp, T. Engel, A. Zinnen, M. Henze, IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium. IEEE,
 and K. Wehrle, “Website fingerprinting at internet scale.” in NDSS, 2020, pp. 1–6.
 2016. [243] N. Ruffing, Y. Zhu, R. Libertini, Y. Guan, and R. Bettati, “Smart-
[222] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A sys- phone reconnaissance: Operating system identification,” in 2016 13th
 tematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting IEEE Annual Consumer Communications & Networking Conference
 defenses,” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on (CCNC). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1086–1091.
 Computer and Communications Security, 2014, pp. 227–238. [244] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
[223] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Walkie-talkie: An efficient defense against “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural
 passive website fingerprinting attacks,” in 26th {USENIX} Security networks for internet of things,” IEEE access, vol. 5, pp. 18 042–18 050,
 Symposium ({USENIX} Security 17), 2017, pp. 1375–1390. 2017.
[224] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Diaz, and M. Wright, “Toward an [245] Y. Meidan, M. Bohadana, A. Shabtai, J. D. Guarnizo, M. Ochoa, N. O.
 efficient website fingerprinting defense,” in European Symposium on Tippenhauer, and Y. Elovici, “Profiliot: a machine learning approach
 Research in Computer Security. Springer, 2016, pp. 27–46. for iot device identification based on network traffic analysis,” in
[225] K. Abe and S. Goto, “Fingerprinting attack on tor anonymity using deep Proceedings of the symposium on applied computing, 2017, pp. 506–
 learning,” Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific Advanced Network, vol. 42, 509.
 pp. 15–20, 2016. [246] A. Sivanathan, H. H. Gharakheili, F. Loi, A. Radford, C. Wijenayake,
[226] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-cnn: A data-efficient A. Vishwanath, and V. Sivaraman, “Classifying iot devices in smart
 website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” Proceedings on environments using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Transactions
 Privacy Enhancing Technologies, vol. 1, p. 19. on Mobile Computing, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, 2018.
[227] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image [247] H. Yao, P. Gao, J. Wang, P. Zhang, C. Jiang, and Z. Han, “Capsule
 recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision network assisted iot traffic classification mechanism for smart cities,”
 and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 7515–7525, 2019.
[228] S. E. Oh, S. Sunkam, and N. Hopper, “-fp: Extraction, classification, [248] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, I. Akodkenou, A. Soule, and K. Salamatian,
 and prediction of website fingerprints with deep learning,” Proceedings “Traffic classification on the fly,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Commuon Privacy Enhancing Technologies, vol. 2019, no. 3, pp. 191–209, nication Review, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 23–26, 2006.
 2019. [249] T. Karagiannis, K. Papagiannaki, and M. Faloutsos, “Blinc: multilevel
[229] C. Wang, J. Dani, X. Li, X. Jia, and B. Wang, “Adaptive fingerprinting: traffic classification in the dark,” in Proceedings of the 2005 conferwebsite fingerprinting over few encrypted traffic,” in Proceedings of ence on Applications, technologies, architectures, and protocols for
 the Eleventh ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and computer communications, 2005, pp. 229–240.
 Privacy, 2021, pp. 149–160. [250] L. Bernaille and R. Teixeira, “Early recognition of encrypted applications,” in International Conference on Passive and Active Network
[230] N. P. Hoang, A. A. Niaki, P. Gill, and M. Polychronakis, “Domain
 Measurement. Springer, 2007, pp. 165–175.
 name encryption is not enough: privacy leakage via ip-based website
 [251] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, and K. Salamatian, “Early application identifingerprinting,” Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, vol.
 fication,” in Proceedings of the 2006 ACM CoNEXT conference, 2006,
 2021, no. 4, pp. 420–440, 2021.
 pp. 1–12.
[231] O. Ajao, J. Hong, and W. Liu, “A survey of location inference
 [252] A. McGregor, M. Hall, P. Lorier, and J. Brunskill, “Flow clustering
 techniques on twitter,” Journal of Information Science, vol. 41, no. 6,
 using machine learning techniques,” in International workshop on
 pp. 855–864, 2015.
 passive and active network measurement. Springer, 2004, pp. 205–
[232] Y. Ikawa, M. Enoki, and M. Tatsubori, “Location inference using mi- 214.
 croblog messages,” in Proceedings of the 21st international conference [253] A. W. Moore and D. Zuev, “Internet traffic classification using bayesian
 on world wide web, 2012, pp. 687–690. analysis techniques,” in Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMETRICS
[233] J. Han, E. Owusu, L. T. Nguyen, A. Perrig, and J. Zhang, “Accom- international conference on Measurement and modeling of computer
 plice: Location inference using accelerometers on smartphones,” in systems, 2005, pp. 50–60.
 2012 Fourth International Conference on Communication Systems and [254] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2img: A sequence-to-image
 Networks (COMSNETS 2012). IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–9. based approach towards ip traffic classification using convolutional
[234] A. Gallagher, D. Joshi, J. Yu, and J. Luo, “Geo-location inference neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE International conference on big data
 from image content and user tags,” in 2009 IEEE Computer Society (big data). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1271–1276.
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. [255] J. Zhao, Q. Li, Y. Hong, and M. Shen, “Metarocketc: Adaptive
 IEEE, 2009, pp. 55–62. encrypted traffic classification in complex network environments via
[235] I. Trestian, S. Ranjan, A. Kuzmanovic, and A. Nucci, “Measuring time series analysis and meta-learning,” IEEE Transactions on Network
 serendipity: connecting people, locations and interests in a mobile 3g and Service Management, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2460–2476, 2024.
 network,” in Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM conference on [256] Q. Wang, A. Yahyavi, B. Kemme, and W. He, “I know what you did on
 Internet measurement, 2009, pp. 267–279. your smartphone: Inferring app usage over encrypted data traffic,” in
[236] A. K. Das, P. H. Pathak, C.-N. Chuah, and P. Mohapatra, “Contextual 2015 IEEE conference on communications and network security (CNS).
 localization through network traffic analysis,” in IEEE INFOCOM IEEE, 2015, pp. 433–441.
 2014-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2014, [257] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Appscanner:
 pp. 925–933. Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
[237] F. Xu, Y. Li, H. Wang, P. Zhang, and D. Jin, “Understanding mobile traffic,” in 2016 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy
 traffic patterns of large scale cellular towers in urban environment,” (EuroS&P). IEEE, 2016, pp. 439–454.
 IEEE/ACM transactions on networking, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1147–1161, [258] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Multi-
 2016. classification approaches for classifying mobile app traffic,” Journal
[238] H. Wang, F. Xu, Y. Li, P. Zhang, and D. Jin, “Understanding mobile of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 103, pp. 131–145, 2018.
 traffic patterns of large scale cellular towers in urban environment,” in [259] T.-D. Pham, T.-L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, T.-D. Cao, and H.-L. Truong,
 Proceedings of the 2015 Internet Measurement Conference, 2015, pp. “Mappgraph: Mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic
 225–238. using deep graph convolution neural networks,” in Proceedings of the
[239] F. Xu, Y. Lin, J. Huang, D. Wu, H. Shi, J. Song, and Y. Li, “Big 37th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, 2021, pp.
 data driven mobile traffic understanding and forecasting: A time series 1025–1038.
 approach,” IEEE transactions on services computing, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. [260] F. Aiolli, M. Conti, A. Gangwal, and M. Polato, “Mind your wallet’s
 796–805, 2016. privacy: identifying bitcoin wallet apps and user’s actions through
[240] R. Lippmann, D. Fried, K. Piwowarski, and W. Streilein, “Passive op- network traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 34th ACM/SIGAPP
 erating system identification from tcp/ip packet headers,” in Workshop Symposium on Applied Computing, 2019, pp. 1484–1491.
 on Data Mining for Computer Security, vol. 40, 2003. [261] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
[241] Y.-C. Chen, Y. Liao, M. Baldi, S.-J. Lee, and L. Qiu, “Os fingerprinting application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph
 and tethering detection in mobile networks,” in Proceedings of the 2014 neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
 Conference on Internet Measurement Conference, 2014, pp. 173–180. Security, vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 37

[262] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smart- [283] P. Choorod and G. Weir, “Tor traffic classification based on encrypted
 phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE payload characteristics,” in 2021 National Computing Colleges Con-
 Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. ference (NCCC). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
 63–78, 2017. [284] I. Goldberg and C. A. Wood, “Network-based website fingerprinting,”
[263] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-wood-privsec-wfattacks-00,
 traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, 2019.
 lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Network and [285] “New tor release: Tor 0.4.0.5,” https://blog.torproject.org/
 Service Management, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, 2019. new-release-tor-0405/, 2019, accessed: 2022-02-15.
[264] S. E. Coull and K. P. Dyer, “Traffic analysis of encrypted messaging [286] S. Li, H. Guo, and N. Hopper, “Measuring information leakage in
 services: Apple imessage and beyond,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proceedings of the 2018
 Communication Review, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 5–11, 2014. ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
[265] C. V. Wright, L. Ballard, S. E. Coull, F. Monrose, and G. M. Masson, 2018, pp. 1977–1992.
 “Spot me if you can: Uncovering spoken phrases in encrypted voip [287] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, and R. Johnson, “Cs-buflo: A congestion
 conversations,” in 2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (sp sensitive website fingerprinting defense,” in Proceedings of the 13th
 2008). IEEE, 2008, pp. 35–49. Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, 2014, pp. 121–130.
[266] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Analyzing [288] D. Lu, S. Bhat, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Dynaflow: An efficient
 android encrypted network traffic to identify user actions,” IEEE website fingerprinting defense based on dynamically-adjusting flows,”
 Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 1, in Proceedings of the 2018 Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic
 pp. 114–125, 2015. Society, 2018, pp. 109–113.
[267] B. Saltaformaggio, H. Choi, K. Johnson, Y. Kwon, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, [289] S. Henri, G. Garcia-Aviles, P. Serrano, A. Banchs, and P. Thiran, “Pro-
 D. Xu, and J. Qian, “Eavesdropping on fine-grained user activities tecting against website fingerprinting with multihoming,” Proceedings
 within smartphone apps over encrypted network traffic,” in 10th on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, vol. 2020, no. 2, pp. 89–110,
 {USENIX} Workshop on Offensive Technologies ({WOOT} 16), 2016. 2020.
[268] F. Yan, M. Xu, T. Qiao, T. Wu, X. Yang, N. Zheng, and K.-K. R. [290] T. Wang, “The one-page setting: A higher standard for evaluating
 Choo, “Identifying wechat red packets and fund transfers via analyzing website fingerprinting defenses,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
 encrypted network traffic,” in 2018 17th IEEE International Conference SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2021,
 on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications/12th pp. 2794–2806.
 IEEE International Conference on Big Data Science and Engineering
 [291] mikeperry, “Experimental defense for website
 (TrustCom/BigDataSE). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1426–1432.
 traffic fingerprinting,” https://blog.torproject.org/
[269] Y. Wang, N. Zheng, M. Xu, T. Qiao, Q. Zhang, F. Yan, and J. Xu, experimental-defense-website-traffic-fingerprinting/, 2011, accessed:
 “Hierarchical identifier: Application to user privacy eavesdropping on 2022-02-11.
 mobile payment app,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 14, p. 3052, 2019.
 [292] A. Fotouhi, H. Qiang, M. Ding, M. Hassan, L. G. Giordano, A. Garcia-
[270] F. Schneider, A. Feldmann, B. Krishnamurthy, and W. Willinger, “Un-
 Rodriguez, and J. Yuan, “Survey on uav cellular communications: Pracderstanding online social network usage from a network perspective,”
 tical aspects, standardization advancements, regulation, and security
 in Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet
 challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4,
 Measurement, 2009, pp. 35–48.
 pp. 3417–3442, 2019.
[271] Y. Feng, “Botflowmon: Identify social bot traffic with netflow and
 [293] J. Whelan, A. Almehmadi, and K. El-Khatib, “Artificial intelligence for
 machine learning,” 2018.
 intrusion detection systems in unmanned aerial vehicles,” Computers
[272] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Can’t you
 and Electrical Engineering, vol. 99, p. 107784, 2022.
 hear me knocking: Identification of user actions on android apps via
 [294] K. Kim, J. S. Kim, S. Jeong, J.-H. Park, and H. K. Kim, “Cybersecurity
 traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Data
 for autonomous vehicles: Review of attacks and defense,” Computers
 and Application Security and Privacy, 2015, pp. 297–304.
 & Security, vol. 103, p. 102150, 2021.
[273] Y. Zhao, X. Ma, J. Li, S. Yu, and W. Li, “Revisiting website fingerprinting attacks in real-world scenarios: A case study of shadowsocks,” in [295] K. M. Ali Alheeti and K. McDonald-Maier, “Intelligent intrusion
 International Conference on Network and System Security. Springer, detection in external communication systems for autonomous vehicles,”
 2018, pp. 319–336. Systems Science & Control Engineering, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 48–56, 2018.
[274] R. Nithyanand, X. Cai, and R. Johnson, “Glove: A bespoke website [296] Y. Feng, J. Li, and T. Nguyen, “Application-layer ddos defense with
 fingerprinting defense,” in Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on reinforcement learning,” in 2020 IEEE/ACM 28th International Sym-
 Privacy in the Electronic Society, 2014, pp. 131–134. posium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–10.
[275] A. J. Pinheiro, P. Freitas de Araujo-Filho, J. de M. Bezerra, and [297] W. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. He, Y. Li, and J. Liu, “Botmark: Automated
 D. R. Campelo, “Adaptive packet padding approach for smart home botnet detection with hybrid analysis of flow-based and graph-based
 networks: A tradeoff between privacy and performance,” IEEE Internet traffic behaviors,” Information Sciences, vol. 511, pp. 284–296, 2020.
 of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3930–3938, 2021. [298] M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita, “Network
[276] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website anomaly detection: methods, systems and tools,” Ieee communications
 fingerprinting,” in 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security surveys & tutorials, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 303–336, 2013.
 20), 2020, pp. 717–734. [299] S. Barnum, “Standardizing cyber threat intelligence information with
[277] C. V. Wright, S. E. Coull, and F. Monrose, “Traffic morphing: An the structured threat information expression (stix),” Mitre Corporation,
 efficient defense against statistical traffic analysis.” in NDSS, vol. 9. vol. 11, pp. 1–22, 2012.
 Citeseer, 2009. [300] OpenAI, “Chatgpt,” 2023, [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/
[278] X. Luo, P. Zhou, E. W. Chan, W. Lee, R. K. Chang, R. Perdisci et al., chatgpt.
 “Httpos: Sealing information leaks with browser-side obfuscation of [301] A. Nascita, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
 encrypted flows.” in NDSS, vol. 11, 2011. A. Pescapé, “A survey on explainable artificial intelligence for internet
[279] G. Cherubin, J. Hayes, and M. Juárez, “Website fingerprinting defenses traffic classification and prediction, and intrusion detection,” IEEE
 at the application layer.” Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol., vol. 2017, Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2024.
 no. 2, pp. 186–203, 2017. [302] D. Han, Z. Wang, W. Chen, Y. Zhong, S. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Yang,
[280] Z. Deng, Z. Liu, Z. Chen, and Y. Guo, “The random forest based detec- X. Shi, and X. Yin, “Deepaid: Interpreting and improving deep
 tion of shadowsock’s traffic,” in 2017 9th International Conference on learning-based anomaly detection in security applications,” in Pro-
 Intelligent Human-Machine Systems and Cybernetics (IHMSC), vol. 2. ceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
 IEEE, 2017, pp. 75–78. Communications Security, 2021, pp. 3197–3217.
[281] J. Beznazwy and A. Houmansadr, “How china detects and blocks [303] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting
 shadowsocks,” in Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement model predictions,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
 Conference, 2020, pp. 111–124. vol. 30, 2017.
[282] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, [304] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “” why should i trust you?”
 “Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related,” in explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
 Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on information systems ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
 security and privacy (ICISSP). sn, 2016, pp. 407–414. data mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 38

[305] G. Plumb, D. Molitor, and A. S. Talwalkar, “Model agnostic super- Cong Wu is currently a research fellow at School of
 vised local explanations,” Advances in neural information processing Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Techsystems, vol. 31, 2018. nological University, Singapore. He received Ph.D.
[306] V. Belle and I. Papantonis, “Principles and practice of explainable degree at School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 machine learning,” Frontiers in big Data, p. 39, 2021. Wuhan University in 2022. His research interests
[307] U. Bhatt, A. Xiang, S. Sharma, A. Weller, A. Taly, Y. Jia, J. Ghosh, include AI system security and Web3 security. His
 R. Puri, J. M. Moura, and P. Eckersley, “Explainable machine learning research outcomes have appeared in USENIX Secuin deployment,” in Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, rity, ACM CCS, IEEE TDSC, TIFS.
 accountability, and transparency, 2020, pp. 648–657.
[308] Y. Feng, J. Xu, and L. Weymouth, “University blockchain research
 initiative (ubri): Boosting blockchain education and research,” IEEE
 Potentials, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 19–25, 2022.

 Yebo Feng is a research fellow in the College of Chong Wang received the bachelor’s and PhD
 Computing and Data Science (CCDS) at Nanyang degrees from Fudan University, in 2018. He is
 Technological University (NTU). He received his currently a research fellow at Cyber Security Lab-
 Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from the Univer- oratory, Nanyang Technologicai University. His resity of Oregon (UO) in 2023. His research interests search interests lie in the crossroads between artifiinclude network security, blockchain security, and cial intelligence and software engineering. His overanomaly detection. He is the recipient of the Best arching research mission revolves around enhancing
 Paper Award of 2019 IEEE CNS, Gurdeep Pall both productivity and security within the realm of
 Graduate Student Fellowship of UO, and Ripple software development. He has published multiple
 Research Fellowship. He has served as the reviewer papers in international journals and conferences,
 of IEEE TDSC, IEEE TIFS, ACM TKDD, IEEE such as the IEEE Transactions on Software Engi-
JSAC, IEEE COMST, etc. Furthermore, he has been a member of the neering (TSE), ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
program committees for international conferences including SDM, CIKM, (TOSEM), ACM Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
and CYBER, and has also served on the Artifact Evaluation (AE) committees (FSE), IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engifor USENIX OSDI and USENIX ATC. neering (ASE) and IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis,
 Evolution and Reengineering (SANER).

 Jun Li is a professor in the Department of Computer
 Science and director of the Network and Security
 Research Laboratory at the University of Oregon. He
 was also a Ripple Fellow, Narus Research Fellow, Hao Ren was a Research Fellow at Nanyang Techand founding director of the Center for Cyber Secu- nological University, Singapore. He received his
 rity and Privacy at the University of Oregon. He has Ph.D. degree in Dec. 2020 from the University of
 received the CAREER Award from the US National Electronic Science and Technology of China. He
 Science Foundation, the Faculty Excellence Award was a visiting Ph.D. student at the University of
 from the University of Oregon, and the Recognition Waterloo from Dec. 2018 to Jan. 2020. He has
 of Service Award from ACM. He received his Ph.D. published papers in major conferences/journals, inwith honors from UCLA in 2002. His research in- cluding ACM ASIACCS, ACSAC, IEEE TCC, and
terests include networking, distributed systems, cybersecurity, and blockchain. IEEE Network. He won the Best Paper Award from
He has published more than 100 peer-reviewed papers, including several Best IEEE BigDataSecurity 2023. His research interests
Paper awards. include applied cryptography and privacy-preserving
 machine learning.

 Jelena Mirkovic is Research Team Leader at USC
 Information Sciences Institute and Research Associate Professor of Computer Science at USC. During
 Jiahua Xu is Associate Professor in Financial
 her professional career she published more than 100
 Computing, and Programme Director of the MSc
 conference and journal papers, and the first book on
 Emerging Digital Technologies at UCL. She is also
 the denial-of-service attacks. She also pioneered use
 affiliated to the UCL Centre for Blockchain Techof testbeds in cybersecurity education. Her research
 nologies. Her research focuses on blockchain ecointerests span cybersecurity, networking and educanomics and decentralized finance. She has published
 tion.
 in Usenix Security, ACM IMC, FC, IEEE ICDCS
 and IEEE ICBC. She has reviewed for Advances
 in Complex Systems, Computer Networks, Transactions on the Web and Cities.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541

 39

 Yang Liu is currently a full professor and the
 director of the cyber security lab in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He specializes in
 software security, verification, software engineering
 and artificial intelligence. His research has bridged
 the gap between the theory and practical usage of
 formal methods and program analysis to evaluate
 the design and implementation of software for high
 assurance and security. His work led to the development of state-of-the-art model checker, Process
 Analysis Toolkit (PAT). By now, he has more than
200 publications and 6 best paper awards in top tier conferences and journals.
With more than 50 million Singapore dollar funding support, he is leading a
large research team working on state-of-the-art software engineering and cyber
security problems and currently serving as an associated editor of TIFS.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on March 27,2025 at 15:11:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.