3246 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 VarAD: Lightweight High-Resolution Image
 Anomaly Detection via Visual
 Autoregressive Modeling
 Yunkang Cao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Haiming Yao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
 Wei Luo , Student Member, IEEE, and Weiming Shen , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—This article addresses a practical task: high- AD [4], real-world applications often demand high-resolution
resolution image anomaly detection (HRIAD). In compar- images (1024 × 1024 or higher) for inspection.
ison to conventional image anomaly detection for low- This requirement is due to the potential defects being exresolution images, HRIAD imposes a heavier computational
 tremely minute compared to the overall product, rendering
burden and necessitates superior global information capture capacity. To tackle HRIAD, this article translates im- low-resolution AD methods less effective [5]. Although it is
age anomaly detection into visual token prediction and feasible to directly downsample high-resolution images to a
proposes visual autoregressive modeling-based anomaly lower resolution for inspection, this process can cause the loss of
detection (VarAD) based on visual autoregressive modeling critical details regarding subtle anomalies. For instance, certain
for token prediction. Specifically, VarAD first extracts mul- scenarios like plastic part inspection [2] and lens inspection [6]
tihierarchy and multidirectional visual token sequences, necessitate detecting anomalies of approximately 1 mm× 1 mm
and then employs an advanced model, Mamba, for visual in a product measuring 100 mm× 100 mm. Such anomalies are
autoregressive modeling and token prediction. During the
prediction process, VarAD effectively exploits information incredibly challenging to detect in low-resolution (256 × 256)
from all preceding tokens to predict the target token. Fi- images, as they occupy only about five pixels. Conversely, in
nally, the discrepancies between predicted tokens and orig- high-resolution images (1024 × 1024), these anomalies occupy
inal tokens are utilized to score anomalies. Comprehensive around 100 pixels, significantly easing the detection process.
experiments on four publicly available datasets and a real- While it can be feasible to apply a sliding window strategy [7]
world button inspection dataset demonstrate that the pro- to high-resolution images to obtain smaller patches instead of
posed VarAD achieves superior HRIAD performance while downsampling, this approach can lose global information within
maintaining lightweight, rendering VarAD a viable solution
for HRIAD. images and lead to unreliable detection results. Hence, this study
 proposes to detect anomalies directly in high-resolution images,
 Index Terms—Autoregressive modeling, image anomaly namely high-resolution image anomaly detection (HRIAD).
detection, token prediction. In comparison to the typical low-resolution AD setting,
 HRIAD faces several inherent challenges. Thus, the computa-
 I. INTRODUCTION tional burden increases significantly with high-resolution im-
 MAGE anomaly detection (AD) aims to identify irregular ages, and capturing global information, which can be criti-
I patterns within images, playing a crucial role in industrial
defect inspection [1]. While existing AD methods [2], [3] excel
 cal for detecting certain anomalies, is more challenging compared to low-resolution counterparts. Some reconstructionin low-resolution settings, typically 256 × 256, and achieve based AD methods, like reverse distillation for anomaly dehigh-detection performance on standard datasets like MVTec tection (RD4AD) [8], can capture a certain level of global
 information. Specifically, these methods begin by extracting
 visual tokens using a vision tokenizer and then reconstructing
 Received 15 November 2024; accepted 14 December 2024. Date of
 these tokens through a bottleneck module. Anomaly scores
publication 16 January 2025; date of current version 4 April 2025. This are derived from the discrepancies between the original and
work was supported by the Ministry of Industry and Information Tech- reconstructed visual tokens. The bottleneck can be based on
nology of the People’s Republic of China under Grant #2023ZY01089, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) or vision transformers.
and in part by the HPC Platform of Huazhong University of Science and
Technology where the computation is completed. Paper no. TII-24-6079. However, while the CNN-based bottleneck [8] [see Fig. 1(a)]
(Corresponding author: Weiming Shen.) contributes to capturing neighboring information for recon-
 Yunkang Cao and Weiming Shen are with the State Key Labora- struction, its receptive fields remain limited and cannot utilize
tory of Intelligent Manufacturing Equipment and Technology, Huazhong all tokens for reconstruction, potentially diminishing their ef-
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
cyk_hust@hust.edu.cn; wshen@ieee.org). fectiveness for HRIAD. On the other hand, transformer-based
 Haiming Yao and Wei Luo are with the State Key Laboratory of Pre- bottlenecks [9], [10] [see Fig. 1(b)] can achieve global receptive
cision Measurement Technology and Instruments, Department of Pre- fields through self-attention. However, the self-attention mechcision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail:
yhm22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; luow23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).
 anism leads to a significant increase in computational demands
 Code is available at https://github.com/caoyunkang/VarAD. due to the quadratic complexity of attention calculations, making
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3523574 transformer-based bottlenecks impractical for the HRIAD task.

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
CAO et al.: VarAD: LIGHTWEIGHT HIGH-RESOLUTION IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION VIA VISUAL AUTOREGRESSIVE MODELING 3247

 3) VarAD proposes to extract multihierarchy and multidirectional visual token sequences and utilizes Mamba for
 autoregressing, achieving a better detection performance.

 II. RELATED WORK
 A. Image Anomaly Detection
 This study classifies existing image anomaly detection methods based on the type of information utilized, namely, local and
 global information.
 1) Local Information: Many image anomaly detection methods focus on extracting local information. These methods typically employ pretrained CNNs to extract image embeddings,
Fig. 1. Motivation. By translating AD into token prediction, VarAD
demonstrates the ability to capture global information while remaining which are then used to model the distribution of these embedlightweight. dings. Anomalies are detected based on discrepancies between
 testing and training embeddings. Existing methods can be categorized into knowledge distillation [17], [18], [19], memory
 Therefore, this study aims to introduce a lightweight HRIAD
 bank [3], [20], discriminative [21], [22], and flow-based [23],
model capable of capturing global information. Specifically, the
 [24] methods. For example, knowledge distillation-based methstudy proposes visual autoregressive modeling-based anomaly
 ods [17] align a pretrained teacher network with a randomly
detection (VarAD), which employs visual autoregressive (VAR)
 initialized student network via normal images. They assume
modeling to capture the sequential relationships between visual
 that since the student and teacher networks are only aligned
tokens. VarAD draws inspiration from the success of autorevia normal images, they will have different outputs for abnormal
gressive models in large language models [11], renowned for
 images, and these discrepancies are utilized to detect anomalies.
their robust global modeling capacity through next-token pre-
 Memory bank-based methods [3], [20], on the other hand, store
diction. Similarly, VarAD formulates the HRIAD task as a token
 representative normal embeddings and score anomalies based
prediction task, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). It initially tokenizes
 on the nearest distance to this bank. Sliding window-based selfimages into a sequence and trains the model to predict future
 supervised learning (SWSSL) [7] introduces self-supervised
tokens based on previous ones. By training on normal images, the
 learning for augmentation-invariant features and combines these
model is expected to predict only normal tokens during testing.
 features with memory banks for high-resolution medical image
Discrepancies between predicted and original tokens are then
 anomaly detection. However, SWSSL still relies on a patch
utilized to score anomalies. In contrast to reconstruction-based
 encoder for feature extraction, which can only perceive local
approaches with transformer-based bottlenecks [12], [13], [14],
 information. Discriminative approaches like SimpleNet [22] and
which employ all input tokens to reconstruct normal tokens, our
 global and local anomaly co-synthesis strategy (GLASS) [21]
method uses only preceding tokens to predict future ones. With
 typically train a network to differentiate between normal and
advanced VAR models, we reduce complexity to a linear scale
 abnormal features for anomaly detection; however, such netwhile preserving global information capture capabilities.
 works are often implemented using simple convolutional lay-
 To enhance detection performance, VarAD proposes to
 ers, which are limited to capturing local information. In addiadapt a pretrained vision model (self-distillation with no lation, flow-based methods [23], [24] use flow models to model
bels(DINO) [15]) as the vision tokenizer for extracting visual
 normal embedding distribution directly. While these methods
tokens. These multihierarchy visual tokens are then traversed
 have achieved promising detection performance for traditional
spatially via multiple directions into multiple token sequences.
 low-resolution scenarios, their effectiveness may diminish in
These multihierarchy and multidirectional visual token sehigh-resolution images due to their limited capacity to capture
quences provide informative contexts and enable comprehensive
 global information.
prediction of normal tokens. Furthermore, VarAD leverages
 2) Global Information: Certain image anomaly detection
Mamba [16], an up-to-date autoregressive model for token premethods enhance their capacity to capture global information
diction, achieving superior modeling capacity and efficiency.
 by modifying their model architectures. Conventional image
Experimental results on four widely used public AD datasets
 anomaly detection methods are based on CNNs. For instance,
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficacy of VarAD.
 collaborative discrepancy optimization (CDO) [2] replaces
 In summary, this study makes the following contributions.
 conventional backbones with high-resolution net (HRNet) [25]
 1) This study addresses a more practical setting, i.e.,
 to extract image embeddings with larger receptive fields.
 HRIAD, and conducts systematic benchmarks on this RD4AD [8] and omni-frequency channel-selection reconstrucsetting, making a step toward practical industrial applica- tion generative adversarial network (OCR-GAN) [26] introduce
 tions. While previous studies [5] have introduced HRIAD, bottlenecks to extract global context, followed by embedding
 our benchmark is more comprehensive, encompassing reconstruction based on global semantic information. In
 seven methods across four datasets with resolutions rang- addition, methods like global-local correspondence framework
 ing from 256 × 256 to 1024 × 1024. (GLCF) [14] establish two network branches (global and
 2) This study proposes to reformulate image anomaly de- local) to extract and aggregate global and local embeddings,
 tection as a token prediction task. VarAD based on VAR respectively, thereby improving the capture of global
 modeling is proposed to address this task. information. Similarly, EfficientAD [27] extends the
3248 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

knowledge-distillation scheme by operating in local and of high-resolution images (1024 × 1024 in this study) repreglobal feature spaces simultaneously. Some approaches senting normal instances of a specific product category. The
explicitly target the capture of global information by using objective is to develop a model capable of identifying anomalies
visual transformers for reconstruction, such as partial semantic within unseen images from the same category and generating
aggregation vision transformer (PSA-VT) [9], prior normality a corresponding anomaly map A ∈ RH×W , where H and W
prompt transformer (PNPT) [13], and MLDFR [28], or denote the resolution of the original images. In the anomaly map,
for inpainting, like inpainting transformer (Intra) [10] higher values indicate that the corresponding coordinate position
and adaptive mask inpainting network (AMI-Net) [12]. is more likely to be abnormal. Typically, the highest score of the
However, the attention mechanisms in transformers often anomaly map can indicate the overall anomaly degree of the
lead to intensive computational demands due to the quadratic whole image.
complexity of attention calculations in both computation and
memory, hindering their applications in HRIAD. In contrast,
 B. Method Overview
spatiotemporal consistency incorporated knowledge distillation
(STCIKD) [5] adopts a strategy to predict future tokens based The proposed HRIAD method, VarAD, introduces a novel
on several preceding tokens but still fails to extract information approach by reformulating anomaly detection as a token predicfrom all preceding tokens. To capture global information tion task. As shown in Fig. 2, this method comprises several key
and enable lightweight detection, the proposed VarAD also steps. First, given an image, VarAD extracts multihierarchy and
translates the anomaly detection task into token prediction and multidirectional visual token sequences. Subsequently, in the
exploits VAR modeling for great efficiency. VAR modeling phase, VarAD leverages Mamba [16] to predict
 future tokens based on previous tokens in an autoregressive
 manner. Following this, VarAD computes the prediction errors
B. Autoregressive Modeling between the predicted tokens and the original tokens to assess
 1) Language Autoregressive Modeling: Language autore- anomalies. Finally, the results from multihierarchy and multidigressive modeling has gained significant traction for its promis- rectional predictions are aggregated to produce the final anomaly
ing global capture capacity, exemplified by GPT-4 [11]. A recent detection results.
advancement in this field is Mamba [16], which allows each
token in a sequence to interact with previously scanned tokens C. Visual Token Sequence Extraction
via a compressed hidden state, reducing quadratic complexity
to linear. The efficacy of Mamba in long sequence modeling has The visual token sequence extraction step consists of two subgarnered considerable attention. steps: tokenizing the image into multihierarchy visual tokens,
 2) VAR Modeling: The success of language autoregressive
 which are then sequentialized into multidirectional visual token
modeling has spurred efforts in VAR modeling. Early work, sequences.
 1) Image Tokenized: The descriptive quality of visual tosuch as vector quantized generative adversarial networ (VQ-
GAN) [29], employs a decoder-only transformer to generate kens, as described in LVM [30], plays a crucial role in the
image tokens in a standard raster-scan autoregressive manner, autoregressive modeling process. VarAD proposes to adapt a
leading to improved image generation quality. More recently, pretrained vision model, DINO [15], as the visual tokenizer.
VAR modeling has been utilized to construct visual founda- Specifically, the image is inputted into the pretrained visual
tion models. For instance, the large vision model (LVM) [30] model, and tokens from specific layers are extracted to form
 H W
translates visual data into visual sentences and utilizes autore- multihierarchy visual tokens Fh ∈ RC× N h × N h , where N h is
gressive training for next token prediction, enabling the solution the downsampling ratio of hth hierarchy and H is the number
of various vision tasks by designing suitable visual prompts at of hierarchies. However, since the pretrained model is trained
test time. The success of Mamba has also inspired numerous on natural image datasets, its descriptiveness may diminish
works in the field of visual data. For example, the pioneering when applied to the target category due to domain gap issues.
endeavor VMamba [31] proposes traversing the spatial domain, Therefore, VarAD addresses this challenge by adapting the
converting images into multidirectional visual token sequences, pretrained DINO model. This adaptation involves integrating
and then utilizing Mamba for modeling, showcasing promising a feature adapter φh (·) for each hierarchy feature and utilizing
capabilities across various visual perception tasks. Drawing a residual connection to obtain the adapted tokens F̂h
inspiration from these advancements in VAR modeling, this
study chooses to reformulate anomaly detection as a token F̂h = φh (Fh ) + Fh , h = 1, . . . , H. (1)
prediction task and utilizes Mamba for VAR modeling. The
proposed VarAD presents to have better HRIAD performance During training, the visual model remains frozen, while the
and higher efficiency. adapters are trainable. This approach mitigates the domain gap
 without compromising the original descriptiveness.
 2) Token Sequentialized: Autoregressive modeling is natu-
 III. VARAD METHODOLOGY rally designed for 1-D sequences and cannot be directly applied
 to 2-D visual tokens. Hence, VarAD employs a spatial traversal
A. Problem Definition of the visual tokens and translates them into visual token se-
 The HRIAD task is designed to meet practical requirements. quences. A straightforward strategy might involve expanding the
Following the mainstream unsupervised anomaly detection set- visual tokens linearly along the row axis. However, this approach
ting [2], the training set Ttrain for HRIAD consists of a collection restricts the token prediction process to only consider preceding
CAO et al.: VarAD: LIGHTWEIGHT HIGH-RESOLUTION IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION VIA VISUAL AUTOREGRESSIVE MODELING 3249

Fig. 2. Framework of the proposed VarAD.

tokens, thereby potentially sacrificing valuable post-target infor- Postdiscretization, the model can be represented as
mation. To overcome this limitation, VarAD introduces a multidirectional scanning function denoted as MDS, which scans h(t) = Ah(t − 1) + Bx(t), y(t) = Ch(t). (5)
visual tokens in multiple directions. This innovation allows for
the comprehensive retention of information crucial for accurate In addition, Mamba associates the matrices A, B, C with the
token prediction. Illustrated in Fig. 2, VarAD unfolds visual input, thereby ensuring the dynamism of weights within autoretokens along rows and columns into sequences, proceeding gressive modeling.
to scan along four distinct directions: top-left to bottom-right, 2) Token Prediction: VarAD utilizes Mamba to predict the
bottom-right to top-left, top-right to bottom-left, and bottom-left lth token based on the previous tokens. However, due to the
to top-right. This ensures that each token integrates information potentially strong correlation between neighboring visual tofrom all tokens, enhancing predictive accuracy across various kens, the conventional autoregressive approach used in language
directions. The process is formulated as follows: modeling, i.e., next-token prediction, tends to overfocus on
   nearby tokens for visual data. This overemphasis on neigh-
 {v1 , . . . , vLh }hk = MDS F̂h , k = 1, 2, 3, 4 (2) boring tokens may hinder the learning of global information.
 Therefore, VarAD proposes to predict the lth token based on
where {v1 , . . . , vLh }hk represents the kth directional visual token previous tokens, excluding the M nearest tokens, denoted by
sequence of the hth hierarchy. Lh denotes the length of the visual {v1 , . . . , vl−M }. Given that the resolutions of features vary
token sequences, which is equal to NHh × NWh . across hierarchies, this study associates M with the feature
 resolutions, setting M h = m NHh and M h = m NWh for the row-
D. Visual Autogressive Modeling spanned and column-spanned token sequences, respectively,
 VarAD utilizes VAR modeling for token prediction. Specifi- where m is a hyperparameter named prediction step that controls
cally, Mamba [16] is utilized as the autoregressive model. the length of tokens to be excluded.
 1) Mamba: The architecture of the Mamba model is visu- Then, (5) for predicting the lth token is rewritten as
alized in Fig. 2, within which the state-space model (SSM) is
the most vital component. Specifically, SSMs are conventionally h(l) = Ah(l − 1) + Bvl−M , v l = Ch(l) (6)
recognized as linear time-invariant systems mapping stimulation
x(t) ∈ RL to response y(t) ∈ RL . These SSMs are typically where h(l) denotes the hidden state at the lth step, incorporating
formulated as linear ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [see information from {v1 , . . . , vl−M }, and v l represents the pre-
(3)], with parameters including A ∈ RP ×P , B, C ∈ RP for a dicted token. Thus, the token prediction process maintains linear
state size P complexity, ensuring high efficiency even for high-resolution
 images.
 h (t) = Ah(t) + Bx(t), y(t) = Ch(t). (3)
 To predict the first M tokens, VarAD adds beginning of
The continuous parameters A and B can be discretized from sequence (BOS) tokens to the beginning of each visual token
the continuous system into discrete parameters A and B with sequence and end of sequence (EOS) tokens to the end, where
zero-order hold with a timescale parameter  [BOS], [EOS] ∈ RM ×C . Then, utilizing (6), VarAD obtains the
 predicted tokens as follows:
 A = exp (A)
 B = (A)−1 (exp(A) − I) · B. (4) {[BOS], v1 , . . . , vL } −→ {v 1 , . . . , v L , [EOS]} (7)
3250 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 TABLE I 2) Implementation Details: This study adopts a default reso-
 STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF THE UTILIZED DATASETS lution of 1024 × 1024 for HRIAD. All images undergo resizing
 to match the dimensions of 1024 × 1024, followed by normalization using the mean and standard deviation obtained from the
 ImageNet dataset. For image tokenization, DINO (ViT-S/14)1 is
 utilized as the default method. Tokens from the fourth, eighth,
 and 12th layers are selected to form multihierarchy visual tokens,
 each possessing a channel size of C = 384. The hyperparameter
 prediction step m is by default set to 4. The training process
E. Anomaly Detection utilizes the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 5 × 10−4
 for 10 epochs. All experiments are performed on a computing
 The hypothesis of VarAD is that through training solely with system equipped with Xeon(R) Gold 6226R CPUs@2.90GHz,
normal samples, the autoregressive model can exclusively pre- accompanied by one NVIDIA 3090-Ti GPU with 24 GB of
dict normal tokens, thus the disparities between predicted tokens memory.
and original tokens can be utilized to score anomalies. With (7), 3) Evaluation Metrics: This study employs three widely used
VarAD has obtained predicted tokens for multihierarchy and metrics to evaluate anomaly detection performance: the area
multidirectional visual token sequences. Subsequently, VarAD under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), the
proposes to aggregate predicted tokens from multiple directions, maximum F1 Score under optimal thresholds (max-F1), and
thus ensuring that the prediction encompasses information from average precision (AP). The primary focus of the evaluation
all tokens (excluding neighboring ones). The process is formu- is on pixel-level anomaly detection, while image-level metrics
lated as are reported only for the main experiments. Notably, although
 h  
 F = MDS−1 {v 1 , . . . , v Lh }hk , k = 1, 2, 3, 4 (8) the per-region overlap (PRO) score is commonly used to assess
 pixel-level performance and is widely adopted in low-resolution
where MDS−1 represents the reverse function of the multidirec- settings, this study excludes it due to the significant computational scanning process MDS, which first traverses individual tional overhead it imposes in HRIAD.
1-D predicted token sequences back to 2-D visual tokens as 4) Comparison Methods: This study conducts a comparlike F̂h , and then averages all the predicted 2-D tokens into the ative analysis of the proposed VarAD with several popuh lar anomaly detection methods. Specifically, the comparipredicted visual tokens F .
 Subsequently, the prediction errors across multiple hierar- son methods include CNN-based methods, pretrained feature
chies are aggregated to produce the final anomaly maps A, mapping (PFM) [18], RD4AD [8], PatchCore [3], CDO [2],
 PyramidFlow [23], and MultiScale Flow (MSFlow) [24], and
 h
 Ahij = ||Fij − F̂hij ||22 transformer-based methods, AMI-Net [12] and PNPT [13]. We
 utilize their publicly available implementations, only adjusting
 H
  input resolutions to assess their performance in HRIAD.
 Aij = (Ahij ). (9)
 h=1 B. Main Results
During training, VarAD minimizes the anomaly maps A for 1) Pixel-Level Comparisons: Table II illustrates the qualinormal images, thereby ensuring that the predicted tokens are tative comparisons between VarAD and other alternatives in
similar to the original tokens, formulated as the proposed HRIAD setting. While representative methods
  such as PatchCore [3] and RD4AD [8] have reported saturated
 L= Aij . (10) performance in their original reports under the low-resolution
 ij
 setting, their detection performance for high-resolution images
By optimizing VarAD with normal images through this objec- shows a notable decline. CDO [2] achieves promising detection
tive, the prediction errors for normal tokens are expected to be performance for high-resolution images because of its utilized
minimized, while the errors for abnormal tokens can be larger, backbone HRNet [25], demonstrating the importance of global
as VarAD is not trained to predict abnormal tokens. information in HRIAD. MSFlow also achieves promising results
 thanks to the designed multiscale flow model. Surprisingly,
 IV. EXPERIMENTS while AMI-Net [12] and PNPT [13] utilize vision transformers that should be able to capture global information, they
A. Experiments Setup still achieve subpar anomaly detection performance in com-
 1) Dataset Descriptions: This study systematically evaluparison to other alternatives. In contrast, VarAD achieves the
ates the proposed VarAD on four publicly available datasets: best performance across all datasets, with AUROC scores of
MVTec AD [4], visual anomaly (VisA) [32], beantech anomaly 97.7%, 98.5%, 97.8%, and 98.8% on the four datasets, redetection (BTAD) [33], and describable texture dataset (DTD)- spectively. VarAD exhibits significant improvements on BTAD
Synthetic [34]. The statistical information of these datasets is and DTD-Synthetic, outperforming the second-place method
summarized in Table I, encompassing 42 categories in total, with CDO by 6.5% and 5.0% in max-F1, respectively, which un-
15 287 normal training samples, and 2237 and 3695 normal and derscore the superior global modeling capacity of the proposed
abnormal testing samples, respectively. These extensive datasets
provide a comprehensive HRIAD benchmark. 1 [Online]. Available: https://github.com/facebookresearch/dinov2
CAO et al.: VarAD: LIGHTWEIGHT HIGH-RESOLUTION IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION VIA VISUAL AUTOREGRESSIVE MODELING 3251

 TABLE II
 QUANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF VARAD WITH ALTERNATIVE METHODS ON PUBLIC DATASETS

Fig. 3. Anomaly maps on the four publicly available datasets and our private data from the real-world button inspection task.

 TABLE III
 QUANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF VARAD WITH ALTERNATIVE METHODS ON PUBLIC DATASETS

VarAD. Fig. 3 visualizes the detection results of VarAD and the C. Ablation Study
comparison methods, further demonstrating the superiority of
VarAD. This study performs a series of ablation experiments to
 2) Image-Level Comparisons: Image-level anomaly detec- thoroughly assess the impact of individual components within
tion results are also critical for HRIAD. As shown in Table III, VarAD. Given the primary focus on pixel-level performance in
all methods exhibit a notable performance decline in HRIAD this study, only pixel-level metrics are reported in the following
compared to their original results in low-resolution settings. experiments.
For instance, PatchCore [3] achieves 99.1% AUROC on MVTec 1) Influence of Sequentialized Direction: During the token
AD in the low-resolution scenario, but only 93.1% in HRIAD. sequentialization process, VarAD scans the visual tokens in
Overall, MSFlow and CDO demonstrate superior performance multiple directions to prevent potential information loss. Fig. 4
on MVTec AD and VisA, whereas our proposed VarAD presents a comparison of the detection performance of VarAD
achieves the highest performance on BTAD and DTD-Synthetic, when scanning in different directions. The results indicate that
surpassing the second-place methods by 0.2% and 0.4% aggregating information from all directions consistently yields
AUROCs. superior performance compared to using a single direction. This
3252 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 4. Anomaly detection performance of VarAD with different setups. From top to bottom: different scanning directions; different prediction steps
m; different feature adapters, where w/o indicates that the pretrained model is used to directly extract tokens; and different feature hierarchies.

underscores the effectiveness of utilizing multidirectional visual whether a linear layer or a ResBlock, significantly improves
token sequences. detection performance, while solely using LoRA fails to mitigate
 2) Hyperparameter Sensitive Analysis: The only hyperpa- the domain gap and leads to subpar detection results. Combining
rameter for VarAD is m, which controls the length of neigh- LoRA with the linear layer or ResBlock shows improvements in
boring tokens to be excluded in the token prediction process. certain metrics but declines in others. Furthermore, the complex
This study assesses the detection performance of VarAD with adapter ResBlock does not consistently outperform the simple
different values of m, and the results are presented in Fig. 4. linear layer but can introduce more parameters. Therefore, we
Generally, the prediction process becomes more challenging default to using only the linear layer for feature adaptation,
with increased m, as more information from neighboring tokens improving more than 10.0% in max-F1 on MVTec AD, VisA,
is excluded. Hence, with increased m, VarAD is expected to and BTAD compared to the unadapted model.
acquire a stronger global modeling capacity. However, a larger 4) Influence of Token Hierarchy: This study evaluates
m may lead to the loss of local information and influence VarAD under different combinations of token hierarchies. Genthe prediction quality. As visualized in Fig. 4, the detection erally, tokens from a shallow layer contain structural informaperformance exhibits an increasing and then decreasing trend tion, while those from a deeper layer may incorporate more
with larger values of m, peaking at m = 4. Nevertheless, VarAD global information. As shown in Fig. 4, the combination of the
is not sensitive to changes in m, showing only slight variations fourth, eighth, and 12th token hierarchies consistently achieves
in detection performance under different values of m. better performance compared to other combinations. Therefore,
 3) Influence of Feature Adapter: The visual token sequence this combination is selected as the default setting for VarAD.
extraction process involves tokenizing images into visual tokens. 5) Influence of Backbone: To comprehensively investigate
VarAD defaults to utilizing the pretrained model DINO for tok- the influence of backbones, this study compares VarAD with difenization and proposes a feature adapter to mitigate the domain ferent backbones, including vision transformer (ViT) [36] undergap between the pretrained natural image data and the target going supervised pretraining, masked auto encoder (MAE) [37],
industrial data. We design several feature adapters for evaluation, contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP) [38], and DINO
including a simple linear layer and a more complex residual with various architectures. The comparison results are shown
block (ResBlock). In addition to appending the feature adapters in Table IV. It clearly demonstrates that pretrained backbones
after the pretrained model, we also explore a parameter-efficient significantly influence detection performance, indicating that
fine-tuning method, low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [35], and its backbones trained with specific objectives may better suit VAR
combination with the designed feature adapters, as shown in modeling. We will further study the underlying mechanisms in
Fig. 4. It is evident from the table that the feature adapter, the future. Overall, VarAD with DINO-ViT-B/14 achieves the
CAO et al.: VarAD: LIGHTWEIGHT HIGH-RESOLUTION IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION VIA VISUAL AUTOREGRESSIVE MODELING 3253

 TABLE IV
 ABLATION STUDY ON DIFFERENT BACKBONES FOR VARAD

 Fig. 7. Complexity comparisons of different methods.
Fig. 5. Anomaly detection performance under different resolutions.

Fig. 6. Anomaly maps under different resolutions. (a) PFM.
(b) RD4AD. (c) PatchCore. (d) CDO. (e) PyramidFlow. (f) MSFlow. Fig. 8. (a) Real-world button inspection platform. (b) Samples.
(g) AMI-Net. (h) PNPT. (i) VarAD.

 TABLE V
best anomaly detection performance. However, DINO-ViT-B/14 STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF THE COLLECTED BUTTON DATASET
requires nearly four times the parameters compared to DINO-
ViT-S/14 and achieves only 3.8 FPS. Consequently, after trading
off all factors, this study elects to use DINO-ViT-S/14 as the
visual tokenizer, achieving lightweight, efficient, and promising
high-resolution anomaly detection performance.

D. Analysis
 1) Influence of Image Resolution: This study evaluates the
detection performance of comparison methods under different for different resolutions. VarAD even witnesses some slight
resolutions, namely 256 × 256, 512 × 512, 768 × 768, 1024 × improvements in max-F1 and AP with increased resolutions for
1024. Fig. 5 presents their detection performance on the four all datasets. Whereas VarAD may underperform compared to
datasets under different resolutions. It shows that the existing other methods at low resolutions, such as 512 × 512 on VisA,
AD methods tend to perform weaker with larger resolutions. certain scenarios necessitate high-resolution images to address
For instance, the AUROC on MVTec AD of PatchCore de- subtle anomalies. In these cases, subtle anomalies may occupy
creases from 98.4% to 95.8% when image resolutions increase very few pixels (e.g., five) in low-resolution images, making
from 256 × 256 to 1024 × 1024. While CDO can better capture them difficult to detect. Fig. 6 further visualizes the detection
global information compared to other existing AD methods, it results of these comparison methods under different resolutions.
still witnesses some drops in detection performance. In con- It is evident that VarAD consistently achieves excellent detection
trast, the proposed VarAD achieves commendable detection results under improved resolutions, while other methods exhibit
performance across all resolutions. Its AUROC remains stable deficiencies.
3254 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

 TABLE VI
 QUANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF VARAD WITH ALTERNATIVE METHODS ON THE COLLECTED BUTTON INSPECTION DATASET

 2) Complexity Analysis: Considering practical applications, of the established dataset. Nevertheless, VarAD achieves notably
both anomaly detection performance and model efficiency re- superior detection results compared to other methods, with
quire comprehensive evaluation. Specifically, this study con- impressive scores of 96.8% AUROC, 36.0% max-F1, and 30.8%
ducts a fair comparison of various methods across the following AP. VarAD surpasses the second-place method, CDO, by 0.1%
four dimensions: AUROC, 5.4% max-F1, and 4.6% AP. The qualitative anomaly
 1) training time—measured on a single NVIDIA 3090Ti localization comparison results of various methods are depicted
 with a batch size of two; in Fig. 3 (Button). It is evident that the proposed VarAD achieves
 2) number of parameters; significantly better detection results than other alternatives.
 3) floating-point operations per second (FLOPs);
 4) inference speed in terms of frames per second (FPS). V. CONCLUSION
 Fig. 7 demonstrates that transformer-based methods exhibit
higher computational complexity compared to others, while In summary, this article presents VarAD, a novel approach for
CNN-based methods generally offer greater efficiency. Overall, detecting anomalies in high-resolution images. VarAD transthe proposed VarAD achieves the fastest training time, signif- forms anomaly detection into a token prediction task, utilizicantly lower FLOPs, and the highest average max-F1 score ing Mamba for VAR modeling. By predicting future tokens
across the four datasets. Specifically, VarAD converges within in multihierarchy and multidirectional visual token sequences,
only 10 epochs (389 s), whereas other methods, such as CDO and VarAD effectively scores anomalies based on prediction errors.
RD4AD, typically require 50 epochs (over 1200 s). Moreover, Extensive evaluations on four publicly available datasets and a
the parameter count and FLOPs of VarAD are lower than those real-world button inspection dataset attest to the superior detecof other methods, with only a slight increase compared to Pyra- tion performance and efficiency of VarAD. In future research,
midFlow and MSFlow, yet demonstrating significantly better we aim to extend VarAD to simultaneous anomaly detection
performance. In terms of inference speed, VarAD operates in across multiple categories and improve its image-level anomaly
an autoregressive manner, leading to a slightly lower FPS than detection performance.
CNN-based methods such as PyramidFlow and MSFlow, which
utilize efficient flow models for rapid inference. Nevertheless, REFERENCES
VarAD achieves a commendable speed of 8.0 FPS. [1] G. Xie et al., “IM-IAD: Industrial image anomaly detection benchmark
 in manufacturing,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 2720–2733,
 May 2024.
E. Evaluations on Real-World Data [2] Y. Cao, X. Xu, Z. Liu, and W. Shen, “Collaborative discrepancy optimization for reliable image anomaly localization,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 To further assess the applicability and effectiveness of VarAD, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 10674–10683, Nov. 2023.
this study develops an image acquisition platform, as depicted [3] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
 “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
in Fig. 8(a), and gathers private data from a real-world button Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 14318–14328.
inspection task. During the image acquisition process, vari- [4] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The
ous types of noise are intentionally introduced to assess the MVTec anomaly detection dataset: A comprehensive real-world dataset
robustness of the comparison methods, including unaligned for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 4,
 pp. 1038–1059, 2021.
positions of buttons, different illumination conditions, and back- [5] Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, and W. Shen, “High-resolution image anomaly detection
ground interference. These noise types render the established via spatiotemporal consistency incorporated knowledge distillation,” in
real-world button inspection dataset more challenging than the Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Sci. Eng., 2023, pp. 1–6.
four public datasets utilized in this study. In addition, these but- [6] H. Bai et al., “Vision datasets: A benchmark for vision-based industrial
 inspection,” 2023, arXiv:2306.07890.
tons feature potential subtle and small anomalies, necessitating [7] H. Dong, Y. Zhang, H. Gu, N. Konz, Y. Zhang, and M. A. Mazurowski,
HRIAD. Hence, we acquire images with a high resolution of “SWSSL: Sliding window-based self-supervised learning for anomaly
1024 × 1024. Representative samples from the dataset are vi- detection in high-resolution images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 42,
 no. 12, pp. 3860–3870, Dec. 2023.
sualized in Fig. 8(b). The constructed dataset consists of four [8] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
categories of buttons. Table V shows the detailed statistical one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
information for the collected button datasets. Recognit., 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
 Table VI provides a category-level quantitative comparison of [9] H. Yao et al., “Scalable industrial visual anomaly detection with partial
 semantics aggregation vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
results on the established dataset. It is apparent that all methods vol. 73, 2024, Art. no. 5004217.
demonstrate weaker performance on this dataset compared to [10] J. Pirnay and K. Chai, “Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection,” in
their results on public datasets, indicating the increased difficulty Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal. Process., 2022, pp. 394–406.
CAO et al.: VarAD: LIGHTWEIGHT HIGH-RESOLUTION IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION VIA VISUAL AUTOREGRESSIVE MODELING 3255

[11] J. OpenAI et al., “GPT-4 technical report,” 2024, arXiv:2303.08774. [35] E. J. Hu et al., “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,” in
[12] W. Luo, H. Yao, W. Yu, and Z. Li, “AMI-Net: Adaptive mask inpainting Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, [Online]. Available: https:
 network for industrial anomaly detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. //openreview.net/forum?id=nZeVKeeFYf9
 Autom. Sci. Eng., to be published, doi: 10.1109/TASE.2024.3368142. [36] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
[13] H. Yao, Y. Cao, W. Luo, W. Zhang, W. Yu, and W. Shen, “Prior normality image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 prompt transformer for multiclass industrial image anomaly detection,” 2021.
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 11866–11876, Oct. 2024. [37] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
[14] H. Yao, W. Yu, W. Luo, Z. Qiang, D. Luo, and X. Zhang, “Learning autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 global-local correspondence with semantic bottleneck for logical anomaly Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 5, [38] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural lanpp. 3589–3605, May 2024. guage supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[15] M. Oquab et al., “DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without supervision,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2024, 2024. [Online]. Available:
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=a68SUt6zFt Yunkang Cao (Graduate Student Member,
[16] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective IEEE) received the B.S. degree in mechanical
 state spaces,” in Proc. 1st Conf. Lang. Modeling, 2024. [Online]. Available: design, manufacturing, and automation in 2020
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=tEYskw1VY2 from the Huazhong University of Science and
[17] Y. Cai, D. Liang, D. Luo, X. He, X. Yang, and X. Bai, “A discrepancy aware Technology, Wuhan, China, where he is curframework for robust anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., rently working toward the Ph.D. degree in mevol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3986–3995, Mar. 2024. chanical engineering.
[18] Q. Wan, L. Gao, X. Li, and L. Wen, “Unsupervised image anomaly His current research interests include madetection and segmentation based on pretrained feature mapping,” IEEE chine vision, visual anomaly detection, and in-
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2330–2339, Mar. 2023. dustrial foundation models.
[19] Y. Cao, X. Xu, C. Sun, L. Gao, and W. Shen, “BiaS: Incorporating biased
 knowledge to boost unsupervised image anomaly localization,” IEEE
 Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 2342–2353, Apr. 2024.
 Haiming Yao (Graduate Student Member,
[20] Q. Wan, L. Gao, X. Li, and L. Wen, “Industrial image anomaly localization
 IEEE) received the B.S. (Hons.) degree in meabased on Gaussian clustering of pretrained feature,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 surement and control technology and instru-
 Electron., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 6182–6192, Jun. 2022.
 ments from the School of Mechanical Science
[21] Q. Chen, H. Luo, C. Lv, and Z. Zhang, “A unified anomaly synthesis stratand Engineering, Huazhong University of Sciegy with gradient ascent for industrial anomaly detection and localization,”
 ence and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2022.
 in Proc. Comput. Vis.–ECCV 2024 – 18th Eur. Conf., (Lecture Notes in
 He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
 Computer Science), Milan, Italy, vol. 15125, Sep. 29-Oct. 4, 2024, pp. 37–
 in measurement and control technology and in-
 54. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72855-6_3
 struments with the Department of Precision In-
[22] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “Simplenet: A simple network
 strument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
 for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 His research interests include visual anomaly
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
 detection, deep learning, visual understanding, and artificial intelligence
[23] J. Lei, X. Hu, Y. Wang, and D. Liu, “Pyramidflow: High-resolution
 for science.
 defect contrastive localization using pyramid normalizing flow,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 14143–14152.
[24] Y. Zhou, X. Xu, J. Song, F. Shen, and H. T. Shen, “Msflow: Wei Luo (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 Multiscale flow-based framework for unsupervised anomaly detec- B.S. degree in measurement and control techtion,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., to be published, nology and instruments from the School of Medoi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3344118. chanical Science and Engineering, Huazhong
[25] J. Wang et al., “Deep high-resolution representation learning for visual University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
 recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 10, China, in 2023. He is currently working toward
 pp. 3349–3364, Oct. 2021. the Ph.D. degree in measurement and control
[26] Y. Liang, J. Zhang, S. Zhao, R. Wu, Y. Liu, and S. Pan, “Omni-frequency technology and instruments with the Departchannel-selection representations for unsupervised anomaly detection,” ment of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua Univer-
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 4327–4340, 2023. sity, Beijing, China.
[27] K. Batzner, L. Heckler, and R. König, “Efficientad: Accurate visual His research interests include deep learning,
 anomaly detection at millisecond-level latencies,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF anomaly detection, and machine vision.
 Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 127–137.
[28] Y. Guo, M. Jiang, Q. Huang, Y. Cheng, and J. Gong, “MLDFR: A multilevel features restoration method based on damaged images for anomaly
 detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, Weiming Shen (Fellow, IEEE) received the
 pp. 2477–2486, Feb. 2024. B.E. and M.S. degrees in mechanical engineer-
[29] P. Esser, R. Rombach, and B. Ommer, “Taming transformers for high- ing from Northern Jiaotong University, Beijing,
 resolution image synthesis,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pat- China, in 1983 and 1986, respectively, and the
 tern Recognit., 2021, pp. 12868–12878. Ph.D. degree in system control from the Univer-
[30] Y. Bai et al., “Sequential modeling enables scalable learning for large sity of Technology of Compiegne, Compiegne,
 vision models,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., France, in 1996.
 2024, pp. 22861–22872. He is currently a Professor with the Huazhong
[31] Y. Liu et al., “VMamba: Visual state space model,” in Proc. 38th University of Science and Technology (HUST),
 Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024. [Online]. Available: https: Wuhan, China, and an Adjunct Professor with
 //openreview.net/forum?id=ZgtLQQR1K7 the University of Western Ontario, London, ON,
[32] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spot-the-difference Canada. Before joining HUST in 2019, he was a Principal Research
 self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in Officer with the National Research Council Canada. He is a Fellow
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 392–408. of Canadian Academy of Engineering and the Engineering Institute
[33] P. Mishra, R. Verk, D. Fornasier, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti, “VT- of Canada. His work has been cited more than 16 000 times with an
 ADL: A vision transformer network for image anomaly detection and h-index of 61. He authored or coauthored several books and more
 localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Ind. Electron., 2021, pp. 01–06. than 560 articles in scientific journals and international conferences in
[34] T. Aota, L. T. T. Tong, and T. Okatani, “Zero-shot versus many-shot: related areas. His research interests include agent-based collaboration
 Unsupervised texture anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter technologies and applications, collaborative intelligent manufacturing,
 Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2023, pp. 5553–5561. the Internet of Things, and big data analytics.