IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025 3503113

 Variational Graph Attention Networks With
 Self-Supervised Learning for Multivariate
 Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Yu Gao , Jin Qi , Member, IEEE, Hongjiang Ye , Ying Sun , Member, IEEE, Xiaoxuan Hu ,
 Zhenjiang Dong , and Yanfei Sun , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Cyber-physical systems (CPSs) are multidimen- I. I NTRODUCTION
sional and complex systems that integrate computing, networking, and physical environment, including various sensors
that can produce vast multivariate time series data. Recently,
scholars have proposed many unsupervised anomaly detection
 D UE to the development of informatization, many sensors
 are deployed in complex cyber-physical systems (CPSs),
 such as autonomous vehicles and water treatment plants,
methods to monitor and alarm potential faults of CPSs. However, to produce vast multivariate time series data with different
current methods still have some limitations. First of all, it is
 characteristics, attributes, and scales [1]. CPSs are large-scale
challenging to capture spatial-temporal relationships explicitly.
In the second place, the anomaly detection model based on the and geographically dispersed. There may be implicit depenvariational autoencoder (VAE) may not use the latent variable dency relationships between sensors. The fault of a particular
and often falls into a kind of collapse, which is encouraged by sensor can spread to other related devices, causing cascading
the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence term. In the end, more failures of components or the entire system. Usually, detecting
information about the anomalies is needed. This article proposes
 abnormal time points from multivariate time series data helps
a novel anomaly detection method called variational graph attention networks with self-supervised learning (VGATSL). We use monitor and discover potential risks, threats, and faults of
stacked spatial-temporal graph attention (STGAT) networks to CPSs, avoiding business interruption and even casualties.
capture the temporal and feature correlations. Next, a VAE is con- However, in the real world, anomalies are rare, and annotating
structed based on bidirectional gated recurrent units (BiGRUs), data are expensive [2]. Based on this, unsupervised anomaly
and the von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution is used as its latent
space. Indeed, this distribution places latent representation on
 detection has received widespread attention.
the surface of a unit hypersphere to allow for uninformed Unsupervised anomaly detection aims to train a robust
priors, thus preventing the model collapse. Additionally, self- model with generalized patterns using unlabeled historical
supervised learning is introduced to simulate abnormal behaviors normal data. Once this model cannot fit the current obserand to help the model form more explicit normality bound- vation, it will alarm [3]. Recently, many methods have been
aries. Extensive experiments on three public real-world datasets
demonstrate that VGATSL outperforms the baseline methods.
 developed [4], [5], [6]. Specifically, prediction-based methods
We also illustrate that VGATSL has superior interpretability and focus on predicting multiple continuous values to discover
flexibility. contextual anomalies, such as long- and short-term memory
 Index Terms— Latent variable model, multivariate time (LSTM) [7] and temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) [8].
series, self-supervised learning, spatial-temporal graph attention Reconstruction-based methods attempt to explore anomalies in
(STGAT) network, unsupervised anomaly detection. the overall distribution of sub-sequences, including generative
 adversarial networks (GANs) [9] and autoencoders (AEs) [10].
 Received 19 August 2024; revised 9 October 2024; accepted 21 October Mainly, AEs use reconstruction error as the threshold. Some
2024. Date of publication 20 November 2024; date of current version
11 December 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural promising models have also been proposed, such as variational
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62471252, Grant 62172235, and AE (VAE) [11] and convolutional AE (CAE) [12]. Addi-
Grant 62402242; in part by the Primary Research & Development Plan tionally, transfer learning-based anomaly detection methods
of Jiangsu Province under Grant BE2023025; and in part by the Natural
Science Research Project of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions under Grant have also attracted plenty of scholars to research, such as
22KJB520028. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. DAAN [13], AICDA [14], and FS-ADAPT [15]. Neverthe-
Yang Song. (Corresponding author: Yanfei Sun.) less, these methods cannot capture the coupling relationship
 Yu Gao is with the College of Automation and College of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing between sensors, making it difficult for them to process non-
210023, China (e-mail: gynj610@163.com). Euclidean data.
 Jin Qi, Hongjiang Ye, Xiaoxuan Hu, and Yanfei Sun are with the School Fig. 1 shows an inspired example from the secure Water
of Internet of Things, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Nanjing 210003, China (e-mail: qijin@njupt.edu.cn; HJ.Yep@foxmail.com; Treatment System (SWaT) dataset [16]. This example provides
xiaoxuanhu@njupt.edu.cn; sunyanfei@njupt.edu.cn). four sensor signals. Overall, sensor signals are time-dependent.
 Ying Sun and Zhenjiang Dong are with the School of Computer Science and The value of the next timestamp is closely related to the
Technology, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing
210023, China (e-mail: sunying@njupt.edu.cn; dongzhenjiang@njupt.edu.cn). trend of changes in the historical series. It can be observed
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3502890 that the signal exhibits significant periodicity. Meanwhile,
 1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3503113 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 Fig. 2. Visualization of related challenges. (a) If the latent space is a Gaussian
 distribution, the KL term will force the instance to move toward the prior
 (centered at the origin). N (·) represents the Gaussian distribution. (b) Lack
 of abnormal data leads to the model learning biased decision boundaries.

Fig. 1. Illustrative example (from secure water treatment system dataset). The
anomaly event is marked as yellow. Four sensors (FIT101, LIT101, MV101,
and P101). 2) The VAE-based model is prone to collapse, which will
 result in a local optimum. Probabilistic methods often
 assume that the prior follows a Gaussian distribution.
Fig. 1 shows an anomaly event (yellow span). This anomaly
 Moreover, the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence term
occurred on sensor LIT101 (set the water level above H) [16].
 in the loss function will encourage the posterior toward
During this period, the LIT101 value slowly increased, while
 the prior, which makes model optimization difficult,
FIT101 and MV101 remained uninfluenced, and P101 dropped
 as indicated in Fig. 2(a).
to a low-level value. The above situation fully demonstrates
 3) The lack of information about the anomalies. For
the coupling relationship between LIT101 and P101, and
 unsupervised anomaly detection, the model’s training
they will interact. In addition, FIT101 and MV101 are not
 process relies on unlabeled historical normal data, which
useless, as they can also create an offsetting effect that changes
 makes it unable to access abnormal knowledge and
the dependency relationship with other sensors. Therefore,
 then form inaccurate normality boundaries, as indicated
it is challenging to identify anomaly events based on purely
 in Fig. 2(b).
temporal patterns. Learning the spatial correlation between
multivariate time series is crucial. To address the abovementioned challenges, we propose a
 Graph neural networks (GNNs) [17] have successfully pro- novel variational graph attention network with self-supervised
cessed non-Euclidean data. The reason is that GNNs use a learning (VGATSL) for unsupervised anomaly detection. First,
message-passing mechanism to extract contextual representa- VGATSL adopts a graph feature extractor to capture the temtions of nodes, which helps to learn spatial features of multi- poral and feature representations used for reconstruction. This
variate time series. For example, graph convolutional network feature extractor consists of stacked spatial-temporal graph
(GCN) [18] has the characteristic of permutation invariance attention (STGAT) networks. In the second place, VGATSL
and can use fast localized convolutional filters to process non- uses the von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution as a substitute.
Euclidean data. Graph deviation network (GDN) [19] uses vMF distribution places latent representation on the surface
attention mechanisms to extract spatial information. Other of a unit hypersphere. So, KL divergence can be fixed as
methods, such as MTAD-GAT [6] and STGAT-MAD [20], a constant, structurally preventing collapse and making the
can jointly capture spatial-temporal correlations. However, model more robust. Last, VGATSL introduces self-supervised
due to limitations of fitting, these methods cannot model the learning to simulate abnormal behaviors, which attempts to
stochastic interrelationships. Recent work has also attempted perturb the normal data to synthesize compelling anomalies
to combine GNNs with probabilistic methods, considering for the model.
the randomness of multivariate time series, which helps to To summarize, the main contributions of this article are as
reduce intrinsic information loss, such as the graph rela- follows.
tional learning networks (GReLeN) [5] and variational graph 1) We propose a novel unsupervised anomaly detection
convolutional recurrent networks (VGCRN) [21]. However, method, which utilizes the graph feature extractor to
these methods cannot adaptively learn graph structures and learn spatial-temporal information and builds a VAE
often lose discriminative dependencies in the time dimension. based on bidirectional gated recurrent units (BiGRUs)
Researchers have introduced self-supervised learning into vari- to achieve the reconstruction task.
ational GNNs, such as self-supervised variational graph AEs 2) We utilize the vMF distribution instead of the Gaus-
(SS-VGAE) [22], and self-supervised multivariate KPIs sian distribution as latent space, which places the
anomaly detection (MAD-STA) [23], to improve feature sepa- latent representation on the surface of a unit hyperrability or dynamic graph structures. Unfortunately, they can- sphere to allow for uninformed priors and thus avoid
not access unknown abnormal knowledge and are difficult to KL collapse.
optimize. In summary, the research mentioned above has made 3) We introduce self-supervised learning to address the
substantial progress but still faces some critical challenges. lack of information about anomalies. Specifically, this
 1) It is difficult to capture spatial-temporal relationships module can generate different but realistic abnormal
 explicitly. Detection performance will decrease if the instances to help the model obtain rich original inforimplicit information is lost. mation and learn more explicit normality boundaries.
GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3503113

 4) Extensive experiments have been carried out on three Hence, this article attempts to use graph learning to address
 public real-world datasets to prove the effectiveness and this problem.
 progressiveness of VGATSL.
 This article is organized as follows. Section II introduces the B. Transfer Learning-Based Anomaly Detection
related work. Section III presents the preliminaries. Section IV Transfer learning is dedicated to transferring knowledge
describes VGATSL in detail. Section V reports the experimen- from one field to another related field. It is widely applied
tal results and discussions. Section VI presents the limitations in anomaly detection tasks like machine monitoring, predicand future work. Section VII draws the conclusions. tive maintenance, and energy management. Without loss of
 generality, Transfer learning-based anomaly detection methods
 II. R ELATED W ORK mainly include instance transfer, parameter transfer, mapping
 We review the vital anomaly detection research for transfer, and domain-adversarial transfer [35], [36].
multivariate time series. Meanwhile, we discuss transfer Intuitively, instance transfer assigns different weights to
learning-based anomaly detection to help readers better under- source domain data. For example, Vincent et al. [37] selected
stand current research hotspots. Considering that our method labeled instances with similar localized data distributions in
relies on spherical latent space representation and self- the source and target domains and then transferred them to
supervised learning, we summarize relevant work on these the target anomaly detection task. Parameter transfer starts
topics. with pretrained model parameters and fine-tunes on the target task. For example, Wen and Keyes [38] proposed a
A. Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection CNN-based transfer learning framework for anomaly detec-
 Traditional methods are classified into statistical learning tion. This framework pretrains the model on synthetic normal
(e.g., ARIMA [24]), clustering-based (e.g., OCSVM [25]), data and then fine-tunes its weights on unknown univariate or
density-based (e.g., LOF [26]), and isolation-based methods multivariate abnormal data.
(e.g., iForest [27]). Thanks to its powerful and robust feature The basic idea of mapping transfer is to learn the feature
extraction capabilities, more and more unsupervised detection representations of the target domain and minimize the distritasks are adopting the deep learning paradigm. bution differences between the source and the target domains.
 Prediction-based methods attempt to observe the current Typical measuring methods include Wasserstein distance [39],
data point and alert for anomalies if its predicted value maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [40], maximum mean
deviates from the actual value. Recurrent neural networks square discrepancy [41], and variance discrepancy representa-
(RNNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are the tion [42]. Qian et al. [42] proposed a vibration characteristiccore architectures of prediction-based models. Hundman et al. guided distribution alignment metric, which improves MMD.
[28], proposed LSTM-NDT, which utilizes LSTM to achieve It can express variance information and enhance discrepancy
accurate predictions and uses a nonparametric thresholding representation ability. Cao et al. [43] utilized generalized
approach to evaluate residuals. This method has been validated normality learning to minimize the distribution gap between
in detecting spacecraft anomalies. Kravchik and Shabtai [29] in-distributed and out-of-distribution normal samples.
proposed an anomaly detection scheme based on the statistical Wang et al. [44] proposed an anomaly-aware contrastive
deviation. Its core architecture is a different variant of CNNs. alignment model to align contrastive representations and
Lai et al. [30] proposed the LSTNet, which uses CNNs or labeled normal representations. Qian et al. [14] proposed
RNNs to extract time series’ local dependencies and trend an adaptive intermediate class-wise distribution alignment
information. model, which aligns the global and class-wise distributions of
 Reconstruction-based methods focus on compressing data different domains and adaptively achieves domain confusion.
into implicit representations and using the reconstruction error Inspired by GANs [9], domain-adversarial transfer aims
as the detection threshold. Currently, AE is the most popular to extract generalized features through adversarial trainmethod [10]. For example, Su et al. [1] developed a robust ing. For example, Mao et al. [13] proposed a novel deep
anomaly detection scheme, which uses the stochastic variables one-class Transfer learning method based on domain adverconnection technique to learn the normal patterns and then sarial training, which adaptively transfers one-class detection
uses reconstruction probabilities to locate anomalies. Addition- rules to improve end-to-end anomaly detection performance.
ally, GANs have also been introduced [9]. MAD-GAN [3] sets Li et al. [15] proposed a Few-shot anomaly detection framedetection thresholds based on the discrimination and recon- work, which uses a dueling triplet network to address the
struction errors. Chen et al. [31] proposed DAEMON, which constraints of unsupervised target information and learns
uses adversarial strategies to regularize implicit variables and invariant features by adversarial training.
reconstructed data for robust learning of normal patterns. It is In summary, transfer learning-based anomaly detection
worth mentioning that other methods, such as the deep autoen- methods have attracted plenty of scholars to research.
coding gaussian mixture model (DAGMM) [32], denoising AE We review these well-known works to help readers better
(DAE) [33], and Deep convolutional autoencoding memory understand current research hotspots.
networks (CAE-M) [34], have also achieved good results.
 However, the above methods cannot capture the complex C. Graph Learning in Multivariate Time Series
topological relationships between sensors, making it challeng- GNN has succeeded in modeling multivariate time
ing to process non-Euclidean data with potential correlations. series [45], [46], [47], [48]. For example, GDN [19] adopts
3503113 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

a flexible framework to construct graphs and uses attention method can address the lack of knowledge about anomalies
mechanisms to encode information. MTAD-GAT [6] treats all and promote the model to learn more explicit normality
timestamps and variables as different complete graphs and boundaries.
jointly optimizes them. STGAT-MAD [20] uses multiscale
STGAT networks to capture spatial-temporal correlations. E. Spherical Latent Space
These methods cannot model the stochastic interrelation-
 Probabilistic generative models (PGMs) have achieved
ships during reconstruction, considering the limited fitting.
 outstanding results in image classification, text translation,
Researchers attempted to combine probabilistic methods with
GNNs. Chen et al. [21], proposed VGCRN, which models the sequence prediction, and other fields [61], [62], [63]. PGMs
channel dependence and randomness using the graph convo- often assume that the prior of the latent space follows a
lutional recurrent network (GCRN). GReLeN [5] combined Gaussian distribution. This may lead to collapse. Researchers
GNNs and stochastic relation learning mechanisms to capture attempt to introduce non-Euclidean latent spaces to explore
sensor interdependence and established a composite metric. more flexible priors. For example, Nickel and Kiela [64]
These methods have achieved impressive results, but they mapped data into an n-dimensional Poincaré space to capture
cannot learn the evolutionary patterns of graph structures well hierarchical representations. Liu and Zhu [65] used Riemanand may lose discriminative dependencies in time dimension. nian manifolds as the latent space for inference models.
Based on this, researchers introduced self-supervised learn- However, these methods still require prior information and
ing into variational GNNs. For example, Zhang et al. [22] overlook the inherent spherical nature of some data. The vMF
proposed a SS-VGAE method. It searches for the optimal distribution is another competitive choice, which places the
center of the latent space, enhancing the separability of latent representation on the surface of a unit hypersphere to
mean features. Chen et al. [23] proposed a self-supervised allow for uninformed priors [66], [67]. For example, Guu et al.
multivariate anomaly detection method that combines adaptive [68] set the latent space of VAE as a vMF distribution and
graph structure learning with improved graph attention net- applied it to sentence editing tasks. Davidson et al. [69]
works (GAT). Hojjati et al. [49] used self-supervised learning replaced the Gaussian distribution with the vMF distributo map the adjacent partitions into similar representations, tion and extended the reparameterization trick for rejecting
which helps the model learn discriminative features. However, sampling. Guan and Smith [70], Xu and Durrett [71], and
these anomaly detection methods based on SS-VGAEs still Serban et al. [72] also reported superiorities of spherical latent
cannot access abnormal knowledge and are prone to forming spaces, which inspired us.
inaccurate normality boundaries. In this article, we use selfsupervised learning to simulate abnormal behaviors, which III. P RELIMINARIES
helps to synthesize compelling anomalies for the model. This Here, we introduce the concepts of GAT, VAE, and vMF disis significantly different from the previous research. Addi- tribution and analyze the limitations of Gaussian distribution.
tionally, existing variational graph AEs typically assume that
the prior follows a Gaussian distribution, which makes model A. Graph Attention Networks
optimization difficult and causes mode collapse. The proposed
method uses the vMF distribution as latent space, which places Given a graph G(V, E) with d nodes, where V =
the latent representation on the surface of a unit hypersphere {v1 , v2 , . . . , vd } is the node set. E is the edge set. Thus, the
to allow for uninformed priors and thus avoid KL collapse. attention score [48] is calculated as
It is worth mentioning that recent research has also introduced exp(δ(ω⊤ · (vi ⊕ v j )))
 αi, j = P (1)
 k∈Ni exp(δ(ω · (vi ⊕ vk )))
theories such as discrete wavelet transform and adversarial ⊤
learning into GNNs [50], [51], [52], [53].
 where δ(·) is the LeakyReLU activation function; ω is the
 learnable weight matrix; ⊕ is the concatenation operation;
D. Self-Supervised Learning Ni is the set of neighboring nodes of node i; The output
 representation of the ith node is
 Researchers are committed to developing self-supervised  
multivariate time series methods suitable for downstream X
tasks [54], [55], [56], [57], [58], [59], [60]. For example, hi = σ  αi, j v j  (2)
Eldele et al. [58] transformed the original time series data into j∈Ni
multiple views and used temporal and contextual contrastive
 where σ (·) is the Sigmoid activation function.
learning to capture robust representations. Yue et al. [59]
proposed TS2Vec, which adopts a hierarchical mechanism to
perform contrastive learning and utilizes an aggregation oper- B. Variational Autoencoder
ation to capture the sub-sequence representation. Nevertheless, The VAE is based on variational Bayesian inference [11].
these pretext tasks still cannot provide information related to Let x ∈ X represent the observed vector and z ∈ Z represent
anomalies, making it difficult to simulate real-world abnormal the continuous latent variable. The prior p(z) conforms to a
behaviors. Xu et al. [60], used a series of perturbation oper- Gaussian distribution. Moreover, we use a neural network to
ations to generate abnormal instances. These instances help parameterize the conditional distribution pθ (x|z) for modeling
the model to obtain rich abnormal information. Indeed, this the data distribution. We will train VAE by maximizing
GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3503113

marginal log-likelihood log pθ (x). However, directly optimiz- where pdata is the real data distribution. We assume that
ing log pθ (x) is complex. Therefore, a posterior distribution the distribution family for pθ (x|z) is flexible [74]. So, there
pθ (z|x) is introduced. Specifically, we use a parameterized exists p ∗ in the distribution family that makes KL( pdata (x)
variational posterior qφ (z|x) to approximate the true posterior. || p ∗ (x)) = 0. Based on this, we make pθ (z|x) = p ∗ and
Based on this, marginal log-likelihood can be written as can obtain that the first term in (5) equals zero. When the
 Z second term in (5) is also zero, we obtain the optimal ELBO.
 log pθ (x) = qφ (z|x) log pθ (x) dz In this case, we can get pθ (z|x) = qφ (z|x) = p(z). The above
 Z
 situation demonstrates that the latent variable z provides no
 pθ (x, z) qφ (z|x)
 Z  
 = qφ (z|x) log · dz information.
 qφ (z|x) pθ (z|x)
 ZZ
 pθ (x, z)
 = qφ (z|x) log dz
 Z qφ (z|x) D. vMF Distribution
 qφ (z|x)
 Z
 + qφ (z|x) log dz The vMF distribution [69] is placed on the (n − 1) dimen-
 Z pθ (z|x) sional sphere Sn−1 . It is parameterized by a direction vector µ
 = L(θ, φ; x) + KL qφ (z|x)|| pθ (z|x) .
 
 (3) and a concentration parameter κ ≥ 0, where ∥µ∥ = 1.
From this, the first term is called the evidence lower bound If κ = 0, the vMF is a Uniform distribution. The Proba-
(ELBO). The second term is the KL divergence of the varia- bility Density Function of the vMF distribution for the unit
tional posterior qφ (z|x) and the true posterior pθ (z|x). Hence, vector z is defined as
we often use L(θ, φ; x) as the lower bound of marginal
log-likelihood [73]. q(z; µ, κ) = Cn (κ)exp(κµ⊤ z) (6)
 Thus, we can expand L(θ, φ; x) κ n/2−1
 Cn (κ) = (7)
 Z
 pθ (x, z) (2π ) In/2−1 (κ)
 n/2
 L(θ, φ; x) = qφ (z|x) log dz
 qφ (z|x) where I represents the modified Bessel function.
 ZZ
 p(z)
 = qφ (z|x) log dz
 Z q φ (z|x)
 Z IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
 + qφ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) dz
 Z A. Problem Statement
 = −KL(qφ (z|x)|| p(z)) + Eqφ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)].
 Given a multivariate time series X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , x T },
 (4)
 where xt ∈ Rm is the measurement value of m sensors at
Intuitively, the first term encourages the variational posterior timestamp t. We use a sliding window with a step size of τ to
qφ (z|x) to match the prior p(z). The second term is the divide it into the sub-sequence set S = {s1 , s1+τ , . . .}, where
reconstruction loss. Since the Gaussian is a location-scale st = {xt , xt+1 , . . . , xt+l−1 } and l is the window size. This
family of distributions, we can use reparameterization tricks article aims to reconstruct sub-sequences without accessing
to approximate ELBO. label information, and it takes the deviation of reconstruction
 and actual values as the anomaly score.
C. Limitations of Gaussian Distribution
 ELBO contains two gradient terms. One is the KL diver- B. Overview
gence term. Another one is the data likelihood (reconstruction
loss). When the parameterized neural networks are RNNs, Next, we describe VGATSL in detail. As indicated in
the KL divergence term regularizes the variational posterior Fig. 3, the model comprises three sub-modules: graph feature
qφ (z|x) toward the prior p(z) [71], [74]. Because RNNs are extractor, VAE with vMF distribution, and self-supervised
universal approximators that can express arbitrary distribution learning module. Further, the workflow of this model is as
and do not rely on latent variables. According to [63], the follows.
variational posterior qφ (z|x) carries very little information, 1) Add perturbations to the original sub-sequence s; Genwhich forces the model to ignore latent variables (the model erate the abnormal instance s̃.
considers latent variables as noise sources). Based on this, the 2) Graph feature extractor captures spatial-temporal informodel may fall into a local optimum, where qφ (z|x) = p(z), mation and obtains output representations h and h̃.
which makes the KL divergence term in (4) equal to zero. 3) Establish a discriminator f c to classify output represen-
In other words, this issue is KL collapse. tations h and h̃. It can help the model learn more explicit
 Zhao et al. [74] provided theoretical explanations for the normality boundaries.
above issue from the perspective of information preference. 4) Encoder f e maps the output representation h to a latent
We rewrite (4) as [11] space H ∈ Rn . Meanwhile, the latent variable z ∈ Rn
 conforms to the vMF distribution.
 L(θ, φ; x) = −KL( pdata (x)|| pθ (x))
 5) Decoder f d reconstructs the sub-sequence based on the
 − E pdata (x) [KL(qφ (z|x)|| pθ (z|x))] ≤ 0 (5) latent variable z.
3503113 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 3. Structure of VGATSL. It consists of three sub-modules: graph Feature Extractor, VAE with vMF distribution, and self-supervised learning module.

 Fig. 5. Graph Structures. (a) Feature-oriented graph structure. (b) Temporal-oriented graph structure.

 relationships between sensors. So, we set the adjacent
 matrix Aifeat
 j = 1, where weight wi j , i; j ∈ [1, m].
 Indeed, the dependency patterns between sensors are
Fig. 4. Framework of graph feature extractor. symmetrical. Thus, the adjacent matrix Afeat should be
 diagonal. In other words, we believe the nodes have
 maximum connectivity, and each edge has a weight.
C. Graph Feature Extractor Fig. 5(a) shows the structure.
 This extractor aims to encode the spatial-temporal informa- 2) Temporal-Oriented Graph Structure: Meanwhile,
tion of sub-sequences. It includes an embedding network and we treat all timestamps within a sliding window as
stacked STGAT networks [20], as indicated in Fig. 4. a complete graph G tmp = (V tmp , E tmp ), where V tmp is
 The Embedding Network extracts the unique characteristics the node set. Each node is a feature vector xt+c at the
of each sensor [19]. Specifically, we use a 1-D CNN to timestamp t + c, and 0 ≤ c ≤ l − 1 represents
transform the sub-sequence into a feature information matrix the time interval. E tmp is an edge set that reflects the
 connection relationship between different timestamps.
 u = σ (Conv1D(s, W) + b) (8)
 Fig. 5(b) shows the structure. We believe there is a
where Conv1D(·) represent 1-D convolution operation; W is connection between the past and current nodes [20].
the weight; b is the bias. This operation enables the subsequent It is reasonable. A sensor signal is a collection of data
stacked STGAT network to understand and process them. points arranged in time order. Random variables change
 The stacked STGAT Networks use attention mechanisms to over time and have continuity. Thus, we set the adjacent
 tmp tmp
capture the sub-sequences causal relationships and temporal matrix Aab = 1, where a ≥ b. In contrast, Aab = 0,
dependencies. We first construct graph structures in feature where a<b, and a; b ∈ [t, t + l − 1].
and temporal dimensions. Then, we use the STGAT block to process feature-oriented
 1) Feature-Oriented Graph Structure: We treat the sub- and temporal-oriented graph-structured data, as indicated in
 sequence st as a complete graph G feat = (V feat , E feat ), Fig. 4. Indeed, the STGAT block contains a feature GAT layer
 where V feat = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm } is the node set, and the and a temporal GAT layer. Specifically, we input the matrix u
 sequence st(i) at sensor i represents node vi . E feat is the into the feature GAT layer to learn the spatial correlation,
 edge set. A correlation relationship between any nodes i according to (1) and (2). The output representation r ϑ can be
 and j must exist. There may be implicit dependency obtained, where ϑ represents the number of STGAT blocks.
GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3503113

Meanwhile, the same operation captures temporal correlation scheme [77] to sample ϖ ∈ [−1, 1] from the univariate
in different timestamps. So, we can obtain the final output density g(ϖ |κ, n). According to [69], we can expand the
representation h ϑ . univariate density g(ϖ |κ, n) as follows:
 n  1 (n−3)
 2 π2 exp(κϖ ) 1 − ϖ 2 2
D. VAE With vMF g(ϖ |κ, n) =  C n2 (10)
 0 n2 B 12 , 12 (n − 1)
 
 Based on the above discussion, we adopt the VAE
model [11] to achieve the reconstruction task and use where B(·) is the Beta function. Thus, we can calculate the
BiGRUs as the encoder f e and decoder f d . Compared with latent variable z ′ ← (ϖ ; ((1 − ϖ 2 )1/2 )ε⊤ )⊤ under modal e1 .
LSTM-based models, BiGRUs have fewer parameters, faster Finally, we use orthogonal transform U (µ) to obtain a latent
convergence speed, and superior performance [75]. Addi- variable z that conforms to q(z|µ, κ). Specifically, we use
tionally, we choose the vMF distribution as the prior and Householder reflection to implement this operation, as shown
variational posterior to avoid KL collapse [63], [74]. in Algorithm 2.
 Specifically, the encoder f e encodes the output representation h and obtains the latent variable z ∈ Rn . Here, we assume Algorithm 1 Sampling Process
that the prior p(z) is a Uniform distribution on the hypersphere Require: Mean µ; Concentration κ;
vMF(·, κ = 0). It is represented as one divided by the surface 1: Sample ε ∼ vMF(z|e1 , κ);
area of a (n − 1) dimensional sphere 1/[2(π n/2 )/0(n/2)], 2: Sample ϖ √ ∼ g(ϖ |κ, n) ∝ exp(κϖ )(1 − ϖ 2 )(n−3)/2 ;
where 0(·) is the Gamma function [69]. Meanwhile, we use 3: z ′ ← (ϖ ; ( 1 − ϖ 2 )ε ⊤ )⊤ ;
the variational posterior qφ (z|x) = vMF(z; µ, κ) to approx- 4: U ← Householder(e1 , µ);
imate the true posterior pθ (z|x), where the mean parameter return U z ′ ;
µ is the output of the encoding neural network and the
concentration parameter κ is a constant. According to (6)
and (7), we can rewrite the KL divergence term in (4)
 Algorithm 2 Householder Transform
 KL(vMF(z; µ, κ)||vMF(·, 0)) Require: Mean µ; Modal vector e1 ;
 = KL qφ (z|x)|| p(z) 1: ν ′ ∼ e1 − µ;
 
 ν′
 Z
 qφ (z|µ, κ) 2: ν ← ∥ν ′ ∥ ;
 = qφ (z|µ, κ) log dz 3: U ← I − 2νν ′ ;
 p(z)
 ZZ return U ;
 qφ (z|µ, κ) log Cn (κ) + κµT z − log p(z) dz
 
 =
 Z " # On this basis, we utilize decoder f d to reconstruct the sub-
 2 π n/2
 = log Cn (κ) + κµEq [z] + log sequence. Its input is latent variable z. The loss function is
 0(n/2)
 n  n Lrec = Eqφ (z|s) [log pθ (s|z)]
 = − 1 log κ − log(2π ) − log I n2 −1 (κ)
 2 2 − KL(vMF(µ, κ)||vMF(·, κ = 0)) (11)
 I n2 (κ) n n 
 +κ + log π + log 2 − log 0 . (9) where the first term is reconstruction loss, and the second term
 I n2 −1 (κ) 2 2
 is the KL divergence based on vMF distribution.
It is evident that the modified KL divergence relies solely on
the concentration κ, and not on the mean µ. KL divergence
 E. Self-Supervised Learning
is a function of hyperparameters n and κ, which can be
precisely controlled [68]. Specifically, we consider κ as a This module uses pretext tasks to provide information about
constant. Thus, the KL divergence term is also a constant, anomalies. Actually, we add tailored perturbations to normal
and the KL collapse will not occur; there is qφ (z|x) ̸ = sub-sequences to simulate abnormal instances. These instances
p(z). At this point, we believe the latent variable z provides help to learn more explicit decision boundaries. Specifically,
rich information. However, when using Gaussian VAE, the contextual and collection transformations are adopted [60].
value of KL divergence is constantly changing. It exhibits 1) Contextual Transformation: Randomly select dimena concentrated probability mass around the origin. In other sions of the last observation of the input sub-sequence;
words, the Gaussian VAE habit pulls the posterior toward the Calculate the mean of the previous values; Add offset to
prior [71]. In this case, the latent variable z does not provide the mean and obtain the contextual outlier; Replace the
any information, which makes optimization difficult [76]. data values of the selected dimensions with contextual
 Next, we introduce the details of sampling latent variable outliers. The offset is −0.5 or +0.5.
z from the vMF distribution. We follow Wood’s rejection 2) Collection Transformation: Randomly select a group of
sampling scheme [77], as illustrated in Algorithm 1. It is an dimensions; Randomly select a segment of the input
improved Ulrich’s procedure [78]. Specifically, we sample ε sub-sequence (its length not exceeding 0.2 l); Take the
from the distribution vMF(z|e1 , κ) with modal vector e1 = last observation as the endpoint of the segment; Use the
(1, 0, . . . , 0), where ε is a unit vector tangent to the hyper- collection outliers to replace the values of the segment
sphere. Second, we use an acceptance–rejection sampling in the selected dimension.
3503113 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE I set is 11.97%. We downsample the SWaT dataset every
 I NFORMATION OF DATASETS 10 seconds to speed up the training.
 2) Water Distribution Dataset (WADI) [79] is a simulated
 large-scale urban water distribution system with more
 realistic water treatment and distribution networks. The
 system has been running for 16 days. In the first
 14 days, we collected 118 795 normal data for training—
 the last 2 days in attack scenarios. Thus, we collected
 To learn intrinsic representations from these transforma- 17 275 data for testing, of which 5.99% were abnortions, we use a discriminator f c to classify the output mal. The testbed consists of 127 sensors and actuators.
representations h and h̃, as shown in Fig. 3. It helps deter- We also downsample the WADI dataset.
mine whether the input sub-sequence is from the normal or 3) Wind Turbine Dataset (WTD) [20] is collected by ten
abnormal data. So, this process can be formulated as sensors. The collection process lasts 1–2 years, with
 a sampling interval of 10 min. Considering on-the-
 Lssl = − ya log( f c (h)) + yb log f c h̃
  
 (12)
 spot operation and maintenance records from wind farm
where ya = 1 and yb = 0 are pseudo labels. Please note that operators, we labeled the data deviating from normal
abnormal instances share the same pseudo labels. mode. The proportion of abnormal data in the test set
 is 43.70%.
F. Training and Inference Based on this, the data format is measured values with
 timestamps, known as a multivariate time series. We use all
 1) Training: In summary, we combine reconstruction and
 sensor records as input features for the model. Specifically,
self-supervised losses to train the model. The final loss funcwe set sliding step τ = 1 and the sliding window size
tion is
 l = 5 under SWaT, l = 5 under WADI, and l = 60
 L = Lrec + λLssl (13) under WTD. Totally, we obtain 47 511 training samples and
 44 982 test samples under SwaT (sample format is subwhere λ is a tradeoff coefficient. sequence, with feature size of 51 and length of 5),
 2) Inference: The VAE with vMF distribution attempts to 118 791 training samples and 17 271 test samples under WADI
reconstruct the input sub-sequence. We use unlabeled his- (feature size of 127 and length of 5), and 24 074 training
torical normal data to train the model. Thus, based on the samples and 28 598 test samples under WTD (feature size
reconstruction error value, we can judge whether the test of 10 and length of 60). Please note that once a timestamp
instance is normal or abnormal. in a sub-sequence exhibits abnormal behavior, we will label
 First of all, we calculate the abnormal score as the entire sub-sequence as an abnormal sample. Furthermore,
 1 we apply the same data preprocessing to all methods, i.e.,
 Score = ∥xt − x̂ t ∥2 (14) using Minimum-and-Maximum normalization to scale the
 m
 SWaT, WADI, and WTD datasets. We randomly divide 20%
where x̂ t is the predicted value. Second, consistent with [20], of the training data as the validation set.
we set a decision threshold based on expert knowledge. If the 2) Metrics: Consistent with [5], [6], and [19], we select Preabnormal score exceeds the threshold, the input is abnormal cision (Prec), Recall (Rec), and F1-Score (F1) as evaluation
and vice versa. indicators.

 V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
A. Datasets and Metrics B. Comparison Methods
 1) Datasets: We evaluate and compare VGATSL on three VGATSL is compared with different popular and typical
public and real-world datasets. As listed in Table I, we provide methods.
helpful information such as dataset name and size, sample 1) PCA [80], which is used to find low-dimensional prodimension, and anomaly rate. jections to capture most of the variance in the data.
 1) Secure Water Treatment Dataset (SWaT) [16] comes 2) iForest [27], which isolates each data point to a termifrom a water treatment testbed with 51 sensors. nation node. The path length from the termination node
 The system has been running for 11 days. Further, the to the root node is an anomaly measure.
 system suffered 41 cyber and physical attacks in the 3) LSTM-AE [10], which is a reconstruction-based method.
 last 4 days. These attacks have different intentions and We set the encoder and decoder as a double-layer LSTM.
 durations. Please note that the collection is continuous. 4) USAD [81], which is a typical unsupervised anomaly
 Therefore, we label the overall sequential data based on detection method that uses an adversarial training
 each timestamp’s normal and abnormal behavior. In the scheme based on encoder–decoder architecture to learn
 experiment, we use 47 515 normal data collected in the reconstruction errors.
 first 7 days for training and 44 986 data collected in 5) MAD-GAN [3], which is a GAN-based method that uses
 the last 4 days for testing. The anomaly rate in the test LSTM-RNN to capture temporal correlations.
GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3503113

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHOD

 6) GDN [19], which learns the topological relationships
 between sensors and utilizes attention mechanisms to
 predict the future values of nodes.
 7) MTAD-GAT [6], which includes reconstruction and
 prediction-based models, treating all timestamps and
 variables in a multivariate time series as two complete
 graphs to encode temporal and spatial correlations. Fig. 6. Confusion matrices on three datasets. (a) SWaT. (b) WADI. (c) WTD.
 8) STGAT-MAD [20], which uses stacked STGAT networks
 to capture the temporal and feature correlations.
 The network structure of VGATSL is as follows: 1) the The competitiveness of VGATSL can be attributed to these
number of STGAT blocks is two; 2) encoder or decoder is aspects. First, we use advanced network structures to model
BiGRUs with 150 neurons; 3) the dimension size of z is 15; multivariate time series, which compensate for the shortand 4) the discriminator is a double-layer, fully connected comings of existing methods in spatial-temporal information
network. loss. Second, different signal transformations collaborate to
 We train this model on an NVIDIA GeForce generate anomaly instances, which helps the model form
RTX 4090 GPU. The Adam optimizer [82] is also selected, more explicit decision boundaries. Third, compared with the
and the initial learning rate is 0.001. We set the hyper- Gaussian distribution, the vMF distribution learns stochastic
parameter λ = 0.1, and κ = 25. interrelationships, which helps to eliminate the KL collapse
 of the Encode–Decode.
 Next, we plot VGATSL’s confusion matrices. As indicated
C. Results and Analysis in Fig. 6, VGATSL can effectively identify the abnormal class.
 Table II reports the results. VGATSL achieved the best For SWaT dataset, the actual negative rate is 99.52%. For
results on all datasets. Compared with other methods, WADI dataset, the actual negative rate is 99.43%. For WTD
VGATSL improves the F1-Score by 0.26% on SWaT dataset, dataset, the actual negative rate is 95.25%. The misclassifica-
1.10% on WADI dataset, and 2.86% on WTD dataset. Overall, tion proportion is higher for normal data than for abnormal
as the size of the dataset increases, there is less performance data. This can be attributed to:
improvement. The main reasons are as follows. 1) We do not use the “Point Adjust” scheme in this
 1) Inaccurate label information. experiment.
 2) Data contains more noise. 2) We do not use the “Reduction,” which can confuse the
 3) Differences in data distribution. decision boundaries.
 Because of the limitations of feature extraction techniques,
traditional methods perform terribly on three datasets. In deep
 D. Ablation Study
learning methods, LSTM-AE and USAD are susceptible
to noise interference, which makes identifying normality Meanwhile, ablation studies demonstrate the necessity of
boundaries in large-scale datasets challenging. MAD-GAN different components. We set five variants.
performed well on the SWaT dataset. However, it performs 1) Disable graph feature extractor (abbreviated as
terribly on WADI and WTD datasets. Because the generative w/o GFE).
ability of MAD-GAN is limited, it cannot capture all patterns 2) Disable vMF distribution (replace with Gaussian distriin complex data distributions. Graph learning methods, such bution, and abbreviated as w/o vMF, G-VAE).
as GDN, MTAD-GAT, and STGAT-MAD, can extract spa- 3) Disable vMF distribution (replace with AE, abbreviated
tial information, which helps improve detection performance. as w/o vMF, AE).
However, these methods make it difficult to model the stochas- 4) Disable self-supervised learning module (abbreviated as
tic interrelationships during reconstruction. w/o SSL).
3503113 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

 TABLE III
 A BLATION R ESULTS

 Fig. 7. Parameter sensitivity analysis on wind turbine Dataset. (a) SWaT.
 (b) WADI. (c) WTD.

 5) Disable BiGRUs (replace with BiLSTM, and abbreviated as w/o BiGRUs).
 Table III shows the results. After removing the graph
feature extractor, we observe that the F1-Score decreases
from 0.8855 to 0.8669. The feature extractor can encode
spatiotemporal information, which helps the model capture the
causal relationships and temporal dependencies. We also find
 Fig. 8. Detailed analysis of the proposed method. (a) Graph attention
that w/o SSL reduces performance. Indeed, this module helps network. (b) Self-supervised learning.
the model learn more explicit normality boundaries.
 The vMF distribution allows for uninformed priors, thus
avoiding the KL collapse. After replacing the latent space Furthermore, we evaluated the performance of dimensions
with Gaussian distribution, F1-Score decreased by 3.53%; for different latent variables n ∈ [5, 15, 25, 50, 100]. Here,
After replacing the latent space with AE, F1-Score decreased we set the sliding window length to 60 and the tradeoff
by 2.74%. It is because Gaussian VAE pulls the posterior parameter to 0.1. As indicated in Fig. 7(c), VGATSL is robust
toward the prior. Moreover, BiGRUs are function approxi- to the latent dimensions, and the performance difference is
mators that can fit any probability distribution and do not insignificant under different parameter settings. We find that
rely on latent variables. AE’s performance is slightly better when n = 50, F1-Score decreases to 0.8288; When n = 100,
than G-VAE. F1-Score reaches 0.9064.
 If the BiLSTM backbone network was used, F1-Score
decreased by 9.54% compared to the proposed method.
 F. Detailed Analysis
BiGRUs have fewer parameters, faster convergence speed, and
a superior ability to capture time series features. Previous experiments have demonstrated the importance
 of the graph feature extractor. In Fig. 8(a), we analyze the
 performance of different attention layers (i.e., feature and
E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis temporal graph attention layer). The experiment is conducted
 To better illustrate the impact of different parameters, we set on the WTD dataset. When only using the feature or temporal
three configurations: sliding window length l, tradeoff param- graph attention layer, the F1-Score significantly decreases,
eter λ, and dimensions of latent variables n. with an accuracy decrease of over 3%. This indicates that
 This section provides a detailed performance comparison the relationship between the feature and the temporal graph
of the WTD dataset. Fig. 7(a) shows the comparison results attention layers is complementary, playing a positive role
of different sliding window lengths l ∈ [5, 30, 60, 100]. Here, in extracting spatial and temporal information. We find that
we set the tradeoff parameter to 0.1 and the dimensions of under the same conditions, temporal-oriented graph attention
latent variables to 15. The results indicate that the performance networks are superior to feature-oriented graph attention netgradually improves as the sliding window length increases. works. This is because industrial data usually has temporal
When l = 100, F1-Score suddenly drops to 0.7797. This characteristics such as dynamism and nonstationarity, which
is because a larger sliding window may not only provide contain the evolution laws and state information of industrial
more temporal information to the model but also increase the systems and are more prominent than spatial characteristics
difficulty of encoding temporal representations. such as coupling in topological relationships.
 In Fig. 7(b), we compare the test results with different Fig. 8(b) shows the comparative performance analysis of
tradeoff parameters λ ∈ [0.1, 0.4, 0.7, 1.0]. It can be observed different signal transformations. It can be observed that the
that as the tradeoff parameter λ gradually increases, the overall signal transformation of “Contextual” is competitive. When the
performance shows a downward trend. When λ = 0.7, the model only learns the enhanced data generated by the “Collecmodel achieves the lowest F1-Score. Self-supervised learning tion” signal transformation, its performance will significantly
brings more raw anomaly information to the model. However, decrease. We believe the anomaly examples generated by the
during training, a larger proportion of self-supervised learning transformation of “Collection” are relatively rare in realistic
losses can affect the performance of other components and datasets. When the model is trained, its decision boundaries
mislead the decision boundaries. will be blurred if all the enhanced data are such examples.
GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3503113

Fig. 9. Performance comparison under different percentage of anomaly.
(a) F1-Score. (b) AUC-PR. Fig. 10. Case analysis on wind turbine dataset. (a) Multivariate time series.
 (b) Anomaly score.

However, when the model jointly learns the enhanced data
generated by the transformation of two types of signals, it will
achieve complementary performance and achieve the best
detection results.

G. Percentage of Anomaly
 Next, we set the anomaly ratios on the test set to 5%, 10%, Fig. 11. Convergence of proposed method. (a) SWaT. (b) WADI. (c) WTD.
15%, 20%, and 25% to simulate possible anomalies that may
occur in the real world. We still use the WTD dataset as
an example. In particular, we chose USAD and GDN as a
comparison.
 Fig. 9(a) shows the F1-Score under different anomaly
ratios. Meanwhile, we plot the corresponding AUR-PR values, Fig. 12. Inference time of proposed method. (a) SWaT. (b) WADI. (c) WTD.
as indicated in Fig. 9(b). Overall, the performance of VGATSL
is superior to that of USAD and GDN. It is worth mentioning TABLE IV
that when the ratio values are 15% and 20%, the performance M EASUREMENTS ON W IND T URBINE DATASET
of GDN reaches its best. This experiment demonstrates that
VGATSL has good stability and can address the problem of
imbalanced datasets in real industrial scenarios.

H. Case Studies
 We provide cases to demonstrate the interpretability of
VGATSL. Specifically, we use a downsampling technique Table IV lists the parameter sizes of different models
to reduce the sequence length. As indicated in Fig. 10(a), to compare their corresponding spatial efficiency. GDN has
we present test examples on the WTD dataset. The red the lowest number of parameters and model size. Additionarea represents the abnormal data we have detected. On this ally, VGATSL achieves the second-best spatial efficiency.
basis, we calculate the average anomaly score, which helps to Compared with MAD-GAN, its model size has decreased
locate the faulty sensor. To save space, we only analyze the by 0.3 MB; Compared with STGAT-MAD, its model size
situation in region two. As shown in Fig. 10(b), darker colors decreased by 1.17 MB. Therefore, the proposed method also
indicate higher average anomaly scores; therefore, wind speed has flexibility in practical applications.
is considered the most likely sensor to fail. The anomaly is the
cracking of the main bearing, and frequent changes in wind VI. L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
speed are the leading cause. Although the proposed method reduces computational
 costs (memory consumption, FLOP, parameter count),
I. Convergence and Complexity Analysis it takes 15.52 s (0.345 ms/sample) to infer SWaT,
 Fig. 11 shows the training loss of VGATSL. For the SWaT 27.44 s (1.589 ms/sample) to infer WADI, and 1.87 s
dataset, this method converges at the 50th epoch; For the (0.065 ms/sample) to infer WTD on NVIDIA GeForce
WADI dataset, this method converges at the 80th epoch; For RTX 4090 GPU. We consider this to be due to multiple
the WTD dataset, this method converges at the 500th epoch. spatiotemporal attention blocks in the network. In addition,
In conclusion, VGATSL has convergence and stability and a solving the vMF distribution is relatively cumbersome, and
fast convergence speed. using reparameterization techniques can reduce application
 Next, we evaluate the inference time of various methods efficiency and feasibility.
on different datasets. Here, we chose MAD-GAN, GDN, In the future, we will research: 1) we attempt to incorand STGAT-MAD as comparative methods. As indicated in porate prior knowledge into the proposed method to learn
Fig. 12, VGATSL is competitive regarding time efficiency. intrinsic representations from mixed information sources and
3503113 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

achieve fault localization, monitoring, and other activities in [13] W. Mao, G. Wang, L. Kou, and X. Liang, “Deep domain-adversarial
more complex industrial systems and 2) we will develop anomaly detection with one-class transfer learning,” IEEE/CAA J.
 Autom. Sinica, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 524–546, Feb. 2023.
more efficient and robust models and conduct comprehensive [14] Q. Qian, J. Luo, and Y. Qin, “Adaptive intermediate class-wise distheoretical analysis. tribution alignment: A universal domain adaptation and generalization
 method for machine fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 Syst., early access, Mar. 21, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3376449.
 VII. C ONCLUSION [15] H. Li, W. Zheng, F. Tang, Y. Zhu, and J. Huang, “Few-shot timeseries anomaly detection with unsupervised domain adaptation,” Inf. Sci.,
 This article proposes an unsupervised anomaly detection vol. 649, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 119610.
method called variational graph attention networks with self- [16] J. Goh, S. Adepu, M. Tan, and Z. S. Lee, “Anomaly detection in cyber
supervised learning. We have built a graph feature extractor physical systems using recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 18th
 Int. Symp. High Assurance Syst. Eng. (HASE), Jan. 2017, pp. 140–145.
based on stacked STGAT networks to learn feature-oriented [17] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A comand temporal-oriented topological structures. In particular, prehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
the relationship between the feature and the temporal graph Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Mar. 2020.
attention layers is complementary, playing a positive role in [18] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural
 networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” in Proc. Adv.
extracting spatial and sequential information. Additionally, Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 29, 2016, pp. 3844–3852.
the vMF distribution is selected as the latent space, which [19] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
places the latent representation on the surface of the unit in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
 May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
hypersphere to allow for uninformed priors, thus preventing
 [20] J. Zhan et al., “Stgat-mad : Spatial–temporal graph attention network
the model from falling into the local optimum. We also find for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
that the performance of different signal transformations varies. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022, pp. 3568–3572.
The self-supervised learning module can simulate abnormal [21] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
behaviors and help the model form more explicit decision variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
 series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
boundaries. Extensive experiments demonstrate that VGATSL pp. 3621–3633.
outperforms the baseline methods and can be applied to actual [22] L. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised variational graph autoencoder for
industrial scenarios. system-level anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
 pp. 1–11, 2023.
 [23] N. Chen, H. Tu, H. Zeng, and Y. Ou, “Anomaly detection for
 R EFERENCES key performance indicators by fusing self-supervised spatio-temporal
 graph attention networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 300, Sep. 2024,
 [1] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Art. no. 112167.
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural [24] Q. Yu, L. Jibin, and L. Jiang, “An improved ARIMA-based traffic
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data anomaly detection algorithm for wireless sensor networks,” Int. J.
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837. Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 12, no. 1, Jan. 2016, Art. no. 9653230.
 [2] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory [25] J. Ma and S. Perkins, “Time-series novelty detection using one-class
 networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detec- support vector machines,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., vol. 3,
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–12080, 2003, pp. 1741–1745.
 Dec. 2023. [26] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 [3] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
 adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. Cham, [27] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
 Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 703–716. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Oct. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 [4] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous [28] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and non-
 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 4433–4439. parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 [5] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
 anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in [29] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Detecting cyber attacks in industrial
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2390–2397. control systems using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Workshop
 [6] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph Cyber-Phys. Syst. Secur. PrivaCy, Jan. 2018, pp. 72–83.
 attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), [30] G. Lai, W.-C. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Modeling long-and short-
 Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850. term temporal patterns with deep neural networks,” in Proc. Int. ACM
 [7] K. Greff, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutník, B. R. Steunebrink, and Conf. Res. Devel. Inf. Retrieval (SIGIR), 2018, pp. 95–104.
 J. Schmidhuber, “LSTM: A search space Odyssey,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 [31] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2222–2232, Oct. 2016.
 interpretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf.
 [8] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Tempo- Data Eng. (ICDE), Apr. 2021, pp. 2225–2230.
 ral convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in
 [32] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu-
 Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
 pp. 156–165.
 pp. 1–19.
 [9] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun.
 ACM, vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, 2020. [33] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol, “Extracting
 and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in Proc.
[10] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
 25th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2008, pp. 1096–1103.
 G. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder–decoder for multi-sensor anomaly
 detection,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148. [34] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
[11] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013, detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 arXiv:1312.6114. Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2021.
[12] M. Gutoski, N. M. R. Aquino, M. Ribeiro, A. E. Lazzaretti, and [35] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
 H. S. Lopes, “Detection of video anomalies using convolutional autoen- ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, Jul. 2009.
 coders and one-class support vector machines,” in Proc. 13th Brazilian [36] V. Vercruyssen, W. Meert, and J. Davis, “Transfer learning for time series
 Congr. Comput. Inteligence, Jan. 2018, pp. 1–12. anomaly detection,” in Proc. IAL@ PKDD/ECML, 2017, pp. 27–36.
GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 3503113

[37] V. Vincent, M. Wannes, and D. Jesse, “Transfer learning for anomaly [59] Z. Yue et al., “Ts2vec: Towards universal representation of time series,”
 detection through localized and unsupervised instance selection,” in in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 8980–8987.
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 6054–6061. [60] H. Xu, Y. Wang, S. Jian, Q. Liao, Y. Wang, and G. Pang, “Calibrated
[38] T. Wen and R. Keyes, “Time series anomaly detection using convolu- one-class classification for unsupervised time series anomaly detectional neural networks and transfer learning,” 2019, arXiv:1905.13628. tion,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5723–5736,
[39] J. Shen, Y. Qu, W. Zhang, and Y. Yu, “Wasserstein distance guided Nov. 2024.
 representation learning for domain adaptation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. [61] M. Tschannen, O. Bachem, and M. Lucic, “Recent advances in
 Artif. Intell., 2018, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 1–8. autoencoder-based representation learning,” 2018, arXiv:1812.05069.
[40] E. Tzeng, J. Hoffman, N. Zhang, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell, [62] Y. Miao, L. Yu, and P. Blunsom, “Neural variational inference for text
 “Deep domain confusion: Maximizing for domain invariance,” 2014, processing,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), vol. 48,
 arXiv:1412.3474. Jun. 2016, pp. 1727–1736.
[41] Q. Qian, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, and Y. Qin, “Maximum mean square [63] S. R. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, A. M. Dai, R. Jozefowicz, and
 discrepancy: A new discrepancy representation metric for mechanical S. Bengio, “Generating sentences from a continuous space,” 2015,
 fault transfer diagnosis,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 276, Sep. 2023, arXiv:1511.06349.
 Art. no. 110748. [64] M. Nickel and D. Kiela, “Poincaré embeddings for learning hierarchical
[42] Q. Qian, H. Pu, T. Tu, and Y. Qin, “Variance discrepancy representation: representations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017,
 A vibration characteristic-guided distribution alignment metric for fault pp. 6341–6350.
 transfer diagnosis,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 217, Aug. 2024, [65] C. Liu and J. Zhu, “Riemannian stein variational gradient descent for
 Art. no. 111544. Bayesian inference,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, vol. 32,
[43] T. Cao, J. Zhu, and G. Pang, “Anomaly detection under distribution no. 1, pp. 1–8.
 shift,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, [66] A. Banerjee, I. S. Dhillon, J. Ghosh, S. Sra, and G. Ridgeway, “Cluspp. 6488–6500. tering on the unit hypersphere using von Mises-Fisher distributions,” J.
[44] Q. Wang, G. Pang, M. Salehi, W. Buntine, and C. Leckie, “Cross-domain Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 6, no. 9, 2005.
 graph anomaly detection via anomaly-aware contrastive alignment,” in [67] R. A. Fisher, “Dispersion on a sphere,” Proc. Roy. Soc. London A, Math.
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 4676–4684. Phys. Sci., vol. 217, no. 1130, pp. 295–305, 1953.
[45] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., [68] K. Guu, T. B. Hashimoto, Y. Oren, and P. Liang, “Generating senvol. 2, no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021. tences by editing prototypes,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, vol. 6,
[46] J. Zhou et al., “Graph neural networks: A review of methods and pp. 437–450, Jul. 2018.
 applications,” AI Open, vol. 1, pp. 57–81, Jan. 2020. [69] T. R. Davidson, L. Falorsi, N. De Cao, T. Kipf, and J. M. Tomczak,
[47] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph “Hyperspherical variational auto-encoders,” 2018, arXiv:1804.00891.
 convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907. [70] H. Guan and W. A. P. Smith, “Structure-from-motion in spherical video
[48] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and using the von Mises-Fisher distribution,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
 Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903. vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 711–723, Feb. 2017.
[49] H. Hojjati, M. Sadeghi, and N. Armanfard, “Multivariate time-series [71] J. Xu and G. Durrett, “Spherical latent spaces for stable variational
 anomaly detection with temporal self-supervision and graphs: Applica- autoencoders,” 2018, arXiv:1808.10805.
 tion to vehicle failure prediction,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. [72] I. V. Serban, A. G. Ororbia II, J. Pineau, and A. Courville, “Piece-
 Knowl. Discovery Databases. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023, wise latent variables for neural variational text processing,” 2016,
 pp. 242–259. arXiv:1612.00377.
[50] D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, L. Livi, and C. Alippi, “Change detection [73] X. Chen et al., “Variational lossy autoencoder,” 2016, arXiv:1611.02731.
 in graph streams by learning graph embeddings on constant-curvature [74] S. Zhao, J. Song, and S. Ermon, “InfoVAE: Information maximizing
 manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 6, variational autoencoders,” 2017, arXiv:1706.02262.
 pp. 1856–1869, Jun. 2020. [75] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation
[51] P. Qi, D. Li, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-SGCN: Multivariate anomaly of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014,
 detection with self-learning graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. arXiv:1412.3555.
 Conf. Data Eng., 2022, pp. 1232–1244. [76] M. Abul Hasnat, J. Bohné, J. Milgram, S. Gentric, and L. Chen, “Von
[52] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet Mises-Fisher mixture model-based deep learning: Application to face
 graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” verification,” 2017, arXiv:1706.04264.
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023. [77] A. T. A. Wood, “Simulation of the von Mises Fisher distribution,”
[53] T. K. K. Ho and N. Armanfard, “Self-supervised learning for anomalous Commun. Statist.-Simul. Comput., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 157–164, Jan. 1994.
 channel detection in EEG graphs: Application to seizure analysis,” in [78] G. Ulrich, “Computer generation of distributions on the M-sphere,”
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 7866–7874. J. Roy. Stat. Soc., Ser. C, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 158–163, 1984.
[54] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework [79] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
 Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. systems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Physical Syst. Smart Water
[55] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for Netw., 2017, pp. 25–28.
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [80] M.-L. Shyu, S.-C. Chen, K. Sarinnapakorn, and L. W. Chang, “A novel
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738. anomaly detection scheme based on principal component classifier,” in
[56] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked Proc. ICDM Found. New Direction Data Mining Workshop, Piscataway,
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. NJ, USA, 2003, pp. 172–179.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009. [81] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
[57] C.-C. Chiu, J. Qin, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, and Y. Wu, “Self-supervised learning “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 with random-projection quantizer for speech recognition,” in Proc. Int. in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 3915–3924. 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
[58] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and [82] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 contextual contrasting,” 2021, arXiv:2106.14112. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.