IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025 2225

 VPN-Encrypted Network Traffic Classification
 Using a Time-Series Approach
 Jaidip Kotak , Idan Yankelev , Idan Bibi, Yuval Elovici , and Asaf Shabtai

 Abstract—Network traffic classification provides value to orga- applications or the type of applications, by analyzing the
nizations and Internet service providers (ISPs). The identification packets. This capability is extremely important for organiof applications or services from network traffic enables orga- zations and network service providers, since it (1) provides
nizations to better manage their business, and ISPs to offer
services to their users. Given the vast quantity of traffic flowing effective security (e.g., detecting anomalous traffic or applicain and out of organizations, it is impractical to write manual tion behavior), and (2) guarantees network quality-of-service
signatures for traffic identification. The effectiveness of machine (QoS) for specific applications (e.g., video streaming).
learning (ML) in the identification of applications or services The main challenges faced when performing NTC are:
from network traffic has been demonstrated. Even when network (1) the large volume of network traffic, (2) the evolving nature
traffic is encrypted, ML algorithms achieve high accuracy in the
task of traffic identification based on statistical information and of network traffic patterns due to user behavior and changes
the packets’ headers and payloads. However, existing approaches in applications’ functionality, and (3) the use of technologies
were shown to be ineffective for VPN-encrypted network traffic. like network address translation (NAT), internal proxies, and
In this study, we propose a novel time-series based approach for VPNs.
the identification of traffic/source applications on VPN-encrypted The two existing network traffic classification approaches—
traffic. We also demonstrate the broad applicability of our
proposed approach by evaluating its effectiveness on non-VPN feature-based and rule-based methods (statistical and
traffic that is encrypted, and on IoT traffic. behavioral)—are not directly applicable to VPN-encrypted
 traffic. The limitation of the feature-based approach is based
 Index Terms—Network traffic classification, virtual private
networks (VPN), machine learning, encrypted traffic and cyber- on the network flow, from which it identifies the right
security. features and preprocesses them for the machine learning
 (ML) model [11], [12]; it is not possible to segregate
 different network flows in VPN-encrypted traffic, as all of
 I. I NTRODUCTION the traffic is within a single VPN-encrypted tunnel and is
 MONG other changes in the past decade, today’s work- therefore a single network flow. The rule-based approach relies
A from-home culture has played a role in shifting people
to online platforms, which has led to a dramatic increase in
 mainly on the port number and the header fields of network
 communication [13], [14]. However, as mentioned, in VPNthe amount of Internet traffic. The number of Internet users encrypted traffic there is a single network flow and the header
worldwide is currently around 4.9 billion; this means that information is not visible due to the encryption provided by the
almost two-thirds of the world’s population is connected to VPN. Therefore, these approaches are not directly applicable
the Internet [1]. to VPN-encrypted network traffic classification (V-NTC).
 Due to online privacy campaigns and growing concern from Our Method: We propose a method for V-NTC, which is
advertisers, Internet service providers (ISPs), and governments based on the sliding window of a time series. In this method,
regarding the disruption, manipulation, and monitoring of features from the packets are derived every second, and the
Internet traffic, users’ awareness of privacy issues associated features of m seconds are appended to form a single training
with Internet use has grown [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. To or testing instance, where m is the window length. Then, to
preserve privacy, circumvent censorship, and access geo- form the next data instance, we slide by one second (i.e., 2
filtered content, many users use virtual private network (VPN) to m+1 seconds) and construct a second data instance. The
technology [8], [9], [10]. InceptionTime model [15] was used to classify the time-series
 Given the increased volume of network traffic, there is based instances.
a need for service providers and organizations to perform Evaluation: Initially, we planned to use the publicly
automatic network traffic classification (NTC) to infer the available VPN traffic dataset – ISCXVPN2016 [16] –
 to evaluate the proposed method for VPN-encrypted traf-
 Received 25 December 2023; revised 12 August 2024 and 22 November fic classification. However, since we found a discrepancy
2024; accepted 23 January 2025. Date of publication 20 February 2025; in this dataset (described in detail in Section II-B),
date of current version 22 April 2025. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Y. Diao. we formed our own dataset that includes traffic from
(Corresponding author: Jaidip Kotak.) three geographical locations. This dataset is available
 The authors are with the Department of Software and Information Systems at https://zenodo.org/records/13301379. We evaluated our
Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be’er Sheva 84105, Israel
(e-mail: jaidip@post.bgu.ac.il). approach on the entire dataset and for each geographical loca-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3543903 tion, on both the classification task at the category level (e.g.,
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

streaming, chat), and the application level (e.g., YouTube, for their application’s communication. Even DPI tools are
Vimeo). An accuracy of 93-95% was obtained for category- irrelevant, as most of the traffic is encrypted or VPN-encrypted
level classification for each location and for the combined these days.
traffic from all three locations. Accuracy ranging from 84% Due to the lack of privacy, technologies such as NAT,
to 91% was obtained for application-level classification for internal proxies, and VPNs were established to allow compaeach location and when combining the traffic from all three nies, organizations, and individuals to use a network without
locations. To demonstrate our method’s generic nature on non- revealing any identifying data; as a result, new methods
VPN traffic, we evaluated it on the ISCXVPN2016 dataset and capable of performing encrypted NTC with high accuracy
a subset of the IoTTrace [17] dataset. without compromising users’ privacy are needed. Advances in
 Contribution: The contributions of our research are as the field led to the development of novel approaches based
follows: on network traffic flow features, well suited to the data’s
 • To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to classify encrypted nature, as well as the use of deep neural network
 and identify VPN-encrypted traffic using a time-series methods which allow the computer to find its own weights in
 approach. order to correctly classify the traffic classes.
 • The proposed approach is generic in nature, i.e., it is In [28], the authors proposed a framework that employs a
 applicable to VPN-encrypted traffic, non-VPN traffic, and stacked autoencoder (SAE) and convolution neural network
 IoT device type classification, as demonstrated in our (CNN) to classify network traffic. To train the neural networks,
 evaluation on different datasets. they performed a preprocessing phase in which the Ethernet
 • The proposed approach can be used on network traffic header and uniformed protocol header length were removed,
 originating from different geographical locations (using and the packets’ bits were transformed to bytes; afterward,
 a VPN). they filtered out all non-application data-related packets, such
 • We created a dataset of VPN-encrypted and non-VPN as packets with ACK/SYN/FIN flags or DNS queries. The
 traffic from three different geographical locations which framework achieved 98% accuracy in the application identificontains more unique applications than existing datasets cation task and 93% in the traffic categorization task by using
 and will make this dataset available to the research the CNN network as the classification model. Similar work has
 community. been performed by [30], [31], [34], [39], [41] and [40] who
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. utilized payload and other header information, applying deep
Section II reviews the related work on VPN traffic clas- learning models like a CNN, 1D-CNN & bidirectional gated
sification and the existing public VPN dataset. Section III recurrent unit (BiGRU), bidirectional encoder representation
describes the characteristics of the VPN-encrypted traffic Transformer (BERT) & CNN, three-layer multilayer percepdataset, the network setup during data generation, and the tion (MLP), CNN, and ensemble long short-term memory
data generation process. Section IV outlines the methods (LSTM), respectively, and achieving results in a similar range.
used, including data preprocessing, feature construction, and However, the major limitation of these approaches is that they
the classification model. Section V presents the experiments rely on the presence of clear text information in encrypted
conducted and their results. Section VI discusses the findings, traffic, particularly with the TLS protocol, where initial negolimitations, and potential areas for future research. Finally, tiation happens in clear text. In real VPN traffic, however, this
Section VII concludes the paper by summarizing our findings information is encrypted and hidden within the VPN tunnel,
and contributions. making these methods bound to fail.
 In addition to deep learning models, several studies have
 leveraged machine learning algorithms for classifying VPN
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 and non-VPN network traffic. For instance, [32] proposed a
A. Network Traffic Classification method that utilized time-related statistical features generated
 In the past, network traffic detection was performed based by ISCXFlowMeter/CICFlowMeter, such as flow duration,
on the port numbers used in network communication. The flow bytes per second, max active time, max biat (backward
same port numbers were used by all the applications that inter-arrival time), max flowiat (flow inter-arrival time), mean
were communicating on the same protocol [18]. Therefore, biat, min active time, min biat, and std active time (standard
it was easy to identify the network traffic, as mentioned deviation of active time). These features were then used to
in [19], [20], [21]. Later, payload-based deep packet inspec- train a RF model, achieving over 95% accuracy for categorytion (DPI) tools such as PACE, OpenDPI, L7-filter, nDPI and level VPN traffic classification.
Cisco’s NBAR were used to extract features from packets’ ISCXFlowMeter/CICFlowMeter is a network traffic flow
payloads; and then, simple ML models (such as decision tree generator and analyzer that processes packet capture (PCAP)
(DT), random forest (RF), and k-nearest neighbors (KNN)) files to generate bidirectional flows. Each flow is identified
capable of bifurcating between the different traffic groups and based on the direction of the first packet (source to destination
classifying the packets based on the features were used, as or destination to source) and enriched with over 80 statistical
mentioned in [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27]. features, including flow duration, packet counts, byte counts,
 However, as the Internet evolved, the above-mentioned and packet lengths for both forward and backward directions.
methods have become obsolete, since most developers today These features are frequently used in network traffic classido not follow a specific standard in selecting the port number fication tasks, enabling the detection and differentiation of
KOTAK et al.: VPN-ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING A TIME-SERIES APPROACH 2227

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION A PPROACHES

various traffic types. However, it is important to note that these flows, which limits their applicability to real-world VPN
features rely on the ability to aggregate the packets by flows. scenarios where this assumption does not hold true.
This dependency makes such methods unsuitable with datasets In contrast, Vu et al., [29] developed a time-series feature
where multiple flows are encapsulated within a VPN tunnel, extraction method consisting of a feature engineering method,
appearing as a single flow. which is used to extract significant attributes of the encrypted
 Similarly, studies like [35] and [37] have employed features network traffic behavior by analyzing the time series of
derived from ISCXFlowMeter with machine learning mod- receiving packets, and a deep learning-based method which
els such as neural networks (NN), support vector machines is used to exploit the correlation of time-series data samples
(SVM), and boosting algorithms (e.g., XGBoost, LightGBM, of the encrypted network applications. The authors used the
AdaBoost), achieving comparable results. newly generated time-series features to train a model based on
 The limitation of such studies is that ISCXFlowMeter/ the LSTM recurrent neural network to learn the features in the
CICFlowmeter assume that traffic can be segmented into flow time-series samples. The method’s performance surpassed that
records using 5-tuple values (source IP, destination IP, source of methods proposed in prior studies, obtaining an accuracy
port, destination port, and protocol). However, this assumption of 98.17% while reducing the number of features used to
does not hold true for real VPN traffic, where traffic flows are 55; in contrast, 1,500 features were required in the model
often merged and encrypted in the VPN tunnel. As a result, proposed in [28]. The method was primarily tested on category
these methods are not directly applicable to real VPN traffic classification instead of application classification.
scenarios. Table I summarizes recent work on encrypted network
 Additionally, studies such as [33] and [36] utilized only traffic classification. It highlights that most studies utilize the
the packet sizes and inter-arrival times for classification, ISCXVPN2016 dataset, which contains known discrepancies.
employing LSTM & ordinary differential equation networks Additionally, many approaches either assume that traffic can
(ODENet) and adversarial auto-encoder (AAE) & deep support be segmented into multiple flows or rely on application
vector data description (DSVDD), respectively. However, these payload content, neither of which is applicable to real VPN
approaches assume that traffic can be neatly segmented into traffic scenarios.
2228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 TABLE II
 C HARACTERISTICS OF O UR DATASET

B. Publicly Available Network Traffic Dataset was collected using one VPN client, which was configured
 In most prior works, the ISCXVPN2016 dataset (VPN- for three geographical locations (Canada, England, and Japan).
nonVPN dataset) was used to demonstrate the effectiveness The characteristics of our dataset are presented in Table II.
of the proposed NTC and V-NTC approaches [42], [43], [44], The categories are based on those used in [16] with some
[45], [46], [47]. However, on taking a more in-depth look exceptions (like P2P, Web browsing).
at the content of the dataset’s files, we made the following
observations: A. Dataset Characteristics
 • In some PCAP files, the content of the packets is in clear
 text. The three geographical locations (Europe, North America,
 • The port numbers used are well-known port numbers for
 and Asia) were used to observe the impact that location has on
 different services. the performance of our approach. Traffic from each application
 • In some PCAP files, the protocols are TLS, HTTP, etc.
 was captured for 1.5 hours, thus the recorded PCAP files
 • Certain structures of the protocol (like HTML pages for
 in the dataset are nearly uniform (+/- 5-10 minutes). The
 the HTTP protocol) are present in the clear text. first difference observed in the data from the three locations
 • On resolving the DNS name for the IP address, we found
 was in the amount of traffic recorded (in GB) for a fixed
 that the IP address belongs to the server of well-known period of time (1.5 hours). When using a VPN client for
 applications. the geographical location of Canada, 10 GB of traffic was
 • There are multiple flow records.
 captured, whereas 7 GB was captured for England, and 8 GB
The above observations derived from the VPN-encrypted was captured for Japan.
traffic PCAP files suggest that the dataset does not contain After capturing the traffic, the PCAP files were cleaned,
VPN-encrypted data (see also A). Ideally, in VPN-encrypted removing the background noise, and segregated so they only
data, we would see one (or a few) flow records for the VPN contained the traffic flow from the VPN tunnel; this way, the
tunnel(s), which might not use well-known ports. Also, due to dataset can be used in future research without the need to clean
the presence of the VPN tunnel in real VPN-encrypted traffic, the files again.
network traffic should not contain the structure/header of any
protocol; however, in this dataset, protocols are detected based B. Network Setup
on the structure/header.
 To produce the dataset, we used VirtualBox to create a
 Since there is a need for a VPN-encrypted dataset on which
 virtual machine on top of the host computer. Wireshark was
NTC and V-NTC approaches can be tested, to evaluate the
 used on both the virtual machine and the host computer to
method proposed in this study, we created our own dataset,
 capture non-VPN and VPN-encrypted network traffic, respecdetails of which are provided in Section III.
 tively. OpenVPN was used on the host computer as the VPN
 client with configurations for three different countries: Japan,
 III. E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC DATASET Canada, and England, i.e., the VPN servers were located in
 In this section, we describe the characteristics of our dataset those locations (while the VPN client was located in Israel).
and provide an overview of how it was created. We collected Firefox was used for all of the applications requiring a Web
25 GB of labeled network traffic and approximately 76.5 hours browser. VPN-encrypted traffic was captured between the
of packet capture from our four categories of traffic (chat, VPN client (host computer) and the VPN server. In addition,
video, file transfer, and video conferencing), containing both non-VPN-encrypted traffic was captured between the virtual
VPN-encrypted and non-VPN-encrypted traffic flows. Data machine and the application layer.
KOTAK et al.: VPN-ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING A TIME-SERIES APPROACH 2229

Fig. 1. Comparison of generic machine learning systems and VPN-encrypted traffic classification framework.

C. Data Generation
 The dataset was made up of traffic from each application
mentioned in Table II. Wireshark was used to create a single
1.5 hour PCAP file for each application. The traffic in
the video category, which consists of Vimeo, Netflix, and
YouTube, was produced by members of the research team
as they watched videos on each platform. The traffic in the
chat category, which consists of Skype, Facebook, Google
Hangouts, WhatsApp, and Telegram, was created by team Fig. 2. Data instances construction using sliding window.
members as they chatted with one another on each platform.
The traffic in the video conferencing category, which consists source and destination IP address, source and destination port
of Skype, Google Meet, Zoom, and Microsoft Teams, was number, and packet size of each packet. This process results
generated by team members as they participated in conference in a raw feature file for each application.
calls on each platform. For the file transfer category, which
consists of WhatsApp, Dropbox, Google Drive, Skype, and B. Feature Construction
Telegram, we uploaded and downloaded files of various sizes Within each feature file, the packets are grouped, per
on the different applications and captured the traffic. second; then the features listed in Table III are created for
 each group. A one-second sliding window is used to provide
 IV. M ETHODS high granularity and capture real-time variations in traffic,
 A comparison between a generic machine learning system which is essential for timely detection and response. Statistical
and our VPN-encrypted traffic classification approach is pro- features were also included, as they were shown to be effective
vided in Fig. 1, which highlights the process flow from data for online network intrusion detection in the paper presenting
capture to output analysis; shows how network traffic is Kitsune [48]. We focus on three primary series of features:
captured, preprocessed, modeled, and analyzed to determine time delta, packet sizes, and accumulated directional packet
application or category probabilities; and aids in network sizes, in addition to some other features. The time delta
device management. The subsections that follow provide series involves the generation of statistical features based on
detailed explanations of each stage: data preprocessing, feature the time difference ratios between consecutive packets. For
construction, and classification model. the packet sizes series, we create statistical features related
 to the size ratios between consecutive packets. In contrast,
A. Data Preprocessing the accumulated directional packet sizes series involves the
 From the PCAP file of each application, we first filtered construction of statistical features that account for the ratio of
out the single largest flow (by size) which contains the cumulative packet size between consecutive packets, considerapplication’s VPN-encrypted traffic. By performing this step ing the direction of each packet. This comprehensive approach
we eliminated any unwanted traffic (noise) generated by other ensures that we capture both instantaneous and cumulative
applications running in the background. The published dataset behaviors in packet transmission (refer to Algorithm 1 in the
will consist of these cleaned PCAP files. After obtaining Appendix for the pseudocode).
the single VPN-encrypted flow for each application, it was Then we applied the concept of the sliding window, wherein
processed using Tshark1 to extract fields like the timestamp, a single instance is created by appending n features of m
 seconds (i.e., the window length) which results in a single
 1 https://tshark.dev instance with the shape of 1 x n x m (refer Fig. 2 where
2230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 TABLE III
 D ETAILED D ESCRIPTIONS OF F EATURES , I NCLUDING T HEIR S ERIES , S UB -S ERIES , AND R ELEVANCE TO VPN T RAFFIC

the window length is five). Table II contains the number Z-score normalization) on the entire dataset, transforming the
of data instances (column Total Instances) after the features data so that it has a mean of zero and a standard deviation
were constructed. We also performed standardization (i.e., of one. Our aim in performing this feature construction
KOTAK et al.: VPN-ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING A TIME-SERIES APPROACH 2231

 TABLE IV
 S UMMARY OF THE E XPERIMENTS P ERFORMED

process was to convert the network traffic data to time-series
data.

C. Classification Model
 For the classification of the VPN-encrypted network traffic (that was converted to time-series data), we used the
InceptionTime model [15]. This model is an inception-based
network [49] that applies several convolutions with filters of
various lengths. It consists of an ensemble of five different Fig. 3. Inception network for time-series classification [49].
inception networks that are initialized randomly.
 Inception network classifiers contain two different residual
blocks. For the inception network, each block is comprised
of three inception modules rather than traditional fully convolutional layers. Each inception module applies convolutions
with lengths of 10, 20, and 40, with a max pooling operation
followed by a bottleneck layer, and concatenates the outputs. Fig. 4. Data split for 5-fold cross-validation in time-series analysis.
Each residual block’s input is transferred via a shortcut linear
connection so it can be added to the next block’s input, thus
mitigating the vanishing gradient problem by allowing a direct application, as shown in Fig. 4, for five folds, where 80%
flow of the gradient [50]. The padding chosen aims to maintain of the dataset was used for training, and 20% was used for
the dimensionality of the time series after the convolutions. testing. We divided the training and test set in a sequential
After the residual blocks, a global average pooling (GAP) manner to avoid leaking any information resulting from the
layer is employed which averages the output (in the form features’ construction (described in Section IV-B) to the test
of multivariate time series) over the whole time dimension. set. We used a batch size of 64, and training was performed
The network is comprised of six inception modules stacked for 10 epochs. The metrics used in our evaluation are the F1-
sequentially within each residual block. Each module includes score and accuracy. Note that as shown in Table III, feature
a bottleneck layer to reduce dimensionality, which is followed numbers 44-47 will not have any impact in experiments 1-4,
by multiple convolutional layers with different filter lengths. because in VPN traffic, the unique source and destination IP
Then, a final traditional fully connected softmax layer is used, and the unique source and destination port will remain the
with the number of neurons equal to the number of classes same across all applications. Values for these features will
in the dataset. Fig. 3 depicts the architecture of an inception differ in experiments 5-6 and therefore will have an impact on
network in which six inception modules are stacked one after the performance in those cases.
the other. The inception modules use multiple filters of varying
lengths, specifically three sets of filters each with lengths of
 Experiments 1-2: Classification of Network Traffic at the
10, 20, and 40. For more details about the model, please refer
 Category- and Application-Level for the Entire Dataset
to [15].
 In these two experiments, traffic from all three geographical
 locations was combined. In the first experiment, there were
 V. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS four labels, i.e., four application categories. The classification
 Table IV provides a summary of the experiments performed. accuracy and F1-score results are presented in Table V; as
We divided the data into training and test sets for each can be seen, when the length of the sliding window was
2232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 TABLE V
 E XPERIMENT 1 - P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT A PPLICATIONS FOR C ATEGORY-L EVEL C LASSIFICATION
 W ITH A S LIDING W INDOW L ENGTH OF 60 S ECONDS

 TABLE VI
 E XPERIMENT 2 - P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT A PPLICATIONS FOR A PPLICATION -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION
 W ITH A S LIDING W INDOW L ENGTH OF 60 S ECONDS

Fig. 5. Performance of the models trained on the entire dataset for various sliding window lengths (Y-axis).

60 seconds, the overall accuracy obtained was 93.80%. In the against the model; the results can be found in Tables V and VI.
second experiment, there were 17 labels, i.e., one for each The results for smaller sized sliding windows are presented in
application. The classification accuracy and F1-score results Fig. 5; results for longer sized sliding windows are presented
are presented in Table VI; as can be seen, when the length in Fig. 8 in the Appendix. As can be seen, larger sliding
of the sliding window was 60 seconds, the overall accuracy windows, such as 120 seconds, result in minimal improvement
obtained was 86.50%. Note that to obtain a granular view in accuracy while significantly increasing latency. Based on
of the performance, we examined each application’s test data this analysis, a 60-second sliding window was chosen as it
KOTAK et al.: VPN-ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING A TIME-SERIES APPROACH 2233

 TABLE VII
 E XPERIMENT 3 - P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT A PPLICATIONS FOR E ACH C OUNTRY FOR C ATEGORY-L EVEL C LASSIFICATION
 W ITH A S LIDING W INDOW L ENGTH OF 60 S ECONDS

 TABLE VIII
 E XPERIMENT 4 - P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT A PPLICATIONS FOR E ACH C OUNTRY FOR A PPLICATION -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION FOR A
 S LIDING W INDOW L ENGTH OF 60 S ECONDS

strikes a balance between capturing sufficient data for accurate
classification and maintaining low latency for practical realworld application. It can be seen that poorer accuracy was
obtained for the Whatsapp_files application at the category
level (see Table V) with the combined data from all three
countries; this could stem from the different sizes of the
files that were used when capturing the network traffic.
After removing the Whatsapp_files application’s data from the
training and test samples, the overall category-level accuracy
results improved from 93.80% to 96.20%, and the overall
application-level accuracy results improved from 86.50% to
88.60%.
 The experiments were conducted on a system with the Fig. 6. Comparative analysis of various models for experiment 1-2.
following configuration: a single NVIDIA TITAN X (Pascal)
GPU, 6 CPU cores, 125.21 GB of RAM, and 12.0 GB of GPU average RAM utilization was 11.56%. The average prediction
memory. The average CPU utilization during the experiments time for 1,000 instances was 0.0639 seconds, and the training
was 8.37%, the average GPU utilization was 4.69%, and the time per epoch was approximately 38 seconds.
2234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 TABLE IX
 C HARACTERISTICS OF THE ISCXVPN2016 DATASET S UBSET

 TABLE X
 E XPERIMENTS 5 & 6 - P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT A PPLICATIONS FOR C ATEGORY- AND A PPLICATION -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION

 The bar chart in Fig. 6 compares our proposed method’s The baseline LSTM model (denoted as LSTM 80 40 20)
performance with that of the method of Vu et al. [29] and used for comparison consists of a sequential architecture with
a method with baseline LSTM model. As can be seen, an 80-neuron LSTM layer, followed by a 40-neuron LSTM
our proposed method outperforms the others on all metrics. layer, and a 20-neuron dense layer. This architecture also
The significant difference in application-level performance includes three dropout layers, each with a dropout rate of
indicates that our method captures granular patterns more 0.5, and uses the features proposed in this paper. The worst
effectively than the other two method, reflecting its superior performance of the three was obtained by the model of
capability in detailed pattern recognition. Vu et al. [29], as depicted in the graph.
KOTAK et al.: VPN-ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING A TIME-SERIES APPROACH 2235

Fig. 7. Performance of the models trained on country-specific data for various sliding window lengths (Y-axis).

 TABLE XI
 E XPERIMENT 7 - P ERFORMANCE ON I OT DATA FOR S LIDING W INDOWS OF VARIOUS L ENGTHS (O CTOBER 23)

 TABLE XII
 E XPERIMENT 7 - P ERFORMANCE ON I OT DATA FOR S LIDING W INDOWS OF VARIOUS L ENGTHS (O CTOBER 24)

Fig. 8. Performance of the models trained on the entire dataset for prolonged sliding window lengths (Y-axis).

Experiments 3-4: Classification of Network Traffic at the categories. The classification accuracy and F1-score results
Category- and Application-Level for Each Country for the three models trained respectively on traffic from
 In these two experiments, models were trained separately Japan, Canada, and England are presented in Table VII. In
for each country, i.e., trained and tested on one country. In the the fourth experiment, there were 17 labels, i.e., one for each
third experiment, there were four labels, i.e., four application application. The classification accuracy and F1-score results
2236 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

Fig. 9. HTTP protocol tags are visible in the payload of data.

for the three models trained on traffic from Japan, Canada, and In the fifth experiment, there were six labels, i.e., six
England respectively are presented in Table VIII. The results application categories. The classification accuracy and F1-
for smaller sliding windows are presented in Fig. 7. As can be score results are presented in Table X; as can be seen, the
seen, in most cases the accuracy and F1-score results improve overall accuracy was 97.30% when the length of the sliding
as the size of the sliding window increases. window was 60 seconds. As seen in the table, the accuracy
 of our approach at the category level was lower for Spotify;
Experiments 5-6: Classification of Network Traffic at the this could be due to Spotify’s streaming format (audio) which
Category- and Application-Level for Non-VPN-Encrypted differs from that of the other recorded streaming services
Traffic (video).
 In these two experiments, a subset of non-VPN traffic from In the sixth experiment, there were 21 labels, i.e., one
the ISCXVPN2016 datset was used; the characteristics of for each application. The classification accuracy and F1-score
the subset are presented in Table IX. In both experiments, results are presented in Table X; as can be seen, the overall
we considered files in which the traffic was present for at accuracy was 93.40% when the length of the sliding window
least 300 seconds, i.e., at least five minutes of recording. was 60 seconds.
Please note: In these two experiments, as there were multiple To see the impact of the last four features (i.e., feature
files per application, we calculated weighted accuracy. Also, numbers 44 to 47), we reran these two experiments withas mentioned earlier, we use all the features mentioned in out those four features and obtained 95.5% (compared to
Table III in these experiments. 97.30%) accuracy in category classification (experiment five)
KOTAK et al.: VPN-ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING A TIME-SERIES APPROACH 2237

Fig. 10. Syntax of the FTP protocol is visible in the payload of data.

and 83.60% (compared to 93.40%) accuracy in application data from a larger number of applications and from different
classification (experiment six). This shows that application- geographical locations, which is better suited to today’s applilevel accuracy drops significantly after removing the last four cations, and used it to demonstrate the effectiveness of our
features, which shows the major contribution of those features. proposed approach. To demonstrate the generic and universal
 Note that to obtain a granular view of the performance, we nature of our approach, we also assessed our approach’s ability
examined each application’s test data against the model; the to identify applications in non-VPN-encrypted network traffic
results can be found in Table X. (experiments 5 & 6) as well as IoT devices; the results of
 We also represent the top 10 features for each experiment this experiment (experiment 7) are presented at the end of this
in the Appendix. section).
 We used a sliding window time-series approach which
 VI. D ISCUSSION enables our method to identity any type of traffic with less data
 Prior research [16], [29], [31] only demonstrated the than that needed by other methods, i.e., the number of seconds
proposed method’s effectiveness on the existing dataset, which of traffic needed is equal to the length of the sliding window.
has limitations. Here we produced a new balanced dataset with In other approaches one might need to wait for the flow’s
2238 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

Fig. 11. PCAP shows multiple flows with well-known domain names and ports.

 TABLE XIII TABLE XIV
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 1 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 2

completion or for a certain number of packets to be exchanged,
which can often be time consuming. Our aim in proposing this
approach was to provide a time-series-based approach which in existing flow-based approaches if there are 10 flows in the
is generic in nature and can be applied to different network traffic there will be 10 data instances, whereas in our approach,
scenarios, irrespective of the domain (e.g., IoT and computer the number of data instances can vary based on the time;
network), protocol (e.g., TCP and UDP), and the type of therefore, we were unable to compare the performance of our
encryption (e.g., VPN-encrypted, TLS-encrypted, and non- approach directly with the performance of existing methods.
encrypted). As our approach differs from existing approaches However, the accuracy reported in this paper is comparable or
in that it is based on time series, we could not directly better than the accuracy obtained by other methods in most of
compare the methods’ accuracy in our performance evaluation; the examined scenarios.
KOTAK et al.: VPN-ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING A TIME-SERIES APPROACH 2239

 TABLE XV TABLE XVII
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 3 (JAPAN ) M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 3 (C ANADA )

 TABLE XVIII
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 4 (JAPAN )

 TABLE XVI
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 3 (E NGLAND )

 from October 23 and 24 are presented in Tables XI and XII
 respectively. In this experiment we removed the features
 (for example, fw_1250_packets) that had a standard deviation
 value of zero, since they had no impact on the performance
 and created an error (division by zero) when performing
Experiment 7: Classification of IoT Device Type standardization. Also, as mentioned earlier we included the
 In this experiment, we used a subset of the IoTTrace [17] last four features mentioned in Table III in this experiment.
dataset (specifically, traffic from October 23 and 24). We took We note that although we used two different Netatmo devices,
into account IoT devices whose network traffic lasted for more the model was able to bifurcate their traffic correctly despite
than 3000 seconds (i.e., 50 minutes) to train two models (each both devices coming from the same manufacturer.
model was trained for a day). We used 8000 seconds of traffic To see the impact of the last four features (i.e., feature
from each IoT device in the experiment. We were unable to numbers 44 to 47), we reran this experiment for a sliding
use the entire dataset, because the data was not continuous, window of 60 seconds without those four features and obtained
as is needed for training in our approach. However, our aim 97.80% (compared to 97.80%) and 98.90% (compared to
was only to perform a proof of concept demonstrating the 99.80%) accuracy for the October 23 and October 24 datasets
applicability of our approach on a different type of dataset. respectively. This shows that removing the last four features
The results of the two models trained and tested on traffic had no, or very minimal, impact on performance in this case.
2240 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

 TABLE XIX TABLE XXII
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 4 (E NGLAND ) M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 6

 TABLE XXIII
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 7 (O CTOBER 23)
 TABLE XX
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 4 (C ANADA )

 TABLE XXI
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 5 TABLE XXIV
 M OST I MPORTANT F EATURES IN E XPERIMENT 7 (O CTOBER 24)

 VII. C ONCLUSION application- and category-levels. To evaluate our approach we
 In this paper, we proposed a time-series-based approach created a new dataset that consists of the traffic of differfor the classification of VPN-encrypted network traffic at the ent applications captured from three different geographical
KOTAK et al.: VPN-ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING A TIME-SERIES APPROACH 2241

Algorithm 1 Feature Extraction from a particular country and test it against data from different
 1: Input: countries.
 • TSV_file: TSV file containing parsed packet data
 • window_length: List of time window lengths in
 A PPENDIX
 seconds (e.g. 30, 40, 50, 60 etc.) for feature extraction
 2: Output: The tables below present the 10 most important features
 • features_df: Dataframe containing extracted features for each experiment. The “Difference (%)” column in each
 3: Algorithm: table represents the difference between the baseline validation
 4: Load parsed packet data from TSV file into dataframe accuracy (with all features) and the new validation accuracy
 5: Determine packet direction based on source port (without the feature mentioned).
 6: Initialize an empty list for statistics
 7: for each time sample in window_length do R EFERENCES
 8: Extract data sample within the specified time window
 [1] Statista. “Topic: Internet usage worldwide.” [Online]. Available: https://
 from dataframe www.statista.com/topics/1145/internet-usage-worldwide/#topicHeader_
 9: Compute time delta features: _wrapper
 • Bidirectional delta ratios between consecutive pack- [2] R. Subramanian, “The growth of global Internet censorship and circumvention: A survey,” Commun. Int. Inf. Manag. Assoc., vol. 11, no. 2,
 ets: (rΔt bi ) = Δtin,i
 i Δtout,i+1 p. 6, 2011.
 • Ingoing delta ratios between consecutive packets: [3] F. Li, A. A. Niaki, D. Choffnes, P. Gill, and A. Mislove, “A largein ) = Δtin,i
 (rΔt
 scale analysis of deployed traffic differentiation practices,” in Proc. ACM
 i Δtin,i+1 Special Interest Group Data Commun., 2019, pp. 130–144.
 • Outgoing delta ratios between consecutive packets: [4] N. Weaver, C. Kreibich, and V. Paxson, “Redirecting DNS for Ads
 out ) = Δtout,i
 (rΔt
 and profit,” in Proc. USENIX Workshop Free Open Commun. Internet
 i Δtout,i+1 (FOCI), 2011, p. 12.
10: Compute packet size features: [5] A. M. Kakhki et al., “Identifying traffic differentiation in mobile
 • Bidirectional size ratios between consecutive packets: networks,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., 2015, pp. 239–251.
 bi ) = sizein,i [6] T. Garrett, L. E. Setenareski, L. M. Peres, L. C. Bona, and E. P. Duarte,
 (rsize i sizeout,i+1 “Monitoring network neutrality: A survey on traffic differentiation
 • Ingoing size ratios between consecutive packets: detection,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2486–2517,
 in ) = sizein,i
 (rsize 3rd Quart., 2018.
 i sizein,i+1 [7] R. S. Raman, L. Evdokimov, E. Wurstrow, J. A. Halderman, and
 • Outgoing size ratios between consecutive packets: R. Ensafi, “Investigating large scale HTTPS interception in Kazakhstan,”
 out ) = sizeout,i
 (rsize in Proc. ACM Internet Meas. Conf., 2020, pp. 125–132.
 i sizeout,i+1 [8] M. T. Khan, J. DeBlasio, G. M. Voelker, A. C. Snoeren, C. Kanich, and
11: Compute accumulated packet size features: N. Vallina-Rodriguez, “An empirical analysis of the commercial VPN
 • Accumulated i bidirectional size ratios: ecosystem,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., 2018, pp. 443–456.
 bi j =1 sizein,j [9] M. Ikram, N. Vallina-Rodriguez, S. Seneviratne, M. A. Kaafar, and
 (r size i) =  i+1 V. Paxson, “An analysis of the privacy and security risks of android
 j =1 sizeout,j
 • Accumulated  ingoing size ratios: VPN permission-enabled APPs,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., 2016,
 i pp. 349–364.
 in j =1 sizein,j
 (r size )i = i+1 [10] T. Sharma and M. Bashir, “Privacy apps for smartphones: An assessment
 j =1 sizein,j of users’ preferences and limitations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Human–
 • Accumulated  outgoing size ratios: Comput. Interact., 2020, pp. 533–546.
 i
 out ) = j =1 sizeout,j
 (r
 [11] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and J. Wu, “Robust
 size i i+1
 sizeout,j network traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 23, no. 4,
 j =1
12: Compute additional features pp. 1257–1270, Aug. 2015.
 [12] T. T. Nguyen and G. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for Internet
13: Append all computed features to the statistics list traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
14: end for Tuts., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, 4th Quart., 2008.
15: Convert the statistics list into a new dataframe (fea- [13] A. Callado et al., “A survey on Internet traffic identification,” IEEE
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 37–52, 3rd Quart., 2009.
 tures_df) [14] N. Al Khater and R. E. Overill, “Network traffic classification techniques
16: Return features_df and challenges,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Digit. Inf. Manag.
 (ICDIM), 2015, pp. 43–48.
 [15] H. I. Fawaz et al., “InceptionTime: Finding AlexNet for time series
 classification,” Data Min. Knowl. Disc., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1936–1962,
 2020.
 [16] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
locations. Such a dataset is needed by the research community, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
since we found that the existing dataset has several limitations. in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
 pp. 407–414.
We also demonstrated the generic nature of the proposed
 [17] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments
approach by evaluating it in several other scenarios, such as using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
classification of non-VPN-encrypted traffic and IoT device vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2018.
type. It should also be noted that along with organizations and [18] “Service name and transport protocol port number registry.” 2019.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names-
ISPs, methods of this type can also be used by adversaries for port-numbers/service-names-port-numbers.xhtml?&amp;page=1
reconnaissance of their targets. In future research, we plan to [19] P. Schneider, TCP/IP Traffic Classification Based on Port Numbers,
apply our approach in scenarios where there is network traffic Harvard Univ., Cambridge, MA, USA, 1997.
 [20] G. Cheng and S. Wang, “Traffic classification based on port connection
flowing simultaneously from different applications within the pattern,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Service Syst. (CSSS), 2011,
same VPN tunnel. We also plan to train our approach on data pp. 914–917.
2242 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

[21] Q. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. Wang, and X. Li, “UDP traffic classification using [36] S. Lv, C. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Wang, B. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “AAEmost distinguished port,” in Proc. 16th Asia–Pac. Netw. Oper. Manag. DSVDD: A one-class classification model for VPN traffic identification,”
 Symp., 2014, pp. 1–4. Comput. Netw., vol. 236, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109990.
[22] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Muller, and K. Hanssgen, [37] G. Abbas, U. Farooq, P. Singh, S. S. Khurana, and P. Singh, “Feature
 “A survey of payload-based traffic classification approaches,” IEEE engineering and ensemble learning-based classification of VPN and non-
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1135–1156, 2nd Quart., VPN-based network traffic over temporal features,” SN Comput. Sci.,
 2013. vol. 4, no. 5, p. 546, 2023.
[23] H.-K. Lim, J.-B. Kim, K. Kim, Y.-G. Hong, and Y.-H. Han, “Payload- [38] Z. Wang et al. “An effective real-time traffic classification method
 based traffic classification using multi-layer LSTM in software defined using convolutional neural network.” 2023. [Online]. Available:
 networks,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 12, p. 2550, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ouci.dntb.gov.ua/en/works/4ggEk2B4/
 https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/9/12/2550 [39] Y. Xu, J. Cao, K. Song, Q. Xiang, and G. Cheng, “FastTraffic: A
[24] F. Risso, M. Baldi, O. Morandi, A. Baldini, and P. Monclus, lightweight method for encrypted traffic fast classification,” Comput.
 “Lightweight, payload-based traffic classification: An experimental eval- Netw., vol. 235, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109965.
 uation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2008, pp. 5869–5875. [40] R. T. Elmaghraby, N. M. A. Aziem, M. A. Sobh, and A. M. Bahaa-Eldin,
[25] Z. Fan and R. Liu, “Investigation of machine learning based network “Encrypted network traffic classification based on machine learning,”
 traffic classification,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst. Ain Shams Eng. J., vol. 15, no. 2, 2024, Art. no. 102361.
 (ISWCS), 2017, pp. 1–6. [41] S. Soleymanpour, H. Sadr, and H. Beheshti, “An efficient deep learning
[26] S. Özdel, Ç. Ateş, P. D. Ateş, M. Koca, and E. Anarım, “Payload- method for encrypted traffic classification on the Web,” in Proc. IEEE
 based network traffic analysis for application classification and intrusion 6th Int. Conf. Web Res. (ICWR), 2020, pp. 209–216.
 detection,” in Proc. 30th Eur. Signal Process. Conf. (EUSIPCO), 2022, [42] A. Iliyasu and H. Deng, “Semi-supervised encrypted traffic classification
 pp. 638–642. with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” IEEE Access,
[27] J. Kotak and Y. Elovici, “IoT device identification using deep learning,” vol. 8, pp. 118–126, 2019.
 in Proc. Comput. Intell. Security Inf. Syst. Conf., 2019, pp. 76–86. [43] R. Nigmatullin, A. Ivchenko, and S. Dorokhin, “Differentiation of
[28] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep sliding rescaled ranges: New approach to encrypted and VPN traffic
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Eng. Telecommun. (En&T), 2020, pp. 1–5.
 learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020. [44] B. Appiah, A. Sackey, O.-A. Kwabena, J. B. Ansuura, and P. Buah,
[29] L. Vu et al., “Time series analysis for encrypted traffic classification: A “Fusion dilated CNN for encrypted Web traffic classification,” Int. J.
 deep learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Symp. Commun. Inf. Netw. Security, vol. 24, pp. 733–740, Jul. 2022.
 Technol. (ISCIT), 2018, pp. 121–126. [45] D. Wei, F. Shi, and S. Dhelim, “A self-supervised learning model for
[30] S. Soleymanpour, H. Sadr, and M. N. Soleimandarabi, “CSCNN: unknown internet traffic identification based on surge period,” Future
 Cost-sensitive convolutional neural network for encrypted traffic classi- Internet, vol. 14, p. 289, Oct. 2022.
 fication,” Neural Process. Lett., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 3497–3523, 2021. [46] M. Pathmaperuma, Y. Rahulamathavn, S. Dogan, and A. Kondoz, “Deep
[31] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER: learning for encrypted traffic classification and unknown data detection,”
 Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,” Sensors, vol. 22, p. 7643, Oct. 2022.
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985. [47] Y. Li, F. Wang, and S. Chen, “VPN traffic identification based on
[32] M. Al-Fayoumi, M. Al-Fawa’reh, and S. Nashwan, “VPN and non- tunneling protocol characteristics,” in Proc. IEEE CCET, Aug. 2022,
 VPN network traffic classification using time-related features,” Comput. pp. 150–156.
 Materials Continua, vol. 72, no. 2, p. 12, 2022. [48] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “KitSune: An
[33] S. Roy, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Fast and lean encrypted Internet traf- ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
 fic classification,” Comput. Commun., vol. 186, pp. 166–173, Mar. 2022. Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp., 2018, pp. 1–8.
[34] Z. Shi, N. Luktarhan, Y. Song, and G. Tian, “BFCN: A novel classifica- [49] C. Szegedy, S. Ioffe, V. Vanhoucke, and A. A. Alemi, “Inception-v4,
 tion method of encrypted traffic based on BERT and CNN,” Electronics, inception-ResNet and the impact of residual connections on learning,”
 vol. 12, no. 3, p. 516, 2023. in Proc. 31st AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017, pp. 4278–4284.
[35] S. Ramraj and G. Usha, “Hybrid feature learning framework for the [50] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
 classification of encrypted network traffic,” Connection Sci., vol. 35, recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
 no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 2197172. pp. 770–778.