7192 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 When Federated Learning Meets Knowledge
 Distillation to Secure Consumer Edge Network
 Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE, Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE,
 and Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Consumer networks face several security challenges from outdated software, weak authentication systems, and
due to the distributed nature of edge devices and the sensitive inadequate security practices. As a result, attackers can exploit
data they handle. Federated Learning (FL) presents a promising these weaknesses, leading to data breaches, identity theft, and
paradigm for collaborative model training in distributed environments. However, its implementation in edge consumer networks unauthorized access to sensitive information. Addressing these
raises concerns about model heterogeneity, communication effi- challenges requires robust security measures to protect users
ciency, and reverse engineering attacks. To address these issues, and maintain network integrity [1], [2], [3].
in this paper, we introduce SKDFL, a novel framework that The distributed nature of consumer networks, where
leverages Knowledge Distillation (KD) and Secure Multi-Party devices frequently connect and disconnect from the network,
Computation (SMPC) techniques to enhance communication efficiency while preserving data privacy in edge consumer networks. complicates traditional security approaches. This dynamic
Through the use of KD, the distilled knowledge is transmitted environment makes it challenging for centralized security
between devices, significantly reducing communication overhead. solutions to effectively monitor and defend against emerg-
Additionally, we incorporate lightweight encryption mechanisms ing threats in real-time. Additionally, the sheer volume and
to protect soft-labels from reverse engineering attacks using diversity of devices in consumer networks exacerbate the
SMPC. We evaluate our proposed framework using two public
datasets and demonstrate its efficiency in reducing commu- difficulty of enforcing consistent security policies across
nication costs, achieving up to a 92.4% reduction compared all endpoints. Consequently, gaps in security posture can
to conventional FL methods. Moreover, SKDFL achieves high emerge, leaving the network susceptible to infiltration and
performances in terms of accuracy and F1-score in both binary compromise. The interconnected nature of consumer networks
and multi-class classification while preserving the privacy of introduces the risk of lateral movement, wherein attackers
clients. Our obtained results show the potential of SKDFL to
address the challenges of communication efficiency and data exploit vulnerabilities in one device to gain access to other
privacy in FL for edge consumer networks, paving the way for interconnected devices or sensitive data within the network.
secure and efficient collaborative learning in consumer networks. This lateral movement can propagate rapidly, escalating the
 Index Terms—TinyML, federated learning, knowledge distilla- impact of a security breach and complicating remediation
tion, edge consumer network. efforts. Additionally, the increasing prevalence of IoT devices
 in consumer networks introduces new attack vectors, as many
 of these devices lack robust security features and are often
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 overlooked by users and manufacturers alike.
 N RECENT years, consumer networks have become more
I complex, connecting many different devices ranging from
smartphones, smart home gadgets (such as thermostats and
 Addressing the security challenges inherent in consumer
 networks requires a multifaceted approach that combines
 proactive risk mitigation strategies with robust detection and
security cameras), and Internet of Things (IoT) devices. response mechanisms. This approach can leverage advanced
The rapid expansion of consumer networks has significantly machine learning techniques, particularly for Intrusion
improved connectivity and convenience. However, it also Detection Systems (IDS), to enhance the network’s defense
introduces critical security risks due to the growing number capabilities. By deploying machine learning algorithms trained
of connected devices. Many of these vulnerabilities stem on historical data and real-time network traffic patterns, IDS
 can autonomously identify anomalous behavior indicative of
 Received 4 May 2024; revised 16 July 2024 and 23 September 2024; potential security threats.
accepted 7 November 2024. Date of publication 8 April 2025; date of current
version 14 August 2025. This work was supported by the National Natural Machine learning-based IDS offers several advantages over
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through traditional rule-based systems. They can adapt to evolving
research under Grant RGPIN-2025-07140. (Corresponding author: Zakaria threats by continuously learning from new data, allowing
Abou El Houda.)
 Zakaria Abou El Houda is with the RSEC, UMR INRS-UQO, INRS- them to detect previously unseen attack patterns and zero-day
EMT, University of Quebec, Gatineau, QC J8Y 3G5, Canada (e-mail: vulnerabilities. Additionally, machine learning algorithms can
zakaria.abouelhouda@inrs.ca). analyze vast amounts of network data at high speed, enabling
 Hajar Moudoud is with the Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie,
Université du Québec en Outaouais, Gatineau, QC J8Y 3G5, Canada (e-mail: rapid detection of security incidents without overwhelmhajar.moudoud@uqo.ca). ing network administrators with false positives. Moreover,
 Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of machine learning techniques can be applied to anomaly
Computing and Informatics, Sharjah University, Sharjah, UAE (e-mail:
bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae). detection, where deviations from normal network behavior
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3559004 are flagged as potential security threats. By establishing a
 1558-4127 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: WHEN FL MEETS KD TO SECURE CONSUMER EDGE NETWORK 7193

baseline of typical network activity, machine learning algo- the FL process to create a communication-efficient and secure
rithms can detect deviations that may indicate unauthorized learning environment for edge consumer networks. SKDFL is
access attempts, malware infections, or other suspicious activ- designed to enhance the efficiency of model training across
ities. This proactive approach enables early detection and diverse and resource-constrained edge devices without comcontainment of security breaches, minimizing their impact on promising the model’s effectiveness or the privacy of the data.
the network and reducing the time-to-response to security Through experimentation with the WSN-DS and UNSW-NB15
incidents [4], [5]. datasets, SKDFL demonstrates substantial reductions in com-
 While the usage of ML models can indeed be effective munication costs, achieving up to a 92.4% reduction compared
in detecting attacks, it may not always be suitable for con- to conventional FL methods. Moreover, SKDFL maintains
sumer devices with limited computing power, storage, and good model performance, thereby offering a promising soluenergy resources. Consumer devices, such as smartphones, tion for deploying privacy-preserving intelligent systems in
IoT gadgets, and smart home appliances, often operate under edge environments. Knowledge Distillation serves as a stratestringent resource constraints, making it challenging to deploy gic technique in this framework, enabling a “teacher-student”
and execute complex ML algorithms directly on these devices. model paradigm where a compact student model learns from a
One primary concern is the computational overhead associated more complex teacher model. By distilling knowledge from a
with training and running ML models on resource-constrained comprehensive teacher network to lightweight student models,
devices. Training sophisticated ML models typically requires SKDFL significantly reduces the size and complexity of the
significant computational resources and large datasets, which models that need to be trained and updated across the network.
may exceed the processing capabilities of consumer devices. This reduces the computing burden on each device and lowers
Moreover, the memory and storage requirements for storing the amount of data sent during training, helping to solve a
model parameters and intermediate data can strain the limited major challenge in traditional federated learning.
onboard resources of these devices, potentially impacting The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as
their performance and user experience. Additionally, energy follows:
consumption is a critical consideration for consumer devices, • We design SKDFL, a novel framework that leverages
especially those powered by batteries. Running ML algorithms Knowledge Distillation (KD) techniques to enhance comcontinuously on these devices can drain battery life rapidly, munication efficiency while preserving data privacy in
leading to decreased usability and user dissatisfaction. This edge consumer networks. Through the use of KD, the
energy consumption issue becomes even more pronounced in distilled knowledge is transmitted between devices, sigthe context of real-time ML inference, where devices must nificantly reducing communication overhead.
process data streams continuously to detect and respond to • We incorporate lightweight encryption mechanisms to
security threats promptly. protect local model updates from reverse engineering
 To address the challenges of deploying ML models attacks using Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMPC).
on resource-constrained consumer devices, researchers have • We evaluate SKDFL using the WSN-DS and UNSWproposed an innovative solution known as TinyML. TinyML NB15 datasets and demonstrate substantial reductions in
focuses on optimizing ML algorithms and models for deploy- communication costs, achieving up to a 92.4% reducment on devices with limited computing power, storage, and tion compared to conventional FL methods. Moreover,
energy resources, making it an ideal candidate for enhancing SKDFL achieves high model performances of 99% in
security on consumer devices. The key innovation behind accuracy and F1-score, offering a promising solution
TinyML lies in the development of lightweight ML algo- for deploying privacy-preserving and efficient intelligent
rithms and model architectures specifically designed to operate systems in edge environments.
efficiently on microcontrollers and other embedded systems. The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II reviews
These algorithms are optimized for low computational com- key studies that apply machine learning and TinyML for attack
plexity, minimal memory footprint, and energy efficiency, detection in consumer networks. Section III describes the
enabling them to run effectively on devices with limited proposed system model. Section IV evaluates the efficiency
resources. By leveraging techniques such as quantization, of SKDFL and compares it with recent approaches. Finally,
pruning, and model compression, we can reduce the size and Section V concludes the paper.
complexity of ML models without significantly sacrificing
performance. On the other hand, Federated learning (FL)
emerges as a key solution by enabling many edge devices to II. R ELATED W ORK
collaboratively learn a shared model while keeping the training The rapid evolution of cyber-attacks necessitates advanced
data on local devices. This helps protect privacy and improve and dynamic defense mechanisms. Traditional IDS, which
data security. Nevertheless, the vanilla FL approach still faces relied heavily on signature-based methods, struggled against
challenges such as high communication overhead and the het- new and evolving threats. Recent advancements in ML have
erogeneity of device capabilities, which can severely hamper significantly improved the capabilities of attack detection
the practical deployment and scalability of such models [6], systems, making them more adaptive, efficient, and capa-
[7], [8], [9]. ble of handling vast and diverse data streams in real-time.
 To address these challenges, we propose SKDFL, a novel This integration has facilitated the shift towards more robust
framework that integrates Knowledge Distillation (KD) into anomaly detection frameworks that learn from data to identify
7194 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 TABLE I
unusual patterns indicative of attacks. Deep Learning (DL), TABLE OF N OTATIONS
a subset of ML, has been pivotal in this transformation.
Techniques such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs) have been
employed to enhance the detection accuracy of complex attack
patterns in network traffic. In [10], Jiang et al., showed that
multi-channel LSTM networks can achieve high accuracy on
the NSL-KDD dataset, a well-known benchmark in network
security research. However, deep learning models often require
significant computational power, making them difficult to use
in resource-limited environments. This has led to growing
interest in lightweight ML models that offer strong accuracy with lower computational requirements. The integration
of machine learning into edge computing environments has
rapidly evolved, driven by the increasing need for on-device
intelligence and data privacy preservation. Traditional central- to incorporate knowledge distillation within a federated learnized training methods are often impractical due to their heavy ing framework, showing that it is possible to significantly
reliance on data transmission and processing power, which reduce the model size and computational requirements on
are limited in edge computing scenarios. Federated learning, edge devices while maintaining high model performance. Our
first introduced by McMahan et et al. [11], offers a promising approach, SKDFL, not only minimizes the communication
alternative by decentralizing the training process, thus allowing overhead associated with federated learning but also enhances
edge devices to collaboratively learn a shared prediction the privacy and security of the local model updates, making it
model while keeping all the training data on the device. FL’s particularly suitable for secure edge consumer networks.
application in IDS is particularly valuable in environments
where data privacy is paramount, such as in financial insti- III. K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION -E NABLED F EDERATED
tutions or healthcare systems. Li et et al. [12] explored FL’s L EARNING IN E DGE C ONSUMER
potential to perform secure, decentralized machine learning
across multiple nodes, demonstrating that FL can effectively A. System Architecture
reduce the risk of data leakage during the training process. The SKDFL system is designed to facilitate a
Moreover, FL facilitates the deployment of ML models in het- communication-efficient federated learning (FL) process
erogeneous networks, where devices of varying computational across a network of edge devices, leveraging knowledge
capabilities collaboratively contribute to the model’s training. distillation techniques to enhance learning efficiency and
Konečný et al. [13] introduced optimization techniques for model accuracy. This system model aims to address challenges
FL that minimize the communication costs associated with associated with bandwidth constraints, limited computational
model training, which is crucial for bandwidth-constrained resources, and the need for privacy preservation in consumer
environments [14], [15]. edge networks. We have considered a system architecture
 Despite its benefits, FL faces major challenges like high (see Fig. 1) in which only encrypted logits/soft-labels are
communication costs and differences in device capabilities. exchanged between the server and clients. Thus, instead
Konec̆ní et al. [13] highlighted these challenges, noting that the of communicating model parameters Wi at each round, we
frequent communication required to update model parameters communicate knowledge in the form of soft-label outputs
across a distributed network often becomes a bottleneck, using a public shared dataset X pub , as:
especially when dealing with large models or poor network  
conditions. To address these issues, researchers have explored Yi ← fWi X pub (1)
various strategies to reduce the size of the transmitted data
 where fWi is the locally trained model parameterized by Wi .
and to compress model updates effectively [12]. Parallel to
advancements in federated learning, knowledge distillation
has emerged as a robust technique for model compres- B. System Model
sion and acceleration, where a compact “student” model is Table I shows the table of notations. The SKDFL frametrained to emulate the behavior of a larger “teacher” model. work integrates the principles of federated learning (FL) with
Hinton et al. [16] demonstrated that knowledge distillation knowledge distillation (KD), allowing edge devices (nodes)
could effectively transfer the knowledge from a cumbersome to collaboratively learn a global model without sharing their
model to a lighter model without significant loss in accuracy. local data. Each node trains a local model on its dataset
This concept has been successfully applied across various and participates in a knowledge-sharing protocol that distills
domains, including natural language processing [17] and information from multiple models into a singular, more gencomputer vision [16]. In the context of edge computing, eralized model. This method effectively reduces the required
the application of knowledge distillation presents a unique communication bandwidth by transmitting compressed model
opportunity to enhance the efficiency of federated learning updates (knowledge) instead of raw data, ensuring efficient
systems. The work by Li et al. [18] represents an early attempt use of network resources. In KD, initially, a global teacher
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: WHEN FL MEETS KD TO SECURE CONSUMER EDGE NETWORK 7195

Fig. 1. SKDFL system architecture.

model is trained on a centralized server or cloud using a where σ is the softmax function, zT (x) and zS (x) are the logits
large dataset. This teacher model serves as the source of from the teacher and student models, respectively.
knowledge to be distilled to local student models. Each The knowledge distillation loss is then computed as:
node in the network trains its student model using its local    
 zT (x)
dataset. The loss function optimized during this training is LKD = T 2 · KL σ σ (zS (x)) , (4)
given by the cross-entropy, which for a binary classification T
task can be expressed as: combined with the traditional hard target cross-entropy loss:
  
 Llocal (θi ) = − y log fi (x; θi ) Lcombined = α · Lhard (qS , y) + β · LKD . (5)
 (x,y)∈Di
  Once knowledge distillation is complete on each device,
 + (1 − y) log(1 − fi (x; θi )) ; (2)
 the updated student models are aggregated to obtain a new
where fi (x; θi ) is the sigmoid output of the local model for global model. This aggregation process may involve averinput x,θi are the parameters of the model at node i, and (x, y) aging the model parameters or using more sophisticated
represents the training pairs in the local dataset Di . techniques to combine the models effectively. Aggregation
 After local training, each device conducts knowledge distil- can be performed in a decentralized manner, with devices
lation by leveraging the pre-trained global teacher model. The communicating directly with each other or through a central
student model on each device learns to mimic the behavior server acting as an aggregator. After local updates, the models
of the global teacher model by minimizing a distillation loss are aggregated securely to update the global model. To ensure
function. This distillation process typically involves comparing privacy, the updates are encrypted before transmission and
the output distributions or representations of the teacher and decryption is performed during aggregation:
student models and optimizing the student model’s parameters
 1
 N
to match those of the teacher. Knowledge distillation allows
student models to learn from the output distributions (soft θg = Enc(θi ), (6)
 N
 i=1
targets) generated by teacher models. These distributions are
softened using a temperature parameter T, enhancing the θg ← θg + η · Dec θg , (7)
information transfer about inter-class relationships: where Enc and Dec represent the encryption and decryption
  
 zT (x) functions, and  is the learning rate for updating the global
 pT (x) = σ , qS (x) = σ (zS (x)), (3)
 T model.
7196 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 In the SKDFL framework, secure aggregation of model Algorithm 1: SKDFL Pseudo-Algorithm
updates is crucial to maintain the privacy and security of the Input: Set of node models {Mi }N i=1 , local datasets
data. We utilize Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMPC) to {Di }N .
 i=1
perform this aggregation without revealing individual updates Output: Optimized federated model parameters with
to any of the participating nodes or to an external adver- distilled knowledge
sary. The security of this SMPC protocol relies on the Initialize: Set a public dataset X pub .
assumption that a sufficient number of nodes behave honestly 1 Initial Phase: Generate a fixed finite field (i.e., a set of
and do not collude. If a majority of the nodes are honest, integers from 0 to Q − 1 for a prime number Q) for all
they can prevent any malicious node from learning about computations to take place along with the initial global
individual updates or from influencing the aggregated result model parameters W0 .
unduly. 2 for r ← 1 to rmax do
 Assuming each node i has a model update θi , the goal is 3 for each Secure Aggregator n in N do
to compute the sum of these Soft Labels securely. The process 4 for each Consumer Edge Node i in I do
involves the following steps: pub,c
 5 Yr,i,n ← NodeUpdate(r);
 1) Each node i splits its update thetai into N shares such
 pub,c I pub,c
 that the sum of these shares equals the update: 6 Yr+1,n = 1I i=1 Yr,i,n ;
 
 n pub,c
 Yr+1 = N
 pub,c
 θi = sij , sij ∈ Rd , (8)
 7 n=1 Yr+1,n ;
 pub
 j=1
 8 Yr+1 ← D(Decode(Yr+1 c ));
 pub
 9 Send Yr+1 to each Consumer Edge Node;
 where sij is the share of node i’s update given to node
 j, and d is the dimensionality of the model parameters. 10 ClientUpdate (r): // Each Consumer Edge Node
 2) Each node i securely sends the share sij to node j. (Student) executes this function;
 3) Each node j aggregates the shares it receives from all 11 for each Local client i in I in parallel: do

 nodes: 12 1. Perform knowledge distillation from the public
 pub pub
 n shared dataset: W ← train(W, Xr , Yr );
 Sj = sij . (9) 13 2. Local Training: Wr,i ← train(W, Xr,i , Yr,i );
 pub pub
 i=1 14 3. Compute Soft Labels: Yr,i ← fWi (Xr );
 pub,c pub
 4) The nodes then combine their aggregates to compute the 15 4. Encode Soft Labels: Yr,i ← Encode(Yr,i );
 overall update: pub,c
 16 5. Encrypt Soft Labels: Split Yr,i into N shares;
 pub,c
 
 n 
 n 
 n 
 n 17 6. return Yr,i,n ;
 θg = Sj = sij = θi . (10)
 j=1 j=1 i=1 i=1
 TABLE II
 This method ensures that the individual updates θi are C ONSIDERED S CENARIOS
never revealed to other nodes or any external observer.
The use of SMPC allows the computation of the sum
of updates in a way that preserves the confidentiality of
the data. Algorithm 1 shows the main training process of
our SKDFL.

 3 show the considered student model (i.e., local model)
 IV. I MPLEMENTATION
 training loss for 5 and 10 clients, respectively, during 10
 We have implemented our proposed SKDFL, using PySyft, rounds, 25 rounds, and 50 rounds, respectively. We observe
a privacy-centric deep-learning library built on top of the that the student model loss, in both cases, decreases until it
PyTorch framework. In our test environment, we considered reaches the minimum only after a few rounds of training (i.e.,
two datasets: the WSN-DS dataset and the UNSW-NB15 2 rounds). This demonstrates the communication efficiency of
dataset. The WSN-DS dataset is used as the public dataset the SKDFL framework, as it achieves significant loss reducshared between the organization and clients, while the UNSW- tion with minimal communication rounds. Such efficiency is
NB15 dataset is treated as the local dataset. We divided the crucial in FL, where reducing the number of communication
UNSW-NB15 dataset among clients so that each client has rounds between clients and the central server helps minimize
a subset containing samples of each attack type. To evaluate bandwidth usage and latency, leading to more scalable and
SKDFL, we defined two scenarios: binary and multi-class practical FL implementations.
classification. In each scenario, we varied the number of
involved FL clients from 5 to 10 and adjusted the rounds
of training from 10 to 50 (see Table II). During each round, A. Performance Evaluation
clients distill knowledge using the shared WSN-DS dataset, The performance of our proposed framework is assessed
apply their subset of the local UNSW-NB15 data, and then using metrics like accuracy, precision, recall (true positive
use the WSN-DS dataset to predict new labels. Figs. 2 and rate, TPR), F1-score, and the area under the receiver operating
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: WHEN FL MEETS KD TO SECURE CONSUMER EDGE NETWORK 7197

Fig. 2. Training loss of local model for 5 clients during (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 3. Training loss of local model for 10 clients during (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 4. Confusion matrices of our SKDFL for (a) 10 training rounds; (b) 25 training rounds; and (c) 50 training rounds.

characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC). The ROC curve visually Recall (or TPR) indicates the proportion of actual positives
plots the true positive rate against the false positive rate correctly identified:
(FPR). A confusion matrix is also used, providing counts TP
of true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false Recall = DR = TPR = (13)
 TP + FN
negatives.
 Accuracy measures the model’s ability to classify data The F1-score, the harmonic mean of precision and recall,
correctly and is calculated as: balances both metrics:
 2
 F1 = (14)
 TP + TN
 Precision + Recall
 1 1
 Accuracy = (11)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 where True positives (TP) are correctly identified intrusions,
 Precision measures the proportion of correct positive clas- false negatives (FN) are missed intrusions, false positives (FP)
sifications: are incorrect intrusion classifications, and true negatives (TN)
 are correctly classified benign instances. A high-performing
 TP model will achieve strong accuracy, recall, and F1-score
 Precision = (12) while keeping false positives low. Fig. 4 shows the confusion
 TP + FP
7198 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 5. ROC Curves of our SKDFL for (a) 10 training rounds; (b) 25 training rounds; and (c) 50 training rounds.

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF SKDFL AND R ECENT AI M ODELS
 U SING THE UNSW-NB15 DATASET

matrices of our SKDFL framework across different training
rounds: (a) 10 training rounds, (b) 25 training rounds, and
(c) 50 training rounds. SKDFL achieves high accuracy and
an F1-score of 99%. Fig. 5 presents the ROC curves of our
SKDFL framework across different training rounds: (a) 10
rounds, (b) 25 rounds, and (c) 50 rounds. The curves illustrate the model’s performance in terms of the true positive
rate and the false positive rate for various classification
thresholds. A high-performance score of 99% was achieved
across all three training durations. Macro-average ROC curves
were also generated by calculating the TPR and FPR for
each class and averaging them, which is particularly useful
for balanced classes and assessing the classifier’s overall
performance. We consistently achieved a high performance
score of 99% for 10, 25, and 50 rounds. Figs. 6(a) and Fig. 6. Total duration of SKDFL process training and FedAvg in the
6(b) show the total time taken to complete the federated (a) binary classification and (b) multi-class classification.
learning (FL) process for our SKDFL framework compared
to traditional FL (specifically FedAvg (without KD)) for both
binary and multi-class classification tasks. The results demonstrate significant reductions in communication costs, achieving have compared our proposed framework (SKDFL) with recent
up to a 92.4% reduction compared to conventional FL AI-based intrusion detection approaches from the literature,
methods. including Fuzziness Semi-Supervised Learning [19], Random
 Forest-Based IDS [20], IDS for Wireless Sensor Networks
 (IDSWSN) [21], IDS using Outlier Gaussian Mixture [22],
B. Comparative Analysis and IDS for Cyber-Physical Systems (IDSCPS) [23]. Table III
 In this section, we compare the performance of our presents the accuracy and F1-score for our SKDFL framework
proposed SKDFL framework with several centralized AI- compared to the centralized AI approaches on the UNSWbased schemes in detecting attacks in consumer networks. We NB15 Dataset. The results demonstrate that our framework
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: WHEN FL MEETS KD TO SECURE CONSUMER EDGE NETWORK 7199

achieves the highest accuracy of 99% and the highest F1- [11] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
score of 99% with only 28.08 seconds of training time. “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Stat., 2017, pp. 1–10.
This shows that our proposed SKDFL framework not only [12] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, “Federated learning:
maintains the privacy of participants but also outperforms cen- Challenges, methods, and future directions,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
tralized methods in terms of detection accuracy and F1-score. vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 50–60, May 2020.
 [13] J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, and P. Richtárik, “Federated
Overall, SKDFL is a promising framework, offering robust optimization: Distributed machine learning for on-device intelligence,”
protection against emerging attacks while preserving data 2016, arXiv:1610.02527.
privacy. [14] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen,
 “MobileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc. IEEE
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018.
 [15] X. Zhang, X. Zhou, M. Lin, and J. Sun, “ShuffleNet: An extremely
 V. C ONCLUSION efficient convolutional neural network for mobile devices,” in Proc. IEEE
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 6848–6856.
 This paper proposed a novel federated learning approach [16] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
for secure edge consumer network, called SKDFL. The network,” in Proc. NIPS Deep Learn. Represent. Learn. Workshop, 2015,
SKDFL framework uses a novel integration of federated pp. 1–11.
 [17] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “DistilBERT, a distilled
learning with knowledge distillation tailored to the needs version of bert: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” in Proc. NeurIPS,
of edge computing in consumer networks. This approach 2019, pp. 1–5.
not only addresses privacy and communication efficiency [18] X. Li, B. Chen, and W. Lu, “FEDDKD: Federated learning with
 decentralized knowledge distillation,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53, no. 15, pp.
but also leverages advanced machine-learning techniques to 18547–18563, Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
cope with the computational limitations of edge devices. s10489-022-04431-1
For future work, we intend to explore optimizing the trade- [19] H. Suryotrisongko and Y. Musashi, “Evaluating hybrid quantumclassical deep learning for cybersecurity botnet DGA detection,”
offs between model accuracy and computational efficiency Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 197, pp. 223–229, Jan. 2022.
to further enhance performance on resource-constrained edge [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
devices. Additionally, we intend to integrate Explainable AI S1877050921023590
 [20] K. Singh, S. C. Guntuku, A. Thakur, and C. Hota, “Big data analytics
techniques, which could improve transparency and trust in the framework for peer-to-peer botnet detection using random forests,” Inf.
model’s decisions, addressing concerns about the interpretabil- Sci., vol. 278, pp. 488–497, Sep. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.
ity of local models at the edge. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025514003570
 [21] C. D. McDermott and A. Petrovski, “Investigation of computational
 intelligence techniques for intrusion detection in wireless sensor
 networks,” Int. J. Comput. Netw. Commun., vol. 9, pp. 45–56, Jul. 2017.
 R EFERENCES [Online]. Available: http://hdl.handle.net/10059/2526
 [22] N. Moustafa, G. Misra, and J. Slay, “Generalized outlier gaussian mix-
 [1] S. Mumtaz, A. Alsohaily, Z. Pang, A. Rayes, K. F. Tsang, and
 ture technique based on automated association features for simulating
 J. Rodriguez, “Massive Internet of Things for industrial applications:
 and detecting Web application attacks,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput.,
 Addressing wireless IIoT connectivity challenges and ecosystem fragvol. 6, no. 2, pp. 245–256, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
 mentation,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 28–33,
 [23] N. Moustafa, E. Adi, B. Turnbull, and J. Hu, “A new threat intelligence
 Mar. 2017.
 scheme for safeguarding industry 4.0 systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
 [2] Y.-C. Lee, Y. Wei, H. Wang, H.-T. Au, Y. Liu, and K. F. Tsang, “DDoS pp. 32910–32924, 2018.
 impact analysis index for edge internet of things system evaluation,” in
 Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Product Compliance Eng. Asia (ISPCE-ASIA),
 2022, pp. 1–5.
 [3] H. R. Chi, C. K. Wu, N.-F. Huang, K.-F. Tsang, and A. Radwan, “A
 survey of network automation for Industrial Internet-of-Things toward
 industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 2065–2077,
 Feb. 2023.
 [4] Z. A. E. Houda, H. Moudoud, and B. Brik, “Federated deep reinforcement learning for efficient jamming attack mitigation in O-RAN,” IEEE
 Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 9334–9343, Jul. 2024.
 [5] Z. A. E. Houda, D. Naboulsi, and G. Kaddoum, “A privacy-preserving
 collaborative jamming attacks detection framework using federated
 learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12153–12164,
 Apr. 2024.
 [6] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava, Zakaria Abou El Houda (Member, IEEE) received
 “Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
 detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum. University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, in
 Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024. 2021, and the Ph.D. degree in computer engi-
 [7] H. Xie, Y. Wang, Y. Ding, C. Yang, H. Zheng, and B. Qin, “Verifiable neering from the University of Technology of
 federated learning with privacy-preserving data aggregation for con- Troyes, Troyes, France, in 2021. He is currently
 sumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, an Assistant Professor with the National Institute
 pp. 2696–2707, Feb. 2024. of Scientific Research (INRS), within the Energy,
 [8] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, S. Islam, and Materials and Telecommunications Center (INRS-
 A. K. M. N. Islam, “Federated learning-based personalized recommen- EMT), where he leads the Resilient Cybersecurity
 dation systems: An overview on security and privacy challenges,” IEEE Reseach Laboratory. He is a member of the joint
 Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2618–2627, Feb. 2024. INRS-UQO Research Unit on Cybersecurity and Digital Trust. Prior to joining
 [9] P. Chatterjee, D. Das, and D. B. Rawat, “Federated learning empowered INRS, he served as a research scientist in various institutions, contributing
 recommendation model for financial consumer services,” IEEE Trans. to significant research projects on the application of machine learning for
 Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2508–2516, Feb. 2024. intrusion detection systems, and studying the explainability and robustness of
[10] F. Jiang et al., “Deep learning based multi-channel intelligent attack these systems. His current research interests include applied AI for intrusion
 detection for data security,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. 5, no. 2, detection systems, security in distributed/federated machine learning, and
 pp. 204–212, Apr.–Jun. 2020. blockchain for network security.
7200 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

 Hajar Moudoud (Member, IEEE) received the Bouziane Brik (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 B.Eng. degree in software engineering from the Engineer degree (Ranked First) in computer science,
 Mohammadia School of Engineers, Rabat, Morocco, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Laghouat
 in 2018, the first Ph.D. degree in computer engi- University, Algeria, in 2010, 2013, and 2017, respecneering from the University of Sherbrooke, Canada, tively. He is currently working as an Assistant
 in 2022, and the second Ph.D. degree in computer Professor with the Computer Science Department
 engineering from the University of Technology of of Computing and Informatics College, Sharjah
 Troyes, France, in 2022. She is currently a Professor University, UAE. Before joining Sharjah University,
 with the Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie, he worked as an Assistant Professor with the DRIVE
 Université du Québec en Outaouais, Canada. Her Department, Bourgogne University, France. He has
 research interests include the security of the Internet also worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow with the
of Things, applied machine/deep learning for intrusion detection systems, and University of Troyes, CESI School, and Eurecom Research Institute, France.
leveraging blockchain to enhance the security of next-generation networks He has been (still) working on resources management and security challenges
(5G and beyond/6G). of 5G network slicing in the context of H2020 European projects, including
 MonB5G, 5GDrones, InDiD, and 5G-INSIGHT. His research interests also
 include 5G and beyond networks, explainable AI, and machine/deep learning
 for wireless networks. He is an active member in many conferences’
 organizing committees, such as Globecom, WCNC, ICC, GIIS, EAI, and EAI
 CICom. He actively organized different special issues in prestigious journals
 as well as conference workshops.