Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Expert Systems With Applications
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa

XG-NID: Dual-modality network intrusion detection using a heterogeneous
graph neural network and large language model
Yasir Ali Farrukh a , Syed Wali a , Irfan Khan a,∗, Nathaniel D. Bastian b

a
 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Clean & Resilient Energy System Lab (CARES), Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
b Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Army Cyber Institute, United States Military Academy, West Point, NY, USA

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Keywords: In the rapidly evolving ﬁeld of cybersecurity, the integration of ﬂow-level and packet-level information for real-
Network Intrusion detection time intrusion detection remains a largely untapped area of research. This paper introduces “XG-NID,” a novel
Graph neural network framework that, to the best of our knowledge, is the ﬁrst to fuse ﬂow-level and packet-level data within a hetero-
Multi-modal fusion
 geneous graph structure, oﬀering a comprehensive analysis of network traﬃc. Leveraging a heterogeneous graph
Large language models
Explainable AI
 neural network (GNN) with graph-level classiﬁcation, XG-NID uniquely enables real-time inference while eﬀectively capturing the intricate relationships between ﬂow and packet payload data. Unlike traditional GNN-based
 methodologies that predominantly analyze historical data, XG-NID is designed to accommodate the heterogeneous nature of network traﬃc, providing a robust and real-time defense mechanism. Our framework extends
 beyond mere classiﬁcation; it integrates Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate detailed, human-readable
 explanations and suggest potential remedial actions, ensuring that the insights produced are both actionable and
 comprehensible. Additionally, we introduce a new set of ﬂow features based on temporal information, further enhancing the contextual and explainable inferences provided by our model. To facilitate practical application and
 accessibility, we developed “GNN4ID,” an open-source tool that enables the extraction and transformation of raw
 network traﬃc into the proposed heterogeneous graph structure, seamlessly integrating ﬂow and packet-level
 data. Our comprehensive quantitative comparative analysis demonstrates that XG-NID achieves an F1 score of
 97 % in multi-class classiﬁcation, outperforming existing baseline and state-of-the-art methods. This sets a new
 standard in Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) by combining innovative data fusion with enhanced
 interpretability and real-time capabilities.

1. Introduction ing to the shutdown of mission-critical cyber-physical systems (Gartner,
 2021), highlighting the critical need for improved defensive measures.
 In the dynamic and increasingly complex landscape of cybersecu- Traditional machine learning-based NIDS methodologies can be
rity, Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) play a crucial role in broadly categorized into two types: those that analyze ﬂow informaprotecting systems and networks from a wide range of cyber threats tion and those that scrutinize packet-level information (Farrukh, Wali,
(Mallick and Nath, 2024). The growing signiﬁcance of cybersecurity Khan, and Bastian, 2023). Flow-based NIDS analyze aggregated data
is underscored by the rise in cyber-attacks driven by rapid digital ex- about network traﬃc, such as the volume of data transferred between
pansion (Mwangi, 2024). In an era marked by unprecedented inter- endpoints, the duration of connections, and the frequency of interacconnectedness and technological advancement, the cybersecurity land- tions. This approach is eﬃcient for identifying patterns and anomalies
scape faces an escalating challenge: the relentless wave of cyber threats at a higher level, such as Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks,
targeting critical infrastructures, sensitive information, and the core which are characterized by unusually high volumes of traﬃc (Specht
functions of society (Farrukh, Wali, Khan, and Bastian, 2024a). As the and Lee, 2004). However, ﬂow-based systems can miss more nuanced atdigital landscape expands, so does the complexity and sophistication tacks that are embedded within the payload of individual packets (Umer,
of cyber-attacks, necessitating a paradigm shift in defensive strategies Sher, and Bi, 2017).
(Cunningham, 2020). According to Gartner, by 2025, 30 % of businesses Conversely, packet-based NIDS focus on the contents of individual
in critical infrastructure will face a security breach, potentially lead- packets, examining payloads for signatures of known exploits, malware,

 ∗ Corresponding author.

 E-mail addresses: yasir.ali@tamu.edu (Y.A. Farrukh), syedwali@tamu.edu (S. Wali), irfankhan@tamu.edu (I. Khan), nathaniel.bastian@westpoint.edu
(N.D. Bastian).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.128089
Received 19 September 2024; Received in revised form 28 April 2025; Accepted 6 May 2025
Available online 10 May 2025
0957-4174/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

and other malicious content. This method excels at detecting attacks that 4. We propose new temporal ﬂow features to improve contextual unrely on speciﬁc payload characteristics, such as SQL injection or buﬀer derstanding and explainability in network intrusion detection, and
overﬂow attacks (Farrukh et al., 2022). Despite their detailed inspection leverage LLMs to generate detailed, human-readable explanations
capabilities, packet-based systems can be overwhelmed by high volumes and potential mitigation strategies.
of traﬃc and may fail to identify broader traﬃc patterns indicative of
certain attacks. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 re-
 The inherent limitations of relying solely on either ﬂow or packet- views related works, covering the application of GNNs in NIDS and the
level information highlight the need for an integrated approach. Certain role of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) in NIDS. Section 3 details
sophisticated attacks can exploit these limitations to bypass detection. the adopted methodology, including the dataset, proposed framework,
For instance, an SQL injection attack, which embeds malicious SQL com- its integral components, and their operation. Section 4 presents the remands within a packet’s payload, might evade a ﬂow-based NIDS be- sults and provides a comparative analysis. Section 5 concludes the paper
cause it does not generate signiﬁcant anomalies in traﬃc patterns (Umer and outlines potential future work.
et al., 2017). Conversely, ﬂow-based attacks can slip through packetlevel NIDS because they do not involve malicious payloads but rather 2. Related works
manipulate the volume and frequency of packets (Tan et al., 2014).
This dichotomy underscores a critical gap in current machine learning- In this section, we review the existing literature in two parts: the
based NIDS technologies. By failing to leverage the complementary application of GNNs in NIDS and the role of XAI in the NIDS domain.
strengths of both ﬂow and packet-level information, existing systems Notably, there is a signiﬁcant gap in the research concerning the integraleave networks vulnerable to a range of attack vectors. Addressing this tion of packet-level and ﬂow-level information for both inference and
gap requires a novel approach that combines these two types of infor- explainability. Our work aims to address this gap by leveraging data
mation into a uniﬁed framework, enabling more comprehensive threat fusion through heterogeneous graph structures, extracting contextual
detection. information from both packet and ﬂow levels, and performing graph-
 In response to these challenges, our paper proposes a novel method level classiﬁcation to enable real-time inference with explainability. This
of multi-modal data fusion that integrates both ﬂow and packet-level in- comprehensive approach not only enhances the detection capabilities
formation, represented in a unique heterogeneous graph format. This ap- but also provides actionable insights, advancing the ﬁeld of network
proach leverages Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to process and analyze security.
the heterogeneous data, capturing the intricate relationships and patterns within network traﬃc. By representing network traﬃc as graphs, 2.1. Graph neural network
where nodes and edges encapsulate both ﬂow and packet attributes, we
can harness the strengths of both modalities of data. This fusion allows The majority of the existing literature on GNN-based NIDS focuses
our system to detect a broader spectrum of cyber-attacks, improving on node-level and edge-level classiﬁcation. These studies are primarily
overall detection accuracy. The graph-based representation also facili- aimed at analyzing historical network traﬃc to understand past attacks
tates the learning of complex network patterns, which are essential for or to visualize network activity in a more user-friendly manner, often
identifying sophisticated threats. lacking real-time inference capabilities (Messai and Seba, 2023). Fur-
 Furthermore, we emphasize the importance of contextual explain- ther, most of these works employ homogeneous graph representations
ability in cybersecurity. Traditional NIDS outputs are often cryptic, mak- of network traﬃc, which do not fully exploit the heterogeneous nature
ing it diﬃcult for cyber analysts to understand and respond to threats of network data. This leaves a gap in leveraging the heterogeneity of
eﬀectively (Abou El Houda, Brik, and Khoukhi, 2022). By integrating network traﬃc and providing real-time inference. We discuss several
explainability using contexual information from large language models notable works herein, highlighting their contributions and limitations.
(LLMs), our approach provides clear, actionable insights into detected Lo, Layeghy, Sarhan, Gallagher, and Portmann (2022) presented
threats, detailing the nature of the attack, aﬀected components, and rec- “E-GraphSAGE” to classify network ﬂows using edge-level classiﬁcaommended mitigation strategies. tion. The model captures edge and topological information in IoT net-
 In short, this paper emphasizes the importance of data fusion in works for classiﬁcation. The authors enhanced the GraphSAGE (Hamilnetwork security and proposes a novel framework that integrates ﬂow ton, Ying, and Leskovec, 2017) algorithm to directly exploit the strucand packet-level information using GNNs, along with contextual and ex- tural information of the network ﬂow and encode it in a graph. Deplainable inferences. By bridging the gap between these two data modal- spite these advancements, the scalability and real-time inference capaities and leveraging their combined information, our approach oﬀers a bilities remain questionable due to the computational complexity of anrobust and comprehensive solution to network intrusion detection. This alyzing complete ﬂow information. Chang and Branco (2024) further
framework not only enhances the detection of threats but also provides enhanced E-GraphSAGE by integrating residual learning and an attenactionable insights that can lead to the development of intelligent sys- tion mechanism to increase eﬃciency. They utilized E-GraphSAGE with
tems capable of making autonomous decisions on appropriate responses, residual learning to target minority class imbalance and introduced an
thereby paving the way for improved cybersecurity measures. The main edge-based residual graph attention network (E-ResGAT) to improve efcontributions of this work are as follows: ﬁciency. However, the reliance on ﬁxed neighborhood edge sampling
 and attention mechanisms might still face challenges in highly dynamic
1. We present XG-NID, a novel framework that fuses ﬂow-level and network environments.
 packet-level data modalities using a heterogeneous graph structure, Zhou, Xu, Rush, and Yu (2020) proposed a supervised approach
 enabling real-time, context-aware network intrusion detection with based on a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) and network traces.
 enhanced explainability and actionable insights. They considered only the topological structure of the graph, omitting
2. We develop a Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network (HGNN) model edge features and initializing node features as a vector of ones. This
 for graph-level classiﬁcation in NIDS, designed to capture complex method can eﬃciently handle large graphs but may miss critical edge
 network interactions and support real-time inference, while accom- information that could enhance detection accuracy. Similarly, Zhang,
 modating the diverse nature of network traﬃc. Li, Chen, Lee, and Lee (2022) suggested using a GCN for botnet detec-
3. We introduce GNN4ID (Farrukh, Wali, Khan, and Bastian, 2024b), tion. They used 12 GCN layers to capture long-term dependencies in
 an open-source tool that transforms raw network traﬃc into the pro- large botnet architectures. However, very deep GCN models are prone
 posed heterogeneous graph format, streamlining the integration of to over-smoothing, which can diminish the model’s ability to distinguish
 ﬂow and packet-level data for comprehensive analysis. between classes.

 2
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

 Altaf, Wang, Ni, Liu, and Braun (2023) presented a comprehensive provide a detailed explanation of individual predictions by measuring
GNN-based NIDS model capable of capturing relations in the network the impact of each feature on the ﬁnal outcome (Moustafa, Koroniotis,
graph and combining both node and edge features to identify abnormal Keshk, Zomaya, and Tari, 2023). Their methodology, applied to the CItraﬃc behavior. This approach uses IP addresses and port numbers to CIDS2017 dataset, demonstrated how this combination of SHAP values
represent Internet of Things (IoT) sessions as nodes and network ﬂows and LLM can oﬀer coherent responses regarding inﬂuential predictors
as edges, which helps mitigate multiple attack vectors at the application of model outcomes. Similarly, Ali and Kostakos (2023) developed Huntand network layers. However, attacks dependent on payload content can GPT, a specialized intrusion detection dashboard that incorporates XAI
still evade detection. A more general approach to detecting intrusions frameworks like SHAP with a Random Forest classiﬁer trained on the
with a heterogeneous graph is proposed in (Pujol-Perich, Suárez-Varela, KDD99 dataset to enhance model interpretability.
Cabellos-Aparicio, and Barlet-Ros, 2022). The graph is built based on Despite these advancements, signiﬁcant issues remain regarding the
network ﬂows, creating separate nodes for the source host, destination scalability, eﬃciency, and human-centric aspects of XAI-driven cybersehost, and the ﬂow itself. This structure, combined with a nonstandard curity solutions. Current explanations based on SHAP values often lack
message-passing neural network (MPNN), improves the model’s abil- the necessary contextual and temporal information, which is crucial for
ity to learn embeddings from ﬂows. Despite its promising accuracy, the accurately identifying and explaining time-based attacks. Time-based
model was tested on a heavily pre-processed dataset, raising questions attacks, such as DDoS attacks, unfold over speciﬁc periods, where the
about its performance on more balanced and varied data. timing and sequence of network events are quite important. A more ef-
 Cao et al. (2021) proposed representing packet traﬃc using a spatio- fective explanation would incorporate temporal information, with featemporal graph to model features that vary with time. Their method tures highlighting a rapid inﬂux of requests to the targeted server from
aims to detect DDoS attacks in software-deﬁned networking (SDN) en- speciﬁc IPs within a brief timeframe, providing a clearer understanding
vironments using a Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Network (ST- of why the attack was detected.
GCN) (Yu, Yin, and Zhu, 2017). While this approach eﬀectively captures Explaining payload-speciﬁc attacks based on network ﬂow remains a
temporal dynamics, its applicability to a wider range of attacks remains challenge. The actual signature of payload-speciﬁc attacks, such as SQL
to be seen. Premkumar, Schneider, Spivey, Pavlik, and Bastian (2023) is injection, lies within the payload itself. These attacks can demonstrate
the only paper we found that eﬀectively integrates both ﬂow and packet benign behavior in network ﬂow, with their malicious intent residing
information utilizing Graph Representation Learning (GRL). Their ap- in the packet content. Thus, explanations must consider the payload to
proach ﬁrst generates packet-level embeddings from graph representa- clearly convey why a prediction was made. Current methods that extions, then combines these with ﬂow-level features for ﬁnal prediction. plain such attacks solely based on ﬂow data fail to capture the critical
While this method captures detailed packet information and broader details within the payload, leading to incomplete or inaccurate expla-
ﬂow characteristics, it lacks direct fusion of these features, potentially nations. These shortcomings are addressed in this paper by enhancing
leading to increased computational overhead due to the two-step pro- the feature extraction process to include both contextual and temporal
cessing required. information for time-based attacks, and by ensuring payload-speciﬁc at-
 In short, while existing GNN-based NIDS models oﬀer various meth- tacks are explained based on their content.
ods for network intrusion detection, they often focus on either node
or edge-level classiﬁcation and typically lack the integration of hetero- 3. Methodology
geneous information sources. Our proposed approach addresses these
shortcomings by leveraging both packet and ﬂow-level data within a In this section, we present the methodology employed to develop
heterogeneous graph framework, enabling more comprehensive and and evaluate our proposed framework for network intrusion detection.
real-time intrusion detection. By utilizing graph-level classiﬁcation, our The framework leverages the fusion of ﬂow and packet-level informamodel can better capture the complex relationships inherent in network tion through a HGNN to provide real-time, explainable, and actionable
traﬃc and provide robust defense mechanisms against a broader range insights. We begin by providing details of the proposed framework, inof cyber threats. cluding the feature extraction and development, graph construction, and
 the integration of explainability through contextual inference. This is
2.2. Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence followed by details of the dataset used for training and testing. The
 methodology outlines the key components that contribute to the eﬀec-
 Recent research in XAI has been actively applied to cybersecurity, tiveness of our approach, ensuring comprehensive analysis and robust
particularly in specialized use cases like network intrusion detection and intrusion detection capabilities.
malware identiﬁcation. Han et al. (2021) developed the DeepAID framework to interpret unsupervised deep learning-based anomaly detection 3.1. Proposed framework
systems for cybersecurity. This approach helps security analysts understand why a certain sample is considered anomalous by comparing the The proposed framework, XG-NID, introduces a novel approach to
anomaly to a normal reference data point. network intrusion detection by integrating ﬂow-level and packet-level
 XAI holds promise in enhancing the adoption of machine learning information into a heterogeneous graph structure. This multi-modal
(ML) models within existing cybersecurity frameworks. However, sev- data fusion empowers the model to capture the complex interaceral challenges still need to be addressed (Nadeem et al., 2023), par- tions within network traﬃc, enabling more accurate, robust, and
ticularly in making explanations more understandable for users and re- context-aware intrusion detection. By incorporating both granular
ducing the opacity of ML models within NIDS frameworks. To address (packet-level) and aggregated (ﬂow-level) data, XG-NID addresses the
these issues, Alwahedi, Aldhaheri, Ferrag, Battah, and Tihanyi (2024) limitations of traditional NIDS and provides a more holistic view of
explored the integration of LLMs with XAI techniques. Consequently, re- network behavior. A key strength of XG-NID lies in its dual focus on
cent research papers have focused on adding an LLM layer to the existing high-performance detection and interpretability. Beyond achieving
frameworks. state-of-the-art accuracy, the framework prioritizes human-readable
 Ziems, Liu, Flanagan, and Jiang (2023) introduced LLM-DTE (Large explanations and actionable insights to bridge the gap between
Language Model Decision Tree Explanations), a method that utilizes technical detection outputs and decision-making by security analysts
LLM to generate natural language explanations for decision tree-based or non-expert users. This is achieved through the integration of a LLM,
NIDS. Khediri et al. (2024) proposed an approach that integrates SHAP which enhances the explainability of detected threats, making complex
(SHapley Additive exPlanations) values with LLMs to generate human- cyber threat information accessible even to users without cybersecurity
understandable explanations for detected anomalies. These SHAP values expertise.

 3
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

Fig. 1. Illustration of the proposed framework “XG-NID”. The framework, depicted here, demonstrates its capability to better identify network attacks either based
on ﬂow or packet-level information with detailed contextual information and potential remedial actions. The framework comprises of six key components: Flow and
Feature generator, Explainable Feature Extractor, Graph Generator, HGNN Model, Integrated Gradient Explainer, and Generative Explainer.

 The name XG-NID reﬂects these core principles: ‘X’ stands for Ex- focus set a new standard for modern NIDS. The following sub-sections
plainable, emphasizing the framework’s focus on generating under- provide a detailed technical breakdown of each component, highlightstandable insights; ‘G’ denotes the use of a GNN for modeling complex ing their individual roles and the interdependencies that contribute to
network interactions; and ‘NID’ represents the Network Intrusion De- the overall eﬀectiveness of the proposed framework.
tection System, the primary application domain. The ‘X’ particularly
highlights the role of the LLM in providing contextualized explanations 3.1.1. Flow and feature Generator
and remedial guidance based on the HGNN’s detection results. The Flow and Feature Generator is the ﬁrst component of our pro-
 The framework is designed as a modular pipeline comprising six key posed framework, responsible for processing raw network traﬃc and
components, each playing a distinct yet interconnected role in the intru- aggregating it into ﬂows. The primary goal of this component is to exsion detection process (as illustrated in Fig. 1). The process begins with tract features from raw network traﬃc for real-time inference. For our
the Flow and Feature Generator, which captures raw network traﬃc and approach, we set a maximum limit of 20 packets per ﬂow, following the
processes it to generate network ﬂows while extracting both ﬂow-level work of the CIC-IoT2023 dataset (Neto et al., 2023). The decision to limit
and packet-level features. This ensures that the system has a rich rep- the ﬂow to 20 packets is driven by our objective to enable real-time inresentation of network activity, essential for detecting both broad-scale ference; allowing ﬂows to accumulate based on default parameters could
and ﬁne-grained attacks. These generated ﬂows are subsequently passed result in ﬂow durations of up to 30 minutes (Aouini and Pekar, 2022).
to the Explainable Feature Extractor, which derives new temporal fea- Additionally, we set an idle timeout of 120 seconds, meaning that if a
tures based on historical ﬂow data. By tracking patterns over time, this ﬂow remains inactive for this duration, it is concluded.
component enables the detection of time-based anomalies and strength- The Flow and Feature Generator also segregates packet-level inforens the system’s ability to explain its decisions. mation with respect to its corresponding ﬂow, ensuring that each ﬂow
 Once the features have been generated and enhanced, the data is includes payload information derived from its associated packets. This
transferred to the Graph Generator, which transforms the ﬂow and segregation is crucial for generating graph structures, as our objective
packet-level features into a heterogeneous graph structure. In this graph, is to unify ﬂow and packet-level information into a cohesive represennodes represent ﬂows and packets, while edges capture relationships tation.
such as packet sequences and ﬂow connections, providing a compre- Built upon NFStream (Aouini and Pekar, 2022), the Flow and Feature
hensive foundation for the inference process. This transformed graph is Generator computes 76 ﬂow-level features and 14 packet-level features.
then analyzed by the core detection engine of the framework, the HGNN The primary focus of the packet features is to capture the payload infor-
Model. The HGNN processes the graph to classify network traﬃc as ei- mation, which is crucial for detecting payload-speciﬁc attacks.
ther benign or belonging to speciﬁc attack classes. Its ability to model Once the ﬂows and their respective features are generated, the Flow
both node-level and edge-level information allows it to capture the nu- and Feature Generator transforms the payload of each packet within a
anced behaviors of complex cyber threats. ﬂow into a uniform feature space of 1500 features. This transformation
 The output of the HGNN Model is forwarded to both the Integrated is based on the method outlined in Farrukh et al. (2022), where the
Gradient Explainer and the Generative Explainer. The Integrated Gradi- payload of each packet is represented by 1500 features derived from
ent Explainer applies Integrated Gradients to the HGNN’s predictions, the bytes of the payload. The hexadecimal representation of each byte
identifying the most signiﬁcant attributes of the graph structure that is converted into an integer ranging from 0 to 255, with each resulting
contributed to the model’s prediction. This step provides a transparent integer forming one feature. In cases where the payload is shorter than
view into the inner workings of the model, oﬀering localized explana- 1500 bytes, zero padding is applied to maintain a consistent feature
tions of its outputs. Building upon these feature attributions, the Gener- vector structure. For packets with no payload, the entire feature vector
ative Explainer uses an LLM to convert technical explanations into clear, is padded with zeros.
human-readable insights. It also provides potential mitigation strategies, Mathematically, the feature space for a ﬂow can be represented as
ensuring that the system’s outputs are not only accurate but also ac- follows:
tionable and understandable, even for individuals without specialized Features = [𝐹1 , 𝐹2 , … , 𝐹76 , 𝑃payload , 𝑃ﬂag , … , 𝑃layersize ] (1)
security knowledge. where:
 This structured ﬂow—from raw data ingestion to actionable 𝑃payload = [𝑃11500 , 𝑃21500 , … , 𝑃𝑛1500 ]
insights—ensures that XG-NID is both technically rigorous and practically viable. The modular design allows for ﬂexible integration and 𝑃ﬂag = [𝑃1𝑥 , 𝑃2𝑥 , … , 𝑃𝑛𝑥 ]
future enhancements, while the dual-modality fusion and explainability 𝑃layersize = [𝑃1𝑥 , 𝑃2𝑥 , … , 𝑃𝑛𝑥 ]

 4
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

In this context:

 • 𝐹1 , 𝐹2 , … , 𝐹76 denote the 76 ﬂow-level features, encapsulating various attributes related to the overall network ﬂow.
 1500 , 𝑃 1500 , … , 𝑃 1500 ] represents the payload features of
 payload = [𝑃1
 • 𝑃
 2 𝑛
 the packets within the ﬂow, where each packet 𝑃𝑖 is expressed as a
 1500-dimensional vector. The superscript 1500 denotes the dimensionality of each payload vector.
 𝑥 𝑥 𝑥
 ﬂag = [𝑃1 , 𝑃2 , … , 𝑃𝑛 ] represents another set of packet-level fea-
 • 𝑃

 tures, such as ﬂags, with dimensionality 𝑥 for each packet.
 𝑥 𝑥 𝑥
 layersize = [𝑃1 , 𝑃2 , … , 𝑃𝑛 ] represents additional packet-level fea-
 • 𝑃

 tures, such as IP layer size, also with dimensionality 𝑥 for each
 packet.

3.1.2. Explainable feature extractor Fig. 2. Impact of sliding window size on the model performance. The optimal
 Conventional features, developed by the ﬁrst component, are typ- range (350-400) achieves a peak F1 score of 97 %, balancing detection accuracy
ically eﬀective for identifying volume-based attacks characterized by and temporal context.
signiﬁcant spikes in SYN requests or packet rates within a single ﬂow Algorithm 1 Explainable Feature Extractor for NIDS
but are less eﬀective in detecting attacks that require understanding Input:
patterns across multiple ﬂows. To address this limitation, the explain- 1: 𝑊 → Rolling time window
able feature extractor also extracts temporal features that capture statis- 2: 𝐹 → Conventional ﬂow features
tics from previous ﬂows. This approach involves analyzing the evo- Output:
lution of network ﬂow statistics over time and identifying patterns 3: 𝐸 → Extracted features for NIDS
across multiple ﬂows. Techniques such as sliding window features, Step 1: Initialize Sliding Window Tracking
which aggregate statistics within speciﬁc time frames (e.g., connec- 4: for each destination 𝐷𝑗 do
tion attempts or packet rates over the last minute), provide a more 5: Initialize 𝑊𝑗 ← [0, 0, …, 0] (size 𝑊 )
comprehensive view of network activity and help identify deviations 6: end for
from normal behavior. Temporal correlation, which tracks the relation- Step 2: Update Sliding Window and Calculate Temporal Feaship between successive ﬂows such as repeated scanning attempts from tures
the same source, aids in identifying reconnaissance activities. By inte- 7: for each time step 𝑡𝑖 do
grating these additional features, the detection system can better un- 8: for each destination 𝐷𝑗 do
derstand and explain the broader context of network traﬃc patterns, 9: Update 𝑊𝑗 with packets received at 𝑡𝑖
leading to a more performant approach for identifying and mitigating 10: Calculate temporal features 𝑇𝑗 from 𝑊𝑗
threats. 11: end for
 Our proposed approach for extracting additional features is illus- 12: end for
trated in Algorithm 1. This approach leverages sliding window and tem- Step 3: Integrate Conventional and Temporal Features
poral techniques to enhance the detection and explanation of cyber- 13: 𝐸 ← Combine 𝐹 and 𝑇 for all destinations
attacks. As detailed in Table 1, the algorithm tracks and calculates var- Return:
ious rolling window-based temporal features for each destination ma- 14: Extracted features 𝐸
chine. These temporal features are systematically updated over time and
are then integrated with conventional ﬂow features. The resulting set of
metrics oﬀers a comprehensive framework for network intrusion detec- 3.1.3. Graph generator
tion, improving both the accuracy and interpretability of the system’s To eﬀectively utilize network traﬃc data for network intrusion depredictions. This integration of temporal and ﬂow-based features allows tection, we transformed the extracted ﬂow and packet features into a
for a more dynamic and context-aware understanding of network behav- heterogeneous graph structure. This transformation leverages both ﬂowior, which is crucial for identifying and explaining complex, time-based level and packet-level information, facilitating a comprehensive analysis
attacks. of the network traﬃc. Our graph structure includes two types of nodes
 To validate the impact of the sliding window size on model perfor- and two types of edges, enabling detailed and nuanced modeling of netmance, we conducted an experimental analysis using varying window work activities.
sizes ranging from 0 to 1000. The results, depicted in Fig. 2, indicate that Let  = (, ) represent our heterogeneous graph, where  is the set
a window size in the range of 350-400 achieves the optimal balance be- of nodes and  is the set of edges. The nodes in our graph are categorized
tween detection performance and temporal context, yielding the highest into two types: ﬂow nodes and packet nodes. Each ﬂow node 𝑣𝑓 ∈ 𝑓
F1 score of 97 %. While larger windows resulted in marginal declines in corresponds to a unique network ﬂow  , and each packet node 𝑣𝑝 ∈ 𝑝
performance due to excessive data aggregation, smaller windows strug- represents an individual packet 𝑖 within a ﬂow  having 𝑛 packets.
gled to capture meaningful temporal patterns, leading to reduced detec- Thus, the set of nodes  is given by:
tion accuracy.
  = 𝑓 ∪ 𝑝 (2)
 It is also important to highlight that the sliding window size has no
impact on computational time or inference speed. This is because the Each ﬂow node 𝑣𝑓 is associated with a feature vector 𝐡𝑣𝑓 ∈ ℝ𝑑 , desliding window operation simply involves adding the most recent packet rived from ﬂow-level attributes. Similarly, each packet node 𝑣𝑝 has a
and removing the oldest one from the window, making it a lightweight feature vector 𝐡𝑣𝑝 ∈ ℝ1500 , where the attributes are primarily based on
computation. As a result, the size of the sliding window does not aﬀect packet payload data.
the computational complexity or introduce latency during real-time de- Edges in the graph  also fall into two categories: “contain” edges 𝑐
tection. This ensures that the framework maintains its eﬃciency regard- and “link” edges 𝑙 . A “contain” edge 𝑒𝑐 ∈ 𝑐 connects a ﬂow node 𝑣𝑓
less of the selected window size while still beneﬁting from optimized to its corresponding packet nodes 𝑣𝑝 . The feature vector for a “contain”
detection performance. edge, 𝐚𝑒𝑐 ∈ ℝ𝑏 , includes the layer sizes and direction of the packet. The

 5
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

Table 1 Algorithm 2 Generation of Network Traﬃc Graphs
Explainable Feature Set for Time-Based Network Intrusion Detection.
 Input:  → 𝐡𝑣𝑓 , 𝐡𝑣𝑝 for 𝑖 in 
 Feature Name Description 1: Initialize:  and  as empty sets.
 Rolling_UDP_Sum Cumulative count of UDP packets received at the 2: for each packet 𝑖 in ﬂow  do
 destination within a rolling time window. 3: Create a packet node 𝑣𝑝 for 𝑖 .
 Rolling_TCP_Sum Cumulative count of TCP packets received at the 4: Add 𝑣𝑝 to 𝑝 .
 destination within a rolling time window.
 5: end for
 Rolling_ACK_Sum Cumulative count of TCP acknowledgement packets
 received at the destination within a rolling time window. 6: Create a ﬂow node 𝑣𝑓 representing ﬂow 𝐹 .
 Rolling_FIN_Sum Cumulative count of TCP FIN packets received at the 7: Add 𝑣𝑓 to 𝑓 .
 destination within a rolling time window. 8: for each packet node 𝑣𝑝 corresponding to 𝑖 do
 Rolling_RST_Sum Cumulative count of TCP RST packets received at the
 9: Add a "contain" edge 𝑒𝑐 connecting 𝑣𝑓 to 𝑣𝑝 in 𝑐 .
 destination within a rolling time window.
 Rolling_ﬁn_Sum Cumulative count of TCP FIN packets received at the 10: end for
 destination within a rolling time window. 11: for each 𝑖 from 1 to || − 1 do
 Rolling_psh_Sum Cumulative count of TCP PSH packets received by the 12: Add a "link" edge 𝑒𝑙 connecting 𝑣𝑝𝑖 and 𝑣𝑝𝑖+1 in 𝑙 .
 destination within a rolling time window. 13: end for
 Rolling_SYN_Sum Cumulative count of TCP SYN packets received by the
 destination within a rolling time window.
 Return: The graph  = (, ).
 Rolling_ICMP_Sum Cumulative count of ICMP requests received by the
 destination within a rolling time window.
 Rolling_http_port Frequency of access attempts to well-known HTTP ports
 at the destination within a rolling time window.
 Rolling_Average_ Average duration of bidirectional communication
 Duration sessions with the destination within a rolling time
 window.
 Rolling_DNS_Sum Cumulative count of DNS requests received by the
 destination within a rolling time window.
 Rolling_vulnera- Indicates the presence of known vulnerable ports at the
 ble_port destination within a rolling time window.
 Rolling_packets_Sum Cumulative count of all packets received at the
 destination within a rolling time window.
 Rolling_bipack- Cumulative count of bidirectional packets (both
 ets_Sum incoming and outgoing) associated with the destination
 within a rolling time window.
 Unique_Ports_In_ Tracks the number of unique source ports used to
 SourceDestination communicate with a speciﬁc destination within a rolling
 time window.

 Fig. 3. Illustration of graph structure, fusing ﬂow and packet level data modali-
𝑐 are represented as: ties. The features of edges utilized in the generation of graph structures are highlighted on each edge. For ’link’ edge we are utilizing only one feature whereas
𝑐 = {(𝑣𝑓 , 𝑣𝑝𝑖 ) ∣ 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛} (3) for the contain edge the number of features are four.

 A “link” edge 𝑒𝑙 ∈ 𝑙 connects sequential packet nodes within a ﬂow,
thereby forming a directed acyclic graph (DAG). The feature vector for The layered architecture of the proposed HGNN model is as follows:
a “link” edge, 𝐚𝑒𝑙 , includes the time diﬀerence (𝑡𝛿 ) between two consecutive packets. 𝑙 are represented as: ( ( ))
 ℎ(1)
 
 = ReLU GATConv ℎ(0)
 
 , 𝐀, 𝐄 (5)
 𝑖 𝑖
𝑙 = {(𝑣𝑝𝑖 , 𝑣𝑝𝑖+1 ) ∣ 1 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑛} (4)
 where ℎ(0)
 𝑖
 denotes the initial node features for each node type 𝑖 , 𝐀
 The process of generating the graph structure is concisely prerepresents the adjacency matrix, and 𝐄 denotes the edge features. The
sented in Algorithm 2. Additionally, we developed an open-source
 GATConv layers learn attention scores for each edge, enabling the model
tool, GNN4ID (Farrukh et al., 2024b), which facilitates the transforto focus on the most relevant connections in the graph.
mation of raw network traﬃc into the proposed heterogeneous graph
 In the HGNN model, both node and edge features are crucial for
structure. GNN4ID eﬀectively integrates the functionalities of our ﬁrst
 accurately capturing the characteristics of network traﬃc. The GATConv
three components, enabling users to seamlessly convert any raw netlayers compute attention coeﬃcients 𝛼𝑖𝑗 for each edge (𝑖, 𝑗), which are
work traﬃc data into the desired graph format. This tool comprethen used to aggregate the features of neighboring nodes and edges. The
hensively demonstrates the entire process, from extracting informaaggregation function for the node embeddings at layer 𝑙 is deﬁned as:
tion from raw packet capture ﬁles to generating ﬂow and packetlevel features, and ultimately constructing the speciﬁed graph struc- ⎛ ∑ ∑ (𝑙) ⎞
ture. A visual depiction of our graph structure is provided in Fig. 3, ℎ(𝑙) = 𝜎⎜ 𝛼𝑖𝑗(𝑙) 𝐖(𝑙) ℎ(𝑙−1) + 𝛼𝑖𝑗 𝐖(𝑙) ℎ(𝑙−1) ⎟ (6)
 𝑖 ⎜  𝑗 𝑒 𝑒𝑖𝑗 ⎟
highlighting the detailed connections and attributes of both nodes and ⎝𝑗∈ (𝑖) 𝑒𝑖𝑗 ∈ ⎠
edges.
 where  (𝑖) represents the neighbors of node 𝑖, 𝐖(𝑙) and 𝐖(𝑙)𝑒 are the
 learnable weight matrices for nodes and edges, respectively, and 𝜎 is a
3.1.4. Graph neural network model non-linear activation function (ReLU or LeakyReLU). The edge features
 The proposed HGNN model is designed to eﬀectively process the dual ℎ(𝑙−1)
 𝑒𝑖𝑗 are combined with the node features from the previous layer to
modalities of network traﬃc packet-level and ﬂow-level information— provide a richer representation at each layer. This combination allows
by leveraging a heterogeneous graph structure. The model is built upon the model to capture both local (node-level) and global (edge-level) inthe Graph Attention Convolution (GATConv) (Velickovic et al., 2017) teractions within the graph.
approach to capture the intricate relationships between diﬀerent types The HGNN model consists of two GATConv layers, each followed
of nodes and edges in the network traﬃc graph. by a batch normalization step and a LeakyReLU activation function to

 6
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

introduce non-linearity: In our HGNN, the Integrated Gradient Explainer generates explana-
 ( ( ( ))) tions by calculating the contributions of each feature in the heteroge-
ℎ(2)
 
 = ReLU BN GATConv ℎ(1)
 , 𝐀, 𝐄 (7) neous graph to the network’s prediction. This approach helps us under-
 𝑖 𝑖
 stand which features are most inﬂuential for each speciﬁc prediction,
 Here, the batch normalization function BN(⋅) is applied to the outthereby making the model’s decisions more interpretable.
put of the GATConv layer to stabilize the learning process, particularly
in deep networks, by normalizing the output features. The LeakyReLU
 3.1.6. Generative explainer
activation function ensures that the model can learn from both positive
 The generative explainer module uses a structured approach, inteand negative feature values, thereby enhancing its ability to capture
 grating both ﬂow and payload importance to create human-readable
complex patterns in the data.
 explanations. This process begins by utilizing the output of the Inte-
 Following the two convolutional layers, the node embeddings are
 grated Gradients Explainer to assess the importance of heterogeneous
aggregated into a single graph-level embedding using a global mean
 graph features. The extracted importance values are then used to create
pooling operation:
 prompts, which are sent to the LLM (a Llama 3-8B model) to generate
 ( )
𝐡graph = GlobalMeanPool ℎ(2)
 (8) comprehensive explanations through zero-shot prompting.
 𝑖
 While the LLM operates in a zero-shot setting, its ability to provide
 This pooling step generates a uniﬁed representation of the entire meaningful explanations is signiﬁcantly enhanced by the newly develgraph by averaging the embeddings of all nodes, ensuring that both oped temporal features and their contextual descriptions. These features
packet-level and ﬂow-level information are comprehensively captured. enrich the prompt with domain-relevant information, guiding the LLM
 The graph-level embedding is then passed through a series of fully to interpret complex network behaviors more accurately. The structured
connected layers to produce the ﬁnal classiﬁcation output. These layers nature of these features enables the LLM to produce precise, humanprogressively reduce the dimensionality of the embedding while reﬁning readable explanations and suggest remedial actions without requiring
the learned features: ﬁne-tuning. However, we recognize that ﬁne-tuning the LLM, especially
 ( ( ( ))) using techniques like LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), could further reﬁne its
Out = LogSoftmax 𝐖2 ⋅ ReLU 𝐖1 ⋅ ReLU 𝐖0 ⋅ 𝐡graph (9) contextual understanding and tailor its responses to speciﬁc organizawhere 𝐖0 , 𝐖1 , and 𝐖2 are weight matrices for the fully connected lay- tional needs. This enhancement is part of our future research agenda,
ers, and LogSoftmax(⋅) converts the ﬁnal output into class probabilities. aimed at improving both domain speciﬁc knowledge and organization
 The proposed HGNN model eﬀectively integrates packet-level and speciﬁc remedial steps.
ﬂow-level information within a heterogeneous graph framework, com- The development of well-structured prompts is a critical component
bining node and edge features to capture the full spectrum of interac- of our zero-shot prompting approach, as it enables the LLM to genertions in network traﬃc data. By utilizing GATConv layers with attention ate accurate, context-aware explanations without requiring task-speciﬁc
mechanisms, the model prioritizes critical connections within the graph, ﬁne-tuning. The success of zero-shot inference is highly dependent on
enhancing the overall accuracy of the classiﬁcation. prompt quality, making it essential to design prompts that are both
 informative and aligned with the underlying data characteristics. The
 systematic process of constructing these prompts is described in Algo-
3.1.5. Integrated gradient explainer
 rithm 3. To further clarify the structure and practical application of our
 The fourth component in our system is the Integrated Gradient Exprompt design, Fig. 4 presents visual examples of the prompt format, ilplainer, which provides feature-based local explanations for each prelustrating both the general structure and speciﬁc instances for payloaddicted outcome from the HGNN model. This explainer uses the Intedependent and ﬂow-dependent attacks. These examples help demongrated Gradient approach to determine the contribution of each input
 strate how prompt formulation contributes to generating reliable and
feature to the network’s prediction (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan, 2017).
 interpretable outputs from the LLM.
One of the primary advantages of Integrated Gradients is that it does not
 The ﬁrst step of this process involves initializing the prompt with a
require any modiﬁcation to the original network architecture. It is imphrase that clearly states the predicted class from the HGNN. Speciﬁ-
plemented with a few calls to the standard gradient operator, making
 cally, we used the following initialization phrase (referred to as 𝑃init ) :
it simple and eﬃcient to use. Moreover, this method ensures that the
 “The predicted class from GNN is {PredictedClass}.” This initial prompt
attributions are accurate and meaningful, as it satisﬁes key theoretical
 sets the context for the LLM to focus on the speciﬁc prediction made
principles that make the explanations reliable.
 by the GNN. Following this, the ﬂow importance values are processed
 Integrated Gradients work by considering the path integral of the
 by sorting them in descending order and selecting the top features that
gradients of the prediction function 𝐹 along a straight line from a basecontributed most to the prediction. These features and their correspondline input to the actual input. If a baseline input is not provided, zero
 ing actual values are then integrated into the second part of the prompt,
is used as the default value. The method computes the integral of the
 which is constructed to provide speciﬁc details about the top contributgradients at all points along this path, resulting in attributions that exing factors. This segment of the prompt is framed as: “The top features
plain the importance of each feature in the input. Mathematically, this
 contributing to this prediction are:” followed by a list of features and
is represented as follows:
 their actual values (referred to as 𝑃part2 ).
 1
 𝜕𝐹 (𝑥′ + 𝛼(𝑥 − 𝑥′ )) An alignment section is then added to the prompt. The alignment
IntegratedGrad𝑖 (𝑥) = (𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥′𝑖 ) × 𝑑𝛼 (10) phrase (denoted as 𝑃align ) is crucial as it instructs the LLM to focus on
 ∫𝛼=0 𝜕𝑥𝑖
 explaining the predicted outcome and its potential reasons without in-
 𝜕𝐹
 Here, 𝜕𝑥 represents the gradient of the prediction function 𝐹 with troducing new or unrelated information. The phrase used is: “Don’t ex-
 𝑖
respect to the 𝑖-th input feature. 𝑥 is the actual input, and 𝑥′ is the base- pect any values on your own. Explain the predicted outcome and its
line input. The integral accumulates these gradients along the path from potential reason along with the potential mitigation. Start your answer
𝑥′ to 𝑥, weighting them by the diﬀerence between 𝑥 and 𝑥′ along each with “The predicted outcome is.”
feature dimension. These parts (𝑃init , 𝑃part2 , and 𝑃align ) are then combined to form a
 Function 𝐹 represents the prediction function of the HGNN. It maps comprehensive query (𝑄ﬂow ), which is then sent to the LLM to generate
the input features of the heterogeneous graph to the output prediction. the ﬂow-based response. If the GNN predicts a payload-speciﬁc attack,
In our context, 𝐹 (𝑥) is the predicted outcome based on the input fea- such as web-based or bruteforce attacks, additional processing is done
tures 𝑥, which include node attributes, edge weights, and other relevant for the payload data. In this processing, the payload importance vecinformation from the heterogeneous graph. tors are normalized, and the top payloads are converted into a human-

 7
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

 readable ASCII string. Consequently, a second query (𝑄payload ) is constructed to analyze the payload data. This query is preﬁxed with the
Algorithm 3 Generative Explanation for GNN Predictions phrase assigned to 𝑃payloadPreﬁx : “Analyze whether this payload of net-
 Input: work ﬂow is malicious or not. Give reason concisely.” This query, along
 1: 𝐏imp → Importance values for payload features with the alignment section (𝑃align ), is sent to the LLM to generate a cor-
 2: 𝐏val → Actual values of payload features responding response.
 3: 𝐅imp → Importance values for ﬂow features Finally, the outputs from the ﬂow and payload-based queries are
 4: 𝐅val → Actual values of ﬂow features combined to form the complete generative explanation (𝐺exp ).This ap-
 5: 𝐶pred → Class predicted by the GNN proach ensures that the explanations are accurate and understandable
 6: 𝐍feat → Descriptive names of features for both ﬂow-based and payload-speciﬁc attacks.
 Output:
 7: 𝐆exp → Explanation generated by the LLM 3.2. Dataset
 8: 𝑃init ← “The predicted class from GNN is { 𝐶pred }”
 9: 𝐅sorted ← Sort 𝐅imp in descending order To ensure a robust and comprehensive evaluation of the
10: 𝐅top ← Extract top 𝑛 features from 𝐅sorted proposed XG-NID framework, we have employed three widely
11: 𝑃part2 ← “The top features contributing to this prediction are:” recognized benchmark datasets: CIC-IoT2023 (Neto et al., 2023), CIC-
12: for each 𝑖 in 𝐅top do IDS2017 (Sharafaldin, Lashkari, and Ghorbani, 2018), and UNSW-NB15
13: 𝑃part2 ← 𝑃part2 + “{ 𝐍feat [𝑖] } with actual value { 𝐅val [𝑖] }” (Moustafa and Slay, 2015). While the CIC-IoT2023 dataset is described
14: end for in detail, including its preprocessing pipeline, we refrain from repeating
15: 𝑃align ← Alignment section phrase similar preprocessing steps for CIC-IDS2017 and UNSW-NB15 to pre-
16: 𝑄ﬂow ← 𝑃init + 𝑃part2 + 𝑃align serve readability and avoid redundancy. All three datasets were pro-
17: 𝑅ﬂow ← Send 𝑄ﬂow to the LLM cessed using a consistent pipeline to ensure fair comparison. Notably,
18: if 𝐶pred corresponds to payload-speciﬁc attacks then since CIC-IDS2017 and UNSW-NB15 do not provide labeled PCAP ﬁles,
19: 𝑃norm ← Normalize 𝐏imp vectors we utilized the method introduced in Farrukh et al. (2022) to generate
20: 𝑃avg ← Calculate average importance of 𝐏norm labeled ﬂow-based data using the available ﬂow metadata. This multi-
21: 𝑃sorted ← Sort in 𝐏avg ← descending order dataset evaluation enhances the reliability and generalizability of our
22: 𝑃top ← Extract top 𝑛 payloads from 𝐏sorted ﬁndings across diverse network traﬃc conditions and attack proﬁles.
23: 𝑃hex ← Convert 𝐏top from decimal to hex
24: 𝑃ascii ← Convert 𝐏hex into ASCII string 3.3. CIC-IDS2017 dataset
25: 𝑃payloadPreﬁx → Payload analysis phrase
26: 𝑄payload ← 𝑃payloadPreﬁx + 𝐏ascii + 𝑃align The CIC-IDS2017 dataset, developed by the Canadian Institute for
27: 𝑅payload ← Send 𝑄payload to the LLM Cybersecurity, captures a diverse range of modern network traﬃc sce-
28: end if
 narios, including both benign activities and sophisticated cyberattacks.
29: Return 𝐆exp ← 𝑅ﬂow + 𝑅payload
 The dataset simulates realistic traﬃc generated by 25 users over a period of ﬁve days, encompassing approximately 48.8 GB of network data.
 It is provided in both PCAP and CSV formats, with the latter comprising

Fig. 4. Illustration of structured prompt formats used in the zero-shot prompting. The left side shows the design and example of the ﬂow-based prompt (𝑄ﬂow ), where
the predicted attack and contributing ﬂow features are provided for explanation. The right side displays the structure and example of the payload-based prompt
(𝑄payload ), where the LLM is asked to assess whether a given payload string is malicious or benign. For attacks that are payload-dependent, the ﬁnal explanation
generated by the LLM is derived by combining the responses from both 𝑄ﬂow and 𝑄payload , enabling a more comprehensive and context-aware interpretation.

 8
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

80 ﬂow-based features extracted using CICFlowMeter. The dataset in- Table 2
cludes over 2.8 million records across seven major attack categories: Description of the CICIoT2023 Dataset.
brute-force, DoS, DDoS, web-based attacks, inﬁltration, botnets, and Type Target Total Number Class
port scanning. Several work in the literature has widely utilized this of Records Distribution
dataset for benchmarking intrusion detection research. Benign Benign 1,098,195 2.35 %
 DDoS Attack 33,984,560 72.79 %
3.4. UNSW-NB15 dataset DoS Attack 8,090,738 17.33 %
 Mirai Attack 2,634,124 5.64 %
 Recon Attack 354,565 0.76 %
 The UNSW-NB15 dataset, released by the Australian Centre for Cyber Spooﬁng Attack 486,504 1.04 %
Security (ACCS), oﬀers a rich collection of contemporary network traﬃc WebBased Attack 24,829 0.05 %
designed to emulate both legitimate behavior and a broad spectrum of Bruteforce Attack 13,064 0.03 %
attack vectors. Generated using the IXIA PerfectStorm tool within a con- Total 46,686,579 100 %
trolled cyber range environment, the dataset captures over 31 hours of
traﬃc distributed across 79 PCAP ﬁles, totaling more than 99 GB. It in- Table 3
cludes both raw packet data and ﬂow-based representations generated Attackers’ Device Names and MAC Addresses.
using Argus and Bro-IDS, featuring over 45 extracted attributes. The
 Device Name MAC Address
dataset comprises approximately 2.5 million records and covers nine
distinct attack types, including Fuzzers, Analysis, Backdoors, DoS, Ex- Raspberry Pi 4–4 GB E4:5F:01:55:90:C4
 Raspberry Pi 4–2 GB DC:A6:32:C9:E4:D5
ploits, Generic, Reconnaissance, Shellcode, and Worms. Although this
 Raspberry Pi 4–8 GB DC:A6:32:DC:27:D5
dataset has been available for several years, it remains widely used by Raspberry Pi 4–2 GB DC:A6:32:C9:E5:EF
researchers as a benchmark for evaluating the performance of NIDS. Raspberry Pi 4–2 GB DC:A6:32:C9:E4:AB
 Raspberry Pi 4–2 GB DC:A6:32:C9:E4:90
3.5. CIC-IoT2023 dataset Raspberry Pi 4–2 GB DC:A6:32:C9:E5:A4
 Ring Base Station B0:09:DA:3E:82:6C
 Fibaro Home Center Lite AC:17:02:05:34:27
 The CIC-IoT2023 dataset (Neto et al., 2023), developed by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC), is utilized to evaluate the eﬀec-
 Table 4
tiveness of our proposed framework. This dataset has been developed Data Distribution After Data Preprocessing.
to capture the complexities and security challenges inherent in contemporary IoT networks, which are increasingly vulnerable to sophisticated Type Flows After Filter Test Set Train Set

cyber-attacks. This dataset is distinguished by its extensive coverage of Benign 1,306,976 4,000 20,000
network traﬃc, incorporating a wide array of IoT devices and diverse DDoS 33,137,785 4,000 20,000
 DoS 7,889,155 4,000 20,000
attack scenarios. Generated using a large-scale IoT topology compris-
 Mirai 2,568,491 4,000 20,000
ing 105 devices, the dataset accurately reﬂects the interconnected and Recon 931,805 4,000 20,000
dynamic nature of modern IoT environments. Spooﬁng 55,807 4,000 20,000
 The dataset features 33 distinct attacks, systematically categorized WebBased 5,449 1,090 20,000
into seven classes: Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), Denial of Ser- Bruteforce 2,336 467 20,000

vice (DoS), Reconnaissance, Web-based attacks, Brute Force attacks,
Spooﬁng, and the Mirai botnet. These attacks were orchestrated by ma- classes, a combination of undersampling and oversampling techniques
licious IoT devices targeting other IoT devices, thereby creating realistic was employed to create a balanced dataset. Initially, 20 % of the data
adversarial scenarios that are representative of actual threats faced by samples were set aside to form the test set for each class. However,
IoT ecosystems. for classes with a large number of samples, the test set was capped at
 CIC-IoT2023 is provided in two formats: raw network traﬃc data 4,000 randomly selected samples to avoid overrepresentation. In con-
(in pcap ﬁles) and an extracted ﬂow-based dataset, which is computed trast, classes with fewer samples were retained as-is to preserve data
within a ﬁxed-size packet window. The dataset is vast, comprising a integrity. The remaining samples were then allocated to the training
total of 46,686,579 events and featuring 47 distinct attributes. Table 2 set. To balance the training data, classes with more than 20,000 samples
oﬀers a comprehensive breakdown of the CIC-IoT2023 dataset, detailing were undersampled by randomly selecting 20,000 samples, while classes
the types of attacks, the targets of these attacks, the total number of with fewer than 20,000 samples were oversampled to reach 20,000 samrecords, the distribution of records used for training and validation, and ples per class. This approach ensured a well-balanced distribution across
the percentage distribution across diﬀerent classes. The “total number all classes in both the training and test sets, as detailed in Table 4.
of records” speciﬁcally refers to the quantity of feature tuples extracted An important aspect of our preprocessing approach was the carefrom the original pcap ﬁles, which are summarized within a ﬁxed-size ful handling of attack subclasses. Since each main attack class in the
packet window. CIC-IoT2023 dataset contains several subclasses, we ensured that the
 sampling process maintained proportional representation across these
3.5.1. Dataset preprocessing subclasses. This approach allowed us to preserve the diversity of at-
 The data preprocessing stage involved two tasks to ensure the quality tack types while achieving a more coherent and balanced dataset. Deand balance of the dataset used for our analysis. The ﬁrst task was fo- tailed information about the data preprocessing steps, including the
cused on ﬁltering the generated ﬂows from GNN4ID based on the MAC implementation, can be found in the GitHub repository GNN4ID (Faraddresses of the attackers provided in the CIC-IoT2023 dataset (Neto rukh et al., 2024b).
et al., 2023). We applied a ﬁltering process where any ﬂow instance
with either the source or destination MAC address matching one of the 4. Results and analysis
known attacker addresses was retained and rest was removed from attack classes. Conversely, any ﬂow associated with these attacker MAC This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed
addresses was excluded from the benign class. The speciﬁc MAC ad- XG-NID framework, focusing on its detection performance, explainabildresses identiﬁed as attackers are detailed in Table 3. ity, and computational eﬃciency in real-time network intrusion detec-
 The second task involved addressing the signiﬁcant class imbalance tion scenarios. The analysis is structured into two primary subsections:
present in the CIC-IoT2023 dataset. Given the uneven distribution of Performance Analysis and Explainability Analysis.

 9
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

 The Performance Analysis subsection provides a thorough compari- Table 5
son of the proposed framework against baseline models and state-of-the- Comparison with Approaches Using Flow-level Information.
art techniques, demonstrating its superiority and robustness in detecting Performance Metrics Payload-
 Methods
network intrusions by eﬀectively fusing packet-level and ﬂow-level in- Speciﬁc
 Precision Recall F1 Score
formation. Additionally, this subsection includes a focused Scalability
and Computational Overhead analysis, which assesses the framework’s Random Forest 0.97 0.96 0.96 0.92
 Logistic Regression 0.82 0.91 0.85 0.78
feasibility for real-time intrusion detection. Key factors such as infer- Adaboost-Classiﬁer 0.42 0.39 0.41 0.2
ence time and the inﬂuence of computational hardware on the overall Multilayer 0.87 0.93 0.9 0.81
security pipeline are discussed to highlight the system’s operational eﬃ- Perceptron
ciency. Conversely, the Explainability Analysis subsection explores how KNeighborsClassiﬁer 0.92 0.94 0.93 0.8
 DNN 0.93 0.95 0.94 0.88
our framework leverages contextual information to produce explainable
 Conv-AE (Khan and 0.89 0.8 0.86 0.84
and actionable insights, thereby enhancing the interpretability of the Kim, 2020)
model’s predictions and facilitating informed decision-making by secu- IIDS (Narayan et al., 0.77 0.92 0.81 0.69
rity operators. 2023)
 All evaluations presented in this section are conducted in the context CNN-LSTM 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.86
 (Gueriani, Kheddar,
of multi-class classiﬁcation. To ensure fairness, reliability, and reproand Mazari, 2024)
ducibility, all experiments were performed under consistent experimen- Proposed Work 0.95 0.99 0.97 0.94
tal conditions, with uniform data preprocessing and distribution strategies applied across all models. The approaches included for comparison
were implemented by closely adhering to the methodologies outlined in
their respective original papers, thereby preserving the integrity of their framework over approaches that utilize only ﬂow-level or packet-level
evaluation protocols while aligning them within a uniﬁed experimental information. For clarity and conciseness, baseline comparisons were
framework. conducted exclusively on the CIC-IoT2023 dataset. To further enhance
 the analysis, we examined the performance of these baseline models
4.1. Performance analysis against speciﬁc categories of attacks—speciﬁcally, payload-dependent
 attacks (e.g., brute-force and web-based attacks) using ﬂow-level fea-
 Conducting a direct, apple-to-apple comparison of the proposed tures, and payload-independent attacks using packet-level features. This
framework presents certain challenges, as, to the best of the authors’ breakdown provides deeper insights into the strengths and limitations
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to fuse dual modalities—packet-level of single-modality approaches in contrast to our uniﬁed dual-modality
and ﬂow-level information of network traﬃc—within a HGNN. Conse- framework.
quently, comparing our framework with existing approaches that solely We conducted experiments using several widely adopted machine
utilize either ﬂow-level or packet-level information may not yield an learning models, including Random Forest, Logistic Regression, Adaccurate assessment of its overall eﬀectiveness. aBoost Classiﬁer, Multilayer Perceptron, K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN),
 Furthermore, comparing our proposed HGNN with existing graph- and a simple three-layered Deep Neural Network (DNN) with default pabased NIDS introduces inherent challenges. Most prior works employing rameters. These evaluations were performed separately using ﬂow-level
Graph Neural Networks are designed for edge-level or node-level classi- information and packet-level information to benchmark these models.
ﬁcation, often relying on historical traﬃc analysis rather than enabling For utilizing packet-level information, we followed the approach outreal-time inference, as discussed in Section 2. In contrast, our framework lined in Farrukh et al. (2022) to extract payload data and train the modis explicitly developed for graph-level classiﬁcation with real-time de- els accordingly.
tection capabilities. As a result, direct comparisons with node- or edge- Additionally, we incorporated several established approaches from
level models are not directly applicable due to fundamental diﬀerences the literature that use either ﬂow-level or packet-level information, ofin problem formulation and system objectives. fering a more comprehensive comparison. Table 5 presents an overview
 Given that our framework is tailored for real-time inference while of the comparison with approaches relying on ﬂow-level information.
eﬀectively fusing dual modalities to improve the detection of both ﬂow- The “Payload-Speciﬁc” column highlights the performance of the modlevel and packet-level attacks, a tailored evaluation strategy is essential. els on attacks that depend on the packet’s payload. Similarly, Table 6
To ensure a comprehensive assessment of our approach, we divided the provides a comparison with approaches that utilize packet-level inforperformance analysis into two distinct parts. mation, where the “Flow-Speciﬁc” column shows the performance on
 In the ﬁrst part, we compare our framework with baseline models attack classes that are independent of payload data.
that either utilize ﬂow information or payload information, oﬀering a The results clearly demonstrate that our proposed framework outbroad comparison with existing approaches. In the second part, we focus performs the baseline models in both scenarios, underscoring the signifon state-of-the-art approaches that combine ﬂow and packet-level infor- icance of incorporating dual modalities of network traﬃc. It is evident
mation in some form, which allows us to evaluate our approach against that approaches based solely on ﬂow-level information underperform
more relevant benchmarks. This two-part analysis provides a balanced on attacks reliant on payload data, while approaches based on packetand thorough assessment of our framework’s eﬀectiveness. level information exhibit weaknesses in detecting attacks that are not
 Finally, we present a concise analysis of the computational eﬃciency dependent on payload information. This highlights the necessity and
and scalability of the proposed framework. This assessment covers key eﬀectiveness of our proposed dual-modality approach.
factors such as inference time, the impact of resource utilization on overall framework performance, and the additional overhead introduced by
integrating the LLM for generating explainable and actionable insights. 4.1.2. Dual-modality state-of-the-art
By examining these aspects, we aim to showcase the framework’s ca- One of the standout aspects of our proposed framework is the fupability to support real-time intrusion detection while ensuring optimal sion of dual modalities—packet-level and ﬂow-level information—in
operational eﬃciency. network security. This multi-modal data fusion represents a signiﬁcant
 innovation but also presents a challenge in evaluating our framework
4.1.1. Baseline comparisons against other approaches, as the integration of both types of infor-
 In evaluating the baseline models, our goal is to present a com- mation is quite uncommon in the existing literature. Despite this, we
prehensive comparison that highlights the advantages of the proposed identiﬁed a few state-of-the-art approaches that, in some capacity, uti-

 10
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

 Table 6 the model’s ability to detect sophisticated attacks that span both modal-
 Comparison with Approaches Using Packet-level Information. ities. Moreover, our framework represents the ﬁrst of its kind to fuse
 Performance Metrics Flow- dual modalities through a heterogeneous graph, providing a novel and
 Methods
 Speciﬁc more holistic approach to network intrusion detection.
 Precision Recall F1 Score
 As illustrated in Fig. 5, our proposed framework outperforms several
 Random Forest 0.82 0.64 0.74 0.71 state-of-the-art methods in terms of detection performance. To ensure a
 Logistic Regression 0.64 0.52 0.53 0.55
 Adaboost-Classiﬁer 0.47 0.39 0.35 0.41
 comprehensive and robust evaluation, we assessed our approach across
 Multilayer 0.78 0.57 0.62 0.64 all three benchmark datasets, providing a broader perspective on its
 Perceptron generalizability. In Fig. 5, we report results using the F1-score, which
 KNeighborsClassiﬁer 0.84 0.63 0.7 0.66 oﬀers a more balanced and representative metric for multiclass classiﬁ-
 DNN 0.84 0.75 0.78 0.74
 cation tasks. The superior performance of our model can be attributed to
 McPID (Hojjatinia, 0.71 0.65 0.68 0.60
 Monshizadeh, and its inherent fusion of packet-level and ﬂow-level information, enabling
 Khatri, 2023) more precise and eﬃcient classiﬁcation. This integration not only en-
 Parallel ViT (Zhang, 0.82 0.78 0.80 0.68 hances detection accuracy but also provides more actionable insights,
 2024) establishing our framework as a cutting-edge solution in the domain of
 BI-TBL (Wanshun, 0.78 0.74 0.71 0.65
 network intrusion detection.
 Panxiang, Gang, and
 Min, 2023)
 Proposed Work 0.95 0.99 0.97 0.98 4.1.3. Scalability and computational overhead
 Scalability and computational overhead are critical considerations in
 evaluating the real-time feasibility of the proposed XG-NID framework,
 especially given the integration of a LLM for generating explainable
lize both packet-level and ﬂow-level information, albeit through multi- and actionable insights. While the LLM enhances interpretability, its
ple steps or separate processes. inclusion raises concerns about real-time performance, as the speed of
 One such approach is presented by Premkumar et al. (2023), where network packet capture signiﬁcantly exceeds typical LLM response
the authors utilized packet-level information—speciﬁcally, the payload times. However, it is important to note that both packet capture
of packets—to compute embeddings of the packets within a ﬂow. After rates and LLM inference speeds are inﬂuenced by several factors. As
generating these embeddings using a GNN, they combined the embed- summarized in Table 7, multiple factors inﬂuence both the network
dings with respective ﬂow features to perform classiﬁcation, thereby packet capture rates and LLM inference speeds. For packet capture
leveraging dual modality. Another notable work by Kiﬂay, Tsokanos, using Python’s Scapy, network bandwidth, NIC and CPU performance
Fazlali, and Kirner (2024) employs a two-step classiﬁcation process. In (Marinos, Watson, and Handley, 2014), and buﬀer sizes are the
their approach, two separate models are trained: one for ﬂow-level in- main inﬂuencing factors. Similarly, the inference speed of the LLM
formation and another for packet-level information. This multimodal (Llama 3-8B and DeepSeek-V2 Lite) is inﬂuenced by several factors,
network traﬃc analysis approach, though eﬀective, treats the modali- including model size, GPU capabilities, prompt complexity, and model
ties separately before combining them for ﬁnal classiﬁcation. Further, quantization.
the TR-IDS framework proposed by Min, Long, Liu, Cui, and Chen (2018) Despite these diﬀerences, the LLM in XG-NID serves a suppleincorporates a multi-stage processing pipeline. It uses word embeddings mentary role, providing post-detection explanations without aﬀectand a Text-CNN to extract features from packet payloads, which are then ing the core real-time detection pipeline, which is handled exclucombined with ﬂow features for classiﬁcation. While these methods rep- sively by the HGNN. Additionally, the LLM is only triggered for samresent signiﬁcant strides in multi-modal network security, they all rely ples ﬂagged as attacks, ensuring it does not continuously burden the
on multi-step or multi-process approaches to fuse the dual modalities. system.
 In contrast, our proposed framework inherently fuses packet-level To quantify computational eﬃciency, we measured the HGNN’s
and ﬂow-level information within a uniﬁed, heterogeneous graph struc- inference latency, which averaged approximately 6.563 milliseconds
ture, eliminating the need for additional processing steps. This seamless per sample, as reported in Table 7. For the LLMs, the average exintegration not only simpliﬁes the processing pipeline but also enhances planation spanned around 390 tokens, with an observed inference

Fig. 5. Performance comparison between the proposed framework and several state-of-the-art models that incorporate dual modalities of network traﬃc, evaluated
across three benchmark datasets (CIC-IoT2023, CIC-IDS2017, and UNSW-NB15). The proposed framework consistently outperforms existing approaches, achieving
up to 97 % F1-score—a widely accepted metric for assessing multiclass classiﬁcation performance in intrusion detection systems.

 11
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

 Table 7
 Overview of Component-Wise Performance and Inﬂuencing Factors in the XG-NID Framework.
 Component Inﬂuencing Factors Model Measured Performance

 - Network Bandwidth
 Network Packet Capture - NIC and CPU Performance Python (Scapy) 26 packets/second
 - Buﬀer Sizes

 - GPU Capability
 Real-time Detection - Preprocessing Pipeline HGNN 6.563 ms/sample
 - Model Complexity

 - Model Size
 Llama 3-8B ∼64 tokens/second (∼6s per 390-token explanation)
 - GPU Capability
 LLM Inference
 - Prompt Complexity
 DeepSeek-V2 Lite ∼20 tokens/second (∼19.5s per 390-token explanation)
 - Model Quantization

speed of 64 tokens per second for LLaMA-3 8B and 19 tokens per ing template. The generated response, as shown in Fig. 7, demonsecond for DeepSeek-V2 Lite. It is important to note that both mod- strates that relying solely on conventional ﬂow attributes is insuﬃ-
els were utilized in Q4_0 quantized format, following the default cient to establish a clear relationship with the detected attack. This
conﬁguration of the Ollama framework (Ollama, 2024), which sig- limitation arises because individual ﬂow attributes, such as acceptable
niﬁcantly reduces memory consumption and allows execution on a packet size ranges, can be misleading when considered in isolation.
consumer-grade GPUs (RTX 3070 GPU, 8GB). Consequently, while at- In contrast, DDoS attacks are more eﬀectively explained by analyztack detection occurs within milliseconds, a detailed explanation is ing the average behavior of packets over a speciﬁc timeframe rather
provided to analysts within approximately 6 seconds using LLaMA-3 than focusing on single ﬂow attributes. This comparison highlights that
8B—though this latency can be reduced with enhanced computational the inclusion of our explainable features and the rolling window conresources. cept provides more accurate reasoning for ﬂow-based attacks, mak-
 Additionally, packet capture experiments using the same hardware ing the responses generated by our proposed system signiﬁcantly more
setup recorded an average of 26 packets per second. This provides a meaningful.
practical baseline to evaluate real-time capabilities, highlighting the balance between detection speed and interpretability. Furthermore, the dis- 4.2.2. Payload-based attacks’ explanation
parity between packet capture rates and LLM inference speeds empha- The second type of attack involves packet-level threats, where the
sizes the importance of optimized system design. actual maliciousness resides in the packet payload. Although these at-
 Finally, it is essential to acknowledge that operational speeds of tacks may exhibit benign behavior in terms of network ﬂow, their mapractical Network-Based Intrusion Detection Systems frequently remain licious intent becomes apparent through payload analysis. Previous rebelow actual network speeds (Lai, Cai, Huang, Xie, and Li, 2004) searchers (Ali and Kostakos, 2023; Khediri et al., 2024; Ziems et al.,
due to deep packet inspection’s computational intensity. However, XG- 2023) have explained such attacks using only ﬂow attributes, which is
NID’s real-time performance can substantially improve through high- insuﬃcient because ﬂow data alone doesn’t reveal the inherent maliend hardware deployment, parallel processing techniques, and further ciousness in most payload attacks, such as SQL injection or malware
algorithmic optimizations, ensuring scalability while maintaining oper- distribution.
ational eﬃciency. To address this limitation, we introduced a second case in our Algorithm 3, speciﬁcally designed for payload-speciﬁc attacks. For these
4.2. Explainability analysis types of attacks, our approach generates two queries: one focused on
 analyzing the payload text to assess potential exploitation, and an-
 To assess the explainability of our proposed system, we utilized the other based on ﬂow attributes. This dual-query method enables our sysdefault hyperparameters of the Llama 3 model (AI@Meta, 2024) and tem to provide a more comprehensive explanation, as shown in Fig. 8.
applied Algorithm 3 to generate prompts that guide the LLM in produc- The ﬁrst part of the response clearly indicates that the packet payload
ing the desired responses. This algorithm involves executing diﬀerent is malicious, containing a potential SQL injection query. This payload
queries tailored for ﬂow-based and payload-speciﬁc attacks. Therefore, analysis eﬀectively conveys the malicious nature of the predicted attack.
we present two sample responses generated by our proposed system, The subsequent sections then provide ﬂow-based explanations and sugillustrating these two distinct cases. gest potential mitigation steps, ensuring a thorough understanding of
 the threat.
4.2.1. Flow-based attacks’ explanation
 In the ﬁrst scenario, the predicted attack is a ﬂow-based attack, 4.2.3. Explainability evaluation via LLM-as-a-judge
speciﬁcally a DDoS attack. The attacker attempts to overwhelm network Evaluating the quality of natural language explanations generated by
resources in a distributed manner within a speciﬁc timeframe. The Gen- LLMs remains a challenging task due to the lack of standardized meterative Explainer leveraged the top features identiﬁed by the previous rics. Following recent works in the literature (Wang et al., 2023; Zheng
component and provided a comprehensive response, as illustrated in et al., 2023), we adopt the LLM-as-a-judge paradigm, which has demon-
Fig. 6. The initial part of the response highlights the predicted attack strated competitive alignment with human evaluations in multiple natusing descriptive feature names. It clearly shows how an increase in ural language generation tasks. This approach leverages the reasoning
ICMP packets within the speciﬁc timeframe suggests that the attacker capabilities of a larger language model to assess the correctness and
is attempting to overwhelm the targeted system. The second part out- clarity of generated outputs.
lines the potential mitigation steps that can be taken to address such To operationalize this framework, we reformulate the task of exattacks. planation evaluation as a zero-shot classiﬁcation problem. Speciﬁ-
 To compare our generated explanations with previous work by cally, we utilize ChatGPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) as an external eval-
Khediri et al. (2024), we replicated their methodology by utilizing uator that receives a generated explanation and is asked to infer
Shapley values of the predicted outcomes and their instruction tun- the most likely attack class from a predeﬁned list of candidate la-

 12
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

Fig. 6. Illustration of the generative explanation for a ﬂow-based DDoS. The response generated by the proposed system incorporates explainable features and a
rolling window analysis, providing a more comprehensive and accurate reasoning for the detected attack.

 Fig. 7. Illustration of the generative explanation for a ﬂow-based DDoS attack, highlighting the insuﬃciency of relying solely on conventional ﬂow attributes.

bels. This approach allows us to quantify the sense-making ability of explanation is more coherent, informative, and well-aligned with the
the explanation: the better the explanation, the more accurately the underlying attack behavior.
LLM can identify the correct attack type from the textual description To ensure robustness and generalizability, this evaluation is conalone. ducted across all three benchmark datasets used in our study—CIC-
 For each explanation instance, ChatGPT-4o is provided with an IoT2023, CIC-IDS2017, and UNSW-NB15. Additionally, we benchanonymized explanation—i.e., with the true label withheld—and mark the performance of our LLaMA-3-based explainer against that of
prompted to select the most probable attack class from a ﬁxed list of DeepSeek-V2 Lite (Liu et al., 2024), a signiﬁcantly larger model (15.7B
attack classes. An example of the prompt used is shown below: parameters), under the same prompt structure and evaluation setup.
 Fig. 9 presents the classiﬁcation accuracy achieved by ChatGPT-4o when
 judging explanations produced by both models. As shown, both LLMs
 generate comparably eﬀective explanations, indicating that the outputs
 of our generative explainer are generally well-aligned with the semantics of the attacks. However, a relatively lower accuracy is observed on
 the UNSW-NB15 dataset, which correlates with its reduced classiﬁca-
 We compute the quality of the generated explanations by comparing tion performance as reported earlier in Fig. 5. This suggests that when
the attack class predicted by the LLM (acting as a zero-shot classiﬁer) the base classiﬁcation itself is uncertain or noisy, the corresponding exagainst the true label. A higher classiﬁcation accuracy indicates that the planations are less distinguishable, even for a powerful judge model.

 13
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

Fig. 8. Comprehensive explanation of a packet-level attack, demonstrating the malicious nature of the packet payload. The ﬁgure shows the dual-query approach,
where the payload analysis identiﬁes potential SQL injection, followed by ﬂow-based explanations and suggested mitigation steps, ensuring a thorough understanding
of the attack scenario.

 To further assess the relative quality of the explanations produced by
each model, we conducted a pairwise comparison experiment in which
ChatGPT-4o was asked to evaluate two anonymized explanations for
the same attack instance—one generated by LLaMA-3 and the other by
DeepSeek-V2 Lite—and select which explanation is better, or declare
them equally good. The prompt used for this evaluation is provided
below:

 Fig. 10. Pairwise win rate comparison between explanations generated by
 Using this prompt, we computed the win rate of each model across LLaMA-3 (8B) and DeepSeek-V2 Lite (15.7B) across all three datasets, as judged
all three datasets, quantifying how often each model’s explanation was by ChatGPT-4o. The LLM-judge was provided with the true attack label and two
preferred over the other. The results of this comparative analysis are anonymized explanations and asked to select the more informative one or declare a tie. DeepSeek appears to provide more concise and better explanation of
presented in Fig. 10. This evaluation provides a deeper insight into not
 attacks across all three datasets.
only whether explanations are correct, but also how well-structured and
meaningful they are from the perspective of an expert judge.
 5. Conclusion

 This work introduced “XG-NID”, a novel framework that bridges a
 critical gap in NIDS. Traditional systems have either relied heavily on
 ﬂow-level information, leaving them vulnerable to payload-dependent
 attacks, or focused on payload data, making them susceptible to nonpayload-based threats. XG-NID addresses this issue by combining ﬂowlevel and packet-level data into a heterogeneous graph structure, effectively capturing the diverse nature of network traﬃc. By utilizing a
 HGNN for graph-level classiﬁcation, XG-NID exceeds in performance,
 providing robust detection capabilities for both payload-dependent and
 non-payload-dependent attacks. Moreover, the introduction of explainability through LLMs ensures that actionable insights are generated in a
 human-readable format, making the system accessible to users without
 deep technical knowledge. This feature simpliﬁes the decision-making
 process, reducing reliance on experts and empowering quicker responses
Fig. 9. Accuracy of ChatGPT-4o in identifying the correct attack class from ex- to potential threats.
planations generated by LLaMA-3 (8B) and DeepSeek-V2 Lite (15.7B) across The results show that XG-NID not only surpasses existing state-ofthree benchmark datasets. The results reﬂect the coherence and clarity of the the-art methods but also performs consistently well across diﬀerent
explanations, with both models achieving comparable performance. Lower ac- types of attacks, achieving an impressive F1 score of 97 % in multicuracy on the UNSW-NB15 dataset is consistent with its lower classiﬁcation class classiﬁcation. We evaluated the framework on three diﬀerent
performance, as shown in Fig. 5. benchmark NIDS datasets, accompanied by a detailed analysis of the

 14
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

generated explanations and the actionable insights provided by the Cunningham, C. (2020). Cyber warfare–truth, tactics, and strategies: Strategic concepts
LLM. The model’s adaptability and real-time inference capabilities and truths to help you and your organization survive on the battleground of cyber
 warfare. Packt Publishing Ltd.
position it as a powerful tool for modern cybersecurity defense, setting Farrukh, Y. A., Khan, I., Wali, S., Bierbrauer, D., Pavlik, J. A., Bastian, N. D. (2022).
a new standard for network intrusion detection systems. Payload-byte: A tool for extracting and labeling packet capture ﬁles of modern network
 In short, XG-NID not only addresses the critical limitations of cur- intrusion detection datasets. In 2022 IEEE/ACM International conference on big data
 computing, applications and technologies (BDCAT) (pp. 58–67). IEEE.
rent NIDS but also introduces a framework that enhances both perfor- Farrukh, Y. A., Wali, S., Khan, I., Bastian, N. D. (2023). SeNet-I: An approach for detecting
mance and usability. By combining innovative data fusion techniques, network intrusions through serialized network traﬃc images. Engineering Applications
advanced graph-based modeling, and enhanced interpretability, it oﬀers of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 126, 107169.
 Farrukh, Y. A., Wali, S., Khan, I., Bastian, N. D. (2024a). AIS-NIDS: An intelligent and selfa promising solution for strengthening cybersecurity defenses. sustaining network intrusion detection system. Computers & Security, 144, 103982.
 Future work will focus on extending the evaluation across additional Farrukh, Y. A., Wali, S., Khan, I., Bastian, N. D. (2024b). Gnn4id. https://github.com/
datasets to ensure greater robustness in diverse network environments. Yasir-ali-farrukh/GNN4ID.
 Gartner, I. (2021). Gartner predicts 30 % of critical infrastructure organizations will
Moreover, we aim to integrate XG-NID into an autonomous system capaexperience a security breach by 2025. https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/
ble of making independent security decisions and providing rapid threat press-releases/2021-12-2-gartner-predicts-30--of-critical-infrastructure-organi.
responses. Additionally, we plan to further enhance the explainability Gueriani, A., Kheddar, H., Mazari, A. C. (2024). Enhancing IoT security with CNN and
component by incorporating industry-tailored ﬁne-tuning or a Retrieval- LSTM-based intrusion detection systems. In 2024 6th International conference on pattern
 analysis and intelligent systems (PAIS) (pp. 1–7). IEEE.
Augmented Generation (RAG) system, allowing the model to generate Hamilton, W., Ying, Z., Leskovec, J. (2017). Inductive representation learning on large
responses aligned with security standards and organizational standard graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30 (pp. 1024–1034)
operating procedures (SOPs). These advancements will help pave the Han, D., Wang, Z., Chen, W., Zhong, Y., Wang, S., Zhang, H., Yang, J., Shi, X., Yin, X.
 (2021). DeepAID: Interpreting and improving deep learning-based anomaly detection
way toward intelligent, self-sustaining cybersecurity solutions. in security applications. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer
 and communications security (pp. 3197–3217).
 Hojjatinia, S., Monshizadeh, M., Khatri, V. (2023). A deep intrusion detection model for
CRediT authorship contribution statement
 network traﬃc payload analysis. In 2023 International conference on software, telecommunications and computer networks (softCOM) (pp. 1–7). IEEE.
 Yasir Ali Farrukh: Methodology, Data Curation, Formal analysis, Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W. et al.
 (2022). LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR, 1(2), 3.
Experimentation, Writing – Original Draft; Syed Wali: Methodology,
 Khan, M. A., Kim, J. (2020). Toward developing eﬃcient conv-AE-based intrusion detec-
Writing – Original Draft, Visualization, Investigation, Formal analy- tion system using heterogeneous dataset. Electronics, 9(11), 1771.
sis; Irfan Khan: Writing – Review & Editing, Supervision, Resources; Khediri, A., Slimi, H., Yahiaoui, A., Derdour, M., Bendjenna, H., Ghenai, C. E. (2024).
Nathaniel D. Bastian: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Re- Enhancing machine learning model interpretability in intrusion detection systems
 through SHAP explanations and LLM-generated descriptions. In 2024 6th International
view & Editing, Project Administration. conference on pattern analysis and intelligent systems (PAIS) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
 Kiﬂay, A., Tsokanos, A., Fazlali, M., Kirner, R. (2024). Network intrusion detection leveraging multimodal features. Array, 22, 100349.
Data availability Lai, H., Cai, S., Huang, H., Xie, J., Li, H. (2004). A parallel intrusion detection system for
 high-speed networks. In Applied cryptography and network security: Second international
 Data will be made available on request. conference, ACNS 2004, Yellow Mountain, China, June 8–11, 2004. proceedings 2 (pp.
 439–451). Springer.
 Liu, A., Feng, B., Wang, B., Wang, B., Liu, B., Zhao, C., Dengr, C., Ruan, C., Dai, D., Guo,
Declaration of competing interest D. et al. (2024). DeepSeek-V2: A strong, economical, and eﬃcient mixture-of-experts
 language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04434.
 Lo, W. W., Layeghy, S., Sarhan, M., Gallagher, M., Portmann, M. (2022). E-graphSAGE:
 The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial A graph neural network based intrusion detection system for iot. In Noms 2022-2022
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence IEEE/IFIP network operations and management symposium (pp. 1–9). https://doi.org/10.
the work reported in this paper. 1109/NOMS54207.2022.9789878
 Mallick, M. A. I., Nath, R. (2024). Navigating the cyber security landscape: A comprehensive review of cyber-attacks, emerging trends, and recent developments. World
Acknowledgments Scientiﬁc News, 190(1), 1–69.
 Marinos, I., Watson, R. N. M., Handley, M. (2014). Network stack specialization for performance. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 44(4), 175–186.
 This work was supported in part by the U.S. Military Academy Messai, M.-L., Seba, H. (2023). IoT network attack detection: Leveraging graph learning
(USMA) under Cooperative Agreement No. W911NF-22-2-0081. The for enhanced security. In Proceedings of the 18th international conference on availability,
views and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors reliability and security (pp. 1–7).
 Min, E., Long, J., Liu, Q., Cui, J., Chen, W. (2018). TR-IDS: Anomaly-based intrusion
and do not reﬂect the oﬃcial policy or position of the U.S. Military detection through text-convolutional neural network and random forest. Security and
Academy, U.S. Army, U.S. Department of Defense, or U.S.Government. Communication Networks, 2018(1), 4943509.
 Moustafa, N., Koroniotis, N., Keshk, M., Zomaya, A. Y., Tari, Z. (2023). Explainable intrusion detection for cyber defences in the internet of things: Opportunities and solutions.
References IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 25(3), 1775–1807.
 Moustafa, N., Slay, J. (2015). UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for network intru-
Abou El Houda, Z., Brik, B., Khoukhi, L. (2022). “Why should i trust your ids?”: An ex- sion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set). 2015 Military communications
 plainable deep learning framework for intrusion detection systems in internet of things and information systems conference, MilCIS 2015 - Proceedings. https://doi.org/10.1109/
 networks. IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society, 3, 1164–1176. MILCIS.2015.7348942
AI@Meta (2024). Llama 3 model card. https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3/blob/ Mwangi, P. (2024). Cybersecurity threats and national security in the digital age. American
 main/MODEL_CARD.md. Journal of International Relations, 9(1), 26–35.
Ali, T., Kostakos, P. (2023). HuntGPT: Integrating machine learning-based anomaly Nadeem, A., Vos, D., Cao, C., Pajola, L., Dieck, S., Baumgartner, R., Verwer, S. (2023).
 detection and explainable AI with large language models (LLMs), arXiv preprint SoK: Explainable machine learning for computer security applications. In 2023 IEEE
 arXiv:2309.16021. 8th European symposium on security and privacy (EuroS&P) (pp. 221–240). IEEE.
Altaf, T., Wang, X., Ni, W., Liu, R. P., Braun, R. (2023). NE-GConv: A lightweight node Narayan, K. R., Mookherji, S., Odelu, V., Prasath, R., Turlapaty, A. C., Das, A. K. (2023).
 edge graph convolutional network for intrusion detection. Computers & Security, 130, IIDS: Design of intelligent intrusion detection system for internet-of-things applica-
 103285. tions. In 2023 IEEE 7th Conference on information and communication technology (CICT)
Alwahedi, F., Aldhaheri, A., Ferrag, M. A., Battah, A., Tihanyi, N. (2024). Machine learning (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
 techniques for IoT security: Current research and future vision with generative AI and Neto, E. C. P., Dadkhah, S., Ferreira, R., Zohourian, A., Lu, R., Ghorbani, A. A. (2023).
 large language models. Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems, 4, (pp. 167–185). CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark for large-scale attacks in IoT environ-
Aouini, Z., Pekar, A. (2022). NFStream: A ﬂexible network data analysis framework. Com- ment. Sensors, 23(13), 5941.
 puter Networks, 204, 108719. Ollama (2024). Ollama. https://github.com/ollama/ollama.
Cao, Y., Jiang, H., Deng, Y., Wu, J., Zhou, P., Luo, W. (2021). Detecting and mitigating OpenAI (2024). GPT-4o technical report. https://openai.com/index/gpt-4o. Accessed: Feb
 DDos attacks in SDN using spatial-temporal graph convolutional network. IEEE Trans- 2025.
 actions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 19(6), 3855–3872. Premkumar, A., Schneider, M., Spivey, C., Pavlik, J., Bastian, N. D. (2023). Graph represen-
Chang, L., Branco, P. (2024). Embedding residuals in graph-based solutions: The E- tation learning for context-aware network intrusion detection. In Artiﬁcial intelligence
 ResSAGE and E-ResGAT algorithms. A case study in intrusion detection. Applied In- and machine learning for multi-domain operations applications V (pp. 82–92). SPIE (vol.
 telligence, 54, (pp. 6025–6040). 12538).

 15
Y.A. Farrukh et al. Expert Systems With Applications 287 (2025) 128089

Pujol-Perich, D., Suárez-Varela, J., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., Barlet-Ros, P. (2022). Unveiling Wanshun, L., Panxiang, Z., Gang, D., Min, T. (2023). BI-TBL: A network intrusion detecthe potential of graph neural networks for robust intrusion detection. ACM SIGMET- tion method based on payload analysis. In 2023 20th International computer conference
 RICS Performance Evaluation Review, 49(4), 111–117. on wavelet active media technology and information processing (ICCWAMTIP) (pp. 1–5).
Sharafaldin, I., Lashkari, A. H., Ghorbani, A. A. (2018). Toward generating a new intru- IEEE.
 sion detection dataset and intrusion traﬃc characterization. https://doi.org/10.5220/ Yu, B., Yin, H., Zhu, Z. (2017). Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks: A deep
 0006639801080116 learning framework for traﬃc forecasting, arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.04875.
Specht, S. M., Lee, R. B. (2004). Distributed denial of service: Taxonomies of attacks, tools, Zhang, B., Li, J., Chen, C., Lee, K., Lee, I. (2022). A practical botnet traﬃc detection
 and countermeasures. In Pdcs (pp. 543–550). system using gnn. In Cyberspace safety and security: 13th international symposium, CSS
Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., Yan, Q. (2017). Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In 2021, virtual event, November 9–11, 2021, proceedings 13 (pp. 66–78). Springer.
 International conference on machine learning (pp. 3319–3328). PMLR. Zhang, Y. (2024). Intrusion detection of iot traﬃc payload based on parallel neural net-
Tan, Z., Jamdagni, A., He, X., Nanda, P., Liu, R. P., Hu, J. (2014). Detection of denial-of- works. In Proceedings of the 2024 3rd international conference on cyber security, artiﬁcial
 service attacks based on computer vision techniques. IEEE Transactions on Computers, intelligence and digital economy (pp. 16–20).
 64(9), 2519–2533. Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z., Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li,
Umer, M. F., Sher, M., Bi, Y. (2017). Flow-based intrusion detection: Techniques and chal- D., Xing, E. et al. (2023). Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena.
 lenges. Computers & Security, 70, 238–254. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 46595–46623.
Velickovic, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P., Bengio, Y. et al. (2017). Zhou, J., Xu, Z., Rush, A. M., Yu, M. (2020). Automating botnet detection with graph
 Graph attention networks. stat, 1050(20), 10–48550. neural networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06344.
Wang, J., Liang, Y., Meng, F., Sun, Z., Shi, H., Li, Z., Xu, J., Qu, J., Zhou, J. (2023). Is Ziems, N., Liu, G., Flanagan, J., Jiang, M. (2023). Explaining tree model decisions in natchatgpt a good nlg evaluator? A preliminary study, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04048. ural language for network intrusion detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19658.

 16