IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025 10419

 XIPHOS: Adaptive In-Vehicle Intrusion Detection
 via Unsupervised Graph Contrastive Learning
Qiguang Jiang , Kai Wang , Member, IEEE, Yuliang Wei , Hongri Liu , and Bailing Wang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—As vehicles have become increasingly connected and The central communication channel between the ECUs is
intelligent, attacks against in-vehicle networks (IVNs) are becom- the Controller Area Network (CAN), which is the best known
ing more prevalent and pose a great threat to vehicle security and most widely used protocol in the automotive industry [3],
and occupant safety. Intrusion detection techniques utilizing deep
learning models have become a common approach to secure [4]. The CAN bus has real-time communication with minimal
IVNs. However, existing work has shown some weaknesses. time delay and priority arbitration mechanism and completes
1) They are unable to directly extract the rich information the data exchange between the ECUs by providing a public
hidden in the data behavioral patterns. 2) The effectiveness of network with standardized protocols.
most supervised models depends on balanced data distributions However, there are well-known security flaws in the proand high-quality labels, whereas the current state of real-world
datasets does not match these demands. 3) The performance of tocol design that make it possible for attacks on the IVN
unsupervised learning models is inferior to supervised methods, with the ability to seriously jeopardize driving safety [5], [6],
accompanied by unstable or unpredictable results. In this paper, [7]. Notably, recent studies have shown that adversaries can
we design and implement XIPHOS, a novel and adaptive IVN inject forged CAN messages to manipulate powertrain control,
intrusion detection mechanism that is capable of achieving disable safety systems, or affect driver assistance functions,
efficient detection performance in the unsupervised environment.
XIPHOS utilizes the principle of mutual information maximiza- even in modern production vehicles. These vulnerabilities have
tion to extract as many potential data invariants as possible. driven a surge of research in recent years toward intrusion
By detecting abnormal system behaviors through error offsets detection and anomaly analysis techniques for securing CAN
of clustered combinations of feature units, XIPHOS is able to bus [8], [9].
perform both graph-level representation and node-level represen- Thus, in order to protect IVNs from injection attacks,
tation from IVN data. In addition, the adaptiveness of XIPHOS
is indicated by its ability to update the model parameters over existing approaches can be summarized into message authentime at different detection scenarios. Experimental results on tication and intrusion detection. Since the CAN bus is almost
widely used datasets show that XIPHOS has greater advantages ubiquitous as the backbone of the IVN in modern vehicles,
over existing methods in terms of both detection performance changing the CAN protocol (such as adding message authenand freedom from attack labeling data dependences. The code is tication, data encryption [10]) would require modifying the
available at https://github.com/wangkai-tech23/XIPHOS
 integration approach of all vehicle manufacturers, which is
 Index Terms—Controller area network, unsupervised intrusion clearly impractical.
detection, graph contrastive learning, graph-theory, in-vehicle Fortunately, as another promising technology, intrusion
network.
 detection can provide security without modifications to the
 I. I NTRODUCTION CAN protocol, and can be categorized into specification-

T HE popular intelligent connected vehicles (ICVs) have
 already been equipped with in-vehicle communication
devices and a variety of embedded computing devices containbased methods and machine learning (ML)-based methods
 [11]. The former constructs a knowledge base by capturing and
 creating all attack signatures in advance and detects attacks by
ing hundreds of sensors and actuators managed by electronic monitoring the current network traffic based on the signatures
control units (ECUs), providing users with a variety of intel- in the predefined knowledge base [12]. However, it is unable
ligent and comfort services [1], [2]. to detect new and previously unseen attacks such as zero-
 Received 28 August 2024; revised 8 May 2025 and 18 August 2025;
 day threats, and detection accuracy can only be ensured by
accepted 25 September 2025. Date of current version 8 October 2025. This continuously maintaining and updating the knowledge base.
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation For instance, as a representative of specification-based methof China (NSFC) under Grant 62272129 and in part by Taishan Scholar ods, knowledge graph-based methods [13], [14] often rely
Foundation of Shandong Province under Grant tsqn202408112. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication on predefined knowledge bases and known attack signatures,
was Prof. Kemal Akkaya. (Corresponding author: Kai Wang.) limiting their adaptability to emerging or evolving threats.
 Qiguang Jiang and Kai Wang are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai 264209,
 Moreover, such methods incur high construction and main-
China, and also with Shandong Key Laboratory of Industrial Net- tenance costs and exhibit inherent limitations in modeling
work Security, Weihai 264209, China (e-mail: jiangqiguang 971@163.com; temporal dependencies and achieving cross-platform generaldr.wangkai@hit.edu.cn). ization.
 Yuliang Wei, Hongri Liu, and Bailing Wang are with the Harbin Institute
of Technology, Weihai 264209, China, also with Qingdao Research Institute, In contrast, ML-based approaches, including traditional
Qingdao 266109, China, and also with Shandong Key Laboratory of Indus- machine learning, regression algorithm, deep learning and
trial Network Security, Weihai 264209, China (e-mail: wei.yl@hit.edu.cn;
liuhr@hit.edu.cn; wbl@hit.edu.cn).
 reinforcement learning [15], [16], are becoming increasingly
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3616624 attractive for building intrusion detection systems. Among
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
10420 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

them, as the state-of-the-art method, deep learning-based We implement XIPHOS and evaluate the performance on
methods have become the mainstream of IVN intrusion detec- two different CAN datasets with injection attack: the Car
tion due to their unique ability to discover hidden patterns Hacking dataset [17] and the ROAD dataset [18]. The ROAD
in massive data, which helps to improve classification perfor- dataset contains attacks on real vehicles, while the Car
mance. Based on a fair comparative performance analysis in Hacking dataset is simulated in the in-vehicle environment.
[16], we summarize the following limitations of deep learning- The evaluation results show that XIPHOS achieves better
based IVN intrusion detection methods. performance on IVN intrusion detection with a much lower
 (1) Most of the existing intrusion detection methods do not dependence on labels than the state-of-the-art methods.
change the original multidimensional time-series data format In summary, our main contributions are as follows.
in preprocessing and detection, which cannot further reflect 1) We propose XIPHOS, an unsupervised and adaptive
the regularity between CAN message’s identifiers (CAN IDs) detection approach based on mutual information maximizaand hidden patterns in data flow, resulting in poor detection tion, which is the first adaptive intrusion detection framework
performance. (2) In practice, labeling CAN bus datasets is using unsupervised graph contrastive learning in IVNs, and
often costly, and attack samples are typically much fewer than does not require attack labels throughout the process.
normal ones. This class imbalance significantly hinders the 2) We introduce an enhanced mutual information estimation
effectiveness of supervised learning and limits its potential for strategy by extending graph representations from the original
further performance improvement. (3) It is possible for the node-graph to node-node plus graph-graph, thereby improvunsupervised model to overfit the data or be affected by low- ing feature expressiveness and discrimination, especially for
quality or noisy data, which can degrade the performance of capturing complex temporal dependencies in CAN traffic.
the model, leading to unstable results and difficulty in repro- 3) We conduct extensive empirical validation on multiple
ducing results. (4) Existing intrusion detection methods lack real-world CAN datasets under a vehicle–cloud collaboraarchitectural designs that support differentiated adaptation to tive architecture, evaluating both supervised and unsupervised
vehicle–cloud resources. Deep learning-based intrusion detec- baselines in terms of detection accuracy and inference latency
tion models, in particular, need to demonstrate stable operation on automotive-grade hardware. The results demonstrate that
in resource-constrained, real-time in-vehicle environments to XIPHOS not only achieves high detection performance but
validate their practical feasibility. also satisfies real-time operational requirements, effectively
 In this paper, we address the above four problems by bridging the gap between academic research and practical inproposing XIPHOS, a novel unsupervised and adaptive IVN vehicle deployment.
intrusion detection mechanism that utilizes graph contrastive The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Secrepresentation learning and adaptive classification methods tion II introduces the background knowledge and provides the
to identify injection attacks from a large number of CAN necessary preliminaries. Section III describes our proposed
messages. Firstly, XIPHOS starts by converting raw CAN XIPHOS. We show the experiments and results in section IV,
data into graph-structured data based on the logical topol- followed by the discussion in section V. Related work is given
ogy characteristics and data flow coupling characteristics in section VI. We conclude the paper in section VII.
between vehicle communication nodes. Then, XIPHOS quantifies potential similarities between graph-structured data and II. BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES
constructs graph or node vector embeddings in the graph
 In this section, we introduce the CAN protocol and threats
contrastive learning module in a way that maximizes mutual
 in § II-A and § II-B. Then, we provide the definitions and
information. This module does not require any labeled data
 preliminaries needed in § II-C and § II-D.
and additionally considers the fusion of local and global
information. Finally, an adaptive pre-training is performed
based on a moderate amount of normal data samples and A. CAN Protocol
feature mapping with autoencoder-based error reconstruction According to the ISO 11898 standard, the CAN protocol
in response to data fluctuations. A Single Gaussian Model covers the physical layer and the transport layer. Various
(SGM) is used to analyze and obtain the final classification classic in-vehicle networks such as CAN, CAN with Flexible
results. Data Rate (CAN FD), Local Interconnect Network (LIN),
 XIPHOS is designed to be adaptive and scalable. Depend- FlexRay, and Media Oriented System Transport (MOST) are
ing on the application scenarios, XIPHOS is free to select connected through gateways. As the de facto communication
some normal samples in the adaptive hierarchical clustering standard for ECUs in IVN systems, CAN is a broadcastclassification module, i.e., it can choose to restart training like serial data communication protocol to support message
at any time to adapt to the data changes over time. Next, passing between ECUs [19]. It uses differential voltage signals
depending on the downstream task requirements, XIPHOS to denote Dominant bit (0) and Recessive bit (1). Each
can perform different granularity of detection, i.e., realiz- ECU executes vehicle control logic on its microcontroller
ing graph classification or node classification tasks. While and handles CAN message reception (bitstream interpretation
XIPHOS is designed to perform feature extraction without and ID matching) and transmission (encoding messages into
labeling in the graph contrastive learning module, it can alter- differential voltage signals via the CAN controller).
natively be implemented for semi-supervised and supervised CAN messages have four main types of frames: data frames,
learning. remote frames, overload frames, and error frames. The data
JIANG et al.: XIPHOS: ADAPTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 10421

 2) Injection Attack on CAN: Research [18] divides the
 attacks into three general categories, including fabrication
 attacks, suspension attacks, and masquerade attacks.
 Fig. 1. CAN frame. Fabrication Attacks are injected from the fully compromised ECUs using forged IDs and Data Fields.DoS attack,
frame is used to send data, consisting of the following: start fuzzy attack, and targeted ID attack are three typical fabricaof frame (SOF), arbitration field, control field, data field, cyclic tion attacks. In these attacks, the adversary can inject arbitrary
redundancy check (CRC) field, acknowledgment (ACK) field messages into the bus while the legitimate ECU is still sending
and end of frame (EOF). The arbitration field determines legitimate messages, triggering the message conflict problem
the priority of the message, with 11-bit identifier in standard [21]. Simple fabrication attacks are therefore bound to bring
frames and 29-bit identifier in extended frames. The control about periodic changes in CAN messages. It is especially easy
field specifies whether the frame is in standard or extended to detect attacks that send messages at a very high frequency.
format and indicates the length of the data payload. The data Suspension Attacks only need to prevent a weakly comfield carries the actual transmitted content and is encoded in promised ECU from transmitting messages. They can cause
Big-Endian format. The CRC field is responsible for detecting damage not only to the weakly compromised ECU itself, but
bit errors that may occur due to noise or transmission conflicts. also to other ECUs that rely on its information to function.
The ACK field is used to confirm whether the message was Masquerade Attacks are the most advanced and sophistireceived correctly, and the EOF marks the end of the frame cated types of attacks, requiring substantial hacking expertise,
[4], [20]. Arbitration ID and Data Field are relevant to the access to system-level resources, and comprehensive knowlscope of this paper. The complete figure of the CAN message edge of the target vehicle’s internal architecture. In this attack,
data frame is shown in Fig. 1. It is important to note that the adversary first disables the target ECU, rendering it funcdata transmitted over the CAN bus is inherently untagged. In tionally inactive, i.e., suspending its message transmissions
existing CAN datasets, labels are manually assigned post hoc, and placing it in a weakly compromised state. Simultaneously,
with each CAN frame annotated as either normal or abnormal. a fully compromised ECU is deployed to impersonate the
 When multiple ECUs attempt simultaneous transmission, unavailable target, injecting spoofed messages with the same
the CAN protocol employs an arbitration mechanism to ID at a realistic transmission frequency. These malicious
resolve contention, granting bus access to the message with the messages can deceive other ECUs into executing unintended
highest priority, indicated by the lowest Arbitration ID. Lower- actions, potentially resulting in system malfunctions. A key
priority frames withdraw and enter receiver mode, allowing characteristic of the masquerade strategy is that it enables
only the winning node to transmit. After a 3-bit inter-frame the injection of malicious messages with targeted IDs without
space (IFS), nodes that have buffered data or previously lost causing message conflicts (e.g., without changing temporal
arbitration will initiate another round of access arbitration. The patterns of the message transmission), thereby preserving
CAN ID not only determines transmission priority but also the temporal integrity of the communication flow. Notably,
identifies message content. Typically, each ECU is assigned masquerade attacks typically operate on specific signal fields
a fixed set of IDs, which are transmitted at regular intervals within the CAN frame rather than replacing entire data payto update signal values. The data field (payload) carries up to loads, making them significantly more precise and stealthy,
8 bytes of message content. The CAN protocol incorporates and thus more difficult to detect by conventional intrusion
robust error-handling mechanisms essential for fault tolerance detection mechanisms.
[4]. Errors such as frame loss, retransmission, and flag trigger-
 C. Definition
ing are detectable, enabling nodes to respond with appropriate
corrective actions [20]. 1) CAN Messages Definition: A CAN message refers to
 a structured data frame transmitted over the CAN bus. Each
 message typically contains an Arbitration ID, a payload of up
B. Threats in CAN Bus to 8 bytes, and optional metadata such as timestamps or labels
 An attacker can use physical ports (e.g., On-Board Diag- for intrusion detection purposes.
nostic (OBD) ports, USB ports, etc.) or wireless networks Definition 1: For modeling purposes, a CAN data stream
(short-range wireless interfaces represented by Bluetooth, can be represented as a multivariate time series Ξ =
remote wireless networks such as broadcasting channels, {ξ1 , ξ2 , . . . , ξt , . . . , ξT } ∈ RT ×10 , where each message at time
addressable channels, etc.) which adversaries may use to t is denoted as:
intrude into the control of the CAN bus or ECU.
 ξt = {ID, d1 , d2 , . . . , d8 , dl } ∈ R10 , t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } (1)
 1) Compromised ECU: In order to understand the complexity of an attack more clearly and quickly, we use the attack Therein, ID is the arbitration ID of the CAN message, d1
model defined in [18] along with widely used terminology. to d8 are the byte-level payload values in the Data Field,
 Weakly compromised ECU can be suspended by the and dl is a label value indicating the type of attack (or
adversaries for any message transmission. normal message). For notational simplicity, we rewrite ξt as
 Fully compromised ECU is under full control of the ξt = {d0 , d1 , d2 , . . . , d8 , dl }. In this work, d0 and the arbitration
attacker, including sending fake messages and accessing the ID are used interchangeable. We next formalize a key term
node’s memory. used in our proposed algorithm.
10422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Definition 2: We consider W CAN messages arranged TABLE I
according to the normal communication as a window. W is the T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF THE C AR H ACKING DATASET
window size [22]. Assume that there are L windows in total.
wl denotes the matrix consisting of CAN messages within the
l-th window after preprocessing.
 wl = {ξl∗W , ξl∗W+1 , . . . , ξl∗W+(W−1) } (2)
where l ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , L − 1}.
 2) Problem Formulation: This paper is dedicated to formulating the IVN intrusion detection task as a graph learning
modeling problem, and thus the problem can be defined as Theorem 1 ((JS MI Lower Bound):): Let P and Q be two
follows. distributions. Define a discriminator scoring function s with
 Definition 3 (Unsupervised Graph Representation Learn- output D s (x) = σ(s(x)), where σ(·) is the sigmoid function
ing:): Given a set of graphs G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , G|G| }, we and x denotes a pair of input features.
expect to learn a d-dimensional representation of every single From Eq. (8) in [24], the variational formulation of the JS
graph Gi ∈ G (d ∈ Z+ ). Existing graph embedding tasks divergence defines the discriminator optimization objective as
are categorized into node-level embedding and graph-level
 J (s) = Ez∼P log D s (z) + Ez∼Q log (1 − D s (z))
    
embedding, which typically learn by aggregating features of
their neighboring nodes. Thus, we denote the embedding of
 Using the variational representation of DGAN (PkQ) in Table I
graph Gi as H(Gi ) ∈ Rd , and node embedding or patch
 of [24], we obtain
representations of graph Gi as h(Gi ) ∈ R|Gi |×d , where |G|
indicates the number of nodes. 1
 J (s) + log 4 , ∀s
 
 DJS (PkQ) ≥
 2
D. Preliminaries indicating that for any non-optimal s, the above expression
 provides a variational lower bound on the JS divergence that
 1) Mutual Information (MI): As distinct from correlation,
 can be optimized directly.
MI captures non-linear statistical dependencies between variables, and thus can act as a measure of true dependence [23].
 III. XIPHOS F RAMEWORK
In brief, MI quantifies the dependence of two random variables
X and Y in the form of XIPHOS is an unsupervised and adaptive intrusion detection
 for IVNs, which leverages graph contrastive learning that max-
 I(X; Y) = DKL (PXY ||PX ⊗ PY ) imizes local and global MI and adaptive hierarchical clustering
where PXY is the joint probability distribution, and PX and PY mapping to achieve high-performance intrusion detection in
are marginal distribution. DKL is the KL-divergence with the the absence of attack label information, providing meaningful
following expression: inspiration for unsupervised graph learning. XIPHOS consists
 Z     of three major components: (a) graph-structured data generp(x) dP
 DKL (P||Q) := p(x) log dx = EP log ation (§ III-A), (b) graph contrastive representation learning
 x q(x) dQ (§ III-B) and (c) adaptive hierarchical clustering classification
 2) Mutual Information Maximization: Direct maximiza- (§ III-C). In the training process, XIPHOS transforms raw
tion of I(X; Y) via KL-based variational bounds, such as data from (a), learns graph embeddings with (b), and learns
the Donsker–Varadhan representation, is theoretically well- benign behavioral patterns in (c). In the inference process,
founded but often unstable in practice, particularly in high- XIPHOS transforms the target data with (a), obtains the
dimensional settings, due to the unbounded nature of the KL graph embeddings in (b), and detects anomalies with (c). The
divergence and the high variance of its estimators. To obtain a overview of XIPHOS is depicted in Fig. 2.
stable and bounded training objective, we adopt the variational Although CAN messages are typically recorded as multidif -divergence framework [24] and employ the Jensen–Shannon mensional time-series data, this format fails to capture their
(JS) divergence as the optimization criterion. Specifically, we inherent structural regularities. To address this, component (a)
estimate DJS (PXY k PX ⊗ PY ) using a discriminator-based vari- transforms raw CAN bus data into spatio-temporally correlated
ational lower bound, providing a numerically stable surrogate graph-structured data, comprising feature and adjacency matrifor dependence estimation between X and Y. This choice does ces that reflect logical topology and coupling patterns among
not alter the definition of MI; rather, it replaces the KL-based communication nodes. Further details are provided in [25].
estimator with a JS-based objective that yields bounded gradi- The graph-structured data is subsequently processed by the
ents, better conditioning, and improved empirical robustness. graph contrastive learning module (b) to obtain graph-level
 The variational formulation of the JS divergence allows it to or node-level embeddings. The encoder quantifies potential
be expressed via a discriminator scoring function s, as shown similarities among graph instances by maximizing MI, while
in [24]. This directly leads to Theorem 1, where we present integrating both local and global node information to enhance
a variational lower bound for MI based on the JS divergence representation quality.
and show that the discriminator objective yields a tractable Adaptive hierarchical clustering classification module (c)
and optimizable bound on DJS . is trained exclusively on benign features generated by
JIANG et al.: XIPHOS: ADAPTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 10423

 Fig. 2. The architecture of XIPHOS.

the contrast learning module to model normal message and derive node feature vectors from their structural attributes.
behavior. Feature combinations are processed by multiple TCGs characterize temporal interaction features within CAN
independent self-encoders to compute root mean square error message streams, providing insights into variations in message
(RMSE) values, which are then evaluated using a SGM to transmission probabilities. In parallel, Coupling Relationship
determine thresholds and identify anomalies. This module Graphs (CRGs) are constructed to generate adjacency matrifurther supports adaptive detection by continuously updating ces, where edges encode direct interactions between CAN
its feature mapping strategy in response to varying data messages based on identifier-level associations. While both
distributions. TCGs and CRGs serve as novel graph-based views of CAN
 The following sections provide a detailed explanation of the traffic, they complement each other by representing distinct
operation of these three modules and illustrate how their inte- aspects of ECU communication: TCGs emphasize temporal
gration enables unsupervised and adaptive intrusion detection distribution patterns, whereas CRGs highlight coupling relawithout reliance on labeled attack data. tionships among message flows.
 1) TCG: According to definition 2, the multivariate CAN
A. Graph-Structured Data Generation Module time series is segmented into L temporal windows. Within each
 As a complex non-Euclidean data structure, a graph is window, each distinct CAN ID is represented as a node, and
better suited than traditional two-dimensional Euclidean rep- directed edges are established to capture transitions between
resentations for modeling intricate relationships. In particular, IDs, permitting bidirectional connections. As shown in Fig. 2,
graph-theoretic approaches are effective in capturing interac- the latter ID value points to the previous ID value, all messages
tion patterns among ECUs. Prior work [22] proposed a graph in the l-th window generate a directed graph G(T )
 l , with the
construction method based on CAN bus data distribution, number of nodes equal to the number of different IDs. This
leveraging periodicity-induced regularities of CAN messages. yields a set of TCGs G(T ) (T )
 1 , . . . , G L for L windows.
This approach, known for its interpretability and simplicity, The statistical properties of TCG (such as the average
serves as an inspiration for our design. To more accurately weight, the max degree, the number of nodes, the number of
represent real-world graph data, it is often necessary to edges, the max weight) capture the global structure within the
construct multiple graph views that capture different types current window, which can be merged with the local payload
of relationships among nodes. Accordingly, we introduce of each CAN message.
two graph views in this study: one to represent message Specifically, we extract the node number, edge number,
timing dependencies and another to capture ID association maximum degree from single constructed TCG G(T l
 )
 of lrelationships, jointly used to generate graph-structured data th window as xl(n) , xl(e) , xl(d) , which supplement every local
Gl = (Xl , Al ), l = 0, 1, · · · , L − 1. CAN message ξt as node feature vector xt . We obtain xt =
 We construct Timing Correlation Graphs (TCGs) to cap- {d0 , d1 , d2 , . . . , d8 , xl(n) , xl(e) , xl(d) , dl } ∈ R13 , xt in l-th window.
ture the long-term distributional patterns of CAN messages Hence, node feature matrix Xl = {xl∗W , · · · , xl∗W+(W−1) }.
10424 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 2) CRG: To capture short-term associations in CAN traffic, The function READOUT (·) can be implemented as a simit requires us to enhance the correlation between the same ple permutation-invariant operation such as average pooling,
IDs in the CAN delivery mechanism. As illustrated in Fig. 1, or as a more sophisticated graph-level aggregation function
such coupling is reflected in the contextual relevance between designed to capture complex structural information. For simadjacent messages and the similarity among messages sharing plicity, we rewrite h(K) φ (G) as hφ (G).
the same ID. Thus, we construct the CRGs G(C) (C)
 1 , . . . , G L for In contrast to previous GNN-based learning, graph con-
L windows as follows. The window segmentation is aligned trastive learning reinforces and maximizes non-linear statistiwith that defined for TCGs in Definition 2. cal dependencies between two augmented views by comparing
 There are N nodes in each G(C) l , because we treat each the representation of one view against that of the other. In
CAN message as a node. The edges in CRG G(C) l have two our method, we adopt edge perturbation as the augmentation
kinds of connections. The first is the connection between two strategy, where each edge is independently added or removed
consecutive CAN messages with generally different CAN ID according to an i.i.d. uniform distribution, thereby generating
values. The other is an edge that connects two nodes with the two augmented graphs G0 , G00 from the original graph G. This
same CAN ID values. operation perturbs the connectivity structure of G by randomly
 In the CRG generation phase, as illustrated in Fig. 2, the modifying a certain proportion of edges. Edge perturbation
gray solid, dashed, and dot-dash links to the right of each serves as an augmentation/noise addition to make graph
CAN ID represent the similarity relationships among messages contrastive learning model less fragile, which demonstrates
with the same ID, while the black links to the left indicate robustness to edge connectivity pattern variations.
the temporal adjacency between consecutive CAN messages. After obtaining node-level representations hφ (G0 ), hφ (G00 ),
Hence, we get Al = G(C) l and the final graph-structure data is and graph-level representations Hφ (G0 ), Hφ (G00 ), we apply a
Gl = (Xl , Al ), l = 0, 1, · · · , L − 1. nonlinear transformation f (·), referred to as the projection
 In summary, we propose timing correlation statistical head, to map these augmented representations into a separate
mechanism (TCG) and a relationship-aware message passing latent space. Specifically, we design fl (·) and fg (·) as twoparadigm (CRG) to reflect the long-term statistical distribution layer multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) with PReLU activations.
and coupling relationship, generating graph-structured data Define the parameters of f (·) as ϑ collectively. The resulting
G = {G = (X, A)}, |G| = L. projected embeddings are denoted as z = fl (hφ (G)) for the
 node-level representation, and Z = fg (Hφ (G)) for the graphlevel representation.
B. Graph Contrastive Learning Module 1) Training Process: The objective of graph contrastive
 The central focus of the graph comparison learning module learning is to train encoders and capture informative graph
is to train a powerful graph neural network (GNN) encoder to representations suitable for downstream tasks. To this end, our
characterize graph nodes. Building upon the recent augmented approach is inspired by the Deep InfoMax framework [28], and
graph contrastive learning method [26], we optimize the MI seeks to maximize MI between node–node and graph–graph
metric in a way that strengthens the MI of local nodes in order embeddings across two augmented views. This dual-level
to utilize the graph information more comprehensively. contrast yields more fine-grained local representations, and
 Formally, the k-th layer of a GNN on graph G can be outperforms methods that rely solely on graph–graph or
represented as node–graph contrast.
 According to [24], we give the Jensen-Shannon MI estimav = COMBINE
 h(k) , a(k)
 (k)
 h(k−1)
 
 v n (3) tor on local and global pairs, maximizing the estimated MI as
 an = AGGREGAT ION hu , u ∈ N (v)
 (k) (k) (k−1) follows:
 
 (4)
 X
 φ̂, ϑ̂, ψ̂ G = arg max Iφ,ϑ,ψ (z0 , z00 )
 
where h(k)
 v , v ∈ G is the patch feature embedding of node v φ,ϑ,ψ
 G∈G
through k layers, N (v) is the neighborhood of node v. Besides, 
AGGREGAT ION (k) (·) and COMBINE (k) (·) are component + Iφ,ϑ,ψ (Z 0 , Z 00 ) (7)
functions of the GNN layer.
 Define parameters of GNN as φ. Hence, the patch repre- where Iφ,ϑ,ψ is the MI estimator modeled by discriminator
sentation at the k-th layer on all nodes in graph G is denoted T ψ , and T ψ is a discriminator function modeled by a neural
as network with parameters ψ. Moreover, z0 = fl (hφ (G0 )), z00 =
 fl (hφ (G00 )), Z 0 = fg (Hφ (G0 )), Z 00 = fg (Hφ (G00 )).
 h(k)
 φ (G) = CONCAT hv
 (k)
 ,v ∈ G
 
 (5)
 We have
 Therein, CONCAT (·) denotes the concatenation function
 Iφ,ϑ,ψ ( fl (hφ (G0 )), fl (hφ (G00 ))) ,
that aggregates feature vectors across k GNN layers into a h  i
single representation, capturing multi-hop neighborhood infor- EP −sp −T ψ(l) ( fl (hφ (G0 )), fl (hφ (G00 )))
mation centered at each node [27]. h  i
 After K layers propagation, the final output embedding for − EP×P̃ sp −T ψ(l) ( fl (hφ (G0 )), fl (hφ (G̃00 ))) (8)
the whole graph G is
 and
  K
 Hφ (G) = READOUT h(k) φ (G) (6) Iφ,ϑ,ψ (Hφ (G0 ), Hφ (G00 ))
 k=1
JIANG et al.: XIPHOS: ADAPTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 10425

Algorithm 1 Fine-Grained Graph Contrastive Representation different feature units. Thus, the fluctuation of the data
Learning Algorithm is reflected by the RMSE values of multiple independent
 Require: autoencoders, which are classified based on the SGM fitting.
 Augmentations τα , τβ , GNN encoders gφ1 , gφ2 , projection Concretely, either the flattened node-level representation ~ul
 head fϑ1 , fϑ2 , batch size N, graph sets {G = (A, X)| G ∈ G}. or the graph-level representation ~ug , both denoted as ~u =
 1: for sampled batch {G κ }κ=1 N
 ∈ G do {u1 , u2 , · · · , ud } ∈ Rd , forms a temporal sequence U = {~ut |
 2: for κ = 1 to N do ~ut = (ut,1 , ut,2 , · · · , ut,d )} indexed by time t. nt normal vectors
 3: Aακ = τα (Aκ ); Aβκ = τβ (Aκ ); // Augmented adjacent are randomly sampled to form the training subset Utrain .
 matrixes from different augmenting approaches 1) Hierarchical Clustering Map: The combination of hier-
 4: hακ , Hκα = gφ1 (Aακ , Xκ ); // Node-level and graph-level archical clustering features filtered temporally can help to
 embedding generated by GNN encoder α discover data patterns in the latent space. To ensure that
 5: hβκ , Hκβ = gφ2 (Aβκ , Xκ ); // Node-level and graph-level the grouped features effectively capture traffic behavior, we
 embedding generated by GNN encoder β follow the approach in [30], using inter-dimensional distances
 6: zακ ← fϑ1 (hακ ); zβκ ← fϑ1 (hβκ ); // Node-level repre- to quantify feature correlations. These correlation distances
 sentation mapped by the projector fϑ1 are incrementally aggregated and used to guide the clustering
 7: Zκα ← fϑ2 (Hκα ); Zκβ ← fϑ2 (Hκβ ); // Graph-level process.
 representation mapped by the projector fϑ2 More precisely, the hierarchical clustering mapping algo-
 8: end for rithm performs the following steps: The summary statistics
 9: for i = 1 to N and j = 1 to N do are incrementally updated with the features of ~u to generate
10: Iil j = T ψ(l) (zαi , zβj ), Iigj = T ψ(g) (Ziα , Z βj ); // Calculating distance matrix. Then, based on generated distance matrix,
 MI of graph and nodes respectively statistical hierarchical clustering is performed to form F(·).
11: end for Finally, F(~u) = ~v is computed, and ~v is passed to the integrated
 PN PN g
 Oφ1 ,φ2 ,ϑ1 ,ϑ2 N12 i=1 j=1 [L(Ii j ) + L(Ii j )]; // Computing
 l
12: autoencoder learning module.
 the gradient of the total MI for backpropagation For the number of instances P seen so far nt , the expected
13: end for value of nt instances is ūt,i = n1t nt=0 t
 ut,i , i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , d}.
 Hence, we define the correlation distance matrix D as:
 Ci, j
 h  i
 , EP −sp −T ψ(g) ( fg (Hφ (G0 )), fg (Hφ (G00 ))) Di, j = 1 − p q (10)
 h  i crs
 i crsj
 − EP×P̃ sp −T ψ(g) ( fg (Hφ (G0 )), fg (Hφ (G̃00 ))) (9)
 Pnt 2
where G̃ (negative graph sample) is an input sampled from a where
 Pnt crs
 i = t=0 ut,i − ūt,i and Ci, j =
distribution P̃, which is the same empirical probability distribu- t=0 (u t,i − ūt,i )(ut, j − ūt, j ) .
tion as the input probability space P. G̃00 is the augmentation The next step is to perform agglomerative hierarchical clusgraph of G̃. Moreover, sp(z) = log(1 + ez ) is the softplus tering to find mapping function F(~u) = ~v based on the distance
function. matrix D obtained. At first, each dimension is considered as a
 Equations (8) and (9) are used to compute MI at the node separate cluster. Next, the most similar clusters are gradually
and graph levels, respectively. Positive samples are drawn from merged according to the similarity matrix D. This process is
the joint distribution x p ∼ p(G0 , G00 ), while negative samples repeated until a single cluster encompassing all d data points is
are drawn from the product of marginal distributions xq ∼ formed. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering results in only
p(G0 ) · p(G̃00 ). In practice, negative samples are generated by one cluster, whose instructiveness for the methodology of this
randomly shuffling the graph dataset and using other instances paper is that the combination of clusters with a maximum
within each batch, following the approach in [29]. length ≤ s is intercepted and then m groups are generated in
 Finally, the model parameters are optimized using mini- the clustering dendrogram. The feature units divided into the
batch stochastic gradient descent. Let G denote a set of training same groups are spliced into a vector v j ∈ R s and filled with
graphs, where each sample graph G = (X, A) ∈ G consists of an zeros to the empty positions within this s-dimension space.
adjacency matrix A ∈ R|G|×|G| and initial node feature vectors Finally, we can obtain ~v = {v1 , · · · , vm }.
X ∈ R|G|×13 . The proposed contrastive learning procedure is 2) Integrated Autoencoder Learning: We use an unsupersummarized in Algorithm 1. vised artificial neural network designed for anomaly detection
 2) Inference Process: After completing the training pro- task to depict data fluctuations [30]. It consists of two layers
cess, we execute the lines 1 through 5 of Algorithm 1 to obtain of autoencoders: the Ensemble Layer and the Output Layer.
the node-level representation ~ulκ = (hακ + hβκ )/2 ∈ Rd and the In order to improve the performance and robustness of
graph-level representation ~ugκ = (Hκα + Hκβ )/2 ∈ R|Gκ |×d for the intrusion detection, each self-encoder in ensemble layer tries
graph Gκ ∈ G, which are then used for downstream tasks. to reconstruct the features of the instances and forwards the
 reconstruction error to the self-encoder in output layer, realizing the integrated nonlinear voting mechanism and reducing
C. Adaptive Hierarchical Clustering Classification Module the influence of noise and perturbation on the model.
 In this module, we adopt the Kitsume architecture [30] Let θ denote the set of entire self-encoders. L(1) =
to map graph representations into combinations of several {θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θm } and L(2) = θ0 represent the ensemble layer
10426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

and output layer, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2. Since the TABLE II
combination ~v = {v1 , · · · , vm } of m features is generated from T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF THE ROAD DATASET
hierarchical clustering map, the ensemble layer L(1) is an
ordered set of m three-layer autoencoders and receives feature
group mapped into v j to measure the independent anomalies
by θ j ∈ L(1) . Therein, each θ j is a three-layer autoencoder,
with input size = s. During training, L(1) learns the behavioral patterns of their respective subspaces by minimizing the
RMSE. The output layer L(2) is a three-layer autoencoder with
input size = m, which receives 0-1 normalized RMSE signals
from L(1) . During training, it learns the RMSE patterns of the
ensemble layer, while during inference, it outputs the overall
RMSE variation to support final anomaly classification.
 3) Adaptive Classification: In [30], the output layer is
responsible for generating the RMSEs, i.e. the final anomaly
score. However, this approach may result in two different
fluctuations canceling each other out. Therefore, we take into
account the RMSE generated by the ensemble layer as well, Since the ID and data fields in the Car Hacking dataset
treating all (M + 1) RMSEs as a high-dimensional Gaussian are stored in hexadecimal, we convert them to decimal for
distribution, and fit all RMSE to assess the degree of anomaly preprocessing. In addition, we divide all the different types of
by using a SGM. Then, we determine the class of feature ~u data into 70% training, 20% validation, and 10% testing sets.
by setting the significance level as α. 2) ROAD Dataset: It has the advantages that real attacks
 are performed on real vehicles, since simulated data may not
 IV. E XPERIMENT always be legitimate in real vehicles [18]. The physical effects
 We conduct comprehensive experiments on two representa- of all captured attacks on real vehicle data are verified. The
tive CAN datasets, as described in § IV-A. § IV-B introduces ROAD dataset contains the following five usable advanced
abundant comparison methods. Evaluation metrics are pre- masquerade attacks: a) Correlated Signal Masquerade Attack,
sented in § IV-C, followed by an analysis of hyperparameter b) Max Speedometer Masquerade Attack, c) Reverse Light Off
sensitivity in § IV-D. Detection performance is comprehen- Masquerade Attack, d) Reverse Light On Masquerade Attack,
sively evaluated in § IV-E. §IV-F describes the vehicle–cloud and e) Max Engine Coolant Temp Masquerade Attack. These
collaboration framework, including two computing platforms. attacks fall under advanced masquerade scenarios, where the
Finally, ablation studies are presented in §IV-G. attacker replaces a legitimate CAN message frame with a
 malicious one transmitted at the same frequency, thereby
 impersonating the target message. The operation in ROAD
A. Dataset and Preprocess dataset is realized by extracting legitimate frames on CAN bus
 Considering the representativeness and authenticity of the and injecting malicious messages in place, without changing
datasets, we choose the most widely used automotive hacking the timing characteristics or causing message conflicts, and
dataset in the CAN intrusion detection literature and the thus difficult to be detected by traditional methods.
ROAD dataset with the highest fidelity. The two selected Table II presents the distribution of the ROAD dataset,
datasets are described in detail as follows. which contains a lower proportion of labeled samples com-
 1) Car Hacking Dataset: It contains a large number of pared to the Car Hacking dataset, thereby posing a greater
examples of multiple fabrication attacks, generated by logging challenge for intrusion detection models. On the one hand,
CAN traffic from OBD-II ports of real vehicles from the the low proportion of attack samples undermines the model’s
Hacking and Countermeasure Research Lab (HCRL) of Korea ability to accurately distinguish malicious behaviors. On the
University. Specifically, the Car Hacking dataset consists of a other hand, masquerade attacks, which inject malicious content
normal dataset and four different attack datasets: DoS, Fuzzy, without altering the temporal patterns of message transmission,
spoofing GEAR and spoofing RPM. are inherently more stealthy. Together, these reasons impose
 Among them, spoofing GEAR and spoofing RPM are both more stringent requirements on model evaluation and highlight
targeted ID attacks, targeting messages with IDs 043f and the need for label-free detection strategies.
0316, respectively. In the Car Hacking dataset, adversaries Since the ROAD dataset contains only raw CAN logs
are capable of injecting arbitrary messages into the CAN without labels, annotations are generated using the CAN-D
bus at any time, leading to message conflicts with legitimate algorithm [31]. To align the translated signals (CSV fortransmissions and periodic fluctuations in the CAN traffic. The mat) with the raw log data, we match messages based on
sample distribution of the Car Hacking dataset is presented in both CAN ID and timestamp. Messages with identical ID
Table I, where the relatively low proportion of labeled samples and timestamp value are treated as a single message. The
poses a significant challenge for supervised intrusion detection resulting data is then reformatted to match the structure of
models, as it limits the availability of reliable training data, the Car Hacking dataset, followed by identical preprocessing
while also increases the difficulty of model evaluation. steps.
JIANG et al.: XIPHOS: ADAPTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 10427

B. Compared Methods C. Evaluation Metrics
 To evaluate the effectiveness of different methods, this
 A fair comparison between XIPHOS and existing state- paper employs classic classification metric methods. Accuracy,
of-the-art CAN bus intrusion detection methods is challeng- Precision and Recall can be calculated from the number of true
ing due to inconsistencies in detection granularity across negatives (TN), true positives (TP), false negatives (TN) and
approaches. To ensure comparability, we adopt the graph false positives (FP), defined as follows:
classification setting for XIPHOS, where a graph is labeled
as anomalous if it contains at least one anomalous node; TP + TN
 Accuray = (11)
otherwise, it is considered as normal. T P + T N + FP + FN
 Accordingly, we compare XIPHOS with one graph-based TP
 Precision = (12)
method (G-IDCS), one classical machine learning model T P + FP
(RF), two basic supervised neural networks (MLP and TP
 Recall = (13)
LSTM), three advanced supervised convolutional models T P + FN
(EfficientNet, MobileNetV3, and CANet), and three rep- In addition, the false positive rate (FPR) describes the
resentative unsupervised methods (DAGMM, MSFlow, and probability of detection errors, which is the ratio of FP to the
MTGFlow), covering both supervised and unsupervised number of actual normal samples and reflects the workload
paradigms. of security personnel on dealing with false alarms. The true
 1) Supervised Intrusion Detection Methods: RF [32] positive rate (TPR) is the ratio of TP to the number of actual
leverages an ensemble learning framework for multi-class clas- attack samples.
sification, constructing each decision tree based on a random FP
subset of features from individual CAN messages. Employing FPR = (14)
 FP + T N
a feedforward neural network architecture, MLP [32] per- TP
forms multi-class classification at the granularity of single TPR = (15)
 T P + FN
CAN messages. As a prominent RNN variant, LSTM [33]
utilizes the last observation window of prior CAN messages The F1-score is more useful than accuracy in the case
to predict the next CAN ID, enabling multi-class classification of unbalanced class distribution. It is the harmonic mean of
with enhanced predictive performance. EfficientNet [34] is precision and recall, calculated as follows:
a simple and efficient high-performance convolutional neural 2 × Precision × Recall
network after carefully balancing depth, width, and resolution. F1 − score = (16)
 Precision + Recall
It uses an efficient composite scaling method that allows the
 A common metric for dealing with unbalanced data is the
model to easily scale the baseline ConvNet in a principled
 Area Under the Curve (AUC) to quantitatively represent the
and efficient manner while satisfying resource constraints.
 performance of a model; it is the area under the Receiver
MobileNetV3 [35] combines the depthwise separable con-
 Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC curve is a
volutions of MobileNetV1, the inverted residual with linear
 graph with the FPR on the horizontal axis and the TPR on the
bottleneck of MobileNetV2 and a lightweight attention model,
 vertical axis. It reveals the relationship between FPR and TPR
and uses h-swish instead of swish as its activation function.
 at different thresholds. The value domain of AUC ranges from
This makes it faster in computation and more friendly to
 0.5 to 1. Higher values of AUC indicate better performance
quantization. CANet [36] consists of a two-branch dense comof the model.
parison module which performs multi-level feature comparison
between the support image and the query image. It embeds
an attention mechanism and achieves effective information D. Hyperparameter Impact on Performance
fusion from multiple support examples in the setting of k-shot In this subsection, we independently vary the hyperparamelearning. ter variables of XIPHOS and report their impact on detection
 2) Unsupervised Intrusion Detection Methods: DAGMM performance.
[37] is a deep auto-encoding Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) 1) Hidden Layers Size of GNN in Graph Contrastive Learnfor unsupervised anomaly detection by combining a deep auto- ing Module (h): Node embeddings are used to encode input
encoder with GMM, which optimizes the parameters of both graph features. As can be seen in Fig. 3(a), relatively small
deep auto-encoder and the mixture model in an end-to-end dimensions are sufficient to encode these characteristics, while
fashion to help the auto-encoder get rid of less local optima. larger dimensions lead to overfitting, which may seriously
MSFlow [38] is a novel multi-scale flow-based framework affect the detection performance. Additionally, if h is too small,
composed of asymmetrical parallel flows with multi-scale it will instead increase the false alarm rate. We found that
perceptions, which is adopted for anomaly detection and h = 32 (Car Hacking dataset) and h = 64 (ROAD dataset) are
localization according to feature distribution discrepancies. the optimal dimensions.
MTGFlow [39] is an unsupervised anomaly detection approach 2) Batch Size in Graph Contrastive Learning Module (B):
for multivariate time series anomaly detection via sample The batch size B determines the amount of graph data
density fitting distribution, dynamic graph, and entity-aware processed during each contrast learning iteration. A small
normalizing flow, which can capture the complex distribution B weakens the contrastive signal and increases the risk of
patterns of multivariate time series. overfitting to a limited subset of the data. Conversely, an
10428 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 Fig. 3. Effect of different hyper-parameters on performance of XIPHOS.

excessively large B increases computational cost and may lead the ROAD dataset, XIPHOS achieves an average of 74.97%
to overly smooth representations. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the F1-score, which is significantly lower than the Car Hacking
optimal batch sizes are B = 32 for the Car Hacking dataset dataset. This is due to the fact that the advanced masquerade
and B = 16 for the ROAD dataset. attacks in the ROAD dataset have the property of completely
 3) Edge Drop Percent of Graph Augmentation (ρ): To replacing the legitimate messages, with only the payload
minimize disturbances and improve robustness, the graph thresholds being altered, making them extremely stealthy.
is appropriately perturbed to enhance the learning perfor- However, despite having an AUC of only 75.15%, it also
mance of the model. In Fig. 3(c), when ρ is too small, the outperforms the unsupervised state-of-the-art detectors and is
graph-structured data features are too individualized and lack comparable to supervised methods. The FPR of XIPHOS on
generality. Conversely, if ρ becomes too large, resulting in two datasets is 0.19% and 0.32%, which is significantly lower
noise interfering with the features of normal graph data, it will than other methods possessing high F1-score.
also cause the detection performance to be degraded. When Notably, DAGMM yields zero precision, recall, F1-score,
ρ = 0.1, XIPHOS can learn with the best quality augmented and FPR on both datasets, with an AUC fixed at 0.5. This
graph on both datasets. outcome indicates that all samples are classified as the majority
 4) Significance Level of SGM (α): The significance level, class, producing no true positives and revealing the model’s
as the key to choosing the threshold, directly determines the inability to generate discriminative anomaly scores under
performance of the model. Too low a significance level tends severe class imbalance. In contrast, XIPHOS consistently
to cause false negatives, while too high a level tends to cause achieves stable performance across both threshold-based and
false positives. Fig. 3(d) shows that α = 0.0005 (Car Hacking ranking-based metrics, even in highly imbalanced scenarios.
dataset) and α = 0.13 (ROAD dataset) are the optimal values.
 5) Number Of Instance in Adaptive Hierarchical Clustering F. Vehicle-Cloud Collaboration Framework
Classification Module (nt ): The number of instances nt deter- Given that the intrusion detection model serves as the core
mines the data scale used in adaptive hierarchical clustering. component of IVN security, it must support real-time detection
When nt is too small, this module fails to learn representative and maintain a certain performance guarantee under confeatures, as shown in Fig. 3(e). However, increasing nt beyond strained computational resources. Existing intrusion detection
a certain point yields diminishing returns and may lead to methods typically lack architectural designs that support adapoverfitting. To balance these effects, we empirically identify tive deployment in heterogeneous vehicular–cloud resource
nt = 500 for the Car Hacking dataset and nt = 150 for the environments. In practice, effective deployment requires not
ROAD dataset as optimal settings. only a cloud-based computing platform but also an on-board
 detection system that ensures real-time performance, adequate
E. Detection Performance computational capacity, and scalability. To meet these require-
 To evaluate the detection performance of XIPHOS, we ments, we select appropriate hardware based on computational
conduct extensive comparative experiments on two datasets capability and application scenarios, and we also describe a
against state-of-the-art methods, without using any attack representative automotive-grade computing platform.
labels. The accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, area under For the on-board environment, we adopt the NVIDIA
the ROC curve (AUC) and FPR results of all these methods Jetson Orin Nano (see Fig. 4), a pre-development Xavier
including XIPHOS can be seen in Table III. system-on-chip widely used in both industry and academia
 On the simple Car Hacking dataset, XIPHOS can obtain for intelligent vehicle applications. It integrates a GPU and
almost perfect detection results. This is because the Car CAN bus interface, delivers approximately 21 Tera Operations
Hacking dataset contains only more easily detected fabrication Per Second (TOPS) of computing power, and offers low
attacks, whose anomalous behaviour can be easily represented power consumption. Its ARM-based architecture enables the
by hidden patterns such as periodicity. While dealing with deployment and evaluation of deep learning-based intrusion
JIANG et al.: XIPHOS: ADAPTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 10429

 TABLE III
 T EST R ESULTS OF E ACH M ETHOD IN C AR H ACKING DATASET AND ROAD DATASET

 Fig. 4. NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano (T206).

detection algorithms under realistic, resource-constrained conditions.
 To simulate a cloud environment, we utilize a highperformance computing device (LENOVO 90VA000JCP)
equipped with a 64-bit Intel Core i7-13700 CPU @ 3.6GHz
and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080 GPU (32 GB). It not only
 Fig. 5. Inference time of different models.
fully trains the intrusion detection model with PyTorch 1.13
and Python 3.8, but also verifies the models’ performances
under non-resource-constrained conditions. of XIPHOS on the vehicle side is still at the practically
 The vehicle–cloud collaborative simulation framework is acceptable level of one millisecond. This latency is well within
designed to optimize model performance through continuous operational constraints for IVN intrusion detection, making the
interaction between the vehicle and the cloud. All models are approach deployable in safety-critical environments.
trained and validated in the cloud, while inference is performed
on the vehicle-side platform. G. Ablation Experiment
 The inference process consists of data loading and testing, This section evaluates the effectiveness of key components
and thus, the inference time is the sum of loading and testing within the XIPHOS framework by individually analyzing the
time. Fig. 5 shows the inference time of various models for impact of the Graph Contrastive Learning module (GCL) and
each CAN message. Results indicate that processing, testing the Adaptive Hierarchical Clustering Classification module
and overall inference times are consistently lower on cloud (AHC) on overall detection performance.
platforms than on in-vehicle devices, suggesting that limited 1) Upstream Feature Extractor (GCL) Replacement: We
onboard resources may reduce detection speed. However, evaluate a combination of AHC and other state-of-the-art
it is worth noting that the real-time inference performance graph representation methods including InfoGraph [27], and
10430 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION E XPERIMENT R ESULTS OF GCL ON C AR H ACKING DATASET

Contrastive Multi-View Representation Learning on Graphs isolation forests, are more sensitive to the initial distribu-
(CMVRLG) [40]. Table IV shows the impact of these compo- tion and noise of the data, making it difficult to reproduce
nents on detection performance on the Car Hacking dataset. the classification results in the case of small samples. In
Notably, compared to InfoGraph and CMVRLG, XIPHOS addition, K-means, FCM and GMM may lead to unstable
can significantly improve the extraction of features. Further- or unpredictable results. We leave the these improvement of
more, XIPHOS outperforms CMVRLG, primarily due to its classification module for future research.
enhanced ability to capture and utilize local information.
 2) Downstream Classifier (AHC) Replacement: In this sub- C. Computational Cost of Graph Transformation Steps
section, we choose to use a combination of GCL and other A quantitative analysis of the computational cost introduced
classical unsupervised classifiers including K-means, Fuzzy C- by the graph transformation step is provided in Section IV.
means (FCM), GMM. The results are shown in the first three While the graph-based representation incurs moderate runrows of Table IV, proving the importance of the classifier for time overhead compared to lightweight baselines such as
the model results. We can observe that these unsupervised RF, LSTM, and DAGMM, it improves detection accuracy
classifiers are more sensitive to the initial distribution and and F1-score, especially under complex and stealthy attack
noise of the data. Since these methods rely solely on data scenarios where traditional models often struggle to generalize.
similarity for clustering, they face significant challenges in These results indicate that XIPHOS achieves a practical
segmentation tasks when prior knowledge is unavailable and and deployment-oriented balance between computational effiadaptability is limited. ciency and detection performance. Although not the lightest
 The results in Table IV illustrate that the combination of approach, its adaptability to different detection scenarios and
GCL and AHC performs the best, which means that excellent robustness against diverse attack patterns make it well-suited
upstream feature extraction and downstream tasks are indis- in resource-constrained, safety-critical vehicular environments,
pensable for IVN intrusion detection. where reliability and detection quality are prioritized over
 minimal latency. Given its substantial performance advantages,
 V. D ISCUSSION the computational overhead introduced by the graph transfor-
A. Upstream Feature Extraction Methods mation is a reasonable trade-off in practice.
 Experimental results show that transforming multidimen-
 D. More Advanced Attacks
sional temporal data into graph-structured data enables
XIPHOS to capture intrinsic data characteristics more effec- The masquerade attack is executed by suspending transmistively. The use of MI maximization further enhances the sions from the targeted ECU and injecting spoofed messages
capacity of GCL to perform deep feature extraction and from another ECU at an identical frequency. This strategy
structural abstraction. These results indicate that enhancing the induces erroneous operations without causing message conperformance of unsupervised learning hinges on constructing flicts or timing anomalies, making it highly stealthy and
informative representations capable of compensating for the difficult for traditional detection methods to identify. Furabsence of labeled data, which remains a fundamental chal- thermore, the scarcity of labeled samples in the ROAD
lenge in the field. dataset exacerbates the challenges of effective model training.
 Thus, these characteristics of advanced attacks impose stricter
 requirements on model evaluation and underscore the necessity
B. Adaptability and Quality of Training Data of adopting unsupervised detection strategies. In Section IV,
 AHC learns normal data behavior to detect attacks by we demonstrate that XIPHOS can effectively detect masidentifying fluctuations in anomalies, as AHC can incorporate querade attacks that imitate normal message communication
examples from different domains during training, which makes patterns. However, if the adversaries have detailed knowledge
it adaptable to different environments. However, if AHC is of how XIPHOS works, they may craft attacks that evade
trained on a small or low quality dataset that fails to adequately detection by our model. To prevent these hostile attacks against
represent the behavior of IVN bus data, this may lead to an input graphs and GNNs, developing more robust graph-based
increase in false positives. Additionally, some unsupervised defenses against adversarial attacks remains an important
classification methods, such as support vector machines and direction for future research.
JIANG et al.: XIPHOS: ADAPTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 10431

 1) Further Classification: The unsupervised approach in annotations, which is particularly beneficial in the automothis paper essentially performs a binary classification task tive context. Nonetheless, the lack of supervision introduces
that distinguishes between normal and abnormal instances. several challenges. Unsupervised models are susceptible to
Although public IVN datasets contain a substantial amount overfitting on noisy or low-quality data, may learn unstable
of both labeled and unlabeled data, the available labeled data or non-generalizable patterns, and often depend on heuristic
remains insufficient for training effective supervised mod- thresholding, thereby compromising reproducibility and hinels. Hence, self-supervised learning can further complement dering practical deployment.
unsupervised methods to more precisely categorize abnormal Recent efforts have turned to graph-based approaches to
instances into specific attack types in future work. enhance the structural modeling of CAN traffic. For example,
 the method in [44] proposes a novel graph representation
 VI. R ELATED W ORK to capture inter-message relationships for anomaly detection,
 XIPHOS focuses on three main areas of research: IVN marking a shift from traditional feature-based techniques
graph-structured data conversion and utilization, unsupervised toward structure-aware learning. However, several limitations
detection methods, and graph-based representation learning. persist. The evaluation in [44] is based on small-scale datasets
 focused primarily on fabrication attacks, leaving its applicability to more complex and stealthy threats such as masquerade
A. Graph-Structured Data Conversion
 attacks insufficiently addressed. In addition, its detection
 Deep learning-based IVN intrusion detection methods basi- performance is relatively modest, and the experiments are concally process the time-series data stream into neat Euclidean ducted solely in a cloud environment, which does not account
spatial data, e.g., sequences and matrices [16], [17]. However, for the real-time and resource-constrained conditions typical
the relationships of real-world data often do not have the of in-vehicle systems. Furthermore, although the approach is
canonical character of Euclidean data, which makes modeling unsupervised, it lacks key evaluation metrics such as AUC and
learning with Euclidean spatial data limited. FPR, which are essential for assessing detection robustness
 Compared to traditional data formats, graph-structured and practical applicability. These shortcomings highlight the
data offers a more expressive representation for modeling existing gap between current graph-based intrusion deteccomplex relationships and capturing richer contextual infor- tion methods and their scalability in real-world automotive
mation. It has proven effective in a variety of heterogeneous deployments, both in terms of implementation feasibility and
domains, such as social networks and molecular structures comprehensive performance validation.
[41], [42], [43], due to its ability to encode dependencies through node-edge connectivity. Therefore, graph-based
analytical techniques facilitate deeper exploration of the under- C. Graph-Based Representation Learning
lying patterns and structural insights within the data. 1) Random Walks: A representative line of unsupervised
 1) Graph-Structured Data Utilization: Meanwhile, exten- representation learning on graph-structured data employs
sive research has been conducted on graph learning tasks, random-walk-based language models to capture node embedincluding node classification, link prediction, subgraph extrac- dings, as exemplified by node2vec and DeepWalk [42], [48].
tion, association analysis, and graph classification [27], [29], These methods treat sequences generated from random walks
[42], [43]. Despite its advantages in encoding rich structural over graphs as analogues to sentences in natural language,
contexts, the generation and analysis of graph-structured data enabling the use of skip-gram models for embedding learning.
remain challenging, particularly when compared to traditional However, to generate such sequences, random walks often simgeometric data formats. This is especially true for multi- plify the graph structure, effectively trading off rich structural
variate time-series traffic data in networked systems, where semantics for adjacency information [49]. Moreover, their pertransforming such data into semantically meaningful graph formance is highly sensitive to hyperparameter configurations,
representations poses a non-trivial challenge. It is encouraging which limits robustness and adaptability across diverse graph
to note that several studies have begun to investigate the settings.
structural properties of CAN traffic, laying the groundwork for
 2) Graph Kernels: Another common unsupervised graph
transforming CAN data into graph-structured representations
 learning approach is the graph kernel [50]. Graphs are decomand enabling graph-based intrusion detection, as exemplified
 posed into multiple substructures and the similarity between
by [22] and our prior work [25].
 the substructures are measured using inner products, defined
 as a kernel function, in appropriately normalized vector
B. Unsupervised Detection Methods spaces. However, they require hand-drawn the way of the
 Unsupervised intrusion detection has become a pivotal similarity metrics between substructures, leading to sparse
research direction for securing CAN bus systems, owing to or non-smooth representation and thus poor generalization
its capacity to detect zero-day or evolving attacks without performance [50].
reliance on labeled training data [38], [39], [44]. Various 3) Graph Contrastive Learning: Contrastive learning (CL)
techniques have been proposed, including autoencoder-based inherently aims to enforce representation consistency under
anomaly detection [45], temporal modeling with message appropriate transformations [51]. By minimizing the distance
attributes using LSTM [46], and statistical distribution esti- between augmented views of the same sample, CL has
mation [47]. These methods reduce the dependence on costly achieved notable success in self-supervised learning across
10432 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

domains such as computer vision and natural language pro- [5] L. Xue et al., “Said: State-aware defense against injection attacks on
cessing [52], [53], and has attracted growing research interest in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., Boston, MA,
 USA, Aug. 2022, pp. 1921–1938.
in recent years. In graph learning, where data often lacks [6] Y. Liu et al., “Vehicular intrusion detection system for controller area
sufficient labels or is difficult to annotate, CL has been widely network: A comprehensive survey and evaluation,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
adopted to learn meaningful node and graph representations Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 10979–11009, Jul. 2025.
 [7] L. Wang, Q. Zhao, W.-B. Lee, and C. Wang, “Deploying intrusion
in an unsupervised manner. This series of algorithm studies is detection on in-vehicle networks: Challenges and opportunities,” IEEE
known as Graph Contrastive Learning (GraphCL) methods. Netw., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 306–312, Jan. 2025.
 [8] J. Cao et al., “Anomaly detection for in-vehicle network using self-
 GraphCL has emerged as a leading paradigm for unsu- supervised learning with vehicle-cloud collaboration update,” IEEE
pervised representation learning at both the node and graph Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 7454–7466, Jul. 2024.
levels [26], [27], [29], [40], [43]. The foundational work [9] S. Jeong, M. Ryu, H. Kang, and H. K. Kim, “Infotainment system
 matters: Understanding the impact and implications of in-vehicle infoon MI estimation, introduced in [28] and [54], provided the tainment system hacking with automotive grade Linux,” in Proc. 13th
theoretical basis for subsequent methods such as [27] and [29]. ACM Conf. Data Appl. Secur. Privacy, Apr. 2023, pp. 201–212.
These approaches optimize GNN encoders by maximizing the [10] Z. Lu, Q. Wang, X. Chen, G. Qu, Y. Lyu, and Z. Liu, “LEAP:
 A lightweight encryption and authentication protocol for in-vehicle
MI between augmented views of the same graph, thereby communications,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf. (ITSC),
encouraging semantic consistency, while simultaneously push- Auckland, New Zealand, Oct. 2019, pp. 1158–1164.
 [11] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski,
ing apart representations of different graphs. The encoder G. Madzudzo, and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for
parameters are updated iteratively until convergence or a in-vehicle networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 11,
predefined termination criterion is satisfied [29]. pp. 1–40, Feb. 2023.
 [12] F. Luo, Z. Yang, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, B. Wang, and M. Wu, “A
 Nevertheless, several prior works [27], [29], [43] do not multi-layer intrusion detection system for SOME/IP-based in-vehicle
incorporate explicit graph augmentations. Such augmenta- network,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 9, p. 4376, Apr. 2023.
tions serve as a form of structured noise injection, which [13] H. Sun, J. Wang, J. Weng, and W. Tan, “KG-ID: Knowledge graph-based
 intrusion detection on in-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
can enhance model robustness and preserve intrinsic graph Syst., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 4988–5000, Apr. 2025.
properties. While the work in [43] inspires us to use graph [14] H. Alqahtani and G. Kumar, “Deep learning-based intrusion detection
contrastive learning paradigm as an upstream unsupervised system for in-vehicle networks with knowledge graph and statistical methods,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 16, nos. 5–6,
feature extraction strategy, the research [40] further presents a pp. 3539–3555, Jun. 2025.
graph diffusion-based augmentation method. However, it lacks [15] X. Zhou, W. Liang, J. She, Z. Yan, and K. I. Wang, “Two-layer
a comprehensive formulation of local-global MI objectives federated learning with heterogeneous model aggregation for 6G supported Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 6,
and its node representations are insufficiently expressive, with pp. 5308–5317, Jun. 2021.
experimental validation limited to graph-level tasks but lacking [16] K. Wang, A. Zhang, H. Sun, and B. Wang, “Analysis of recent deeplearning-based intrusion detection methods for in-vehicle network,”
node classification capabilities. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1843–1854, Feb.
 2023.
 VII. C ONCLUSION [17] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
 detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
 We propose an unsupervised and adaptive intrusion detec- vol. 21, pp. 1–13, Jan. 2020.
 [18] M. E. Verma et al., “A comprehensive guide to CAN IDS data and
tion mechanism, XIPHOS, capable of operating without attack introduction of the ROAD dataset,” PLoS ONE, vol. 19, no. 1, Jan. 2024,
labels. With no dependence on a priori knowledge of attack Art. no. e0296879.
patterns, XIPHOS dynamically adapts to unknown threats, [19] M. H. Shahriar, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “CANtropy: Time series
 feature extraction-based intrusion detection systems for controller area
making it particularly suitable for real-world in-vehicle envi- networks,” in Proc. Inaugural Int. Symp. Vehicle Secur. Privacy, 2023,
ronments. A novel MI computation strategy is introduced, pp. 1–8.
which integrates local and global information to enhance [20] K.-T. Cho and K. G. Shin, “Error handling of in-vehicle networks makes
 them vulnerable,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.
feature extraction. By constructing graph-structured represen- New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Oct. 2016,
tations and maximizing MI, XIPHOS captures abstract features pp. 1044–1055.
and performs intrusion detection through an adaptive hierar- [21] C. Miller and C. Valasek, “Advanced can injection techniques for vehicle
 networks,” in Proc. Black Hat USA, Las Vegas, NV, USA, Aug. 2016,
chical classification framework. Vehicle–cloud collaborative pp. 1–28.
experiments on two widely used CAN datasets demonstrate the [22] R. Islam, R. U. D. Refat, S. M. Yerram, and H. Malik, “Graph-based
 intrusion detection systemfor controller area networks,” IEEE Trans.
effectiveness of the proposed method in achieving satisfactory Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1727–1736, Mar. 2022.
results in terms of detection performance. [23] J. B. Kinney and G. S. Atwal, “Equitability, mutual information, and the
 maximal information coefficient,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 111,
 no. 9, pp. 3354–3359, Mar. 2014.
 R EFERENCES [24] S. Nowozin, B. Cseke, and R. Tomioka, “f-gan: Training generative
 neural samplers usingvariational divergence minimization,” in Proc.
[1] H. H. Jeong, Y. C. Shen, J. P. Jeong, and T. T. Oh, “A comprehensive
 30th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Barcelona, Spain, Dec. 2016,
 survey on vehicular networking for safe and efficient driving in smart
 pp. 271–279.
 transportation: A focus on systems, protocols, and applications,” Veh. [25] K. Wang, Q. Jiang, B. Wang, Y. Wu, and H. Zhang, “STATGRAPH:
 Commun., vol. 31, no. 100349, pp. 1–22, Oct. 2021. Effective in-vehicle intrusion detection via multi-view statistical graph
[2] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain: learning,” 2023, arXiv:2311.07056.
 A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4, [26] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph
 pp. 2356–2426, 2023. contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural Inf.
[3] Y. Xie, G. Zeng, R. Kurachi, F. Xiao, H. Takada, and S. Hu, “Timing Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Dec. 2020, p. 5812.
 analysis of CAN FD for security-aware automotive cyber-physical [27] F.-Y. Sun, J. Hoffmann, V. Verma, and J. Tang, “InfoGraph: Unsupersystems,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, vised and semi-supervised graph-level representation learning via mutual
 pp. 3064–3078, Jul. 2023. information maximization,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
[4] Bosch, Robert Bosch GmbH, Postfach, Gerlingen, Germany, 1991. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Apr. 2019, pp. 1–14.
JIANG et al.: XIPHOS: ADAPTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 10433

[28] R. D. Hjelm et al., “Learning deep representations by mutual information [52] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
 estimation and maximization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 New Orleans, LA, USA, May 2019, pp. 1–24. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[29] P. Velickovic, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Lio, Y. Bengio, and [53] T. Mikolov, L. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Distributed
 R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Rep- representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,” in
 resent., 2019, pp. 1–17. Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 2, Dec. 2013, pp. 3111–3119.
[30] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [54] M. I. Belghazi et al., “Mutual information neural estimation,” in Proc.
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 531–540.
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2018,
 pp. 1–15.
[31] M. E. Verma, R. A. Bridges, J. J. Sosnowski, S. C. Hollifield, and
 M. D. Iannacone, “CAN-D: A modular four-step pipeline for com- Qiguang Jiang received the master’s degree in comprehensively decoding controller area network data,” IEEE Trans. Veh. puter science and technology with Harbin Institute
 Technol., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 9685–9700, Oct. 2021. of Technology (HIT), China. Her research interests
[32] T. Moulahi, S. Zidi, A. Alabdulatif, and M. Atiquzzaman, “Comparative include intelligent and efficient in-vehicle intrusion
 performance evaluation of intrusion detection based on machine learn- detection models.
 ing in in-vehicle controller area network bus,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 pp. 99595–99605, 2021.
[33] I. Berger, R. Rieke, M. Kolomeets, A. Chechulin, and I. Kotenko,
 “Comparative study of machine learning methods for in-vehicle intrusion
 detection,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Secur. Privacy Requirements Eng.,
 2019, pp. 85–101.
[34] M. Tan and Q. V. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for
 convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, Kai Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 pp. 1–10. degree in communication and information systems
[35] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. from Beijing Jiaotong University, China, in 2014.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1314–1324. He is currently a Full Professor with the School of
[36] C. Zhang, G. Lin, F. Liu, R. Yao, and C. Shen, “CANet: Class-agnostic Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
 segmentation networks with iterative refinement and attentive few-shot of Technology, Weihai, China, and also with the Faclearning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. ulty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 5217–5226. Harbin, China. He has published more than 40 arti-
[37] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsucles in prestigious international journals, including
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Feb.
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NTELLIGENT T RANS -
 2018, pp. 1–19.
 PORTATION S YSTEMS , ACM TOIT, and ACM TIST.
[38] Y. Zhou, X. Xu, J. Song, F. Shen, and H. T. Shen, “Msflow: Multi-
 His research interests include in-vehicle network security, advanced persistent
 scale flow-based framework for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE
 threat (APT) detection, and trustworthy machine learning. He is a member of
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 2437–2450, Feb.
 ACM and a Senior Member of China Computer Federation (CCF).
 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3344118.
[39] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate
 time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
 no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024.
[40] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view represen- Yuliang Wei received the Ph.D. degree from
 tation learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), the School of Computer Science and Technology,
 2020, pp. 4116–4126. Harbin Institute of Technology, China, in 2006. He is
[41] W. Jin, R. Barzilay, and T. S. Jaakkola, “Junction tree variational currently an Associate Professor with the School of
 autoencoder for molecular graph generation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
 Learn. (ICML), J. G. Dy and A. Krause, Eds., 2018, pp. 2328–2337. of Technology, Weihai, China. He has published
[42] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for more than 20 papers in prestigious international journetworks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery nals and conferences. His research interests include
 Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, Aug. 2016, pp. 855–864. machine learning and data analysis.
[43] J. Qiu et al., “GCC: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network
 pre-training,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
 Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1150–1160.
[44] N. Kabilan, V. Ravi, and V. Sowmya, “Unsupervised intrusion detection
 system for in-vehicle communication networks,” J. Saf. Sci. Resilience,
 vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 119–129, Jun. 2024. Hongri Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the Fac-
[45] S. Longari, D. H. Nova Valcarcel, M. Zago, M. Carminati, and S. Zanero, ulty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology
 “CANnolo: An anomaly detection system based on LSTM autoencoders (HIT), China, in 2021. He is currently an Assistant
 for controller area network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., Researcher with the School of Computer Science
 vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1913–1924, Jun. 2021. and Technology, HIT, Weihai, China. His research
[46] V. Tanksale, “Design of anomaly detection functions for controller area interests include industrial control network security,
 networks,” IEEE Open J. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 2, pp. 312–321, 2021. V2X security, and zero trust security.
[47] H. Narasimhan, V. Ravi, and N. Mohammad, “Unsupervised deep
 learning approach for in-vehicle intrusion detection system,” IEEE
 Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 103–108, Jan. 2023.
[48] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learning of
 social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2014, pp. 701–710. Bailing Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[49] L. F. R. Ribeiro, P. H. P. Saverese, and D. R. Figueiredo, “struc2vec: degree in computer architecture from Harbin Insti-
 Learning node representations from structural identity,” in Proc. 23rd tute of Technology (HIT), China, in 2006. He is
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Halifax, NS, currently a Full Professor with HIT, Weihai, and
 Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 385–394. Qingdao Research Institute, Qingdao, China. He
[50] A. Narayanan, M. Chandramohan, R. Venkatesan, L. Chen, Y. Liu, and
 has published more than 80 articles in prestigious
 S. Jaiswal, “Graph2vec: Learning distributed representations of graphs,”
 international journals and been selected for China
 2017, arXiv:1707.05005.
[51] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework National Talent Plan. His research interests include
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. information content security and industrial control
 Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. network security.