IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025 12037

 ZTID-IoV: Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection in IoV
 Using Neurosymbolic AI Approach With
 Federated Meta-Learning
 Farhan Ullah , Gautam Srivastava , Senior Member, IEEE, Leonardo Mostarda , Member, IEEE,
 and Umar Raza , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— The rapid growth of the Internet of Vehicles I. I NTRODUCTION
(IoVs) and smart consumer electronics has generated cybersecurity concerns that require an intelligent, adaptable, and
privacy-preserving Intrusion Detection System (IDS). This study
introduces ZTID-IoV, a novel neurosymbolic AI framework
that integrates federated learning, lightweight transformers, and
 T HE rapid convergence of IoVs and smart consumer
 electronics has resulted in the development of an interconnected transportation ecosystem that is revolutionizing
meta-learning to improve threat detection while preserving user in-vehicle experiences, vehicle automation, and mobility serprivacy in consumer IoVs. Our approach leverages neural com- vices. These developments improve traffic management, road
ponents such as a transformer model for recognizing patterns safety, and user comfort, but also pose cybersecurity risks to
in network traffic, combined with symbolic AI techniques such
as self-organizing maps for interpretable client clustering and key infrastructure, user privacy, and vehicle operations [1].
rule-guided reasoning, to achieve robust cybersecurity in dis- Modern connected vehicles exchange sensitive data with roadtributed environments. A lightweight transformer architecture side infrastructure, cloud platforms, and consumer electronics,
optimizes performance for resource-constrained edge devices, and creating a complex attack surface. The real-time and privacy
SOM-based clustering enhances model aggregation by grouping requirements of consumer applications and transportation sysdevices with similar behavioral patterns. The proposed system employs Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) to enable tems are supported by advanced security solutions, which are
rapid adaptation to emerging threats across diverse consumer designed to safeguard networks [2].
devices, while federated learning ensures decentralized model Centralized machine learning techniques are used in traditraining without exposing sensitive user data. Experiments on tional intrusion detection to gather unstructured network traffic
real-world IoT intrusion datasets demonstrate that our frame- from smart devices and vehicles. This centralized solution
work achieves higher detection accuracy compared to centralized
and pure neural approaches while maintaining low computational exposes sensitive driver and vehicle operational data, which
overhead. Additionally, the neurosymbolic design provides inter- raises privacy concerns. Moreover, the presence of a single
pretable threat explanations, crucial for consumer applications aggregation point introduces system vulnerabilities, where a
where transparency is essential. The results highlight the poten- breach could lead to widespread failures. Federated learning
tial of ZTID-IoV in enabling zero-trust security for IoV and offers a potential alternative by reducing data centralization
other connected consumer electronics. This work contributes to
the evolving landscape of AI-driven cybersecurity by addressing and enabling remote model training. Its implementation in the
critical challenges in privacy and adaptability, making ZTID-IoV IoV may involve three major challenges. First, the current
particularly suitable for next-generation IoV ecosystems. implementations are insufficiently adaptable to the changing
 Index Terms— Neurosymbolic artificial intelligence (AI), IoV attack vectors across a variety of consumer electronics and
security, zero-trust IDS, federated learning, model-agnostic automotive platforms. Second, they frequently fall short of the
meta-learning, self-organizing maps. transparent decision-making requirements necessary for vehicle safety certification. Finally, federated learning is vulnerable
 Received 30 June 2025; revised 11 August 2025 and 2 October 2025;
accepted 19 October 2025. Date of publication 23 October 2025; to model poisoning and other adversarial attacks targeting
date of current version 8 December 2025. (Corresponding author: shared parameters [3], [4].
Gautam Srivastava.) The cybersecurity of IoV-consumer ecosystems is facing
 Farhan Ullah is with the Cybersecurity Center, Prince Mohammad Bin Fahd
University, Al Khobar 31952, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: fullah@pmu.edu.sa). an increasing number of challenges as a result of their
 Gautam Srivastava is with the Department of Math and Computer Science, unique characteristics. A variety of data patterns are gener-
Brandon University, Brandon, MB R7A 6A9, Canada, also with the Research ated by interdependent parts, such as entertainment systems,
Center for Interneural Computing, China Medical University, Taichung 40402,
Taiwan, and also with the Centre for Research Impact and Outcome, Chitkara personal smart gadgets, and vehicle control units. These are
Institute of Engineering and Technology, Chitkara University, Rajpura, challenging for conventional detection systems to effectively
Punjab 140401, India (e-mail: srivastavag@brandonu.ca). process, as demonstrated by malicious applications that target
 Leonardo Mostarda is with the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Perugia, 06123 Perugia, Italy (e-mail: leonardo. infotainment interfaces and spoofed attacks on tire presmostarda@unipg.it). sure monitors [5]. Conventional detection systems struggle
 Umar Raza is with the Faculty of Science and Engineering, Department to analyze data streams from connected devices such as
of Engineering, Manchester Metropolitan University, M15 6BX Manchester,
U.K. (e-mail: u.raza@mmu.ac.uk). automotive ECUs, smartphones, and infotainment systems due
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3625081 to their diversity. Automotive safety systems need extremely
 © 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
12038 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

low latency responses, whereas consumer applications need presented in Section III, the results and analysis are discussed
effective and easily understood security measures. Moreover, in Section IV, and the study is concluded in Section V.
attack methods against automotive and consumer networks are
always changing. This needs adaptive security systems that can II. R ELATED W ORK
detect emerging threats without costly retraining or threaten-
 Several research studies utilize SOM, MAML, and feding user privacy via centralized data collection [6]. Current
 erated learning to enhance the efficiency and accuracy of
solutions are inadequate in their ability to effectively address
the multifaceted security challenges that IoV-consumer ecosys- intrusion detection systems [1], [6], [7], [8]. The following
tems present. Although neural network-based methods are sections examine various approaches that utilize FL, as well
highly effective at recognizing patterns, they frequently lack as the combined application of SOM and MAML, to enhance
transparency and provide limited insight into their decision- cyberattack classification in distributed environments.
making processes. In contrast, rule-based systems are more
interpretable; however, they are unable to respond to new A. SOM/MAML Methods
threats or manage the complexity of multimodal data pro- The Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture Model
duced by contemporary interconnected devices. Furthermore, (DAGMM) has demonstrated superior performance in
many existing techniques treat vehicle and consumer device comparison to conventional two-stage methods. However,
security separately, ignoring valuable connections that result it is unable to maintain the input topology as a result of the
from their combined behavior. A unified security architecture constraints imposed by its autoencoder design. Chen et al. [9]
that combines machine learning and symbolic reasoning while proposed an SOM-assisted DAGMM to address this issue.
protecting user privacy is needed to address these challenges. The model improves the accuracy of intrusion detection
This paper introduces ZTID-IoV, a zero-trust IDS framework by maintaining the topological structure and improving
that is specifically designed for IoV and smart consumer the representation of features through SOM integration.
environments. This framework is founded on a novel neu- Almi’ani et al. [10] proposed an IDS that is based on a
rosymbolic AI paradigm. This paper adds four significant clustered SOM. The system functions in two phases: initially,
contributions to the domain: a SOM is constructed, and subsequently, its neurons are
 1) We present ZTID-IoV, a neurosymbolic AI framework hierarchically clustered using k-means. This solution tackles
 that uses federated learning, lightweight transformers, connection record sensitivity and processing time issues.
 and meta-learning to improve threat detection and user Lu et al. [8] introduced an IoT-based IDS that is specifically
 privacy. The framework combines transformers for pro- designed for scenarios with restricted training samples. The
 cessing multivariate data with SOM for interpretable approach uses meta-learning and a two-layer MAML-based
 threat clustering of automotive systems and consumer training strategy to train a generalized model on malicious
 electronics. traffic data from various attack types. Wang et al. [11]
 2) This strategy supports user privacy while preserving utilized online meta-learning to design a network IDS that
 threat detection capabilities. MAML-based federated includes anti-forgetting mechanisms and few-shot learning
 meta-learning enables the rapid adaptation of vehicle capabilities. It learns efficiently with minimal input and
 models to novel attacks. The method ensures data pri- prevents major errors by saving and reapplying previous
 vacy and promptly identifies evolving risks from limited models. Gong et al. [12] created a few-shot learning-based
 instances, making it helpful against novel in-vehicle IDS to overcome challenges in evaluating similar video
 system and consumer application attacks. frames. The method uses a trained augmented MAML
 3) The proposed study adopts a zero-trust approach to framework on original video frames and segmented track area
 secure the federated learning process for intrusion detec- masks. The goal of this work is to enhance training efficiency
 tion across varied clients in the IoVs. To improve by providing theoretical insight and practical solutions for
 robustness, cluster-aware aggregation is used, in which handling frame similarity during meta-learning. The strategy
 clients are grouped according to behavioral similari- improves typical supervised learning models in intrusion
 ties using SOM analysis. This system maintains rigid detection and adaptation with few samples in real-world
 trust boundaries, continuously checks client behavior, railway video data simulations. Hu et al. [13] proposed a
 mitigates poisoning risks, and reduces communication privacy-preserving few-shot traffic detection approach based
 overhead, following zero-trust principles. This strategy on federated meta-learning. Clients can respond to local
 is critical in IoV, as frequent vehicle-to-vehicle and threats while the server collects global data using dual-phase
 vehicle-to-infrastructure interactions create many attack updates. This method considers enhanced persistent threat
 surfaces. detection as a model generalization effort. This technique
 4) The proposed approach is rigorously assessed on four detects advanced persistent threats with good accuracy, low
 standard datasets with differing client counts. This eval- latency, and robust adaptability across domains.
 uation emphasizes the framework’s capacity to sustain
 robustness, generalize, and scale effectively in a variety
 of real-world scenarios. B. FL-Based Methods
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Related Mothukuri et al. [14] proposed a federated learning-based
work is reviewed in Section II, the proposed scheme is solution for detecting anomalies using local device data.
ULLAH et al.: ZTID-IoV: ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION IN IoV USING NEUROSYMBOLIC AI APPROACH 12039

Fig. 1. ZTID-IoV: Detecting Zero-Trust Intrusions in the Internet of Vehicles with a Neurosymbolic AI Approach and Federated Meta-Learning.

Gated recurrent units are incorporated into the model, and only The utilization of clustered gradient similarities to select
model parameters are sent to a central server. The ensemble clients expedites convergence and enhances real-time intrusion
method improves privacy protection and detection over cen- detection.
tralized methods. Huang et al. [15] proposed a federated-based Our novel ZTID-IoV method detects IoT threats while
IDS for the IoT that prioritizes data privacy across edge preserving data by utilizing lightweight transformers,
devices. This technique is adequate to low-resource set- meta-learning, and federated learning. The method uses
tings because it uses a lightweight MobileNet-Tiny model interpretable device aggregation using SOMs, symbolic
for feature extraction and turns network traffic into visuals. reasoning, and transformer models to identify traffic patterns.
Evaluation results indicate robust detection capabilities, A lightweight transformer improves edge device efficiency,
regardless of the presence of imbalanced data. Chen et al. [16] while SOM-based clustering facilitates model aggregation.
proposed privacy score and evasion rate measures for eval- ZTID-IoV responds swiftly to new threats via MAML, and
uating federated learning-based intrusion detection, focusing federated learning allows for secure, decentralized model
on adversarial impact and traffic similarity. The Kitsune upgrades without releasing sensitive data.
model can be circumvented by fraudulent communication,
as their research demonstrated. To address this, they devised III. ZTID-IoV: F EDERATED N EUROSYMBOLIC
an optimization method that improves privacy and detection by Z ERO -T RUST I NTRUSION D ETECTION IN IoV
decreasing gradient similarity and boosting input variety. The
unequal distribution of IoT data limits edge-based intrusion The proposed ZTID-IoV approach is shown in Figure 1.
detection, which leads to a high rate of false alarms for This approach integrates meta-learning, federated learning, and
unknown attacks, as highlighted by Lu et al. [17]. To elim- self-organizing maps to develop a cybersecurity solution that is
inate manual labeling, they suggested self-labeling using a adaptive and maintains privacy in IoV environments. Effective
cosine similarity-based feature extractor and selective model federated aggregation can be implemented by features such
aggregation. The technique demonstrated high performance as MAML, which enables rapid adaptation to new attack
on the CICIDS2017 dataset, even in the absence of human patterns, a lightweight detection model based on transformers,
labeling. Uddin et al. [18] identified significant problems and SOM-based client clusterings.
in cross-domain federated learning, including differences in
data properties, labeling, and security needs. Transfer learn- A. Dataset Preparation
ing, including fine-tuning global models with local domain We evaluate the suggested method on four standard datasets.
data, improves adaptability. Meta-learning techniques, such The CICIOTDIAD20241 [20] is a comprehensive dataset of
as MAML, allow models to adjust quickly with minimal IoT attacks developed by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecudata. Domain adaptation techniques and federated transfer rity. It comprises 33 attacks against 105 IoT devices to improve
learning are also proposed for improved generalization while the identification of devices and the detection of anomalies.
preserving privacy across several domains. Yan et al. [19] To address limitations of unreliable IDS datasets, the second
improved anomaly-based intrusion detection with federated dataset, CICIDS2017,2 comprises realistic benign traffic and
learning in response to growing cyber risks in IoT. Although several recent attacks [21]. It provides labeled PCAPs and
existing systems promote global performance, they frequently
overlook the adaptation of local models. Participant models 1 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iot-diad-2024.html
can be customized to local data using federated meta-learning. 2 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html
12040 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 TABLE I a fixed random seed random_state = 42. Importantly, each
 C LASS D ISTRIBUTION ACROSS A LL DATASETS experiment employed the same sampling method. The same
 randomized selection method is consistently applied to either
 complete or subsampled datasets. The data is partitioned
 among client nodes to simulate federated environments following preprocessing, and an independent global test set is
 maintained for the final evaluation. A training-to-testing split
 of 80-20 ensures reliable model validation [24].

 C. Lightweight Transformer Architecture
 The intrusion detection model uses an improved transformer
 architecture that is designed to analyze tabular data efficiently.
 Equation 1 shows that the input features X ∈ Rn×din are first
 translated into a lower-dimensional token space by a linear
 projection [25].
 Z0 = XWe + be where We ∈ Rdin×dtoken , be ∈ Rdtoken
 (1)
 The compact embedding dimension is denoted by dtoken =
 32 in this case. The h = 4 attention units and L = 2 layers
flow-based CSV files for accurate IDS evaluation by imitating of multi-head self-attention are utilized by the transformer
human behavior across protocols with the B-Profile system. encoder. Equations 2 and 3 determine how each layer l
A variety of devices, sensors, communication protocols, and computes.
edge configurations are utilized in the development of the third MHSA(Zl ) = Concat(head1 , . . . , headh )W O (2)
dataset, CICIOV20243 [22]. This testbed is part of the IoT !
and Industrial IoT ecosystem. The fourth dataset, UAVAttack4 Qi KiT
 headi = Softmax √ Vi (3)
[23], contains logs from simulated and real UAV flights under dk
benign and attack situations. It highlights the challenges of
 Qi , Ki , Vi represent learnt query, key, and value projections
GPS spoofing and interference, which are difficult to replicate
 for head i, and dk = dtoken/ h. Equation 4 illustrates how
in a variety of research environments. Table I summarizes
 layer outputs include residual connections and layer normalnetwork traffic distributions from four datasets. The “Dataset
 ization.
& Class” field identifies each dataset as well as its traffic
categories. The terms “Samples” and “Percentage” indicate the Zl+1 = LayerNorm(Zl + FFN(LayerNorm(Zl
absolute traffic counts and the relative frequency of each class + MHSA(Zl )))) (4)
in the dataset, respectively. The “Ratio” column compares
class ratios to other classes’ total samples in the dataset. The classification head implements linear projection subsequent to global average pooling, as illustrated in equation 5.
B. Data Preprocessing n
 !!
 1 X (i)
 Data quality and consistency are both improved during y = Softmax Linear ZL (5)
 n
the extensive preparation phase that the network traffic data i=1

goes through. The integrity of the dataset is first ensured The efficient lightweight transformer features a lower token
by removing any columns with non-numeric values, missing size (dtoken = 32), fewer attention heads (h = 4), and a
entries, or infinite values. The dimensionality is carefully shallow depth of only two layers (L = 2). These improvemaintained by retaining only the relevant features that are ments lower computational and memory overhead, making the
required for the learning task, as network traffic frequently model suitable for real-time intrusion detection in resourcecontains a high number of features. To normalize input constrained environments. Despite its modest size, it may
ranges, min-max normalization is used to transform all fea- capture complex feature interactions in tabular network traffic
ture values to the [0,1] range, which improves convergence data, enhancing the overall effectiveness of the proposed
during training. Label encoding is the process of converting technique.
categorical attack types into numerical labels that may be
employed with machine learning models. Subsampling is D. Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning
applied only when the dataset exceeds a predefined size limit
 The proposed method adopts a privacy-preserving federated
max_samples. Stratified random sampling is implemented to
 learning framework. A global model 2G is cooperatively
ensure reproducibility and preserve class distributions, with
 trained by K distributed clients without exchanging raw data.
 3 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iov-dataset-2024.html Each client k keeps its local dataset Dk = (xi, yi )i = 1n k
 4 https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/uav-attack-dataset and updates the local model using stochastic gradient descent,
ULLAH et al.: ZTID-IoV: ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION IN IoV USING NEUROSYMBOLIC AI APPROACH 12041

 query
as indicated in equation 6. Only model parameters are trans- tasks by gradient descent on query sets Dk , as shown in
ferred to the central server, preserving data privacy throughout equation 12 [28].
the training process [26], [27]. X query
 2 ← 2 − β∇2 LTk (2′k ; Dk ) (12)
 (t+1) (t) (t)
 2k = 2k − η∇L(2k ; Bk ) (6) Tk ∼ p(T )

 A minibatch is indicated by Bk ⊂ Dk , and the learning rate It uses β as its meta-learning rate. The inner-loop adaptation
is η. Equation 7 shows that clients have the choice to use (Eq. 11) is conducted locally on each client during each
MAML-based adaptation. federated round, followed by query loss broadcast to the
 supp server. During each federated round, the server does the meta-
 2′k = 2G − α∇L(2G ; Dk ) (7) update (Eq. 12) before the cluster-aware aggregation step in
 The support set Dk supp and the adaptation rate α are being Algorithm 1.
utilized. The servers use SOM to group clients into groups This ensures that the global initialization 2G is refined
according to their data distributions µk k = 1 K , where µk is the each round while still benefiting from the clustering-based
mean feature vector of Dk . The SOM uses competitive learning aggregation. Equation 13 demonstrates that this formulation
to create cluster allocations c(k) ∈ 1, . . . , C, as illustrated in allows for rapid adaptation to novel attack patterns Tnew with
equation 8. few samples m.

 c(k) = arg min ∥µk − w j ∥ (8) 2′new = 2 − α∇2 LTnew (2; Dnew
 m
 ) (13)
 j
 The meta-objective maintains global model generaliza-
 Cluster-aware aggregation computes weighted averages for tion by reducing anticipated loss across tasks as shown in
SOM weight vectors w j j = 1C using equation 9. equation 14.
  
 query
 |S | 1 min ETk ∼ p(T ) [LTk (2′k ; Dk )] (14)
 2G (r +1) =
 c 
 X X
 c = 1C 2k  (9) 2
 K |Sc |
 k∈Sc This bi-level optimization rapidly customizes new client
 The clients in cluster c are denoted by Sc = k : c(k) = c. environments and generalizes across varied intrusion patterns.
Convergence is evaluated by the global validation loss, as illus- Thus, incorporating meta-learning into the federated setup
trated in equation 10, and the federated rounds r ∈ 1, . . . , R is critical for improving model adaptability, scalability, and
proceed until convergence. robustness in dynamic and heterogeneous intrusion detection
 scenarios.
 |Lval(r ) − Lval(r −1) |
 (r −1)
 <ϵ (10)
 Lval F. SOM-Based Client Clustering
 The convergence threshold is denoted by the symbol ϵ. This The SOM originally proposed by Kohonen [29] uses an
architecture preserves privacy while allowing for customized unsupervised neural architecture to project high-dimensional
detection through client-specific adaptation and effective client data distributions µk k=1
 K ⊂ Rd onto a two-dimensional
knowledge transfer via clustered aggregates. The current grid G = {1, . . . , M} × {1, . . . , N }. This allows for intelligent
architecture ensures privacy by utilizing federated learning, client grouping [30]. According to equation 15 and Figure 2,
in which clients never exchange raw data but only model the Kohonen algorithm employs competitive learning to mainparameters. tain a prototype vector wi j ∈ Rd for every grid node (i, j) ∈ G.
 (i ∗ , j ∗ ) = arg min ∥µk − wi j ∥2 (15)
 (i, j)∈G
E. Meta-Learning Integration
 Client data is typically non-IID in federated learning envi- The SOM preserves topological relationships across neighronments, resulting in substantial variations in local model borhood alterations, as shown in equation 16. Equation 17
performance. This approach integrates MAML into the fed- shows the relationship between the Gaussian neighborhood
erated learning architecture to promote generalization across function h(·) and the decaying learning rate η(t).
varied client tasks. Meta-learning learns a shared initialization wi j ← wi j + η(t) · h((i, j), (i , j ) ; t) · (µk − wi j) (16)
that can be readily adjusted to new client-specific tasks with
 |(i, j) − (i , j ) |2
 !
minimum data computation. This can be helpful in federated , )
 h((i, j), (i j ; t) = exp − (17)
environments where data heterogeneity and limited com- 2σ 2 (t)
munication cycles prevent global convergence. The MAML
 This leads to cluster assignments c(k) = (i , j ) , which
framework uses a two-stage optimization procedure to increase
 enable cluster-aware model aggregation, as demonstrated in
the model’s flexibility [13]. The inner loop implements clientsupp equation 18. Equation 19 demonstrates that the final global
specific fine-tuning on support sets Dk for every client task
 model incorporates updates particular to each cluster.
Tk ∼ p(T ), as illustrated in equation 11.
 1 X
 2′k = 2 − α∇2 LTk (2; Dk
 supp
 ) (11) 2G (c) = k ∈ Sc 2k , Sc = k | c(k) = c (18)
 |Sc |
 The inner loop learning rate is denoted by α in this scenario. 2G =
 X
 c∈C
 |Sc | (c)
 2 (19)
The meta-update optimizes the starting attributes across all K G
12042 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 Algorithm 1 ZTID-IoV: Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection
 for Internet of Vehicles
 K , Attack classes C
 Input: Client datasets: {Dk }k=1
 Output: Global intrusion detection model 2G
 Function ZTID-IoV({Dk }, C):
 Initialization: Initialize global transformer model
 2G with dtoken = 32, h = 4, L = 2;
 Initialize SOM grid G = {1, . . . , M} × {1, . . . , N }
 with random wi j ;
 Data Preparation: for each client k do
 Clean Dk : remove non-numeric, NaN, ±∞
 values;
 xi j −min(x j )
 Normalize: x̂i j = max(x j )−min(x j )
 ;
 Encode labels: y ← LabelEncoder(C);
 supp query
 Split Dk into support/query sets: Dk , Dk ;

 for each federated round r = 1 to R do
 Client Clustering: for each client k do
 Compute mean feature vector µk = E[Dk ];
 Find BMU:
 (i ∗ , j ∗ ) = arg min(i, j)∈G ∥µk − wi j ∥2 ;
 Update SOM: wi j ←
 wi j + η(t)h((i, j), (i ∗ , j ∗ ); t)(µk − wi j );
 Assign cluster: c(k) = (i ∗ , j ∗ );
 Client Training: for each client k in parallel
 do
 if MAML enabled then
 Inner-loop adaptation on client k;
 Inner loop:
 supp
 2′k = 2G − α∇L(2G ; Dk );
 Fig. 2. Client clustering using Kohonen SOMs to group similar IoV devices.
 Compute query loss:
 query
 Lk = L(2′k ; Dk ); √
 O( K /C) compared to ordinary federated averaging [7].
 else Initializing the SOM grid dimensions M × N based on client
 Local SGD: population K provides a default of 25 nodes.
 √ To maintain
 2k ← 2G − η∇L(2G ; Bk ); topology, we use the heuristic C = ⌊ 5K ⌋ to compute
 Send 2k to server; the number of clusters on a near-square grid (M ≈ N ).
 Initializing prototype vectors wi j through PCA sampling of
 Meta-Update (Outer P Loop): client data means {µk }, while neighborhood radii and learning
 K
 2G ← 2G − β∇2G k=1 Lk ; rates follow exponential decay schedules. This initialization
 Executed once per federated round, on the strategy guarantees the construction of robust clusters while
 server, before aggregation simultaneously preserving computational efficiency. Variations
 Cluster-Aware Aggregation: for each cluster in client participation during federated rounds are effectively
 c ∈ G do handled by the adaptive nature of our SOM implementation.
 (c) The SOM-based clustering approach operates by dynami-
 2G ← |S1c | k∈Sc 2k ;
 P
 cally projecting only active clients into the SOM grid. Each
 (c)
 Update global model: 2G ← c |SKc | 2G ;
 P
 active client is assigned to the best-matching node based on
 (r ) (r −1)
 |Lval −Lval data distribution, without requiring full client participation.
 Convergence Check: if < ϵ then Competitive learning updates pertinent nodes in the SOM
 L(r
 val
 −1)

 Break; incrementally, preserving significant topological relationships.
 This ensures a resilient and adaptable model updates even with
 Output: Return 2G for intrusion detection; fluctuating client numbers by aggregating available clients
 within each cluster.

 IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
 The identified clusters are denoted as C. This technique A. Performance Indicators
improves model accuracy on heterogeneous data by using The ZTID-IoV architecture is evaluated across multiple
unique cluster-wise updates and accelerates convergence by distributed clients to validate its effectiveness and robustness
ULLAH et al.: ZTID-IoV: ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION IN IoV USING NEUROSYMBOLIC AI APPROACH 12043

Fig. 3. Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with CICIoTDIAD2024 dataset using 15 clients.

Fig. 4. Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with CICIoV2024 dataset using 7 clients.

Fig. 5. Jamming: Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with UAVAttack dataset using 15 clients.

in real-world IoT and IoV environments. Equations 20 to 23 loss and accuracy. Initially, the models demonstrate low
define the core classification outcomes: True Positives (TP), accuracy (55–60%) and a high loss (0.9–1.0). clients 4 and
False Positives (FP), True Negatives (TN), and False Negatives 5 demonstrate the most rapid rate of improvement. Particularly
(FN), which are used to compute key performance metrics for clients 3 and 6, there is a substantial decrease in loss
including precision, recall, F1-score, and accuracy. Precision (0.3–0.5) and an increase in accuracy (90–95%) between
is the proportion of intrusions that are correctly identified, Rounds 10–20. By the final stages, all clients achieve high
while recall is indicative of the capacity to identify actual accuracy (99%) and low loss (0.06). Figure 5 displays the
intrusions. The F1-score balances both, while accuracy reflects training performance of 15 clients over 50 federated learning
total prediction accuracy. rounds, with changing loss and accuracy. Most clients initially
 TP have moderate accuracy (75-80%) and higher loss values
 Pr ecision = (20) (0.5-0.6). Early rounds show increased accuracy, particularly
 (T P + F P)
 after Round 6, with several clients above 95% accuracy.
 FP
 Recall = (21) By the 20th round, almost all clients achieve convergence with
 (F P + T N ) a loss of less than 0.01-0.02 and an accuracy of 99-100%.
 (2 ∗ T P) The client-wise training performance over 50 rounds is pre-
 F1 − scor e = (22)
 (2T P + F P + F N ) sented in Figure 6. Clients initially exhibit greater loss values
 (T P + T N ) (0.3–0.4) and moderate accuracy (80–90%). The majority of
 Accuracy = (23)
 (T P + T N + F P + F N ) clients achieve an accuracy rate of approximately 99% and
 a loss rate of approximately 0.01–0.02 by the 15th round.
 Figure 7 illustrates that clients experienced a rapid improve-
B. Performance Analysis and Comparisons ment in accuracy and loss, rising from ∼80–90% accuracy
 Figure 3 displays the performance of the proposed method, with a high loss (∼0.4) to ≥99% accuracy and loss <0.01 by
comparing epoch loss and accuracy for various clients. Some Round 15. During the final rounds, all clients achieved 100%
clients outperform others, with client 10 achieving 96.26% accuracy with minimum loss, indicating strong convergence.
accuracy in Round 49 and client 14 reaching 95.51% in The performance parameters for the proposed method
Round 34, while client 6 lags with 82.64% accuracy in employing the CICIoTDIAD2024 dataset for 10 clients are
Round 7, likely due to data or resource disparities. Figure 4 shown in Table II. The model had high accuracy (95.59%),
displays client training performance, including epoch-wise with good precision, recall, and F1-scores for both benign
12044 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 6. Spoofing: Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with UAVAttack dataset using 10 clients.

Fig. 7. Spoofing: Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with UAVAttack dataset using 12 clients.

 TABLE II TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 10 C LIENTS U SING P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 3 C LIENTS U SING CICIoV2024 DATASET
 CICIoTDIAD2024 DATASET

 TABLE VI
 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 7 C LIENTS U SING CICIoV2024 DATASET
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 5 C LIENTS U SING CICIDS2017 DATASET

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 15 C LIENTS U SING
 TABLE IV CICIoV2024 DATASET
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 10 C LIENTS U SING
 CICIDS2017 DATASET

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS U SING UAVAttack
 DATASET W ITH VARYING N UMBERS OF C LIENTS
and attack traffic. The MAML value is 0.1599, indicating
the model’s capacity to swiftly adapt to new tasks. Table III
displays data on the intrusion detection system’s performance
with 5 clients from the CICIDS2017 dataset. The model
scored 99.52% accuracy for most attack types, including
DDoS, PortScan, and WebAttacks. Infiltration attacks performed poorly, with a recall of 0.50. This MAML score of
0.0533 shows excellent adaptability to novel attack patterns.
 Table IV provides a summary of the model’s performance
across 10 clients using the CICIDS2017 dataset. The overall
accuracy was 99.76%, and the MAML score of 0.0420 indi- traffic. A MAML score of 0.0635 indicates strong adaptability
cates great adaptation to changing data on clients. Figure V with minimal training, and the overall accuracy is 98.92%.
shows the CICIoV2024 results for three clients, achieving The performance results of the CICIoV2024 dataset with
perfect spoofing detection and high scores for DoS and benign seven clients are presented in Table VI. The model scored
ULLAH et al.: ZTID-IoV: ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION IN IoV USING NEUROSYMBOLIC AI APPROACH 12045

 TABLE IX
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH R ELATED P UBLISHED S TUDIES

 TABLE X Using more stringent thresholds (ϵ = 0.001) raises the com-
 P ERFORMANCE V ERSUS C ONVERGENCE T HRESHOLDS puting cost but produces minimal improvements. The results
 indicate that ϵ = 0.01 achieves an optimal balance between
 model performance and training efficiency. The ablation
 study is shown in Table XI. The lightweight configuration
 (d_token=32, h=4, L=2) optimizes performance and efficiency, attaining 99.0% F1-score with the fastest convergence
 TABLE XI (37–42 rounds). Larger values result in marginal benefits
 H YPERPARAMETER A BLATION S TUDY (≤0.2% F1) but slower convergence, whereas smaller values
 reduce accuracy (0.7–2.1%) despite requiring more rounds.
 This validates our design selections for the proposed approach.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 This study introduced the neurosymbolic AI framework
 ZTID-IoV to address growing cybersecurity vulnerabilities
 in smart consumer environments and IoVs. The application of SOM facilitates interpretable client clustering and
 enhances model aggregation by grouping behaviorally similar devices. Experimental evaluations are conducted using
99.09% accuracy, with excellent precision for benign and a diverse array of real-world intrusion datasets, including
spoofing classes and high overall scores. Table VII shows the CICIoTDIAD2024, CICIDS2017, CICIoV2024, and UAVAt-
CICIoV2024 results for 15 clients, with precision, recall, and tack. The model typically achieved an accuracy of 95.59% to
F1-scores near 0.99 for DoS, GAS, RPM, Speed, and Steering 99.86% for essential classes such as DDoS, DoS, Spoofing,
Wheel attacks. The system achieved 99.60% accuracy and and WebAttacks, with F1-scores near 1.00. MAML scores
a MAML score of 0.0591, indicating strong adaptation and demonstrated exceptional adaptability across client distribugeneralization across diverse client data. Table VIII compares tions, in support of the model’s generalization to decentralized
the model’s performance on the UAVAttack dataset for 10, 12, environments. ZTID-IoV improves zero-trust security in nextand 22 clients. The model achieved high precision, recall, and generation IoV systems and offers a scalable and reliable
F1-scores in both normal and anomalous classes. The accuracy solution for AI-powered cybersecurity centers.
ranged from 99.59% to 99.86%. The MAML scores exhibit a The proposed approach performs well; however, it may
slight decrease (by 0.0213 and 0.0238) as the number of clients have some research limitations. These limitations may include
increases, suggesting that the generalization is improved. This performance degradation due to extreme data heterogeneity or
means that the model adapts better to heterogeneous and dis- restricted computational resources at edge devices. Real-time
persed data settings, handling variances over a wider number deployment, privacy-preserving aggregation, and adversarial
of clients more efficiently. Table IX compares the proposed attack robustness may limit its applicability. Future research
ZTID-IoV technique with recent federated and meta-learning- could integrate multimodal data, use blockchain technology
based intrusion detection approaches. The comparison includes to strengthen trust, and validate the framework in large-scale
several performance metrics, such as accuracy, precision, real-world IoV scenarios to improve its applicability.
recall, and F1-score. Some prior studies only reported partial
metrics, represented by “–” in the table. The suggested method R EFERENCES
outperforms the baselines in all reported measures, with an [1] P. Rani et al., “Federated learning-based misbehavior detection for
accuracy of 99.86%, precision and F1-score of 100%, and the 5G-enabled Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 4656–4664, May 2024.
recall of 99.00%. This demonstrates its exceptional perfor-
 [2] Q. Lai et al., “Improved transformer-based privacy-preserving architecmance in detecting attacks within the IoVs framework. ture for intrusion detection in secure V2X communications,” IEEE Trans.
 The convergence threshold ϵ = 0.01 was empirically Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1810–1820, Feb. 2024.
optimized using the UAVAttack dataset. Table X illustrates [3] T. Saranya, S. Sridevi, C. Deisy, T. D. Chung, and M. K. A. A. Khan,
 “Performance analysis of machine learning algorithms in intrusion detecthat this value maintains training efficiency while achieving tion system: A review,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 171, pp. 1251–1260,
optimal accuracy and F1-score (0.9986 and 0.99), respectively. Jun. 2020.
12046 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

 [4] S. K. Datta, J. Haerri, C. Bonnet, and R. Ferreira Da Costa, “Vehicles as [18] M. P. Uddin, Y. Xiang, M. Hasan, J. Bai, Y. Zhao, and L. Gao, “A sysconnected resources: Opportunities and challenges for the future,” IEEE tematic literature review of robust federated learning: Issues, solutions,
 Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 26–35, Jun. 2017. and future research directions,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 57, no. 10,
 [5] S. Safavat and D. B. Rawat, “Asynchronous federated learning for pp. 1–62, Oct. 2025.
 intrusion detection in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. IEEE [19] H. Yan, X. Lin, S. Li, H. Peng, and B. Zhang, “Global or local
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), May 2023, adaptation? Client-sampled federated meta-learning for personalized
 pp. 1–6. IoT intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20,
 [6] S. A. Abdel Hakeem and H. Kim, “Advancing intrusion detection in pp. 279–293, 2024.
 V2X networks: A comprehensive survey on machine learning, federated [20] M. Rabbani et al., “Device identification and anomaly detection
 learning, and edge AI for V2X security,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. in IoT environments,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 10,
 Syst., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 11137–11205, Aug. 2025. pp. 13625–13643, May 2025.
 [7] X. Qu et al., “A survey on the development of self-organizing maps for [21] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 unsupervised intrusion detection,” Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 26, no. 2, a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 pp. 808–829, Apr. 2021. ICISSp, pp. 108–116, 2018.
 [8] C. Lu, X. Wang, A. Yang, Y. Liu, and Z. Dong, “A few-shot- [22] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches
 based model-agnostic meta-learning for intrusion detection in security against DoS and spoofing attack in IoV can bus,” Internet Things,
 of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, vol. 26, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 101209.
 pp. 21309–21321, Dec. 2023. [23] J. Whelan, T. Sangarapillai, O. Minawi, A. Almehmadi, and
 [9] Y. Chen, N. Ashizawa, C. K. Yeo, N. Yanai, and S. Yean, “Multi- K. El-Khatib, “Novelty-based intrusion detection of sensor attacks on
 scale self-organizing map assisted deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture unmanned aerial vehicles,” in Proc. 16th ACM Symp. QoS Secur.
 model for unsupervised intrusion detection,” Knowledge-Based Syst., Wireless Mobile Netw., Nov. 2020, pp. 23–28.
 vol. 224, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 107086. [24] J. J. Davis and A. J. Clark, “Data preprocessing for anomaly based net-
[10] M. Almi’ani, A. A. Ghazleh, A. Al-Rahayfeh, and A. Razaque, “Intelli- work intrusion detection: A review,” Comput. Secur., vol. 30, nos. 6–7,
 gent intrusion detection system using clustered self organized map,” in pp. 353–375, Sep. 2011.
 Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Softw. Defined Syst. (SDS), Apr. 2018, pp. 138–144. [25] S. Ullah et al., “TNN-IDS: Transformer neural network-based intrusion
[11] Z. Wang, Y. Lu, W. Wu, Y. Lu, and H. Wang, “A few-shot and detection system for MQTT-enabled IoT networks,” Comput. Netw.,
 anti-forgetting network intrusion detection system based on online vol. 237, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 110072.
 meta learning,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2024, [26] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Federated learning
 pp. 3877–3882. for data privacy preservation in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” IEEE
[12] X. Gong, X. Chen, Z. Zhong, and W. Chen, “Enhanced few-shot learning Netw., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 50–56, May 2020.
 for intrusion detection in railway video surveillance,” IEEE Trans. Intell. [27] Z. Liu, J. Guo, W. Yang, J. Fan, K.-Y. Lam, and J. Zhao, “Privacy-
 Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11301–11313, Aug. 2022. preserving aggregation in federated learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Big
[13] Y. Hu, J. Wu, G. Li, J. Li, and J. Cheng, “Privacy-preserving few-shot Data, early access, Jul. 15, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TBDATA.2022.3190835.
 traffic detection against advanced persistent threats via federated meta [28] A. Yang et al., “Application of meta-learning in cyberspace security: A
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2549–2560, survey,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 67–78, Feb. 2023.
 May 2024. [29] R. Wehrens and J. Kruisselbrink, “Flexible self-organizing maps in
[14] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha, Kohonen 3.0,” J. Stat. Softw., vol. 87, no. 7, pp. 1–18, 2018.
 and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for IoT [30] S. Dey, Q. Ye, and S. Sampalli, “A machine learning based intrusion
 security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554, detection scheme for data fusion in mobile clouds involving heteroge-
 Feb. 2022. neous client networks,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 49, pp. 205–215, Sep. 2019.
[15] K. Huang, R. Xian, M. Xian, H. Wang, and L. Ni, “A comprehen- [31] F. Ullah, L. Mostarda, D. Cacciagrano, M. J. F. Alenazi, C.-M. Chen, and
 sive intrusion detection method for the Internet of Vehicles based on S. Kumari, “Federated edge intelligence for enhanced security in confederated learning architecture,” Comput. Secur., vol. 147, Dec. 2024, sumer intermittent healthcare devices using adversarial examples,” IEEE
 Art. no. 104067. Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4574–4585, May 2025.
[16] J. Chen, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, X. Feng, and K. Xu, “FedDef: Defense [32] K. Kumar and M. Khari, “Federated active meta-learning with
 against gradient leakage in federated learning-based network intru- blockchain for zero-day attack detection in industrial IoT,” Peer-Peer
 sion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, Netw. Appl., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1–47, Jul. 2025.
 pp. 4561–4576, 2023. [33] S. He, C. Du, and M. S. Hossain, “6G-enabled consumer electronics
[17] W. Lu et al., “Stones from other hills: Intrusion detection in statistical device intrusion detection with federated meta-learning and digital twins
 heterogeneous IoT by self-labeled personalized federated learning,” in a meta-verse environment,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 14348–14361, May 2025. no. 1, pp. 3111–3119, Feb. 2024.