3600 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 5G Mobile Networked Clusters Anomaly Detection
 Under Distribution Shifts: A Causal Perspective
 Xuyuan Liu, Chao Luo , Member, IEEE, and Rui Shao

 Abstract— Along with the application of the C-band of the healthcare systems, vehicle-to-everything communications,
high-frequency spectrum, the number of 5G wireless base stations drone communication systems, and the industrial Internet of
has increased significantly compared with 3G/4G networks. Things (IoT) [1], [2], [3], [4].
Therefore, how to intelligently detect anomalies in base stations is
crucial for the daily operation and maintenance of 5G networks. Although 5G’s millimeter wave spectrum enables increased
Nowadays, 5G Mobile Network Clusters (5G-MNCs) are gradu- bandwidth, it also requires a significant increase in base
ally replacing individual base stations for maintenance as a group station density. This presents deployment challenges for wireof regional base stations with high internal correlation. However, less base stations—essential components of communication
anomaly detection in 5G-MNC remains challenging due to the infrastructure. A vital operational priority is anomaly detection
complex spatio-temporal measurement data, and additionally, the
distributional variations of such data’s time series can also have in base station clusters, which is highlighted by this rapid
a large impact on anomaly detection. In this work, we propose a infrastructure growth.
novel architecture that integrates causal intervention with doubly Traditional approaches for mobile network anomaly detecresidual spatio-temporal graph convolution (Causal-DRSTGC). tion mostly use manually set fixed criteria to track Key
First, a causal intervention module is introduced to eliminate Performance Indicators (KPIs) at specific base stations [5],
the effect of confounders due to distribution shifts. Second,
a doubly residual structure is adopted to output reconstruction [6], [7]. Despite the interpretability benefits of these expert
and hidden representations respectively, which is more conducive knowledge-based approaches, they have three key drawto promoting the representation capability of 5G-MNC data. backs. First, for modern networks—comprising hundreds of
Third, after stacking multiple DRSTGC blocks, a reconstruction thousands of base station nodes—creating separate threshmodule and a discrimination module are designed to process old models for each base station requires substantial expert
data reconstruction representation and hidden representations
for joint optimization. Finally, a flexible score is designed to input and ongoing maintenance as network topologies change.
balance the contributions of each component to improve the This drives operating costs to unaffordable levels. Second,
overall performance of anomaly detection. Extensive experiments current methods usually use monitoring systems with just
conducted on China Mobile’s real-world dataset demonstrate that one variable, analyzing each base station’s KPIs separately.
the proposed model achieves remarkable performance. For Clus- This design is still vulnerable to false alarms brought on by
ter1, the F1-scores for shielding and decommissioning anomalies
reach 89.29% and 90.53%, respectively. Additional validation single-node data changes and exhibits significant sensitivity to
on public industrial datasets demonstrates its generalization local noise. Third, the spatial correlation features inherent in
capability, achieving an F1-score of 83.43% on PSM, confirming base station clusters are not sufficiently captured by existing
its effectiveness in various application scenarios. solutions. Notably, in cellular network designs, neighboring
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, causal interventions, spatio- base stations achieve spatial coordination through techniques
temporal modeling, graph convolution network, 5G mobile like load balancing and handover optimization. However, the
network. intrinsic spatio-temporal coupling properties of KPI data are
 I. I NTRODUCTION not captured by conventional threshold-based methods, leading
 to systematic discrepancies in the assessment of the overall
W ITH its high bandwidth, ultra-low latency, and extensive connection, the 5G mobile network offers vital
technical support for vertical sector applications such as smart
 normal condition of the network [8].
 In practical operational scenarios, compared to the discrete
 deployment architectures of 3G/4G networks, 5G systems
 Received 3 June 2025; revised 5 September 2025 and 17 October 2025; exhibit a denser network topology. This denser topology
accepted 10 November 2025. Date of publication 13 November 2025; date of
current version 31 December 2025. This research is supported by the National facilitates resource sharing and dynamic scheduling through
Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos: 62172264). The associate editor clustered configurations rather than relying on individual or
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was loosely coordinated base stations [9]. A 5G-MNC can be
R. Malekian. (Corresponding author: Chao Luo.)
 Xuyuan Liu is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, defined as a closely coordinated cluster of base stations within
Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, China. specific coverage areas, as illustrated in Fig.1. To ensure
 Chao Luo is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, continuous coverage and effective load distribution across 5G
Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, China, and also with Shandong
Provincial Key Laboratory for Novel Distributed Computer Software Tech- base stations, strong interconnections between wireless nodes
nology, Jinan 250014, China (e-mail: luochao@sdnu.edu.cn). must be maintained across the service area. This architecture
 Rui Shao is with the Center of Network Optimization, China Mobile enables seamless handover between multiple base stations
Shandong Company Ltd., Jinan 250014, China.
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at during user mobility, ensures load balancing, and leverages
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCCN.2025.3632390, provided by the authors. collaborative virtualization technologies to achieve resource
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2025.3632390 sharing and dynamic scheduling. This focus on real-time
 2332-7731 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3601

 defined topological characteristics while elucidating intrinsic
 synchronization dependencies between base stations. Furthermore, the DRSTGC module incorporates a doubly residual
 architecture that simultaneously outputs reconstruction and
 hidden representations to enhance the representational capacity of 5G-MNC data. Following two stacked DRSTGC
 modules, we implement causal intervention mechanisms to
 mitigate distribution shift effects. Finally, we develop a
 dual-component architecture comprising discrimination and
 reconstruction modules for collaborative anomaly detection,
 effectively integrating information from both original data
 domains and latent spatial representations. The synergistic
Fig. 1. Example of 5G-MNCs, and each node represents a base station. integration of these modules with an adaptive anomaly scoring mechanism enables complementary inference capabilities,
performance aligns with advancements in related wireless thereby achieving enhanced detection robustness. The main
communications technologies [10]. contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
 Therefore, in this study, we conduct anomaly detection in 1) A novel anomaly detection model (Causal-DRSTGC) is
5G mobile networks through the lens of 5G-MNC architecture. proposed, by combining causal learning with graph learning
The methodological strengths are multifold: By establishing mechanisms, which can effectively eliminate environmenthe entire 5G mobile network as a unified monitoring and tal confounding factors and address anomaly detection of
modeling architecture, our approach captures spatio-temporal spatio-temporal data in distribution shifts.
correlations among network nodes, consequently enhanc- 2) The introduction of a joint optimization mechanism
ing anomaly detection performance. System-wide anomaly enables the synergistic integration of discrimination-based and
detection across the 5G-MNC substantially mitigates the reconstruction-based modules, which are implemented in the
effects of noise and fluctuations originating from individual latent and original data domains, respectively. This integration
nodes on collective detection performance. The proposed is designed to achieve superior model performance.
technique effectively suppresses false positives induced by 3) Extensive experiments on real-world 5G-MNC datasets
unaccounted node interactions, thereby strengthening both and public industrial datasets validate the superiority of the
robustness and stability in detection processes. Moreover, proposed method in various application scenarios.
this paradigm promotes data-driven learning mechanisms that
remove dependency on expert-configured thresholds, achieving II. R ELATED W ORK
dual improvements in the reduction of maintenance costs and A. Mobile Network Anomaly Detection
the enhancement of detection efficiency.
 The domain of mobile network anomaly detection has
 From another perspective, distribution shift problems
 seen extensive methodological development, with various
with 5G-MNC data may compromise the accuracy of
 approaches investigating distinct strategies and frameworks
anomaly detection systems. Variations in the environment
 for identifying network irregularities. Dridi et al. [13] develare the main cause of these shifts in distribution. Buildoped an automated framework that employs machine learning
ing environment-invariant representations of data is crucial
 techniques, including One-Class Support Vector Machines,
to reducing the effects of distribution shifts. To learn
 Support Vector Regression, and Long Short-Term Memory
invariant representations in this situation, we include a Par-
 (LSTM), to detect network anomalies in cellular traffic in real
tial Conditional Invariance Regularization (PCIR) term in
 time. Sangaiah et al. [14] devised an automated procedure that
this architecture [11]. By lowering the Maximum Mean
 integrates unsupervised learning with classification algorithms
Discrepancy (MMD), we decrease the disparity between repto detect and diagnose active failures in mobile networks by
resentations from various environments. Therefore, due to the
 combining network-collected data with manual drive testing.
influence of communication environment, distribution shift
 The data generated by 5G-MNCs exhibit inherent nonproblems are commonly present in intelligent wireless comlocalized spatio-temporal dependencies and temporal state
munication systems [12]. This research effectively eliminates
 relationships between current and historical data matrices [15].
the impact of distribution shifts brought on by environmental
 The inherent complexity of these spatio-temporal characterchanges using causal intervention approaches.
 istics substantially increases anomaly detection difficulty for
 For analyzing complex spatio-temporal interdependencies
 5G-MNC data streams. Consequently, conventional statistical
within 5G-MNC data, we develop a Doubly Residual
 approaches and machine learning methods may be inadequate,
Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolution (DRSTGC) block incorrequiring specialized computational architectures for 5G-MNC
porating two graph convolution components with residual
 anomaly detection.
connections. The primary component systematically incorporates predefined domain knowledge, while the auxiliary
component employs data-driven methodology to address resid- B. Deep Learning Approaches for Anomaly Detection
ual patterns unresolved by the preceding module. This The effectiveness of deep learning-based methods in
innovative architecture effectively leverages 5G-MNC’s pre- anomaly detection has been empirically validated across
3602 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

multiple domains, establishing a robust theoretical foundation potentially enabling even anomalous data to achieve satfor further exploration and practical implementation [16], isfactory reconstruction fidelity [33]. Furthermore, 5G net-
[17], [18], [19]. Particularly notable contributions include work measurement data inherently has complex dynamic
Thill et al. [20], who developed a temporal convolutional spatio-temporal characteristics and is susceptible to disautoencoder (AE) for ECG signal anomaly detection. Li et al. tribution shifts—making it imperative to develop novel
[21] proposed a stacked variational autoencoder (VAE) inte- methodologies tailored for 5G-MNC data.
grated with GNNs to address time series anomaly detection
challenges. Lunardi et al. [22] introduced an unsupervised C. Out-of-Distribution (OOD) Challenges With Temporal
deep anomaly detection system that employs convolutional Shift
autoencoding for network traffic profiling from initial packet
 Inspired by OOD graph learning advancements, researchers
sequences, incorporating adversarial training strategies to
 have recently focused on temporal shift-induced OOD probenhance detection robustness. Deng and Hooi [23] established
 lems. For instance, CauSTG [34] introduces a causal framea GNN-based predictive paradigm that identifies anomalies
 work that transfers both local and global spatio-temporal
through systematic deviations between predicted and observed
 invariant relationships to OOD scenarios. CaST [35] employs a
values. Liu et al. [24] employed a Temporal Convolutional
 structural causal model (SCM) to interpret the data generation
Network (TCN)-based deep learning approach for channel
 process in spatio-temporal graphs, and uses backdoor adjustprediction, with its computationally intensive tasks handled
 ment to decouple invariant features from temporal environby Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) to reduce the response
 ments. STVE [36] encodes traffic data into two disentangled
time. Huang et al. [25] devised HitAnomaly, a hierarchirepresentations and incorporates contextual information from
cal Transformer-based model for log anomaly detection that
 spatio-temporal environments—using them as self-supervised
effectively processes unseen log templates and anomalous
 signals to enhance the generalizability of context-oriented
parameter values.
 representations and improve OOD performance.
 Nam et al. [26] proposed the Dual-Time-Frequency
 However, current research mostly focuses on predicting
(DualTF) model, which employs a nested sliding window
 temporal drift but has limited exploration of time series
mechanism: the outer and inner windows process temporal
 anomaly detection. Existing detection methodologies mainly
and frequency domain features, respectively; this synchronizes
 address anomalies under identical training-testing distribution
anomaly scoring across domains to resolve time-frequency
 assumptions. However, experiments show significant perforgranularity discrepancies. Lee et al. [27] introduced an
 mance degradation when facing data with diverse distribution
Uncertainty-aware Dynamic Thresholding (UDT) method
 shifts in real applications.
that dynamically adjusts detection thresholds by quantifying epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties in temporal data
for time-series anomaly detection. Liu et al. [28] devel- III. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
oped TopoGDN for fine-grained modeling of temporal and This study formulates the anomaly detection problem
feature dimensions. The model utilizes multi-scale temporal in 5G Mobile Network Configuration (5G-MNC) as a
convolution modules for feature extraction and incorporates spatio-temporal anomaly detection task. As illustrated in Fig.2,
graph structure learning with topological attention mech- the 5G-MNC system is formally represented as a weighted
anisms. This combined approach effectively captures both graph G = (V, E, A), where the node set V comprises N base
inter-feature dependencies and high-order topological patterns. stations (N = |V |); the edge set E captures inter-base sta-
Dai and Chen [29] presented a Graph-Augmented Normalizing tion connectivity relationships; the weighted adjacency matrix
Flow (GANF) model that establishes causal dependencies A ∈ RN ×N is constructed through geographical distance
among multivariate time series through Bayesian networks metrics, with each matrix element Ai,j corresponding to the
while employing normalizing flows for density estimation geographical distance between nodes vi and vj .
in anomaly detection. Wang et al. [30] devised COCA, The 5G-MNC state at each timestep t is mathematically
a deep contrastive one-class framework combining contrastive represented as a graph signal matrix Xt ∈ RN ×C , where
learning with normality assumptions for time-series anomaly C denotes the feature dimensionality. To effectively capdetection. Yang et al. [31] proposed DCdetector, featuring a ture temporal dependencies, we employ a sliding window of
dual-attention contrastive architecture with multi-scale patch length T to construct spatio-temporal feature sequences Xt =
design that generates multi-view temporal representations and (Xt−T +1 , Xt−T +2 , . . . , Xt ), as model inputs. The anomaly
enhances discriminative power through contrastive loss opti- detection objective involves generating binary classification
mization. Meli [32] proposed a novel OUAD, using causal labels y ∈ {0, 1} for given samples (the numbers 0 and
discovery to learn a normal causal graph of the system, and 1 represent normal and anomalous, respectively).
it evaluated the persistency of causal links during real-time Notably, this study adopts a semi-supervised learning
acquisition of sensor data to promptly detect anomalies. paradigm: the training set X contains exclusively normal
 The above methods typically operate under the funda- samples, while the testing set X ′ incorporates both normal and
mental assumption that models cannot accurately reconstruct anomalous instances for model validation. This configuration
or predict unseen anomalous samples, thereby differentiating effectively simulates practical engineering requirements in
between normal and anomalous instances. However, their application scenarios where anomaly samples are scarce but
modeling approaches may inadvertently induce overfitting, require precise identification.
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3603

 B. Doubly Residual Stacking Architecture
 Inspired by the doubly residual architecture of N-
 BEATS [37], this study proposes a novel Doubly Residual
 Spatio-temporal Graph Convolution (DRSTGC) block to
 model implicit synchronous dependencies among base stations
 in 5G Mobile Network Clusters (5G-MNC). Our approach
 demonstrates significant architectural and functional innovations compared to N-BEATS:
 Multidimensional Expansion: While N-BEATS addresses
 temporal dependencies in general time series through predictive sequence modeling, DRSTGC employs spatio-temporal
 graph convolutions to capture complex spatio-temporal corre-
Fig. 2. Graph structure of 5G-MNC. lations in input sequences. This extension enables effective
 modeling of both spatial topological relationships between
 base stations and temporal dynamics of signal propagation.
 IV. P ROPOSED A PPROACH Functional Innovation: Diverging from N-BEATS’s doubly
 residual architecture for time-series forecasting, our struc-
 This study introduces a deep spatio-temporal graph con- ture enhances representational capacity for anomaly detection
volutional anomaly detection architecture, with its core (l)
 tasks. As illustrated in Fig.4, the input Xt to the l-th block
architecture depicted in Fig.3. The methodology employs (l)
 generates two outputs: Reconstruction Output X̂t : Partial
stacked Doubly Residual Spatio-temporal Graph Convolution reconstruction results removing resolved explicit features.
(DRSTGC) blocks design. Each DRSTGC block contains (l)
 Hidden Representation Ot : Residual-connected features captwo complementary graph convolutional modules: spatioturing unresolved latent patterns.
temporal graph convolution module (STGCM) synchronously
 Progressive Feature Decoupling: The cascaded residual
extracts spatio-temporal correlations based on existing graph
 architecture enables hierarchical feature extraction. In the
structures, and auxiliary spatio-temporal graph convolution
 reconstruction path, previous modules progressively strip
module (ASTGCM) learns hidden spatio-temporal dependen- (l−1)
 resolved explicit features X̂t , forcing subsequent modules
cies. To address distribution shifts in practical scenarios,
 to focus on unresolved information. The collective output of
a novel intervention module is integrated to mitigate confoundall blocks is formulated as
ing factor interference. The architecture ultimately performs X (l)
anomaly detection through synergistic integration of discrimi- X̂t = X̂t (1)
nation and reconstruction modules. They effectively integrate l
information from both the original data domain and latent (l)
 X
 Ot = Ot (2)
spatial representations. By integrating these modules with an l
adaptive scoring mechanism, the proposed model leverages
their complementary strengths to achieve more robust anomaly The final reconstruction X̂t constitutes the aggregated sumdetection. Subsequent subsections offer detailed descriptions mation of partial reconstructions from all blocks, achieving
of each individual component. hierarchical decomposition while enabling interpretable output
 generation. Moreover, the reconstruction representation can
 uniquely identify this segment of temporal data as label
A. Temporal Embedding information within the causal intervention module. Analogously, the ultimate hidden representation Ot , emerges as the
 The KPI metrics generated by 5G-MNC systems are sigcumulative integration of latent partial representations. Hidden
nificantly influenced by user behaviors and temporal patterns,
 representations can serve as core temporal information for
consequently exhibiting seasonal variations that recur at pericausal intervention within the causal intervention module. This
odic intervals (e.g., daily and weekly cycles).
 multi-scale aggregation mechanism facilitates multi-view rep-
 To comprehensively model periodic dependencies in 5Gresentation aggregation and enables multi-scale latent pattern
MNC base stations, we employ temporal embedding to encode
 extraction, thereby enhancing anomaly detection sensitivity.
each timestep into vector representations. For a given timestep,
two one-hot encoded vectors are generated based on its
hour-of-day and day-of-week attributes. These vectors are C. Doubly Residual Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolution
subsequently concatenated and projected through a fully con- Block
nected layer to obtain temporal embeddings mt ∈ Rm . For We propose the Doubly Residual Spatio-temporal Graph
the t-th temporal segment containing historical timesteps, the Convolution (DRSTGC) block to simultaneously capture
corresponding temporal embedding matrix is formulated as temporal and spatial dependencies in 5G-MNC data.
Mt = [mt−T +1 , mt−T +2 , . . . mt ]T ∈ RT ×D . The resultant As depicted in Fig.5, the proposed architecture comprises
temporal embeddings encapsulate critical timing information two spatio-temporal graph convolution modules with douthat is subsequently integrated into DRSTGC blocks for bly residual connections. The primary module systematically
spatio-temporal modeling. incorporates domain-specific prior knowledge, while the
3604 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

auxiliary module subsequently processes residual information function is applied to eliminate weak connections, followed
unresolved by its predecessor. by a softmax operation to normalize the learned auxiliary
 1) Spatio-temporal Graph Convolution Module (STGCM): adjacency matrix.
The STGCM is designed to synchronously extract Subsequently, the self-learned auxiliary graph G =
spatio-temporal correlations through integrated Graph (V, E, Aaux ) undergoes the same Graph Convolutional Gated
Convolutional Gated Recurrent Units (GCGRUs) [38] and Recurrent Unit (GCGRU) operations as the STGCM. The
fully connected layers. Given a graph G = (V, E, A), the output of the GCGRU is then fed into two fully connected
spectral graph convolution operation ∗ g on input signal X layers with ReLU activation functions to generate partial
can be formally defined as: reconstructions and hidden representation outputs. The operations are formally defined as follows:
 Wg ∗G X = σ (LXWg + bg ) (3)  
 (l,2)
 Ot = σ U1l,2 Htl,2 + bl,2
 1 (11)
where L = I − D−( 2 ) AD−( 2 ) denotes the Laplacian matrix,
 1 1

 (l,2)
I is the identity matrix, and D is the degree matrix. Wg and bg X̂t = σ(U2l,2 Htl,2 + bl,2
 2 ) (12)
are the learnable parameters. σ is the ReLU activation func- (l,2) (l,2)
tion. In the construction of GCGRU, the matrix multiplication where Ot and X̂t are the partial hidden representation
in GRU is replaced with graph convolution operation. For and the partial reconstruction of ASTGCM.
convenience of presentation, omitting the superscript and the 3) Block Output: The outputs of the doubly residual
operation of GCGRU can be defined as spatio-temporal graph convolution block consist of two parts,
 one is the fusion of the partial hidden representations of
 zt = σ (Wz ∗G [It ; Ht−1 ] + bz ) (4) (l,1) (l,2)
 Ot and Ot , and the other is the summation of the
 (l,1) (l,2)
 rt = σ (Wr ∗G [It ; Ht−1 ] + br ) (5) partial reconstruction representations of X̂t and X̂t . The
 ct = tanh (Wc ∗G [It ; rt ⊙ Ht−1 ] + bc ) (6) outputs are defined as
 Ht = zt ⊙ Ht−1 + (1 − zt ) ⊙ ct (7) (l) (l,1) (l,2)
 Ot = σ(W l [Ot ; Ot ] + bl ) (13)
 (l) (l,1) (l,2)
where It = Xt∗ + mt denotes the summation of input and X̂t = X̂t + X̂t (14)
temporal embedding, and Xt∗ ∈RD represents the result of a (l) (l)
fully connected transformation of Xt , aiming to have the same where Ot and X̂t are the hidden representation and recondimension as mt . Ht denotes the output of GCGRU at time t. struction outputs of the l-th block, respectively.
WZ , Wr , Wc , bz , br and bc are learnable parameters. To address the interference of confounding factors in time
 Then, two branches consisting of two fully connected layers series data under distribution shifts, this study proposes a
are used to output partial reconstruction and partial hidden causal intervention module. It mitigates the impact of distrirepresentation. For the STGCM in the l-th block, the outputs butional variations by introducing a PCIR regularization term.
 (l) (l)
are defined as Therefore, Ot and X̂t are fed into the intervention module
 (l,1)
   to compute the causal loss. Finally, the respective partial
 Ot = σ U1l,1 Htl,1 + bl,1
 1 (8) (l)
 reconstructions X̂t of each DRSTGC block are summed and
 fed into the reconstruction module to compute reconstruction
  
 (l,1)
 X̂t = σ U2l,1 Htl,1 + bl,1
 2 (9) (l)
 scores. The partial hidden representations Ot are aggre-
 (l,1) (l,1) gated and delivered to the discrimination module to calculate
where Ot and X̂t are the partial hidden representation
 anomaly probabilities.
and the partial reconstruction of STGCM, and U1l,1 , U1l,1 , bl,1
 1
and bl,1
 2 are learnable parameters.
 2) Auxiliary Spatio-temporal Graph Convolution Mod- D. Intervention Module
ule (ASTGCM): The ASTGCM serves as a complement to 1) Invariant Representation Context Under Distribution
the STGCM, addressing information flows that cannot be Shifts: Our formulation operates under the assumptions of an
resolved through prior knowledge derived from available graph environmental set (denoted as E) and a sample space (denoted
structures. While the ASTGCM shares the same fundamen- as X) of time series data. We consider a sliding time window
tal architecture as the STGCM, it distinguishes itself by sample Xt drawn from an unknown distribution pn , which is
employing an auxiliary adjacency matrix to autonomously primarily concentrated on a subset N ⊆ X defining the normal
learn unresolved hidden spatial dependencies. This auxiliary class. Given Xt ∼ pn , we decompose Xt into a pair of random
adjacency matrix is designed to complement the prior graph. variables Xa and Xe such that X = (Xa , Xe ). Here, the
Specifically, two randomly initialized node embeddings with environment E exclusively influences Xe . Conceptually, Xa
learnable parameters are defined, and the auxiliary adjacency represents the relevant features of time series X that determine
matrix is formulated as: its anomaly status, while Xe represents style features of time
 Aaux = sofmax σ E1 ET
 
 (10) series X that determine its environmental status. While these
 2
 style features remain unaffected by the anomaly status of the
 Here, E1 and E2 represent the source and target node time series, they are influenced by environmental conditions.
embeddings, respectively, where their multiplicative product Building on causal inference theory [11], we consider the
defines the spatial dependency weights. The ReLU activation process from Xt to Ot in Fig.4 as the encoder f : X → O that
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3605

Fig. 3. Overall architecture of the model.

 Causal-DRSTGC model to obtain an invariant representation
 O of the original sample X. This enables more effective
 processing in the subsequent module for calculating more
 accurate anomaly scores. Below, we elaborate on the main
 workflow of the causal intervention module.
Fig. 4. Construct of doubly residual stacking architecture. Firstly, we introduce a causal graph for anomaly detection
 based on a structural causal model (SCM), as illustrated in
 Fig.6. We treat X̂ as the environment E described above.
 As discussed in Section IV-B, X̂ serves as the reconstruction
 representation of X, functioning to distinguish samples X
 and assign them to their corresponding environmental labels.
 Therefore, we further obtain:
 We say O is an invariant representation of X under domain
 shift if
 ′
 pdo(X̂=e) (O = ·) = pdo(X̂=e ) (O = ·) , f oranye, e′ ∈ X̂.
 (16)
 Xa and Xe denote relevant features and the style features,
 respectively. The hidden representation O represents the final
 representation of time series X. We introduce new random
Fig. 5. Construct of Doubly Residual Spatio-temporal Graph Convolution variable W that is a binary variable indicating whether a
block(DRSTGC block).
 sample is normal (W = 0) or anomalous (W = 1).
 It establishes causal relationships among five variables,
maps raw observations to a representation space O.Here, O = where links from one variable to another indicate causation:
f (X) constitutes the final representation. Domain invariance cause → effect. We present the following interpretation of
is formalized as follows: SCM:
 Definition. We say O is an invariant representation of X Xa → O: Since Xa is the primary feature and f is the
under domain shift if mapping from X to O, any probability associated with X can
 ′ be replaced by O. O also serves as the final output of the
 pdo(E=e) (O = ·) = pdo(E=e ) (O = ·) , f oranye, e′ ∈ E.
 model, used to determine whether a sample is anomalous.
 (15)
 Xa ← W → Xe : W fundamentally determines the
 The symbol do denotes an intervention operation. That sample attribute X, thus constituting a causal relationship, and
is, the intervention E = e is represented as do (E = e), consequently influences both Xa and Xe .
which differs from observing E = e through existing data. p X̂ → Xe → O: The reconstruction representation X̂ is
denotes probability. Invariant representations prevent anomaly treated as an environmental label at the causal level, uniquely
detectors from misclassifying phenomena induced by domain determining the style features Xe within the sample. Subseshift. By definition, these representations O exhibit resistance quently, these style features exert a certain influence on O.
to variations in E. Theorem 1: Suppose that f learns an invariant representa-
 Therefore, this module aims to derive a causal loss function tion, O⊥X̂.
as a partial conditional invariance regularization (PCIR) term Proof. Since f learns an invariant representation and is
through causal intervention theory. This function trains the measurable, O becomes Xa measurable. This implies that any
3606 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 representation Ot . This enhances the generalization capability
 of Causal-DRSTGC under distribution shifts. Moreover, the
 proposed model automatically generates environment labels
 through the reconstruction patterns decomposed by DRSTGC,
 eliminating the need for manual annotation and better suiting
 real-world application scenarios.

 E. Discrimination Module
 Within the discrimination module, the learned hidden representations are employed to distinguish anomalous data in
 the latent space. However, during 5G network operation
Fig. 6. Causal graph for anomaly detection.
 and maintenance, generating sufficient anomalous samples
 for supervised training is usually infeasible—anomalies occur
 infrequently. To address this limitation, we implement a comprobability involving events of O can be expressed in terms putationally efficient negative sampling strategy to generate
of probabilities involving Xa . It thus suffices to demonstrate pseudo-anomalous samples. Given a temporal segment Xt ,
Xa ⊥X̂. We prove this via d-separation. Note that there are we apply a permutation perturbation strategy to produce
two paths from Xa to X̂. One via W and the other via O. negative samples Xt′ . Specifically, the permutation operation
The path via W is blocked because Xe is a collision, and divides the signal into randomly sized subsequences and
neither Xe nor its descendant O are observed. The path via O shuffles them, with each base station sequence undergoing
is blocked because O is a collision with no descendants and independent permutation to deliberately disrupt inter-sequence
is not observed. Hence, Xa ⊥X̂. correlations. Subsequently, random temporal jittering is intro-
 The fundamental challenge lies in ensuring duced to the permuted segments.
statistical independence between O and X̂.If this The discrimination module processes hidden representations
 from either original inputs or negative-sampled data through a
independence holds, we find that pdo(X̂=e) (O = ·) =
 ′ gated recurrent unit (GRU) layer, which sequentially computes
pdo(X̂=e ) (O = ·) , f oranye, e′ ∈ X̂. By definition, O is an
 hidden states across temporal intervals. The final hidden
invariant representation of time series X.
 state is then passed to a fully connected layer with sigmoid
 Secondly, while counterfactual examples are generally
 activation to derive anomaly scores within [0,1] for each input
inaccessible, enforcing appropriate conditional independence
 segment, and to calculate the discrimination loss. The module
constraints can still induce counterfactual invariance. In pracis ultimately trained in an end-to-end manner using pseudo
tice, this condition may be formulated as M M D(p(O =
 labels.
·|X̂ = e), p(O = ·|X̂ = e′ )) = 0, where M M D denotes
the Maximum Mean Discrepancy. To capture complex highdimensional differences, we utilize a cosine kernel, which F. Model Training
is particularly effective in comparing the angular similarity
 Building upon the preceding analysis, we propose the utibetween feature vectors.
 X lization of MMD between two distributions as the driving
 Lmmd = MMD mechanism for invariance induction. Additionally, we introduce Eq.(17) as a PCIR term specifically applied to anomaly
 e, e′ ∈ X̂ ,e̸=e′ detection in time series under distribution shifts.
  
 p(Ot = · | W = ·, X̂t = e), p(Ot = · | W = ·, X̂t = e′ ) The discrimination and reconstruction modules exhibit distinct yet complementary strengths, forming mutually reinforc-
 (17)
 ing components. Specifically, the reconstruction module learns
 The causality loss function, as shown in Eq.(17), can serve latent representations by reconstructing original observations,
as a PCIR term. Specifically, due to the temporal continuity, with anomaly detection achieved through reconstruction errors
we randomly set the window value to 10. Additionally, there is since unseen anomalies tend to induce substantial deviaa one-to-one correspondence between every element of X̂t and tions. Nevertheless, the reconstruction-based module primarily
Ot . For each value of X̂t and Ot , we obtain the correspond- focuses on sample reconstruction fidelity while ensuring
ing environmental label ei , i ∈ [1, 10], from reconstruction distinctiveness between normal and anomalous sample reprerepresentation X̂t .And we obtain the corresponding hidden sentations. Consequently, this approach may enable accurate
representation oi , i ∈ [1, 10], from hidden representation Ot . reconstruction of anomalous data.
We then apply M M D (oi , oj ) = 0, f oranyei ̸= ej , thereby The discrimination module is trained to identify anomaly in
obtaining the corresponding causal loss. temporal evolution patterns, guaranteeing discriminative sepa-
 Furthermore, we compute the causal loss separately for rability in the latent space. This effectively compensates for the
normal samples (W=0) and anomalous samples (W=1), limitations inherent in reconstruction-based methodologies.
ultimately achieving a stronger decoupling between Accordingly, the composite loss function is formulated as
the reconstructed representation X̂t and the hidden the weighted summation of three optimization objectives,
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3607

Algorithm 1 Training procedure of Causal-DRSTGC In this architecture, D denotes the discriminator, where
Input: Training data set X = {X1 , X2 ,. . . , Xt }, Epoch E. Ot represents the hidden representation of the input sample,
Output: The learned model parameters Θ. and Ot′ corresponds to the hidden representation generated
1: Initialize all parameters; by the negative sampling strategy. The training procedure for
2: for e = 1, 2,. . . . . . , E do Causal-DRSTGC is outlined in Algorithm 1.
3: for t = 1, 2, . . . . . . , T do
 (1) (1)
4: Ot , X̂t ← Block 1 (Xt , Mt , E1 , E2 )
 (2) (2) (1) G. Model Inference
5: Ot , X̂t ← Block 2 (Xt − X̂t , Mt , E1 , E2 )
 (1)
6: Ot = Ot + Ot
 (2) As mentioned in previous sections, the reconstruction and
 (1)
7: X̂t = X̂t + X̂t
 (2) discrimination modules are jointly trained to optimize targets.
8: Generate negative sample Xt′ and perform forward As a result, both modules are encouraged to contribute to
 propagation to obtain the negative representation Ot′ and anomaly detection cooperatively. In order to do this, we create
 the negative reconstruction representation X̂t′ . a scoring system based on reconstruction and discrimination
9: // Calculate the total loss using that balances each of their contributions, increasing anomaly
  Eq. (20) detection’s overall efficacy. In particular, given an observation
10: L = Lrec Xt , X̂t + Ldis (Ot , Ot′ ) +
 segment (Xt−T +1 , Xt−T +2 , . . . , X t ), the reconstruction score
Lmmd ((X̂t , X̂t′ ), (Ot , Ot′ )) is calculated from the deviation between the reconstructed val-
11: Update model parameters using L; ues and the original observations, whereas the discrimination
12: end for score, pt is derived from the discriminator’s output probability.
13: end for The definition of the inference score st is
14: return The learned parameters. T
 ∥ Xt−T +i − X̂t−T +i ∥22 +α × (1 − pt )
 P
 i=1
 st = (21)
Algorithm 2 Inference procedure of Causal-DRSTGC 1+α
Input: Testing data set X = {X1 ,X2 ,. . . ,XT }, model param- The hyperparameter α, which balances the contributions
eter Θ, threshold τ . of the two components, will be thoroughly investigated in
Output:The label yt of Xt . the subsequent sensitivity analysis section. An anomaly is
1: Load the trained model parameters Θ; identified when the inference score exceeds a threshold [39],
2: for t = 1, 2, . . . T, do where this threshold is determined through grid search on the
 (1) (1)
3: Ot , X̂t ← Block 1 (Xt , Mt , E1 , E2 ) validation set. The detailed inference procedure is presented
 (2) (2) (1) in Algorithm 2.
4: Ot , X̂t ← Block 2 (Xt − X̂t , Mt , E1 , E2 )
 (1) (2)
5: Ot = Ot + Ot
 (1) (2)
6: X̂t = X̂t + X̂t V. E XPERIMENT
7: Calculate the inference score st using Eq. (21); This section begins with an introduction to the dataset
8: if st >τ then and experimental setup. Subsequently, the performance of
9: yt =“Anomalous” Causal-DRSTGC is validated using real-world operational data
10: else from 5G-MNC systems. A case study is then conducted to ana-
11: yt =“Normal” lyze experimental outcomes, accompanied by ablation studies
12: end if and sensitivity analysis. Finally, the model’s performance is
13: end for further validated on industrial datasets, and a complexity
 analysis is conducted.

denoted as Eq.(20). Here, Lrec represents the reconstruction- A. Dataset Description
based loss, defined as the mean squared error (MSE) between To evaluate the proposed method’s effectiveness, we use
targets and reconstructed values. Ldis corresponds to the a real-world 5G-MNC dataset. Collected by China Mobile
discrimination loss employing binary cross-entropy. Lmmd Communications in Jinan, Shandong Province, it contains Key
serves as the loss function for the intervention module, which Performance Indicator (KPI) records from two 5G-MNCs.
incorporates the aforementioned regularization strategy. The Cluster1 comprises 5 base stations, while Cluster2 consists
hyperparameter α and λ balance the loss contributions of the of 14 base stations. The selected KPI for anomaly detection
three modules. is the average number of Radio Resource Control (RRC)
 X connections, with data aggregated at 15-minute intervals. The
 Ldis = − log(1 − D(Ot )) + log(D(Ot′ )) (18) dataset spans from September 3, 2021, to January 3, 2022.
 t Table I presents the partition lengths of the training and testing
 T
 1 X sets.
 Lrec = ∥ Xt+i − X̂t+i ∥22 (19) In practical applications, decommissioning and shielding
 T i=1
 represent two categories of anomalies in the operational main-
 L = (1 − α)Lrec + αLdis + λLmmd (20) tenance of 5G networks, described as follows:
3608 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 Decommissioning. Base station decommissioning refers to
the phenomenon where base stations unexpectedly go offline
during operation. It is caused by factors like severe weather
and transmission failures, resulting in communication service
interruption.
 Shielding. As critical components of mobile communication
systems, base stations play a pivotal role in maintaining
communication quality. However, physical obstructions caused
by billboards and outdoor buildings can degrade signal transmission. Therefore, base station shielding as an anomaly can
affect the daily operation of 5G-MNC.
 Fig.7 illustrates two real-world anomaly scenarios involving
14 base stations in a 5G-MNC system, with each subplot
depicting the average number of RRC connections. Fig.7(a)
demonstrates the decommissioning anomaly case, showing
a simultaneous sharp decline in RRC connections across a
group of base stations. As shown in Fig.7(b) for the shielding
anomaly case, a decrease in RRC connections at base stations
B1, B3, B4, and B6 results in a corresponding surge at the
neighboring base stations B2 and B5.
 In 5G-MNC systems, anomalies are highly uncommon
in practical scenarios, and existing anomaly datasets remain
insufficient to validate the comparative performance of detection models. To address this, we implemented anomaly
data imputation using the following methodology. Specifically, to simulate base station decommissioning anomalies,
we stochastically reduced the number of users establishing
connections with neighboring base stations at a specified rate
of 0.6 over a given time interval. For base station shielding
anomalies, we proportionally reduced the number of connected
users at a target base station by a defined ratio of 0.6, then
redistributed the reduced connections to its geographically
adjacent base stations based on spatial proximity. Statistical
metrics for both anomaly clusters are provided in Table I.
 Fig. 7. Two real anomalies in the 5G-MNC data. (a) Decommissioning
 To more effectively simulate scenarios involving distribu- anomaly. (b) Shielding anomaly.
tion shifts and render the distribution shifts in the testing
sets more pronounced, while simultaneously enabling com-
 TABLE I
prehensive demonstration of our proposed model’s superior
 C LUSTER 1 AND C LUSTER 2 DATA STATISTICS
capabilities, we adopted a specific approach. Accordingly,
we manually introduced distribution shifts into the testing sets
of the aforementioned datasets by adjusting the magnitude of
fluctuations to 0.5. Within the middle 70% of the temporal
range, two continuous intervals were selected for each of the
five feature columns, and variance manipulation was applied
to approximately 10% of the data. This process retained the
mean of the selected data segments while randomly altering
the variance of individual data points.
 Taking the testing set of Cluster1 as an example (total
sample size: 3,542), two consecutive intervals were chosen
for each of the five feature columns within the middle 70% B. Experimental Setup
of the time series. A total of 342 samples (approximately Evaluation Metrics. To measure and evaluate method per-
9.66%) underwent variance perturbation. Features 1–4 each formance, four standard metrics were employed: precision (P),
had 70 data points modified (1.98% per feature), while Feature recall (R), F1-score (F1), and ROC-AUC (AUC) [40], [41].
5 contained 62 modified points (1.75%). As exemplified in In practical applications, anomalies typically manifest as con-
Fig.8, the blue curve represents the original time series, and tinuous segments; thus, point-wise metrics are not prioritized.
the orange curve illustrates the modified data distribution. Following the evaluation strategy of [42], if any anomalous
This experimental design effectively validates the model’s observation exists within a segment, the entire segment is
robustness under variance shifts conditions. labeled as the positive class.
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3609

 modules facilitate collaborative anomaly detection in both
 original data space and latent feature domains. Furthermore,
 the integration of causal graphs with intervention mechanisms
 effectively mitigates confounding effects under distribution
 shifts, significantly enhancing model robustness. Experimental
 results demonstrate that Causal-DRSTGC achieves state-ofthe-art performance compared to existing methods.
 Shielding anomalies differ fundamentally from decommissioning scenarios in 5G-MNC operations. While decommissioning involves simultaneous failures across multiple base
 stations within a region, shielding anomalies typically occur
 within individual base stations, where adjacent nodes com-
Fig. 8. Samples distribution shift for manual processing. The blue curve pensate through dynamic traffic redistribution. This distinction
represents the original time series, and the orange curve illustrates the modified results in stronger spatial dependencies during shielding events
data distribution. compared to decommissioning scenarios. Causal-DRSTGC
 effectively models evolutionary relationships between base
 stations and their neighbors through spatio-temporal cor-
 Baselines. The proposed method was compared against
 relation mining, with particular sensitivity to dependency
seven baselines: DCdetector (2023), GANF (2022), COCA
 alterations caused by shielding anomalies. This capability
(2023), UDT (2025), DUALTF (2024), TopoGDN (2024), and
 positions Causal-DRSTGC as a promising solution for 5G-
OUAD (2024). All comparisons adhered to the architectures
 MNC anomaly detection challenges.
recommended in their original publications. Since not all
 To comprehensively evaluate the scalability and robustness
anomaly detection methods were designed for 5G-MNC sceof Causal-DRSTGC on large datasets with varying topologies,
narios, each model was evaluated across all feasible thresholds,
 we expanded our data scope to clusters of different scales: 2,
and experimental results were reported based on the highest
 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 19 nodes. Results demonstrate that
F1-score.
 Causal-DRSTGC maintains stably high performance across
 Data Preprocessing. Consistent with [43], Z-score normalclusters of all scales, enabling reliable scaling to larger datasets
ization was first applied to the training and testing sets to
 and adaptation to diverse topologies. Experimental results are
enhance the robustness of the proposed method. Additionally,
 shown in Fig.9.
aligning with [44], the adjacency matrix for 5G-MNC was
 To rigorously test the model’s adaptability to real-time
computed based on the geographical distances between base
 environmental changes and dynamic topology shifts, we ranstations within the mobile network cluster. The weighted
 domly altered the adjacency relationships among nodes four
adjacency matrix A can be formulated as:
 times within a 16-node cluster, simulating continuous network
 topology evolution. Experimental results demonstrate that our
 2 2
 
 ηij ηij model continues to exhibit robust performance, effectively
 exp(− ), i ̸
 = jandexp(− )≥ϵ
 
 Aij = δ2 δ2 (22) proving its stability and adaptability to dynamic 5G network
 0, otherwise
 
 environments. Experimental results are shown in Fig.10.
 To validate the impact of long-range temporal and spatial
where Aij is the weight of the edge, and it is determined by
 dependencies across multiple nodes on anomaly detection,
ηij , which is the geographical distance between base stations
 we further conducted the following experiments. Specifically,
i and j. δ 2 and ϵ are the thresholds to control the distribution
 we set the time window size to 100 sample points. On the
and sparsity of adjacency matrix A, and they are set to 1e-5
 Cluster1 dataset, we removed one time window, three consecand 0.3 in this work, respectively.
 utive time windows, and three non-consecutive time windows
 respectively, and performed anomaly detection. The detection
C. Experimental Results results are shown in Table IV, with the maximum values of
 In this subsection, we conducted experiments on the real- the core metrics F1-score and AUC highlighted in bold. The
world 5G-MNC dataset to evaluate the effectiveness of results show that even a small amount of missing historical
Causal-DRSTGC against seven baseline methods. Table II data has an impact on anomaly detection results, which proves
presents the shielding anomaly detection performance com- that the model can extract effectively long-range dependencies
parison between Cluster1 and Cluster2, while Table III from historical time-series data.
summarizes the decommissioning anomaly detection results. Subsequently, from a spatial perspective, on the Cluster1
The best score achieved is highlighted in bold. dataset, we removed the adjacency edges of node 5, the
 The proposed Causal-DRSTGC architecture comprehen- adjacency edges between nodes 4 and 5, and the adjacency
sively explores spatio-temporal patterns in original 5G-MNC edges between nodes 3, 4, and 5, respectively, as illustrated
data through specifically designed components. The STGCM in Fig.11. The detection results are shown in Table V, with
and ASTGCM modules effectively leverage domain-specific the maximum values of the core metrics F1-score and AUC
knowledge to capture inherent synchronous dependencies highlighted in bold. The findings indicate that the absence
within 5G-MNC systems. Discrimination and reconstruction of link relationships from the original cluster reduces the
3610 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 Fig. 11. Node relationship diagram after removing adjacent edges of specific
 nodes.

 Cluster2 dataset for ablation studies in this section. Specifi-
Fig. 9. Performance of clusters with different numbers of nodes. The
blue curve represents shielding anomalies, and the orange curve represents cally, we disabled individual modules within Causal-DRSTGC
decommissioning anomalies. for systematic evaluation. w/o STGCM and w/o ASTGCM
 denote the variants where the spatio-temporal graph convolution module (STGCM) and auxiliary spatio-temporal
 graph convolution module (ASTGCM) are deactivated in each
 block, respectively. The w/o Reconstruction variant performs
 anomaly detection exclusively through the discrimination
 mode, while the w/o Discrimination variant relies solely on the
 reconstruction mode. The w/o Intervention variant eliminates
 the causal intervention mechanism. As shown in Table VI,
 experimental results confirm the indispensability of all aforementioned modules in Causal-DRSTGC.
 In the w/o ASTGCM configuration, only predefined
 topological information from 5G-MNC is utilized for representation learning, which restricts comprehensive exploration
 of 5G-MNC data characteristics. Similarly, disabling STGCM
 prevents full exploitation of prior knowledge, emphasizing the
 complementary roles of both modules. The absence of the
 reconstruction module confines anomaly detection to latent
 space analysis, neglecting informational cues from original data. Conversely, removal of the discrimination module
Fig. 10. Performance of different adjacency relationships in a cluster
with 16 nodes, where the first row shows topological structures of different prioritizes reconstruction fidelity while disregarding critical
adjacency relationships among 16 nodes, the second row shows performance discriminative features that separate normal and anomalous
metrics for shielding anomalies and the third row shows performance metrics samples. Eliminating the intervention module impairs the
for decommissioning anomalies.
 model’s capacity to address distribution shifts, ultimately
 degrading detection performance.
performance of anomaly detection to varying degrees, which To intuitively validate the effect of causal intervention
demonstrates that the proposed model can capture spatial module and the discrimination module, we provide a comrelationships between non-directly adjacent nodes for carrying parative visualization of the model’s latent representations in
out anomaly detection. Fig. 12. Specifically, we selected a continuous sequence with
 To comprehensively evaluate our model’s adaptability anomalies and visualized the model’s output representations.
beyond a single KPI, we conducted additional experiments We first reduced the dimensions to 2D space via UMAP, then
using the signal strength (RSRP) metric on the original Clus- generated scatterplots for visualization.
ter1 and Cluster2 datasets. As shown in Table II and Table III, Fig.12(a) illustrates the mapping of the proposed model,
the model still achieves competitive F1-scores and AUC values while Fig.12(b) depicts the visualization without the interfor both shielding and decommissioning anomalies. vention module. A stark contrast can be observed: the
 representations in Fig.12(a) exhibit tighter, more structured
 clusters corresponding to normal and anomalous states. This
D. Ablation Study suggests that the intervention module effectively disentangles
 To investigate the effectiveness of distinct components in the confounders, allowing the model to learn more invariant
Causal-DRSTGC for anomaly detection, we employed the and robust representations that are irrelevant to distribution
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3611

shifts. In contrast, the features in Fig. 12(b) are more dispersed and overlapping. This dispersion indicates that the
ablated model is susceptible to spurious correlations introduced by shifting data distributions. This visual evidence
directly supports our quantitative results in Table II and
Table III, explaining why the intervention module contributes
to a significant accuracy improvement. That is, it guides the
model to base its decisions on relevant features rather than on
confounding factors.
 Fig.12(c) presents the visualization without the discrimination module. It further elucidates that integrating the
discrimination module into the hidden representation imposes
direct constraints on the distribution of normal and anomalous samples in the latent space, thereby enhancing model
performance.
 Collectively, architectural ablation of any module degrades
detection efficacy.

E. Case Study
 To visually demonstrate the anomaly detection performance of Causal-DRSTGC on 5G-MNC data, Fig.13 and
Fig.14 presented two distinct visualization results. Specifically,
we selected two anomalous 5G-MNC data segments from
Cluster1 and Cluster2 datasets, respectively, then computed
and displayed their anomaly scores. Fig.13 illustrates a shielding anomaly detection result on Cluster1, where node B3
exhibits a significant performance decline in the anomalous
region, simultaneously inducing concurrent load increases in
its associated nodes B1, B4, and B5. Fig.14 demonstrates a
decommissioning anomaly detection result on Cluster2, where
a group of neighboring base stations (B3, B8, B11, B12,
and B13) show synchronized reductions in RCC connections
within the anomalous region. Notably, in both cases, Causal-
DRSTGC promptly generates conspicuous spike alerts.
 Furthermore, in the architectural design of Causal-
DRSTGC, the ASTGCM module employs an auxiliary
self-learned adjacency matrix to capture unresolved hidden
spatial dependencies, serving as complementary information
to the predefined graph structure. To validate this mechanism, we conducted a case study visualizing the self-learned
adjacency matrix. Specifically, we presented the geographical
layout of base station B7 and its neighbors, along with the
corresponding rows from both the predefined adjacency matrix
and the self-learned matrix in Fig.15. Blue markers denote Fig. 12. Mapping of different variants of the model in two dimensions (red
 dots are anomalous samples, blue dots are normal samples).
the top three neighbors specified in the predefined adjacency
matrix for node B7, while brown markers indicate the top three
neighbors identified in the self-learned matrix. The visualization reveals three additional base stations in the self-learned specific details, please refer to the Appendix A (Supplementary
matrix that, despite lacking direct adjacency in the predefined Material).
structure, maintain relatively close geographical proximity It is common for base stations to experience fault recovery
and demonstrate measurable influence on B7’s actual oper- scenarios in real applications. To validate the model’s adaptational status. This evidence confirms that the self-learned ability in such cases, we manually added more pronounced
matrix effectively supplements the predefined graph structure, fault data to simulate the kind of transition processes and test
enabling ASTGCM to uncover latent spatial relationships. the proposed model. For specific details, please refer to the
 Given the multi-stage architecture with stacked DRSTGC Appendix E (Supplementary Material).
blocks, there is a possibility of error propagation through the In addition, the impact of extreme weather is also a factor
layers. We conducted a controlled experiment in which artifi- that base stations need to consider in practical scenarios.
cial errors were introduced after the first DRSTGC block. For Hence, we simulated the data fluctuations and distribution
3612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF SHIELDING ANOMALY DETECTION FOR C LUSTER 1 AND C LUSTER 2

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DECOMMISSIONING ANOMALY DETECTION FOR C LUSTER 1 AND C LUSTER 2

changes caused by extreme weather conditions (such as heavy conducted using the Cluster1 and Cluster2 datasets. Specifirain and blizzards) and further validate the performance of cally, we evaluated the recall, precision, F1-score, and AUC
model. For specific details of experiments, please refer to the for decommissioning anomalies and shielding anomalies under
Appendix F (Supplementary Material). varying α values, with results visualized in Fig.16 and Fig.17.
 For Cluster2, experimental results demonstrate that the
 model achieves optimal overall performance for shielding
F. Sensitivity Analysis anomalies at α = 0.1 and λ = 0.1, while the optimal
 During model training, the hyperparameters α and λ balance configuration for decommissioning anomalies occurs at α =
the loss contributions of the reconstruction, discrimination, 0.3 with λ = 0.1. The reconstruction module learns data
and intervention modules, which critically influence anomaly distributions by minimizing the mean squared error between
detection performance in 5G-MNC systems. To analyze the inputs and outputs. However, the scarcity of anomalous samsensitivity of Causal-DRSTGC, extensive experiments were ples in detection tasks may render this module sensitive to
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3613

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF TEMPORAL RELATIONSHIPS AFFECTED C OMPARISON OF DIFFERENT VARIANTS
 BY HISTORICAL TIME - SERIES . D0 INDICATES ORIGINAL DATA . D1
 INDICATES DATA AFTER REMOVING ONE TIME WINDOW. D2 INDI -
 CATES DATA AFTER REMOVING THREE CONSECUTIVE TIME
 WINDOWS . D3 INDICATES DATA AFTER REMOVING THREE
 NON - CONSECUTIVE TIME WINDOWS

 TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AFFECTED BY
 NON - ADJACENT NODES . D0 INDICATES ORIGINAL DATA . T1 INDICATES
 THE DATA AFTER REMOVING THE ADJACENT EDGES OF NODE 5.
 T2 INDICATES THE DATA AFTER REMOVING THE ADJACENT
 EDGES OF NODES 4 AND 5. T3 INDICATES THE DATA AFTER
 REMOVING THE ADJACENT EDGES OF NODES 3, 4, AND 5

 Fig. 13. Case of shielding anomaly detection result on Cluster1.

noise. Concurrently, maintaining partial reconstruction constraints helps capture spatio-temporal dependencies among
base stations, providing auxiliary information for the discrimination module. The discrimination module employs binary
cross-entropy loss to distinguish normal samples from pseudoanomalies. Higher weights prioritize discrimination capability
enhancement, amplifying representational divergence between
normal and anomalous samples to improve detection sensitiv- Fig. 14. Case of decommissioning anomaly detection result on Cluster2.
ity for rare anomalies. The configuration λ = 0.1 balances
robustness and flexibility, suppressing distribution shifts from
environmental factors while preserving critical spatio-temporal α = 0.1 and λ = 0.1 for shielding anomalies and α = 0.3 with
patterns related to anomalies. Thus, for Cluster2, we select λ = 0.1 for decommissioning anomalies.
3614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 15. Locations of base station B7 and its neighbors (each marker denotes
a base station). The row of B7 in the adjacency matrix (blue) and the row of
B7 in the learned matrix (brown).

 For Cluster1, experimental results reveal that α = 0.5 and
λ = 0.1 yield optimal performance for both anomaly types.
Compared with Cluster2, Cluster1 contains fewer base stations with lower feature dimensionality, exhibiting simpler
spatio-temporal dependencies but more pronounced localized
distribution disturbances. The higher α value (0.5) imposes Fig. 16. Comparison of the performance of different parameters in Cluster2.
stronger reconstruction constraints, effectively suppressing (a) Shielding anomaly detection. (b) Decommissioning anomaly detection.
noise interference in low-dimensional feature space through
enhanced input-output alignment while preserving essential
spatio-temporal correlations. Furthermore, λ = 0.1 minimizes
representation discrepancies across environments, mitigating
amplified distribution shifts in low-dimensional features to
ensure robustness under complex conditions. These experiments confirm that parameter selection must consider data
characteristics: for 5G-MNC scenarios with smaller scale and
lower feature dimensionality, we recommend α = 0.5 and
λ = 0.1.
 We further conducted parameter sensitivity analysis with
2-node and 10-node clusters to investigate the adaptability
of hyperparameters across different network scales. For specific details, please refer to the Appendix B (Supplementary
Material).
 Besides, in order to conduct a more comprehensive analysis of the model, we have further implemented sensitivity
analysis from multiple perspectives including the influence
of batch size on training efficiency and performance, the
optimal stacking block number for DRSTGC, and the chosen
of the negative sampling strategy. Due to space limitations,
for specific details, please refer to Appendix C, D, and G
(Supplementary Material).

G. Industrial Data Applications
 1) Datasets: To further validate the generalizability of Fig. 17. Comparison of the performance of different parameters in Cluster1.
our proposed method, we conducted experiments using the (a) Shielding anomaly detection. (b) Decommissioning anomaly detection.
following datasets. The PSM dataset [45], a public dataset
obtained from eBay server machines, contains 25-dimensional
metrics. The MSL dataset [46], collected by NASA, records SMAP dataset [46], also collected by NASA, provides soil
sensor and actuator status data from the Mars rover. The sample measurements and telemetry information from the
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3615

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF PSM, MSL, AND SMAP DATASETS ON DIFFERENT BASELINES

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE P EPPER DATASET ON DIFFERENT BASELINES

Mars rover. Compared with MSL, SMAP exhibits a higher capability to distinguish between normal and anomalous samincidence of point anomalies. Pepper is a humanoid robot ples. Although GANF exhibits a marginally higher AUC
developed by SoftBank Robotics for use in human–robot than Causal-DRSTGC on the SMAP dataset, Causal-DRSTGC
interaction and social assistance [47]. The dataset comprises maintains significantly superior F1-score performance, sug-
256 sensor readings. It records data for three distinct types gesting a better balance between precision and recall.
of cyber-physical attacks: “JointsControl”, “LedsControl” and We conducted experiments under three types of attacks
“WheelsControl”. The Pepper dataset is a well-known bench- on the Pepper dataset, with results shown in Table VIII.
mark for anomaly detection in robotics, and is considered The findings indicate that our model also achieved the best
particularly challenging due to the high dimensionality of the performance. These experimental outcomes validate Causaldata. DRSTGC’s generalizability and effectiveness, particularly its
 Similar to the 5G-MNC dataset, the testing sets were modi- significant advantages over existing baselines in balancing
fied by introducing artificial distribution shifts through manual precision-recall tradeoffs, handling distribution shifts, and
processing. Given the substantial data volume, our adjustment modeling complex spatio-temporal dependencies.
involved setting the fluctuation amplitude to 0.5 and applying This demonstrates that the proposed model not only applies
variance perturbation to 30% of the data in the central 70% to 5G-MNC scenarios but also generalizes effectively to
region. diverse time-series anomaly detection tasks, including server
 2) Baselines: We selected the following advanced anomaly monitoring, aerospace sensor, and robot data, highlighting its
detection methods for comparison: TopoGDN(2024) [28], practical utility.
GANF(2022) [29], COCA(2023) [30], DUALTF(2024) [26],
OUAD(2024) [32]. Our evaluation metrics included precision H. Complexity Analysis
(P), recall (R), F1-score (F1), and ROC-AUC (AUC). The time complexity of the DRSTGC block stacking archi-
 3) Performance Evaluation: We conducted comparative tecture is O(BT (N 2 D + N D2 )). The time complexity of
analyses of Causal-DRSTGC against baseline methods with the causal intervention module is O(BT 2 N D). Here, B
results presented in Table VII. The experimental results represents the batch size, T represents the size of the time
demonstrate that Causal-DRSTGC achieves superior F1-scores window, N represents the number of feature nodes, and D
across all three public datasets. Except for the SMAP represents the feature dimension after data processing.
dataset, Causal-DRSTGC achieves the highest AUC values Besides, we calculated the actual running time and memory
on both PSM and MSL datasets, indicating its enhanced consumption of the proposed model on both Cluster1 and
3616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE IX solutions to trace back to the fundamental causes, which
 RUNNING TIME AND MEMORY CONSUMPTION OF hinders further improvements in overall operational efficiency.
 C LUSTER 1 AND C LUSTER 2
 Hence, in future work, how to autonomously identify the
 emergence of new anomalies and locate the root causes of
 anomalies in 5G-MNCs are valuable research directions.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] J. Contreras-Castillo, J. Guerrero-Ibañez, S. Zeadally, and E.-K. Hong,
 “Generative AI for Internet of Vehicles (IoV): Potential and challenges,”
 IEEE Commun. Standards Mag., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 106–116, Jun. 2025.
 [2] S. A. A. Hakeem and H. Kim, “Advancing intrusion detection in
 V2X networks: A comprehensive survey on machine learning, federated
 learning, and edge AI for V2X security,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Cluster2 listed in Table IX. The running time listed is the Syst., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 1–69, Aug. 2025.
cumulative time for training dataset. We performed inference [3] Q. Zheng et al., “MobileRaT: A lightweight radio transformer method
on the test dataset item by item to simulate real-world stream- for automatic modulation classification in drone communication systems,” Drones, vol. 7, no. 10, p. 596, Sep. 2023.
ing scenarios, avoiding the use of any vectorization methods.
 [4] Y. Tan, J. Liu, Y. Li, and J. Wang, “Deep learning based proactive
One can observe that each item of data for inference requires anomaly detection for 5G core control plane network function interacapproximately 0.07 seconds. Considering that the minimum tions,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., early access, Feb. 7, 2025,
time interval for mobile operators to collect each item of doi: 10.1109/TCCN.2025.3539660.
 [5] S. F. Ahmed et al., “Toward a secure 5G-enabled Internet of Things: A
data is 15 minutes, the responsiveness of the model can meet survey on requirements, privacy, security, challenges, and opportunities,”
the requirements of real-time applications. The experimental IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 13125–13145, 2024.
environment utilized an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU @ [6] X. Chen, Q. Qiu, C. Li, and K. Xie, “GraphAD: A graph neural network
 for entity-wise multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. 45th
128GB RAM configuration computer. These results demon- Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2022, pp. 2297–2302.
strate the capability of the proposed model for deployment in [7] N. Zhao, B. Han, R. Li, J. Su, and C. Zhou, “A multivariate KPIs
real-world industrial scenarios. anomaly detection framework with dynamic balancing loss training,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1418–1429,
 Jun. 2023.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [8] X. Wang et al., “Adaptive multi-receptive field spatial–temporal graph
 convolutional network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. IEEE Global
 In 5G Mobile Network Clusters (5G-MNCs), the proposed Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–7.
model effectively resolves complex spatio-temporal pattern [9] S. Piltyay, A. Bulashenko, and I. Demchenko, “Wireless sensor network
recognition and distribution shifts robustness issues. The connectivity in heterogeneous 5G mobile systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
designed DRSTGC block achieves deep modeling of inter-base Conf. Problems Infocommunications Sci. Technol. (PIC ST), Oct. 2020,
 pp. 625–630.
station synchronization dependencies through integration of [10] Q. Zheng, S. Saponara, X. Tian, Z. Yu, A. Elhanashi, and R. Yu, “A
predefined topological information with data-driven hidden real-time constellation image classification method of wireless commudependency mining. By incorporating causal intervention nication signals based on the lightweight network MobileViT,” Cognit.
 Neurodynamics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 659–671, Apr. 2024.
mechanisms and partial conditional invariance regulariza- [11] J. B. S. Carvalho, M. Zhang, R. Geyer, C. Cotrini, and J. M. Buhmann,
tion (PCIR), the architecture eliminates confounding effects “Invariant anomaly detection under distribution shifts: A causal perspecinduced by distribution shifts, significantly enhancing detec- tive,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 310–337.
 [12] Q. Zheng, X. Tian, L. Yu, A. Elhanashi, and S. Saponara, “Recent
tion robustness in non-stationary environments. A joint opti- advances in automatic modulation classification technology: Methods,
mization strategy combining discrimination and reconstruction results, and prospects,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 2025, no. 1, Jan. 2025,
modules leverages complementary information between origi- Art. no. 4067323.
 [13] A. Dridi, C. Boucetta, S. E. Hammami, H. Afifi, and H. Moungla,
nal data and latent feature spaces, establishing a more reliable “STAD: Spatio-temporal anomaly detection mechanism for mobile netanomaly scoring mechanism. work management,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 1,
 Experimental results demonstrate that Causal-DRSTGC out- pp. 894–906, Mar. 2021.
performs state-of-the-art methods on real-world China Mobile [14] A. K. Sangaiah, S. Rezaei, A. Javadpour, F. Miri, W. Zhang, and
 D. Wang, “Automatic fault detection and diagnosis in cellular networks
5G-MNC datasets, particularly excelling in shielding and and beyond 5G: Intelligent network management,” Algorithms, vol. 15,
decommissioning anomaly scenarios with superior F1-score no. 11, p. 432, Nov. 2022.
and AUC metrics. Ablation studies confirm the necessity of [15] F. Wen and H. Wymeersch, “5G synchronization, positioning, and
 mapping from diffuse multipath,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 10,
core components. Generalization experiments further reveal no. 1, pp. 43–47, Jan. 2021.
outstanding cross-domain performance on widely-used indus- [16] L. Chao, L. Yinghua, D. Fengqian, and S. Rui, “Spatio-temporal
trial benchmark datasets, highlighting strong universality and anomaly detection for 5G-clusters: A multi-scale fuzzy contrastive
 learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Netw., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 1588–1602,
practical value. Aug. 2025.
 Although this study demonstrated effectiveness, real-world [17] P. K. Deka, Y. Verma, A. B. Bhutto, E. Elmroth, and M. Bhuyan, “Semi-
5G-MNC deployments still face challenges. First, the identifi- supervised range-based anomaly detection for cloud systems,” IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1290–1304, Jun. 2023.
cation of anomaly types still relies on prior expert knowledge,
 [18] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Guo, H. Yin, C. Li, and H. Chen, “Decoupling
particularly in dynamic and complex network environments, representation learning and classification for GNN-based anomaly detecwhere autonomous anomaly categorization remains challenge. tion,” in Proc. 44th ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Dev. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2021,
Second, the application background of mobile network clusters pp. 1239–1248.
 [19] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,”
leads to the difficulty of root cause localization in real scenar- IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12081–12094,
ios. Currently, there is a lack of systematic and automated Dec. 2023.
LIU et al.:5G MOBILE NETWORKED CLUSTERS ANOMALY DETECTION UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS 3617

[20] M. Thill, W. Konen, H. Wang, and T. Bäck, “Temporal convolutional [42] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series,” Appl. detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 Soft Comput., vol. 112, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 107751. network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
[21] W. Li, W. Hu, T. Chen, N. Chen, and C. Feng, “StackVAE-G: An Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 efficient and interpretable model for time series anomaly detection,” AI [43] J. Li, H. Izakian, W. Pedrycz, and I. Jamal, “Clustering-based anomaly
 Open, vol. 3, pp. 101–110, Jun. 2022. detection in multivariate time series data,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 100,
[22] W. T. Lunardi, M. A. Lopez, and J.-P. Giacalone, “ARCADE: Adver- Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106919.
 sarially regularized convolutional autoencoder for network anomaly [44] X. Zhang, Z. Tian, Y. Shi, Q. Guan, Y. Lu, and Y. Pan, “STFGCN:
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, Spatio-temporal fusion graph convolutional networks for subway traffic
 pp. 1305–1318, Jun. 2023. prediction,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 194449–194461, 2024.
[23] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection [45] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynin multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., May 2021, chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
 vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4027–4035. in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
[24] K. Liu et al., “DeepBAN: A temporal convolution-based communication Aug. 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
 framework for dynamic WBANs,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, [46] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 no. 10, pp. 6675–6690, Oct. 2021. T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and non-
[25] S. Huang et al., “HitAnomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 detection in system log,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 17, Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
 no. 4, pp. 2064–2076, Dec. 2020. [47] A. K. Pandey, R. Gelin, and A. Robot, “Pepper: The first machine of its
[26] Y. Nam et al., “Breaking the time-frequency granularity discrepancy in kind,” IEEE Robot Autom. Mag., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 40–48, Mar. 2018.
 time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024,
 pp. 4204–4215.
[27] J. Lee, J. Lee, and S. B. Kim, “Uncertainty-informed dynamic threshold for time series anomaly detection,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 278,
 Jun. 2025, Art. no. 127379.
[28] Z. Liu, X. Huang, J. Zhang, Z. Hao, L. Sun, and H. Peng, “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection based on enhancing graph attention Xuyuan Liu received the B.E. degree from Qingdao
 networks with topological analysis,” in Proc. 33rd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. University of Technology, China, in 2024. He is
 Knowl. Manag., Jul. 2024, pp. 1555–1564. currently pursuing the M.E. degree with the School
[29] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong
 detection of multiple time series,” 2022, arXiv:2202.07857. Normal University. His research interests include
[30] R. Wang et al., “Deep contrastive one-class time series anomaly detec- anomaly detection and multivariate time series
 tion,” in Proc. SDM, Jun. 2023, pp. 694–702. analysis.
[31] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
 Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[32] D. Meli, “Explainable online unsupervised anomaly detection for
 cyber-physical systems via causal discovery from time series,” in
 Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Autom. Sci. Eng. (CASE), Aug. 2024,
 pp. 4120–4125.
[33] N. Huyan, D. Quan, X. Zhang, X. Liang, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao,
 “Unsupervised outlier detection using memory and contrastive learning,” Chao Luo (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 6440–6454, 2022. degree in computer science from Dalian University
[34] Z. Zhou et al., “Maintaining the status quo: Capturing invariant relations of Technology, China, in 2013. He is currently a Profor OOD spatiotemporal learning,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. fessor with the School of Information Science and
 Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 3603–3614. Engineering, Shandong Normal University, China.
[35] Y. Xia et al., “Deciphering spatio-temporal graph forecasting: A causal He has published more than 60 refereed articles. His
 lens and treatment,” in Proc. NeurIPS, vol. 36, 2023, pp. 37068–37088. research interests include machine learning, complex
[36] J. Hu, Y. Liang, Z. Fan, H. Chen, Y. Zheng, and R. Zimmermann, systems, and time series analysis.
 “Graph neural processes for spatio-temporal extrapolation,” in Proc. 29th
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Sep. 2023,
 pp. 752–763.
[37] B. N. Oreshkin, D. Carpov, N. Chapados, and Y. Bengio, “N-BEATS:
 Neural basis expansion analysis for interpretable time series forecasting,”
 2019, arXiv:1905.10437.
[38] S. Rahmani, A. Baghbani, N. Bouguila, and Z. Patterson, “Graph neural
 networks for intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8846–8885, Aug. 2023. Rui Shao received the master’s degree in com-
[39] H. Zhang et al., “Spatio-temporal weighted graph reason learning for puter software and theory from Shandong University.
 multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Internet Things J., He is currently with China Mobile Communications
 vol. 12, no. 15, pp. 29373–29383, Aug. 2025. Group Shandong Company Ltd., mainly engaged in
[40] S. He, Q. Guo, G. Li, K. Xie, and P. K. Sharma, “Multivariate time series wireless network optimization and planning work
 anomaly detection based on multiple spatiotemporal graph convolution,” for 5G/4G networks. His research interests include
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–14, 2025. 5G communication network planning, strategy opti-
[41] X. Zhang et al., “Rethinking robust multivariate time series anomaly mization, SON, anomaly recognition, and network
 detection: A hierarchical spatio-temporal variational perspective,” IEEE structure optimization.
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 9136–9149, Dec. 2024.