IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 847

 A Decentralized Root Cause Localization Approach
 for Edge Computing Environments
 Duneesha Fernando , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Maria A. Rodriguez ,
 and Rajkumar Buyya , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Edge computing environments host increasingly com- communication frequency—i.e., microservices that frequently
plex microservice-based IoT applications, which are prone to per- interact are co-located to reduce communication overhead and
formance anomalies that can propagate across dependent services. latency [3]. While QoS-aware placement serves as the primary
Identifying the true source of such anomalies—known as Root strategy for deploying microservices in heterogeneous edge
Cause Localization (RCL)—is essential for timely mitigation. How- environments, communication-aware placement generally acts
ever, existing RCL approaches are designed for cloud environments
and rely on centralized analysis, which increases latency and comas a complementary secondary approach.
munication overhead when applied at the edge. This paper proposes Over time, these microservice-based IoT applications are susa decentralized RCL approach that executes localization directly ceptible to performance anomalies caused by resource hogging
at the edge device level using the Personalized PageRank (PPR) (e.g., CPU or memory) and resource contention, which can
algorithm. The proposed method first groups microservices into negatively impact their QoS and violate their Service Level
communication- and colocation-aware clusters, thereby confining Agreements [4], [5]. Therefore, it is crucial to conduct performost anomaly propagation within cluster boundaries. Within each mance anomaly detection on microservice-based IoT applicacluster, PPR is executed locally to identify the root cause, signifi- tions in edge computing environments and eventually mitigate
cantly reducing localization time. For the rare cases where anoma- such anomalies.
lies propagate across clusters, we introduce an inter-cluster peer- However, anomalies can propagate through communication
to-peer approximation process, enabling lightweight coordination
among clusters with minimal communication overhead. To enhance
 and colocation dependencies in microservice architectures [6],
the accuracy of localization in heterogeneous edge environments, [7]. In other words, an anomaly originating in one microserwe also propose a novel anomaly scoring mechanism tailored to the vice can cascade to others: for example, if a data aggregation
diverse anomaly triggers that arise across microservice, device, and microservice running on an edge node suffers from memory
network layers. Evaluation results on the publicly available edge saturation, it may delay the delivery of processed sensor data.
dataset, MicroCERCL, demonstrate that the proposed decentral- This slowdown can then cause dependent services, such as
ized approach achieves comparable or higher localization accuracy real-time anomaly detectors or actuator controllers, to experithan its centralized counterpart while reducing localization time ence increased latency or dropped requests, which in turn may
by up to 34%. In addition, scalability experiments conducted on appear anomalous even though they are not the true source. As
large-scale datasets generated using the iAnomaly framework show a result, the system may encounter multiple detections across
that the proposed decentralized approach consistently outperforms
the centralized baseline in terms of localization efficiency under
 the architecture, even though only a single source is responsible
increasing system scale. for triggering the anomaly. Identifying the true source of the
 anomaly is crucial for implementing effective mitigation strate-
 Index Terms—Edge computing, root cause localization, anomaly gies. This challenge is known as Root Cause Localization (RCL),
detection, microservices, decentralized systems, Personalized and our paper focuses specifically on addressing this problem.
PageRank, performance diagnosis. Existing approaches for RCL in microservices primarily focus
 on cloud environments [8], [9], [10]. At the time of writing,
 I. INTRODUCTION there is only one study on RCL aimed at edge computing
 DGE-CLOUD integrated environments consist of geo- environments, known as MicroCERCL [3]. Both cloud-based
E graphically distributed devices with heterogeneous computing, storage, and networking capabilities. IoT applications
 RCL approaches and MicroCERCL rely on telemetry data collected from decentralized monitoring agents and transmitted to
are frequently architected as microservices and deployed in these a central location for analysis. While effective in cloud settings,
distributed environments to satisfy the Quality of Service (QoS) applying such a centralized approach at the edge increases
requirements of each module while optimizing resource utiliza- data transfer times, thereby degrading localization speed. This
tion [1], [2]. In addition to QoS-aware placement, microser- highlights an opportunity to develop solutions that execute RCL
vices in IoT applications are also commonly deployed based on closer to edge devices. To address this gap, our research proposes
 a decentralized RCL approach that performs the analysis directly
 Received 30 October 2025; revised 5 February 2026; accepted 23 February at the edge device level.
2026. Date of publication 26 February 2026; date of current version 10 April Graph-based methods represent the current state of the art
2026. (Corresponding author: Rajkumar Buyya.) in RCL [8], [9], [10]. Within this space, unsupervised heuristic
 The authors are with Quantum Cloud Computing and Distributed Sys- approaches that exploit graph centralization play a particularly
tems (qCLOUDS) Laboratory, School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia (e-mail:
 important role. In an RCL setting, centralization measures help
rbuyya@unimelb.edu.au). identify the most “influential” or “central” node in the anomaly
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2026.3668228 propagation graph, under the assumption that the true root cause

 1939-1374 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
848 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

will often lie at or near the center of anomalous interactions. r We propose a fully decentralized RCL framework for edge
These approaches are lightweight and offer high interpretability, computing environments based on PPR, enabling efficient
making them well-suited for resource-constrained edge environ- localization without centralized data aggregation.
ments when compared to more computationally intensive super- r We introduce a novel anomaly scoring mechanism tailored
vised deep learning methods, such as Graph Neural Networks to the characteristics of edge infrastructures, capturing
(GNNs) [3]. Among the unsupervised centralization techniques, anomaly triggers across microservice, device, and network
the Personalized PageRank (PPR) algorithm has proven to be a layers.
particularly effective method for RCL [7], [11]. Building upon r We develop a communication- and colocation-aware clusthis foundation, we employ PPR as the core algorithm in our tering strategy that limits anomaly propagation within cluswork. ters, reducing localization latency.
 Edge environments, however, are characterized by a large r We design an inter-cluster peer-to-peer approximation and
number of highly distributed devices, creating a complex prob- aggregation mechanism to support robust localization unlem space that graph-based approaches must navigate. This der multi-cluster anomaly propagation.
complexity can significantly increase localization times [6], r We conduct extensive evaluations on the MicroCERCL
[12], [13]. To address this challenge, our proposed PPR-based benchmark and large-scale iAnomaly datasets, demondecentralized RCL approach groups microservices into clusters strating improved accuracy, scalability, and efficiency over
based on their communication and colocation dependencies. centralized baselines.
This means that when an anomaly occurs, it typically propagates The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
within the identified cluster boundaries. In such cases, the source reviews current research on RCL in microservice-based systems,
microservice can be located by executing PPR only within that discusses their deployment models, presents an overview of
cluster. This reduces the search space that the PPR algorithm the Personalized PageRank algorithm, and examines the effineeds to explore, leading to shorter localization times compared ciency aspects of existing RCL techniques. Section III introto the traditional centralized approaches. duces our proposed decentralized RCL methodology, including
 In rare instances where anomalies may propagate outside of the novel anomaly scoring mechanism, the communicationthe cluster, we propose an inter-cluster peer-to-peer approxi- and colocation-based clustering approach, and the decentralized
mation process. In our inter-cluster peer-to-peer approximation execution of the PPR algorithm. Section IV reports experimental
process, clusters exchange the average of their anomaly scores, results on both the MicroCERCL benchmark and large-scale
which serves as a compact representation of the anomaly state datasets generated using iAnomaly, evaluating localization acof each cluster. This exchanged value is incorporated into the curacy, efficiency, and scalability with respect to system size
receiving cluster’s anomaly score list as an approximate indica- and cluster count. Section V concludes the paper and outlines
tor of the other cluster’s influence. Each cluster then executes directions for future work.
its PPR-based RCL algorithm independently. By doing so, we
limit communication overhead while still retaining the ability to
capture inter-cluster anomaly propagation across iterations. II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
 Existing PPR-based RCL approaches designed for cloud en- In this section, we provide an overview of existing RCL techvironments typically compute anomaly scores by quantifying niques, examine their deployment patterns and the challenges of
their correlation with anomalous response time metrics [11], adapting cloud-based approaches to edge environments, present
[14]. While this works well in cloud settings, such correlation- the fundamentals of the PPR algorithm, and discuss the effibased scoring is less effective in IoT and edge environments, ciency aspects of existing RCL techniques.
where anomalies can originate from heterogeneous layers of
the infrastructure. As a secondary contribution, we extend the
conventional PPR framework by introducing a novel anomaly A. Root Cause Localization Techniques
scoring mechanism tailored to the characteristics of edge envi- RCL in microservices environments leverages various data
ronments. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work sources to identify performance issues, categorized into metricto propose an RCL approach tailored to the characteristics and based, trace-based, log-based, and multi-source approaches [8],
limitations of edge environments while specifically trying to [9]. Metric-based RCL focuses on key performance indicators
reduce the impact of scalability on localization time through like CPU utilization and Queries Per Second (QPS), providing
decentralization. direct insights into potentially faulty modules. It stands out for its
 We evaluated our proposed decentralized RCL approach using efficiency and adaptability compared to log-based approaches,
a publicly available dataset released alongside the MicroCERCL which are often voluminous, unstructured, heterogeneous in
paper [3]. Evaluations performed on the dataset using PPR format, and complex to analyze in real-time [10], [16].
with our proposed anomaly scoring mechanism demonstrate Trace-based RCL, while useful for understanding request
that the decentralized RCL approach achieves the same level flows, is often too coarse-grained to effectively diagnose deeper
of accuracy as its centralized counterpart, while significantly system issues, such as resource bottlenecks or internal mireducing localization time in scenarios of single-cluster anomaly croservice misbehaviors [17]. Additionally, these methods enpropagation, as well as in rare instances where anomalies propa- counter scalability challenges, as they require expensive and
gate across multiple clusters. In addition, scalability experiments time-consuming data collection and processing. Furthermore,
conducted on large-scale datasets generated using the iAnomaly they require instrumentation of source code, whereas metrics
framework [15] show that the proposed decentralized approach can be collected without intrusive modifications.
consistently outperforms the centralized baseline in terms of Emerging multi-source RCL techniques aim for a comprelocalization efficiency under increasing system scale. hensive view by integrating metrics, logs, and traces, but add
 This paper makes the following key contributions: complexity due to differences in data formats, granularity, and
FERNANDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED ROOT CAUSE LOCALIZATION APPROACH FOR EDGE COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS 849

temporal alignment [10], [18]. In some cases, one modality may
even dominate or obscure the others. In contrast, metric-based
approaches offer a structured and simpler framework, making
them practical and effective for RCL investigations in dynamic
edge-cloud environments.
 RCL techniques that rely on metrics as the primary source
of data can be broadly divided into two categories: correlationdriven statistical approaches and graph-based approaches [9],
[10]. Correlation-driven statistical approaches are typically triggered when an anomaly detection module identifies unusual
response times in the frontend microservice. These methods
then compute correlations between the anomalous response
times and metrics from other microservices, ultimately reporting
the metric with the highest correlation and its corresponding
microservice [19], [20]. While these methods are suitable for
deployment in cloud environments, where web applications are
primarily hosted, they fall short when applied at the edge, where
anomalies can arise from any metric across various levels of the Fig. 1. Centralized root cause localization in edge environments.
infrastructure. Moreover, these methods generally struggle with
accuracy due to their reliance on simple pairwise correlations,
which may overlook multi-service dependencies and indirect these cloud-based approaches are applied in edge computing
causal paths. environments.
 In contrast, graph-based RCL methods, which represent the
current state of the art, explicitly model service dependencies B. Centralized Deployment of Existing Root Cause
and anomaly propagation using graph structures constructed Localization Solutions
after anomaly detection [3], [7], [11], [14]. Two main types of
 As shown in Fig. 1, the edge infrastructure consists of a set
graphs are commonly used: causal graphs, which represent diof edge devices
rect cause–effect relationships between metrics, and topological
graphs, which capture service interactions based on deployment E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , e|E| }.
and runtime traces [8], [9]. This work focuses on topological
graphs, as they can be easily constructed using deployment Let the set of microservices be:
information and traces, making them practical for modeling mi- M = {m1 , m2 , . . . , m|M| }.
croservice dependencies, unlike causal graphs that are difficult
to construct accurately in dynamic edge-cloud environments. Each microservice m ∈ M is deployed on exactly one edge
 Once constructed, these graphs can be analyzed using ei- device. The deployment mapping can be defined as
ther unsupervised heuristic methods (e.g., centrality-based approaches) or supervised deep learning methods (e.g., Graph δ : M → E,
Neural Networks, GNNs) [8], [10]. Centrality-based methods where δ(m) gives the device on which microservice m is deexploit graph properties to identify the most “influential” or ployed.
“central” node within the anomaly propagation graph, under Each edge device e ∈ E has a monitoring agent that gaththe assumption that the true root cause often lies near the center ers performance and resource consumption metrics from the
of anomalous interactions. These methods are lightweight, inter- microservices deployed on that device. Both cloud-based RCL
pretable, and require no labeled training data or pre-trained mod- studies and MicroCERCL send the collected telemetry data to
els, making them highly suitable for resource-constrained and a central location, such as the cloud, for analysis. While this
heterogeneous edge environments [9]. In contrast, supervised approach works well in the cloud, where data transfer times are
methods such as GNNs are often computationally expensive, relatively low, applying it at the edge increases data transfer
demand large labeled datasets, and require retraining to adapt to times, which negatively impacts the speed of localization. Furnew system configurations, which limits their practicality at the thermore, transferring data to a central location does not align
edge. Among other unsupervised centralization techniques such well with the network instability characteristic of cloud-edge
as degree centrality (identifies nodes with the largest number environments [3]. Therefore, it is essential to develop solutions
of anomalous connections), betweenness centrality (highlights that enable RCL to be performed closer to the edge devices in
nodes acting as bridges in anomalous paths), and eigenvector- edge computing environments.
based methods (emphasize nodes connected to other highly In situations where graph-based RCL approaches are in place,
anomalous nodes), Personalized PageRank (PPR) has emerged the centralized RCL module maintains a topology graph
as a particularly effective method for RCL [7], [11]. Unlike
simple degree or betweenness measures, PPR captures both local G = (V, L),
and global structural dependencies, enabling it to rank potential which captures the structure and interactions of the monitored
root causes more robustly even in large and heterogeneous system.
graphs. Therefore, we adopt the PPR algorithm as the foundation The set of vertices V consists of both microservices and the
for our RCL solution. edge devices on which they are deployed:
 In the next section, we discuss how existing RCL solutions are
typically deployed and highlight the challenges that arise when V =M∪E
850 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 and edges in the topology graph. Formally, for a node vi ∈ V :
 a(vi )
 Si = 
 vj ∈V a(vj )

 where a(vi ) denotes the anomaly score of node vi . This ensures
 that S is a valid probability distribution:
 |V |
 
 Si = 1.
Fig. 2. Overview of the root cause localization process. i=1

 The transition probability matrix P ∈ R|V |×|V | captures the
 The set of edges L represents relationships between these normalized probabilities of transitioning between nodes based
vertices and is composed of two distinct types: on edge weights. For an edge lij ∈ L connecting nodes vi and
 L = Lcomm ∪ Ldep vj , its weight is determined by its anomaly score a(lij ). The
 transition probability is defined as:
 1) Communication edges (Lcomm ) capture interactions between microservices, derived from trace data: a(lij )
 Pij =  ,
 vk ∈N (vi ) a(lik )
 Lcomm ⊆ M × M,
 where (mi , mj ) ∈ Lcomm if microservice mi communi- where N (vi ) denotes the set of neighbors of vi . Consequently,
 cates with mj . P is a row-stochastic matrix, ensuring:
 2) Deployment edges (Ldep ) link each microservice to the |V |
 
 edge device on which it is hosted, obtained from the Pij = 1 ∀i.
 deployment configuration: j=1
 Ldep = {(m, δ(m)) | m ∈ M}. PPR-based RCL approaches designed for cloud environments
 Together, these vertices and edges form a topology that re- typically compute the anomaly scores for the nodes and edges of
flects both the logical communication between microservices the constructed topology graph—required for calculating P and
and their physical placement across edge devices, enabling the S—by quantifying their correlation with anomalous response
RCL process to reason over the system’s structure. time metrics [11], [14]. Specifically, for each anomalous node or
 In cloud environments, where primarily web applications are edge, the correlation between its observed metric values and the
deployed, continuous anomaly detection is typically performed anomalous response time metric is measured, thereby assigning
only on the response times of user-facing microservices [7], [11], higher scores to components exhibiting stronger associations
[14], [21]. When an anomaly is detected in any of those metrics, it with the observed performance degradation. However, IoT applitriggers the RCL process. In contrast, many edge applications do cations would benefit from a novel anomaly scoring mechanism
not interact directly with end users and often follow architectures tailored to address the triggers that arise from different levels of
such as publish–subscribe or streaming. Therefore, instead of edge infrastructure.
relying solely on user-facing response times, anomaly detection With P and S defined, the PPR algorithm iteratively refines a
must be performed at multiple levels across the infrastructure— ranking vector r ∈ R|V | , representing the steady-state probabilincluding microservice, device, and network layers—to ensure ities of each node being the root cause. The update rule is given
effective root cause localization in edge environments. In this by:
context, anomalies detected at any level should trigger the RCL
 r(k+1) = αP r(k) + (1 − α)S,
process. Once an anomaly is identified, the edges and vertices of
the topology graph (G) are populated with the anomalous metrics where:
from the detection window. This graph serves as input for the r α ∈ (0, 1) is the damping factor, controlling the trade-off
PPR algorithm. Fig. 2 demonstrates an overview of the RCL between following graph transitions (P r(k) ) and teleportprocess from data collection to anomalous services ranking. The ing to the personalization distribution (S);
next subsection explains the PPR algorithm in detail. r r(k) denotes the ranking vector at iteration k.
 The algorithm converges when the difference between suc-
C. Personalized PageRank Algorithm for Root Cause cessive iterations falls below a predefined threshold:
Localization
 r(k+1) − r(k)  < ε,
 Although the topology graph (G) populated with anomalous
metrics serves as the input for the RCL process, the Personalized where ε denotes the desired precision. Convergence is achieved
PageRank (PPR) algorithm specifically operates on two key in- using power iteration, with the number of iterations influenced
puts: the personalization vector (S) and the transition probability by both α and ε. Lower values of α typically result in faster
matrix (P) [22]. convergence due to increased reliance on the personalization
 The personalization vector S ∈ R|V | represents the prior vector.
probability distribution over the nodes, encoding our belief Given that our approach seeks to improve localization effiregarding their likelihood of being the root cause. In the proposed ciency by reducing localization time, we next review the effiframework, S is derived from anomaly scores assigned to nodes ciency aspects of existing RCL techniques.
FERNANDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED ROOT CAUSE LOCALIZATION APPROACH FOR EDGE COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS 851

 TABLE I
 SUMMARY OF CLOUD AND EDGE RCL TECHNIQUES: ACCURACY VERSUS EFFICIENCY FOCUS

D. Efficient Root Cause Localization Techniques unsupervised heuristic approaches, largely due to the complexity
 of the network [3].
 Training time, localization time, and resource overhead are the
 MicroHECL [19] and PDiagnose [27] are cloud RCL techmost important efficiency metrics considered in studies on cloud
 niques that specifically aim to improve efficiency, particularly
RCL [10]. These metrics hold equal or even greater significance
 by providing faster localization speeds. Both approaches elimat the edge. By utilizing the PPR algorithm, we have eliminated
 inate the need for training, similar to our chosen method. They
the need for training and reduced resource overhead due to its
lightweight nature. However, our proposed decentralized RCL are centralized approaches; MicroHECL achieves efficiency by
 efficiently traversing the service dependency graph and using
approach primarily targets the reduction of localization time.
 pruning techniques to eliminate irrelevant service calls during
 Localization time can be discussed in relation to the time
complexity of the PPR algorithm. The time complexity of the anomaly propagation chain analysis, which further enhances
 efficiency. On the other hand, PDiagnose tries to reach ef-
PPR algorithm for a given topology graph G = (V, L) depends
 ficiency by removing the computationally heavy dependency
on the size of the graph, which can be expressed in terms of its
number of edges [23]. At each iteration, the algorithm performs a graph-building phase and utilizing a vote-based localization
 process on an anomaly queue. However, both approaches adopt
sparse matrix–vector multiplication, whose computational cost
is proportional to the number of edges |L|. Therefore, the per- relatively simplistic strategies that may compromise localizaiteration complexity is O(|L|). If k denotes the number of iter- tion accuracy. Given the need to strike an appropriate balance
 between effectiveness and efficiency, our proposed decentralized
ations required to reach convergence, the total time complexity
becomes O(k · |L|). Thus, the overall convergence time of the method leverages a graph-based approach to enhance accuracy
PPR algorithm scales linearly with both the number of edges while reducing localization time. Additionally, cloud efficiency
 techniques like pruning, as used in MicroHECL, complement
and the number of iterations needed to achieve convergence.
 In contrast to conventional PageRank algorithm, which dis- our proposed approach.
tributes teleportation probabilities equally across all nodes, the Building on the insights from existing RCL techniques and
 their efficiency considerations, the next section details our pro-
PPR approach biases the algorithm towards nodes and edges
with higher anomaly scores [22]. This personalization effec- posed decentralized RCL methodology, which aims to reduce
tively prioritizes microservices and interactions that are more localization time while maintaining high accuracy.
likely to be the root cause at the outset, thereby reducing the
number of iterations required for convergence and improving III. METHODOLOGY
localization efficiency. Edge environments, however, consist of Our proposed decentralized RCL approach aims to minimize
a large number of devices and are highly distributed, creating the need for the PPR algorithm to traverse the entire graph
a complex problem space for graph-based approaches to navi- by clustering edge devices that frequently communicate with
gate [6], [12], [13]. In such environments, where the underlying each other. This means that the PPR algorithm only needs to
dependency graph can become extremely large, reducing the explore the cluster where the anomaly has propagated. As a
effective search space—and hence the number of edges consid- result, the search space is reduced, leading to shorter localization
ered during computation—is crucial for minimizing localization times. Additionally, since our approach conducts localization as
time. This is where our proposed decentralized RCL approach close to the edge device level as possible, it further decreases
contributes, by narrowing the search space through cluster-based localization time by minimizing data transfer delays.
graph partitioning, which indirectly reduces the number of edges We define the set of clusters as
involved in PPR computation and thus accelerates convergence.
 A comparison of cloud and edge RCL techniques in terms C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , c|C| }.
of their focus on efficiency (and accuracy as well) is shown in
 Each edge device e ∈ E is assigned to exactly one cluster, and
Table I. The majority of studies on cloud RCL have primarily
 we can represent the mapping of edge devices to clusters as
focused on improvements in accuracy, evaluating this single aspect [9], [13], [24]. Some research has also addressed efficiency, γ : E → C,
particularly the localization times of their proposed methods. For
instance, AAMR [14], MicroEGRCL [25], and Grace [26] claim where γ(e) indicates the cluster to which edge device e belongs.
to provide faster inference times. However, none of these studies We will provide further details on the clustering algorithm in
have specifically designed their approaches with efficiency as Section III-B.
a priority. In addition, the only study focused on edge RCL, As illustrated in Fig. 3, our approach deploys an anomaly
MicroCERCL, did not incorporate efficiency considerations detection module at each edge device. This module utilizes a
into its approach. Consequently, during efficiency evaluations, BIRCH clustering-based anomaly detection model. BIRCH is
it was found that its inference time was longer than that of an unsupervised, lightweight technique that is widely used for
852 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 followed by the topology subgraph formation algorithm.
 Section III-C explains the decentralized execution of the PPR
 algorithm for both single cluster and multiple cluster anomaly
 propagation scenarios.

 A. Novel Anomaly Scoring Mechanism for Edge Environments
 PPR-based RCL approaches designed for cloud environments
 typically compute the anomaly scores for the nodes and edges of
 the constructed topology graph—required for calculating P and
 S—by quantifying their correlation with anomalous response
 time metrics [11], [14]. Specifically, for each anomalous node or
 edge, the correlation between its observed metric values and the
 anomalous response time metric is measured, thereby assigning
 higher scores to components exhibiting stronger associations
 with the observed performance degradation. However, in IoT
 applications, where anomalies may arise from various levels
 of edge infrastructure, we introduce a novel anomaly scoring
 mechanism designed specifically to meet these requirements.
 1) Anomaly Score for Microservices: Each microservice m
Fig. 3. Decentralized root cause localization in edge environments. is assigned an anomaly score that aggregates two main influences:
 r Anomalous metric influence
anomaly detection in multiple root cause localization studies [3], r Incoming anomalous edge influence
[11], [14], [21], and it also suits the properties of edge environ-
 Thus, the anomaly score for a microservice m, denoted by
ments. It analyzes the performance and resource consumption
 AS(m), is computed as:
metrics collected by the monitoring agent assigned to each edge
device. Unlike cloud-based applications that primarily deploy AS(m) = ASmetric (m) + ASedge (m)
web applications, anomaly detection for IoT applications—      
 Metric-induced Edge-induced
which are not necessarily user-facing—should analyse all metrics obtained from the monitoring agent. a) Anomalous metric influence: Let A denote a BIRCH
 In our context, where anomaly detection occurs at multiple cluster of anomalous time series metrics associated with milevels throughout the infrastructure, we consider any detected croservice m. We define the anomalous metric influence score
anomalies as triggers for root cause localization. In the proposed of microservice m, denoted by ASmetric (m), as:
approach, the RCL module corresponding to each cluster is 
placed at the node with the highest computational power within ASmetric (m) = corr(A) (1)
the cluster. Each RCL module maintains a topology subgraph Gi
that corresponds to its cluster ci . When an anomaly is detected, where corr(A) is the pairwise correlation among all metric time
the edges and vertices of the topology subgraph Gi are populated series in cluster A computed using a direction-invariant correwith the anomalous metrics gathered from the microservices lation metric such as the absolute Pearson correlation metric.
deployed in that cluster. b) Incoming anomalous edge influence: To capture the
 Subsequently, we form the personalization vector Si and the performance impact on downstream services due to microsertransition probability matrix Pi corresponding to the topology vice m, we consider all anomalous incoming edges represented
subgraph by using a novel anomaly scoring mechanism, which as microservice pairs (md , m), where md ∈ D is the downwe introduce in Section III-A. The novel anomaly scoring mech- stream microservice sending requests to the target microservice
anism is tailored to address triggers arising from different levels m. D is the set of all downstream microservices from m with
of the edge infrastructure. Following this, we can execute the an anomalous incoming edge to m. For each such edge, we
PPR algorithm within the cluster. Our approach assumes that in compute the correlation between the edge’s anomalous response
the majority of scenarios, an anomaly will propagate within a time (represented by the 90th percentile of latency) and each
single cluster, which means we only need to explore that specific anomalous metric xi ∈ A of the target microservice m and
cluster. However, in rare cases where anomalies may propagate obtain the maximum of these correlation values. The sum of all
outside of the cluster, we provide an inter-cluster peer-to-peer such maximum correlation values is assigned to the incoming
approximation process that the clusters can follow to localize anomalous edge influence score of microservice m, denoted by
the root cause microservice. This strategy also aims to reduce ASedge (m), as shown in (2).
localization time by parallelizing the graph traversal across 
 ASedge (m) = max corr(RTmd →m , xi ) (2)
clusters and reducing inter-process communication overhead xi ∈A
 md ∈D
through one time exchange of approximate anomaly scores. The
inter-cluster peer-to-peer approximation process will be further This formulation enables the anomaly scoring mechanism to
explained in Section III-C. account for both internal anomalies and anomalous behavior
 The upcoming sections are organized as follows: Section III-A observed at communication boundaries, capturing the cascadintroduces the novel anomaly scoring mechanism tailored for ing effect of faults within microservice architectures. These
edge environments while Section III-B explains the proposed microservice-level scores are used to form the personalization
communication and colocation-based clustering approach, vector S.
FERNANDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED ROOT CAUSE LOCALIZATION APPROACH FOR EDGE COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS 853

 Algorithm 1: Communication and Colocation-Based Clustering Algorithm.
 1: Input : Centralized topology graph G = (V, Lcomm )
 where V is the set of microservices M and edge devices
 E, and Lcomm is the set of communication edges
 between microservices
 2: Input : Function δ(m) which maps each microservice m
 to its deployment node
 3: Input : Threshold to merge clusters τ
 4: Output : Cluster to edge device mapping cluster_map
 5: Initialize cluster_map such that for each deployment
 node ei , there is a cluster cei = {m ∈ V | δ(m) = ei }
 6: For each pair of clusters (cei , cej ), define the
 inter-cluster communication
  weight
 w(cei , cej ) = mp ∈cei f req(mp , mq ), where
 mq ∈cej
 f req(mp , mq ) is the communication frequency between
 microservices mp and mq
 7: repeat
 8: Find the cluster pair (cp , cq ) with maximum weight
 w(cp , cq )
 9: if w(cp , cq ) > τ then
 10: Merge cp and cq into a new cluster cnew = cp ∪ cq
 11: Update cluster_map =
 (cluster_map \ {cp , cq }) ∪ {cnew }
 12: Recalculate inter-cluster weights w(cnew , ci ) for all
 ci ∈ cluster_map \ {cnew }
 13: end if
Fig. 4. Inter-cluster communication edge representation using a shadow node. 14: until all inter-cluster weights w(ci , cj ) ≤ τ
 15: Return : cluster_map
 2) Anomaly Score for Edges: The anomaly score for each
inter-service edge represented as a microservice pair (ms , mt ),
denoted by AS(ms , mt ), is computed using the same formula- Algorithm 1 presents our proposed communication and
tion as the anomalous metric influence score presented in (1). colocation-based clustering approach. It obtains the centralized
 topology graph G  = (V, Lcomm ) consisting of the set of mi-
  croservices M and the set of edge devices E as vertices, and
 AS(ms , mt ) = corr(B) (3) the set of communication edges between microservices Lcomm ,
 together with function δ(m) which maps each microservice m to
 B denotes a BIRCH cluster of anomalous edge-level metrics its deployment node and τ which is the threshold to merge clus-
(e.g., different percentiles of response time) associated with the ters as inputs. As an edge device is the smallest unit that groups
communication from microservice ms to mt , while corr(B) is colocated microservices, the algorithm starts by initializing
the pairwise correlation among all metric time series in cluster cluster_map, which maintains the cluster to edge device map-
B computed using a direction-invariant correlation metric such ping, such that there is a cluster corresponding to microservices
as the absolute Pearson correlation metric. deployed in each edge device. However, since microservices are
 These edge-level scores are subsequently used to populate placed primarily to satisfy QoS requirements, rather than based
the transition probabilities in the matrix P , guiding the flow of on communication frequency, there would be communication
anomaly information through the system topology during the dependencies between initial clusters. Therefore, our algorithm
RCL phase. next attempts to group such devices with high communication
 This novel anomaly scoring mechanism, specifically designed frequencies. As detailed in step 6 of Algorithm 1, we calculate
for edge computing environments, is utilized in our proposed de- the inter-cluster communication weight for each pair of clusters.
centralized RCL approach, which is explained in the upcoming This weight represents the communication frequency between
sections. the microservices deployed in those clusters. Subsequently, the
 algorithm performs an iterative merging procedure. At each step,
 it identifies the pair of clusters with the highest inter-cluster
B. Communication and Colocation-Based Clustering communication weight. If this weight exceeds the threshold
 Anomalies can propagate through communication and colo- τ , the two clusters are merged into a single cluster, and the
cation dependencies in microservice architectures [6], [7]. Our cluster_map is updated accordingly. The inter-cluster commuproposed clustering approach aims to group microservices that nication weights involving the newly formed cluster are then
are both colocated and frequently communicate with one an- recalculated. This process continues until no inter-cluster weight
other, so that when an anomaly occurs, it propagates within the exceeds the threshold τ , ensuring that clusters are only merged
identified cluster boundary in most cases. when strong communication relationships exist. Finally, the
854 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Algorithm 2: Topology Subgraph Formation for Decentralized RCL Modules.
 1: Input: Final cluster_map from Algorithm 1
 2: Input: Centralized topology graph G = (V, Lcomm )
 3: Output: Set of topology subgraphs {Gi }, one for each
 cluster ci
 4: for each cluster ci in cluster_map do
 5: Vci ← {m ∈ V | δ(m) ∈ ci }  Vertices:
 microservices in cluster ci
 6: Lci ← {(mp , mq ) ∈ Lcomm | mp ∈ Vci ∧ mq ∈
 Vci }  Intra-cluster edges Fig. 5. Inter-cluster peer-to-peer (p2p) approximation process.
 7: proxy_nodes ← ∅
 8: for each (mp , mq ) ∈ Lcomm where mp ∈ Vci and
 mq ∈ / Vci do the destination microservice in c1 that is the endpoint of the
 9: Create a new shadow node smq representing mq outgoing inter-cluster link from c2 . The outgoing edge from the
 inside cluster ci originating microservice in c2 is redirected to this shadow node,
 10: proxy_nodes ← proxy_nodes ∪ {smq } allowing G2 to capture the external communication dependency
 11: Lci ← Lci ∪ {(mp , smq )}  Redirect outgoing without directly incorporating microservices from outside its
 edge to proxy node own cluster.
 12: end for The above-mentioned inter-cluster communications are ex-
 13: Vci ← Vci ∪ proxy_nodes pected to be infrequent, and the occurrence of anomalies along
 14: Form topology subgraph Gi = (Vci , Lci ) such inter-cluster edges is even rarer. Each cluster is deliber-
 15: end for ately constructed to capture the majority of communication and
 16: Return: Set of topology subgraphs {Gi }, one for each colocation relationships, thereby ensuring that most anomalies
 cluster ci propagate entirely within a single cluster. Consequently, RCL
 can typically be performed within the cluster in which the
 anomaly is propagated. Upon anomaly detection, the corresponding topology subgraph Gi is populated with the anomalous
algorithm outputs the updated cluster_map, which contains metrics associated with its microservices. Subsequently, the
the final cluster-to-edge device mapping. personalisation vector Si and the transition probability matrix
 Once the final set of clusters is obtained, we construct Pi are constructed using the novel anomaly scoring mechanism
the topology subgraph for the decentralized RCL module introduced in Section III-A.
corresponding to each cluster. This process is explained in
Algorithm 2. It obtains the cluster_map which is the output C. Decentralized Execution of the Personalized PageRank
of Algorithm 1 together with the centralized topology graph
G  = (V, Lcomm ) consisting of the set of microservices M and Algorithm
the set of edge devices E as vertices, and the set of communica- There are two possible scenarios when performing PPR,
tion edges between microservices Lcomm , as inputs. For a given depending on whether the incoming edges to shadow nodes are
cluster ci , the vertices of its topology subgraph, Gi , consist of all detected as anomalous. In most cases, due to communication
microservices deployed on the edge devices assigned to ci . The and colocation-based clustering, anomaly propagation remains
intra-cluster edges are defined as the communication edges be- confined within a single cluster. In such cases, PPR can be
tween these microservices in the centralized topology graph, G . executed locally within the cluster according to the formulation
In addition, to preserve the connectivity information with exter- in Section II-C, iterating until convergence and returning the minal microservices while ensuring that the sub-topology remains croservice with the highest probability in r. In this scenario, both
self-contained, each communication edge originating from a Pi and Si are constructed using only the original (non-shadow)
microservice in ci to a microservice outside ci is redirected to a nodes in the cluster.
shadow node placed within Gi . This shadow node symbolically Although the clustering strategy is designed to minimise interrepresents the remote endpoint and serves as the destination for cluster anomaly propagation, rare cases may still occur where
the redirected outgoing edge. The resulting topology subgraph anomalies traverse less frequent communication paths spanning
therefore captures both the internal structure of the cluster and multiple clusters. These cases are detected when incoming edges
its interaction points with the rest of the system, enabling the to shadow nodes are identified as anomalous. When this happens,
decentralized RCL module to operate independently while still the anomaly propagation path between clusters is considered
considering external dependencies. disconnected, and the inter-cluster peer-to-peer (p2p) approxi-
 To illustrate how an inter-cluster communication edge is mation process is triggered.
represented using a shadow node in the source cluster, we refer Consider the example in Fig. 4 together with the correspondto Fig. 4. In this example, clusters c1 and c2 are connected by an ing interaction diagram in Fig. 5. At time t0 , the computation
inter-cluster communication edge. The topology subgraph G1 threads of both clusters c1 and c2 independently begin computing
for cluster c1 contains as vertices all microservices deployed their respective Pi and Si . If an anomaly is detected on the
within c1 , along with the communication edges between them. incoming edge to the shadow node in c2 , that indicates a discon-
Similarly, the topology subgraph G2 for cluster c2 contains all nection in the anomaly propagation path and triggers the intermicroservices deployed within c2 and their internal communica- cluster p2p approximation process. At that time (i.e., t0 + δ1 ),
tion edges. In addition, G2 includes a shadow node representing the communication thread of cluster c2 sends a wait_message
FERNANDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED ROOT CAUSE LOCALIZATION APPROACH FOR EDGE COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS 855

to c1 , indicating its intent to provide an average approximate The idea behind this formulation is to distribute the anomaly
anomaly score. This approximation is used to reduce communi- likelihood assigned to cluster cj (by cluster ci ) proportionally
cation overhead while still capturing the anomaly influence of c2 across cj ’s local anomaly scores, capturing how ci perceives cj ’s
across iterations. While the communication thread is sending the influence.
wait_message, the RCL module (i.e., the computation thread) Finally, the global perspectives from all clusters are averaged
in c2 continues to compute the anomaly scores required to form to derive a unified anomaly probability vector:
P2 and S2 and uses them to calculate its average approximate
 1  global
 N
anomaly score as:
 ricombined = r
  N i=1 i
 x
 avg_approx_anom_score = x∈S (4)
 |S| The microservice with the highest likelihood in ricombined is
 selected as the final root cause. This aggregation ensures that all
 After completing the computation (i.e., at time t1 ), this value participating clusters contribute to the final decision, enhancing
is sent to c1 along with the anomaly score of the incoming edge robustness in rare cases of inter-cluster anomaly propagation.
to the shadow node.
 Upon receiving the wait_message from c2 at time t0 + δ2 ,
c1 continues to compute P1 and S1 , while awaiting c2 ’s average IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
approximate anomaly score. It also calculates its own average In this section, we discuss the evaluation results of the proapproximate anomaly score in the same way as (4) and sends posed decentralized RCL approach. First, in Section IV-A, we
it to c2 when ready at time t2 . Note that one cluster must wait explain the details of the experimental setup used for evaluation
for the other to complete this computation, since t1 = t2 . In the together with implementation details. Next, in Section IV-B, we
depicted example, t2 > t1 , and thus c2 waits, as indicated by the discuss the results of evaluating the proposed method against its
red block between t1 and t2 . centralized counterpart, which is commonly referenced in the
 Once both clusters have exchanged their average approximate existing literature [7], [11] and serves as our baseline approach.
anomaly scores, they update their Pi and Si (a straightforward Following this, in Section IV-C, we conduct a further analysis of
update to the corresponding matrix and vector) by incorporat- our decentralized results in the context of both single-cluster and
ing the other cluster as a node. Both clusters then run their multi-cluster anomaly propagation cases. We then investigate
PPR-based RCL algorithms independently, as in the standard the impact of increasing cluster counts on localization accuracy
scenario. This procedure is a modified version of the JXP in Section IV-D, followed by a large-scale scalability analyalgorithm [28], an efficient and decentralized PageRank ap- sis on iAnomaly-generated datasets in Section IV-E. Finally,
proximation used in peer-to-peer web search networks. Without Section IV-F discusses the overall findings, with a particular
loss of generality, this communication protocol is extendable to focus on efficiency, communication overhead, and scalability in
scenarios with more than two clusters. edge environments.
 Finally, during decision making, one cluster ci (e.g., c1 in our
case) typically identifies a microservice within its boundary as A. Experimental Setup and Implementation Details
the root cause, while other clusters (e.g., c2 ) point to ci as the
origin of the anomaly. In this case, the microservice identified We evaluated the proposed decentralized RCL approach usby ci is selected as the final root cause. While this is the majority ing two complementary datasets: the publicly available Microcase, in practical scenarios (expected to be extremely rare) where CERCL dataset1 [3] and large-scale datasets generated using the
multiple clusters identify distinct local microservices as the most iAnomaly framework [15].
likely causes, an inter-cluster result aggregation mechanism a) MicroCERCL dataset: This dataset represents the first
(explained next) is applied to reconcile these decisions. large-scale benchmark for cloud–edge collaborative microser-
 After completing their independent PPR executions, each vice systems and remains the most comprehensive hybrid decluster ci produces a ranking vector ployment dataset available to date. It contains data collected
 from 81 microservices belonging to four applications: Sockri = [rim1 , rim2 , . . . , rimk , ric1 , ric2 , . . . , ricn ] Shop, Hipster, Bookinfo, and the newly introduced AI-Edge.
 These microservices are deployed across four cloud servers and
where the first k elements correspond to its internal microser- two groups of two edge servers, following a communication
vices (mj ) and the remaining n elements represent connected frequency-based application placement strategy.
 c
clusters (cj ). The term ri j denotes the anomaly likelihood To reflect realistic production environments, the dataset inassigned to cluster cj by cluster ci . tegrates a wide range of anomalies. Using ChaosMesh, the au-
 Next, each cluster integrates its internal anomaly profile and thors injected application-level anomalies, such as CPU resource
its inferred external influences from other connected clusters to exhaustion in containers, memory leaks, and network latency.
construct its global perspective vector as follows: Additionally, Linux kernel traffic control (TC) was employed to
  simulate kernel-level network failures—including packet loss,
 riglobal = rilocal , ric1 influence , ric2 influence , . . . , ricn influence duplication, corruption, disorder, delay, and jitter—between
 cloud and edge nodes. Consequently, the dataset captures both
 Here, rilocal = [rim1 , rim2 , . . . , rimk ], which corresponds to the communication- and colocation-induced anomaly propagation
internal anomaly profile, represents the anomaly likelihoods patterns.
of microservices within ci . For each connected cluster cj , the From the available dataset, we selected 383 scenarios that
 c influence
influence component ri j is obtained as: provide adequate diversity in fault types. Among them, 237
 c influence c
 ri j = ri j · rjlocal 1 https://github.com/WDCloudEdge/MicroCERCL
856 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

scenarios (denoted SH) correspond to cases where the root-cause B. Evaluation Against the Centralized Baseline
microservice belongs to the SockShop application, while the Before evaluating the decentralized RCL approach, we first
remaining 146 scenarios (denoted HH) involve root causes from
 validate the centralized variant of our method, which utilizes
the Hipster application. For each scenario, we extracted trace the PPR-based localization algorithm. This step ensures that
information to construct topology graphs, and corresponding our implementation achieves comparable performance to the
metrics were used for anomaly detection and RCL.
 existing MicroCERCL benchmark [3], thereby establishing it
 b) iAnomaly-based datasets: Although MicroCERCL as a reliable baseline for subsequent comparison.
provides high deployment realism and anomaly diversity, its Table II compares the results of our centralized PPR-based
graph sizes are limited for analyzing scalability under inapproach with those reported in the MicroCERCL paper, where a
creasing system complexity. To evaluate computational effi- GNN-based centralized RCL model was used. The performance
ciency under larger input sizes, we therefore employed the is evaluated using the standard Accuracy@k metric, which
dataset generation simulator provided by iAnomaly, which is
 measures the proportion of test cases where the true root-cause
influenced by the iAnomaly emulator to preserve execution microservice appears within the top-k ranked predictions. In our
realism. evaluation, we report results for k = 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10, covering
 The iAnomaly framework enables the generation of service
 both precise and broader localization ranges. In addition, we
dependency graphs ranging from 50 to 2,500 nodes, thereby report the Mean Average Rank (MAR), which indicates the
supporting systematic scalability analysis. Unlike purely syn- average position of the true root cause (lower values are better),
thetic simulators, the iAnomaly generator populates graphs usand the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), which reflects how early
ing anomalous traces derived from real execution data, ensuring the correct root cause appears in the ranked list (higher values
realistic temporal and causal characteristics. The underlying are better).
workloads span diverse IoT applications, from lightweight sen-
 As shown in Table II, our centralized PPR-based approach
sor pipelines to computation-intensive services such as face de- demonstrates competitive localization performance relative to
tection and recognition, and are executed under a wide range of MicroCERCL’s GNN-based model. While the top-1 accuracy
injected anomalies such as resource saturation, service failures,
 (Accuracy@1) is moderately lower, the performance steadily
and network congestion. improves at larger values of k, reaching near-perfect Accuc) Implementation details: All experiments, including hy- racy@10in both application cases. This trend indicates that PPR
perparameter tuning, were conducted on the Spartan HPC
 effectively ranks the true root-cause microservice within a small
cluster.2 The implementation was performed in Python 3.10 set of top candidates, even without model training or feature
using PyTorch 2.2,3 SciPy 1.13,4 and Scikit-learn 1.1.5 learning.
 To construct decentralized subgraphs, we first applied The average ranking performance, reflected by MAR and
Algorithm 1 to cluster the edge devices in each scenario based on MRR, further confirms this observation. For both applications,
their communication and colocation dependencies. The resulting the MAR values of 2.29 (HH) and 2.17 (SH) indicate that the
cluster assignments were then used to generate corresponding true root cause typically appears near the second position in the
topology subgraphs using Algorithm 2. Both algorithms were ranked list. Meanwhile, MRR values of 0.64 and 0.68 imply
implemented in Python. To determine the optimal threshold for that in many scenarios the correct root cause appears at rank 1
merging clusters (denoted as τ ), which is a key hyperparameter or 2, thus remaining consistently close to the top of the ranking
required for Algorithm 1, we employed Tree-structured Parzen list. Overall, these results establish our centralized PPR-based
Estimator (TPE)-based Bayesian optimization [29]. In the Miimplementation as a strong and reliable baseline for comparison
croCERCL experiments, all scenarios produced between 2 and with the proposed decentralized RCL approach.
4 clusters per scenario. Having established the centralized PPR-based RCL model
 For anomaly detection, we adopted the BIRCH clusteringas a valid baseline, we next evaluate the performance of our
based algorithm from Scikit-learn, following the configuration proposed decentralized RCL approach. This evaluation focuses
recommended by the MicroCERCL authors. Specifically, the on two key aspects: localization accuracy and localization effianomaly sensitivity threshold β was set to 0.07, balancing
 ciency. Similar to the centralized evaluation, we use the Acanomaly detection accuracy and noise reduction. The pro- curacy@k (for k = 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10), Mean Average Rank
posed anomaly scoring mechanism (Section III-A) was imple- (MAR), and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) metrics to meamented using the SciPy library. Subsequently, the PPR-based
 sure localization accuracy. In addition, to assess the efficiency
RCL algorithm—used in both decentralized and centralized improvement achieved through decentralization, we introduce
variants—was implemented in Python. Its hyperparameters, α two new metrics: Average Time Reduction Percentage and Total
and ε, were tuned using the same TPE-based Bayesian optimiza-
 Time Reduction Percentage.
tion approach [29]. The Average Time Reduction Percentage quantifies the mean
 To support reproducibility and facilitate future research, we percentage reduction in localization time across all scenarios. It
have publicly released the full implementation, configuration
 is defined as
files, and preprocessing scripts6 .
 The next subsection presents a detailed comparison between
 1 
 N (i) (i)
our decentralized RCL approach and its centralized baseline. tcentralized − tdecentralized
 (i)
 × 100 ,
 N i=1 tcentralized
 2 https://dashboard.hpc.unimelb.edu.au/
 3 https://pytorch.org/
 (i) (i)
 4 https://scipy.org/ where tcentralized and tdecentralized denote the localization times un-
 5 https://scikit-learn.org/ der the centralized and decentralized settings for the ith scenario,
 6 https://github.com/Cloudslab/efficient_rcl_framework respectively, and N is the total number of scenarios. This metric
FERNANDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED ROOT CAUSE LOCALIZATION APPROACH FOR EDGE COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS 857

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON OF CENTRALIZED RCL RESULTS ON THE MICROCERCL DATASET

 TABLE III
 CENTRALIZED VERSUS DECENTRALIZED RCL PERFORMANCE

reflects the average per-scenario improvement achieved through C. Detailed Analysis of Decentralized Results
decentralization.
 While the previous subsection presented the overall perfor-
 The Total Time Reduction Percentage, on the other hand, mance of the decentralized RCL approach, a more granular
considers the aggregate time across all scenarios, defined as
 analysis could provide deeper insights into its behavior under
 different anomaly propagation patterns. Specifically, we cate-
  
 tcentralized − tdecentralized gorize the 383 evaluation scenarios (237 SH and 146 HH) into
  × 100. single-cluster propagation and multi-cluster propagation cases.
 tcentralized
 This categorization enables us to assess whether the decentralized approach consistently maintains localization accuracy and
 Together, these two metrics capture both per-scenario con- efficiency regardless of whether the anomaly remains confined
sistency (Average Time Reduction Percentage) and overall effi- to a single cluster or propagates across multiple clusters.
ciency gain (Total Time Reduction Percentage). Table IV summarizes the results for both categories, reporting
 As shown in Table III, the decentralized approach consistently the same set of accuracy and efficiency metrics — Accuracy@k
outperforms the centralized baseline across both application (for k = 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10), Mean Average Rank (MAR), Mean
groups (HH and SH). In terms of accuracy, the decentralized Reciprocal Rank (MRR), and the average/total time reduction
method improves Accuracy@1 from 0.43 (HH) and 0.50 (SH) percentages.
to 0.56 and 0.61, respectively, while achieving even higher scores The majority of scenarios (311 out of 383) fall under the
for larger k values. Both MAR and MRR values also demonstrate single-cluster anomaly propagation category, where the anomaly
notable gains, indicating that the true root-cause microservice originating from the root-cause microservice propagates only
appears higher in the ranked list under decentralized processing. within its local cluster. In these cases, our decentralized method
This improvement in accuracy can be attributed to the noise demonstrates a substantial efficiency improvement — achieving
reduction effect introduced by decentralization: by performing over 23–34 % reduction in localization time on average — while
RCL within smaller, communication-aware clusters, each sub- maintaining strong accuracy levels (Accuracy@3 >0.84 for both
graph captures more localized dependencies and avoids the prop- HH and SH). These results demonstrate that when the anomaly
agation of irrelevant information from distant microservices. impact is localized, decentralized inference efficiently uses intra-
 In terms of efficiency, the results indicate substantial time cluster communication to identify the root cause with minimal
reductions, with 17–21% improvement for HH and over 33% for overhead.
SH in both average and total time reduction percentages. These For the remaining multi-cluster propagation cases (72 out of
results highlight that decentralization not only maintains but, in 383), where anomalies propagate across clusters and the algomany cases, enhances localization accuracy, while significantly rithm engages in inter-cluster peer-to-peer (P2P) approximation,
reducing localization time, thus achieving a more effective bal- the decentralized approach continues to perform competitively.
ance between accuracy and efficiency. Accuracy metrics remain high (Accuracy@1 ≥ 0.63 for HH and
 These results collectively confirm that decentralization leads ≥ 0.87 for SH), validating that the cross-cluster coordination
to clear gains in both accuracy and efficiency compared to the process is effective. Among the 72 multi-cluster propagation
centralized baseline. However, the extent of these improvements cases, a very small subset required the additional inter-cluster
can depend on how anomalies propagate within the system. To result aggregation step—specifically when both participating
better understand the influence of anomaly propagation charac- clusters independently identified local anomalies as potential
teristics, the next subsection analyzes the decentralized results root causes. In these cases, the aggregation step ensured consisin greater depth by separating the evaluation into single-cluster tent decision-making without sacrificing accuracy. The resulting
and multi-cluster cases. accuracy values remained stable (Accuracy@1 ≥ 0.63 for HH
858 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE IV
 DECENTRALIZED RCL PERFORMANCE BROKEN DOWN BY ANOMALY PROPAGATION TYPE

and ≥ 0.87 for SH), indicating that the inter-cluster result aggregation mechanism effectively reconciles results from different
clusters.
 As expected, the efficiency gains are somewhat lower (2.77–
28.79%) in cross-cluster scenarios due to the additional latency
introduced by inter-cluster communication. The impact of the
inter-cluster result aggregation mechanism, however, is minimal: since it requires only a single exchange of low-dimensional
ranking vectors, its communication overhead is negligible compared to the total P2P coordination time. The slight reduction in
overall efficiency is therefore primarily attributed to inter-cluster
message synchronization rather than to aggregation itself. Despite this, the method still achieves a notable reduction in localization time while maintaining, or even improving, localization
accuracy compared to the centralized baseline.
 Overall, this breakdown illustrates that the proposed de- Fig. 6. Accuracy@K under increasing numbers of anomalous clusters on
 MicroCERCL (obtained by relaxing clustering constraints to form up to 14
centralized approach adapts well to both local and distributed clusters).
anomaly propagation scenarios, sustaining accuracy while offering consistent reductions in localization time.
 E. Scalability Analysis on the Ianomaly Dataset
 To evaluate scalability and localization efficiency beyond
D. Impact of Cluster Count on Localization Accuracy
 MicroCERCL, we conduct additional experiments using the
 The MicroCERCL evaluation scenarios typically produce 2–4 iAnomaly-based dataset generation simulator, which allows us
clusters under our default communication- and colocation-aware to systematically vary the size of the service dependency graph
clustering algorithm. To understand how localization accuracy from 50 to 2,500 nodes. This controlled setup enables a direct
behaves as the number of clusters increases, we conduct an comparison between the centralized PPR baseline and the proadditional sensitivity analysis in which we relax the colocation posed decentralized RCL approach under increasing graph scale.
constraint during clustering, resulting in finer-grained partitions To ensure that the evaluation reflects non-trivial and pracand a larger number of clusters per scenario. This stress test tically relevant settings, we focus exclusively on multi-cluster
allows us to evaluate accuracy under up to 14 clusters on Mi- anomaly propagation scenarios, where coordination across mulcroCERCL, without introducing a new synthetic benchmark for tiple clusters is required. Single-cluster cases are excluded from
accuracy reporting. this analysis, as they can be efficiently handled by local inference
 We group scenarios into buckets according to the number and do not meaningfully stress the scalability of the proposed
of anomalous clusters involved in the propagation (3–5, 6–8, framework.
9–11, and 12–14 anomalous clusters) and report Accuracy@K We report the average end-to-end localization latency unas the number of candidates K increases. Fig. 6 summarizes der three configurations: (i) Centralized PPR, where the full
the results. Overall, the top-1 accuracy decreases as the number graph is processed as a single instance; (ii) Decentralized (fixed
of anomalous clusters grows, reflecting the increased ambiguity clustering), where the graph is partitioned into a fixed number
introduced by distributed propagation and weaker within-cluster of clusters (|C|=5) and PPR is executed locally within each
signals. However, the method remains effective at producing cluster, with inter-cluster coordination enabled when required;
short candidate lists: Accuracy@10 remains high across buckets and (iii) Decentralized (adaptive clustering), where the number
and reaches 100% by top-K (here K=15) in all cases, sub- of clusters is chosen proportional to graph size (approximately
stantially reducing the manual search space for Site Reliability one cluster per 10 nodes), thereby keeping cluster sizes bounded
Engineering (SRE) diagnosis workflows. as the graph grows.
 This trend indicates that increasing the number of clusters Fig. 7 shows the resulting latency trends. As the number of
introduces a measurable accuracy–granularity trade-off: finer nodes increases, the centralized baseline exhibits a pronounced
partitioning improves scalability and reduces local computa- increase in localization time, reflecting the growing cost of PPR
tion, but may weaken the signal concentration that benefits iterations over an increasingly large dependency graph. The
ranking-based localization. We therefore report this behavior as decentralized approach with a fixed number of clusters mitigates
a validity threat and emphasize that cluster granularity should this growth, but still shows gradual increases in latency, as cluster
be selected carefully in practice, balancing scalability benefits sizes (and hence the number of intra-cluster edges processed by
against potential degradation in top-1 localization accuracy. PPR) expand with overall graph scale.
FERNANDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED ROOT CAUSE LOCALIZATION APPROACH FOR EDGE COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS 859

 practical microservice deployments are typically sparse, and our
 communication-aware clustering strategy explicitly minimizes
 inter-cluster dependencies, resulting in near-linear growth with
 respect to the number of clusters in most scenarios. Furthermore,
 the optional result aggregation step is triggered only in rare
 cases and exchanges only compact ranking vectors, introducing
 an additional number of messages proportional to C  , where
 C  ≤ C denotes the number of anomalous clusters participating
 in the aggregation process. As a result, communication overhead
 remains modest even as the number of clusters increases.
 Moreover, in the rare cases where multiple clusters identify
 distinct local anomalies, the results show that the inter-cluster
Fig. 7. Scalability comparison on the iAnomaly dataset. result aggregation mechanism effectively reconciles these outcomes with minimal overhead. Since this step operates on
 In contrast, the adaptive clustering configuration maintains compact ranking vectors rather than raw monitoring data, both
near-constant localization time across all evaluated scales. In communication and computation costs remain negligible. This
this setting, the number of clusters increases proportionally with confirms that the efficiency benefits of decentralization are pregraph size (approximately one cluster per 10 nodes), thereby served even in cross-cluster anomaly propagation scenarios.
explicitly evaluating scalability under growing |C|. By keeping The additional scalability experiments conducted using the
the expected cluster size approximately bounded, the effec- iAnomaly-generated datasets further confirm the efficiency adtive search space per local PPR execution remains stable, and vantages of the proposed decentralized approach under increasthe overall latency is dominated by local computation rather ing system scale. In particular, the decentralized design consisthan global graph size. As a result, the proposed decentralized tently outperforms the centralized baseline in terms of localizaapproach consistently outperforms the centralized baseline in tion latency as graph size grows, demonstrating its suitability
terms of localization efficiency under increasing system scale. for large and highly distributed edge deployments.
 Finally, beyond the observed improvements in localization
 time due to faster convergence of the PPR-based RCL approach,
F. Discussion the decentralized design is expected to further reduce latency in
 In summary, the evaluation results demonstrate that the pro- real deployments by executing RCL at the edge device level.
posed decentralized RCL approach achieves comparable or This minimizes data transfer delays and lowers communication
higher localization accuracy than the centralized baseline, while overhead compared to traditional centralized approaches, where
significantly reducing localization time. The approach performs large volumes of monitoring data must be transported to a central
consistently well across both single-cluster and multi-cluster node for analysis.
anomaly propagation scenarios, confirming its effectiveness under diverse anomaly propagation conditions.
 The results also validate that the inter-cluster peer-to-peer V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
approximation process—designed for multi-cluster anomaly This paper presented a decentralized RCL approach for
propagation—introduces minimal communication overhead microservice-based IoT applications deployed in edge computand exerts negligible impact on localization time. This pro- ing environments. By executing PPR directly at the edge device
cess requires only a one-time exchange of average approx- level and operating over communication- and colocation-aware
imate anomaly scores between connected clusters, involving clusters, the proposed method reduces the effective search space
a limited number of lightweight message exchanges overall for localization and avoids centralized telemetry aggregation. To
(wait_message and avg_approx_anom_score). Empirical improve diagnostic accuracy under heterogeneous edge anomaly
evidence confirms that these exchanges incur almost no wait- triggers, we also introduced a novel anomaly scoring mechanism
ing periods, as most computations proceed in parallel across that captures anomalous behaviors across microservice, device,
clusters, ensuring efficient utilization of resources during coor- and network layers. For rare cases of cross-cluster anomaly propdination. agation, we designed an inter-cluster peer-to-peer approxima-
 From a scalability perspective, the communication overhead tion process, complemented by an optional aggregation mechaof the inter-cluster coordination process grows with the con- nism, enabling robust coordination with modest communication
nectivity of the cluster adjacency graph rather than directly overhead.
with the total number of clusters. Let C denote the number of Extensive evaluations on the publicly available MicroCERCL
clusters and EC the number of inter-cluster links involved in an dataset demonstrated that the decentralized approach achieves
anomaly propagation path. Since C is typically much smaller comparable or higher localization accuracy than a centralized
than the number of microservices N in large-scale edge environ- PPR baseline while reducing localization time by up to 34%.
ments, this design decouples coordination overhead from direct Additional scalability experiments on large-scale iAnomalydependence on system size. For each affected link, the peer- generated datasets further confirmed that the decentralized deto-peer approximation requires a lightweight wait_message sign consistently improves localization efficiency as system size
and a two-way exchange of scalar average anomaly scores. grows, highlighting its suitability for large and highly distributed
Consequently, the total number of coordination messages is edge deployments.
proportional to the number of inter-cluster links involved in the While effective under communication-aware placement
propagation. In the worst case of a fully connected cluster graph, strategies—where microservices that frequently communicate
the number of such links grows quadratically with C. However, are co-located—the proposed approach currently assumes that
860 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

such placement is at least used as a secondary objective alongside [18] G. Yu, P. Chen, Y. Li, H. Chen, X. Li, and Z. Zheng, “Nezha: Interpretable
QoS-aware placement. This is because the current design does fine-grained root causes analysis for microservices on multi-modal obnot generalize to scenarios involving frequent bi-directional servability data,” in Proc. 31st ACM Joint Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
 Found. Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 553–565.
inter-cluster communications. Ideally, such highly interactive [19] D. Liu et al., “Microhecl: High-efficient root cause localization in largemicroservices should belong to the same cluster. Therefore, an scale microservice systems,” in Proc. 43rd Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.: Softw.
important direction for future work is to extend the proposed Eng. Pract., 2021, pp. 338–347.
approach to accommodate other placement techniques, such [20] J. Lin, P. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “Microscope: Pinpoint performance issues
 with causal graphs in micro-service environments,” in Proc. Serviceas purely QoS-driven or adaptive placement strategies, while Oriented Comput.: 16th Int. Conf., Hangzhou, China, 2018, pp. 3–20.
maintaining efficiency and accuracy. We also plan to explore [21] L. Wu, J. Tordsson, J. Bogatinovski, E. Elmroth, and O. Kao, “Microdiag:
optimization opportunities in subsequent stages of the anomaly Fine-grained performance diagnosis for microservice systems,” in Proc.
management pipeline, particularly root cause analysis (RCA) IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell., 2021, pp. 31–36.
 [22] T. H. Haveliwala, “Topic-sensitive pagerank,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf.
and joint RCL–RCA techniques, with a focus on enhancing
 World Wide Web, New York, NY, USA, 2002, pp. 517–526.
efficiency and alignment with edge-specific constraints. [23] H. Wang, Z. Wei, J. Gan, Y. Yuan, X. Du, and J.-R. Wen, “Edge-based
 local push for personalized pagerank,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
 no. 7, pp. 1376–1389, Mar. 2022.
 REFERENCES [24] Y. Zhu et al., “MicroIRC: Instance-level root cause localization for
 microservice systems,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 216, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 112145.
 [1] F. Al-Doghman, N. Moustafa, I. Khalil, N. Sohrabi, Z. Tari, and A. Y.
 [25] R. Chen, J. Ren, L. Wang, Y. Pu, K. Yang, and W. Wu, “MicroEGRCL:
 Zomaya, “AI-enabled secure microservices in edge computing: Opportu-
 An edge-attention-based graph neural network approach for root cause
 nities and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, pp. 1485–1504,
 localization in microservice systems,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Service-
 Mar./Apr. 2023.
 Oriented Comput., Seville, Spain, Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag,
 [2] C. Wu, Q. Peng, Y. Xia, Y. Jin, and Z. Hu, “Towards cost-effective and
 2022, pp. 264–272.
 robust AI microservice deployment in edge computing environments,”
 [26] R. Ren et al., “Grace: Interpretable root cause analysis by graph convo-
 Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 141, pp. 129–142, 2023.
 lutional network for microservices,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 31st Int. Symp.
 [3] Y. Zhu et al., “Root cause localization for microservice systems in
 Qual. Service, 2023, pp. 1–4.
 cloud-edge collaborative environments,” 2024, arXiv:2406.13604. [On-
 [27] C. Hou, T. Jia, Y. Wu, Y. Li, and J. Han, “Diagnosing performance issues
 line]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13604
 in microservices with heterogeneous data source,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 [4] S. Becker, F. Schmidt, A. Gulenko, A. Acker, and O. Kao, “Towards AIOps
 Conf. Parallel Distrib. Process. Appl., Big Data Cloud Comput., Sustain.
 in edge computing environments,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data,
 Comput. Commun., Social Comput. Netw., 2021, pp. 493–500.
 Atlanta, GA, USA, 2020, pp. 3470–3475.
 [28] J. X. Parreira, D. Donato, S. Michel, and G. Weikum, “Efficient and decen-
 [5] M. Soualhia, C. Fu, and F. Khomh, “Infrastructure fault detection and
 tralized pagerank approximation in a peer-to-peer web search network,”
 prediction in edge cloud environments,” in Proc. 4th ACM/IEEE Symp.
 in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases, 2006, pp. 415–426.
 Edge Comput., Arlington, Virginia, 2019, pp. 222–235.
 [29] J. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. Kégl, “Algorithms for hyper-
 [6] D. Scheinert, A. Acker, L. Thamsen, M. K. Geldenhuys, and O. Kao,
 parameter optimization,” in Proc. 25th Annu. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf.
 “Learning dependencies in distributed cloud applications to identify and
 Process. Syst., Granada, Spain, 2011, pp. 2546–2554.
 localize anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell., 2021,
 pp. 7–12.
 [7] W. Tian, H. Zhang, N. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Graph-based root cause Duneesha Fernando (Graduate Student Member,
 localization in microservice systems with protection mechanisms,” Int. IEEE) is currently working toward the PhD degree
 J. Softw. Eng. Knowl. Eng., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1211–1238, 2023. with the School of Computing and Information Sys-
 [8] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause analysis tems, University of Melbourne, Australia. Her rein (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM Comput. search interests include cloud-edge computing, the
 Surv., vol. 55, no. 3, 2022, Art. no. 59. Internet of Things (IoT), distributed systems, perfor-
 [9] N. Fu, G. Cheng, Y. Teng, G. Dai, S. Yu, and Z. Chen, “Intelligent root cause mance anomaly detection and diagnosis, and artificial
 localization in microservice systems: A survey and new perspectives,” intelligence.
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 12, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 325.
[10] T. Wang and G. Qi, “A comprehensive survey on root cause analysis in (micro) services: Methodologies, challenges, and trends,”
 2024, arXiv:2408.00803. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.
 00803 Maria A. Rodriguez is a lecturer with the School
[11] L. Wu, J. Tordsson, E. Elmroth, and O. Kao, “MicroRCA: Root cause of Computing and Information Systems, The Unilocalization of performance issues in microservices,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP versity of Melbourne, Australia. Her research inter-
 Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–9. ests include distributed and parallel systems, with
[12] C. Bulla and M. N. Birje, “Improved data-driven root cause analysis in an emphasis on optimizing support for containerized
 fog computing environment,” J. Reliable Intell. Environments, vol. 8, and cloud-native applications to improve scalability,
 pp. 359–377, 2021. robustness, and cost efficiency in cloud deployments.
[13] O. Kalinagac, W. Soussi, Y. Anser, C. Gaber, and G. Gür, “Root cause and
 liability analysis in the microservices architecture for edge IoT services,”
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2023, pp. 3277–3283.
[14] Z. Zhang, B. Li, J. Wang, and Y. Liu, “AAMR: Automated anomalous
 microservice ranking in cloud-native environment,” in Proc. Softw. Eng.
 Knowl. Eng., 2021, pp. 86–91. Rajkumar Buyya (Fellow, IEEE) is a Redmond
[15] D. Fernando, M. A. Rodriguez, and R. Buyya, “iAnomaly: A toolkit Barry distinguished professor and director with the
 for generating performance anomaly datasets in edge-cloud integrated Quantum Cloud Computing and Distributed Systems
 computing environments,” in Proc. 17th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Utility (qCLOUDS) Laboratory, University of Melbourne,
 Cloud Comput., Sharjah, UAE, Association for Computing Machinery, Australia. He has authored more than 800 publi-
 2024, pp. 236–245. cations and seven textbooks. He is a fellow of the
[16] R. Xin, P. Chen, and Z. Zhao, “CausalRCA: Causal inference based precise Academia Europaea and one of the most highly cited
 fine-grained root cause localization for microservice applications,” J. Syst. researchers in computer science and software engi-
 Softw., vol. 203, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 111724. neering worldwide (h-index: 175, g-index: 384, and
[17] Z. Zhu, C. Lee, X. Tang, and P. He, “HeMiRCA: Fine-grained root cause more than 164,100 citations).
 analysis for microservices with heterogeneous data sources,” ACM Trans.
 Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 33, no. 8, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 200.