1850 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 A Domain Adaptive IoT Intrusion Detection
 Algorithm Based on AEC–GAT Feature
 Extraction and Joint Domain Adversary
 Qian Wang , Menghui Fan, Zhijuan Wu, Hongnian Yu , Senior Member, IEEE, Yongqiang Cheng ,
 and Bing Zhang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The high heterogeneity of Internet of Things performance in various indicators compared to existing al-
(IoT) devices causes severe imbalance in network traffic gorithms.
data, and the cost of collecting and labeling sufficient intrusion samples is high or impossible, resulting in data Index Terms —Adversarial domain adaptation (DA), class
scarcity in IoT security. Therefore, this article proposes a imbalance, graph attention network (GAT), Internet of
domain adaptive IoT intrusion detection algorithm based on Things (IoT) intrusion detection.
causal embedding autoencoder and a graph attention network (AEC–GAT) feature extraction and joint domain adversary, which leverages abundant data resources from tradi- I. INTRODUCTION
tional network intrusion detection to improve the detection ITH the accelerating advancement of Internet of Things
accuracy in IoT environments. First, a feature extraction
method combining an AEC–GAT is designed. The AEC uses
causal inference to uncover deep semantic links between
 W (IoT) technologies, the number of intelligent devices has
 increased exponentially. These devices have been extensively
domains, while GAT captures device interaction patterns deployed across critical sectors, such as the Internet of Vehicles,
to enhance semantic relevance and structure awareness industrial control systems, and intelligent healthcare [1]. The
in the features. Second, to address the pronounced class high connectivity and openness of IoT not only significantly
imbalance in IoT datasets, focal loss is introduced to replace the traditional cross-entropy (CE) loss. This formu- enhance system efficiency and intelligence but also heighten
lation dynamically adjusts the sample weight through the its susceptibility to sophisticated security threats. IoT has bescaling factor to guide the algorithm to focus on the mi- come the key target of hacker attacks due to the characteristics
nority samples that are difficult to classify. Meanwhile, a of heterogeneous devices, diverse communication protocols,
class adaptive independent domain discriminator method and complex deployment environment [2]. Intrusion detection
is proposed, which incorporates a class-level alignment
mechanism within a joint adversarial training method. This systems (IDS) constitute a fundamental defense mechanism in
method dynamically adjusts both the training intensity and IoT security, enabling the real-time identification of anomalous
the loss weight of each class specific domain discriminator. traffic and malicious intrusions.
The experimental results show that the algorithm in this In recent years, with the rapid development of deep learning
article significantly improves the detection performance technology, it has shown strong feature learning and recognition
of IoT intrusion detection by migrating traditional network
intrusion detection domain knowledge, and has superior capabilities in IDS. Detection algorithms based on convolutional neural networks (CNN) [3], recurrent neural networks
 (RNN) [4], and graph neural networks (GNN) [5] have been
 Received 14 October 2025; accepted 4 November 2025. Date of pub- developed to extract rich semantic features from original traffic
lication 25 November 2025; date of current version 5 March 2026. This data. However, these algorithms highly rely on a large number of
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62376240 and Grant 62302428, in part by the complete annotation data, and their acquisition costs are high and
S&T Program of Hebei under Grant 236Z0304G, and in part by the the annotation process is tedious. It is particularly challenging
Innovation Capability Improvement Plan Project of Hebei Province under for IoT intrusion detection due to the heterogeneity and wide
Grant 22567626H. Paper no. TII-25-7175. (Corresponding author: Qian
Wang.) distribution of IoT devices. It is also difficult to build a unified
 Qian Wang, Menghui Fan, Zhijuan Wu, and Bing Zhang are attack sample collection mechanism, resulting in a serious scarce
with the School of Artificial Intelligence (School of Software) and of attack samples.
the Hebei Key Laboratory of Computer Virtual Technology and
System Integration, Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao 066004, China To address these challenges, domain adaptation (DA) has
(e-mail: wangqian@ysu.edu.cn; fanmenghui@stumail.ysu.edu.cn; emerged as a promising solution for intrusion detection by
wzj0911@stumail.ysu.edu.cn; bingzhang@ysu.edu.cn). enabling knowledge transfer and enhancing the robustness of
 Hongnian Yu is with the School of Computing Engineering and the
Built Environment, Edinburgh Napier University, EH10 5DT Edinburgh, learning in the target domain. Its core idea is to use the existing
U.K. (e-mail: H.Yu@napier.ac.uk). models and data in the source domain to improve the general-
 Yongqiang Cheng is with the School of Computer Science, ization ability of the model in the target domain by reducing
University of Sunderland, SR1 3SD Sunderland, U.K. (e-mail:
yongqiang.cheng@sunderland.ac.uk). the distribution difference between the source domain and the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3631964 target domain in the feature space. Leveraging the richness of
1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
WANG et al.: DOMAIN ADAPTIVE IOT INTRUSION DETECTION ALGORITHM 1851

 attention-based interaction modeling, improving feature
 robustness and domain generalize ability.
 2) Focal loss is introduced to address the class imbalance
 problem. Focal loss dynamically adjusts class-specific
 weights to mitigate majority class dominance during
 training, prioritizing difficult classified minority samples
 and thereby enhancing detection performance under class
Fig. 1. Classification comparison with consideration of different class imbalance.
distrubution. Source Class A and B correspond to blue triangles and 3) A class adaptive independent domain discriminator
squares, and Target Class A and B correspond to green triangles and
squares. Before adding class information [see Fig. 1(a)], the feature method is proposed to enable class level alignment. Sepaconfusion appears across different classes, and after adding class in- rate domain discriminators are constructed for each class
formation [see Fig. 1(b)], different classes are better separated. to address the class confusion. In addition, the intensity of
 adversarial training is adaptively modulated according to
traditional network intrusion detection data and their alignment the distributional similarity among classes. This method
with IoT attack patterns, this study defines them as the source improves class-level alignment and mitigates negative
domain, with IoT intrusion data constituting the target domain. transfer.
By mapping the two to the shared feature subspace, the tradi- The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
tional network intrusion knowledge can be effectively migrated introduces the relevant work. Section III explains the algorithm
to the IoT domain, thus improving the performance of IoT proposed in this article. Section IV is validated through experiintrusion detection. ments. Finally, Section V concludes this article.
 In DA algorithms, in order to measure and reduce the distribution difference between the source domain and the target domain, II. RELATED WORK
the measurement algorithms commonly used in the research
include the maximum mean difference [6] and Wasserstein DA has improved IoT intrusion detection by leveraging
distance [7]. In recent years, with the widespread application knowledge from traditional networks. However, its performance
of generative adversarial networks in cross-domain tasks, DA is still hampered by the feature heterogeneity, class imbalance,
algorithms based on adversarial learning have shown significant and coarse alignment common in IoT environments. To address
advantages. These algorithms learn domain-invariant features the shortcomings of existing algorithms, this paper conducts rethrough adversarial training, aligning feature distributions by search on feature extraction method, class imbalance processing
minimizing domain-specific discrepancies. The algorithm pro- and domain alignment method.
posed by Layeghy et al. [8] employs adversarial training to
extract domain-invariant features, effectively enhancing model A. Feature Extraction Method
robustness across diverse network environments. Compared to Feature extraction is central to the performance of IDS, dispecific network structures, adversarial learning provides a more rectly affecting the ability of the model to identify and classify
flexible feature alignment mechanism for DA, which can be network behaviors. Early research methods mainly rely on arimplemented through different algorithms. tificially designed features, such as traffic statistics, protocol
 Although adversarial learning demonstrates considerable field information, and behavior pattern extraction [10]. With
cross-domain transferability, there are still many challenges the development of deep learning, data-driven feature extracin existing DA algorithms. First, existing algorithms predom- tion methods gradually replace the traditional methods. CNN
inantly rely on statistical distribution alignment while disre- and RNN have been widely employed to model the spatial
garding the deep semantic relationships among attack samples. and temporal dependencies of network traffic. For example,
Second, most algorithms adopt the standard CE loss function. literature [4] has constructed a CNN-LSTM fusion algorithm,
In highly imbalanced class scenarios, this loss tends to under- which can simultaneously capture local structure and sequence
emphasize minority classes resulting in substantially degraded dynamics. In recent years, GNN has been introduced into indetection performance. Finally, prevailing DA algorithms, such trusion detection tasks because of its advantages in processing
as domain adversarial neural network (DANN) [9], typically non-Euclidean structured data. The feature extraction algorithm
employ global distribution alignment, which neglects classwise proposed in [11] employs graph convolutional networks (GCN)
discrepancies between source and target domains. Consequently, to learn domain-invariant representations, thereby enhancing
such confusion often results in feature confusion across different the cross-scenario adaptability of the algorithm. However, the
classes (as illustrated in Fig. 1). existing GNN based on intrusion detection algorithms still has
 To address the shortcomings of these algorithms, a domain some generalization ability problems in cross-domain scenarios,
adaptive IoT intrusion detection algorithm based on AEC-GAT and fails to fully consider the impact of correlation between
feature extraction and joint domain adversary is proposed to features on feature extraction.
enable efficient cross-domain intrusion detection.
 The main contributions of this article are as follows:
 B. Class Imbalance Processing
 1) An AEC–GAT feature extraction method is proposed
 to enhance domain invariance. It combines an AEC for IoT intrusion detection often encounters a serious class imbalcausal modeling of semantic relationships with a GAT for ance problem. The number of normal traffic samples far exceeds
1852 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

that of abnormal traffic, which limits the model in identifying TABLE I
 SYMBOL DEFINITION TABLE
minority classes. In order to alleviate this problem, traditional
methods often use resampling techniques, such as undersampling and oversampling [12]. Synthetic minority over-sampling
technique (SMOTE) [13], as a classic oversampling method,
expands the scale of minority classes by generating new samples,
and is widely used for network traffic classification. However, it
may distort the original data distribution or introduce redundant samples, thereby increasing the risk of overfitting [14].
In contrast, the optimization method based on loss function is
more flexible. Saito et al. [15] improved the performance of
minority class recognition by alternately optimizing conditional
entropy in the select targets (STAR) algorithm, which enables
the algorithm to use a small number of labeled samples in the
target domain. The weighted CE loss [16] assigns different loss
weights to each class to enhance the focus on minority classes.
However, the use of static weights limits its ability to adapt
to dynamic changes in data distribution. Focal loss [17] was
initially used for target detection and has been introduced into
the intrusion detection field in recent years.

C. Domain Alignment Method
 Domain alignment is a common strategy in DA techniques,
aiming to reduce distribution discrepancies between source and
target domains to improve model generalization. Ganin and
Lempitsky [18] proposed DANN, which learns domain-invariant focal loss is applied to mitigate class imbalance and heighten
features through adversarial training with a gradient inversion sensitivity to underrepresented attack samples. Finally, a class
layer. However, its performance degrades in intrusion detection adaptive independent domain discriminator method is proposed
due to class imbalance and sparse target labels. To address these to achieve fine-grained, class-level alignment through joint
challenges, Yao et al. [19] introduced soft transmission network adversarial training. The complete algorithm is illustrated in
(STN) with soft labels to enhance conditional distribution align- Fig. 2.
ment, while Wang et al. [20] proposed an unsupervised whole
graph embedding method called weighted causal graph network A. Feature Extraction Method Based on AEC–GAT
(WCGN) to achieve graph-level feature alignment. Li et al. [21]
 Combining AEC and GAT to construct an adaptive feature
proposed cross-domain adaptive clustering (CDAC), a semisuextraction method, which provides more robust shared feature
pervised method that integrates inter- and intracluster alignment.
 representation for subsequent domain alignment. This method
In addition, many methods have focused on leveraging sample
 combines causal mechanism and graph attention to effectively
and structural relationships to achieve finer-grained alignment.
 distinguish normal and abnormal behaviors.
Saito et al. [22] proposed a minimax entropy method called
 1) Causal Embedding Autoencoder (AEC): AEC is a strucattract, perturb, and explore (APE) that enhances intradomain
 tural extension that introduces causal modeling mechanism on
consistency and selective alignment. Similarly, Yao et al. [23]
 the basis of traditional autocoder, aiming to improve the causal
introduced discriminant distribution alignment in the discrimconsistency and portability of features learned in cross-domain
inative distribution alignment with squared loss (DDAS) and
 tasks. All class features were transformed using one-hot encoddiscriminative distribution alignment with CE loss (DDAC),
 ing, and the feature set was standardized through min–max norwhich aligns distributions while enlarging interclass separability
 malization to ensure numerical consistency across dimensions.
through adaptive classifiers. In contrast, Wu et al. [24] pro-
 Features were then ranked according to the Pearson correlation
posed geometric graph alignment (GGA), a graph-based method
 coefficients with the labels, and those with higher correlations
that captures semantic associations between intrusion domains
 were retained for causal graph construction, reducing redunfor domain-invariant representation learning. However, existing
 dancy and computational complexity. The AEC encoder subsemethods often overlook the distribution differences between
 quently maps the high-dimensional features into a lower dimenclasses, which can lead to confusion of features across different
 sional latent space through multiple nonlinear fully connected
classes, limiting the overall effectiveness and generalization
 layers, producing compact representations that preserve critical
ability of cross-domain detection.
 causal structures while suppressing noise. Subsequently, the
 constraint-based peter-clark (PC) algorithm [25] is used to build
 III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
 cause and effect graphs GS and GT . The algorithm determines
 First, an AEC-GAT feature extraction method is devised to causal directions by leveraging V-structures and the acyclicity
enhance semantic integrity and structural awareness. Second, constraints inherent in causal graphs. Assuming that the input is
WANG et al.: DOMAIN ADAPTIVE IOT INTRUSION DETECTION ALGORITHM 1853

Fig. 2. Overall process of the proposed algorithm.

a feature set V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vd }, where each vi ∈ V denotes The encoder of the AEC employs a multilayer perceptron
a feature variable, the procedure consists of two stages: first, a (MLP). Rectified linear unit (ReLU) activations enhance its
fully connected undirected graph is constructed. For any pair nonlinear modeling capacity, while dimensionality reduction
of adjacent nodes (vi , vj ) in the graph, the Fisher Z test is yields compact latent representations. This design preserves key
employed as a conditional independence test to assess their causal dependencies, suppresses noise, and thereby improves the
dependence. If independence is detected, then the corresponding generalization performance of the proposed algorithm.
edge is removed, resulting in an undirected graph G . Second, the 2) Graph Attention Network (GAT): The causal graph directs
direction of edges is determined based on the d-separation prin- the model to capture true causal relationships between variables.
ciple, expanding the skeleton into a completed partially directed Based on this causal structure, this article further introduces GAT
acyclic graph. The constructed causal graphs GS and GT guide to model and aggregate node relationships. GCN relies on predethe AEC in extracting structurally coherent and transferable fined adjacency matrices for feature propagation, limiting their
feature representations within their respective domains. flexibility in capturing semantic relationships between nodes. In
 Reconstruction loss aims to minimize the error between the re- contrast, GAT introduces a learnable attention mechanism that
constructed output and the original input. This objective encour- adaptively assigns aggregation weights to neighboring nodes.
ages the encoder to learn compact and shared low-dimensional GAT effectively reduces reliance on fixed graph structures and
representations enhances the capacity of the method to represent complex graph
   topologies. Simultaneously, its multihead attention mechanism
 Lrecon = Ex∼Ds ∪Dt x − x̂2 (1) enhances the diversity and robustness of feature representations.
 The input data of GAT are graph G = (V, E). The initial
where x is the input data, x̂ is the reconstruction output of the
 feature of each node vi is hi ∈ Rm , where m represents the
method, and  . 2 denotes the squared L2 norm. Simply relying
 dimension of the feature. In order to obtain sufficient expression
on reconstruction loss fails to ensure that the representation
 ability, a shared linear transformation parameterized by the
aligns with the causal structure of data generation. Therefore, 
 weight matrix W ∈ Rm ×m is applied to each node.
a causal consistency loss Lcausal is introduced
 The weight between neighbor nodes is calculated through the
 Lcausal = Evi ∈V [F (vi ) − Φ(vi |P a(vi ))2 ] (2) attention mechanism. For node vi and its neighbor ∀vj ∈ N (i),
 the attention score is calculated as follows:
where F (vi ) is the prediction or feature representation of the
model for the sample, Φ represents the condition generation
function based on the causality diagram, and Pa(vi ) is the parent
node set of vi in the causal graph. eij = LeakyReLU(aT · [Whi  Whj ]) (3)
1854 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 
where a ∈ R2 m is a trainable weight vector,  is a feature LD = −Exs ∼Ds [log D(f (xs ))] − Ext ∼Dt [log (1 − D(f (xt )))]
connection operation, and eij is an unnormalized attention score. (8)
Next, use the function softmax to normalize eij to obtain the where K is the total number of classes, yk is the one pot code
attention weight αij representing the relative importance of of the real tag, P (yk |f (xs )) is the prediction probability of
neighbor vi to node vj classifier C to feature f (xs ), and D(.) is the probability that
 exp(eij ) the output sample of the domain discriminator belongs to the
 αij =  (4) source domain.
 k∈N (i) exp(eik )
 The label classifier relies on the standard CE loss as the
where αij represents the relative importance of neighbor vi to optimization objective, as shown in (9), without adequately
node vj . Here, attention weight αij is used to weight and sum the addressing the performance degradation caused by class imbalfeatures of neighboring nodes, updating the feature representa- ance. This guides the model toward learning an optimal decision
tion of node vi . Specifically, the new feature representation hi boundary for classification
of node vi is obtained by weighted summation of the features
hi of all neighboring nodes vj ∈ N (i) − log(p), if y = 1
 ⎛ ⎞ CrossEntropy(p, y) = (9)
 − log(1 − p), otherwise.
 
 hi = σ ⎝ αij Whj ⎠ (5) In practical applications, such as IoT intrusion detection,
 j∈N (i) normal traffic samples overwhelmingly outnumber malicious
where σ is the activation function using ReLU. The multihead ones. As a result, the training data exhibit severe class imbalance.
mechanism employs independent attention heads to compute Under such conditions, CE loss is dominated by majority class
node features, followed by fusion via concatenation or averag- samples during training, causing the model to underemphasize
ing. If there are N attention heads, then the update feature of minority classes. Meanwhile, traditional CE assigns uniform
node vi is shown as weights across samples, ignoring differences in classification
 ⎛ ⎞ difficulty. This prevents the model from focusing on critical
  instances near the decision boundary, further hindering its ability
 hi = N
 n=1 σ
 ⎝ n
 αij W n hj ⎠ . (6)
 to learn from minority classes.
 j∈N (i)
 Therefore, this article introduces the focal loss function into
 AEC-GAT combines causal reasoning and graph attention the label classifier. The prediction probability pk of this method
to extract domain-invariant features f (x∗ ). The adaptive atten- is defined as follows:
tion mechanism dynamically allocates node weights, effectively
 p, if y = 1
capturing the importance of neighborhoods and improving the pk = (10)
performance of cross-domain learning. 1 − p, otherwise
 where pk denotes the predicted probability of the true class.
B. Processing Class Imbalance Through Focal Loss The focal loss extends the standard CE by introducing a focus-
 To alleviate the performance degradation caused by the differ- ing parameter that adaptively adjusts the contribution of each
ence of feature distribution between different domains, DANN sample. By reducing the weight of easily classified examples
is widely applied in unsupervised DA tasks. Its network ar- and increasing emphasis on difficult ones during training, the
chitecture consists of three components: feature extractor, la- algorithm is effectively guided to focus on more challenging
bel classifier, and domain discriminator. Concurrently, DANN instances. The formulation is as follows:
embeds a gradient reversal layer (GRL) between the feature FL(pk ) = −(1 − pk )γ log(pk ). (11)
extractor and domain discriminator. This layer directly transmits
 λ
features without any transformation during forward propagation, (1 − pk ) can be regarded as a modulation factor that suppresses
while in backward propagation, GRL multiplies the gradient the contribution of easily classified samples, thereby increasing
returned by the domain discriminator by a negative coefficient, the relative weight of the difficult to classify samples in the
thereby reversing the direction of gradient updates. Through loss function. Specifically, when pk approaches 1, the modthis adversarial mechanism, the feature extractor constantly ulation factor (1 − pk )γ approaches 0, substantially reducing
learns to generate domain invariant features that can confuse the loss contribution of easily classified samples. Conversely,
the domain discriminator, while the domain discriminator con- when the predicted probability pk approaches 0, the modulation
tinuously optimizes its domain classification capability. Both of factor (1 − pk )γ approaches 1, thereby increasing the relative
them collectively enhance the domain invariance of the learned weight of difficult classified samples in the loss. Through this
features through this adversarial game mechanism. mechanism, the loss weights are dynamically adjusted, reducing
 The training objective of DANN is formulated as a minimax the overemphasis on easily classified samples while placing
problem, aiming to minimize classification loss LC while max- enhanced emphasis on difficult classified samples. For different
imizing domain discriminator loss LD across domains values of γ, the loss effect is shown in Fig. 3.
 As pk increases—indicating a higher confidence in correct
 
 K
 classification—the associated loss correspondingly decreases.
LC = −E(xs ,y)∼Ds yk · log P (yk | f (xs )) (7)
 To further alleviate the problem of class imbalance in IoT
 k=1
WANG et al.: DOMAIN ADAPTIVE IOT INTRUSION DETECTION ALGORITHM 1855

 domain discriminator (CA-DD) that enhances cross-domain
 generalization.
 Specifically, an independent domain discriminator Dk is designed for each class k. After introducing independent domain
 discriminators, the DANN training process begins by extracting
 features from input samples using the feature extractor. These
 features are initially classified by the label predictor to generate
 predicted class labels. Then, the samples will be assigned to
 the corresponding class discriminator according to the predicted
 class. The domain discriminator Dk then attempts to distinguish
 whether the class k sample originates from the source domain
Fig. 3. Influence of the focusing parameter γ on focal loss. or the target domain. For each domain discriminator Dk , its loss
 function is as follows.
intrusion detection data, this method adds class weight αk in  
focal loss LDk = − Exs ∼Dsk log Dk (f (xs ))
  
 FL(pk ) = − αk (1 − pk )γ log(pk ) (12) − Ext ∼Dtk log 1 − Dk (f (xt )) (15)

where αk is the relative weight of different classes. Smaller In order to further improve the accuracy of domain alignment,
values of αk are assigned to majority-class samples, while larger this paper introduces a class adaptability evaluation mechavalues are given to minority-class samples, thereby increasing nism. Specifically, the similarity between the source and target
the contribution of minority in the overall loss. This modification domain feature distributions is calculated for each class. This
enables the model to maintain overall classification performance information is used to dynamically adjust the weight of each
while improving its ability to detect critical attack classes in IoT class-specific domain discriminator. This method addresses the
intrusion detection tasks. differences in domain alignment effectiveness across classes
 The modulation factor αk for each class k is determined by through fine-grained adjustment of the adversarial training procomputing the weighted proportion of class αk among all source cess.
domain samples. This ensures that the weight for each class can This paper first calculates the similarity dH,U (Dsk , Dtk )
be adaptively adjusted according to its prevalence in the training between the feature distributions of the source and tardata. The calculation formula is as follows: get domains for each class, using a measurement based on
  H−divergence[26]. For each class k, the distribution discrep-
 (xj ,yj )∈Ds yk
 αk =  . (13) ancy between the source and target domains is computed and
 (xj ,yj )∈Ds xj · yk measured using H−divergence.
 According to the above inference, in order to enhance the  
  
adaptability of the label classifier to the class imbalance data in dH,U Dsk , Dtk = sup Ex∼Dsk [h(x)] − Ex∼Dtk [h(x)] (16)
 h∈H
DANN, focal loss is introduced into the loss function of the label
classifier. The improved label classifier loss function formula is where Dsk and Dtk respectively denote the sets of source and
as follows: target domain samples for class k. Dynamic weights for each
 
 K class-specific domain discriminator are adjusted inversely pro-
 γ
 LFocal
 C = − E(xs ,y)∼Ds αk 1 − P (yk | f (xs )) portional to the corresponding class values. The dynamic weight
 k=1 hk of the domain discriminator for class k can be adjusted in-
  versely proportional to the corresponding H−divergence value.
 × yk log P (yk | f (xs )) (14)
 1
 hk = (17)
where P (yk | f (xs )) is the prediction probability of the label 1 + dH,U (Dsk , Dtk )
 γ
classifier for class k, 1 − P (yk | f (xs )) is the moderating A higher H−divergence value indicates a larger distribution
factor, which gives greater weight to difficult classified samples. gap between the source and target domains, suggesting poorer
 Focal loss is adopted to address class imbalance in cross- alignment quality for that class. As a result, a smaller adaptive
domain scenarios by dynamically adjusting sample weights, en- weight is assigned to its domain discriminator, reducing its
hancing focus on difficult and minority samples. This preserves training intensity. This helps prevent overtraining on classes that
domain-invariant feature learning while improving classification are inherently difficult to align, and reduces model overfitting
robustness for imbalanced data. on those classes. In contrast, a smaller H−divergence indicates
 greater similarity between the source and target domain distribu-
C. Class Adaptive Independent Domain Discriminator tions, reflecting better alignment quality. Consequently, a higher
 Traditional IoT cross-domain transfer learning aligns global adaptive weight is assigned to the class, resulting in increased
feature distributions but ignores class-level discrepancies, training intensity. This method can increase the training intensity
causing class confusion near decision boundaries. To address of those classes that have been aligned well, thereby further
this issue, the paper proposes a class-adaptive independent optimizing their performance in the target domain.
1856 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 During the optimization process, an adaptive weight hk is TABLE II
 CROSS-DOMAIN DETECTION OF K → B
incorporated into the loss function of each class-specific domain
discriminator.
 
 K
 LH
 D = h k LDk (18)
 k=1

By jointly optimizing causal loss, label classification loss, and
domain discrimination loss, the algorithm effectively improves
IoT intrusion detection performance. The overall loss function
of the algorithm is as follows:
 λ1 Lrecon + λ2 Lcausal + min max λ3 LFocal
 C − λ 4 LH
 D . (19)
 C D

 IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS TABLE III
 CROSS-DOMAIN DETECTION OF N → T
 In order to comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness and
generalization capability of the proposed algorithm in this article, multiple experiments are designed to validate its performance across different cross-domain intrusion detection tasks.

A. Dataset Introduction and Experimental Setup
 This study selects representative cross-domain intrusion detection datasets to evaluate the proposed algorithm. The datasets
are as follows: the source domain is NSL-KDD [27], UNSW-
NB15[28] and CIC-IDS2017[29]; the target domain is UNSW-
BOTIOT [30] and UNSW-TONIOT[31]. The dataset will be
described in detail below.
 batch normalization is introduced to accelerate convergence and
 NSL-KDD (recorded as K), a standard dataset for network
 improve training stability. This structural design has signifiintrusion detection, includes multiple types of network attacks
 cantly enhanced the generalization ability and discrimination
and has a relatively balanced sample distribution, and it is suitperformance of the algorithm in IoT cross-domain intrusion
able for intrusion detection in traditional network environments;
 detection tasks.
UNSW-NB15 (recorded as N) is a collection based on the
real network environment in the UNSW series, combined with
simulated attacks. It contains diverse network traffic character- B. Comparison Experiment of Overall Performance
istics and is widely used to evaluate the performance of IDS; Evaluation
CIC-IDS2017 (recorded as C) is a baseline dataset in the field In the overall performance evaluation, this article uses a
of network intrusion detection. It is based on real network traffic variety of evaluation indicators to comprehensively measure
capture, covering multiple network protocols, and can be used the performance of the algorithm, including accuracy, precision,
for research related to network security in IDS. recall, F1-score, and area under the curve (AUC).
 UNSW-BOTIOT (recorded as B) simulates the real network To fully verify the performance advantages of the proposed
behavior of IoT devices, with a small sample size and obvious algorithm in the cross-domain IoT intrusion detection task.
distribution deviation. It can better reflect the security challenges This article selects eight current mainstream transfer learning
in the IoT environment; UNSW-TONIOT (recorded as T) is algorithms as the comparison baseline, including APE [22],
specifically designed for IoT scenarios. It can simulate the CDAC [21], STAR [15], DDAS [23], STN [19], DDAC [23],
network behaviors of IoT devices in real-world operations, and WCGN [20], and GGA [24]. The experiment is conducted on
has more complex and representative feature distributions. three representative cross-domain tasks: K → B, N → T, and C
 These datasets not only reflect the differences between tradi- → B. The experimental results are shown in Tables II–IV.
tional computer networks and IoT environments, but also cover It can be seen from the results that in the K → B task, the
the challenges of significant distribution deviation and sample algorithm in this article achieves the best performance in the
imbalance. five indicators of accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and AUC.
 In terms of experimental implementation, this article imple- Especially on F1 score and AUC, it reached 0.892 and 0.901,
ments the proposed model structure based on PyTorch frame- respectively, indicating that it still maintains excellent overall
work. The classifier and domain discriminator are both con- detection performance in the face of significant cross-domain
structed as MLP with two hidden layers. After each layer, differences and uneven class distribution. In the N → T task,
LeakyReLU activation function and Dropout layer (rejection although the accuracy of the proposed algorithm is slightly
rate is 0.3) are connected to enhance the nonlinear expression lower than that of GGA (0.905 versus 0.927), it achieves supeability of the algorithm and inhibit overfitting. At the same time, rior performance across four key indicators—precision, recall,
WANG et al.: DOMAIN ADAPTIVE IOT INTRUSION DETECTION ALGORITHM 1857

 TABLE IV K → B, N → T, and C → B. The experimental results are
 CROSS-DOMAIN DETECTION OF C → B
 shown in Fig. 4. From the comparison between the model M1
 and the complete model M4, it can be seen that removing the
 AEC-GAT reduces accuracy to 76.8%, 77.1%, and 70.8% on
 the three tasks, indicating that the AEC-GAT method plays
 a crucial role in maintaining overall performance. After focal
 loss is replaced by the traditional CE loss function in model
 M2, F1-score in the three cross-domain tasks is lower than the
 complete model M4. This shows that focal loss can effectively
 promote overall performance improvement. By comparing M3
 and M4, it can be observed that replacing the class-adaptive
 domain discriminator globally leads to accuracy drops of 4.0%,
 5.2%, and 4.5% on the three cross-domain tasks, demonstrating
 TABLE V the importance of fine-grained class-level alignment. Therefore,
 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN FOR ABLATION each method proposed in this article has played an important
 role in cross-domain intrusion detection. The complete model
 M4 has achieved optimal performance in both tasks, verifying
 its wide adaptability and robustness in IoT scenarios.

 D. Visual Analysis of Feature Distribution
 To further validate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in cross-domain feature alignment, principal component
 analysis was employed to reduce the dimensionality of high-
F1-score, and AUC. Notably, it attains a precision of 0.898, dimensional features. Both source and target domain samples
higher than the precision of GGA (0.828), and improves the were projected into a 2-D space for visualization. The cross-
F1-score by nearly 10% (0.891 versus 0.790). It is worth noting domain intrusion detection performance was evaluated using
that this task presents a severe imbalance between positive the transfer task K → B. For this task, the feature distributions
and negative classes. Significant improvements in recall and were systematically analyzed, and the visualization results con-
F1-score demonstrate the ability of the algorithm to mitigate firm the effectiveness of the domain alignment, as shown in
class imbalance. In the C → B task, the proposed algorithm Fig. 5.
achieves the highest performance across all indicators compared Fig. 5(a) illustrates the original feature distribution in the K
to the baseline algorithms. This demonstrates its capability to → B task, where a clear separation between source and target
reliably detect abnormal IoT traffic in cross-domain scenarios. domains reveals pronounced domain shift. After applying the
The consistent precision and recall values further highlight the proposed algorithm [see Fig. 5(b)], the two distributions exhibit
robustness of the algorithm across different IoT environments. substantial overlap, indicating that the feature difference be-
 Based on the performance of the three tasks, it can be seen that tween the two domains is significantly reduced, and the domain
the algorithm can not only accurately identify most class sam- alignment effect is obvious.
ples, but also maintain stable performance in detecting minority
class attack traffic. E. Real Intrusion Dataset Detection Experiment
 In order to further verify the adaptability and effectiveness
C. Ablation Experiment
 of the proposed algorithm in real-world IoT environments, this
 To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of each key article introduces two additional real industrial IoT monitoring
component in the proposed algorithm, ablation experiments datasets: Gas Pipeline (recorded as G) and Water Storage Tank
were conducted to individually analyze the contributions of the (recorded as W). Gas Pipeline dataset is collected from the
AEC-GAT feature extractor, focal loss, and class adaptive inde- natural gas pipeline monitoring system, covering a variety of
pendent domain discriminator. This is achieved by removing or sensor readings and attack injection scenarios. Water Storage
replacing the corresponding methods and analyzing the resulting Tank dataset originates from an operational water treatment
changes in detection performance on the target domain. This control system and includes multidimensional monitoring indisection carries out ablation tests based on cross-domain tasks to cators under both normal and malicious conditions. Compared to
keep data preprocessing, training rounds, optimizer, and super traditional datasets, these industrial datasets exhibit higher noise
parameters consistent. The specific comparison model design is levels, greater complexity, and more pronounced distributional
shown in Table V. differences, thereby providing a more realistic evaluation setting
 To verify the actual effectiveness of each key method in for IoT intrusion detection. In the cross-domain evaluation, two
cross-domain intrusion detection, this article conducted ablation tasks were considered: K → W and N → G. The corresponding
experiments on representative cross-domain tasks, including experimental results are presented in Table VII.
1858 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 4. Ablation experiment.

 TABLE VI
 OVERHEAD ANALYSIS

 F. Parameter Analysis
 In the overall loss function in this article, the weight of each
 task is controlled by the parameters γ, λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , and λ4 , and
 the overall optimization goal is shown in (19). In order to verify
 the rationality of parameter selection, this article designs an
 analysis to examine the effects of γ and λ1 − λ4 on algorithm
 performance. Furthermore, transfer tasks K → B, N → T, and
 C → B were selected for detailed analysis, with corresponding
 results visualized in Fig. 6. Experiments show that the rationality
Fig. 5. Data distribution before(a) and after feature alignment(b). (a) K of parameter values directly affects the cross-domain detection
→ B original data. (b) K → B feature alignment data. effect. The parameter configuration finally adopted in this article is: γ = 2, λ1 = 1.0, λ2 = 0.5, λ3 = 1.0, and λ4 = 1.0.
 TABLE VII The best-performing baseline algorithm in each task is also
 CROSS-DOMAIN DETECTION OF K → W AND N → G indicated by a dashed line in the corresponding color. It can
 be observed that when the parameters change, the performance
 of the algorithm in this article remains relatively stable without
 sharp fluctuations. In addition, in almost all parameter ranges,
 the solid line is always higher than the corresponding dotted
 line elevation, which means that the algorithm in this article is
 superior to its corresponding best baseline algorithm in most
 In the cross-domain evaluation on real industrial IoT datasets, parameter ranges.
the proposed algorithm maintains high detection performance,
demonstrating its effectiveness in diverse operational scenarios.
For the K → W task, the algorithm achieves an accuracy of G. Overhead Analysis
79.7%, demonstrating its ability to distinguish between normal To further evaluate the practicality of the proposed algorithm
and attack samples when traditional network traffic is applied to in IoT scenarios, the computational overhead is systematically
a real water treatment system. Similarly, in the N → G task, the analyzed in terms of memory usage, GPU utilization, training
algorithm achieves consistently high accuracy, indicating stable time, and throughput. The evaluation was conducted on three
cross-domain detection even for gas pipeline monitoring data cross-domain tasks (K → B, N → T, and C → B), and the results
with pronounced distributional differences. Analysis of preci- are shown in Table VI.
sion and recall indicates that the algorithm delivers consistently The results indicate that the complete algorithm (ours) mainreliable detection, evidencing both robustness and generaliz- tains memory usage between 6.5 and 6.9 GB, confirming that
ability in real-world IoT environments. Overall, these results the resource requirements are compatible with practical IoT
substantiate that the proposed algorithm is not only effective deployment. The throughput of 7400–7950 samples across three
on traditional IoT datasets but also practical and reliable for cross-domain tasks further demonstrates the efficiency of the
deployment in real-world industrial IoT environments. data processing capability. Both AEC-GAT and CA-DD exhibit
WANG et al.: DOMAIN ADAPTIVE IOT INTRUSION DETECTION ALGORITHM 1859

Fig. 6. Parameter analysis of loss weight.

overhead within desirable ranges, supporting feasibility in IoT [6] A. Gretton, K. M. Borgwardt, M. J. Rasch, B. Schölkopf, and A. Smola, “A
deployment. kernel two-sample test,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 723–773,
 2012.
 [7] N. Courty, R. Flamary, D. Tuia, and A. Rakotomamonjy, “Optimal transport for domain adaptation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 V. CONCLUSION vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1853–1865, Sep. 2017.
 [8] S. Layeghy, M. Baktashmotlagh, and M. Portmann, “DI-NIDS: Domain in-
 To address the challenge of degraded intrusion detection variant network intrusion detection system,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 273,
performance caused by data scarcity in IoT scenarios, this article 2023, Art. no. 110626.
proposes a domain adaptive IoT intrusion detection algorithm [9] Y. Ganin et al., “Domain-adversarial training of neural networks,” J. Mach.
 Learn. Res., vol. 17, no. 59, pp. 2096–2030, 2016.
based on AEC-GAT feature extraction and joint domain ad- [10] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial-temporal feaversary. The algorithm enhances feature representation through tures using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,” IEEE Accausal reasoning and graph attention, mitigates class imbalance cess, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2780250.
 [11] Q. Wang, X. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Ren, and B. Zhang, “A
via focal loss, and achieves fine-grained class-level alignment domain adaptive IoT intrusion detection algorithm based on GWRusing a class-adaptive independent domain discriminator. Exten- GCN feature extraction and conditional domain adversary,” IEEE Insive experiments, including cross-domain comparative evalua- ternet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp. 41223–41234, Dec. 2024, doi:
 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3457894.
tions, ablation studies, parameter analyses, and real-world indus- [12] H. He and E. A. Garcia, “Learning from imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans.
trial IoT validations, demonstrate that the proposed algorithm Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1263–1284, Sep. 2009, doi:
consistently outperforms existing baselines across multiple per- 10.1109/TKDE.2008.239.
 [13] N. V. Chawla et al., “SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling techformance indicators. The results substantiate that each con- nique,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 16, pp. 321–357, 2002.
stituent method contributes significantly to enhancing algorithm [14] C. Bunkhumpornpat, K. Sinapiromsaran, and C. Lursinsap, “Safe-levelrobustness, generalization capability, and deployment feasibil- smote: Safe-level-synthetic minority over-sampling technique for handling
 the class imbalanced problem,” in Proc. Adv. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining:
ity. Moreover, the overhead analysis shows that the algorithm 13th Pacific-Asia Conf., Bangkok, Thailand, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
maintains desirable computational efficiency, supporting feasi- 2009, pp. 475–482.
bility in real-world IoT deployment. Future work will further [15] A. Singh et al., “Improving semi-supervised domain adaptation using effective target selection and semantics,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
explore causal structure enhancement and continual learning Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 2709–2718.
mechanisms to better meet practical IoT deployment needs. [16] Y. Cui et al., “Class-balanced loss based on effective number of samples,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.. 2019, pp. 9268–
 9277.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [17] T. Y. Lin et al., “Focal loss for dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
 The authors would like to thank valuable comments and [18] Y. Ganin and V. Lempitsky, “Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 1180–1189.
suggestions of the reviewers. [19] Y. Yao, Y. Zhang, X. Li, and Y. Ye, “Heterogeneous domain adaptation via
 soft transfer network,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2019,
 pp. 1578–1586.
 REFERENCES [20] L. Wang, C. Huang, W. Ma, X. Cao, and S. Vosoughi, “Graph embedding
 via diffusion-wavelets-based node feature distribution characterization,”
 [1] M. A. Khatun, S. F. Memon, C. Eising, and L. L. Dhirani, “Ma- in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3478–3482.
 chine learning for Healthcare-IoT security: A review and risk mitiga- [21] J. Li, G. Li, Y. Shi, and Y. Yu, “Cross-domain adaptive clustering for
 tion,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 145869–145896, 2023, doi: 10.1109/AC- semi-supervised domain adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 CESS.2023.3346320. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 2505–2514.
 [2] P. Baniya, A. Agrawal, K. Abid, J. Nath, B. K. Chaudhary, and B. Kunwar, [22] K. Saito, D. Kim, S. Sclaroff, T. Darrell, and K. Saenko, “Semisupervised
 “The Internet of Things: Security challenges and opportunities,” in Proc. domain adaptation via minimax entropy,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 3rd Int. Conf. Power Electron. IoT Appl. Renewable Energy Control, 2024, Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 8050–8058.
 pp. 153–158, doi: 10.1109/PARC59193.2024.10486356. [23] Y. Yao, Y. Zhang, X. Li, and Y. Ye, “Discriminative distribution align-
 [3] A. Deshmukh and K. Ravulakollu, “An efficient CNN-based intrusion ment: A unified framework for heterogeneous domain adaptation,” Pattern
 detection system for IoT: Use case towards cybersecurity,” Technologies, Recognit., vol. 101, 2020, Art. no. 107165.
 vol. 12, 2024, Art. no. 203, doi: 10.3390/technologies12100203. [24] J. Wu, H. Dai, Y. Wang, K. Ye, and C. Xu, “Heterogeneous domain adapta-
 [4] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for in- tion for IoT intrusion detection: A geometric graph alignment approach,”
 trusion detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 10764–10777, Jun. 2023, doi:
 pp. 21954–21961, 2017, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2762418. 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3239872.
 [5] Z. Sun, A. M. H. Teixeira, and S. Toor, “GNN-IDS: Graph neural network [25] M. Kalisch and P. Bühlman, “Estimating high-dimensional directed acyclic
 based intrusion detection system,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Availability, graphs with the PC-algorithm,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 8, no. 3,
 Rel. Secur., 2024, pp. 1–12. pp. 613–636, 2007.
1860 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

[26] S. Ben-David et al., “A theory of learning from different domains,” Mach. Hongnian Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 Learn., vol. 79, pp. 151–175, 2010. the B.S. degree in industrial automation from the
[27] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed analysis Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China,
 of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. 2009 IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. in 1982, the M.S. degree in industrial automa-
 Secur. Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6. tion from Northeast Heavy Machinery Institute,
[28] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for Qinhuangdao, China, in 1985, and the Ph.D.
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in degree in mechanical engineering from King’s
 Proc. 2015 Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6. College London, London, U.K., in 1994.
[29] Kurniabudi, D. Stiawan, Darmawijoyo, M. Y. Bin Idris, A. M. Bamhdi, He has successfully supervised 20 Ph.D. theand R. Budiarto, “CICIDS-2017 dataset feature analysis with information ses and 18 Master by Research theses, and
 gain for anomaly detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 132911–132921, has trained 12 postdoctoral research fellows. He
 2020. has authored or coauthored more than 200 journal and conference
[30] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards the papers. He has held several research grants totaling approximately eight
 development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things for network million pounds from the U.K. EPSRC, the Royal Society, the European
 forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 100, Union, AWM, and industry. His research interests include robotics and
 pp. 779–796, 2019. nonlinear control, complex network modeling, wireless communications,
[31] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. H. d. and applied artificial intelligence.
 Hartog, “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data sets,”
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022.

 Qian Wang received the B.S. in educational
 technology, M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in computer science and technology from the School of Yongqiang Cheng received the B.S. and M.S.
 Information Science and Engineering, Yanshan degrees in automatic control from Tongji Uni-
 University, Qinhuangdao, China, in 2009, 2012 versity, Shanghai, China, in 2001 and 2004, reand 2016, respectively. spectively, and the Ph.D. degree in engineering
 From 2015 to 2016, she has been with the design and technology from the University of
 University of Hull, Hull, U.K., as a Visiting Bradford, Bradford. U.K., in 2010.
 Scholar. Since 2016, she has been a Lecture Between 2004 and 2007, he worked fullwith the School of Information Science and En- time with the ZTE R&D Centre, Shanghai. He
 gineering, Yanshan University. Since 2019, she is currently a Professor of artificial intelligence
has been an Associate Professor. She is currently a Supervisor for both aligned with digital healthcare with the Univermaster and doctoral students. She is currently with Edinburgh Napier sity of Sunderland, Sunderland, U.K. He is the
University, Edinburgh, U.K., as a Visiting Scholar. Her research interests REF lead for the School of Computer Science and Technology, the
include machine learning, network security, and healthcare analysis. Deputy Director of the Research Centre for Emerging Technologies and
 Innovation, and leads the Data Science and AI Workstream with the
 John Dawson Drug Discovery and Development Institute. His research
 Menghui Fan received the bachelor’s de- interests include artificial intelligence, trustworthy AI, machine learning,
 gree in computer science and technology from wireless sensor networks, smart systems, and digital technologies.
 Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang, China,
 in 2023. She is currently working in computer
 science and technology toward the master’s degree with the School of Artificial Intelligence
 (School of Software), Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao, China.
 She has been actively engaged in developing adaptive and generalized intrusion detection Bing Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 models based on deep learning and causal rea- degree in computer science and technology
soning techniques to enhance cross-domain detection performance. Her from the College of Computer and Information
current work explores adversarial learning and graph-based represen- Technology, Three Gorges University, Yichang,
tation methods to improve the robustness and interpretability of IoT se- China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree in comcurity systems. Her research interests focuses on network security, with puter science and technology from the School of
an emphasis on intrusion detection, domain adaptation, and intelligent Information Science and Engineering, Yanshan
data analysis in IoT environments. University, Qinhuangdao, China, in 2018.
 Since 2018, he has been a Lecturer with the
 School of Information Science and Engineering,
 Zhijuan Wu received the bachelor’s degree in Yanshan University, and has been an Associate
 computer science and technology from Hebei Professor since 2020. He has been with the Norwegian University of
 University, Baoding, China, in 2021. She is cur- Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, as a Visiting Scholar. He is
 rently working in computer science and technol- currently supervises both master’s and doctoral students. His research
 ogy toward the master’s degree with the School interests include data mining, network security, machine learning, and
 of Artificial Intelligence (School of Software), software security.
 Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao, China.
 She focuses on algorithm optimization and
 its applications to complex, real-world data
 problems. She has developed strong skills in
 model development, feature selection, and performance evaluation. Her current work investigates effective methods for
handling high-dimensional and imbalanced data in multilabel learning.
She aims to contribute to machine learning through both theoretical
study and practical innovation in real applications. Her research interests
include data mining, multilabel classification, and intelligent information
processing.