IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026 3865

 A Federated and Incremental Network Intrusion
 Detection System for IoT Emerging Threats
 Raffaele Carillo , Francesco Cerasuolo , Giampaolo Bovenzi , Domenico Ciuonzo , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Antonio Pescapé , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Ensuring network security is increasingly challeng- scratch, which is both storage- and computation-intensive [5].
ing, especially in the Internet of Things (IoT) domain, where Moreover, while cross-network data sharing could enhance
threats are diverse, rapidly evolving, and often device-specific. NIDS by broadening threat coverage, it raises serious pri-
Hence, Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDSs) require
(i) being trained on network traffic gathered in different vacy concerns, making it impractical in most real-world
collection points to cover the attack traffic heterogeneity, scenarios involving user data. Notably, recent studies have
(ii) continuously learning emerging threats (viz., 0-day attacks), investigated either CIL or FL for NIDS, but largely in isoand (iii) be able to take attack countermeasures as soon as lation: CIL approaches typically assume centralized access
possible.In this work, we aim to improve Artificial Intelligence to all traffic data, while FL ones usually consider a fixed
(AI)-based NIDS design & maintenance by integrating Federated Learning (FL) and Class Incremental Learning (CIL). and pre-defined set of attack classes. Only a limited number
Specifically, we devise a Federated Class Incremental Learning of works explore their integration, and those that do often
(FCIL) framework–suited for early-detection settings—that sup- focus on simplified scenarios such as binary detection tasks,
ports decentralized and continual model updates, investigating overlapping classes, or post-hoc analysis. Consequently, the
the non-trivial intersection of FL algorithms with state-of-the-art problem of incrementally learning new, client-specific attack
CIL techniques to enable scalable, privacy-preserving training in
highly non-IID environments. We evaluate FCIL on three IoT classes from decentralized, non-IID data in an early-detection
datasets across different client scenarios to assess its ability to setting remains largely unaddressed.
learn new threats and retain prior knowledge. The experiments In this work, we propose a FCIL framework for NIDS
assess potential key challenges in generalization and few-sample that simultaneously addresses the challenges of incrementraining, and compare NIDS performance to monolithic and tal learning and decentralized training. By integrating CIL,
centralized baselines.
 the system can continuously incorporate new attack classes
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection systems, Internet without forgetting previously learned threats, while FL
of Things, federated learning, class incremental learning, enables collaborative model training across distributed clients,
0-day attacks.
 ensuring scalability and preserving data privacy. This combi-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 nation allows our NIDS to adapt in real time to emerging

C YBER-ATTACKS have increased rapidly in the last few
 years, reaching an impressive number of 600 million of
attacks performed daily [1], highlighting the urgent need for
 threats in heterogeneous network environments [6], [7],
 [8].
 Combining FL and CIL for designing NIDS poses unique
service providers to adopt a more proactive role in ensuring and still largely unaddressed challenges. First, the non-IID
the integrity, confidentiality, and availability of data across nature of client data means new attack classes may emerge
digital infrastructures. In this scenario, NIDSs are central to only on specific clients, leading to imbalanced updates and
securing modern networks, shifting from static, signature- poor generalization. Second, catastrophic forgetting is intenbased methods to adaptive approaches powered by Machine sified, as clients may observe only new classes, causing the
Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) techniques [2]. This global model to overwrite knowledge of previously learned
need is even more pronounced in the IoT domain, where attacks. Third, the stability–plasticity dilemma becomes even
resource-constrained and heterogeneous devices increase the more pronounced, as each client must not only retain previattack surface. For instance, IoT nodes are often hijacked into ously learned classes while learning new (local) ones, but also
botnets for large-scale DDoS attacks (e.g., Mirai) [3], or run integrate new disjoint attack classes from other clients.
outdated firmware that enables persistent exploitation [4]. Hence, the contributions of this work are the following:
 However, AI-based NIDS cannot easily adapt to emerging
 • we formalize and study a realistic FCIL problem for
(0-day) attacks, as updating them requires training-from-
 NIDS, where early detection, client-specific novel attacks,
 Received 10 August 2025; revised 23 January 2026; accepted 13 March and non-IID decentralized data jointly coexist, a setting
2026. Date of publication 17 March 2026; date of current version that has not been systematically addressed in prior work;
13 April 2026. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was N. Stakhanova. (Corresponding author: • we provide a comprehensive analysis of how state-
Francesco Cerasuolo.) of-the-art (SOTA) CIL strategies behave in federated
 The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Informa- environments, revealing non-trivial interactions with
tion Technologies (DIETI), University of Naples Federico II, 80138 Naples,
Italy (e-mail: francesco.cerasuolo@unina.it). different aggregation schemes (FedAvg, FedProx, and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3675031 FedDyn) and limitations, absent in centralized setups;

 © 2026 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
3866 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE I
 S TUDIES P ROPOSING CIL AND / OR FL T ECHNIQUES FOR NIDS F ROM 2022 O NWARDS IN C HRONOLOGICAL O RDER

 • we investigate realistic federated configurations with The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The studies
 varying numbers of clients (i.e., 2 and 5), each intro- dealing with CIL and FL for NIDS are reviewed in Sec. II.
 ducing a single, disjoint novel attack, thereby explicitly Then, Sec. III describes the FCIL procedure. The experimental
 stressing FCIL-designed NIDS under severe class imbal- setup and results are reported in Sec. IV and V, respectively.
 ance and client heterogeneity; Lastly, Sec. VI concludes our work, highlighting also future
 • we evaluate FCIL-designed NIDS in real-world scenar- directions of our research.
 ios, assessing its ability to (i) generalize across networks
 and (ii) learn effectively from a limited number of II. R ELATED W ORKS
 samples. In this section, we review the use of CIL and FL in the
 context of NIDS. First, we discuss approaches that apply CIL
 to NIDS in Sec. II-A, followed by an overview of FL-based
CARILLO et al.: FEDERATED AND INCREMENTAL NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 3867

methods in Sec. II-B. Then, we examine recent efforts that clients: (i) horizontal (or homogeneous) FL, where clients
integrate both paradigms—CIL and FL—for NIDS (Sec. II-C). share the same feature space but each possesses a different
Finally, Sec. II-D positions our work within this landscape. set of data samples; and (ii) vertical (or heterogeneous) FL,
A summary of the reviewed literature is provided in Table I. in which clients hold different features corresponding to the
 same sample set [32]. Additionally, FL can be classified by
A. Incremental Learning for NIDS the network dimensions into (i) cross-device and (ii) crosssilo settings. The former involves many personal devices
 In this section, we review the literature on CIL applied to
 with unstable connections and variable data, while the latter
NIDS, focusing on approaches that adapt existing intrusion
 features fewer entities—e.g., organizations—with more stable,
detectors to counter emerging attack types and anomalies.
 high-bandwidth links and less frequent communication [33].
In the literature, CIL approaches are divided into three main Furthermore, client data can be characterized as either indefamilies based on model expansions [31]: (i) ”fine-tuning, pendently and identically distributed (IID) or non-IID. In the
expanding the model head and updating the entire model
 former setting, data across clients is statistically consistent and
with the incremental training set; (ii) ”fixed-representation,
 independent. Conversely, in the latter case, data samples are
expanding the model head and freezing parts of the pre-trained
 interdependent and drawn from different distributions, often
model (viz., backbone and/or old head), definitively training reflecting the inherent heterogeneity among clients [33].
the non-frozen parts; (iii) ”model-growth, adding new models Among the reviewed literature, all works deal with horizonor layers to accommodate new knowledge.
 tal FL, sharing feature space while having a disjoint sample
 All the reviewed works are from the fine-tuning family,
 space. Moreover, all the works implement a cross-device setup,
except for I2 RNN [11] and SPCIL [14], which employ modelwith local training performed on edge devices, and deal with
growth solutions. Notably, the fixed-representation family
 classes and samples shared among clients, resulting in data
remains largely unexplored for network intrusion detection distributions that are only partially non-IID (column “DC”).
tasks, as freezing the base model may undermine the plasticity As for FL algorithm (column “FL approach”), the majority
required to learn new patterns (see column “CIL Approach”
 of works leverage FedAvg [17], [18], [19], [21], [22]. Addiin Tab. I for further details).
 tionally, other works propose minor modifications to FedAvg,
 As for incremental episodes (column “CIL Increments”),
 such as incorporating weighted averaging schemes and client
most of the reviewed works adopt multi-class increments—i.e.,
 selection based on contribution significance [20], while others
adding more new classes per episode—while only [11], [15] adopt more sophisticated FL algorithms, such as FedProx [21].
explore the single-class addition scenario, which more closely Interestingly, Rey et al. [17] investigate techniques to defend
mirrors real-world deployment with new attacks typically
 against adversarial clients aiming to poison the global model.
appearing individually over time.
 Finally, all the revised studies address the mMD task
 Reviewed work deals with the Multi-class Misuse Detection
 employing (supervised) DL models [18], [19], [20], [22],
(mMD) task—i.e., distinguishing among benign and all the
 except for [17] and [21] leveraging the (unsupervised)
attack classes—, while Binary Misuse Detection (bMD)—i.e., AutoEncoders (AEs) to perform the Anomaly Detection (AD)
differentiating benign and malicious traffic—is also considered task—that is, training only on the benign class and recognizing
in [16]. In addition, Cerasuolo et al. [15] decompose the intruattacks as anomalies or out-of-distribution samples.
sion detection process into two sequential tasks: a bMD task
and an Attack Classification (AC) task—i.e., categorization of C. Federated Incremental Learning for NIDS
malicious traffic into different attack types.
 Crucially, most of these studies focus on post-mortem In this section, we review existing work that integrates
detection—that is, they do not perform early detection (see incremental expansion of NIDS (i.e., CIL) with decentralized
column “Early Detection”)—typically relying on statistics training approaches (i.e., FL), namely, FCIL. Notably, all
computed over the entire traffic object (see column “Input these studies focus on a multi-class addition (column “CIL
Data”). In contrast, a subset of works avoid (handcrafted) Setup”)—only [28] addresses single-class addition—and confeature summarization, using raw fields from packet headers sider non-disjoint classes among clients (column “DC”).
or payloads as direct inputs to the model. These approaches Among these studies, most adopt CIL approaches which
typically leverage only the first N p packets of a flow to build are baselines in network-related tasks, except for SOINN-RBF
NIDS that support early-stage decisions and enable timely, [23]— leveraging self-organizing incremental neural networks
proactive response to threats. (SOINN) in conjunction with Radial Basis Function (RBF),
 incrementally mapping the original input into a higherdimensional space.
B. Federated Learning for NIDS Regarding the FL strategy, most employ FedAvg either in
 In this section, we review the literature on FL applied its original form or with minor adaptations, as seen in [25],
to NIDS. FL allows NIDS to be trained on decentralized [27], [29]. Notably, Jin et al. [25] leverage class prototypes
attack data, preserving privacy and minimizing malicious and importance factors for client models in the aggregation
traffic transmission. This is especially valuable for sensitive or process. On the other hand, Mao et al. [27] and Quyen et al.
large-scale data, enabling collaborative and privacy-preserving [29] weight each client model during FedAvg aggregation
training [8]. In the literature, two main FL families are com- according to the size of its training dataset. In addition,
monly distinguished based on how data is distributed among several studies adopt alternative FL aggregation algorithms as
3868 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

performance baselines for comparison, including FedSI [28], imbalance between new and existing classes [34]. Addition-
CMFL [23], FedSpace [28], GLFC [26], [28], FCIL [28], ally, adding a single attack per client reflects realistic scenarios
FedProto [28], FedProx [30], SCAFFOLD [30], FedMD [30], where new attacks emerge sparsely and unevenly across the
FedDF [30], and FedGKT [30], or define new approaches, network. Lastly, we assess scalability by varying the number
such as EvoFedIDS [28] or Fed-SOINN [23]. of clients in federated networks, evaluating how the resulting
 As for the detection task, the majority focus on supervised FCIL NIDS handles real-world challenges like cross-network
misuse detection—either bMD [23], [24], [28] or mMD [25], generalization and limited data availability.
[26], [29]. Notably, Jin et al. [25] detect both known and zeroday intrusions and continuously adapt to emerging threats, but III. M ETHODOLOGY
also perform mMD to discriminate among known classes.
 We begin by presenting the core methodologies behind
 CIL (Sec. III-A) and FL (Sec. III-B). Then, we introduce the
D. Literature Gap & Positioning NIDS-focused unified framework for FCIL (Sec. III-C), which
 integrates the key principles of both paradigms.
 In this work, we deal with incremental and decentralized
NIDS to tackle the evolving nature of cyber-attacks and
associated privacy concerns. Differently from previous works A. Class Incremental Learning
considering only CIL [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], In this work, we adopt the CIL paradigm within
[16] or FL [18], [19], [20], [21], [22] separately, which either DL architectures. To provide context, we first introassume centralized data availability or a fixed and closed set of duce the notation about data and fundamental concepts
attack classes, we explore how NIDS can continuously learn underlying both approaches. Notably, the training dataset
in a decentralized fashion. (D={(x1 , y1 ), . . ., (xN , yN )}) is composed of N input samples,
 Equally important, in contrast with existing literature on where each sample (e.g., a biflow) xn ∈ X is labeled as benign
FCIL for NIDS [23], [24], [25], [27], [28], [29], which mostly traffic or attack class (i.e., yn ∈ K = 1, 2, 3, . . .).
assumes full-traffic or post-mortem analysis and overlooks the Considering a generic DL architecture, it is composed of
constraints of timely intrusion response, we consider an early- two parts: a backbone, in charge of the feature extraction
detection setup and investigate the mMD task, along with its φ : X → V obtaining from the input (x) its latent space
decoupled counterpart bMD, followed by the AC task. Sep- representation v (viz., feature vector); a head, transforming
arating bMD and AC decouples detection from classification feature vectors into logits h(φ(x)) = o(x) ∈ O. Then, logits
performance. Unlike mMD, this distinction reveals whether are converted into class probabilities via the usual softmax
a system can only detect threats and correctly identify them activation function, defined as
separately, enabling a clearer assessment of its capabilities.
 |K|
 Furthermore, in order to support low-resource environments, X
 softmax(x) k = pk (x; K) = eok (x) / eo j (x) ,
  
 (1)
we adopt neither model-growth approaches (e.g. DER)—
 j=1
given their increasing storage and communication costs,
which are particularly detrimental in federated settings —, and predictions are obtained as ŷ , argmaxk∈K {pk (x; K)}.
nor baseline approaches for network-related tasks (i.e., FT, The incremental NIDS aims to train a set of parameters
EWC, iCaRL, and WA), which have been shown to be non- θ to learn a function γ : X → K, with γ(x) = ŷ ∈ K
effective for network traffic data [34]. Conversely, we focus on representing the predicted label for input x (i.e., legitimate
cutting-edge CIL approaches from fine-tuning family, such as traffic or a specific attack type).
iCaRL+ [35], BiC [36] and BiC+ [37], MEMENTO [38] and The CIL problem can be formulated as follows: at each
MEMENTO+ [37], in their decentralized flavor. This choice is episode, a set of new classes Knew is introduced, along with
motivated by the lightweight nature of fine-tuning approaches, a labeled dataset Dnew . The goal is to update an existing
which impose minimal storage and communication overhead NIDS—previously trained on Dold —to integrate knowledge
when compared to model-growth solutions. from Knew while preserving its ability to recognize the pre-
 To account for non-IID and unbalanced attack distribu- viously learned classes Kold , thereby enabling discrimination
tions, we move beyond the de facto standard FedAvg and over the complete class set (Kall = Kold ∪ Knew ). Some CIL
include FedProx and FedDyn, which explicitly handle client methods additionally exploit a subset of samples from the old
heterogeneity and update stability, enabling a more realistic classes, retained in memory, to reinforce prior knowledge durevaluation of CIL–FL integration. ing incremental updates. In such cases, training is performed
 Further, most prior FCIL studies assume overlapping attack on the combined dataset Dmem ∪ Dnew [39].
classes or the simultaneous introduction of multiple classes, In the following, the CIL approaches employed in this
which mitigates class imbalance and simplifies aggregation. work are presented. Specifically, we consider approaches from
In contrast, we consider a more general scenario in which fine-tuning family, as they offer the highest scalability witheach client introduces a single, distinct novel attack, resulting out increasing the resource demand. [31]. Notably, all these
in client-specific attack distributions—i.e., no class overlap approaches are considered as a baseline for the incremental
between clients. Moreover, we consider the addition of a process—i.e., FT-Mem—or have proven to be effective for
single attack (class) per client—a more challenging scenario network traffic classification [34], [35], [38] or adaptive NIDS
than those considered in prior work, due to the pronounced task [15]. They utilize an exemplar memory and often employ
CARILLO et al.: FEDERATED AND INCREMENTAL NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 3869

a composite loss function to guide the training process, with model parameters to a central federated server, which coordian optional bias correction layer to prevent task-recency bias. nates the training process. The server aggregates the received
 FT-Mem—Fine-Tuning with Memory [34]: built on top models to produce an updated global model that captures the
of Fine-Tuning (FT) approach [40], it stores a small part of collective knowledge of all clients. This global model is then
old classes samples—selected with herding strategy—and use redistributed to the clients, who resume local training based
them in the incremental training (viz., D = Dnew ∪ Dmem ) to on the aggregated update. This process is iteratively repeated
reduce catastrophic forgetting, by refreshing old knowledge. for R communication rounds.
 iCaRL+—Incremental Classifier and Representation In this work, we consider a cross-silo FL setting, i.e.,
Learning Plus [35]: it adapts iCaRL to network traffic, incor- a federated network with a small number of clients repporating both rehearsal strategy (through herding selection) resenting different organizations or geographical collection
and a composite loss function with equally weighted classifica- points. Each client corresponds to a group of IoT devices
tion and Knowledge Distillation (KD) terms (λclass = λdist = 1). (e.g., gateways, edge nodes, or administrative domains) rather
Differently from iCaRL employing a Nearest Mean Classifier, than individual constrained sensors, and clients collaboratively
iCaRL+ leverage a model head that dynamically expands and train a global NIDS; while each client observes traffic from
activates through the softmax function. different attack classes (non-IID), all employ the same feature
 BiC—Bias Correction [36]: it introduces an additional space (horizontal FL). Communication is therefore limited to
layer—parametrized with α and β—to correct new classes exchanging model updates, whose size—on the order of a few
logits to reduce the task recency and sample biases towards MB per round for our architecture—is compatible with NBnew classes. The incremental training is led by a composite IoT, LTE-M, and typical edge/cloud backhaul links assumed
loss function with classification and KD terms (weighted by in cross-silo IoT and industrial deployments [41]. Supporting
λclass = |Knew |/|Kall | and λdist = 1 − λclass , respectively). BiC fully constrained end devices would instead require additional
retains a balanced small set of biflows—also called correction mechanisms such as model compression or hierarchical FL.
set—composed of dP% · Nold e for each old and new class, In the experiments, we leverage different FL approaches to
where Nold represents the number of old samples for each aggregate models from different federated clients. In detail,
Kold .1 Therefore, the additional layer is trained on this dataset we employ three approaches, described in the following.
(viz., correction set) to determine the two parameters with both Notably, we exclude some approaches from our analysis as
backbone and head frozen. they compute and share local prototypes across the federa-
 MEMENTO—distill augMented knowlEdge, sMooth nEw tion, introducing significant computational and communication
iNformation, and recTify bOth [38]: built upon BiC, it overhead—e.g., FedProK [42], LGA [43].
is defined depending on the scenario considered. Notably, Federated Averaging (FedAvg) [44]: each client performs
for few-class increments, MEMENTO introduces a series of local model update by minimizing its own loss function Fm (θ),
enhancements for improving network traffic classification per- yielding updated parameters θrm = arg minθ Fm (θ). These
formance. These include (i) biflow augmentation techniques locally-updated models are then transmitted to a central server,
using static traffic primitives applied to the IAT—viz., jittering which computes the global model by averaging the collected
 client parameters.
 M
 IAT jit , iat1 · · · iatN p + ρ1 · · · ρN p ,
    
 1 X r
 θr = θm (2)
 M
where ρi ∼ N (µ, σ), i = 1, . . . , NP , and translating m=1

 FedProx (FedProx) [45]: built upon FedAvg, it is based
 IATtra = iat1 · · · iat N p + ρ · · · ρ ,
    
 on the assumption that clients may have very different data
where ρ ∼ N (µ, σ)—, (ii) the construction of a balanced vali- distributions and may not converge when using FedAvg. For
dation set from exemplars memory to lead incremental training these reasons, FedProx adds a proximal term to the local
across tasks, and (iii) the use of a higher temperature in the (viz. client) objective function to keep local updates closer
classification loss to encourage softer probability distributions to the global model. At each communication round r, client
and reduce overconfidence. Last but not least, MEMENTO m computes updated parameters as θrm = arg minθ Lm (θ) by
applies (iv) output smoothing during knowledge distillation to minimizing the following augmented objective function:
better handle biflows belonging to newly-introduced classes. µ 2
 Lm (θ) = Fm (θ) + θ − θr−1 , (3)
 2
B. Federated Learning where Fm (·) is the standard local loss on client m, and µ
 controls the strength of the regularization term. The squared
 In a typical FL setup, a network of M clients c1 , c2 , . . ., c M `2 -norm keeps each client’s model close to the previous global
collaboratively trains a shared model. During each commu- parameters θr−1 , enhancing robustness to data heterogeneity.
nication round r, mth client first updates its local model θrm Server aggregation is then performed analogously as FedAvg.
using its private dataset Dm , tailoring the training to its task. FedDyn [46]: it aims to improve the communication effi-
Once local training is complete, clients send their updated ciency of FedAvg by dynamically modifying the client
 1 The number of per-class biflows in the correction set is limited by the old
 objective with a penalty term so that when model parameters
classes, which are fewer in memory than the new-class biflows of the current converge, they do so in stationary points of the global empirepisode. ical loss. In particular, the linear and quadratic penalty terms
3870 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. Visual representation of the overall proposal. Each client incrementally trains its local NIDS, including new attacks, and simultaneously participates
in the federated network’s collaborative information exchange. This process converges to a global NIDS, then distributed across all clients, to perform (binary
and multiclass) misuse detection and attack classification.

minima are consistent with the global loss stationary point. Despite the generality of the above FCIL formulation (and
The penalty term is based on the local and server models, of the proposed solutions), in this work we are concerned
namely: with the case where each client introduces a distinct set
 α 2 of new classes, i.e. Kmnew ∩ Kmnew 0 = ∅, for m , m0 . This
 m ), θi +
 Lm (θ) = Fm (θ) − h∇Fm (θr−1 θ − θr−1 , (4) setting poses a significant challenge, as it leads to an extreme
 2
 form of non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID)
where the first term represents the standard local empirical
 data distribution among the clients, who must also mitigate
loss (e.g., cross-entropy); the second term (h∇Fm (θr−1 m ), θi)
 catastrophic forgetting as they learn new classes.
subtracts a linear approximation based on past gradients to
 On the top of that, integrating CIL into a federated setting
compensate for bias in the client distribution; and the third
 2 introduces specific design challenges. While simpler fineterm, α2 θ − θr−1 , encourages the local model to stay close
 tuning methods can be directly federated, those including
to the previous global model θr−1 , similar to FedProx. Server
 post-training techniques like bias correction [36], [38] require
aggregation is performed similarly to FedAvg and FedProx.
 tailored solutions. In this work, we leverage two different
 solutions [37] which capitalize FL framework.
C. Federated Class Incremental Learning In the first one, all clients share the same bias layer for new
 In the FCIL setup, each client incrementally introduces a classes K̄new , similar to BiC-based solutions in a centralized
new set of classes, with the objective of training a global setting. Each client updates this layer using its own data
NIDS capable of accurately classifying both previously learned (Dmem ∪ Dmnew ), the server averages the clients’ parameters
and newly introduced classes across all clients. The overall m , βm ) to compute the global correction, and sent the
 (αnew
procedure is depicted in Fig. 1. averaged correction to all clients for the next round:
 Formally, at the generic (incremental) episode, mth client oold (x)
  
in the federated network adds a set of new classes Kmnew . The ō(x) = 1 P M (5)
 m=1 αm o (x) + βm · 1|K̄new |
 new new
 
 M
FCIL procedure begins with a base model—trained on previously seen classes Kold during an earlier federated (possibly In the second approach, each client maintains a personalized
incremental) iteration—which is then distributed to all clients bias layer for its new classes. At each round, client cm updates
joining the network. Accordingly, all the clients start the incre- only its local parameters (αnew m , βm ) and shares them with
mental process from the same model, effectively representing the server. The server stacks all client-specific corrections to
a scenario where clients can join the network asynchronously support classification across all new classes:
 oold (x)
 2 3
and require a synchronization step. In a federated setting,
m client performs local training for a fixed number of epochs 6 αnew onew + β1 · 1|Knew | 7
 6 1 1
 ō(x) = 6
 1
 .. (6)
 7
before synchronizing with the server and other clients across
 .
 7
 4 5
R communication rounds.
 M oM + β M · 1|K M |
 αnew new new
 In the FCIL context, the goal is to update an existing
 trained on Dold —to integrate knowledge m , βm )m=1 are sent back
 The set of all correction parameters (αnew
NIDS—previously M
 new
 S ˚ new M
from K̄ , Km m=1 (i.e. the set of new classes from all to all clients for next round. We denote the averaged variant
the involved clients) while preserving its ability to recognize by A, and the client-specific one by A+ .
the previously learned classes Kold . Hence, discrimination We note that the proposed FCIL framework does not
capabilities of the updated NIDS are required to be over the incur additional asymptotic computational overhead comcomplete class set Kall = Kold ∪ K̄new . pared to standard FL. The overall complexity is dominated
CARILLO et al.: FEDERATED AND INCREMENTAL NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 3871

Fig. 2. Biflows distributions for the IoT datasets employed. Green bars represent the benign class across all three datasets. Sankey diagrams show specific
attacks per category, with colored circles indicating the datasets that contain each attack.

by local training  at each client and can be expressed as malicious data or code; (v) ”Malware, covering uncategorized
 PM
O m=1 R E N m P , where M is the number of clients, R attacks.
the number of communication rounds, E the number of local Within this category, various sub-categories can be identraining epochs, Nm the number of training samples at client m tified based on the specific type of attack or the protocol
(i.e., the size of Dmem ∪ Dmnew ), and P the number of train- involved [16]. For instance, in the DoS category, most
able model parameters. The server-side aggregation of client datasets (except TON IoT) include UDP floods, while
parameters has linear complexity with respect to the number of HTTP and SYN floods are common across all. TON IoT
clients and parameters, i.e. O(MP) per communication round. uniquely has a generic TCP flood; ACK and ICMP floods
We emphasize that the additional components introduced by are specific to IoT-NID and Edge-IIoTset, respectively.
the FCIL framework—such as shared or client-specific bias Info gathering attacks mostly involve various scans: port
layers for incremental class correction—do not affect the (Edge-IIoTset, IoT-NID, TON IoT), OS (IoT-NID,
asymptotic complexity. Their cost is negligible compared to Edge-IIoTset), vulnerability (Edge-IIoTset), and host
the standard local training, since the number of parameters in (IoT-NID). MITM attacks include ARP spoofing across
these layers is small relative to the full model. datasets, with ICMP and DHCP spoofing in TON IoT
 and DNS spoofing in Edge-IIoTset. Injection attacks
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP cover SQL, XSS (TON IoT, Edge-IIoTset), and HTTP
 In this section, we describe the datasets leveraged for injection (Edge-IIoTset). Lastly, malware includes brutethe experiments (Sec. IV-A), along with the DL architecture force attempts on HTTP (TON IoT, Edge-IIoTset),
employed (Sec. IV-B). Then, we present the upperbound telnet (IoT-NID), FTP (TON IoT), plus backdoors and
considered for experiments (Sec. IV-C), introduce the FCIL ransomware in TON IoT and Edge-IIoTset. Conscenarios evaluated in this work (Sec. IV-D), and the metrics cerning the physical testbed, IoT-NID leverages smart
to quantify NIDS capability to recognize and classify attacks devices and general-purpose hardware, while TON IoT and
(Sec. IV-E). Edge-IIoTset use hybrid setups with both physical and
 emulated devices.
A. Network Traffic of Cyber-Attacks To ensure consistent labeling across all datasets, we
 apply a rule-based preprocessing approach that refines
 Datasets. For the experiments, we leverage 3 datasets
 label granularity. The labeling scheme follows a stanincluding IoT datasets, collected from 2019 onward—i.e.,
 dardized format of category-type(-subtype), pro-
TON IoT [47], IoT-NID [48], and Edge-IIoTset [49].
 moting interpretability and structure. Defined categories
 They originally include five categories of attack [49]:
 include dos (denial-of-service), infog (information gath-
(i) ”(Distributed) Denial of Service—(D)DoS— which
 ering), mitm (man-in-the-middle), inject (injection),
includes attacks aiming at causing service disruptions;
 and malwr (malware) [16]. Furthermore, the major-
(ii) ”Info Gathering, which covers attacks focused on
 ity classes of all three datasets are subjected to ranobtaining information from the victim; (iii) ”Man-in-thedom sampling to achieve a biflow number ranging from
Middle—MITM—addressing attacks involving the intercep-
 10k to 100k. Notably, when analyzing the most and least
tion of communication; (iv) ”Injection, targeting the exploitarepresented attack classes, the imbalance ratios—i.e., the ratio
tion of vulnerabilities in applications or systems to introduce
3872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

between the number of biflows of the most populous class TABLE II
over the least one—are 400, 700, and 340 for TON IoT, FCIL S CENARIOS FOR THE T HREE D IFFERENT DATASETS ,
Edge-IIoTset, and IoT-NID, respectively. This indicates D ETAILED IN THE N UMBER OF Kold , Knew , AND C LIENTS
a significant class imbalance—or skewness in the biflow
distribution—that persists even after undersampling, although
it has been partially mitigated. The distributions of the biflows,
resulting from the relabeling procedure, for the three considered datasets are shown in Fig. 2.2
 DL Input. In this work, we consider 6 per-packet characteristics, i.e. Payload Length (PL), Inter Arrival Time (IAT),
Packet Direction (DIR), TCP Window Size (WIN), TCP Flags
(FLG), and Time To Live (TTL). To clarify, PL indicates
the packet length, IAT refers to the time interval between neurons for new attacks introduced that episode by federated
successive packets, DIR denotes packet direction (0 for down- clients. Incremental training begins with the weights obtained
stream, 1 for upstream), WIN represents the TCP window size from the previous incremental episode—i.e., the base model
(set to 0 for UDP packets), FLG stands for the TCP flags weights (θ0avg ) for the initial one. At the end of each episode,
converted into a binary representation (ranging in [0, 255]), all clients synchronize to a common model distributed by the
and TTL means how many routers (hops) a packet can pass federated server.
through before being discarded. Fields such as IP addresses Additionally, to assess the effectiveness of our solution
and ports are deliberately excluded from the model’s training across a distinct DL architecture, we evaluate a hybrid model
to prevent unwarranted bias [50]. In the following experiments, combining 2D-CNN and LSTM layers—denoted HYBRID in
we use different feature sets: base—composed of PL, IAT, the following sections [54]. The network operates on the same
DIR, and WIN—and extended—adding also FLG and TTL. input representation used by the 2D-CNN.
The latter features—i.e., TTL and FLG—have been shown to
carry valuable information for distinguishing between benign
 C. Upper Bound Approaches
and malicious traffic [51], and we aim to evaluate their utility
for intrusion detection in a FCIL setting when focusing on the To recap, FCIL introduces the incremental learning
IoT ecosystem. paradigm into a federated setup. Therefore, to measure sepa-
 Last but not least, to support early detection of malicious rately the performance loss introduced by each challenge—i.e.,
traffic, we extract features from the first N packets of each decentralized data and need to update NIDS to cope with
biflow. Prior work [50], [52] has demonstrated that analyzing evolving threats—, we consider two different upper bounds:
per-packet features from just the initial 10 packets yields (i) Scratch, meaning that the model is trained from-scratch
strong classification results, with only marginal improvements with all the data in a centralized fashion and no incremental
when incorporating the entire biflow [53]. Therefore, time learning, and (ii) centralized CIL, which involves an increseries data comprising the selected features from the first mental training performed in a centralized setup—i.e., the new
10 packets of each biflow are extracted. For shorter biflows, classes of the considered scenario are added on a single client.
zero-padding is applied to keep the sequence length consistent. While Scratch uses all the data at a single point to
 perform training from scratch, centralized CIL assumes that
B. DL Model Architecture each client has access to Dmem for old classes along with the
 traffic data for the new classes it intends to add.
 We use a 2D-CNN architecture—originally introduced in
[54] and widely adopted for both network Traffic Classification
 D. FCIL Scenarios
(TC) [50] and intrusion detection [15]— with modifications
to support incremental learning. Importantly, our approach is For the experiments, we define different federated incremenmodel-agnostic and can be integrated with other DL architec- tal scenarios. In detail, a scenario is compactly referred to as
tures without requiring structural changes. h|Kold | + |Knew |, N i where |Kold | and |Knew | are the number of
 The 2D-CNN is composed of two convolutional layers old and new classes, respectively, and N the number of clients
(Conv2D) followed by pooling and normalization operations, in the federated network. Furthermore, in both scenarios S 1 /S 2
with a final Dense layer providing the classifier output we assume that each federated client observes a (different)
(i.e., a confidence vector). The architecture has 540k trainable new attack at a given time and cooperates with other clients
parameters and is fed with a (matrix-arranged) input x of to incorporate all the attacks seen by the group (i.e. in such
packets × fields for each biflow. a case it holds |Knew | = N ). Additionally, all clients in
 At each incremental step, the backbone of the network the federated network adhere to a common agreement on
remains structurally unchanged—i.e., no architectural mod- the number of communication rounds (R) to be performed.
ifications are introduced—while the head is expanded with In each communication round, clients transmit their locally
 trained models to the server, which aggregates them into a
 2 We leverage bidirectional flows (viz., biflows) as the traffic object. It
 global model and redistributes it to all clients.
encompasses all packets that share the same quintuple (src ip, dst ip,
src port, dst port, and L4 proto), with interchangeable src and The FCIL scenarios used for the experiments are reported in
dst. Tab. II, detailing for each dataset the number of old and new
CARILLO et al.: FEDERATED AND INCREMENTAL NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 3873

classes and the number of clients in the federated network.
We consider federations of 2 and 5 clients, modeling realistic
cross-silo settings in which groups of IoT devices (e.g., organizations or edge clusters) collaboratively train without sharing
raw data, rather than large-scale cross-device FL. Across all
scenarios, Kold always includes the benign class, whereas
Knew contains only attack classes, reflecting the decentralized
emergence of new attacks.

E. Evaluation Metrics
 In this work, we evaluate federated and incremental NIDS
from two complementary perspectives: (i) their ability to
classify network traffic by identifying both benign device
activity and specific attack types, and (ii) their effectiveness
in distinguishing legitimate traffic from malicious traffic.
 To assess attack detection and recognition capabilities, we
leverage F1 Score (briefly, F1) as performance metric [34].
It is computed as the harmonic mean of the per-class precision
and recall and then we obtain its macro version by averaging
the per-class metrics over all the classes, namely
 1 X 2 · Precisioni · Recalli
 F1 Score(θ, K) = , (7)
 |K| Precisioni + Recalli
 i∈K

where K denotes the generic class set and θ a generic model
(learned from-scratch or in federated incremental fashion).
 To focus on NIDS detection capabilities, we use the partial
area under the curve (pAUC), which emphasizes performance
at low False Positive Rate (FPR). The pAUC is defined as:
 Z pu Fig. 3. FCIL performance on TON IoT in the S1 scenario with the base
 pAUC = TPR(fpr) dfpr (8) feature set. Different line styles distinguish approaches according to the
 p` mitigation strategies employed.

where p` = 0 and pu = 0.01, i.e., we compute the area under rate of 0.1, a learning rate decay factor of 3, and a minimum
the ROC—defined by True Positive Rate (TPR)—up to 1% learning rate of 10−4 . For memory-based CIL approaches,
FPR, ensuring relevance for real-world NIDS conditions. 25 biflows per each Kold are selected [38]. In our experiments,
 To obtain insights into both catastrophic forgetting and we explore various synchronization frequencies by setting
intransigence phenomena (due to the incremental learning R = {4, 10, 20, 40, 100, 200}. Each client conducts a total of
process), we break down both the considered metrics by the 200 local training epochs, sharing its model with the server
subset of classes Kold , Knew , and Kall , obtaining for a generic every E = 200/R epochs. For each configuration, we test
metric X the following sub-metrics: X old , X new , and X all . 10 seeds, corresponding to 10 distinct (7 ÷ 3) train-test splits.
 To quantify a model’s gap from upper bound approaches, Results are shown as the average across the incremental runs
we define drop from scratch (Drop-Scratch) and drop from using 10 different seeds, each adding different new classes.
CIL (Drop-CIL) metrics measuring the difference in F1 and The rest framework leverages NumPy4 and Pandas5 for data
PAUC between FCIL NIDS and the upper bounds. management and pre-processing, PyTorch6 for training and
 evaluating NIDS, and Matplotlib7 and Seaborn8 to plot results.
F. Implementation Details
 In this section, we provide the implementation details for V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
the FCIL framework used in this work. Specifically, we
 We begin by analyzing performance in a few-client setting,
extend a Python-based framework—i.e., FACIL3 — to handle
 optimizing FCIL along two axes: feature set and FL algorithm
federated learning training. In detail, we devise a federated
 (Sec. V-A). Then, we scale to a larger number of clients
server responsible for aggregating the models and coordinating
 (Sec. V-B), compare FCIL with training from scratch and
and communicating with the clients during the local training
 centralized CIL (Sec. V-C). Furthermore, we evaluate the
procedure CIL. Additionally, we modify this framework to
train multiple clients simultaneously, with each adding a new 4 https://numpy.org/
attack. The hyperparameters used for the training phase are the 5 https://pandas.pydata.org/

following: 200 epochs with patience of 20, an initial learning 6 https://pytorch.org/
 7 https://matplotlib.org/
 3 https://github.com/mmasana/FACIL 8 https://seaborn.pydata.org/
3874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE III
FCIL P ERFORMANCE ON TON IoT IN THE S1 S CENARIO W ITH E XPANDED F EATURE S ET. R ESULTS A RE S HOWN AS THE D IFFERENCE OF F1 W. R . T.
 THE BASE F EATURE S ET. F URTHERMORE , T HEY A RE B ROKEN D OWN BY THE N UMBER OF S YNCHRONIZATION ROUNDS P ERFORMED AND THE
 S ET OF C LASSES . G REEN B OLDFACE T EXT I NDICATES I MPROVEMENT OVER THE BASE S ET OF F EATURES , W HILE R ED O NE R EFERS TO
 D ECAY IN P ERFORMANCE . G RAY BACKGROUND H IGHLIGHTS FOR E ACH A PPROACH THE R AT W HICH THE B EST I MPROVEMENT
 OVER THE BASE F EATURE S ET I S O BTAINED , W HILE THE G REEN O NES H IGHLIGHT THE
 B EST A PPROACH AND THE B EST R FOR THE C ONSIDERED S ETUP

generalizability of our FCIL solution across different DL Does expanded feature set boost performance? Then, we
architectures (Sec. V-D) and examine the impact of IID attack evaluate the impact of using an expanded feature set. The
data among clients (Sec. V-E). Lastly, we assess real-world results are reported in Tab. III, highlighting the performance
applicability, focusing on cross-network generalization and improvement in green (resp. decay in red) obtained using the
few-sample learning (Sec. V-F). expanded set of features over the base one.
 Generally speaking, performance on Kold highly benefits
A. Few-Client Scenario from the use of the expanded set of features, with FT-Mem
 Hereinafter, we evaluate FCIL performance in the S1 sce- obtaining the highest gain w.r.t. all the other approaches.
nario using TON IoT. Each paragraph answers a key research Notably, it improves at most by ≈14% at R=20. Performance
question, stated as its title. trends on Kall closely reflect those observed for old classes.
 How effective is FedAvg with a base set of features? On the other hand, Knew presents more unstable trends.
In response, we evaluate all CIL methods combined with Specifically, FT-Mem, BiC, and BiC+ demonstrate a generally
FedAvg—using base feature set as input (viz., PL, IAT, DIR, positive trend across almost all synchronization values, with
and WIN). Results in Fig. 3 show that performance on Kall improvements of up to 15%. In contrast, MEMENTO and
closely mirrors that of Kold , largely due to the imbalanced MEMENTO+ experience a critical drop at R=40, losing 16%
scenario with 10 base classes and only 2 new ones (attacks). and 8%, respectively, compared to the base feature set.
 Performance trends vary across methods, depending on It is worth noting that iCaRL+ exhibits a distinctive
their CIL-focused mitigation strategies. Using only rehearsal trend. Its performance improves steadily by up to ≈ 8%
(i.e., FT-Mem), F1 generally improves with more rounds, as the synchronization value increases to R = 20, but
peaking at R = 200 (i.e., 65% F1all ). In contrast, iCaRL+ beyond this point, it experiences a sharp decline, drop-
(combining rehearsal and distillation) reaches its best perfor- ping to around −18%. This behavior may stem from the
mance earlier, at R = 40 (≈54% F1all /F1old and ≈50% F1new ). iCaRL+ loss becoming less effective at higher synchro-
As FT-Mem, iCaRL+ struggles at low R but benefits from nization intervals, potentially causing forgetting or training
higher rounds. instability.
 CIL methods using all three mitigation strategies behave
differently. Their performance on Kold drops as R increases.
For Knew , outcomes depend on the bias correction strategy: (i)
BiC—i.e., with a single shared correction layer for all new
classes—achieve peak F1new scores at R = 20 (≈56%) and
(ii) BiC+ reaches its highest F1new (≈ 64%) at R = 10.
MEMENTO behaves like BiC, peaking at R = 40. But
MEMENTO+ follows a different pattern: performance steadily
rises with more rounds, reaching its best F1new (≈ 71%) at
R=200.

 What is the impact of different FL algorithms on performance? Lastly, we evaluate the performance of different
 FL algorithms, focusing on the top-2 CIL approaches—i.e.,
 BiC+ and MEMENTO+ —and using the expanded feature set as input. Results of this analysis are shown in
 Fig. 4.
 Notably, FedProx shows significant improvements over
 FedAvg for both BiC+ and MEMENTO+ , especially with
 a low number of synchronizations. As R increases, performance of FedAvg and FedProx converges with both scoring
 between 74% and 76% F1all for BiC+ and MEMENTO+ ,
CARILLO et al.: FEDERATED AND INCREMENTAL NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 3875

 TABLE IV
 FCIL P ERFORMANCE ON TON IoT IN THE S2 S CENARIO U SING THE
 E XPANDED F EATURE S ET. F OR E ACH C OMBINATION , THE R ESULTS
 H IGHLIGHT THE B EST S YNCHRONIZATION VALUE , C ORRESPOND -
 ING TO THE H IGHEST ACHIEVED F1all

 noting that having more clients with new classes makes this
 scenario more challenging, as more knowledge needs to be
 integrated into the model at each synchronization. Overall, a
 few synchronization rounds significantly hinder new knowledge acquisition, highlighting the need for frequent updates
 as client number and new classes grow.
 While no strict trends emerge, F1new generally increases
 and F1old decreases as R grows. Similar to S1 , FedDyn
 performs notably worse at R = {4, 10}, whereas FedProx
 consistently leads at higher R, followed by FedDyn. Notably,
 FedProx preserves old knowledge comparably to FedAvg
Fig. 4. Comparison of different FL approaches for TON IoT with expanded and FedDyn, while achieving better F1new , making it the best
feature set in the S1 scenario. trade-off among the three.

respectively. Performance convergence is due to the improvement of FedAvg over FedProx on Kold with higher R, while
FedProx delivers better performance on Knew , especially
with MEMENTO+ . However, both approaches exhibit a declining trend on Kold and Knew performance as R increases.
 On the other hand, FedDyn shows lower performance for
low R, while obtaining the highest F1 for R ≥ 20. This
behavior can be attributed to the dynamic regularization in
FedDyn, which corrects for client drift by incorporating a C. Wrap-up of Results: In this section, we compare the
linear term related to the global model. Similar to FedAvg, performance of the top-performer FCIL approach against the
as R increases, FedDyn shows improved F1old , peaking at upper bound Scratch baseline and centralized CIL training.
R = 20, and F1new , with best value occurring at R = 100 Specifically, we evaluate performance in solving two relevant
(resp. R = 20) for MEMENTO+ (resp. BiC+ ). NIDS tasks: (i) bMD—i.e., distinguishing among legitimate
 and malicious traffic (all attacks as one class); (ii) AC—i.e.,
 fine-grained classification of malicious traffic into different
 attack types. Table V summarizes the results for the two
 scenarios, across all three evaluated datasets and the corresponding tasks discussed above.
 Considering scenario S1 , the best FCIL approach
 (i.e., MEMENTO+ with FedProx at R = 10)
 consistently outperforms the best centralized CIL method
 (i.e., MEMENTO) across bMD/AC tasks for both TON IoT
 and Edge-IIoTset datasets. However, despite these
 improvements, our solution still lags behind the Scratch
 baseline, with performance gaps reaching up to 3% in bMD
B. Many-Client Scenario and 8% in AC. In contrast, for the IoT-NID dataset, the
 In this section, we evaluate FCIL approaches in the S2 CIL method slightly outperforms the FCIL one, showing
scenario for the TON IoT dataset with the expanded feature improvements of + 1% in PAUCAll and + 2% in F1all for AC.
set. Table IV reports the best trade-off achieved for each Moreover, the gap between our method and Scratch is even
combination of CIL and FL at specific values of R. It is worth more pronounced for IoT-NID, with differences of up to 15%
3876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE V
S UMMARY OF P ERFORMANCE FOR THE B EST FCIL A PPROACH —I N C ENTRALIZED AND D ISTRIBUTED FASHION — AND S C R A T C H , ACROSS S CENARIOS
 ( I . E ., S 1 AND S 2 ) AND DATASETS ( I . E ., TON IoT, IoT-NID, AND Edge-IIoTset).P ERFORMANCE I S R EPORTED AS A BSOLUTE VALUE AND
 D ROP W. R . T. S C R A T C H AND CIL A PPROACHES . R ED ( RESP. G REEN ) T EXT H IGHLIGHTS THE G AP
 ( RESP. I MPROVEMENT ) C OMPARED TO U PPER B OUNDS ( I . E ., S C R A T C H AND CIL)

 TABLE VI with significant performance drops relative to CIL—reaching
M ULTICLASS M ISUSE D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE FOR THE B EST FCIL up to 13% for Edge-IIoTset in the AC task. Increasing the
 A PPROACH , O BTAINED U SING THE HYBRID A RCHITECTURE [54], number of clients further degrades performance for both FCIL
 C OMPARED BY U PPER B OUNDS — I . E ., S C R A T C H , AND CIL
 and CIL, while also amplifying the gap to the Scratch baseline. For TON IoT and Edge-IIoTset, the performance
 drops nearly double, peaking at 32% in DropF1New and 17% in
 DropF1All . In contrast, for IoT-NID, the degradation remains
 comparable to that observed in S1 , with the DropF1New in the
 AC task even slightly lower than in the previous scenario.

in AC. The ROC curves in Fig. 5 reveal a notable decline
in TPR for the bMD task when compared to the Scratch
baseline—particularly at low false positive rates (FPR≤1%).
This drop affects both CIL and FCIL approaches, which
exhibit comparable patterns. The degradation is especially D. Generalization Across DL Architectures
severe for Knew , as reflected in the steeper decline of the ROC
curves at low FPR values. Notably, MEMENTO+ consistently To assess the architecture-independent nature of our solution, we evaluate the mMD performance for TON IoT when
outperforms MEMENTO, achieving higher TPR across both
 using the HYBRID network. Table VI shows results both for
Kold and Kall for equivalent FPR thresholds.
 In scenario S2 , we observe a greater ability of the FCIL few-client (S1 ) and many-client (S2 ) scenarios, additionally
approach to retain previously learned knowledge compared comparing FCIL with upperbound approaches—namely, CIL
to the CIL counterpart, as reflected in consistently higher and Scratch.
performance across all class-level metrics. However, FCIL Results are consistent with those reported in Tab. V for
 TON IoT. Notably, the FCIL approach consistently outpershows notable difficulty in incorporating new attack classes,
CARILLO et al.: FEDERATED AND INCREMENTAL NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 3877

 Fig. 6. Comparison of different FL approaches for TON IoT on new IID
Fig. 5. ROC curves for (a) Scratch, (b) MEMENTO, and (c) MEMENTO+
 data, alongside the best non-IID configuration.
in the S1 scenario on the TON IoT dataset. Curves are averaged across all
the seeds. The x-axis is displayed in a symlog scale for improved visibility.
 IID conditions, additional communication rounds provide
forms centralized CIL when using the HYBRID architecture. diminishing returns once the models have sufficiently
In the S1 scenario, FCIL yields improvements of 5% F1 on converged.
previously seen classes and 12% F1 on new classes, for an Comparing FL approaches, FedProx and FedDyn consisoverall gain of + 7% in F1all . Similarly, in S2 , FCIL better tently outperform FedAvg across most settings. This indicates
retains prior knowledge (+ 12% F1) and incorporates new that regularization-based approaches remain beneficial even
classes more effectively (+ 8% F1), resulting in an average when client data are IID. Notably, FedDyn generally achieves
performance increase of 11% F1 over centralized CIL. the best or near-best performance for intermediate values
 Despite these advantages, FCIL remains below the ideal of R (i.e., R = 20), highlighting its robustness in maintaining
Scratch reference, particularly as the number of clients previously-learned knowledge, while FedProx turns out to
grows. In S1 , it incurs a DropF1New of 16% and a DropF1Old be the best with low R—namely, R = 4.
of 5%, whereas in S2 these losses rise to 12% and 28%, Across all methods, performance on the Knew split is
corresponding to F1all reductions of 7% and 16%, respectively. systematically lower than on Kold , regardless of R. This gap
 reflects the inherent difficulty of CIL (even in the absence of
 data heterogeneity) and suggests that catastrophic interference
 with newly-introduced attacks remains a central challenge.
 Nevertheless, moving from a non-IID to an IID setting
 yields a substantial benefit for learning new classes, with the
 best IID configuration—i.e., FedProx at R = 4—improves
 performance on Knew by ≈ 10% F1 compared to the best
 non-IID result—i.e., FedProx at R = 10. This highlights
 the impact of data distribution on plasticity and confirms
E. NIDS Under New IID Data that data homogeneity significantly alleviates, though does
 In this section, we evaluate the performance of FCIL not eliminate, the challenges associated with incremental class
NIDS under an IID data, focusing on a few-client scenario acquisition.
where both clients encounter the same two novel attacks, but
with distinct biflows. Results of this analysis are reported in
Fig. 6 for the different FL algorithms, along with the best
FCIL configuration in the non-IID setup in which each client
encounters a disjoint new attack, obtained in Sec. V-A.
 Similarly to the non-IID configuration, best results are
yielded also in the IID setup with low R, then performance decreases when the communication rate exceeds
a given threshold. This behavior suggests that, under
3878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE VII
B INARY D ETECTION C APABILITIES IN S1 AS PAUC All FOR E ACH
 hsource, T argeti PAIR FOR THE B EST FCIL S OLUTION AND THE B EST
 CIL O NE ( IN BRACKETS ). G REEN BACKGROUND H IGHLIGHTS
 THE PAIRS FOR W HICH source = target

F. NIDS in the Wild: Practical Challenges

 In this section, we analyze some practical challenges
of NIDS when deployed in real-world scenarios: (i) capability of generalizing across networks and (ii) ability to
detect 0-day attacks with only a limited number of biflows
available.
 How well do FCIL NIDS generalize across diverse
networks? In response, we separately evaluate the detection
and classification performance of the best-performing FCIL
model when deployed across different networks, and compare
it with the best CIL model under the same conditions. Specifically, we report the results for the bMD task in Tab. VII,
while Fig. 7 shows the AC performance when FCIL NIDS
is trained on TON IoT and tested with network traffic from
Edge-IIoTset and IoT-NID. Other combinations are not
shown for brevity.
 Specifically, Tab. VII clearly shows a decline in detection
performance when the NIDS is evaluated on a different
network from the one it was trained on. While intra-
 Fig. 7. Confusion matrices for NIDS trained on TON IoT (source dataset)
dataset models achieve ≥ 92% PAUCAll , performance drops and evaluated on Edge-IIoTset (top row) and IoT-NID (bottom row) in
significantly in cross-dataset setup—reaching at most 75% S1 . Gray-shaded rows and columns indicate classes that are absent in the
PAUCAll (for hTON IoT,Edge−IIoTset i), with other target or source dataset.
cases falling below 60% PAUCAll . In most of the combinations, the FCIL approach outperforms the CIL baseline in
both intra-dataset and cross-dataset scenarios, likely due to
the decentralized training and different client-specific data
distributions.
 Similarly, the overall performance on the AC task
remains unsatisfactory. We observe distinct behavioral patterns between the FCIL and CIL NIDS (see Fig. 7).
Specifically, when using TON IoT as the source dataset
and Edge-IIoTset as the target, the FCIL setup shows a Can FCIL NIDS detect new 0-day attacks with just a
clear bias toward certain attack classes—such as dos-http, few samples? In this analysis, we assess the ability of a FCIL
inject-sql, and malwr-backd-tcp—which are also NIDS to incorporate new attacks while retaining knowledge
the most frequent in the source dataset (Fig. 7a). of previously learned ones, under a scenario characterized
In contrast, the CIL setup exhibits even more pro- by a scarcity of new attack samples. Specifically, we connounced bias, particularly toward the dos-tcp and strain the number of biflows available for each new attack
malwr-brutef-http classes (Fig. 7b). When IoT-NID class to fixed values: 15, 25, 50, 100, 200. For this analysis,
is used as the target dataset, the trend reverses. Both we select for the few-shot training the seed that yields the
approaches show a clear prediction bias toward specific attack best FCIL performance in the full-data setup (+ inf). For
classes—such as dos-tcp-syn, infog-scan-port, each setting, samples are randomly drawn from the complete
malwr-ransomware, and mitm-arpspoof (Fig. 7c). dataset corresponding to that class. To ensure robustness and
The CIL setup displays a similar bias, though it is variability in sample selection, each experiment is repeated
less pronounced compared to the FCIL counterpart (Fig. 10 times, with results expressed as the average across the
7d). Similar results are observed across the other datasets repetitions.
and scenarios; their confusion matrices are omitted for Figure 8 compares the performance obtained by the best
brevity. FCIL solution—under few-shot conditions (15 to 200 samples)
CARILLO et al.: FEDERATED AND INCREMENTAL NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 3879

 data across deployments could improve detection coverage,
 privacy concerns make this approach impractical.
 In this work, we bridge the gap between CIL—enabling
 continuous learning—and FL—leveraging distributed data for
 training—by proposing FCIL, combining both approaches to
 design an adaptable, collaboratively trained NIDS. Our results
 show that FCIL methods effectively retain prior knowledge,
 especially leveraging TCP flags and time-to-live as input, but
 face challenges integrating new attacks.
 Overall, MEMENTO+ combined with FedProx achieves the
 best results in both few- and many-client settings. In the
 former, fewer synchronization rounds (R = 10) suffice for
 integrating new classes, while larger networks require more
 rounds (R = 100) to accommodate new knowledge. Under
 these conditions, MEMENTO+ attains 79% and 75% F1all in the
 few- and many-client scenarios on TON IoT, respectively.
 Generally speaking, FCIL shows advantages over CIL in
 smaller networks, though it does not reach the performance of
 training-from-scratch. As the number of clients grows, FCIL
 better preserves existing knowledge but faces increased difficulty in learning new attacks, leading to larger performance
 drops.
 In addition, we evaluate the NIDS in a real-world
Fig. 8. Performance under few-shot conditions (ranging from deployment scenario, assessing both their (i) generalization
15 to 200 samples) and with all samples (+∞) for the best FCIL
method and Scratch, in both few-client and many-client scenarios using
 capabilities and (ii) their ability to learn from limited samples.
the best seed. Notably, deploying a NIDS in a different network environment significantly reduces its detection and classification
and full data (+ inf)—and Scratch for the three consid- performance. However, the FCIL NIDS consistently outperered datasets in the few- and many-client scenarios. In S1 , forms its CIL counterpart, demonstrating greater resilience
performance on Kold is only slightly impacted by limited to network shifts. On the other hand, in few-shot settings,
sample availability. Interestingly, performance on Knew is often FCIL NIDS achieves performance comparable to the full-data
comparable to—or even better than—the full-sample setting, scenario—obtaining similar performance on old classes and
except for Edge-IIoTset, where a notable drop is observed sometimes even outperforming it on new ones.
as samples decrease. This may be due to higher sample Our future directions include (a) enhancing CIL approaches
variability or greater overlap in new attack fingerprints for for better integration of new attacks in federated settings,
the selected seed in Edge-IIoTset. (b) advancing personalization to balance local adaptation
 Similarly, in S2 , Kold performance remains consistent with global knowledge, (c) strengthening privacy protections,
between the two different settings. However, classification (d) reducing communication overhead, (e) improving robuston Knew improves for IoT-NID and Edge-IIoTset, while ness against adversarial threats, and ( f ) including federated
TON IoT scores similarly to the full-sample setting. domain-incremental learning.
 R EFERENCES
 [1] (2024). Microsoft Digital Defense Report: 600 Million Cyberattacks
 Per Day Around the Globe. [Online]. Available: https://
 news.microsoft.com/en-cee/2024/11/29/microsoft-digital-defensereport-600-million-cyberattacks-per-day-around-the-globe/
 [2] Cisco Systems.(2024). Detecting Zero-Days With SnortML. [Online].
 Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/collateral/security/
 firewalls/detecting-zero-days-with-snortml-wp.html
 [3] M. Antonakakis et al., “Understanding the Mirai botnet,” in Proc. 26th
 USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security), 2017, pp. 1093–1110.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [4] B. Zhao et al., “A large-scale empirical analysis of the vulnerabilities
 introduced by third-party components in IoT firmware,” in Proc. 31st
 Guaranteeing security is particularly challenging in IoT ACM SIGSOFT Int. Symp. Softw. Test. Anal., Jul. 2022, pp. 442–454.
environments, where diverse devices continuously collect and [5] G. Apruzzese, L. Pajola, and M. Conti, “The cross-evaluation of machine
 learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
exchange data. In this domain, ML- and DL-based NIDS Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 5152–5169, Dec. 2022.
are crucial for defending against cyberattacks. However, the [6] S. Agrawal et al., “Federated learning for intrusion detection sysdynamic nature of IoT networks—characterized by frequent tem: Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun.,
 vol. 195, pp. 346–361, Nov. 2022.
device churn and heterogeneity—leads to a broader and more [7] E. M. Campos et al., “Evaluating federated learning for intrusion
exposed attack surface. New attacks may emerge frequently, detection in Internet of Things: Review and challenges,” Comput. Netw.,
making NIDS models quickly outdated and requiring the vol. 203, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108661.
 [8] H. Zhang, J. Ye, W. Huang, X. Liu, and J. Gu, “Survey of federated
ability to learn new threats incrementally. Furthermore, attack learning in intrusion detection,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 195,
traffic can vary significantly across networks. While sharing Jan. 2024, Art. no. 104976.
3880 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[9] M. Data and M. Aritsugi, “An incremental learning algorithm on [32] Q. Li et al., “A survey on federated learning systems: Vision, hype and
 imbalanced data for network intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 10th reality for data privacy and protection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Manage., Jul. 2022, pp. 191–199. vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3347–3366, Apr. 2023.
[10] C. Oikonomou, I. Iliopoulos, D. Ioannidis, and D. Tzovaras, “A multi- [33] P. Kairouz and H. B. McMahan, “Advances and open problems in
 class intrusion detection system based on continual learning,” in Proc. federated learning,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, nos. 1–2,
 IEEE Int. Conf. Cyber Secur. Resilience (CSR), Jul. 2023, pp. 86–91. pp. 1–210, Jun. 2021.
[11] Z. Song et al., “Iˆ{2} RNN: An incremental and interpretable recur- [34] G. Bovenzi et al., “Benchmarking class incremental learning in deep
 rent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. learning traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
 Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 51–69, Feb. 2024.
 TDSC.2023.3245411. [35] G. Bovenzi et al., “A first look at class incremental learning in deep
[12] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, and Y. Jia, “A few-shot class- learning mobile traffic classification,” 2021, arXiv:2107.04464.
 incremental learning method for network intrusion detection,” IEEE [36] Y. Wu et al., “Large scale incremental learning,” in Proc. CVPR, 2019,
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2389–2401, Apr. 2024. pp. 374–382.
[13] Y. Wang and S. Cao, “A two-stage class incremental learning approach [37] R. Carillo, F. Cerasuolo, G. Bovenzi, D. Ciuonzo, and A. Pescapè,
 for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. GLOBECOM - IEEE Global “Explainable federated class incremental learning for encrypted network
 Commun. Conf., Dec. 2024, pp. 2353–2358. traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 269, Sep. 2025, Art. no.
 111448.
[14] X. Xu et al., “Advancing malware detection in network traffic with
 [38] F. Cerasuolo et al., “MEMENTO: A novel approach for class incremental
 self-paced class incremental learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 learning of encrypted traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, May 2024, Art.
 no. 12, pp. 21816–21826, Jun. 2024.
 no. 110374.
[15] F. Cerasuolo, G. Bovenzi, D. Ciuonzo, and A. Pescapè, “Attack-adaptive [39] D.-W. Zhou, Q. Wang, Z. Qi, H.-J. Ye, D. Zhan, and Z. Liu, “Classnetwork intrusion detection systems for IoT networks through class incremental learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 incremental learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 263, May 2025, Art. no. vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 9851–9873, Jul. 2024.
 111228. [40] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
[16] F. Cerasuolo, G. Bovenzi, D. Ciuonzo, and A. Pescapè, “Adaptable, filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc.
 incremental, and explainable network intrusion detection systems for IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 397–405.
 Internet of Things,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 144, Mar. 2025, Art. [41] H. Chen, S. Huang, D. Zhang, M. Xiao, M. Skoglund, and H. V. Poor,
 no. 110143. “Federated learning over wireless IoT networks with optimized com-
[17] V. Rey, P. M. S. Sánchez, A. H. Celdrán, and G. Bovet, “Federated munication and resources,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 17,
 learning for malware detection in IoT devices,” Comput. Netw., vol. 204, pp. 16592–16605, Sep. 2022.
 Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108693. [42] X. Gao, X. Yang, H. Yu, Y. Kang, and T. Li, “Fedprok: Trustworthy
[18] Z. Tang, H. Hu, and C. Xu, “A federated learning method for net- federated class-incremental learning via prototypical feature knowledge
 work intrusion detection,” Concurrency Comput., Pract. Exper., vol. 34, transfer,” in Proc. CVPR, 2024, pp. 4205–4214.
 no. 10, p. 6812, May 2022. [43] J. Dong, H. Li, Y. Cong, G. Sun, Y. Zhang, and L. Van Gool, “No
[19] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, K.-K.-R. Choo, and one left behind: Real-world federated class-incremental learning,” IEEE
 M. Nafaa, “FELIDS: Federated learning-based intrusion detection sys- Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 2054–2070, Apr.
 tem for agricultural Internet of Things,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., 2024.
 vol. 165, pp. 17–31, Jul. 2022. [44] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
[20] J. Li, X. Tong, J. Liu, and L. Cheng, “An efficient federated learning “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralsystem for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 17, no. 2, ized data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54,
 pp. 2455–2464, Jun. 2023. A. Singh and J.Zhu., Eds., Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2017,
[21] M. J. Idrissi et al., “Fed-ANIDS: Federated learning for anomaly-based pp. 1273–1282.
 network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 234, Dec. [45] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
 2023, Art. no. 121000. “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. 3rd Mach.
[22] M. H. Bhavsar, Y. B. Bekele, K. Roy, J. C. Kelly, and D. Limbrick, “FL- Learn. Syst. Conf., 2020, pp. 429–450.
 IDS: Federated learning-based intrusion detection system using edge [46] D. A. E. Acar, Y. Zhao, R. M. Navarro, M. Mattina, P. N. Whatmough,
 devices for transportation IoT,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 52215–52226, and V. Saligrama, “Federated learning based on dynamic regularization,”
 2024. 2021, arXiv:2111.04263.
[23] M.-Y. Zhu, Z. Chen, K.-F. Chen, N. Lv, and Y. Zhong, “Attention-based [47] T. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. Den
 federated incremental learning for traffic classification in the Internet of Hartog, “Ton IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for
 Things,” Comput. Commun., vol. 185, pp. 168–175, Mar. 2022. standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion datasets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496,
[24] R. R. dos Santos, E. K. Viegas, A. O. Santin, and P. Tedeschi,
 Jan. 2022.
 “Federated learning for reliable model updates in network-based intru-
 [48] H. Kang et al., “IoT network intrusion dataset,” IEEE dataport, Tech.
 sion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 133, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 103413.
 Rep., 2019, doi: 10.21227/q70p-q449.
[25] D. Jin, S. Chen, H. He, X. Jiang, S. Cheng, and J. Yang, “Federated [49] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and
 incremental learning based evolvable intrusion detection system for zero- H. Janicke, “Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber
 day attacks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 125–132, Jan. 2023. security dataset of IoT and IIoT applications for centralized
[26] Z. Jin, J. Zhou, B. Li, X. Wu, and C. Duan, “FL-IIDS: A novel federated and federated learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306,
 learning-based incremental intrusion detection system,” Future Gener. 2022.
 Comput. Syst., vol. 151, pp. 57–70, Feb. 2024. [50] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescape, “Mobile encrypted
[27] J. Mao, Z. Wei, B. Li, R. Zhang, and L. Song, “Toward ever-evolution traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation,
 network threats: A hierarchical federated class-incremental learning lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
 approach for network intrusion detection in IIoT,” IEEE Internet Things vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
 J., vol. 11, no. 18, pp. 29864–29877, Sep. 2024. [51] W. John and S. Tafvelin, “Analysis of internet backbone traffic and
[28] Z. Zhang et al., “Federated continual representation learning for evolu- header anomalies observed,” in Proc. 7th ACM SIGCOMM Conf.
 tionary distributed intrusion detection in industrial Internet of Things,” Internet Meas., Oct. 2007, pp. 111–116.
 Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 135, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 108826. [52] L. Peng, B. Yang, and Y. Chen, “Effective packet number for early stage
[29] N. H. Quyen, N. V. Hoang, P. T. Duy, and V.-H. Pham, “FI-IDS: A fed- internet traffic identification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 156, pp. 252–267,
 erated incremental learning approach for intrusion detection system,” in May 2015.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Technol. Commun. (ATC), Oct. 2024, pp. 432–437. [53] M. Wang, N. Yang, and N. Weng, “Exploring the impact of early
[30] H. A. Tran, H. T. T. Binh, and A. Mellouk, “Federated learning for detection on DL-based NIDSs models,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Annu.
 network traffic classification: A knowledge consolidation approach,” Ubiquitous Comput., Electron. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON), Oct.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 797–814, Jul. 2026. 2023, pp. 0684–0691.
[31] M. Masana, X. Liu, B. Twardowski, M. Menta, A. D. Bagdanov, and [54] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
 J. van de Weijer, “Class-incremental learning: Survey and performance “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural netevaluation on image classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. works for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050,
 Intell., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5513–5533, May 2023. 2017.

 Open Access funding provided by ‘Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II’ within the CRUI CARE Agreement