2064 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 A Novel Contrastive Loss for Zero-Day Network
 Intrusion Detection
 Jack Wilkie , Hanan Hindy , Senior Member, IEEE, Craig Michie, Member, IEEE, Christos Tachtatzis ,
 James Irvine , Senior Member, IEEE, and Robert Atkinson , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Machine learning has achieved state-of-the-art identify traffic classes on which they have been trained, and
results in network intrusion detection; however, its performance so are vulnerable to zero-day attacks [3].
significantly degrades when confronted by a new attack class— Methods based on anomaly detection, such as Autoencoders
a zero-day attack. In simple terms, classical machine learningbased approaches are adept at identifying attack classes on which and Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [4], [5], help alleviate
they have been previously trained, but struggle with those not this shortcoming of supervised classifiers. These methods
included in their training data. One approach to addressing operate by learning the distribution of exclusively benign
this shortcoming is to utilise anomaly detectors which train traffic, and flag traffic which significantly differs from the
exclusively on benign data with the goal of generalising to learned distribution as potential intrusions. As these models
all attack classes— both known and zero-day. However, this
comes at the expense of a prohibitively high false positive rate. are trained only on benign data, which is abundantly available,
This work proposes a novel contrastive loss function which is they relieve the burden of collating a significant volume of
able to maintain the advantages of other contrastive learning- labelled examples. Furthermore, by training exclusively on
based approaches (robustness to imbalanced data) but can also benign examples, these models are theoretically equally able to
generalise to zero-day attacks. Unlike anomaly detectors, this
 detect well-known and zero-day attacks alike. However, they
model learns the distributions of benign traffic using both
benign and known malign samples, i.e., other well-known attack are also unable to differentiate between new benign traffic
classes (not including the zero-day class), and consequently, subclasses, which leaves them prone high false positive rates,
achieves significant performance improvements. The proposed resulting in them being unsuitable for practical applications.
approach is experimentally verified on the Lycos2017 dataset While Open-Set Recognition (OSR) models such as Deep
where it achieves an AUROC improvement of.000065 and.060883
over previous models in known and zero-day attack detection, Open Classification [6] and OpenMax [7] aim to extend
respectively. Finally, the proposed method is extended to open- supervised classifiers to also detect novel classes, they have
set recognition achieving OpenAUC improvements of.170883 over substandard performance in detecting zero-day attacks when
existing approaches. applied to NIDS.
 Index Terms—Internet of Things, network intrusion detection, Recently, contrastive learning has emerged as a promismachine learning, contrastive learning. ing approach for NIDS. Methods such as Siamese
 Networks [8], [9] and Triplet Networks have shown promising
 I. I NTRODUCTION results, motivated by their performance on imbalanced training
 data. Network traffic and hence training data is inherently
 ETWORK intrusion detection systems (NIDS) are a
N crucial component in any cyber defence strategy. They
monitor communications within a network and flag potenimbalanced: perhaps a fraction of 1% of which represents
 an attack. This class imbalance can significantly affect the
 performance of classically trained machine learning models;
tially malicious traffic (cyber-attacks) to a CyberSecurity
 contrastive approaches have shown great resilience to imbal-
Operations Centre (CSOC) for further investigation. Machine
 anced training data [8]. Despite their ability to train well on
Learning (ML) has become the dominant paradigm in
 highly imbalanced data, like traditional models, contrastive
NIDS [1]. When trained on a sufficiently large compilation
of examples, ML-based approaches are able to learn the models suffer performance degradation when faced with zerodistributions of benign and malicious traffic and accurately day attacks [10].
discriminate between them [2]. However, this approach has its In this work, Contrastive Learning for Anomaly
own limitations: they require high volumes of training data, Detection (CLAD) is proposed as a framework capable
moreover traditional supervised classifiers are able only to of modelling the distribution of benign network traffic in
 embedded space as a von-Mises Fisher (vMF) distribution.
 Received 29 August 2025; revised 21 November 2025; accepted 3 Unlike anomaly detectors it learns this distribution by training
January 2026. Date of publication 12 January 2026; date of current version
26 January 2026. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
 on both benign and malicious traffic giving it enhanced attack
and approving it for publication was E. Nowroozi. (Corresponding author: detection at low false-positive rates. As CLAD does not
Jack Wilkie.) explicitly model the distribution of malicious traffic (as is
 Jack Wilkie, Craig Michie, Christos Tachtatzis, James Irvine, and
Robert Atkinson are with the Department of Electronics and Electrical typical of binary classifiers), it is able to generalise to zero-day
Engineering, University of Strathclyde, G1 1XQ Glasgow, U.K. (e-mail: attacks. The CLAD framework is then extended to OSR giving
jack.wilkie.2017@uni.strath.ac.uk). the Contrastive Learning for Open-Set Recognition (CLOSR)
 Hanan Hindy is with the Faculty of Computer and Information Sciences,
Ain Shams University, Cairo 11566, Egypt. framework. This is achieved by independently modelling
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3652529 the distribution of each known class in a distinct embedded
 1932-4537 
 c 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WILKIE et al.: NOVEL CONTRASTIVE LOSS FOR ZERO-DAY NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2065

subspace allowing it to perform multiclass classification. a lower-dimensional representation, before reconstructing it
Furthermore, zero-day attacks manifest as vectors orthogonal back to the original dimensionality. The model is trained
to the class centroids allowing to them to be easily identified. using a reconstruction objective under the assumption that
 The contributions of this work are threefold: (i) a contrastive malicious samples will have a higher reconstruction error at
loss for binary classification that exclusively learns the benign test time [22].
distribution while still training on malicious traffic; (ii) an Several variations of the standard autoencoder have been
extension of this loss to open-set recognition, enabling multiclass proposed to enhance performance. Sparse autoencoders remove
classification with unknown-class rejection; and (iii) a com- the bottleneck layer and apply regularisation to prevent the model
prehensive empirical comparison against anomaly detection, from learning the identity function [17]. Deep Unsupervised
supervised, and OSR baselines on Lycos2017, demonstrating Anomaly Detection (DUAD) trains an autoencoder while iteraconsistent gains on both known and zero-day attacks.1 tively clustering the data to remove outliers [23]. DAE-LR adds
 a regularisation term to ensure that benign data remains compact
 II. R ELATED W ORKS in latent space [24]. Another variant, AutoSVM, applies an SVM
A. Anomaly Detection to the bottleneck layer to perform classification [25]. Despite
 the widespread application of autoencoders in NIDS, challenges
 Anomaly detection involves understanding the typical pat- remain as certain attacks often exhibit low reconstruction errors,
terns of a dataset during training and then identifying which can prevent them from being detected without a high
deviations from this pattern during inference. In NIDS, this false positive rate [22].
approach is used to train a model on the normal behaviour
of network traffic, allowing it to recognise any deviations as
malicious. Since these models are trained solely on benign
data, they can theoretically identify zero-day as well as known B. Open-Set Recognition
attacks. These models can be used as stand-alone classifiers Open-Set Recognition is a subset of ML which aims to
or alternatively can be combined with traditional rules based extend traditional classifiers, which discriminate between a
or signature-based approaches [11], [12]. closed-set of known classes, to also identify samples of
 Distance-based methods represent one of the simplest class distributions which were not represented in the training
approaches to anomaly detection. These methods typically data. This is applicable to NIDS where it is beneficial for a
calculate the centroid of benign training data and identify classifier to be able to identify zero-day attacks in addition
anomalies based on their Minkowski distance from this cen- to identifying the type of traffic amongst a set of known
troid [13]. The greater the distance, the more likely a data classes.
point is to be an anomaly. Alternative distance measures, One approach to OSR, is to employ a multistage classification
such as Frobenius and Grassmannian distances, have also been framework, which trains both an anomaly detector and closed
employed [14]. Instead of comparing a samples distance to set classifier. Samples are then either flagged as out of
a centroid, other works have used a samples local outlier distribution (OOD) or assigned their predicted closed-set class
factor and the distance to its Kth nearest neighbour [15]. label based on thresholds set on both the anomaly detector and
Most recently, DeepSVDD has attempted to parameterise the classifier’s predictions. In NIDS, an autoencoder and random
these methods by learning a mapping from raw feature space forest have found to be effective for the anomaly detector and
to an embedded space in which benign data is constrained classifier, respectively [26]. Deep Open Classification (DOC)
to a hypersphere [16]. However, these methods have been instead trains a classifier for OSR in an end-to-end manner [6].
shown to require a large amount of data to be effective [17]. Each known class in the dataset is assigned its own logit
Furthermore, selecting a distance metric can be challenging and sigmoid activation in the output layer, with each being
and choices often don’t generalise to zero-day attacks [18]. trained in a one-vs-rest fashion. After training, a Gaussian
 Another approach extends discriminative models to perform distribution is fit onto the sigmoid activations for each class,
anomaly detection. One class SVMs extend SVMs to anomaly with a sample’s likelihood under these distributions being used
detection by learning a boundary which encompasses benign to detect zero-day attacks at test time.
traffic during training. During inference, samples appearing Another line of work aims to extend pretrained closed-set
inside this boundary are deemed to be benign; whilst samples classifiers to OSR. OpenMax does this by fitting a Weibull
outside the boundary are considered to be malicious [4], [5]. distribution to the distances between the activation vectors
Additionally, Isolation Forests (IF), an extension of tree-based from the penultimate layer of a neural network and the
classification models, can be used to identify anomalies as mean activation vector for each known class [7]. During
samples which require many branches to isolate from the inference, an OOD score is calculated using the CDFs of the
training dataset [19]. Weibull distributions. CROSR is an extension of OpenMax
 Deep learning methods have been extensively utilised for where a deep hierarchical reconstruction network (DHRN)
anomaly detection, with numerous studies employing various is trained instead of a standard MLP [27]. G-OpenMax,
techniques [20], [21]. One common approach involves the another extension of OpenMax trains a neural network with
use of autoencoders, which take an input and encode it into synthesised data as the unknown class [28].
 1 The implementation and experiments are open-sourced and available at: Finally, OSR can be performed using statistical analysis
https://github.com/jackwilkie/CLOSR in the feature space. Centroid methods compare the features
2066 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

representation to the mean values using a similarity met- zero-day attacks in binary classification and OSR scenarios,
ric [29]. Open set nearest neighbours considers the ratio respectively. As illustrated in Figure 1 (top), CLAD trains a
of the distance from a sample to its nearest class relative neural network to model benign network traffic as a vMF
to that of the second-nearest class [30]. Weibull SVMs distribution in embedded space. After training, the centroid
calibrate the predictions of one class SVMs using Weibull of this distribution is computed and its cosine distance from
distributions [31]. Extreme value machines derive a density test samples is used as a binary classification score at inferfunction from extreme values theory and use this to model ence time. By leveraging contrastive learning, CLAD avoids
class belongingness probabilities [32]. explicitly modelling malicious traffic and thus does not make
 the closed world assumption, despite training on malicious
C. Contrastive Learning samples. This results in significantly improved known and
 Contrastive learning is a technique in machine learning that zero-day attack detection over traditional supervised classifiers
trains models to learn an embedded representation of the input and anomaly detectors.
data in which similar samples are close together, whilst being CLOSR, shown in Figure 1 (bottom), extends CLAD
separated from dissimilar samples. The simplest form of this to the OSR setting by introducing class-wise linear protechnique is exemplified by Siamese Networks, which utilise jections. These projections are optimised independently
a contrastive loss function designed to minimise distances using the CLAD loss function, enabling the modelling of
between similar pairs and maximise those between dissimilar each known class as an independent vMF distribution in
pairs [33]. In NIDS, a Siamese network was initially trained a distinct embedded subspace. Multiclass classification is
in a supervised fashion, where tabular samples of the same then performed by identifying the class centroid with the
class were treated as similar and different classes were dissim- least cosine similarity to the test embedding. Importantly,
ilar [8]. It was later extended to few-shot classification, where zero-day attacks manifest as vectors orthogonal to class
the Siamese network was able to identify novel attacks without centroids, making them easily distinguishable from known
retraining, given a small number of reference samples [9]. classes.
Since then, contrastive learning has been shown to be effective
when dealing with class imbalance [34] and datasets of limited B. Contrastive Learning for Anomaly Detection
size [10].
 In NIDS the objective of machine learning based binary
 Due to its effectiveness, contrastive learning has been
 classifiers is to leverage a training dataset to learn decision
gaining popularity in NIDS. RENOIR is a contrastive model
 boundaries between benign and malicious samples, such that
which employs two autoencoders, one of which has been
 malicious traffic can be identified during inference. Concretely,
trained on benign traffic and one which has been trained on
 given a training dataset Dtrain := {(xi , yi ) | x ∈ Rf , y ∈
malicious traffic. The distance between a sample and its cor-
 Y}N train
 i=1 containing Ntrain ∈ Z+ recorded network flows—
responding reconstruction is minimised, whilst that between
 where x is a set of f ∈ Z+ tabular features representing each
the sample and the other reconstruction is maximised [35].
 flow and Y := {0, . . . , Nc } is set of class labels representing
FeCo trains an autoencoder using the InfoNCE loss function
 benign traffic (y = 0) and Nc ∈ Z+ known malicious classes
in a federated learning regime where the model can learn from
 of traffic (y = 0)–a decision function must be learned to
multiple clients [36]. In online learning regimes contrastive
 predict the binary class labels y  := 1[y = 0] ∈ {0, 1} of
learning has been used to pseudo-label traffic flows, these
 unknown flows at test time. Here 1 represents an indicator
are then used to periodically retrain the model [37]. Other
 function which returns 1 when the condition is true and returns
approaches have used image representations in place of tabular
 0 otherwise.
data [38].
 The most common solution is to train a parameterised neural
 Finally, contrastive self-supervised learning (SSL)
 network, φθ : Rf → R with parameters θ, to minimise the
approaches are capable of learning features from unlabelled or
 binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss function, which is equivalent
benign traffic which can then be used for anomaly detection
 to maximising the log-likelihood of the conditional distribution
or fine-tuned for classification. SSCL-IDS minimises the
 P (y  | x ; θ) under a Bernoulli model. In practice, it is
distance between two masked views of an input samples whilst
 calculated over a batch B ⊂ Dtrain sampled from the training
maximising it between other samples [39]. Conflow minimises
 dataset as shown in Equation (1), where ŷi := σ(φ(xi ))
the distance between two views of a sample generated by
 is the predicted probability that flow xi is malicious and
passing it through a model twice, each time using a different
 σ : R → [0, 1] is the sigmoid activation function. The model
dropout mask [34]. CLDNN trains a contrastive model using
 parameters θ have been omitted for simplicity.
feature masking to similar pairs and using other samples as
dissimilar pairs [40]. 1      
 LBCE = − yi log ŷi + 1 − yi log(1 − ŷi ) (1)
 |B|
 III. P ROPOSED A PPROACH (xi ,yi )∈B

A. System Overview NIDS trained using the BCE loss aim to directly model
 This section introduces Contrastive Learning for Anomaly the conditional label distribution P (y  | x ). However, when
Detection (CLAD) and its extension, Contrastive Learning faced with imbalanced data, these models often exhibit poor
for Open-Set Recognition (CLOSR), designed for detecting performance due to implicit biases toward the majority class,
WILKIE et al.: NOVEL CONTRASTIVE LOSS FOR ZERO-DAY NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2067

Fig. 1. Wholistic overview of the proposed approach. Top: The CLAD loss function learns the distribution of benign traffic as an embedded vMF distribution.
During inference the cosine distance between test representations and the centroid of this distribution is used to identify anomalous traffic. Bottom: The
CLOSR framework extends CLAD to OSR by modelling the distribution of each known traffic class as an independent vMF distribution in a class specific
embedded subspace. Closed set can be inference can then be performed by identifying the distribution with the highest cosine similarity to the test embedding,
while zero-day attacks manifest as orthogonal vectors. Here the vMF distributions have been flattened for illustrative purposes.

reflecting the marginal label distribution P (y  ) in prac- batch. Finally, τ ∈ R+ is the temperature hyperparameter. The
tice. Moreover, this approach typically assumes a symmetry notation zi := φ(xi ) is used for simplicity.
between known and zero-day attacks where P (y  | x , y ∈ 1  1 
Y) = P (y  | x ). This symmetry does not hold in prac- LSupCon =
 |B| |P(i )|
tice, limiting the model’s ability to generalise to zero-day (xi ,yi )∈B xp ∈P(i)
   
attacks. exp zi · zp /τ
 To circumvent the implicit learning of P (y  ), supervised − log  (2)
contrastive learning utilises the pairwise interactions between xa ∈A(i) exp(zi · za /τ )
 P (x |y)
samples to estimate the density ratio P (x ) from which While contrastive learning has achieved improved
a value proportional to P (y | x ) can be recovered under performance in NIDS tasks due to its ability to model
a uniform prior for P(y). The supervised contrastive loss imbalanced data; existing methods maintain the symmetry
function is given in Equation (2) [41]. Here φ : Rf → Sfo −1 assumption between known and unknown malicious classes
is a neural network mapping the data from feature space to and thus still suffer from reduced performance when faced
an embedded representation of dimensionality fo ∈ Z+ such with zero-day attacks. This work instead proposes the CLAD
 P (x |y=0)
that φ(x )2 = 1 ∀x ∈ Rf . P(i ) := {xj ∈ B | j = i , yj = framework, which learns the density ratio P (x |y=0) while
yi } denotes the set of positive samples for anchor xi , and explicitly modelling P (x | y = 0) as a vMF distribution,
A(i ) := {xj ∈ B | j = i } denotes all other samples in the which has been shown in computer vision literature to be
2068 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

well suited for OOD detection [42]. As the density ratio Finally, simplifying Equation (6) gives the final CLAD
is asymmetrically computed over benign traffic, the model loss function given in Equation (7). Here the concentration
exclusively learns the distribution of benign traffic, with terms have been tied such that κ0 = κ1 and removed as a
malicious samples being used only to normalise the benign multiplicative constant, which is absorbed into the learning
distribution. This relaxes the closed world assumption akin to rate during hyperparameter optimisation. In this formulation,
anomaly detectors (i.e., P (x | y  = 0, y ∈ Y) = P (x | y  = the distance terms are squared to enhance the separation
0)). Furthermore, by explicitly modelling the data as vMF between benign and malicious traffic in the embedded space.
distributions, a structure is forced on embedded representation 
 1  1   2
of the data allowing for zero-day attacks to be detected. LCLAD = d zi , zp
 Additionally, it should be noted that when a shared embed- |B0 | |P(i )|
 xi ∈B0 xp ∈P(i)
ding space is used for many classes, the optimal arrangement 
  1
of class centroids on the hypersphere approaches a regular 2
 + (1 − d (zi , zn )) (7)
simplex configuration, in which the pairwise cosine similarity |N (i )|
 xn ∈N (i)
is fixed at Nc1+1 . This optimal packing reduces the angular separation between centroids as the number of classes The CLAD loss is reminiscent of the hinge-based conincreases, which in turn lowers the margin between known trastive loss function [33], however, differs in several
and zero-day samples. By contrast, learning the distribution fundamental ways. First, CLAD is evaluated exclusively on
of only benign traffic maximises the margin between benign benign anchor samples, whereas the contrastive loss optimises
samples and zero-day attacks. learns the distribution of each known class symmetrically. This
 The CLAD loss function is derived by minimising the neg- removes the closed-world assumption inherent in contrastive
ative log-likelihood of benign samples under the density ratio learning and aligns CLAD with anomaly-style training objec-
P (x |y=0) tives. Second, CLAD can be viewed as fixing the contrastive
P (x |y=0)
 , using vMF class-conditional distributions as shown
 loss’ margin term to m = 1.0 which forces benign and
in the loss function given in Equation (3). Here μ0 ∈ Sfo −1 malicious traffic to converge to antipodal regions of the
and μ¬0 ∈ Sfo −1 are the centroids of the class-conditional hypersphere and eliminates the hinge regularisation. Third,
distributions P (x | y = 0) and P (x | y = 0), respectively. unlike the geometric motivation of contrastive loss, CLAD
The vMF normalisation terms Cfo (κ0 ) and Cfo (κ1 ) have been admits a probabilistic interpretation via a vMF likelihood
 C (κ )
omitted due to forming the additive constant − log( Cfo (κ0 ) ), ratio, yielding a density-ratio estimator rather than a geometric
 fo 1
which is eliminated upon differentiation. The notations Bc := separation loss
{xj ∈ B | yj = c} and Dc := {xj ∈ Dtrain | yj = c} It is pertinent to note that squaring the distance metric
are used to represent the subset of samples in the batch and preserves the bound range of the rescaled distance metric, i.e.,
training dataset belonging to class c ∈ Y, respectively. Finally, d 2 : Sfo −1 × Sfo −1 → [0, 1]. By squaring the distance metric
d : Sfo −1 × Sfo −1 → [0, 1] is the rescaled cosine distance the gradient magnitudes are scaled by factors of 2|d (z , z  )| and
function shown in Equation (4) for two unit vectors z and z  . 2|d (z , z  )−1| for positive and negative pairs, respectively. This
 results in larger gradients for positive pairs with large separa-
 −1  exp(−κ0 d (zi , μ0 )) tions and for negative pairs with poor separation, giving a more
 L= log (3)
 |B0 | exp(−κ1 d (zi , μ¬0 )) discriminative embedded representation. This is similar to the
 xi ∈B0
   temperature scaling used by the SupCon loss function [41],
   1 − z · z
 d z, z = (4) where sharper gradients improve class separability.
 2
 To circumvent the need for computing centroids over the C. Outlier Detection
entire training dataset during optimisation, the relationship CLAD models benign network traffic as a vMF distribution
between an embedding and samples drawn from a vMF in embedded space. This allows for inference to be performed
distribution, as defined in Equation (5), is leveraged. This by evaluating the likelihood of a test embedding under the
relationship enables the centroids of the vMF distributions learned benign vMF distribution. To facilitate this the mean
to be approximated via Monte Carlo sampling using samples direction, μ0 ∈ Sfo −1 , of the benign distribution is calculated
within the current batch, as illustrated in Equation (6), where as the centroid of benign data, normalised to lie on the unit
N (i ) := {xj ∈ B | j = i , yj = yi } denotes the set of hypersphere as shown in Equation (8).
negative pairs for anchor xi and κy  ∈ [0, inf) is class-specific 
concentration parameter of vMF distribution associate with x ∈D zi
 μ= i 0 (8)
binary class label y  . || xi ∈D0 zi ||
   
 d (z , μ) ∝ Ez  ∼vMF(μ,κ) d z , z  (5) The cosine similarity between a test embedding and the
 ⎛  ⎞ distribution centroid is proportional to the likelihood P (x |
 −κ0    y = 0). In principle, this can be converted to a conditional
 ⎜ exp |P(i)| d zi , zp ⎟ probability P (y = 0 | x ) using Bayes’ theorem; however,
 −1  ⎜
 ⎜ xp ∈P(i) ⎟
 ⎟(6)
 L= log⎜  ⎟ computing the marginal likelihood P(x) requires integrating
 |B0 | ⎝  ⎠
 xi ∈B0 −κ1 over all possible class-conditional distributions, which is only
 exp |N (i)|
 d (z i , z n )
 xn ∈N (i) possible under a closed world assumption. Thus, CLAD
WILKIE et al.: NOVEL CONTRASTIVE LOSS FOR ZERO-DAY NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2069

instead uses the negative cosine similarity between a test in its respective linear projection, and then normalised to lie
embedding and the centroid as an OOD score, s(x ) ∈ on a unit hypersphere.
[−1, 1], given by Equation (9). This score is proportional to 
 x ∈D hc (zi )
the negative log-likelihood of the sample under the vMF μc =  i c (13)
distribution, up to an additive constant. This is in line with || xi ∈Dc hc (zi )||
prior work in OOD detection for computer vision [43], where
 By comparing the cosine similarity between an unknown
log-likelihoods are widely used as effective OOD scores.
 test embedding and the centroid of each class’s vMF distribus(x ) = −(z · μ) (9) tion, unnormalised class-conditional likelihoods P (x | y = c)
 can be computed for each class. These can be converted to
 Binary classification can be then made by placing a a closed-set prediction under a uniform prior with Bayes’
threshold, τ ∈ [−1, 1] on the OOD score. As shown in theorem using the softmax function as shown in Equation (14).
Equation (10): test samples with an OOD score less than
this threshold are deemed to malicious, while those with an exp(hc (z ) · μc )
 P (y = c | x , y ∈ Y) =  (14)
OOD score less than or equal to the threshold are considered i∈Y exp(hi (z ) · μi )
benign. It is important to note that this work employs threshold
independent metrics such as AUROC and FPR@95 and thus As the model is not explicitly trained on zero-day attacks,
does not calibrate the value of the threshold. In practical these samples can be assumed to be more uniformly distributed
scenarios the network’s CSOC would determine an acceptable over the unit hypersphere than those from known attack
false positive rate based on available resources and select a classes. Under this assumption, zero-day embeddings exhibit
corresponding value using a held-out validation set of benign many weakly correlated dimensions, allowing the cosine
traffic. similarity between a zero-day sample and a class mean to
  be approximated as a sum of independent random variables,
 0, if s(x ) < τ ;
 ŷ = (10) each weighted by the corresponding component of the class
 1, otherwise.
 centroid. By the Central Limit Theorem, this sum converges
 to a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance 1/fo ,
D. Extension to Open-Set Recognition as formalised in Equation (15).
 The CLAD loss function learns to discriminate the distribution of benign traffic from other classes, resulting in 
 fo
 1
binary predictions indicating whether the unknown sample hc (z ) · μc = hc (z )i μc,i ∼ N 0, (15)
 fo
is benign or malicious. In practical scenarios, it is often i=1
beneficial not only to know that traffic is malicious, but also Following Equation (15), an OOD score, s(x ) ∈ [−1, 0],
the type of attack being performed. To achieve this, CLAD is defined in Equation (16). This is proportional to the logis first modified to learn the distribution of an arbitrary class, likelihood of a test embedding belonging to the Gaussian
c ∈ Y, as shown in Equation (11). To facilitate this, the neural distribution up to an additive constant. A high score is expected
network, φ : Rf → Rfi , projects the data to an intermediate to indicate a zero-day attack.
representation, zi = φ(xi ), which is then mapped to distinct
unit hyperspheres using class-wise linear projection heads, 
 Nc
{hc : Rfi → Sfo −1 }N c s(x ) = − P (y = c | x , y ∈ Y) × (hc (z ) · μc )2 (16)
 c=0 . These heads are independently
optimised to map samples onto a unique hypersphere, where c=0
its associated class distribution is modelled using a vMF While this weighted sum assumes isotropy and independistribution. dence amongst the cosine similarity measurements; these
 
 1  1  2
 assumptions are explicitly supported in this setting due the
 LCLAD (c) = d (hc (zi ), hc (zp )) construction of the embedding space and the properties of
 |Bc | |P(i )|
 xi ∈Bc xp ∈P(i)
  the hyperspherical distributions. Isotropy is ensured under
  1 the assumption of zero-day embeddings being uniformly dis-
 + (1 − d (hc (zi ), hc (zn )))2 (11)
 |N (i )| tributed over the unit hypersphere. In this case, the projection
 xn ∈N (i)
 of a random unit vector onto any fixed unit direction follows
 The CLOSR loss function can then be defined as the CLAD a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and constant variance
loss computed over each class, where each class employs 1/fo , regardless of the class. Furthermore, the independence
its distinct linear projection. The CLOSR loss is formally assumption is supported by the architecture: each class-wise
described by Equation (12). linear projection head is independently optimised using a one-
  vs-rest strategy allowing for them to be treated as independent.
 LCLOSR = LCLAD (c) (12) This is a common assumption made by ensemble modelling
 c∈Y and mixture of experts architectures [44], [45], [46].
 After training, a mean direction (centroid) is computed for Finally, a threshold, τ ∈ [−1, 0], is placed on the OOD
each class, μ ∈ SNc +1×fo −1 ; where μc is the centroid of score. As shown in Equation (17), samples with an OOD score
class c. As shown in Equation (13), this is calculated as the above the threshold are predicted to be the closed-set class
mean of all embeddings of a given class in the training data, with the highest predicted probability; whilst those with an
2070 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

OOD score equal to or less than the threshold are predicted In this section CLAD and CLOSR are evaluated and
as belonging to a previously unseen class (ŷ = −1). compared to baseline models from anomaly detection, super-
  vised classification, and OSR. To ensure fair evaluation, the
 −1, if s(x ) > τ ;
 ŷ = (17) proposed approaches and baseline models were optimised
 argmax (P (y | x , y ∈ Y)), otherwise. and evaluated using an identical procedure: machine learning
 It should be noted that, similar to the binary classification models were trained for 200 epochs using the AdamW
threshold, the threshold τ is not calibrated in this work due optimiser [47]. The learning rate was scheduled using a linear
to the use of threshold independent evaluation metrics. In warmup for 20 epochs followed by cosine annealing [48].
practical deployments, this would be tuned on a held-out Weighted class balancing was also used to sample batches.
closed-set validation set based on acceptable error rates defined The base learning rate, batch size, weight decay, dropout
by the corresponding cybersecurity operations centre (CSOC). rate and the model’s width and depth were tuned as hyper-
 The CLAD loss function is a special case of the CLOSR parameters. The cosine distance metric was used for all
loss. Given an N = Nc + 1 way classification task, CLOSR models.
explicitly models Nc known class distributions with the The hyperparameters of gradient based approaches were
remaining class being treated as OOD samples. For an N = 2 optimised using 200 iterations of random search, with each
way classification task, a single benign class distribution is iteration employing 5-fold of cross-validation across the trainlearned (with known malicious and OOD traffic being con- ing data. Here 200 iterations were used for each model
sidered a single class), yielding the CLAD training objective due to the available compute budget. Standard search ranges
exactly. were used for each parameter, with search ranges being kept
 constant across models. Model specific hyperparameters were
 searched across parameter ranges suggested in the original
E. Network Architecture works. For gradient-free approaches it was feasible to perform
 The CLAD and CLOSR loss functions are parameterised hyperparameter optimisation using a grid search across typical
by a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), notated as φ. The hyperparameter ranges. For fair comparison with the conproposed architecture initially projects the input feature vector trastive loss function, CLAD and CLOSR were trained using
to a higher-dimensional space of dimensionality dmodel ∈ an equivalent margin and hinge regularisation term allowing
Z+ using a linear transformation. Subsequently, a non-linear for an identical search space, however, all optimised models
function is learned through a series of sequential MLP blocks. converged to a margin value of m = 1.0.
Each block comprises a linear transformation, which maintains After hyperparameter optimisation, the configuration with
the width dmodel , followed by a ReLU activation function. the greatest mean AUROC across each cross-validation fold
By using a fixed width across all MLP blocks, the model was selected for training on the entire training dataset and
architecture is simplified, requiring only a single width instead evaluation on the test set. Mean test set results over 20
of a distinct width for each layer. training and evaluation runs are reported. Additionally, statis-
 Finally, a linear projection head is used to downsample the tical testing was performed between CLAD/CLOSR and the
data to its embedded dimensionality and project it onto a unit leading baseline model using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test,
hypersphere. While the CLAD loss function employs a single with statistical significance being indicated where the p-value
projection head, the CLOSR loss function introduces multiple was below the 0.01 threshold.
projection heads in order to facilitate the training of classwise subspaces in a one-vs-rest manner. It should be noted
that while the CLAD loss function introduces sampling noise B. Comparison to Binary Classification Models
through its Monte Carlo approximation, training remained The efficacy of CLAD when compared to baseline models
stable without introducing normalisation or variance reduction in binary classification was primarily evaluated by measuring
techniques to the architecture. the model’s area under the ROC curve (AUROC). This metric
 represents the expectation of the model assigning a higher
 classification score to a malicious sample than to a benign one,
 IV. C OMPARISON TO BASELINE M ODELS
 thereby quantifying the trade-off between true positive and
A. Experimental Procedure false positive rates. The results are given in Table I (top) for
 This work trains and evaluates models using the Lycos2017 known attack classes and Table I (bottom) for zero-day attack
dataset [2], which contains 1,789,954 flows across 14 classes classes. Similarly, the FPR@95 metric, which is the model’s
of traffic, including both malicious and benign samples. The false positive rate when classifying an attack class with a 95%
dataset is highly imbalanced, with benign traffic consisting of recall, is reported for CLAD and baselines models for known
over 1,000,000 samples, and malicious classes ranging from as traffic in Table II (top) and for zero-day attacks in Table II
few as 11 samples to as many as 100,000 samples. The dataset (bottom).
was split into a 50%-50% train-test sets, ensuring that each On known attack classes, anomaly detectors expectedly
set contained an even number of samples of each class. The demonstrated poor performance when compared to supervised
Web Attack (SQL Injections) and Heartbleed classes were an classifiers. As such, CLAD was found to significantly outperexception, as they were only contained in test set to simulate form anomaly detectors on known attacks. When compared to
zero-day attacks. supervised classifiers CLAD achieved statistically significant
WILKIE et al.: NOVEL CONTRASTIVE LOSS FOR ZERO-DAY NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2071

 TABLE I
 AUROC C OMPARISON OF CLAD AND BASELINE M ODELS W HEN D ETECTING K NOWN (T OP ) AND Z ERO -DAY (B OTTOM ) ATTACKS . CLAD
 S IGNIFICANTLY O UTPERFORMS S UPERVISED C LASSIFIERS AND A NOMALY D ETECTORS IN Z ERO -DAY ATTACK D ETECTION . B EST P ERFORMANCE IS
 S HOWN IN B OLD AND * I NDICATES S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE

 TABLE II
 FPR@95 C OMPARISON OF CLAD AND BASELINE M ODELS W HEN D ETECTING K NOWN (T OP ) AND Z ERO -DAY (B OTTOM ) ATTACKS . CLAD
 S IGNIFICANTLY O UTPERFORMS S UPERVISED C LASSIFIERS AND A NOMALY D ETECTORS IN Z ERO -DAY ATTACK D ETECTION . B EST P ERFORMANCE I S
 S HOWN IN B OLD AND * I NDICATES S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE

 TABLE III
performance improvements in AUROC. While CLAD outper- C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED CLOSR F RAMEWORK W ITH BASELINE
formed supervised classifiers on known attacks in FPR@95; M ODELS IN OSR. CLOSR O UTPERFORMS E XISTING M ODELS IN B OTH
this improvement was not found to be statistically significant. O PEN S ET AUC AND O PENAUC. B EST P ERFORMANCE IS S HOWN IN
 B OLD AND * I NDICATES S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE
 On zero-day attack detection, supervised classifiers suffer
from significant performance degradation, indicating overfitting on known traffic. In contrast, anomaly detectors have
circumvented this issue by training only on benign traffic, consequently outperforming the supervised classifiers.
Remarkably, despite training on malicious samples, CLAD
maintains its strong performance against zero-day attacks. By
leveraging the representations learned from both benign and
malicious traffic, CLAD surpasses all baselines with statistically significant performance improvements on both AUROC
and FPR@95. These results highlight the applicability of
CLAD to the binary classification of both known and zero-day
attack classes. OpenAUC [49], where OpenAUC is defined as the product
 of the former two metrics. In this context, open-set AUC
 quantifies the probability of the model correctly distinguishing
C. Comparison to Open-Set Recognition Models test samples from unknown classes against those from the
 The OSR performance of CLOSR was benchmarked known class distributions. The results, reported in Table III,
against a range of baseline models, including state-of-the-art highlight the strong open-set performance of CLOSR. Notably,
approaches from both the NIDS and OSR literature. Models CLOSR achieves a substantially higher open-set AUC than
were evaluated using closed-set accuracy, open-set AUC, and all baseline methods. While this improvement is accompanied
2072 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE IV
 C LOSED S ET C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON B ETWEEN
 CLOSR AND BASELINE M ODELS . B EST P ERFORMANCE IS S HOWN IN
 B OLD AND * I NDICATES S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE

 Fig. 2. AUROC of CLAD as the margin hyperparameter is varied in the range
 [0.1, 1], with (orange) and without (blue) the distance terms being squared.
by a decrease in closed-set classification accuracy; CLOSR
achieves the highest overall performance by a significant
margin, as reflected in its superior OpenAUC score.
 It should be noted that CLOSR can be used as an independent out of distribution detector and paired with a supervised
classifier which performs closed-set classification. In this
regime, the combination of the CLOSR and the Siamese
network achieves the open-set performance of CLOSR and the
closed-set performance of the Siamese network, matching the
best performance in both open and closed-set classification. Fig. 3. T-SNE plots of the validation embeddings produced by left: the
For completeness, additional multiclass classification metrics contrastive loss function and right: the CLAD loss function. Both loss
 functions produce distinct clusters for benign traffic (blue) and malicious
are reported in Table IV. These results are consistent with traffic (red). The contrastive loss function embeddings have overlap between
the above findings: CLOSR exhibits slightly lower closed-set the clusters; while the CLAD loss function creates a clear separation between
performance compared to baselines, yet its effectiveness in clusters.
open-set scenarios makes it the best OSR model in practice.
 terms were squared, there was an increasing trend in the
 V. A DDITIONAL R ESULTS AND A BLATIONS model’s performance as the margin value increases towards
A. Experimental Procedure m = 1.0. This suggests that the performance is greatest
 In this Section results from additional experiments and when the model is trained to maximally separate benign and
ablation studies are reported. To facilitate this, the dataset malicious traffic such that the respective samples lie antipodal
was split into training and test sets identical to those used in on the unit hypersphere.
Section IV. To avoid data leakage from the zero-day classes, To evaluate the impact of tying the concentration terms such
the training data was further divided 80%-20% into training that κ0 = κ1 , a hyperparameter α = κ0κ+κ 0
 1
 was defined,
and validation sets, with models being trained on the training resulting in a loss function where positive-pair distances were
data, and validation performance being reported. scaled by α and negative-pair distances were scaled by a factor
 In order to enable fair comparison between CLAD and the of 1 − α. The α parameter was then swept in the range [0.1,
contrastive loss function, and to ensure that ablations were 0.9]. The mean AUROC across runs was found to be 0.999574
unbiased by the design choices used during hyperparameter with a standard deviation of 0.000570 suggesting that CLAD
optimisation, models were trained using a fixed architecture is largely insensitive to the ratio of the concentration terms.
and set of commonly used hyperparameters. An exception
was made for Section V-G which reports the computational C. Embedding Analysis
requirements of the optimised models.
 A qualitative evaluation of the CLAD loss function was conducted by examining the output embeddings from the model’s
B. CLAD Loss Ablations contrastive head. In Figure 3, the embeddings generated by
 To empirically evaluate design choices used by the CLAD CLAD are visualized using t-SNE dimensionality reduction
loss function, a margin based hinge regularisation term was and compared against those produced using the contrastive
introduced equivalent to the contrastive loss function. CLAD loss. Visual inspection reveals that both loss functions are
models were then trained with the margin value being swept able to separate benign (blue) and malicious (red) traffic into
in the range [0.1, 1] in increments of 0.1, with and without the distinct clusters. However, the contrastive loss exhibits some
distance terms being squared. The results, shown in Figure 2, overlap between classes, whereas CLAD achieves a much
demonstrate that squaring the distance terms in the CLAD loss clearer separation.
yields smoother and more stable improvements in AUROC This distinction reflects the core advantage of the CLAD
across margins, whereas the unsquared formulation exhibits loss: by explicitly modelling benign traffic as a vMF distribufluctuations in performance. Additionally, when the distance tion, the model is encouraged to structure the embedding space
WILKIE et al.: NOVEL CONTRASTIVE LOSS FOR ZERO-DAY NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2073

Fig. 4. Alignment analysis of the contrastive (blue) and CLAD (orange) loss functions when detecting known and zero-day attacks. Left: Balanced recall
of the contrastive and CLAD loss functions amongst classes included in the training data when evaluated using a linear classification probe. Centre: Mean
AUROC of the contrastive and CLAD loss functions when evaluated on zero-day using a linear probe. Right: Mean AUROC of the contrastive and CLAD
loss functions throughout training when evaluated by measuring the distance between validation samples and the centroid of benign traffic.

 of benign embeddings in the training data, this method of
 evaluation is hereby referred to in the remainder of this work
 as centroid evaluation.
 The results, given in Figure 4, indicate that optimising both
 the contrastive and the CLAD loss functions yields embedded
 representations where both known and zero-day classes are
 linearly separable. Notably, CLAD’s representations of different malicious distributions are linearly separable, despite
 being learned using binary class labels. These findings were
Fig. 5. Cumulative distribution function of the cosine distance between
data points and the centroid of benign traffic when training a model using further validated by employing a KNN classifier to assess the
the CLAD and contrastive loss functions. Left: The contrastive loss function performance of the contrastive heads, where CLAD and the
learns a representation in which malicious classes (red) are often closer to the contrastive loss were found to have comparable mean recall
centroid than benign samples (blue). Right: the CLAD loss function learns an
embedded representation of the data in which benign samples (blue) appear scores of .8877 and .8769 respectively.
close to the centroid, malicious samples (red) are far from the centroid, and While both models learned representations where benign
zero-day attacks (orange) are orthogonal to the centroid. and malicious traffic was linearly separable, only CLAD’s contrastive head consistently improved in performance throughout
 training. In contrast, little correlation was observed between
such that the centroid becomes a statistically meaningful and
 the performance of the contrastive loss function’s centroid
robust class proxy. Rather than relying on incidental spatial
 evaluation performance and its training progress, indicating
structure, CLAD imposes a probabilistic constraint that prothat malicious embeddings often appear closer to the benign
motes both intra-class compactness and inter-class separation.
 class centroid than benign embeddings.
While t-SNE offers qualitative insight, the improved detec-
 This phenomenon was further highlighted by plotting the
tion performance and lower false positive rate quantitatively
 cumulative distribution functions of the cosine distances from
support the effectiveness of this representation.
 validation samples of each class to the benign centroid for both
 fully trained models, as shown in Figure 5. The contrastive
D. Alignment Analysis loss function learned an embedded representation in which
 A quantitative comparison between the CLAD and con- many known malicious (mean = 1.157, std = 0.926) and
trastive loss functions was conducted by evaluating their zero-day samples (mean = 2.458 ×10−5 , std = 4.415 ×
respective abilities to classify known and zero-day network 10−5 ) lie closer to the benign centroid than a substantial
traffic throughout training. To facilitate this analysis, two linear fraction of benign traffic (mean = 0.00185, std = 0.0587),
classification probes were appended to the model alongside the explaining its poor performance when using centroid-based
contrastive projection head. One probe was trained on known inference. Conversely, CLAD learned an embedded space in
attack classes in multiclass classification, whilst two additional which benign traffic was tightly clustered around the centroid
malicious classes were separated from the training data and (mean 0.00378, std = 0.0634), with malicious traffic being
used to train the other probe as a binary classifier to identify maximally separated (mean = 1.922, std = 0.0263). Zerozero-day attacks. Both probes were trained on embeddings day attacks occupied the intermediate region (mean = 0.0431,
after the gradient information had been detached, allowing std = 0.0112), which is consistent with the orthogonal OOD
them to evaluate the efficacy of the features learned by the score derived for CLOSR in Section III-D.
model without impacting its weights. The performance of each These findings demonstrate that while both the CLAD and
probe was evaluated on the validation set. The performance contrastive loss functions generate discriminative features for
of the contrastive head was measured by inferring class identifying both known and zero-day attacks, the contrastive
labels from the distance of validation samples to the centroid loss does not guarantee separation between malicious traffic
2074 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE V
 AUROC C OMPARISON OF CLAD U SING VARIOUS C LASS P ROXIES within a small subspace of the hypersphere. In contrast, the
 zero-day embeddings yielded a substantially larger normalised
 rank of 0.4375, supporting the hypothesis that their distribution
 is significantly more diffuse.
 To evaluate the suitability of the weighted Gaussian likelihood used by CLOSR as an OOD score, an ablation study
 compared this score against an energy-based score proportional to the negative joint log-likelihood of a test sample under
 all known class distributions [43] and a score proportional
 TABLE VI to the likelihood of the sample under a Gaussian orthogonal
O PEN -S ET AUC OF CLOSR U SING VARIOUS OOD S CORING F UNCTIONS
 to the centroid of the sample’s predicted closed-set class
 label in its corresponding subspace. The resulting open-set
 AUC values are reported in Table VI. The energy-based score
 outperformed the unweighted Gaussian score, suggesting that
 aggregating information across all class-specific subspaces
 provides more reliable zero-day detection. Finally, the softand the benign class centroid. Hence, reference samples are weighted Gaussian likelihood achieved the highest open-set
required by the classifier to infer a zero-day attack’s position AUC, indicating that a Gaussian-based formulation is a more
in embedded space. This can be achieved via training a appropriate OOD scoring mechanism than those derived from
linear probe, or without re-training by using a KNN classifier. the vMF distributions used for modelling known classes.
Conversely, the CLAD loss function ensures a high expectation of malicious samples appearing further from the benign
 G. Computational Cost and Scalability
centroid than benign samples, allowing zero-day attacks to be
successfully detected. The computational requirements of CLAD, CLOSR, and
 baseline models during inference are summarised in Table VII,
E. Class Proxy Ablation reporting parameter count, VRAM usage, computational complexity (MFLOPs), latency, and throughput. To ensure a fair
 CLAD relies on the distance between a test sample and comparison, all models were evaluated using the architectures
the centroid of benign traffic to perform inference, how- obtained through hyperparameter optimisation. Measurement
ever, centroid-based classification methods can be sensitive to conditions were standardised: a fixed batch size of 1 was
noisy training data and adversarial samples. In Table V, the used for assessing computational complexity and latency, a
performance of CLAD is reported with alternative distance batch size of 1024 was used for measuring VRAM usage, and
measures—specifically, the distance to the median, trimmed throughput was determined using optimal batch sizes selected
mean, medoid, and nearest neighbour. Amongst these, the from {2i | i ∈ Z, 1 ≤ i ≤ 20}. Latency and throughput
centroid yields the best performance. were measured on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU and Intel
 Interestingly, the nearest neighbour distance performs worse Xeon W-2255 CPU under Ubuntu 22.04, using PyTorch 2.0.1
than the centroid distance in this context, which contrasts with (FP32). Each latency value is the mean over 20 timed runs
previous contrastive and self-supervised learning approaches. after 5 warmups. FLOPs were estimated with the PyTorch
This can be attributed to CLAD explicitly modelling the profiler under identical model configurations.
benign traffic as a vMF distribution, unlike other non- In binary classification, the optimised CLAD architecture
parametric approaches such as the SupCon loss function. exhibited a substantially higher parameter count than the
While these results suggest the centroid remains effective baseline models, reflecting its scalability to larger model sizes
under clean conditions, future work will aim to evaluate without overfitting. Despite this increased complexity, CLAD
the robustness of CLAD to adversarial samples and polluted achieved lower latency and higher throughput than RENOIR,
benign samples in the training dataset. demonstrating clear efficiency advantages. Although it was
 less efficient than other baselines, its balance of low latency
F. CLOSR Inference Ablation and comparatively high throughput highlights its suitability as
 To identify zero-day attacks in the embedding space, a practical real-time NIDS solution.
CLOSR computes an OOD score by evaluating the likelihood In OSR, CLOSR was found to be less computationally
of a test sample under a set of Gaussian distributions defined efficient than non-contrastive baselines, which can partly be
over the class-specific subspaces. This formulation is moti- attributed to the hyperparameter search selecting a relatively
vated by the Central Limit Theorem and the assumption that large architecture. This reflects CLOSR’s robustness against
zero-day attacks occupy a broader region of the hypersphere overfitting. When compared to the Siamese network, CLOSR
relative to known classes. To empirically validate this assump- was markedly more efficient, achieving superior results across
tion, two malicious classes were withheld from the training all computational metrics. The inefficiency of the Siamese
data to simulate zero-day attacks. A CLAD model was then network stems from its reliance on the neighbours-distance
trained, and the output embedding matrices were analysed. The scoring function, which requires an expensive search over the
known-class validation embeddings exhibited a normalised training set. CLOSR’s combination of latency and throughput
rank of 0.0625, indicating that known traffic concentrates makes it practical for NIDS.
WILKIE et al.: NOVEL CONTRASTIVE LOSS FOR ZERO-DAY NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2075

 TABLE VII
 C OMPUTATIONAL R EQUIREMENTS OF CLAD, CLOSR, AND BASELINE M ODELS D URING I NFERENCE FOR B INARY
 C LASSIFICATION (T OP ) AND O PEN -S ET R ECOGNITION (B OTTOM )

 VI. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION several limitations remain. The primary drawback of CLOSR
 In this work the contrastive loss for anomaly detec- is its reliance on a distinct linear projection head for each
tion (CLAD) was introduced to bridge the gap between class in the training data, leading to a model whose size
supervised classifiers, which perform well on known traffic and computational cost scales with the number of classes.
but struggle to detect zero-day attacks, and anomaly detectors, This design choice may hinder cross-domain applicability,
which do not degrade in performance when detecting zero-day particularly in fields such as computer vision where datasets
attacks but suffer from high false positive rates. The CLAD can contain thousands of classes. Moreover, the proposed
loss function exploits contrastive learning to exclusively model approaches have not yet been evaluated against adversarial
benign traffic as a von-Mises Fisher distribution in embedded attacks or under conditions involving noisy training data, leavspace. As CLAD is only evaluated on benign anchor samples, ing their robustness in such scenarios uncertain. Addressing
the closed world assumption made by existing supervised these gaps with future work could enhance both the efficiency
classifiers is relaxed allowing for effective generalisation to and resilience of the methods. Finally, extending CLAD and
zero-day attacks despite training on known malicious classes. CLOSR to support cross-network generalisation and few-shot
 CLAD was experimentally evaluated and compared to lead- learning on limited datasets would further strengthen their
ing anomaly detectors and supervised classifiers. It was found practicality and broaden their applicability.
that by training on malicious samples, CLAD outperformed
both existing supervised classifiers when detecting known R EFERENCES
attack classes. Furthermore, CLAD was able to effectively
 [1] H. Hindy et al., “A taxonomy of network threats and the effect
generalise to zero-day attacks, exploiting patterns learned of current datasets on intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access,
from both known attacks and benign traffic to significantly vol. 8, pp. 104650–104675, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/
outperform anomaly detectors when faced with previously 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3000179
 [2] A. Rosay, F. Carlier, E. Cheval, and P. Leroux, “From CIC-IDS2017
unseen classes. to LYCOS-IDS2017: A corrected dataset for better performance,” in
 The extension of CLAD to open-set recognition gave rise Proc. IEEE/WIC/ACM Int. Conf. Web Intell. Intell. Agent Technol. (WIto the Contrastive Loss for Open-Set Recognition (CLOSR) IAT), 2022, pp. 570–575. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
 3486622.3493973
framework, which enabled multiclass classification over a set [3] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
known malicious classes whilst simultaneously identifying of intrusion detection systems: Techniques, datasets and chalzero-day attacks. This was achieved by learning the distribu- lenges,” Cybersecurity, vol. 2, p. 20, Jul. 2019. [Online]. Available:
 https://doi.org/10.1186/s42400-019-0038-7
tion of each known class within a distinct embedded subspace, [4] H. Hindy, R. Atkinson, C. Tachtatzis, J.-N. Colin, E. Bayne, and
with classification performed by evaluating the likelihood of X. Bellekens, “Utilising deep learning techniques for effective zeroday attack detection,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 10, p. 1684, Oct. 2020.
a test sample belonging to each distribution. Zero-day attacks [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/10/1684
manifested as embedded vectors orthogonal to the distri- [5] S. Mukkamala, G. Janoski, and A. Sung, “Intrusion detection using
butions’ centroids allowing easy identification. Experimental neural networks and support vector machines,” in Proc. Int. Joint
 Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2002, pp. 1702–1707. [Online]. Available:
results demonstrated that CLOSR not only maintains strong https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2002.1007774
closed-set classification performance but also generalises [6] L. Shu, H. Xu, and B. Liu, “DOC: Deep open classification of text doceffectively to zero-day attacks, thereby outperforming existing uments,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods Nat. Lang. Process. (EMNLP),
 2017, pp. 2911–2916. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/D17-
OSR approaches for network intrusion detection systems. 1314
 While the ability of CLAD and CLOSR to generalise to [7] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in
zero-day attacks represents a significant step toward practical Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2016,
 pp. 1563–1572. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.
machine learning–based network intrusion detection systems, 2016.173
2076 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 [8] H. Hindy, C. Tachtatzis, R. Atkinson, E. Bayne, and X. Bellekens, [27] R. Yoshihashi et al., “Classification-reconstruction learning for open-set
 “Developing a Siamese network for intrusion detection systems,” in recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 Proc. 1st Workshop Mach. Learn. Syst., 2021, pp. 120–126. [Online]. (CVPR), 2019, pp. 4011–4020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3437984.3458842 1109/CVPR.2019.00414
 [9] H. Hindy et al., “Leveraging Siamese networks for one-shot intrusion [28] Z. Ge, S. Demyanov, Z. Chen, and R. Garnavi, “Generative OpenMax
 detection model,” J. Intell. Inf. Syst., vol. 60, pp. 407–436, Nov. 2022. for multi-class open set classification,” 2017, arXiv:2407.08838.
 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10844-022-00747-z [29] G. Fei and B. Liu, “Breaking the closed world assumption in text
[10] H. Hindy, “Intrusion detection systems using machine learning and deep classification,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput.
 learning techniques,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. School Design Inform., Linguist., Hum. Lang. Technol. (NAACL-HLT), 2016, pp. 506–514.
 Abertay Univ., Dundee, U.K., 2021. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/N16-1061
[11] I. Sarker, A. Kayes, S. Badsha, A. Hamad, P. Watters, and A. Ng, [30] P. Júnior et al., “Nearest neighbors distance ratio open-set classi-
 “Cybersecurity data science: An overview from machine learning per- fier,” Mach. Learn., vol. 106, pp. 1–28, Mar. 2017. [Online]. Available:
 spective,” J. Big Data, vol. 7, p. 41, Jul. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-016-5610-8
 https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-020-00318-5 [31] W. J. Scheirer, L. P. Jain, and T. E. Boult, “Probability models for open
[12] H. Wang, J. Yang, and Y. Lu, “A logical combination based application set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 36, no. 11,
 layer intrusion detection model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyberspace Innov. pp. 2317–2324, Nov. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
 Adv. Technol. (CIAT), 2021, pp. 310–316. [Online]. Available: https:// TPAMI.2014.2321392
 doi.org/10.1145/3444370.3444590 [32] E. M. Rudd, L. P. Jain, W. J. Scheirer, and T. E. Boult, “The extreme
[13] M. Hassen and P. K. Chan, “Learning a neural-network-based represen- value machine,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 3,
 tation for open set recognition,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min. pp. 762–768, Mar. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
 (SDM), 2020, pp. 154–162. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1137/ TPAMI.2017.2707495
 1.9781611976236.18 [33] S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, and Y. LeCun, “Learning a similarity metric
[14] J. Rivero, B. Ribeiro, N. Chen, and F. S. Leite, “A discriminatively, with application to face verification,” in Proc. IEEE
 Grassmannian approach to zero-shot learning for network Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2005,
 intrusion detection,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. pp. 539–546. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2005.
 Process. (ICONIP), 2017, pp. 565–575. [Online]. Available: 202
 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70087-8_59 [34] L. Liu, P. Wang, J. Ruan, and J. Lin, “ConFlow: Contrast network flow
[15] S. Kim, C. Hwang, and T. Lee, “Anomaly based unknown intrusion improving class-imbalanced learning in network intrusion detection,” in
 detection in endpoint environments,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 6, p. 1022, Proc. 6th Int. Conf. SPNCE, 2022, pp. 125–146. [Online]. Available:
 Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/6/ https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1572776/v1
 1022 [35] G. Andresini, A. Appice, and D. Malerba, “Autoencoder-based deep
[16] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. metric learning for network intrusion detection,” Inf. Sci., vol. 569,
 Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2018, pp. 4393–4402. [Online]. Available: https:// pp. 706–727, Aug. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
 proceedings.mlr.press/v80/ruff18a.html ins.2021.05.016
[17] Z. Zhang, Q. Liu, S. Qiu, S. Zhou, and C. Zhang, “Unknown [36] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “FeCo: Boosting intruattack detection based on zero-shot learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, sion detection capability in IoT networks via contrastive learning,” in
 pp. 193981–193991, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, 2022, pp. 1409–1418. [Online]. Available:
 ACCESS.2020.3033494 https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM48880.2022.9796926
[18] M. Hassen and P. K. Chan, “Unsupervised open set recognition using [37] X. Zhang et al., “AOC-IDS: Autonomous online framework with
 adversarial autoencoders,” in Proc. 19th IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. contrastive learning for intrusion detection,” 2024, arXiv:2402.01807.
 Appl. (ICMLA), 2020, pp. 360–365. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/ [38] Z.-M. Wang, J.-Y. Tian, J. Qin, H. Fang, and L.-M. Chen, “A few-
 10.1109/ICMLA51294.2020.00064 shot learning-based Siamese capsule network for intrusion detection
[19] S. Snehaa, G. Shwetha, and B. Priya, “Network intrusion detector based with imbalanced training data,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2021,
 on isolation forest algorithm,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Sep. 2021, Art. no. 7126913. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
 Technol. (ICCST), 2022, pp. 932–935. [Online]. Available: https://doi. 1155/2021/7126913
 org/10.1109/ICCST55948.2022.10040395 [39] P. Golchin et al., “SSCL-IDS: Enhancing Generalization of intrusion
[20] A. Nagisetty and G. P. Gupta, “Framework for detection detection with self-supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. IFIP Netw.
 of malicious activities in IoT networks using Keras deep Conf. (IFIP Netw.), 2024, pp. 404–412. [Online]. Available: https://doi.
 learning library,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Comput. Methodol. org/10.23919/IFIPNetworking62109.2024.10619725
 Commun. (ICCMC), 2019, pp. 633–637. [Online]. Available: [40] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning
 https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCMC.2019.8819688 enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 19,
[21] Y. Lai, K.-Z. Zhou, S.-R. Lin, and N.-W. Lo, “F1ow-based anomaly no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, Nov. 2022. [Online]. Available: https:/doi.org/10.
 detection using multilayer perceptron in software defined networks,” in 1109/TNSM.2022.3218843
 Proc. 42nd Int. Conv. Inf. Commun. Technol., Electron. Microelectron. [41] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” 2021,
 (MIPRO), 2019, pp. 1154–1158. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10. arXiv:2004.11362.
 23919/MIPRO.2019.8757199 [42] Y. Ming, Y. Sun, O. Dia, and Y. Li, “How to exploit hyperspherical
[22] H. A. Dau, V. Ciesielski, and A. Song, “Anomaly detection using embeddings for out-of-distribution detection?” 2023, arXiv:2203.04450.
 replicator neural networks trained on examples of one class,” in Proc. [43] W. Liu, X. Wang, J. D. Owens, and Y. Li, “Energy-based out-of-
 Int. Conf. Simul. Evol. Learn. (SEAL), 2014, pp. 311–322. [Online]. distribution detection,” 2021, arXiv:2010.03759.
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-13563-2_27 [44] T. Dietterich, “Ensemble methods in machine learning,” in Proc.
[23] T. Li, Z. Wang, S. Liu, and W.-Y. Lin, “Deep unsupervised Int. Workshop Multiple Classif. Syst. (MCS),2000, pp. 1–15. [Online].
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45014-9_1
 Comput. Vis. (WACV), 2021, pp. 3925–3934. [Online]. [45] R. M. Rifkin and A. Klautau, “In defense of one-vs-all classification,” J.
 Available: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/WACV2021/html/ Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 5, pp. 101–141, Dec. 2004. [Online]. Available:
 Li_Deep_Unsupervised_Anomaly_Detection_WACV_2021_paper.html https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13391792
[24] D. K. Nkashama et al., “Deep learning for network anomaly detec- [46] J. Puigcerver, C. Riquelme, B. Mustafa, and N. Houlsby, “From sparse
 tion under data contamination: Evaluating robustness and mitigating to soft mixtures of experts,” 2024, arXiv:2308.00951.
 performance degradation,” 2024, arXiv:2407.08838. [47] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay
[25] M. Al-Qatf, Y. Lasheng, M. Al-Habib, and K. Al-Sabahi, “Deep learning Regularization,” 2019, arXiv:1711.05101.
 approach combining sparse autoencoder with SVM for network intrusion [48] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with
 detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 52843–52856, 2018. [Online]. warm restarts,” 2017, arXiv:1608.03983.
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2869577 [49] Z. Wang, Q. Xu, Z. Yang, Y. He, X. Cao, and Q. Huang, “OpenAUC:
[26] M. Verkerken et al., “A novel multi-stage approach for hierarchical Towards AUC-oriented open-set recognition,” in Proc. 36th Adv.
 intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 25033–25045. [Online].
 pp. 3915–3929, Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
 TNSM.2023.3259474 9f73d65a4186198152357be871345771-Paper-Conference.pdf