12598 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026

 A Real-Time Channel-Level Intrusion Detection
 System Based on Multimodal Learning
 Xiaowei Zhao , Mingshu He , Member, IEEE, and Xiaojuan Wang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—With the proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT) pointed out that attackers are using larger botnets composed
devices, cybersecurity threats are escalating. To protect user of infected IoT devices and artificial intelligence (AI) to
privacy and data integrity, a significant portion of IoT traffic significantly increase the scale of attacks [3]. Against this
is secured using encryption technologies. In addition, certain
IoT scenarios demand that intrusion detection systems (IDSs) backdrop, intrusion detection systems (IDSs) have become a
process traffic in real-time. Thus, encrypted flow detection and key technological means for safeguarding IoT security.
real-time detection have emerged as two core challenges for IDS However, in the context of IoT, IDSs primarily face two core
in IoT. To address these challenges, this article proposes RCML- challenges: encrypted traffic detection and real-time detection
IDS, a real-time channel-level IDS based on multimodal learning. requirements.
The core novelty of RCML-IDS lies in its real-time, online
processing capability, enabled by a time-window-based traffic On the one hand, data transmitted in IoT commonly contains
preprocessing mechanism. In addition, it performs channel-level user privacy and sensitive information. To protect the security
traffic aggregation and integrates multimodal features, namely of such data, encryption technologies are typically employed
raw bytes and packet lengths, to capture rich behavioral patterns for secure transmission [4], [5]. This renders traditional portfrom encrypted traffic. Architecturally, two Transformers learn based and payload-based methods largely ineffective [6].
multilevel byte representations from local to global contexts,
while an LSTM captures temporal patterns in packet length Although existing research has attempted to detect encrypted
sequences. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the traffic using packet length sequence features [27], [28], [29],
first multimodal IDS capable of real-time online traffic process- [30], [31], [32], these approaches lose too much data detail.
ing. The experimental results demonstrate that the RCML-IDS Relying solely on a single modality makes it difficult to capoutperforms existing approaches on public and self-collected ture complex attack patterns in encrypted traffic, resulting in
datasets. Its lightweight version achieves a per-sample processing time of approximately 20 ms and permits deployment on limited generalization capabilities. Consequently, multimodal
resource-constrained devices, offering an effective solution for learning offers a more effective solution for encrypted traffic
IoT security. detection.
 Index Terms—Channel-level traffic aggregation, multimodal Multimodal learning, as a method capable of processing and
learning, real-time intrusion detection. understanding information from different modalities, aligns
 more closely with the multisensory collaborative way in which
 humans perceive the world [7]. In the field of network intru-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 sion detection, extracting features from multiple modalities

N OWADAYS, the number of connected devices in the
 Internet of Things (IoT) has significantly increased, and
cyber threats have become increasingly severe [1]. According
 of network flows and fitting features with different attributes
 using various deep learning (DL) models has been proven to
 be an effective strategy [8], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43], [44].
to the DDoS insights report released by Zayo Group, the Therefore, this article adopts two modalities of features: raw
frequency of IoT attacks surged by nearly 82% between 2023 bytes and packet lengths. As illustrated in Fig. 1, these can be
and 2024 [2]. In response to this phenomenon, experts have analogized to image and audio signals in the physical world.
 Received 9 April 2025; revised 19 October 2025; accepted 1 January 2026.
 Specifically, raw bytes contain the specific content of network
Date of publication 12 January 2026; date of current version 26 March traffic, akin to the pixel information in an image, and many
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science works have converted them into grayscale images [33], [34],
Foundation of China under Grant 62402053 and Grant 62227805 and in part
by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant
 [35]; packet length sequences reflect the changes in packet
2025KYQD17(BUPT). (Corresponding author: Mingshu He.) sizes over time, similar to the amplitude variations of audio
 Xiaowei Zhao is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing signals at different time points. The fusion of images and audio
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail:
xwzhao@bupt.edu.cn).
 has been widely applied in areas such as action recognition
 Mingshu He is with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University [9], vehicle classification [10], and fake video detection [11].
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China, and also with the Similarly, by fusing raw bytes and packet lengths, we aim to
Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service, Ministry
of Education, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
 reveal the complex patterns of network flows from different
100876, China (e-mail: hemingshu@bupt.edu.cn). perspectives, thereby enhancing the performance of encrypted
 Xiaojuan Wang is with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing Uni- traffic intrusion detection in IoT.
versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail:
wj2718@bupt.edu.cn).
 On the other hand, in IoT scenarios, especially in vehicular
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2026.3651905 networks and industrial IoT, there is a high demand for
 2327-4662 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHAO et al.: REAL-TIME CHANNEL-LEVEL IDS BASED ON MULTIMODAL LEARNING 12599

 packet lengths, to enhance detection performance in both
 encrypted and nonencrypted scenarios. By optimizing a
 multiloss function, the model can better integrate and
 balance the information learned from byte- and lengthlevel features. Ablation studies demonstrate that our
 multimodal design achieves a 14% accuracy improvement over its single-modality variant using exclusively
 packet length features.
 3) Unlike traditional methods that operate at the flow level,
 we aggregate interhost traffic at the channel level. This
 coarse-grained approach allows us to comprehensively
 capture richer behavioral patterns. Furthermore, we
 employ two Transformer structures to achieve multilevel
 byte feature learning: the packet-level byte Transformer
 uses self-supervised pretraining to capture intrapacket
 byte relationships, and experiments have shown that this
 pretraining strategy can improve detection accuracy by
 4%; the channel-level byte Transformer models inter-
Fig. 1. Analogical relationships between byte/packet-length features in
network traffic and physical-world image/audio signals.
 packet correlations within a channel.
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
 summarizes the related work and analyzes existing methods.
real-time IDSs to promptly identify and respond to security Section III describes the preliminaries. Section IV introduces
threats. If the system experiences delays, it may provide the detailed design of the proposed method. Section V presents
opportunities for attackers to exploit vulnerabilities. Existing the experimental results and performance evaluation. Finally,
research primarily focuses on optimizing model complexity Section VI concludes this article.
to improve training efficiency [1], [45], [46], [47], but these
approaches struggle to handle dynamic and continuous online II. R ELATED W ORKS
data streams, making them difficult to deploy in practical Traditional intrusion detection algorithms, such as portapplications. based traffic classification [13] and deep packet inspection
 In addition, traditional IDSs commonly employ flow-level [14], are rarely used in encrypted flow detection tasks because
analysis, but their aggregation method based on five-tuples they are almost incapable of handling malicious traffic prooverlooks long-term interaction patterns between hosts [12], tected by protocols, such as TLS, VPN, and Tor [15]. As
[39]. For example, in port scanning attacks, attackers probe a result, in recent years, numerous feature-based IDS have
multiple ports of a target host to discover open ports and emerged, which typically combine machine learning (ML) and
services. Such behaviors are more easily exposed at the DL algorithms to learn statistical and sequential features. Howchannel level (based on persistent IP pair connections). ever, the classification performance of single-feature methods
 To address the aforementioned challenges of insufficient is limited. Therefore, some studies have adopted multimodal
single-modal feature representation in encrypted traffic and DL models to address this issue. Table I compares our method
high real-time requirements for IoT traffic detection, this with existing works in terms of the model employed, features
article proposes a real-time channel-level IDS based on mul- used, and the support for both encrypted traffic detection and
timodal learning, named RCML-IDS.1 The system supports real-time detection.
encrypted traffic detection and possesses real-time capabilities.
The main contributions of this article are summarized as
follows. A. Statistical Features-Based Models
 1) We design an online traffic preprocessing mechanism Statistical feature-based detection methods rely on extractbased on time-window sampling, which generates obser- ing features from bidirectional flows (e.g., total number of
 vations consistent with those collected in existing online packets, packet arrival time intervals, and flow duration) [16],
 systems, providing reliable data for simulating real-time [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]. These statistiattack detection. Notably, the detection latency of this cal features are typically modeled and analyzed using ML
 preprocessing mechanism is largely determined by the algorithms to enable threat identification in encrypted traffic
 size of the time window (e.g., 1.10-s latency with 1-s [13]. For example, Apruzzese et al. [19] proposed a random
 time windows), enabling it to flexibly meet the needs of forest (RF)-based IDS using features, such as total transmitted
 online real-time detection. packets, total transmitted bytes, and bytes per second, which
 2) We propose a multimodal learning framework capa- demonstrated certain resilience against adversarial attacks.
 ble of learning two feature modalities: raw bytes and Mohanty et al. [21] combined the predictions from three metalearners—RF, K-nearest neighbors (KNN), and decision tree
 1 The source code is publicly available at https://github.com/Akap-vv/ (DT)—to develop a meta-learning-based defense mechanism,
RCML-IDS enhancing the robustness of statistical feature classification.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
12600 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026

 TABLE I LSTM [27], GRU [28], [29], and GNN [30], to model packet
 C OMPARISON OF O UR A PPROACH W ITH E XISTING W ORKS length sequences. For instance, FS-Net [28] uses a bidirectional GRU to encode packet length sequences and introduces
 a reconstruction mechanism to ensure the effectiveness of the
 learned features. ERNN [27] is a model specifically designed
 for network-induced phenomena, utilizing LSTM networks to
 classify packet length sequences. Han et al. [30] constructed
 the graphs based on packet length sequences using GNN to
 enhance detection capabilities. Packet length sequences have
 been proven effective for encrypted traffic classification. However, length features are relatively coarse-grained, leading to
 the loss of detailed information. This makes it less suitable for
 fine-grained classification in some scenarios and challenging to
 distinguish between attacks with similar feature distributions.
 Therefore, some works have utilized raw byte sequences
 for intrusion detection in encrypted traffic. For example,
 Wang et al. [33], Dong et al. [34], and Maonan et al. [35]
 transformed the hexadecimal byte sequences of encrypted
 flows into grayscale images and employed CNN models
 to classify them. Meng et al. [36] used a Transformer to
 encode the byte sequences of packets and then applied natural
 language processing techniques for classification. Gao et al.
 [37] represented the discrete hexadecimal bytes as words and
 incorporated an attention mechanism into CNN and BiLSTM
 architectures to improve intrusion detection accuracy by focusing on key information and capturing sequential patterns.
 Zhao et al. [38] introduced a traffic classification method based
Moustafa et al. [23] generated new statistical flow features by on a masked autoencoder (MAE), employing a multilevel flow
analyzing the latent characteristics of protocols and employed representation and a traffic Transformer model to better extract
the AdaBoost algorithm to detect malicious traffic in IoT features from raw byte data.
environments. Zhang et al. [24] established the threat models The aforementioned algorithms rely solely on single feafor various attacks based on statistical flow features and tures, which may lead to several limitations. First, they
authentication mechanisms to protect IoT systems. are unable to comprehensively characterize the complex
 However, these methods rely heavily on feature selection, behavioral patterns of network traffic, potentially omitting
which requires extensive experience and specialized knowl- multidimensional information. Second, these methods are
edge. However, another limitation of such approaches is that vulnerable to evasion, as adversaries can manipulate single
they necessitate observing all packets within a complete net- features (e.g., altering packet lengths or byte distributions) to
work flow to form the corresponding flow statistics. Therefore, circumvent detection. Finally, due to the limited information
these methods are greatly time-consuming and unsuitable for captured, the performance of the models often reaches a botscenarios with high real-time requirements. tleneck, posing significant challenges for further enhancement.

B. Sequence Features-Based Models C. Multimodal Models
 Sequence feature-based methods focus more on the tem- Multimodal learning can enhance performance by capturporal information of traffic to explore characteristics, such as ing patterns from multiple perspectives and addressing the
trends and periodicity within sequences. Commonly used fea- limitations of single-feature representations. Kong et al. [39]
tures include packet length sequences, time-interval sequences, employed a sliding sampling window to conduct real-time
and byte sequences. However, packet timing is susceptible sampling of network conversations and extracted three sequento network conditions, making it unstable [25]. In addition, tial features—bytes, lengths, and time intervals—to capture the
existing research that uses packet time intervals as features patterns of different types of traffic. He et al. [40] proposed
often employs dynamic time warping [26], which incurs a novel multiview solution to reduce feature complexity and
significant computational overhead during feature extraction. explored the use of multimodal DL to construct effective
As a result, packet length and byte sequence features are more feature fusion modules for learning the underlying structure
widely utilized. of traffic data. Yu et al. [41] designed a DL method based
 The intuition behind using packet lengths is that attack on multiview learning, utilizing an ensemble classifier for
traffic may exhibit different length distributions and variation multiclass classification of minority attacks. Yun et al. [42]
patterns compared to normal traffic, which can be leveraged extracted three attribute sequences from TLS flows and used
to analyze IoT network traffic and detect potential attacks. DL models to capture long-term dependencies among elements
Existing research has employed various DL networks, such as in packet sequences. Tan et al. [43] combined packet length

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHAO et al.: REAL-TIME CHANNEL-LEVEL IDS BASED ON MULTIMODAL LEARNING 12601

sequence features with statistical features to construct interflow arranged in temporal order, i.e., t1 < · · · < tm
spatiotemporal correlation graphs, uncovering specific spafi = ai , Pif
 
tiotemporal correlations among network flows. Wang et al.
[44] proposed a multimodal encrypted traffic classification Pif = {p1 , . . . , pm } = {(a1 , t1 , c1 ) , . . . , (am , tm , cm )} . (2)
framework, AppNet, which uses a 1D-CNN to extract features 3) Channel: A channel cni represents the traffic between a
from the first 1014 B of the initial packet and an LSTM to learn pair of IP addresses, i.e., an ordered set of packets exchanged
temporal relationships in packet length sequences, ultimately between two hosts. It includes multiple network flows with
concatenating features learned from both perspectives for the same or reversed IP pairs. It is defined as follows, where
classification. ei denotes the IP pair information (source IP and destination
D. Real-Time Models IP), and t1 < · · · < tn
 IoT involves a vast number of devices, frequently handling cni = ei , Picn
 
critical data and sensitive information. IDSs must monitor
 Picn = {p1 , . . . , pn } = {(a1 , t1 , c1 ) , . . . , (an , tn , cn )} . (3)
network traffic and device behavior in real time to promptly
identify and respond to security threats. Tong and Zhang Existing IDSs typically employ a single flow as the granu-
[1] employed an improved residual temporal convolutional larity for detection. In contrast, this article conducts intrusion
network to achieve efficient spatiotemporal feature extraction detection at the channel granularity, which allows for a
and incorporated a channel attention mechanism to optimize more comprehensive learning of rich behavioral features. For
computational efficiency. With a training time of 52 s, their instance, in a port scanning attack, the attacker uses automated
model is claimed to support real-time detection. Alrefaei tools to perform large-scale port scans on the target host,
and Ilyas [45] reduced the prediction time to 0.0311 s by aiming to identify open ports and exploit vulnerabilities to
leveraging feature selection and an RF classifier, significantly launch attacks. During this process, each packet sequence
enhancing detection efficiency while maintaining accuracy. between the attacker and each requested port on the target host
Wang et al. [46] proposed a HyperDetect, which utilizes constitutes a flow. At this point, it is challenging to determine
brain-inspired hyperdimensional computing (HDC) to achieve whether a single flow represents malicious or benign traffic
a 31.83× improvement in inference speed, offering a feasible solely based on individual flows. In comparison, observing
real-time intrusion detection solution for resource-constrained at the channel granularity—that is, without distinguishing
IoT devices. Yan et al. [47] introduced a node selection strat- between ports and considering all packets sent by the attacker
egy based on clustering, which reduced the average training to the target host over a period of time—allows for a more
time of the model to 81.76 s, significantly accelerating training holistic analysis and facilitates easier identification of such
while also improving overall accuracy. While these methods attacks.
focus on improving training and testing efficiency through
model optimization and can meet low-latency online detection B. Transformer
needs, they lack real-time processing mechanisms (e.g., time
 This article employs the Transformer encoder architecwindows) for handling continuous and dynamic online traffic,
 ture, which primarily includes the multihead self-attention
making them less practical for real-world applications.
 mechanism, position embedding, add and norm layers, and
 III. P RELIMINARIES feedforward networks.
A. Granularity of Network Traffic 1) Multihead Self-Attention Mechanism: The essence of the
 Network traffic is composed of a set of consecutive and attention function can be described as a mapping from a query
ordered packets. To analyze it, a discrete representation of the (Q) to a set of key–value (K–V) pairs. In self-attention, the
traffic is required, which refers to the granularity of network Q, K, and V are derived from the same input vector x through
traffic identification. Common granularities of network traffic three distinct linear transformation matrices W Q , W K , and
mainly include packets, flows, and channels, which are defined W V . The multihead self-attention mechanism projects the input
as follows. into different representation subspaces using multiple sets of
 1) Packet: A packet is a fundamental unit of network weight matrices (Transformer uses eight attention heads). The
traffic, composed of a series of hexadecimal bytes, including inference process is as follows:
the header and payload. In encrypted traffic, the payload of 
 QK T
 
the packet is encapsulated by encryption protocols, making it Attention (Q, K, V) = softmax √ V (4)
 d
invisible externally, thereby ensuring the security and privacy  k 
of user information. A packet pi is defined as follows, where headi = Attention QWiQ , K WiK , V WiV
ai represents the five-tuple information (source IP, source (5)
port, destination IP, destination port, and protocol), ti is the MultiHead (Q, K, V) = Concat (head1 , . . . , headh ) W O . (6)
timestamp, i.e., the capture time, and ci is the payload
 Here, dk is the dimension of K, and h is the head number
 pi = (ai , ti , ci ) . (1) of self-attention. Different heads can be understood as multi-
 2) Flow: A flow fi refers to an ordered set of all packets ple independent and parallel self-attention mechanisms, each
that share the same or bidirectional five-tuple information. focusing on different semantics within the sequence. For the
It is defined as follows, where Pif comprises multiple packets byte sequences in this article, they can focus on different parts

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
12602 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026

Fig. 2. System framework of the proposed method, consisting of three components. (a) Data collection for collecting raw network traffic, (b) data preprocessing
that generates both channel-level byte sequence and packet length sequence features, and (c) multimodal learning where a pretraining module performs
unsupervised learning on byte sequences, followed by byte and length modules processing respective features, with a classification module concatenating both
features for final prediction.

within a packet and the relationships between different packets where w1 , b1 , w2 , and b2 represent the parameters of the two
in a channel traffic. linear transformations.
 2) Position Embedding: The self-attention mechanism is
inherently permutation-invariant, meaning that shuffling the IV. M ETHODOLOGY
order of the input sequence does not change the output atten- This article proposes a real-time channel-level IDS based
tion weights. Therefore, the Transformer superimposes input on multimodal learning, which consists of three stages: data
data with position information through position embedding, collection, data preprocessing, and multimodal learning. Fig. 2
which enables the model to distinguish words at different shows the system framework of the proposed method. In
positions. In network packets, the fixed positions of bytes cor- implementation, the method first performs time-window-based
respond to specific fields that carry key information, making sampling and preprocessing on the input traffic, extracting
position embedding essential. channel-level byte sequences and packet length sequences as
 3) Add and Norm: The add and norm layer consists of two two modal features. These features are then processed by
components: add and norm, representing residual connection their respective modules, the byte and length modules, to
and layer normalization operations, respectively. It is applied learn embedded representations. The resulting representations
to both the multihead self-attention layer and the feedforward are concatenated and fed into the classification layer, which
network, as expressed in the following formula: produces the final decision. Fig. 3 further details the specific
 LayerNorm (Xembed + MultiHeadAttention (Xembed )) workflow of the above process.
 LayerNorm (Xhidden + FeedForward (Xhidden ))) (7) A. Data Collection
where Xembed and Xhidden denote the inputs to the MultiHea- This solution supports intrusion detection in both online
dAttention and FeedForward, respectively. and offline scenarios. In the online detection mode, packets
 4) Feedforward Network: The feedforward network is a arriving at the network interface are captured in real time. In
two-layer neural network that maps the vectors obtained from the offline detection mode, packets are read from PCAP files
multihead attention to a higher dimensional space. It then for subsequent analysis.
applies the ReLU nonlinear activation function for feature
selection, before projecting the results back to the original B. Data Preprocessing
dimension. The formula is as follows: This article introduces a novel preprocessing method
 FeedForward (Xhidden ) = ReLU (w1 Xhidden + b1 ) w2 + b2 (8) based on time-window segmentation, which includes three

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHAO et al.: REAL-TIME CHANNEL-LEVEL IDS BASED ON MULTIMODAL LEARNING 12603

 real-time detection in online scenarios. Specifically, we capture
 packets online in units of time windows. Once a time window
 expires, all packets within that window are immediately sent
 for analysis without waiting for the complete network flow.
 2) Channel Traffic Aggregation: For the packets within a
 time window, we group them at the channel granularity. The
 source IP and destination IP of the packets are extracted as
 channel identifiers (see line 4 of Algorithm 1). It is important
 to note that channel identifiers are bidirectional, meaning that
 packets within each channel share the same or reversed IP
 pairs.
 3) Channel-Level Feature Extraction: For each packet, its
 payload length and raw bytes are extracted as features. The
 features of multiple packets within a channel form length
 and byte sequences. For encrypted traffic, the intuition behind
 using length sequences to represent packets lies in the fact
 that different types of network traffic exhibit distinct length
 feature sequences over time due to their inherent behavioral
 and pattern differences. For example, DDoS attack traffic
 usually surges sharply in a short period, resulting in a long
Fig. 3. Workflow of the proposed method. sequence with significant spikes and fluctuation patterns. In
 contrast, normal traffic tends to have a more stable and uniform
components: time-window sampling, channel traffic aggrega- length sequence. Although length sequences have been proven
tion, and channel-level feature extraction. effective for encrypted traffic classification, relying solely on
 packet lengths can lead to the loss of many details. The
Algorithm 1 Online Network Traffic Preprocessing Algorithm discriminative power of packet length sequences is inherently
Input: Network traffic trace (NT T ), time-window (t), pack- limited when they exhibit high similarity. As confirmed in
 ets/sample (n), bytes/packet (p) Section V-A4, different types of network flows can share
Output: List of samples (X) identical packet length sequences, and this feature overlap
 1: procedure P REPROCESS (NT T , t, n, p) creates significant ambiguity for the model.
 2: t0 ← −1 .Initialize the time window start-time Therefore, this article also adopts more fine-grained byte
 3: for pkt in NT T do .Loop over the packets sequence features, leveraging multimodal DL methods to
 4: id ← pkt.ip pairs .Extract the IP pairs as id classify encrypted traffic. Multimodal learning can enhance
 5: if t0 == −1 or pkt.time > t0 + t then performance by capturing patterns from multiple perspectives
 6: t0 ← pkt.time .Start the new time window and mitigating the limitations of single-feature representations.
 7: end if Although the content of encrypted flows cannot be directly
 8: if len(X[t, id]) < n then .Max n packets interpreted, the distribution of bytes in packets varies across
 9: pkt. f eatures ← (pkt len, pkt byte) different network behaviors, and certain key information in the
10: X[t, id].append(pkt. f eatures) packet headers can provide discriminative power for detection
11: end if tasks. By combining packet lengths and raw byte data, this
12: end for method can better integrate channel traffic features, effectively
13: X ← padding(X, n, p) .Unify the feature length learning sequential relationships from byte-to-byte and packet-
14: return X to-packet.
15: end procedure Assume a channel sample is denoted as cni =
 {p1 , p2 , . . . , pm }, where p j is the jth packet in this sample.
 1) Time-Window Sampling: The proposed preprocessing For p j , the byte sequence byte j = [b1 , b2 , . . . , bl ] is extracted,
mechanism applies to both online real-time captured traffic where bl is the last byte and l = len(pj ) is the length of
data and offline stored PCAP files, collectively referred to as packet pj . After extracting these two features for all packets
network traffic trace (NTT). For packets arriving in chrono- in cni , they are concatenated to obtain channel-level byte
logical order, we use a time window t to capture all packets sequence features and length sequence features. To standardize
falling within the interval [t0 , t0 + t], where t0 represents the the length, we select the first n packets of each channel and the
timestamp of the first packet captured within that time window. first p bytes of each packet, padding with zeros if necessary.
This process is described in lines 5 and 6 of Algorithm 1. Therefore, the channel sample cni yields the byte sequence
This sampling method generates observations consistent with feature
the traffic collected by existing online systems, providing
 Bi = byte1 , byte2 , . . . , byten
  
reliable data for simulating real-time attack detection in offline
 = b11 , b12 , . . . , b1p , b21 , b22 , . . . , b2p
    
scenarios, which can be used for subsequent model training.
 , . . . , bn1 , bn2 , . . . , bnp
  
Most importantly, this sampling approach is key to enabling (9)

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
12604 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026

and the length sequence feature Algorithm 2 Pretraining Algorithm
 Input: Packet Capture Data File (PCAP), sequence length p,
 Li = [l1 , l2 , . . . , ln ] . (10) mask ratio m
To prevent IP and MAC addresses from influencing model Output: Trained PBE
 1: procedure P REPROCESS (PCAP, p, m)
training and detection results, they are randomly masked, i.e.,
set to zero. The process of channel-level feature extraction and 2: for each packet in PCAP do
padding corresponds to lines 8–13 of Algorithm 1. 3: Extract payload
 4: Truncate/zero-pad payload to fixed length p
 5: Add [PKT] and [SEP] tokens → Xinput
C. Multimodal Learning 6: Randomly mask m% → Xmasked and Ytarget
 We design an end-to-end multimodal DL network, con- 7: end for
sisting of four modules: pretraining, byte, packet length, 8: Feed Xmasked to PBE → Y pred
and classification. First, the pretraining module learns a byte 9: Compute cross-entropy loss between Y pred and Ytarget
embedding model, with the Transformer serving as the core 10: Update PBE via backpropagation
component. Its multihead self-attention mechanism enables 11: return Trained PBE
the learning of relationships among bytes. Second, the byte 12: end procedure
module uses the pretrained model during training to obtain
packet-level embedding representations. Then, another Transformer is employed to learn the relationships among different the channel-level byte encoder (CBE). Specifically, for the byte
packet embeddings, thereby obtaining channel-level embed- sequence feature Bi = [byte1 , byte2 , . . . , byten ] corresponding
ding representations. Third, the length module models the to the channel sample cni , where byte j represents the byte
packet length sequence using LSTM to learn complementary sequence of the jth packet, the channel-level byte embedding
features from the second modality. Finally, the classification obtained after encoding by the CBE can be expressed as
module concatenates the hidden features output by the byte
 vib = CBE PBE byte1 , PBE byte2 , . . . , PBE byten .
   
and length modules to perform fusion and classification.
 1) Pretraining Module: The objective of the pretraining (11)
module is to learn the relationships among bytes within a 3) Length Module: For the length sequence feature Li =
packet through unsupervised pretraining, thereby acquiring the [l1 , l2 , . . . , ln ] corresponding to the channel sample cni , we
ability to encode and represent packet bytes. The pretraining employ a Bi-LSTM network to learn the underlying reladata consists of raw byte sequences at the packet level. Specif- tionships among packets. The hidden state of the last time
ically, we use Scapy to parse PCAP files, extract the payload step is used as the representation result vil , which encapsulates
of each packet, and truncate it to the first p bytes. Payloads summary information of the entire input sequence
shorter than p bytes are zero-padded to this fixed length. Next,
special tokens are added to each processed byte sequence vil = LSTM (Li ) . (12)
to facilitate model learning. A [PKT] token is placed at the
beginning, and a [SEP] token is added at the end, resulting 4) Classification Module: First, we concatenate the reprein the final input sample Xinput = [PKT, b1 , b2 , . . . , b p , SEP]. sentation results from the byte module and the length module,
We choose the Transformer as the pretraining model because and then pass them through a fully connected layer for
its self-attention mechanism allows each byte to incorporate classification. These two features are complementary. On the
information from other bytes. Inspired by the BERT [48] one hand, the fine-grained byte information supplements the
model, during pretraining, we randomly mask 15% of the coarse-grained length information. On the other hand, since
packet bytes and continuously learn from adjacent bytes, with the first p bytes are truncated to standardize the length, the
the goal of enabling the Transformer network to recover the byte information cannot reflect the complete length informamasked bytes. We refer to this Transformer as the packet- tion of the packets. Therefore, the packet length information
level byte encoder (PBE), which produces a comprehensive also serves as a supplement to the byte information. This
byte embedding for the entire packet by integrating contextual concatenation-and-classification approach allows the model to
information from all bytes. The overall pretraining procedure better integrate these two features and uncover their underlying
is outlined in Algorithm 2. relationships. Subsequently, to further optimize the representation capabilities of the two modules, we classify the
 2) Byte Module: The pretrained PBE is leveraged to obtain
 representation results from each module separately to assist
a byte embedding for each packet. Given the inherent correlain the final decision-making.
tions between adjacent packets in a traffic flow, we design the
 Thus, the overall network’s loss function consists of three
byte module to model the interpacket relationships. The task of
 parts: the classification loss of the byte module lossbyte , the
the byte module is to learn and represent the 2-D byte sequence
 classification loss of the length module losslen , and the final
features, generating a 1-D channel-level byte embedding repreclassification loss losscat
sentation. We employ another Transformer network to process
the byte embeddings of all packets (from PBE) within the N
 1 X
 lossbyte = H yi , pFC− byte vib
 
channel sample cni , resulting in a channel-level byte embed- (13)
ding representation vib . We refer to this Transformer model as N
 i=1

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHAO et al.: REAL-TIME CHANNEL-LEVEL IDS BASED ON MULTIMODAL LEARNING 12605

 N
 1 X
 losslen = H yi , pFC− len vil
 
 (14)
 N
 i=1
 N
 1 X
 losscat = H yi , pFC− cat Concat vib + vil .
 
 (15)
 N
 i=1

 Here, N is the number of training samples, H(·) is the
cross-entropy loss function, and yi is the true label of the ith
sample. Concat(·) represents the concatenation operation of
two vectors. pFC− byte , pFC− len , and pFC− cat denote the predicted
probabilities of the byte features, length features, and combined features, respectively, output by the three fully connected
 Fig. 4. Network topology of the self-built small-scale IoT testbed, containing
layers. Raspberry Pi (attack initiator), smart bulbs, temperature/humidity sensors, and
 The independent losses learned by the two modules ensure cameras, with hybrid Wi-Fi and Ethernet connections.
that the features of each modality are completely learned,
while the joint loss captures the associations between two TABLE II
modalities. The combination of independent losses and joint C OMPOSITION AND S PLITTING OF A LL DATASETS
losses not only preserves the independence of the features but
also promotes their complementarity. This multiloss joint training approach guides the model to converge faster and learn the
behavioral patterns of channel traffic more comprehensively,
thereby enhancing overall performance.

 V. E VALUATION
A. Experimental Preparation
 1) Datasets: To validate the adaptability of our method to
different IoT scenarios and its consistency in both simulated
and real-world environments, we conduct evaluations on three
publicly available datasets and one self-collected dataset.
 1) MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 [49]: This dataset focuses on the
 MQTT protocol, one of the core communication protocols among IoT devices. By simulating real-world
 network environments, it covers normal operations and
 four types of attack scenarios, thereby facilitating the
 assessment of our method’s adaptability and detection
 capabilities under simulated environments.
 2) Ton-IoT [50]: This dataset is based on real-world IoT
 device network traffic and incorporates nine attack patterns alongside normal behavior patterns. Its diversity
 allows for the validation of our method’s generalizability
 across different IoT devices and network environments.
 3) CICIoMT2024 [51]: This dataset focuses on the Internet SYN flooding, brute-force, and port scanning, containof Medical Things (IoMT) scenarios, containing five ing 1 37 396, 1 41 709, 3 13 462, 3 18 209, and 99 402
 types of network attacks targeting 40 IoMT devices packets, respectively. The complete dataset will be made
 and covering multiple protocols, such as Wi-Fi, MQTT, publicly available along with the code of this article to
 and Bluetooth. By combining real medical devices and facilitate future verification and research.
 simulated attacks, this dataset can verify our method’s All datasets are partitioned into a training set and a test
 applicability in complex scenarios within specific set at a 9:1 ratio. A validation set is then subsampled from
 industries. the training set using the same ratio for model training.
 4) Self-Collected Dataset: The self-collected dataset is Detailed sample distributions are shown in Table II. The selfbased on a small-scale IoT network comprising devices collected dataset, although smaller in scale, serves to evaluate
 such as Raspberry Pi, smart bulbs, temperature and the model’s adaptability in real-world few-sample scenarios.
 humidity sensors, and cameras. Specifically, the net- 2) Experimental Setup: In the offline experiments, we train
 work topology is illustrated in Fig. 4. The network and evaluate the model using PyTorch on a server equipped
 employs hybrid Wi-Fi and Ethernet connectivity, with with an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. The Transformer models
 the Raspberry Pi serving as the attack initiator to capture used in the pretraining module and the byte module both have
 traffic data using tcpdump. The dataset comprises normal eight heads and two layers, with a byte embedding dimension
 traffic along with four attack types: ACK flooding, of 128 in the pretraining module. The length module employs

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
12606 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026

 TABLE III B. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
 E FFECT OF PACKET L ENGTH S EQUENCE OVERLAP
 To evaluate the performance of our proposed method,
 we conduct comparative experiments using several stateof-the-art approaches. From the perspective of the features
 used, the following comparative experiments are selected:
 ERNN and Fs-Net utilize length sequence features, YaTC and
 1D-CNN use byte sequence features, while AppNet and
 iDetector employ both length and byte features for multimodal
 learning. We reproduce these methods, with AppNet and
a bidirectional LSTM with a length embedding size of 32 iDetector being implemented based on the detailed descripand a hidden state size of 128. In addition, unless otherwise tions in their respective papers, since their code was not
specified, the following experiments adopt a default time publicly available. The implementation codes for all comparwindow of t = 1 s, a maximum packet count of n = 30 per ative experiments will also be made public in the future.
channel sample, and a byte truncation length of p = 100 per 1) ERNN [27] uses LSTM to classify encrypted traffic
packet. based on packet length sequences. In our imple-
 3) Evaluation Metrics: To assess the classification perfor- mentation, we do not consider the network-induced
mance of the model, the following five well-known metrics are phenomenon mentioned in this article, setting x = 1 in
adopted: accuracy (ACC), precision [positive predictive value the transition matrix.
(PPV)], recall [true positive rate (TPR)], and F1 score (F1). 2) Fs-Net [28] employs a bidirectional GRU to encode
The F1 score provides a comprehensive measure of model features from packet length sequences and introduces a
performance, representing the harmonic mean of PPV and reconstruction mechanism in the autoencoder to ensure
TPR. The formal definitions of these metrics are as follows: the effectiveness of the learned features.
 3) YaTC [38] uses a Transformer to pretrain on randomly
 TP + TN
 ACC = (16) masked network flow byte matrices, learning multilevel
 TP + TN + FP + FN features at both packet and flow levels, followed by fine-
 TP
 PPV = (17) tuning with labeled data.
 TP + FP 4) 1D-CNN [33] converts sequences of hexadecimal bytes
 TP
 TPR = (18) from encrypted network flows into grayscale images and
 TP + FN utilizes a 1D-CNN model to classify these images.
 PPV × TPR
 F1 = 2 × (19) 5) AppNet [44] extracts features from byte sequences
 PPV + TPR using a 1D-CNN and learns temporal relationships in
where TP = true positives, TN = true negatives, FP = false packet length sequences using LSTM. Finally, the feapositives, and FN = false negatives. In addition, we also tures learned from both views are concatenated for
evaluate the detection efficiency and time consumption of classification.
the models by considering the number of model parameters, 6) iDetector [39] extracts three sequence features of byte,
training and testing times, as well as the detection latency. length, and time interval from channel traffic, and classi-
 4) Analysis of Packet Length Sequence Similarity: As fies them using a lightweight deep neural network model
noted in Section IV-B3, “the discriminative power of packet called EdgeNet.
length sequences is inherently limited when they exhibit Table IV presents the classification results and model
high similarity.” In this section, we examine whether dif- parameter counts of all methods on the four datasets. As
ferent classes of network flows share identical packet length shown in the results, our proposed model achieves the best
sequences across three public datasets, and quantify the impact classification performance across all datasets, demonstrating
on classification performance. Table III reports the proportion its robust generalization capability and adaptability to diverse
of samples that have the same packet length sequence yet IoT scenarios. Particularly on the three public datasets, the
belong to different classes, and compares the classification accuracy of RCML-IDS reaches around 98%. On the dataset
performance of an LSTM model before and after removing collected from the real-world environment, the performance of
such overlapping samples. additional models dropped significantly, with the accuracy of
 Results show that all three datasets exhibit sequence overlap YaTC and iDetector decreasing by more than 10%. In contrast,
to varying degrees, with the CICIoT2024 dataset showing our method still maintains a relatively high accuracy of 93%,
a particularly high proportion of such samples at 39%. indicating that the proposed approach exhibits strong robust-
More importantly, the presence of this phenomenon markedly ness when facing real-world IoT environments. The slightly
degrades classification performance because these ambiguous lower performance on the self-collected dataset compared to
samples blur the decision boundary during training. After their the public datasets may be primarily due to the limited number
removal, both accuracy and F1 score improve significantly. of samples for certain attack categories in the self-collected
These findings demonstrate that relying solely on packet length dataset, which affects the model’s performance.
sequences as a single modality is insufficient, which motivates Among the comparison methods, ERNN and Fs-Net,
our additional use of byte sequences. which only use length sequence features, perform the worst.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHAO et al.: REAL-TIME CHANNEL-LEVEL IDS BASED ON MULTIMODAL LEARNING 12607

 TABLE IV
 C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS OF A LL M ETHODS ON THE F OUR DATASETS

Particularly on the CICIoMT2024 dataset, their classification
accuracy is inferior to 55%. This indicates that using only
coarse-grained length sequence features for encrypted traffic
classification is insufficient. The limited information contained
in these features makes it difficult to accurately distinguish
malicious network behaviors.
 In contrast, byte sequences help models learn more comprehensive and detailed features. Notably, the YaTC method
even outperforms the two multimodal DL models, AppNet
and iDetector. This is attributed to its use of a Transformer
to capture feature information from raw bytes at both the
packet and flow levels, allowing for a more comprehensive
consideration of traffic hierarchical relationships. This aligns
with our design philosophy. However, YaTC directly stacks
the bytes of multiple adjacent packets into a matrix and learns
 Fig. 5. Comparison of computational efficiency among all methods on the
them as a whole. Our approach first learns at the packet MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 dataset (training time per 100 batches versus test time
level and then integrates packet-level embeddings to obtain a per sample). The training time of YaTC and RCML-IDS represents the sum
holistic representation of the entire channel traffic. Compared of the pretraining time and fine-tuning/formal training.
to YaTC, our hierarchical design is better able to capture both
the internal features of packets and the relationships between
packets. However, the 1D-CNN method, owing to its simpler of the Transformer architecture, our approach achieves leading
byte processing approach and single model structure, attains accuracy while maintaining moderate inference speeds coma classification accuracy of around 84% on public datasets. pared to other methods.
 Among the two multimodal learning models, AppNet also
utilizes byte sequences and packet length sequences as fea- C. Ablation Experiment
tures. However, for the byte sequences, it only employs a
1D-CNN, which has weaker capabilities in modeling long- To investigate the impact of each module in our model, we
range dependencies and global sequential relationships. The conduct ablation experiments on the Ton-IoT dataset from the
iDetector uses three modal features: byte, packet length, and following aspects.
time intervals, and applies a nonlinear transformation method 1) Pretraining Module: We remove the pretraining proto convert them into fixed-size three-channel features. Specifi- cess and initialize the parameters of the PBE in the
cally, their proposed nonlinear transformation maps the values byte module randomly. This variant is denoted as
of packet length and time intervals to the range of 0–255 and RCML-nopre.
expands the packet length and time-interval sequences into 2-D 2) Byte Module: We remove the byte module and use only
vectors. We argue that this discretization approach loses details the packet length feature without byte sequence features.
of the specific values, especially for continuous features, like This variant is denoted as RCML-len.
packet length and time intervals, thereby leading to inferior 3) Length Module: We remove the length module and use
detection performance compared to AppNet and our method. only the byte sequence feature without packet length
 In addition, Fig. 5 illustrates the comparison of computa- features. This variant is denoted as RCML-bytes.
tional efficiency across all evaluated methods. Notably, our 4) Classification Module: In the original design, the clasmethod exhibits the longest training time, which is attributed sification module combines the losses from the byte
to the computational complexity associated with learning byte- feature classification, length feature classification, and
level features. Nevertheless, leveraging the parallel computing the concatenated classification. To validate its effectiveadvantages inherent in the multihead self-attention mechanism ness, we conduct an ablation experiment using only

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
12608 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026

 Fig. 7. Trends of ACC, F1, and the number of model’s parameters with
Fig. 6. Effect of each module on computational efficiency. The training different n.
time of RCML-bytes, RCML-loss, and RCML-IDS represents the sum of
the pretraining time and formal training.

 the final concatenated classification loss. This variant is
 denoted as RCML-loss.
The analysis of the Table V and Fig. 6 leads to the following
conclusions.
 1) Impact of Pretraining: Omitting the pretraining process
 significantly increases training and testing speeds but
 results in a 4% drop in accuracy. This indicates that
 pretraining enables the model to more effectively learn
 the relationships between bytes within packets, thereby
 Fig. 8. Impact of byte size p on classification performance.
 enhancing overall performance.
 2) Feature Module Comparison: Compared with using the complexity, which in turn may result in longer training and
 byte module alone, relying solely on length features testing times. Therefore, we set n = 30 as the optimal value.
 yields considerably poorer results (with an accuracy gap 2) Number of Bytes p Per Packet: We test the model
 of over 10%), further validating the necessity of employ- with different packet truncation lengths, specifically p = 50,
 ing fine-grained byte features. However, combining 100, 150, 200, and 300 B. In addition to classification perboth features through multimodal learning effectively formance metrics, we also record the training and testing
 leverages their complementary nature, improving clas- times to comprehensively evaluate the model’s performance
 sification accuracy by an additional 2%. However, the and computational efficiency. The results in Fig. 8 show that
 introduction of byte feature learning also brings sig- truncating the first 100 B of each packet yields significantly
 nificant computational overhead, leading to substantial better classification performance compared to other settings.
 increases in training and inference times. As the number of truncated bytes increases, the classification
 3) Effectiveness of Multiloss Training: The multiloss joint performance deteriorates, which may be attributed to the fact
 training approach achieves a 1% higher classification that the latter bytes of the packet contain encrypted payloads
 accuracy compared to using only the single concate- (ciphertext). Since ciphertext typically appears as random or
 nated classification loss. This suggests that the multiloss meaningless data, such information may introduce noise and
 training strategy helps the model better balance the interfere with the model’s judgment. Furthermore, Fig. 9
 relationship between byte and length features, thus demonstrates that both training and inference times scale
 improving detection effectiveness. linearly with byte count. Therefore, considering both classification performance and computational efficiency, p = 100 is
D. Sensitivity Analysis the optimal choice, as it ensures high classification accuracy
 This section analyzes the impact of two key parameters, n while maximizing computational efficiency.
and p, on the MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 dataset.
 1) Maximum Number of Packets n Per Channel: As illus- E. Real-Time Detection Analysis
trated in Fig. 7, the classification accuracy initially increases To verify that our proposed preprocessing method can
and then decreases as the number of packets ranges from 5 to monitor network interfaces in real-time and promptly output
50, with fluctuations not exceeding 1%. The highest accuracy detection results, we deploy the model on a server equipped
of 98.76% is achieved when n = 30. When n exceeds 30, the with an Intel2 Xeon2 Silver 4214 CPU @ 2.20 GHz (without
classification performance of the model declines. In addition,
an increase in the number of packets leads to higher model 2 Registered tradmark.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHAO et al.: REAL-TIME CHANNEL-LEVEL IDS BASED ON MULTIMODAL LEARNING 12609

 TABLE V
 E FFECT OF E ACH M ODULE ON C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE

 TABLE VI
 D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OST
 FOR T WO ATTACK T YPES

Fig. 9. Impact of byte size p on computational efficiency.

 a significant improvement in testing speed. This configuration
 can be considered as our lightweight model (RCML-light).
 Consequently, we test their detection performance against the
 two attacks and record the key metrics in Table VI.
 In terms of detection performance, RCML-IDS achieves
Fig. 10. Network topology for real-time testing, comprising smart devices
generating background traffic and a PC replaying attack traces, with a test approximately 99% accuracy and F1 score for real-time
server capturing and detecting traffic. detection of both types of attacks. In contrast, RCMLlight experiences a slight decline in detection accuracy. This
GPU) and conduct real-time testing. The network topology of comparison demonstrates the advantage of the preprocessing
the test environment is illustrated in Fig. 10, where a small module, which can more precisely extract the relationships
local area network is constructed, containing multiple smart between bytes within packets. Regarding time consumption,
devices to generate background traffic. In addition, a PC is since the data processing procedures of both models are identiused to replay attack traffic from the MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 cal, the time spent on data processing is similar. However, the
dataset to simulate real-world network attack behaviors. The lightweight model boasts a much faster inference efficiency,
test server captured traffic in real-time using the tcpdump tool. with an inference speed nearly eight times faster than the
Packets captured within a 1-s time window are preprocessed full model. The total processing time per sample, which
and immediately fed into the model for detection, with results includes both data processing and model inference time, is
outputted accordingly. approximately 20 ms for the lightweight model and 160 ms for
 It should be noted that the core of traffic replay technology the full model. This trade-off between performance and effilies in simulating and reproducing existing traffic from PCAP ciency indicates that RCML-light achieves a gain in real-time
files, which is inherently unidirectional. In the MQTT-IoT- capability at the cost of acceptable performance degradation,
IDS2020 dataset, the scan A (active scanning attack) and making it suitable for the needs of most IoT applications, such
scan sU (UDP scanning attack) both involve the attacker as smart homes and environmental monitoring.
unilaterally sending a large number of probe packets to the
target device (UDP port), exhibiting strong unidirectional char- F. Comparison of Online Traffic Processing Methods
acteristics. In contrast, the Sparta SSH brute-force attack and The iDetector method [39] also supports online real-time
MQTT brute-force attack require the target device to return packet capture and detection. The key difference from our
response results, making their interaction process bidirectional approach lies in its handling of incoming packets: iDetector
and impossible to fully simulate using unidirectional traffic does not employ time windows. Instead, it adds each arriving
replay technology. Given this, the experiment adopts two types packet to the corresponding channel sample and waits until
of scanning attacks for replay and real-time testing. the sample contains ω packets before sending it for detection.
 From the ablation experiments on each module in However, this approach may result in longer waiting times,
Section V-C, it is evident that omitting the pretraining module potentially leading to delayed analysis. Therefore, in this
results in a decrease in the model’s classification accuracy but section, we compare the detection latency of our proposed

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
12610 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026

 TABLE VII
 D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OST
 OF RCML-L IGHT ON R ASPBERRY PI

 Therefore, our method enables the system to process and
 detect traffic at a more stable and rapid pace. In contrast,
 iDetector’s latency fluctuates widely, indicating that its online
 processing strategy has limitations and is unsuitable for
 real-time detection scenarios in IoT with stringent latency
 requirements.
Fig. 11. Comparison of detection latency among online processing methods.
Data markers represent (top to bottom): maximum, mean, and minimum G. Testing on Resource-Constrained Device
values.
 This section evaluates the real-time performance of the
 proposed approach on resource-constrained devices to verify
time-window-based online processing method with the preits practical applicability in IoT edge environments. The
processing method of iDetector, which directly aggregates
 experiments are conducted on a Raspberry Pi 4B, equipped
channels. Detection latency time (DLT) is defined as the time
 with an ARM Cortex-A72 quad-core processor (1.50 GHz,
difference between receiving the first packet of a sample and
 1 MB L2 cache) and 4 GB of LPDDR4 RAM. This platform
outputting the judgment result for that sample. Specifically,
 is widely adopted as a benchmark in edge AI research, with
we monitor the actual traffic on the server’s network interface
 resource specifications falling within the typical range of
over a period of time and calculate the average, maximum,
 common IoT nodes. Given the high computational complexity
and minimum DLT for both preprocessing methods. It is worth
 of the Transformer and LSTM modules used in our model, a
noting that in the iDetector paper, the authors used a default
 lightweight configuration is adopted to fit limited resources.
setting of ω = 224. For a fair comparison, in addition to this
 Specifically, based on the RCML-light model without the
default setting, we also conduct tests with ω = 30 (consistent
 pretraining mechanism, the number of layers in both the
with our settings).
 Transformer and LSTM is reduced from 2 to 1. Tests show
 From the boxplot of DLT in Fig. 11, it is evident that
 that an input sample length of 10 (n = 10) is the optimal
our proposed time-window-based online processing method
 feasible setting under the resource constraints of this device.
better fulfills real-time detection requirements. The DLT values
 Table VII presents the sample construction delay (DPT),
exhibit a concentrated distribution, as our detection latency is
 inference delay (MIT), and classification performance metrics
primarily determined by the size of the time window (t = 1 s).
 under the aforementioned configuration. The results demon-
Particularly, the majority of the DLT for the lightweight model
 strate that RCML-light attains millisecond-level real-time
falls between 1.07 and 1.11 s, with an average detection delay
 detection on the Raspberry Pi, a resource-constrained device
of 1.10 s. This indicates that the actual time spent on processwhile maintaining high classification accuracy and F1 score.
ing and prediction for multiple channel traffic within a time
 This suggests that the lightweight model can be effectively
window is only 100 ms. Although the full RCML-IDS model
 deployed on IoT edge devices.
shows slightly higher latency due to its increased complexity,
these results collectively demonstrate that our time-window
sampling mechanism provides a unified foundation for real- VI. C ONCLUSION
time detection across models of varying scales, showcasing This article significantly enhances the capability and realthe advantages of our preprocessing approach. time performance of encrypted traffic detection through a
 In contrast, iDetector’s online processing method, which unique online traffic preprocessing mechanism, a multimodal
relies solely on the number of packets within a channel sample, learning framework, and a channel-level traffic aggregation
results in significantly higher detection latency. Its default approach. Just as humans can better understand video content
configuration shows particularly poor performance: maximum by combining image and audio information, this article leverlatency reaches 1851 s, average latency stands at 924 s, and ages DL models to fuse raw byte and packet length features
even the minimum latency remains as high as 135 s. Reducing as two modalities. In combination with channel-level traffic
ω, that is, lowering the requirement for the number of packets aggregation, the proposed approach enables a comprehensive
per sample, can improve response speed to some extent. analysis of the inherent complex patterns of encrypted traffic
At ω = 30, iDetector achieves a reduced average detection at a coarser granularity, thereby allowing for a more precise
latency of 111 s, representing a significant improvement over distinction of various malicious behaviors.
the default configuration. Nevertheless, when compared with Through extensive experimental evaluations, we demonour time-window-based method, its detection latency remains strate the superior performance of RCML-IDS compared
excessively long. to state-of-the-art solutions. More importantly, the proposed

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHAO et al.: REAL-TIME CHANNEL-LEVEL IDS BASED ON MULTIMODAL LEARNING 12611

online preprocessing mechanism based on time-window sam- [16] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartpling enables the model to capture packets in real-time by phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
time windows (e.g., 1 s), and immediately input them into the [17] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic
model for detection and output of results. This mechanism analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
allows the lightweight version, RCML-light, to attain an vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023.
 [18] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
average detection latency of 1.10 s, with a total processing and fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
inference time of approximately 20 ms per sample, meeting the IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021.
real-time requirements of general IoT scenarios. Furthermore, [19] G. Apruzzese, M. Andreolini, M. Colajanni, and M. Marchetti,
 “Hardening random forest cyber detectors against adversarial attacks,”
deployment experiments on a Raspberry Pi 4B validate the IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 427–439,
feasibility and efficiency of the proposed method in resource- Aug. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TETCI.2019.2961157.
constrained edge devices. [20] R. Bozkır, M. Cicioğlu, A. Çalhan, and C. Toğay, “A new platform for
 machine-learning-based network traffic classification,” Comput. Com-
 Future work will focus on two main directions: first, inves- mun., vol. 208, pp. 1–14, Aug. 2023.
tigating the model’s robustness against adversarial traffic and [21] H. Mohanty, A. H. Roudsari, and A. H. Lashkari, “Robust stacking
evasion attacks to enhance its applicability in complex threat ensemble model for darknet traffic classification under adversarial
 settings,” Comput. Secur., vol. 120, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 102830.
environments; second, advancing its integration with existing [22] F. Zaki, F. Afifi, S. Abd Razak, A. Gani, and N. B. Anuar, “GRAIN:
IDS to explore its potential for deployment in real-world IoT Granular multi-label encrypted traffic classification using classifier
networks. chain,” Comput. Netw., vol. 213, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 109084.
 [23] N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K.-R. Choo, “An ensemble intrusion detection technique based on proposed statistical flow features
 R EFERENCES for protecting network traffic of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet
[1] J. Tong and Y. Zhang, “A real-time label-free self-supervised deep learn- Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4815–4830, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.1109/
 ing intrusion detection for handling new type and few-shot attacks in IoT JIOT.2018.2871719.
 networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19, pp. 30769–30786, [24] C. Zhang, Z. Lian, H. Huang, and C. Su, “PCIDS: Permission and
 Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3414492. credibility-based intrusion detection system in IoT gateways,” IEEE
[2] (2023). 2023 Enterprise IoT & OT Threat Report. [Online]. Avail- Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 904–913, Jan. 2024, doi: 10.1109/
 able: https://www.zayo.com/resources/2023-threatlabz-enterprise-iot-ot- JIOT.2023.3289206.
 threat-report [25] J. Huang et al., “A fine-grained video traffic control mechanism
[3] IoT Business News. (2024). AI Adoption and IoT Prolifer- in software-defined networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
 ation Fuel 82% Spike in DDoS Attacks in 2024 [EB/OL]. vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 3501–3515, Sep. 2022.
 [Online]. Available: https://iotbusinessnews.com/2025/02/21/26269-ai- [26] S. Feghhi and D. J. Leith, “A web traffic analysis attack using only
 adoption-and-iot-proliferation-fuel-82-spike-in-ddos-attacks-in-2024/ timing information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 11, no. 8,
[4] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla. (2008). The Transport Layer Security (TLS) pp. 1747–1759, Aug. 2016.
 Protocol Version 1.2, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://tools.ietf.org/ [27] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted trafhtml/rfc5246 fic detection towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans.
[5] A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher, “The secure sockets layer (SSL) Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 3, 2023, doi: 10.1109/
 protocol version 3.0,” Internet Eng. Task Force (IETF), Fremont, CA, TDSC.2023.3242134.
 USA, Tech. Rep. RFC6101, Aug. 2011. [28] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence
[6] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recur- network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comrent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. put. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2023, doi: 10.1109/ [29] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? A robust framework for
 TDSC.2023.3245411. detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2309.04798.
[7] S. Shi, D. Han, and M. Cui, “A multimodal hybrid parallel network [30] Y. Han, X. Wang, M. He, X. Wang, and S. Guo, “Intrusion detection for
 intrusion detection model,” Connection Sci., vol. 35, no. 1, Dec. 2023, encrypted flows using single feature based on graph integration theory,”
 Art. no. 2227780. IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 17589–17601, May 2024.
[8] T. Kim, B. Kang, M. Rho, S. Sezer, and E. G. Im, “A multimodal deep [31] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
 learning method for Android malware detection using various features,” Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov proba-
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 773–788, Mar. bility fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
 2019. (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[9] M. B. Shaikh, D. Chai, S. M. S. Islam, and N. Akhtar, “Multimodal [32] Y. Wang, H. He, Y. Lai, and A. X. Liu, “A two-phase approach to fast
 fusion for audio-image and video action recognition,” Neural Comput. and accurate classification of encrypted traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
 Appl., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 5499–5513, Apr. 2024. vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1071–1086, Jun. 2023.
[10] Y. Zhao, H. Zhao, X. Zhang, and W. Liu, “Vehicle classification based on [33] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 audio-visual feature fusion with low-quality images and noise,” J. Intell. encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 Fuzzy Syst., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 8931–8944, Nov. 2023. networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
[11] L. Cheng, R. Cheng, Y. Liu, D. Gong, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Lip-audio 2017, pp. 43–48.
 modality fusion for deep forgery video detection,” Comput., Mater. [34] C. Dong, C. Zhang, Z. Lu, B. Liu, and B. Jiang, “CETAnalytics: Com-
 Continua, vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 3499–3515, 2025. prehensive effective traffic information analytics for encrypted traffic
[12] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 176, Jul. 2020, Art. no. 107258.
 A channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic [35] W. Maonan, Z. Kangfeng, X. Ning, Y. Yanqing, and W. Xiujuan,
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025, “CENTIME: A direct comprehensive traffic features extraction for
 2023. encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Comput.
[13] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic Commun. Syst. (ICCCS), Apr. 2021, pp. 490–498.
 paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” [36] X. Meng, Y. Wang, R. Ma, H. Luo, X. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Packet repre-
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022, doi: sentation learning for traffic classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD
 10.1109/TIFS.2022.3179955. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022, pp. 3546–3554.
[14] R. Li, X. Xiao, S. Ni, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “Byte segment neural [37] J. Gao, Y. Lu, Y. He, M. Fan, D. Han, and Y. Qiao, “Tokenization
 network for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. representation and deep-learning-based intrusion detection in Internet of
 Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10. Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 23, pp. 37974–37987,
[15] J. Dai, X. Xu, H. Gao, X. Wang, and F. Xiao, “SHAPE: A simultaneous Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3441763.
 header and payload encoding model for encrypted traffic classification,” [38] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1993–2012, Jun. based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
 2023. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Feb. 2023, pp. 1–8.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
12612 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026

[39] X. Kong, Y. Zhou, Y. Xiao, X. Ye, H. Qi, and X. Liu, “IDetector: A Xiaowei Zhao is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 novel real-time intrusion detection solution for IoT networks,” IEEE in electronic science and technology with Beijing
 Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19, pp. 31153–31166, Oct. 2024. University of Posts and Telecommunications,
[40] H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, and J. Ren, “A novel Beijing, China.
 multimodal-sequential approach based on multi-view features for net- Her research interests include machine learning
 work intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 183207–183221, and network security.
 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2959131.
[41] Y. Yu, L. Xu, and X. Jiang, “A high-performance multimodal deep
 learning model for detecting minority class sample attacks,” Symmetry,
 vol. 16, no. 1, p. 42, Jan. 2023.
[42] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted
 TLS traffic classification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
 vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 164–177, Feb. 2023.
[43] X. Tan et al., “Inter-flow spatio-temporal correlation analysis based
 website fingerprinting using graph neural network,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 7619–7632, 2024.
[44] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-Net: A hybrid neural network for
 encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Mingshu He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Sep. 2020, pp. 424–429. degree from Beijing University of Posts and
[45] A. Alrefaei and M. Ilyas, “Using machine learning multiclass classifi- Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2022.
 cation technique to detect IoT attacks in real time,” Sensors, vol. 24, He is currently doing research at the School of
 no. 14, p. 4516, Jul. 2024. Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and
[46] J. Wang, H. Xu, Y. G. Achamyeleh, S. Huang, and M. A. A. Faruque, Telecommunications. His research interests include
 “HyperDetect: A real-time hyperdimensional solution for intrusion network security, anomaly detection, and machine
 detection in IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 8, learning.
 pp. 14844–14856, Apr. 2024.
[47] H. Yan, X. Lin, S. Li, H. Peng, and B. Zhang, “Global or local
 adaptation? client-sampled federated meta-learning for personalized
 IoT intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20,
 pp. 279–293, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3516548.
[48] J. Devlin, M. W. Chang, and K. Lee, “BERT: Pre-training of deep
 bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc. Conf.
 North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Human Lang. Technol., vol. 1, 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[49] H. Hindy, C. Tachtatzis, R. Atkinson, E. Bayne, and X. Bellekens,
 “MQTT-IoT-IDS2020: MQTT Internet of Things intrusion detection Xiaojuan Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 dataset,” IEEE Dataport, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.21227/bhxy-ep04. degree in electronic science and technology from
[50] T. M. Booij, I.Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N.Moustafa, and Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunica-
 F. T. H. D.Hartog, “ToN IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the tions, Beijing, China, in 2015.
 need for standardization of features and attack types in IoT network She is currently an Associate Professor with the
 intrusion data sets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing Univer-
 Jan. 2022. sity of Posts and Telecommunications. Her research
[51] S. Dadkhah, E. C. P. Neto, R. Ferreira, R. C. Molokwu, S. Sadeghi, interests include deep learning, complex networks,
 and A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoMT2024: Attack vectors in healthcare and human gesture recognition.
 devices—A multi-protocol dataset for assessing IoMT device security,”
 Internet Things, vol. 28, pp. 1–30, Dec. 2024.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.