This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 1

 Accurate and Scalable Detection and Investigation
 of Cyber Persistence Threats
 Qi Liu, Muhammad Shoaib, Mati Ur Rehman, Kaibin Bao, Veit Hagenmeyer, Wajih Ul Hassan

 Abstract—In Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attacks, remote connections. Notably, persistence techniques were a
achieving stealthy persistence within target systems is often cru- key feature in nearly 75% of cyberattacks in 2022 [2].
cial for an attacker’s success. This persistence allows adversaries For instance, the Sandworm APT group used webshell perto maintain prolonged access, often evading detection mechanisms. Recognizing its pivotal role in the APT lifecycle, this paper sistence in multistage attacks [3]–[5]. The SolarWinds attack
introduces Cyber Persistence Detector (CPD), a novel system shows how persistence is crucial in APT campaigns, using
dedicated to detecting cyber persistence through provenance scheduled tasks for this purpose [1], [6]–[8]. APT attackers
analytics. CPD is founded on the insight that persistent operations often use a “low and slow” strategy, breaking their actions
typically manifest in two phases: the “persistence setup” and the into phases with waiting periods to avoid detection. They
subsequent “persistence execution”. By causally relating these
phases, we enhance our ability to detect persistent threats. gain initial access, establish persistence, disconnect to evade
First, CPD discerns setups signaling an impending persistent detection, and later reconnect for further malicious activities.
threat and then traces processes linked to remote connections This segmentation and strategic pausing are trademarks of the
to identify persistence execution activities. A key feature of our most stealthy APT attacks, as illustrated in Figure 1.
system is the introduction of pseudo-dependency edges (pseudo-
 In addressing the complexities of APT attacks, Provenanceedges), which effectively connect these disjoint phases using
data provenance analysis, and expert-guided edges, which enable based Intrusion Detection Systems (PIDS) [9]–[20] have befaster tracing and reduced log size. These edges empower us to come essential by transforming audit logs into provenance
detect persistence threats accurately and efficiently. Moreover, graphs, providing causal relationships among system entities,
we propose a novel alert triage algorithm that further reduces such as processes and network sockets. In contrast, rule-based
false positives associated with persistence threats. Evaluations
 detection systems, such as Elastic [21], Google Chronicle [22],
conducted on well-known datasets demonstrate that our system
reduces the average false positive rate by 93% compared to state- and Sigma [23], which match audit logs against a predefined
of-the-art methods. set of signatures, are industry standards for their capability to
 identify persistence threats.
 Index Terms—Advanced Persistence Threat detection, data
provenance analysis. Persistence techniques, as defined by MITRE [1], often
 involve the misuse of “sensitive” system functionalities, such
 as Registry run keys [24]. Current threat detection systems
 I. I NTRODUCTION generate persistence attack alerts whenever these functionalities are accessed, irrespective of whether they are being
 Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attacks are increasingly misused by an attacker or legitimately used by a normal user.
leveraging Living-Off-the-Land Binaries (LOLBins), shifting This approach fails to assess the consequences of the use
the strategic focus from traditional malware to more nuanced of system functionalities, which might only become apparent
persistence techniques. According to MITRE [1], persistence later. Consequently, this leads to a high number of false
techniques are defined as methods that adversaries use to positives; for example, a normal user adding entries in the
keep access to systems across restarts, changed credentials, Registry run keys or startup folder to launch programs upon
or other interruptions that could cut off their access. These log-on would trigger an alert, even though the action is benign.
techniques typically involve the installation of malicious soft- Conversely, if an attacker sets a Registry run key to initiate
ware or the manipulation of legitimate scripts and tasks to a command and control (C2) agent that connects back postensure continuous, unauthorized remote access. Techniques reboot, existing systems would identify the key’s creation but
such as reverse shells, SSH, Powershell Remoting, or other might not link it to subsequent C2 activities due to the delay
executables are often used for establishing and maintaining in their occurrence and the lack of a comprehensive context
 check necessary for accurate persistence detection.
 This work was supported by funding of the Helmholtz Association (HGF)
through the Energy System Design (ESD) program. We also acknowledge
support by the Karlsruhe House of Young Scientists (KHYS) for the research
stay of Qi Liu at University of Virginia.
 A. Limitations of Existing PIDS
 Qi Liu, Kaibin Bao, and Veit Hagenmeyer are with Institute for Automation Anomaly-based or learning-based PIDS [9], [17]–[20],
and Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Eggenstein-
Leopoldshafen 76344, Germany (e-mail: qi.liu@kit.edu; kaibin.bao@kit.edu; [25]–[27] aim to detect novel attacks with less prior knowlveit.hagenmeyer@kit.edu). edge. These PIDS model benign behavior from provenance
 Muhammad Shoaib, Mati Ur Rehman, and Wajih Ul Hassan are graphs, and detect deviations from the modeled normal bewith the School of Engineering & Applied Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4740, USA (e-mail: mshoaib@virginia.edu; havior. However, the assumption that attack-related activiwkw9be@virginia.edu; hassan@virginia.edu). ties are anomalous is not always true. Besides, they require

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 2

representative training data which are not always available, Initial Establish
 Leave
 </>
 Access Persistence
and the training phase slows down the detection process.
 Reconnect Local Leave
Last, learning-based PIDS are inherently more susceptible to via persistence Discovery
concept drift and more vulnerable to evasion attacks [28],
 Reconnect Defense Leave
[29]. Our evaluation in Section VI shows that state-of-the-art via persistence Evasion

learning-based PIDS [17], [18] are not only slower but also
 Reconnect Privilege Leave
less accurate in persistence detection, due to failure to learn via persistence Escalation

persistence attacks’ semantics. Reconnect Network Lateral
 Leave
 via persistence Discovery Movement
 Existing heuristic-based PIDS also struggle with semantic
understanding of persistence attacks, leading to significant Reconnect Data Leave
 via persistence Exfiltration
challenges in connecting the dots across fragmented APT at-
 Fig. 1: Stealthiness by persistence
tack stages. This often results in incomplete and disconnected
provenance (attack) graph reconstructions. Consider the attack
 ⋆ triages persistence-related threat alerts, and
scenario depicted in Figure 1; heuristic-based PIDS, such as
 ⋆ generates accurate graphs for quick incident response.
Holmes [13] and RapSheet [15], often fail to piece together the
full scope of an attack involving persistence. Instead, they pro- CPD is rooted in a thorough analysis of the MITRE
duce isolated graphs, each representing only fragments of the ATT&CK framework [35] which is recognized as the most
APT attack. These systems triage attack graphs based on the comprehensive and widely referenced directory of persistence
number of APT stages, such as lateral movement and privilege threats. We discovered that effective persistence attacks always
escalation, contained within the graphs. If an attacker manages consist of two phases: the persistence setup (e.g., creating a
to fragment the attack graph into smaller, disconnected graphs, Registry run key) and the persistence execution (e.g., a remote
each segment inherently receives a lower severity score and connection initiated by that key). Persistence setup serves
is subsequently ranked lower for detection and investigation. solely as preparation, whereas persistence execution exhibits
Moreover, these heuristic-based PIDS require benign training attackers’ true motives. Recognizing this two-phase process is
data to quantify severity scores and filter false alarms. crucial, yet it is overlooked by existing detection systems.
 Leveraging the above key insight, CPD introduces a novel
B. Limitations of Rule-based Persistence Detectors concept of pseudo-dependency edges (pseudo-edges) to connect persistence setup and persistence execution activities
 Current rule-based persistence detection systems, including
 within system logs, creating a comprehensive provenance
popular solutions like Elastic [21] and Chronicle [22], are
 graph. CPD starts by recording every persistence setup activity
plagued by a high rate of false positives (FPs). These systems
 in system logs, and then specifically checks if there is a subsetypically analyze persistence techniques in isolation, neglectquent remote connection, i.e., potential persistence execution,
ing the broader context of an attack. They often generate alerts
 that can be traced back to the persistence setup activity. If
for system activities that appear suspicious but are actually
 not, it does not raise an alert, significantly reducing false
benign, leading to numerous false alarms. In an effort to
 positives. If yes, it creates a pseudo-edge, and then utilizes
mitigate these false positives, these systems may overly relax
 even more contextual indicators, detailed in Section IV-C,
their detection rules. For instance, our evaluation in Section VI
 before deciding if it is a persistence attack. The creation of a
revealed that activities from programs in standard directories
 pseudo-edge involves tracing processes in provenance graphs
are automatically deemed benign without further scrutiny. This
 that initiate or receive remote connections, assessing their
approach has inadvertently resulted in a significant increase in
 alignment with persistence execution and persistence setup as
false negatives (FNs).
 per our advanced detection rules. This approach enables CPD
 The narrow detection strategy has tangible consequences
 to identify potential persistence activities through detection
in Security Operations Centers (SOCs), where analysts spend
 rules and to analyze processes engaged in remote connections,
roughly 30 minutes on each alert [30], [31], but with up to 99%
 assessing their role in the broader scheme of a persistence
of these turning out to be FPs [32], leading to alert fatigue. To
 threat. This dual-layered strategy, combining precise activity
manage the deluge of alerts, thresholds are often set or hightracking with the creation of pseudo-edges, empowers CPD to
volume alert rules are disabled, resulting in over two-thirds of
 surpass existing threat detectors.
alerts being disregarded [33], [34]. This underscores the dire
 Despite the advantages, relying solely on pseudo-edges for
need for a system that can automatically reduce alert numbers.
 enhancing persistence detection accuracy presents challenges.
 One major issue is that even the most comprehensive logging
C. Our Approach and Contributions systems may not capture all connections, potentially leading
 To address the issues with current persistence threat de- to gaps in the provenance graph and, consequently, false
tection, we introduce Cyber Persistence Detector (CPD), a negatives. Our research found that integrating Windows ALPC
novel system optimized for quick and accurate identification logs with system audit logs could bridge these gaps. However,
of persistence threats in enterprise networks. Our approach this integration significantly increases log storage require-
 ⋆ avoids optimistic assumptions about persistence behavior, ments. Instead of depending on ALPC logs, CPD employs a
 ⋆ avoids the need for any training data, novel technique of expert-guided edges, utilizing insights from
 ⋆ generates few FPs and FNs, process creation and system policy to refine the provenance

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 3

graph and reduce log volume by an average of 37%. While II. M OTIVATION
pseudo-edges specifically aid in identifying persistence threats, A. APT Attack Stages
expert-guided edges serve a broader purpose, improving overall efficiency in tracing and log management without being In a typical APT attack campaign, attackers gain initial
limited to detecting persistence threats. access to a victim organization mainly through program ex-
 Another challenge arises from some benign programs’ be- ploits or stolen credentials. Program vulnerabilities are often
haviors that cause pseudo-edges to be generated excessively, patched, and users frequently change passwords, making these
which can complicate the detection process. To counteract methods unreliable for long-term operations. Thus, attackers
this, CPD incorporates a sophisticated false positive reduction establish persistence using various methods for prolonged,
algorithm, which is informed by an in-depth analysis of reliable access. Post-persistence, they perform local discov-
APT behaviors. This ensures that only genuinely malicious ery to understand target systems, including security program
activities are flagged. Our algorithm capitalizes on the crucial details. To evade detection, they select tools to bypass these
understanding that persistence is merely one component of a security programs or deactivate them after privilege escalation.
multi-stage APT kill chain, all of which need to be executed Afterwards, attackers conduct network discovery to find and
in concert to fulfill the attackers’ objectives. By verifying the move laterally to other vulnerable machines. The hallmark
presence of related kill chain techniques and tactics within of APT campaigns is not immediate impact but remaining
close proximity in the provenance graph, CPD significantly undetected for long periods, aiming to collect and exfiltrate
enhances its capability to distinguish between benign and data or cause significant impact at a strategic point. The ability
malicious actions, improving both the accuracy and reliability to achieve persistence is critical for attackers’ success.
of threat detection.
 Our system CPD outperforms existing detection systems, B. Persistence Prevalence
as evidenced by evaluations on both public datasets and We extracted data from MITRE ATT&CK knowledge
those derived from strictly implemented MITRE emulation base [37], which includes adversary tactics and techniques
plans [36]. It excels in reducing FPs by 93% on average, based on real-world observations. Our statistical analysis on
effectively detecting true persistence attacks, and producing MITRE’s database sheds light on the prevalence of persistence
succinct attack graphs that explain the persistence setup and (sub-)techniques in the wild. There are 99 distinct (sub)-
execution. The capability to pinpoint persistence setup and techniques in persistence tactic. We find out that 94 out
execution within a provenance graph and present it in context of 136 APT groups (69%) leveraged at least one persisprovides security analysts with actionable insights for further tence (sub-)technique in the past. We rank both persistence
investigation, demonstrating CPD’s practicality. Mostly, CPD (sub-)techniques based on the number of APT groups that
has a response time of under a minute for its entire pipeline. leveraged these techniques in the real world, and APT groups
 Unlike previous techniques, CPD produces alarms satisfying based on the number of persistence (sub-)techniques employed
all five properties of reliability, explainability, analytical depth, by them. Due to space limit, we only show the top 10
contextuality, and transferability as introduced in [32]. In its persistence (sub)-techniques in Table I, and top 10 “persistent”
first stage, CPD’s detection rules avoid easily changeable APT groups in Table II.
indicators, such as hard-coded IP addresses and file hashes,
which are common in rule-based security systems [21]–[23],
ensuring reliable detection. The attack graphs produced in the C. Why is Persistence Misunderstood in APT Detection?
second stage of CPD are both explainable and contextual, Persistence is often seen in the wild, but ironically, deproviding an analytical overview of the attack. Finally, the spite its emphasis in the term APT, it is misunderstood in
system’s customizable weighting factors for indicators and the academic research. MITRE defines persistence as the ability
alert budget introduced in the third stage make CPD highly to maintain access to victim systems across restarts, changed
transferable and adaptable for practical use. credentials, and other interruptions that could (temporally)
 The main contributions of our paper are: cut off access. This can be achieved in two primary ways:
• We present a thorough analysis of cyber persistence attacks either by attackers initiating a remote connection using stolen
 and propose CPD, the first detection system specifically credentials (T1078.003) or placing a public key in the SSH
 targeting persistence threats. authorized_keys file (T1098.004); or by the attackers
• We introduce pseudo-dependency edges to causally relate initiating a connection from within the victim system, such
 disjoint persistence phases and improve the detection of as by placing a new entry in the Registry run keys or startup
 these threats. folder (T1547.001), creating scheduled tasks or jobs (T1053),
• We propose the novel concept of expert-guided edges to or inserting commands in Unix shell configuration files like
 enable efficient provenance tracing of persistence threats. .bashrc (T1546.004). For further details regarding these
• We identify critical insights on determining malicious per- techniques, we refer the reader to [35].
 sistence behaviors and propose an alert triage algorithm In our review of all public audit log datasets [38]–[40]
 incorporating these insights to reduce false positives. for evaluating PIDS, we identified a significant gap in the
• We implement and evaluate CPD on diverse datasets, understanding of persistence. Effective persistence hinges on
 demonstrating better attack detection rates and provenance three key conditions: setting a trigger (like creating a Registry
 graph completeness versus state-of-the-art methods. run key), linking code for remote connection to this trigger

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 4

 TABLE I: Top 10 persistent (sub-)techniques
 Registry Run Keys Scheduled Web DLL External Windows Domain WMI Event DLL Search Local
 / Startup Folder Task Shell Side-Loading Remote Services Service Accounts Subscription Order Hijacking Account
 49 45 23 21 20 20 11 10 9 9

 TABLE II: Top 10 persistent APT groups

 Lazarus Sandworm Magic Threat
 APT29 APT41 Kimsuky APT28 APT39 APT3
 Group Team Hound Group-3390
 25 16 12 11 10 10 8 8 8 8

(e.g., placing an executable in the Registry run key), and the system event logs to create a persistence setup table, recording
successful initiation of a remote connection when the trigger activities that match persistence setup detection rules, such as
is activated. In practice, the third condition may not always be new account creations or Registry run key additions. Next,
met, prompting APT actors, such as APT29 to deploy multiple it identifies processes with remote connections in the event
persistence techniques to enhance their odds of maintaining stream, performing individual backward tracing to generate
presence in the target environment. Unfortunately, existing sub-graphs for each. These sub-graphs are then checked
datasets often fulfill only the first condition, setting up a against our persistence execution detection rules, with matches
trigger, and frequently link an irrelevant value to it, thereby recorded in a persistence execution table. In the third step,
missing the second and third conditions. This oversimplifi- CPD aligns entries from persistence execution table with
cation can be counterproductive, as normal programs often persistence setup table based on TTP labels1 , temporal order,
activate these persistence triggers, enabling attackers to blend and specific attributes. It creates a persistence setup atomic
into routine system activities. Unlike these datasets, each of graph, i.e., a minimal sub-graph directly related to persistence,
MITRE’s eleven emulation plans [36], based on real-world and a persistence execution atomic graph when an alignment is
APT behaviors, incorporates at least two persistence tech- found, and then links them with a pseudo-edge. For evaluation
niques without such oversimplification. Thus, we utilize these purposes (Section VI), steps 2 and 3 are combined as step 2
emulation plans to evaluate CPD as detailed in Section VI. alone does not yield direct alerts. The final step introduces
 pseudo-edge strength and a false positive reduction algorithm
 III. T HREAT M ODEL to ensure only significant events are connected.
 Our system, like other PIDS [9]–[16], considers firmware,
OS, and our logging systems in trusted computing base (TCB).
Unlike [9], [13]–[15], we do not presume attacks end before an A. Persistence Threat Detection
OS reboot. Our system is unique in linking provenance attack
 Our persistence setup detection rules are created by studying
graphs across reboots using pseudo-edges. Our logging, as a
 persistence (sub-)techniques described in MITRE ATT&CK
Windows service or a Systemd service on Linux, restarts
 Matrix, hundreds of persistence-related threat reports, and
post-reboot, but an OS reboot may miss system audit events.
 red team tools that provide visibility into low-level code
Notably, attack-related processes starting before our logging
 related to persistence attacks, like Atomic Red Team [43].
service are not logged, often indicating persistence attacks.
 We then improved our persistence setup detection rules by
On Windows, persistence can be achieved through “Create or
 studying and incorporating open-source detection rules from
Modify System Process: Windows Service” (T1543.003), and
 popular rule repositories like Sigma [23] and Elastic [21].
on Linux through “Create or Modify System Process: Systemd
 However, as discussed in Section VI-A in details, our rules
Service” (T1543.002). We can trace back to the root process
 are different from the ones in those repositories. We will
in logs despite missing initial process creation events, using
 commit our persistence detection rules to these open-source
parent process GUID/ID. Our tools System Monitor [41] on
 rule repositories for the public’s benefit.2 The persistence
Windows and Auditd [42] on Linux record these IDs.
 setup detection process is mostly a straightforward string
Technique Coverage. Of those 99 distinct (sub-)techniques
 match process against information inside a single system log
in persistence tactic, only half of them were knowingly used
 event. But some rules have a few more rule conditions, which
by at least one APT group in the past according to MITRE’s
 require information across several log events. For this, we
database. We only created detection rules for about a third
 use “sequenced” query of EQL, a query language specifically
of all persistence (sub-)techniques, which all fall into the
 designed for threat hunting [44]. Indicative strings include
“significant” half of persistence (sub-)techniques and include
 especially file paths, Registry locations, process names and
all top 10 persistence (sub-)techniques. We have excluded all
 command lines etc. Note that these strings are characteristic
persistence (sub-)techniques related to macOS, cloud infrasto the persistence (sub-)techniques. For instance, to implement
tructures, pre-OS boot like Bootkit.
 1 TTP stands for Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures. An exemplary TTP
 IV. S YSTEM D ESIGN
 label is T1547.001.
 CPD employs a four-step approach for accurate persistence 2 The first author of this article has been submitting accepted commits for
detection, as illustrated in Figure 2. Initially, CPD processes non-persistence-related TTP detection rules to those repositories.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 5

 I: Persistence Setup Detection II: Persistence Execution Detection III: Pseudo-edge Creation IV: False Positive Reduction & Persistence Detection

 Persistence Persistence
 Setup False Positive
 Tables
 Table Persistence Reduction
 Alignment
 Persistence Execution Algorithm
 Setup Table
 Detection
 Rules
 Disconnected Graph Stream ... Connecting the Big Dots via Pseudo-edges True Dependency Graph
 System Event Logs ...
 Persistence ...
 ... ... ...
 Audit Processor
 Logs ... ... ...
 ... ...
 ...

 Backward Persistence
 Tracing Execution
 Process List Detection
 with Remote Rules
 Connections

Fig. 2: CPD overview. CPD implements a four-step approach for detecting persistence threats, starting with the creation of a persistence
setup table from audit logs that tracks potential setup actions. It then traces processes with remote connections to form sub-graphs, which
are evaluated against execution rules and aligned with setup actions to form atomic graphs linked by a pseudo-edge. The process is refined
through the introduction of pseudo-edge strength and a false positive reduction algorithm.

the persistence sub-technique T1547.001 (Registry run keys), Algorithm 1: PSEUDO - EDGE C REATION
one of a few known Registry locations must be modified. 1 Function C REATE P SEUDO E DGE (Events E)
 Simply matching system events against those detection rules /* Get a list of persistent setup events */
 2 L<Eα,Lα,T α> ← G ET P ERSISTENCE S ETUP(E)
generates a huge volume of alerts in practice. To reduce /* Get a list of processes with remote conn.
false alerts, CPD first spots every process initiating or accept- */
 3 L<Pγ> ← G ET P ROCESS W ITH R EMOTE C ONNECTION(E)
ing remote connection(s) in the event stream, then performs 4 foreach Pγ ∈ L<P> do
backward tracing on these processes individually. During /* Get a list of persistent exec. events
the backward tracing, CPD inspects whether its provenance */
 5 L<Eγ,Lγ,T γ> ← G ET P ERSISTENCE E XECUTION(Pγ )
graph contains system activities matching our persistence 6 foreach (Eγ ,Lγ ,Tγ ) ∈ L<Eγ,Lγ,T γ> do
 7 foreach (Eα ,Lα ,Tα ) ∈ L<Eα,Lα,T α> do
execution detection rules. Like persistence setup detection 8 if Lγ == Lα then
rules, our persistence execution detection rules contain other 9 if Tγ > Tα then
 10 AGγ ← G ETATOMIC G RAPH(Eγ )
indicative strings incorporating file paths, Registry locations, 11 AGα ← G ETATOMIC G RAPH(Eα )
process names etc. These strings are also characteristic to the /* Create a pseudo-edge */
 12 P AG(γ, α) ← AGγ ∪ AGα
persistence (sub-)techniques. For example, to “activate” the 13 L<P E,P AG> ← L<P E,P AG> ∪
persistence sub-technique T1547.001 (Registry run keys), one < P E(γ, α), P AG(γ, α) >
 14 return L<P E,P AG>
of a few known Registry locations must be read by exactly the
process explorer.exe, and it must rely on this process to 15 Function G ET P ERSISTENCE S ETUP (E)
 16 foreach Rule ∈ LP ersistenceSetupRule do
(directly or indirectly) start the malicious process. 17 forall Condition ∈ Rule do
 Table III demonstrates how sensitive these detection rules 18 satisf ied ← C HECK C ONDITION(Condition, E)
 19 if satisf ied then
are. Note that we assume the integrity of the operating system 20 L<Eα,Lα,T α> ← L<Eα,Lα,T α> ∪ (E,L,T)
including its native built-in system programs. We stress that, 21 return L<Eα,Lα,T α>

at its stage 1, CPD sacrifices specificity for sensitivity in 22 Function G ET P ERSISTENCE E XECUTION (Pγ )
 23 L<Eκ> ← T RAVERSAL BACKWARD(Pγ , E)
its detection results, in order to not miss a single potential 24 foreach Eκ ∈ L<Eκ> do
persistence attack. In other words, CPD will not have false 25 foreach Rule ∈ LP ersistenceExecutionRule do
 26 forall Condition ∈ Rule do
negatives at this stage, but at the cost of having many false 27 satisf ied ← C HECK C ONDITION(Condition, Eκ )
positives. The optimization techniques introduced in CPD 28 if satisf ied then
 29 L<Eα,Lα,T α> ← L<Eα,Lα,T α> ∪
and discussed in Section VI-A only improve its stage 1’s (Eκ ,Lκ ,Tκ )
specificity, and do not impact the sensitivity. Besides, we argue 30 return L<Eγ,Lγ,T γ>

that the evasion techniques for SIEM (Security Information
and Event Management) rules introduced in [45] have only
limited impact on our detection rules. Because, as discussed
in Table III, we mostly do not rely on recorded command
lines or code executed by attackers. Rather, we use indicative execution atomic graph is created (Algorithm 1 Line 10),
file paths, Registry locations and system process names. These which includes only information related to persistence exestrings are immutable under the assumption of OS integrity. cution. Likewise, a persistence setup atomic graph containing
 For every detected potential malicious process (with remote only critical attack information is also generated. Then CPD
connections) from above, CPD checks if it has corresponding creates a pseudo-edge to connect the persistence setup atomic
entries in the persistence setup table, based on the TTP labels, graph and the persistence execution atomic graph (Algorithm 1
some TTP-specific attributes, and happens-before relationship Line 12), resulting into a succinct and insightful persistence
(Algorithm 1 Lines 4-9). If an alignment is found, a persistence attack graph, as shown in Figure 3.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 6

 c:\Windows\System32\hostui.exe
 S S S
 rcs.3aka3.doc cmd.exe sdclt.exe control.exe w
 S w c:\Windows\System32\hostui.bat

 S w c:\ProgramData\Microsoft\Windows\Start
 https.exe powershell.exe
 Menu\Programs\StartUp\hostui.lnk
 before reboot
 after reboot pseudo-edge
 S
 userinit.exe S explorer.exe cmd.exe S
 powershell.exe
 S

 S S S c
 hostui.exe powershell.exe powershell.exe powershell.exe 10.0.3.102, 443

Fig. 3: A persistence attack graph automatically generated by CPD on the EP-APT29-1 dataset. It uses rectangles for processes, ovals
for files / Registry keys, and diamonds for network sockets. Annotations include S=Start, W=Write, C=Connect. The graph successfully
pinpoints T1547.001 (Boot or Logon Autostart Execution: Registry Run Keys / Startup Folder). The upper section reveals persistence
setup: a malicious Microsoft Word-like program (.doc) starts, resulting in a Powershell instance and a shortcut creation in the Windows
startup folder. This shortcut leads to another dropped malicious program, hostui.exe. The lower section, post-reboot, shows persistence
execution: explorer.exe auto-executes startup folder shortcuts, triggering malicious Powershell code and connecting to the attacker.
Indicative strings are bolded for clarity. CPD forms a pseudo-edge linking the process initiating persistence setup with the one managing
the remote connection, i.e., the c2 agent.

 –
 TABLE III: Detection rule sensitivity for the top 10 persistent techniques. TPR = True Positive Rate, ✓ = Yes, ✓ = Almost.
 Detection rules
 (Sub-)techniques Remark
 with TPR=1?
 Registry Run ✓ During persistence setup, new entries must be added to the the standard Registry run keys locations or standard
 Keys / Startup Startup folders. During persistence execution, the corresponding new entries must be read by the system process
 Folder explorer.exe. The malicious process must be ultimately started by explorer.exe.
 Scheduled ✓ During persistence setup, one of a few Windows task creation programs / Powershell cmdlets / API must be called,
 Task and file modification in the Windows standard Tasks folder must be undertaken. During persistence execution, the
 malicious process must be ultimately started by the system process svchost.exe with the flags “-k netsvcs
 -p -s Schedule”.
 –

 Web Shell ✓ During persistence setup, a file containing executable code like PHP is very likely dropped to the web root directory
 like /var/www/html. During persistence execution, the malicious process must be ultimately started by the web
 server program like apache2.
 DLL ✓ During persistence setup, a DLL file must be dropped to the file system. During persistence execution, that DLL
 Side-Loading file must be loaded by a process initiating or accepting remote connection(s).
 External ✓ During persistence setup, a common remote access program must be installed, and its executable file must be
 Remote Services dropped to the file system. During persistence execution, that program must initiate or accept remote connection(s).
 Windows ✓ During persistence setup, a new entry must be added to the standard Registry location for Windows services.
 Service During persistence execution, the corresponding new entry must be read by the system process services.exe.
 The malicious process must be ultimately started by services.exe.
 Domain ✓ During persistence setup, a new entry must be created in the domain controller’s standard Active Directory database
 Accounts stored in the file system. During persistence execution, this new account must be used for logging into target systems.
 WMI Event ✓ During persistence setup, one of a few Windows WMI event creation programs / Powershell cmdlets / API
 Subscription must be called, and file modification in the Windows standard WMI event repository must be undertaken. During
 persistence execution, the malicious process must be ultimately started by the system process wmiprvse.exe.
 DLL Search ✓ During persistence setup, a DLL file must be dropped to the file system. During persistence execution, that DLL
 Order Hijacking file must be loaded by a process initiating or accepting remote connection(s).
 Local ✓ During persistence setup, a new entry must be created in the standard user information database stored in the local
 Account file system. During persistence execution, this new account must be used for logging into target systems.

B. Expert-guided Edges In the logs, the corresponding Registry key modifications
 appear to be done by services.exe, not sc.exe, with no
 In our experiments, we found limitations in linking system apparent link between the two. Further research and consultaentities solely based on Windows’ Process Monitor / System tion with the Windows Developer Reference [46] revealed that
Monitor logs. Specifically, during T1543.003 (Create or the communication between these processes occurs through
Modify System Process: Windows Service) persistence ALPC, a Windows inter-process communication (IPC) method
setup, attackers often use sc.exe to create a malicious not typically logged by standard frameworks. Additional log-
Windows service. This results in a new Registry key under ging via Windows ETW “NT Kernel Logger” confirmed the
HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services, the link but resulted in excessively large datasets due to ALPC’s
basis for our detection rule. This approach, focusing on an widespread use.
immutable Registry location, is more reliable than relying on
command lines, which are easily bypassed, as recent research To address this, we introduce expert-guided edges in CPD.
shows [45]. These edges are formed by applying specialized parsing rules

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 7

 s s
malicious.exe cmd.exe sc.exe create myService C. False Positive Reduction
 expert-guided edge
 Creating a pseudo-edge that accurately indicates a persisw HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
 services.exe tence attack is challenging. This is mainly due to the fact that
 Services\myService
 many benign programs use Registry run keys (T1547.001),
Fig. 4: An expert-guided edge is created during reconstruction of Windows services (T1543.003), scheduled tasks (T1053.005)
a T1543.003 persistence setup attack graph. An attacker-controlled
malicious process leverages LOLBins to create a malicious service etc. for some program-specific routines involving remote confor persistence. The indicative Registry key is however modified by a nections, leading to an inadequate amount of false-positive
Windows system process, to which no link from the malicious process persistence attack graphs. For instance, some benign procan be built using logs from standard logging frameworks. grams create a Windows service to check and download
 updates periodically, like Adobe Acrobat’s Update Service
 (armsvc.exe), mimicking persistence behaviors and trigger-
 Algorithm 2: EXPERT- GUIDED EDGE CREATION ing false-positive pseudo-edges in CPD. While the Windows
 Inputs : System audit log events E; service creation itself mimics persistence setup, the resulted
 List of critical system processes L<P> update downloads (involving remote connections) later on
 Output: List of dependency path L<P >
1 foreach Eκ ∈ E do
 mimic persistence execution. Similarly, programs such as
 /* Get the process of current event */ Google Chrome and Microsoft OneDrive use Registry run keys
2 Pκ ← G ET S UBJECT(Eκ ) for updates, frequently leading to false alarms. Figure 5 shows
3 if Pκ ∈ L<P> then
 /* Add dependency path to the standard a typical false-positive persistence attack graph generated by
 routine nodes */ CPD after its stage 2.
4 P ← A DD PATH T O ROUTINE N ODES(Pκ )
5 L<P > ← L<P > ∪ P To address this, we developed a false positive reduction
6 return LP algorithm using contextual indicators to differentiate between
 benign and malicious activities. This algorithm introduces
 pseudo-edge strength and ranks pseudo-edges based on a
 calculated threat score. We categorize pseudo-edges as either
during log processing for provenance graph generation. This causality-based or correlation-based for improved detection
method embeds expert knowledge about process creation rou- accuracy, due to the difference in the nature of various pertines and operating system policies into the backward and for- sistence techniques. Correlation-based pseudo-edges, related
ward tracing process. For example, we can link sc.exe and to login account techniques like T1098, T1136, and T1078,
services.exe if services.exe modifies a Registry key are less reliable due to the uncertainty of user identity behind
under the specified location right after sc.exe is executed consecutive logins. These receive a ‘penalty’ weight (less than
with the same service name, as illustrated in Figure 4. This 1) in the anomaly score assignment (Equation 3). For precise
approach offers three benefits: faster search process, reduced detection, we utilize context not only from the cyber-killdependency explosion, and bridging gaps otherwise impossible chain tactic and technique levels, but also from the program
to close. execution level.
 1) Causality-based pseudo-edges: We formulate the fol-
 Similarly, we observe missing links on Linux using
 lowing indicators based on studying APT behaviors in real-
Auditd logs even though we are monitoring a very exworld attacks.
tensive list of syscalls. Specifically, during T1543.002
 • Degree of indirection in both persistence setup and per-
(Systemd Service) persistence setup, an indicative file
 sistence execution. As observed in APT29’s real-world
/etc/systemd/system/*.service is created. Howbehaviors, multiple indirection is implemented to start the
ever, during persistence execution, we cannot observe the same
 command and control (c2) agent program. That is, when the
file being accessed, but rather a closely related in-memory
 malicious shortcut file in a Windows startup folder is read,
file /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/*.service/*
 the explorer.exe process runs a normal-looking batch
with the same service file name. An edge cannot be built
 file linked to the shortcut file (indirection 1). The resulted
between the corresponding sub-graphs if using the traditional
 cmd.exe process starts a powershell.exe process as
“write and read on the same file node” principle. Hence we
 instructed in the batch file (indirection 2), which in turn
use an expert-guided edge to resolve this issue. Algorithm 2
 starts another normal-looking process (indirection 3). This
describes the creation of expert-guided edges, and is applied
 process then starts another powershell.exe process (inin Line 23 of Algorithm 1. Note that we create expert-guided
 direction 4), which again starts another powershell.exe
edges under the assumption that the integrity of the OS itself
 process (indirection 5) before contacting the c2 server. This
is not compromised. We show the log storage reduction rate
 obviously deviates from normal programs’ use of Windows
by introducing expert-guided edges in Section VI-B.
 startup folders.
 We acknowledge that currently CPD employs a non-data- • Credential access tactic, as observed in APT actors’ past
driven approach for creating expert-guided edges. However, behaviors, e.g., APT29 [47], Sandworm [3], Wizard Spifuture work may explore a more data-driven method for ex- der [48], is almost always executed as an attempt to obtain
tracting or learning rules for identifying expert-guided edges, the “low-hanging fruits” persistence.
and therefore further enhance the scalability of the system. • Persistence techniques are often executed together, as

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 8

 HKU\....\Software\Microsoft\Windows\
 w CurrentVersion\RunOnce

 s w
 explorer.exe onedrivesetup.exe HKU\....\Software\Microsoft\Windows\
 CurrentVersion\Run\OneDrive
 before reboot
 pseudo-edge
 after reboot
 s s c
 userinit.exe explorer.exe onedrive.exe 20.189.173.5, 443

Fig. 5: A false-positive persistence attack graph automatically generated by CPD on the EP-APT29-1 dataset. This graph wrongly classifies
an instance of T1547.001. It turns out to be a benign program, i.e., Microsoft OneDrive, leveraging Registry run keys for updates. It in fact
connects back to an IP address belonging to Microsoft Corporation.

 they together will likely contribute to more reliable persis- • Remote system discovery (T1018) is performed on one
 tence. domain-joined computer before a remote connection is initi-
• APT actors tend to execute persistence techniques right ated from this computer to another computer in the network.
 after initial access or lateral movement. For example, For instance, APT29 used LDAP queries to enumerate other
 Wizard Spider achieved persistence right after initial com- hosts in the domain before creating a remote Powershell
 promise on the first victim machine, and then persistence session to a secondary victim.
 on the second victim machine right after lateral movement. • Ingress tool transfer (T1105) is performed from one
• APT actors tend to execute some discovery techniques domain-joined computer to another computer before the
 before persistence techniques. However, we find that this remote connection.
 indicator tends to be less reliable and more “noisy” than • Credential access tactic is performed on one domainother indicators. To counter this, we assign the smallest joined computer before a remote connection. For instance,
 weighting factor to this indicator during anomaly score Sandworm has stolen SSH keys on the first compromised
 calculation in Equation 3. computer and then use these credentials to move laterally
 2) Correlation-based pseudo-edges: We further classify to a second computer.
correlation-based pseudo-edges into two types. • Local account creation after or during lateral movement.
 • Installing, activating and enabling standard remote ac-
Type 1 - persistent initial re-access We identified the fol- cess tools like VNC and RDP server.
lowing indicators for this type of persistence. Taking into account above indicators, CPD calculates an
• Observation of credential access tactic is also an indi- anomaly/threat score, and uses this score to quantify pseudocator for correlation-based pseudo-edges. For instance, OS edge strength and rank pseudo-edges. By doing so, we ensure
 credential dumping (T1003) is often performed on victim that the most likely malicious pseudo-edges are always incomputers, and the stolen credentials are used for the remote vestigated first by a security analyst. During the final stage
 re-connection. Besides, the usage intensity, i.e., occurrence of CPD, as formulated in Algorithm 3, a pseudo-edge is first
 of the same technique, and extensiveness, i.e., variation of classified into one of the three categories above (Line 4). Then
 attempted credential access techniques, can be a weighting the corresponding persistence attack graph is automatically
 factor. For example, during one of Sandworm’s engage- 1) analyzed on to extract features related to indicators from
 ments, they uploaded an executable to its target machine above, e.g., the degree of indirection during both persistence
 for dumping web credentials, and another executable for setup and persistence execution, and 2) further explored on
 key-logging a valid user RDP session to obtain domain to include more contextual information and search for the
 credentials. existence of other indicators from above, i.e., related attack
• The accessing computer does not have a legit FQDN or steps in a cyber-kill-chain, e.g., whether credential access
 computer account in the domain. This is more likely a is observed in its dependency graph. The dependency graph
 malicious persistent initial re-access, as attackers typically expands on the persistence attack graph, and is therefore more
 do not physically own a domain joined computer. verbose. That is, our false positive reduction algorithm takes
• Local account creation after lateral movement, e.g., in a as input all indicators found in the succinct persistence attack
 WinRM [49] session. graph as well as in its more verbose dependency graph. In the
• Installing, activating and enabling standard remote ac- following, we explain how these indicators are adopted for
 cess tools like VNC and RDP server. For instance, Car- anomaly score assignment in three equations.
 bank [50] installed a VNC server on its victim machine First, we calculate the anomaly score of an indicator obfor persistence after capturing credentials, and opened the servable from the persistence attack graph as follows (Line 8
 corresponding port on firewall. in Algorithm 3):
Type 2 - persistent lateral movement Type 2 correlation-
 ASind−P AG = Ns2 × Ne2 (1)
based pseudo-edges are a special kind of pseudo-edges, which
represent an intersection between persistence tactic and lateral where Ns and Ne are the degree of indirection in persistence
movement tactic. The following indicators are extracted from setup atomic graph and persistence execution atomic graph,
analyzing real-world APT attacks. respectively.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 9

 Algorithm 3: FALSE POSITIVE REDUCTION being applied. The rationale behind this is that attackers often
 Inputs : System audit log events E; try a variety of techniques from the same tactic together to
 List L<P E,P AG> of pseudo-edge and persistence attack maximize the chance of achieving their objectives. tteq is the
 graph pairs;
 List L<ind−P AG> of indicators inside persistence attack time when an attack step is conducted, and te is the time
 graphs; when persistence execution is performed. If multiple attack
 List L<ind−DG> of indicators inside dependency graphs; (sub-)techniques are observed for the same indicator, we only
 Max persistence-edge alert number N
 Output: List L<P E,AS> of persistence edge and its anomaly score consider the one with the maximal anomaly score.
 pairs In the end, we obtain the final anomaly score from the
 1 foreach < P E(γ, α), P AG(γ, α) > ∈ L<P E,P AG> do Equation 3 (Line 20 in Algorithm 3).
 2 ASP E(γ,α) ← 0
 3 L<ASP E > ← 0 n
 Y
 /* Classify pseudo-edge */ ASP E = (ASi )wi (3)
 4 P E ′ (γ, α) ← G ET C ATEGORY(P E(γ, α)) i=1
 /* Select indicators based on pseudo-edge
 type */ where n denotes the number of found indicators for a given
 5 L′<ind−P AG> ← G ET I NDICATORS(P E ′ (γ, α), pseudo-edge, ASi denotes the anomaly score of an indicator
 L<ind−P AG> )
 6 L′<ind−DG> ← G ET I NDICATORS(P E ′ (γ, α), L<ind−DG> ) obtained from Equation 1 or Equation 2 for this pseudoedge, and wi is a weighting factor. Afterwards, the pseudo-
 7 foreach indicator ∈ L′<ind−P AG> do edge and anomaly score pair is added to a list (Line 21
 8 ASindicator ← C ALCULATE S CORE 1(indicator,
 P AG(γ, α)) in Algorithm 3), which is sorted by anomaly score at the
 9 L<ASP E > ← L<ASP E > ∪ ASindicator end (Line 22 in Algorithm 3). Pseudo-edges ranked lower
10 (L<Eδ> , DG(δ)) ← T RAVERSAL BACKWARD(P AG(γ, α), E) than the N-th pseudo-edge are considered as false-positive
11 (L<Eη> , DG(η)) ← T RAVERSAL F ORWARD(P AG(γ, α), E) pseudo-edges, and therefore removed from the list (Line 23 in
12 DG(κ) ← M ERGE G RAPH(DG(δ), DG(η)) Algorithm 3). Algorithm 3 returns the final list of pseudo-edge
13 L<Eκ> ← L<Eδ> ∪ L<Eη> and anomaly score pairs.
14 foreach Eκ ∈ L<Eκ> do
15 foreach indicator ∈ L′<ind−DG> do
16 satisf ied ← C HECK I NDICATOR(indicator, Eκ ) V. I MPLEMENTATION
17 if satisf ied then
 18 ASindicator ← For our experiments, we implemented the prototype of
 C ALCULATE S CORE 2(indicator, DG(κ)) CPD in Python (∼ 6K lines of code), and deployed it on a
 19 L<ASP E > ← L<ASP E > ∪ ASindicator
20 ASP E(γ,α) ← S UM S CORE(L<ASP E > )
 64bit Ubuntu 23.04 OS with 512 GB of RAM and a 64-core
21 L<P E,AS> ← L<P E,AS> ∪ ASP E(γ,α) AMD processor. This machine hosts a dozen virtual machines
22 L<P E,AS> ← S ORT B Y S CORE (L<P E,AS> ) used by several researchers for conducting separated scientific
23 L<P E,AS> ← R EMOVE B Y B UDGET (L<P E,AS> , N)
 experiments at the same time. Our implementation interfaces
24 return L<P E,AS> Elasticsearch [51] via EQL, a query language specifically
 designed for security use cases. Elasticsearch provides scalable
 and near real-time search for log data investigation. Besides,
 Second, the anomaly score of an indicator observable from we use Python NetworkX [52] for generating provenance
the dependency graph is calculated as follows (Line 18 in graphs on demand, and PyVis [53] for graph visualization.
Algorithm 3): For Linux log collection, we use Auditd [42]. On Windows,
 our primary tool is System Monitor (Sysmon) [41], which,
  unlike Windows ETW, generates and records a process GUID
 max( Dc × F req(teqi ) × V ar(tac)) tteq ≤ te
 ASind−DG = i Ds
 (2) for each process, reducing false dependencies during post-
 Dc
 max( D × F req(teqi ) × V ar(tac))
 e
 tteq > te processing. However, Sysmon lacks file/Registry read colleci
 tion, so we use Windows Security Audit logs for recording all
 where Ds denotes the distance between an indicative attack file and Registry operation. We also collect ALPC logs with
step, e.g., OS credentials dumping, and the persistence setup the “NT Kernel Logger” [54] ETW session.
step. The distance is measured as the number of hops between the corresponding two processes. Similarly, De denotes
 VI. E VALUATION
the distance between the persistence execution step and an
indicative attack step, e.g., remote system discovery. Dc is In this section, we evaluate the efficacy and effectiveness
a predefined cut-off value representing the maximal number of CPD as a persistence detection system. In particular, we
of hops considered as having positive impact on the anomaly investigate the following research questions (RQs):
score. By doing so, it penalizes an indicative attack step too RQ1 How does CPD compare in soundness of persistence
far away from the persistence setup or execution step, in which detection, false positive reduction, and accuracy to openthe weighting factor in Equation 2 is less than 1, when Ds or source SIEM detection rules, commercial EDR systems
De is greater than Dc . F req(teq) represents the occurrence of and state-of-the-art PIDS? (VI-A)
the same attack technique being executed as repeated attempt, RQ2 How high is the log reduction rate by introducing expertwhereas V ar(tac) represents usage extensiveness of the same guided edges in CPD? (VI-B)
tactic, i.e., number of different techniques from the same tactic RQ3 What is the runtime overhead of CPD? (VI-C)

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 10

 TABLE IV: Overview of the evaluation datasets
 related detection rules from these repositories, converted them
 Dataset
 Target Host Persistence Target Data Event into EQL queries and ran them alongside CPD on datasets
 Number Attack Number Host OS Size Number
 containing persistence attacks. The results in Table V reveal
 ATLASv2 2 0 Windows 26GB 5.6M
 that open-source SIEM rules generated more false positives
 DARPA-E5-
 Fivediretions
 3 2 Windows 348GB 1.4B and missed true attacks, and CPD significantly outperformed
 DARPA- 50
 these rules. Further comparison between CPD’s stages 2 and
 1 Windows 380GB 338M 3 is presented in Figure 6. This figure displays the cumulative
 OpTC (/500)
 EP-APT29-1 3 2 Windows 32GB 22M distribution of threat scores for benign and attack pseudo-
 EP-APT29-2 3 3 Windows 24GB 14M edges. The stage 3 results in Table V are based on the lowest
 EP- Windows true attack threat score threshold.
 4 4 68GB 57M
 Sandworm-1 Linux In addition, we employ the ranking metrics cPrecision@k
 (cumulative precision at k) and NDCG@k (normalized discounted cumulative gain at k) to measure the performance of
RQ4 How precise are persistence attack graphs generated by CPD’s threat score ranking in its stage 3. While cPrecision@k
 CPD? (VI-D) measures the proportion of relevant items, i.e., true attacks,
Public Datasets. Public datasets often lack persistence traces. in the top k ranking results, NDCG@k measures ranking
From DARPA datasets, we chose the E5 dataset [39] and quality, rewarding relevant items ranked higher in the list and
OpTC dataset [38], but omitted the E3 [55] due to its lack supporting graded relevance. In Table VI, we show CPD’s
of persistence attacks. DARPA E5 dataset features emulated stage 3’s ranking performance in terms of the top 5 results and
APT attacks. Only the E5 Fivedirections subset, focused on the top 20 results, respectively. It is important to note that these
Windows, contains two instances of persistence attacks. We ranking metrics are inherently relative. That is, to objectively
evaluated only this subset with CPD. The DARPA OpTC assess a system’s ranking performance, various factors should
dataset contains logs from 500 Windows machines. It includes be considered, e.g., baseline systems’ ranking performance,
three persistence instances, but only one meets all criteria from task difficulty. Unfortunately, all of the baseline systems, with
Section II. The other two failed the third condition as the attack which we compare CPD, perform simple binary classification;
ended prematurely. We tested CPD on a subset of 50 machines, they do not rank those instances. That is, we believe that
including the 3 with persistence and 47 random ones. We Table VI provides only a limited assessment of CPD’s threat
also included ATLASv2 [56] for its CBC detection results score ranking performance.
on persistence. ATLASv2 dataset offers more background Nevertheless, we show in Table V that CPD’s final stage
activities and extensive logging than ATLAS [40], such as drastically reduced false positives—from thousands in openthrough Sysmon and VMware CBC [57]. While lacking actual source rules to just dozens per dataset. When comparing to
persistence attacks, it includes CBC’s persistence alerts. We CPD’s stage 2, the false positive reduction algorithm in stage
used these for comparison with CPD. CPD’s detection results 3 of CPD via its threat score ranking achieved an average
on these datasets are verified against the provided ground truth. reduction rate of 83%, significantly enhancing accuracy.
MITRE Attack Emulation. MITRE’s eleven full emulation CPD’s great improvement over SIEM detection rules mainly
plans [36], based on real APT behaviors, each include at result from our two key insights, implemented on its stage
least two persistence techniques. These plans are used in 2 and 3 respectively. Our first powerful insight is that all
MITRE Engenuity ATT&CK® Evaluations [58] to assess persistence attacks require a setup stage that (mis)uses a
commercial EDR systems [59]. However, MITRE has not “sensitive” system functionality and a subsequent execution
published any corresponding datasets. We precisely imple- stage linked with a remote connection. Both SIEM rules
mented two relevant emulation plans, focusing on top 10 and CPD’s stage 1 rules raise alerts when persistence-related
most “persistent” APT groups from Section II-B, and then system functionality is used, but not necessarily misused.
evaluated CPD on these datasets, valuable for PIDS research. Unlike SIEM rules, which don’t associate log events generated
MITRE’s emulation plans target enterprise networks with more at different times, CPD’s stage 2 checks if there is a remote
sophisticated, cross-machine attacks than most public datasets, connection that can be traced back to a setup alert, leading to
offering greater authenticity. The APT29 plan has two distinct removal of alerts on system activities associated with benign
scenarios, while Sandworm’s are identical. We created three usage of system functionality. Our second practical insight is
datasets from emulating APT29 scenario 1, APT29 scenario 2, that persistence is only one of multiple stages in a cyber-killand Sandworm scenario 1, named EP-APT29-1, EP-APT29-2, chain that must be executed together to achieve attackers’
and EP-Sandworm-1, respectively. Table IV gives an overview goals. This key insight is discussed in details in our false
of our datasets. positive reduction algorithm in Section IV-C. Both key insights
 fully leverage the power of provenance analytics, i.e., context
 provided by system activities across a large timespan.
A. Effectiveness of CPD
 All parameters in our false positive reduction algorithms,
CPD vs. SIEM detection rules. After finalizing our persis- e.g., weighting factors, are unchanged for each dataset. Like
tence detection rule set, we compared it with popular open- previous works [13]–[15], our goal is not to exclude all FPs,
source SIEM detection rules from Elastic [21], Sigma [23] but rather to prioritize most potential attacks for investigation
and Google Chronicle [22]. We extracted all persistence- using threat score ranking. In other words, CPD aims to

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 11

 TABLE V: Comparison of CPD and open-source SIEM rules.

 CPD Elastic Chronicle Sigma
 Datasets
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3

 FP FN FP FN FP FN FP FN FP FN FP FN
 *
 DARPA-E5 21911 0/2 117 0/2 7 0/2 5371 1/2 - - 57869 0/2

 DARPA-OpTC 63460 0/1 35 0/1 4 0/1 15111 1/1 47584 0/1 11567 0/1

 EP-APT29-1 4489 0/2 82 0/2 23 0/2 260 2/2 1680 1/2 15158 0/2

 EP-APT29-2 3256 0/3 62 0/3 14 0/3 351 2/3 1724 1/3 13305 0/3

 EP-Sandworm-1 3881 0/4 48 0/4 8 0/4 527 1/4 1209 0/4 63760 0/4
 * The number before / represents false negatives, and the number after / represents true positives in the
 corresponding dataset.

 DARPA-E5 DARPA-OpTC EP-APT29-1
 1.0 Benign 1.0 Benign 1.0
 0.8 Attack 0.8 Attack 0.8
 Threshold Threshold
 0.6 0.6 0.6
 0.4 0.4 0.4 Benign
 0.2 0.2 0.2 Attack
 Threshold
 0.0 0.0 0.0
 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 0 2 4 6 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5
 CDF

 EP-APT29-2 EP-Sandworm-1
 1.0 1.0
 0.8 0.8
 0.6 0.6
 0.4 Benign 0.4 Benign
 0.2 Attack 0.2 Attack
 Threshold Threshold
 0.0 0.0
 0 2 4 6 0 2 4 6
 Threat Score [log-scale]
 Fig. 6: CDF of threat score for false and true alerts

 TABLE VI: Evaluation of CPD’s threat score ranking.
 Elastic’s persistence detection rules. We find out that Elastic’s
 Dataset cPrecision@5 cPrecision@20 NDCG@5 NDCG@20 rules not only overly allowlist programs, but also tend to be
 DARPA-E5 1.00 0.61 1.00 0.80 too specific, containing many hard-coded strings as conditions.
 DARPA- Both cases make them very vulnerable to evasion attacks
 0.20 0.20 0.39 0.39
 OpTC and have many false negatives in practice. For instance,
 EP-APT29-1 0.33 0.33 0.50 0.50 this Elastic rule for T1547.001 [60] allowlists all programs
 EP-APT29-2 0.00 0.15 0.00 0.39 not only under C:\Windows\System32\ but also under
 EP- C:\Program Files\, essentially excluding the majority of
 0.25 0.30 0.43 0.52
 Sandworm-1 programs on Windows. As discussed above, DARPA OpTC
 has three persistence instances, including two “unsuccessful”
 persistence instances only due to incomplete attack scenarios.
maximize the likelihood of detecting persistence attacks based We find that, due to the high-degree of specificity and overly
on limited human resources. Based on the alert budget security allowlisting, Elastic’s rules missed all these three persistence
analysts have, they can flexibly configure this parameter. instances. On the contrary, our system CPD detected all
 We further investigate on why these open-source detection three persistence instances in stage 1, and removed the two
rules have undesired outcomes, in particular, 1) why there unsuccessful persistence instances in stage 2, presenting only
are many false negatives when applying Elastic’s rules; 2) the true persistence as its final output.
why Sigma’s rules create exceptionally high number of false To answer the second question, we resort to manually
positives. To answer the first question, we carefully inspect inspecting Sigma’s persistence detection rules. We find that

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 12

 TABLE VII: Comparison of CPD and CBC EDR
Sigma’s rules are more diverse, with some being overly
specific and others being too general. This Sigma rule sample CPD CBC
for T1574.009 [61] uses only a program file path as condition, Dataset
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3
leading to excessive amount of alerts. We also find that the
 FP FN FP FN FP FN FP FN
high number of alerts is partly due to the fact that the Sigma
rule repository contains many similar rules created by different ATLASv2 1602 0 11 0 - - 56 0

contributors for the same attack (sub-)techniques. We argue
that the repository maintainers should more properly organize
the rules and remove seemingly redundant rules. for us to make direct comparison with them. However, they
 In comparison to Sigma, Chronicle’s rules cause less alerts, would, by construction, fail at detecting persistence. Because a
but have a few false negatives. Besides, we also find out that forward or backward tracing will not reach an event of interest
Chronicle has overly simple rules causing too many alerts such in the next phase, if attackers break down the entire cyber-killas this rule for T1053.005 [62]. At last, Chronicle’s rules chain into multiple phases like in Figure 1. In fact, persistence
overly use process names/paths as conditions. However, in attacks can be used to totally evade them.
the DARPA E5 dataset, process name is absent in log events Therefore, we performed a comparison with five
caused by processes that were created before the logging most recent state-of-the-art learning/anomaly-based PIDS
framework started. Lacking this information will result in KAIROS [17], FLASH [18]3 , MAGIC [27], ORTHRUS [63]
wrong results. Hence we do not evaluate Chronicle’s rules on and VELOX [64], which show superior performance over
the DARPA E5 dataset. It is worth mentioning that this study other learning-based PIDS like [9], [19], [20], [25], [26].
focuses on detecting persistence, which is often overlooked or However, none of these works outline detection results
even badly understood, as explained in Section II. It is not regarding to persistence attacks on each dataset. Each attack
surprising that those popular detection rule repositories have graph shown in the original papers was created from a subset
less sound or complete persistence detection rule sets. of DARPA E3, DARPA E5, or DARPA OpTC dataset. None
 of those chosen subsets contains a true persistence attack.
CPD vs. CBC EDR. We then compare our system CPD
 This is little surprising, as we already discussed above that
with the commercial VMware CBC EDR [57] on ATLASv2
 public datasets often lack persistence traces. True persistence
dataset. For fair comparison, we did not run CPD’s stage 3
 attacks only exist in DARPA E5 Fivedirections subset and
on this dataset, because it does not include a real persistence
 DARPA OpTC day 2 subset.
attack. Table VII shows the detection results of CPD and CBC
 MAGIC was evaluated only on DARPA E3 dataset by
EDR. Like above, without running its stage 3, CPD already
 the authors, but not on more recent DARPA E5, DARPA
outperforms the CBC EDR by reducing the false positive
 OpTC or any datasets containing true persistence attacks.
rate by 80%. Besides, we find that CBC’s IOC (indicator of
 ORTHRUS was evaluated only on some subsets of DARPA
compromise) hits reveal that they blindly allowlist programs
 E3 and DARPA E5 datasets by the authors; those subsets
as well, like SIEM detection rules discussed above. This could
 do not include any true persistence attack. In comparison,
easily result in false negatives.
 KAIROS, FLASH and VELOX were evaluated on the most
 We stress that CPD’s stage 1 also eliminates excessive false recent DARPA dataset, i.e., OpTC dataset. The authors of
alarms caused by critical system programs modifying files and VELOX present a framework [64], [65] for comparing deep
Registry at indicative locations. But CPD first checks if those learning-based PIDS, with which they evaluated state-of-theallowlisted programs are potentially compromised by exam- art PIDS on diverse datasets in terms of general detection
ining whether their executable files are modified. To further performance.
optimize the detection results at the stage 1 of CPD, it does Hence, we took the framework, and evaluated all of the five
not create unnecessary alerts for DLL files dropped on disk state-of-the-art PIDS on the OpTC dataset. More specifically,
that get deleted afterwards. Otherwise it would produce lots of we evaluated them only on the subset containing a true
security alerts related to several persistence (sub-)techniques, persistence attack, i.e., system events from the host 0501. As
e.g., T1574.001 and T1574.002. This is due to a common criticized in the comparison study [64], learning-based PIDS
Windows program behavior, in which a program drops some are sensitive to hyperparameter tuning and previous studies
DLL files to a (temporary) file folder after being started, commonly omit hyperparameter tuning for baseline systems.
then it starts some new instances (as child processes) that Therefore, we took the pre-trained models provided by the
load those DLL files. The DLL files get deleted when those authors of each PIDS, and first performed fine-tuning on the
child processes terminate. However, unlike Linux, Windows OpTC dataset to find the best-performing model of each PIDS.
by default never deletes temporary files, and leaves it to the We leveraged the hyperparameter optimization engine W&B
programs for the clean-up. That is, temporary files persist Sweeps [66] for this purpose.
reboots if not deleted by their creator. Hence, if a DLL
 As suggested in [64], to evaluate a learning-based PIDS,
file is dropped and not deleted afterwards, CPD generates a
 it should be run several times under identical configurations
persistence setup alert for it in its stage 1.
 to compensate the performance instability. This is due to the
CPD vs. prior PIDS. Most state-of-the-art heuristics-based fact that deep learning-based systems often exhibit predictive
PIDS [13]–[15] are evaluated on either proprietary datasets or
datasets without persistence attacks. Hence it is not possible 3 We acknowledge that FLASH and this paper share a subset of authors.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 13

TABLE VIII: Comparison of CPD and prior PIDS on DARPA OpTC TABLE IX: Log reduction rate of expert-guided edges
(Host 0501). ✓ = Detected, ✗= Not Detected
 Dataset Data Size ALPC Data Size Reduction Rate
 Persistence Persistence Run Time Mean Memory
 Setup Execution (minute)* Consumption (GB) EP-APT29-1 32GB 12GB 38%
 CPD ✓ ✓ 2 2.6 EP-APT29-2 24GB 5GB 20%
 KAIROS ✓ ✗ 443 29.2 EP-Sandworm-1 68GB 36GB 53%
 FLASH ✓ ✗ 244 7.6
 MAGIC ✓ ✗ 81 6.3 TABLE X: Memory utilization (MB) of running CPD
 ORTHRUS ✗ ✗ 121 58.3 DARPA- DARPA-
 ATLASv2
 EP- EP- EP-
 OpTC E5 APT29-1 APT29-2 Sandworm-1
 VELOX ✗ ✗ 78 26.0
 max 10830 18464 579 3625 3513 3484
 * From data processing to detection result.
 mean 4484 11720 247 892 895 573

instability [67]. Thus, we ran each fine-tuned learning-based
PIDS five times during our evaluation, and present the results detection system, requires at most less than half of memory
in Table VIII. Note that the run time and the mean memory resource than learning-based PIDS, while being more accurate
consumption in Table VIII are the average values of five runs and at least 39× faster than learning-based PIDS. Note that
for each learning-based PIDS. CPD interfaces with Elasticsearch, a scalable and near real-
 It is worth noting that learning-based PIDS perform attack time search engine, for rule matching, and performs provedetection at various granularity levels, unlike heuristics-based nance analytics only on system events related to persistence
PIDS [13]–[15], which inherently perform attack detection at setup and execution.
the finest granularity level, i.e, the node level. All five PIDS
in Table VIII perform detection at a finer granularity than B. Log Reduction via Expert-Guided Edges
previous learning-based PIDS like UNICORN [9], which clas- As discussed in Section IV, with system logs generated by
sifies an entire graph as benign or malicious. KAIROS takes most popular logging frameworks we observe missing links
system events as input, splits the entire time line into many due to the absence of IPC log events. However, by introducing
time windows, and classifies each time window as benign or expert-guided edges, we can cut the dependence on IPC events
malicious. In comparison, FLASH, MAGIC, ORTHRUS and while still capable of detecting relevant attack steps. During
VELOX can classify each node in the provenance graph as implementation of MITRE full emulation plans, we collect
benign or malicious. ALPC log events using the “NT Kernel Logger” [54] ETW
 KAIROS’s detection result on OpTC shows that it has trace session. Table IX shows the log reduction rate of CPD
correctly classified the time window, in which persistence by employing expert-guided edges instead of relying on ALPC
setup was conducted, as malicious, but wrongly classified logs on each dataset.
the time window, in which the corresponding persistence
execution happened, as benign. Similarly, FLASH and MAGIC
produce a set of malicious nodes, which include the nodes C. Response Time & Runtime Overhead
related to persistence setup, but not the nodes responsible We divide the response time of CPD into three parts.
for persistence execution. Surprisingly, the best-performing Figure 7 presents the cumulative distribution function of
models of ORTHRUS and VELOX have failed consistently response time of CPD in its three stages, respectively. The
across several runs to detect both malicious nodes related to stage 1 response time is measured per detection rule matching.
persistence setup and malicious nodes related to persistence Figure 7 (a) shows that it takes less than half a second to find
execution. alert events in an entire dataset for more than 95% of detection
 Though, it is important to note that ORTHRUS and VELOX rules. We measure the stage 2 response time as the time to
perform attack detection actually at a finer granularity than perform backward tracing on an indicative process with remote
FLASH and MAGIC. That is, FLASH and MAGIC consider connection(s) while matching against persistence execution
that nodes within the neighborhood of a known malicious node rules, persistence tables alignment and pseudo-edge creation.
also as malicious, regardless whether they are actually related As shown in Figure 7 (b), it takes less than 11 seconds to
to the attack. This overestimation contributes to less false create a pseudo-edge for over 90% of all indicative processes.
negatives in node classification, but inevitably leads to more The stage 3 response time is the time for performing backward
false positives. To avoid an overwhelming number of false and forward tracing on each alert produced from stage 2 while
positive nodes, and hence potentially increase the practicality checking for contextual indicators, and calculating the threat
of learning-based PIDS for security analysts, ORTHRUS and score. Figure 7 (c) shows that it takes less than 140 seconds
VELOX refrain from the overestimation shared by previous to inspect each alert for over 95% of all alerts in DARPAlearning-based PIDS. However, our evaluations show that OpTC dataset, and only less than 42 seconds for all alerts in
ORTHRUS and VELOX have weakened their performance other datasets. Memory overhead caused by running CPD on
in detecting true malicious nodes in exchange for less false each dataset is presented in Table X. The results are measured
positive nodes. by using mprof [68], which samples memory consumption
 As shown in Table VIII, CPD, as a dedicated persistence every 100 ms.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 14

 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3
 1.0 1.0 1.0
 0.8 0.8 0.8
 0.6 DARPA-OpTC 0.6 DARPA-OpTC 0.6
 DARPA-E5 DARPA-E5 DARPA-OpTC
 CDF

 0.4 ATLASv2 0.4 ATLASv2 0.4 DARPA-E5
 EP-APT29-1 EP-APT29-1 EP-APT29-1
 0.2 EP-APT29-2 0.2 EP-APT29-2 0.2 EP-APT29-2
 EP-Sandworm-1 EP-Sandworm-1 EP-Sandworm-1
 0.0 0.0 0.0
 0 2 4 6 0 5 10 15 0 200 400 600
 (a) (b) (c)
 Response Time [sec]
 Fig. 7: CDF of response time of CPD

 powershell.exe s CommandInvokation(Set-WmiInstance): ... That is, we believe this will have a limited impact on the
 before reboot practicality of CPD. Further, CPD is robust against evasion
 services.exe pseudo-edge after reboot
 techniques proposed in [28], [29], as they specifically target
 s
 svchost.exe s wmiprvse.exe
 anomaly-based PIDS that are based on path-based embedding
 s or graph-based embedding.
 c
 powershell.exe 202.6.172.98, 443
 B. Maintain and Extend CPD
Fig. 8: WMI persistence attack graph automatically generated by
 One limitation of CPD is that it relies on existing threat
CPD on DARPA OpTC dataset.
 intelligence knowledge base (MITRE ATT&CK), which is
 subject to expansion. That is, the detection rule base in stage
D. Reconstructed Persistence Attack Graphs 1 and the indicator list in stage 3 of CPD need to be updated,
 if new attack techniques or behaviors emerge in the wild.
 An example of reconstructed persistence attack graph from
 Nonetheless, manually updating the rule base in stage 1 and
the public dataset OpTC is showed in the Figure 8. This figure
 the indicator list in stage 3 takes only a few minutes. Besides,
depicts a true positive of T1546.003 (Event Triggered Execuwe stress that unlike signature-based IDS relying on easily
tion: WMI Event Subscription). Like Figure 3 and Figure 5
 modifiable hard-coded strings, CPD is based on characteristic
presented in Section IV, the upper part of the figure shows
 attack behaviors and mostly uses immutable indicative strings
the persistence setup graph, whereas the lower part shows
 in its stage 1. In other words, CPD depends on MITRE
the persistence execution graph. Both parts are connected via
 ATT&CK Matrix and high-level behavior rules that are subject
a pseudo-edge. This succinct attack graph exhibits that the
 to change in a much slower pace.
attacker created a WMI instance during persistence setup. During persistence execution, the Powershell code for connecting
 C. Adaptability and Generality of CPD
back to the attacker is executed through the Windows system
process wmiprvse.exe, when a specified event is triggered. CPD is based on MITRE ATT&CK Matrix, which is a
We stress that the preciseness of this succinct attack graph general framework valued by organizations across the globe.
containing the most critical information related to persistence As such, leading security vendors, on the one hand, continue
can help even inexperienced security analysts achieve a speedy contributing to this framework and, on the other hand, use
full attack investigation. this framework as a reference to develop detection rules/mechanisms. Besides, we use popular standard instrumentationfree logging frameworks for collecting system logs. Our CPD
 VII. L IMITATIONS & D ISCUSSION
 prototype interfaces with Elasticsearch, which is one of the
A. Evasion (Mimicry) Attacks most popular tools for event search and threat analysis among
 As described in Section III, CPD is not designed to de- organizations. CPD is tested on a typical Windows Domain
tect all persistence (sub-)techniques. Although CPD is not network (including both Windows and Linux machines as
tested to detect macOS-based persistence (sub-)techniques, being monitored clients) as required in the MITRE emulation
we believe the principle is transferable. However, detecting plans. CPD is deployed on a Linux machine functioning
cloud infrastructures-related persistence (sub-)techniques may as a server that processes system logs shipped from client
require a different strategy with cloud infrastructures-specific machines and performs attack detection. These characteristics,
conditions considered. Like all other provenance-based detec- combined with its robust foundation in the MITRE ATT&CK
tion systems, which assume the OS integrity, CPD is not able framework, establish CPD as a versatile and comprehensive
to detect pre-OS boot persistence attacks like Bootkit. How- solution, readily deployable in a wide range of enterprise
ever, none of these unaddressed persistence (sub-)techniques settings for effective persistence threat detection with minimal
fall into the most misused top 10 persistence (sub-)techniques. implementation effort.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 15

D. Completeness of CPD Heuristics-based PIDS, such as [13], [15], apply detection
 CPD’s methodology, while illustrated through specific ex- signatures on provenance graphs to transform them into highamples and MITRE techniques in the paper, embodies a level APT stage graphs. These systems calculate threat scores
comprehensive and generalizable framework for detecting per- based partly on the rarity of events and the correlation of APT
sistence threats. The case-by-case analysis serves not merely stages within the APT graphs. However, they face difficulties
as isolated instances but as representative samples of broader in linking fragmented APT attack stages due to not recognizing
persistence threat patterns, showcasing CPD’s practicality the dual nature of persistence attacks, often resulting in
across varied threat landscapes. This approach ensures that incomplete attack graph reconstructions. Consequently, they
while the examples may appear specific in the paper, the rank disconnected graphs so low that true attacks frequently
underlying principles – such as the segmentation into setup and remain uninvestigated. Moreover, these systems require benign
execution phases – are universally applicable. Such a strategy training data to assign rarity scores to events and filter false
underlines CPD’s completeness, affirming its capability to alarms. Additionally, RapSheet [15] is designed as an offline
address not just known scenarios but also to adapt and respond detection system, leading to significant delays in threat idento emerging threats. CPD’s effectiveness is further validated tification and investigation. Unlike these systems, CPD excels
through extensive evaluation on diverse datasets, showcasing in detecting persistence techniques by combining advanced
its superior attack detection rates and graph completeness com- detection rules with pseudo-edges and expert-guided edges.
pared to state-of-the-art methods. However, we acknowledge This unique approach enables CPD to effectively identify and
that CPD does not guarantee the detection of novel persistence investigate persistence threats in real-time, bridging the gaps
techniques. that other PIDS fail to address.
 Specialized Threat Detectors. Specialized threat detectors
 focusing on single stages of APT attacks are well-documented
E. Ablation Analysis in the literature. For instance, Ho et al. [69] introduced the
 The contribution of each of CPD’s modules and techniques Hopper system, and King and Huang [70] developed the
is explained through the paper theoretically and experimen- Euler system, both targeting lateral movement detection using
tally. That is, Table V shows the contribution of each of network logs. There are also specialized systems for detecting
CPD’s three stages’ components in detecting true attacks or phishing emails [71], data exfiltration [72], command and
reducing false positives, i.e., its detection rules in stage 1, control (C2) activities [73], and ransomware [74]. To the
pseudo-dependency edges in stage 2 and the false positive best of our knowledge, CPD is the first specialized detector
reduction algorithm in stage 3. However, we cannot simply that focuses on persistence threats using provenance analytics,
remove stage 1 or stage 2 to evaluate CPD’s performance; filling a critical gap in APT defense strategies.
it would break CPD, as each stage absolutely depends on the Log Reduction Schemes. Numerous log reduction systems
previous stage. Further, the contribution of expert-guided edge have been proposed recently, such as [75]–[79]. Unlike these
is experimentally evaluated and showed in Table IX. Expert- systems, CPD specifically aims to reduce the reliance on IPC
guided edges contribute to, on the one hand, log reduction, and logs to enhance persistence detection, a focus not typically
on the other hand, repair of some broken links in system logs, addressed by existing log reduction schemes. These systems,
as explained in section IV-B. For instance, in practice, CPD while complementary to CPD, can also be integrated to further
would not be able to accurately detect persistence technique decrease the size of audit logs.
T1543.002 (Systemd Service) without expert-guided edges.
 IX. C ONCLUSION
 VIII. R ELATED WORK In this paper, we introduce CPD, a novel system dedicated
 In Section I, we described the limitations of the existing to detecting persistence attacks. Distinctively, CPD leverages
threat detection system that CPD addresses, and complement provenance analytics, moving beyond the basic detection rules
the discussion on related work here: traditionally used. This approach not only significantly reduces
 false alarms but also notably enhances accuracy in identifying
Provenance-based IDS (PIDS). Learning-based PIDS use
 genuine persistence attacks. Our evaluations, conducted on
machine learning to model benign behavior from provenance
 both public datasets and datasets derived from rigorously exegraphs. They alert on deviations during runtime. Early models,
 cuted MITRE emulation plans, demonstrate CPD’s superiority
such as [9], [20], detected anomalies at the graph level,
 over state-of-the-art detection methods. Furthermore, CPD
complicating attack investigations. Newer models improve
 incurs low runtime overhead, making it a valuable addition
detection by focusing on time windows [17], edges [19], or
 to the suite of threat detectors in enterprise settings.
nodes [18], [26], [27]. Despite advancements, these systems
lack explanations for alerts, reducing interpretability. They
 R EFERENCES
also require extensive training data and slow down detection
 [1] The MITRE Corporation. “MITRE ATT&CK.” Accessed: Jan. 2023.
processes. Furthermore, they are vulnerable to concept drift [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org.
and evasion attacks [28], [29]. Recent systems like [17], [2] CrowdStrike, Inc., “Crowdstrike 2023 global threat report,” 2023.
[18], [27] have addressed some issues but still fail to fully [Online]. Available: https : / / www . crowdstrike . com / global - threat -
 report/.
understand persistence attacks or include necessary contextual [3] The MITRE Corporation. “Sandworm Team.” Accessed: June 2023.
checks. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0034/.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 16

 [4] French Cybersecurity Agency, “Sandworm intrusion set campaign [27] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, Magic:
 targeting Centreon systems,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www. Detecting advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation
 cert.ssi.gouv.fr/uploads/CERTFR-2021-CTI-005.pdf. learning, 2023. arXiv: 2310.09831 [cs.CR].
 [5] Pulsedive. “P.A.S. Webshell.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online]. Avail- [28] A. Goyal, X. Han, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “Sometimes, you aren’t
 able: https://pulsedive.com/threat/P.A.S.%5C%20Webshell. what you do: Mimicry attacks against provenance graph host intrusion
 [6] Microsoft Threat Intelligence. “Deep dive into the Solorigate second- detection systems,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023,
 stage activation.” Accessed: Oct. 2023. [Online]. Available: https : / / pp. 1–18.
 www.microsoft.com/en- us/security/blog/2021/01/20/deep- dive- into- [29] K. Mukherjee, J. Wiedemeier, T. Wang, J. Wei, F. Chen, M. Kim, M.
 the - solorigate - second - stage - activation - from - sunburst - to - teardrop - Kantarcioglu, and K. Jee, “Evading Provenance-Based ML detectors
 and-raindrop/. with adversarial system actions,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023,
 [7] P. Paganini. “SolarWinds hack: the mystery of one of the biggest pp. 1199–1216.
 cyberattacks ever.” Accessed: Oct. 2023. [Online]. Available: https : [30] E. Segal. “Alert Fatigue.” Accessed: Aug. 2023. [Online]. Available:
 //cybernews.com/security/solarwinds- hack- the- mystery- of- one- of- https://www.forbes.com/sites/edwardsegal/2021/11/08/alert- fatiguethe-biggest-cyberattacks-ever/. can - lead - to - missed - cyber - threats - and - staff - retentionrecruitment -
 [8] CrowdStrike Intelligence Team. “SUNSPOT: An Implant in the Build issues-study/?sh=4c96871035c9.
 Process.” Accessed: Oct. 2023. [Online]. Available: https : / / www . [31] C. Robinson, “In Cybersecurity Every Alert Matters,” 2021. [Online].
 crowdstrike.com/blog/sunspot-malware-technical-analysis/. Available: https://www.criticalstart.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/
 [9] X. Han, T. Pasqueir, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “UNICORN: US48277521 TLWP.pdf.
 Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in [32] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–18. qualitative study of soc analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in
[10] S. Ma, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “ProTracer: Towards practical provenance Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2783–2800.
 tracing by alternating between logging and tainting,” in Proc. Netw. [33] M. Wojtasiak, “The defenders’ dilemma,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
 Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 1–15. https://info.vectra.ai/state-of-threat-detection.
[11] M. N. Hossain, S. M. Milajerdi, J. Wang, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, [34] CRITICALSTART, “The Impact of Security Alert Overload,” 2019.
 R. Sekar, S. D. Stoller, and V. Venkatakrishnan, “SLEUTH: Real- [Online]. Available: https://www.criticalstart.com/wp-content/uploads/
 time attack scenario reconstruction from COTS audit data,” in Proc. 2021/02/CS Report-The-Impact-of-Security-Alert-Overload.pdf.
 USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 487–504. [35] The MITRE Corporation. “MITRE Matrix.” Accessed: Jan. 2023.
[12] W. U. Hassan, L. Mark, N. Aguse, A. Bates, and T. Moyer, “To- [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/matrices/enterprise/.
 wards scalable cluster auditing through grammatical inference over [36] The MITRE Corporation. “MITRE Adversary Emulation Library.”
 provenance graphs,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, Accessed: Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/centerpp. 1–15. for-threat-informed-defense/adversary emulation library.
[13] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. [37] The MITRE Corporation. “MITRE Attack Stix Data.” Accessed: April
 Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time apt detection through corre- 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/mitre-attack/attack-stixlation of suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. data.
 Privacy, 2019, pp. 1137–1152. [38] M. van Opstal and W. Arbaugh. “DARPA OpTC.” Accessed: Sept.
[14] W. U. Hassan, S. Guo, D. Li, Z. Chen, K. Jee, Z. Li, and A. Bates, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/FiveDirections/OpTC-
 “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with automated provenance data.
 triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2019, pp. 1–15. [39] J. Torrey. “DARPA Transparent Computing.” Accessed: Sept. 2023.
[15] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis [Online]. Available: https : / / github . com / darpa - i2o / Transparent -
 for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Computing.
 Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189. [40] A. Alsaheel, Y. Nan, S. Ma, L. Yu, G. Walkup, Z. B. Celik, X. Zhang,
[16] M. N. Hossain, S. Sheikhi, and R. Sekar, “Combating dependence and D. Xu, “Atlas: A sequence-based learning approach for attack
 explosion in forensic analysis using alternative tag propagation seman- investigation,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3005–3022.
 tics,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 1139–1155. [41] M. Russinovich and T. Garnier. “System Monitor.” Accessed: Feb.
[17] Z. Cheng, Q. Lv, J. Liang, Y. Wang, D. Sun, T. Pasquier, and X. 2023. [Online]. Available: https : / / learn . microsoft . com / en - us /
 Han, “KAIROS: Practical intrusion detection and investigation using sysinternals/downloads/sysmon.
 whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, [42] S. Grubb, The Linux audit daemon, Accessed: Feb. 2023. [Online].
 pp. 9–28. Available: https://linux.die.net/man/8/auditd.
[18] M. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive [43] Red Canary. “Atomic Red Team.” Accessed: Jan. 2023. [Online].
 approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation Available: https://atomicredteam.io/.
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 142–161. [44] Elastic NV. “EQL search.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online]. Available:
[19] J. Zeng, X. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Chen, Z. Liang, T.-S. Chua, and Z. L. https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/eql.
 Chua, “Shadewatcher: Recommendation-guided cyber threat analysis html.
 using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, [45] R. Uetz, M. Herzog, L. Hackländer, S. Schwarz, and M. Henze, You
 pp. 489–506. cannot escape me: Detecting evasions of SIEM rules in enterprise
[20] F. Yang, J. Xu, C. Xiong, Z. Li, and K. Zhang, “Prographer: An networks, 2023. arXiv: 2311.10197 [cs.CR].
 anomaly detection system based on provenance graph embedding,” in [46] A. Allievi, A. Ionescu, D. A. Solomon, K. Chase, and M. E. Russi-
 Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 4355–4372. novich, Windows Internals, Part 2, 7th Edition. Microsoft Press, 2022.
[21] Elastic. “Elastic Detection Rules.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online]. [47] The MITRE Corporation. “APT29.” Accessed: April 2023. [Online].
 Available: https://github.com/elastic/detection-rules. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0016/.
[22] Google Security Operations. “Chronicle Detection Rules.” Accessed: [48] The MITRE Corporation. “Wizard Spider.” Accessed: April 2023.
 Sept. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/chronicle/detection- [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0102/.
 rules. [49] S. White. “Windows Remote Management.” Accessed: March 2023.
[23] SigmaHQ. “Sigma.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online]. Available: https: [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/
 //github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma. winrm/portal.
[24] The MITRE Corporation. “MITRE T1547001.” Accessed: May 2023. [50] The MITRE Corporation. “Carbanak.” Accessed: April 2023. [Online].
 [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1547/001/. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0008/.
[25] Q. Wang, W. U. Hassan, D. Li, K. Jee, X. Yu, K. Zou, J. Rhee, Z. Chen, [51] Elastic NV. “Elasticsearch.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online]. Available:
 W. Cheng, C. A. Gunter, et al., “You are what you do: Hunting stealthy https://www.elastic.co/.
 malware via data provenance analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. [52] NetworkX developers. “NetworkX.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online].
 Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–17. Available: https://networkx.org/.
[26] S. Wang, Z. Wang, T. Zhou, H. Sun, X. Yin, D. Han, H. Zhang, X. Shi, [53] West Health Institute. “PyVis.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online]. Availand J. Yang, “Threatrace: Detecting and tracing host-based threats in able: https://pyvis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
 node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Transactions on [54] D. Marshall. “NT Kernel Logger.” Accessed: Feb. 2023. [Online].
 Information Forensics and Security, vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022. Available: https : / / learn . microsoft . com / en - us / windows - hardware /
 drivers/devtest/nt-kernel-logger-trace-session.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 17

[55] A. D. Keromytis. “DARPA Transparent Computing E3.” Accessed: for big-data causality analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 Sept. 2023. [Online]. Available: https : / / github . com / darpa - i2o / Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1324–1337.
 Transparent-Computing/blob/master/README-E3.md. [79] M. N. Hossain, J. Wang, R. Sekar, and S. D. Stoller, “Dependence-
[56] A. Riddle, K. Westfall, and A. Bates. “ATLASv2.” Accessed: Oct. Preserving data compaction for scalable forensic analysis,” in Proc.
 2023. [Online]. Available: https : / / bitbucket . org / sts - lab / atlasv2 / src / USENIX Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1723–1740.
 master/.
[57] VMware LLC. “Carbon Black Cloud.” Accessed: Oct. 2023. [Online].
 Available: https://www.vmware.com/products/carbon- black- cloud.
 html.
[58] The MITRE Corporation. “MITRE Engenuity.” Accessed: Jan. 2023.
 [Online]. Available: https://attackevals.mitre-engenuity.org/.
[59] The MITRE Corporation. “MITRE Engenuity Evaluation.” Accessed:
 Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://attackevals.mitre-engenuity.org/ Qi Liu received his PhD degree from Karlsruhe Inenterprise/wizard-spider-sandworm/. stitute of Technology, Germany, in 2025. His current
[60] Elastic. “A Elastic rule sample.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online]. research interests include system security, auditing
 Available: https://github.com/elastic/detection- rules/blob/main/rules/ & logging, data provenance analysis, and Advanced
 windows/persistence registry uncommon.toml. Persistence Threat detection and investigation.
[61] SigmaHQ. “A Sigma rule sample.” Accessed: Sept. 2023. [Online].
 Available: https : / / github. com / SigmaHQ / sigma / blob / master / rules /
 windows / file / file event / file event win creation unquoted service
 path.yml.
[62] Google Security Operations. “A Chronicle rule sample.” Accessed:
 Sept. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/chronicle/detectionrules / blob / main / mitre attack / T1053 005 windows creation of
 scheduled task.yaral.
[63] B. Jiang, T. Bilot, N. El Madhoun, K. Al Agha, A. Zouaoui, S.
 Iqbal, X. Han, and T. Pasquier, “ORTHRUS: Achieving High Quality
 of Attribution in Provenance-based Intrusion Detection Systems,” in Muhammad Shoaib received his BS degree in
 Security Symposium (USENIX Sec’25), USENIX, 2025. Broad Discipline of Computing from Hong Kong
[64] T. Bilot, B. Jiang, Z. Li, N. El Madhoun, K. Al Agha, A. Zouaoui, and Polytechnic University in 2022. He is currently a
 T. Pasquier, “Sometimes Simpler is Better: A Comprehensive Analysis PhD student in the DART Lab at University of
 of State-of-the-Art Provenance-Based Intrusion Detection Systems,” in Virginia. His current research interests include en-
 Security Symposium (USENIX Sec’25), USENIX, 2025. terprise systems security and vulnerability detection.
[65] T. Bilot, B. Jiang, and T. Pasquier, “Pidsmaker: Building and evaluating provenance-based intrusion detection systems,” arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2601.22983, 2026.
[66] wandb. “Weights & Biases.” Accessed: Feb. 2026. [Online]. Available:
 https://github.com/wandb/sweeps.
[67] C. Summers and M. J. Dinneen, “Nondeterminism and instability in
 neural network optimization,” in Proceedings of the 38th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, M. Meila and T. Zhang, Eds.,
 ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 139, PMLR, Mati Ur Rehman received his BS degree in Com-
 2021, pp. 9913–9922. puter Science from Lahore University of Manage-
[68] F. Pedregosa and P. Gervais. “Memory Profiler.” Accessed: Oct. 2023. ment Sciences in 2022. He is currently a graduate
 [Online]. Available: https://pypi.org/project/memory-profiler/. student at the University of Virginia, pursuing a
[69] G. Ho, M. Dhiman, D. Akhawe, V. Paxson, S. Savage, G. M. Voelker, PhD in Computer Science. His main research arand D. A. Wagner, “Hopper: Modeling and detecting lateral move- eas include machine learning and system security,
 ment,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3093–3110. with a focus on developing host intrusion detection
[70] I. J. King and H. H. Huang, “Euler: Detecting network lateral move- systems.
 ment via scalable temporal link prediction,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
 Syst. Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–16.
[71] G. Ho, A. Sharma, M. Javed, V. Paxson, and D. Wagner, “Detecting
 credential spearphishing in enterprise settings,” in Proc. USENIX Secur.
 Symp., 2017, pp. 469–485.
[72] Y. Ozery, A. Nadler, and A. Shabtai, “Information based heavy hitters
 for real-time dns data exfiltration detection,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Kaibin Bao received his PhD degree from Karlsruhe
 Syst. Secur. Symp., 2024, pp. 1–15. Institute of Technology, Germany, in 2021. He is
[73] C. Novo and R. Morla, “Flow-based detection and proxy-based evasion currently the Head of the working group Resilient
 of encrypted malware c2 traffic,” in Proc. ACM Workshop on Artificial Secure Automation of the Institute for Automation
 Intelligence and Security, 2020, pp. 83–91. and Applied Informatics at the Karlsruhe Institute
[74] A. Kharaz, S. Arshad, C. Mulliner, W. Robertson, and E. Kirda, “UN- of Technology. His current research topics include
 VEIL: A Large-Scale, automated approach to detecting ransomware,” cybersecurity for critical infrastructures and automain Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 757–772. tion systems using machine learning methods.
[75] M. A. Inam, Y. Chen, A. Goyal, J. Liu, J. Mink, N. Michael, S. Gaur,
 A. Bates, and W. U. Hassan, “Sok: History is a vast early warning
 system: Auditing the provenance of system intrusions,” in Proc. IEEE
 Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2023, pp. 2620–2638.
[76] Z. Xu, Z. Wu, Z. Li, K. Jee, J. Rhee, X. Xiao, F. Xu, H. Wang, and
 G. Jiang, “High fidelity data reduction for big data security dependency
 analyses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Veit Hagenmeyer received his PhD degree from
 2016, pp. 504–516. Universit´e Paris XI, Paris, France in 2002. He is
[77] H. Ding, S. Yan, J. Zhai, and S. Ma, “Elise: A storage efficient logging currently a Professor of Energy Informatics in the
 system powered by redundancy reduction and representation learning,” Faculty of Computer Science, and the Director of
 in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3023–3040. the Institute for Automation and Applied Informat-
[78] Y. Tang, D. Li, Z. Li, M. Zhang, K. Jee, X. Xiao, Z. Wu, J. Rhee, ics at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe,
 F. Xu, and Q. Li, “Nodemerge: Template based efficient data reduction Germany. His research interests include modeling,
 optimization and control of energy systems, machine
 learning-based forecasting in energy systems, and
 integrated cybersecurity of such systems.
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3689905

 18

 Wajih Ul Hassan received his PhD degree in Computer Science from the University of Illinois Urbana-
 Champaign in 2021. He is currently an Assistant
 Professor in the Department of Computer Science at
 the University of Virginia. His research focuses on
 securing complex networked systems by leveraging
 data provenance approaches and scalable system
 design. He has collaborated with NEC Labs and
 Symantec Research Labs to integrate his defensive
 techniques into commercial security products. He
 has received an NSF CAREER Award, a Symantec
Research Labs Graduate Fellowship, recognition as a Young Researcher at the
Heidelberg Laureate Forum, an RSA Security Scholarship, a Mavis Future
Faculty Fellowship, a Sohaib and Sara Abbasi Fellowship, and an ACM
SIGSOFT Distinguished Paper Award.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/