906 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Adapting Large Language Models for Encrypted
 Traffic Analysis Services: An Efficient Realization
 With Mixture of LoRA Experts
 Yi Liu , Xiang Zheng , Chengjun Cai , Member, IEEE, Xingliang Yuan , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Cong Wang , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—As encrypted traffic grows, traditional rule-based and I. INTRODUCTION
deep learning methods struggle with engineering costs and en-
 NCRYPTED network traffic analysis has become a critical
cryption complexity. While Large Language Models (LLMs) offer
promise for traffic analysis via pre-trained feature learning, they
face challenges in handling diverse tasks, retaining pre-training
 E component of network security and management due to the
 widespread adoption of encryption protocols such as HTTPS,
knowledge, and adapting efficiently. To address these issues, we which protect sensitive data during online communications [1].
propose a new traffic representation learning method and a new
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) method for multi-task
 Broadly, encrypted traffic analysis services aim to develop
encrypted traffic analysis services, called TrafficLLM. Traffi- advanced algorithms and tools (e.g., Cisco Encrypted Traffic
cLLM alleviates task heterogeneity by utilizing a universal multi- Analytics) that can accurately identify and classify encrypted
task prompt template and addresses pre-training knowledge forget- traffic without compromising user privacy [2]. This capability
ting by integrating Singular Value Decomposition based Low-Rank enables organizations to infer accessed applications or services
Adaptation (SVD-LoRA). To further reduce the cost of adapting to
multiple tasks, we combine the strengths of the Mixture of Experts
 within their networks, such as mobile app classification [3] or
(MoE) for multi-task learning with SVD-LoRA for PEFT, enabling service identification [4]. To this end, various traditional methefficient multi-task traffic analysis. Additionally, we introduce task- ods have been proposed, including port-based approaches [5],
aware gating functions to dynamically assign different weights payload or packet inspection-based techniques [6], and traffic
to experts, facilitating the efficient fusion of expert knowledge. statistics feature-based methods [7]. However, these approaches
Comprehensive experiments on 7 datasets across 5 downstream
tasks demonstrate that TrafficLLM delivers superior analysis
 rely heavily on rule engineering, requiring substantial manual
performance and resource efficiency compared to state-of-the-art effort to design and maintain classification rules [8]. Moreover,
models, including DeepSeek, NetGPT, ET-BERT, and TFE-GNN. the rapid evolution of encryption technologies has increasingly
Detailed analysis of throughput, memory usage, and latency further limited their adaptability to emerging encryption schemes [9].
highlights the practical advantages of TrafficLLM. As a result, there is an urgent need for more generalizable meth-
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, LLMs, LoRA, ods that can capture implicit and robust patterns in encrypted
mixture of experts. traffic, enabling accurate and universal traffic analysis [8], [9],
 [10].
 To eliminate the need for rule engineering, recent advances
 Received 9 July 2025; revised 15 January 2026; accepted 23 February 2026. in Deep Learning (DL) have been applied to encrypted traffic
Date of publication 9 March 2026; date of current version 10 April 2026. This
work was supported in part by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council under classification [11], [12], [13]. DL techniques, particularly neural
Grant CityU 11218322, Grant 11219524, Grant R6021-20F, Grant R1012-21, network architectures such as Convolutional Neural Networks
Grant RFS21221S04, Grant C2004-21G, Grant C1029-22G, Grant C6015-23G, (CNNs) [14] and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [12], are capaand Grant N_CityU139/21, and in part by the Innovation and Technology
Commission (ITC) under the Joint Mainland-Hong Kong Funding Scheme ble of capturing complex patterns in encrypted traffic, enabling
(MHKJFS) under Grant MHP/135/23. This work was also supported in part by more accurate and adaptive analysis. Early studies typically emthe InnoHK initiative, the Government of the HKSAR, in part by the Laboratory ployed a single DL model trained on large-scale labeled datasets
for AI-Powered Financial Technologies (AIFT), and in part by the Guangdong
and Hong Kong Universities “1+1+1” Joint Research Collaboration Scheme. to perform a specific task, such as protocol identification [15] or
(Corresponding author: Cong Wang.) application classification [16]. As network management tasks
 Yi Liu, Xiang Zheng, and Cong Wang are with the Department of become more complex, multi-task DL models that leverage
Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon Tong Hong
Kong (e-mail: yiliu247@cityu.edu.hk; xzheng235-c@my.cityu.edu.hk; cong- multi-task learning [17] have been proposed to simultaneously
wang@cityu.edu.hk). address multiple encrypted traffic analysis tasks [18]. Overall,
 Chengjun Cai is with the Computer Science and Information Technology DL-based approaches enable network management systems to
Center, City University of Hong Kong (Dongguan), Dongguan 523808, China
(e-mail: chengjun.cai@cityu-dg.edu.cn). better adapt to evolving encryption schemes and substantially
 Xingliang Yuan is with the School of Computing and Information Sys- outperform hand-crafted rule-based methods.
tems, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia (e-mail: Despite their promising potential, existing DL-based algoxingliang.yuan@unimelb.edu.au).
 Our data and code are available at https://github.com/yiliucs/TrafficLLM. rithms still suffer from two key limitations (see Fig. 1): 1) High
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2026.3671484 Model Engineering Costs. The focus of DL-based algorithms

 1939-1374 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIU et al.: ADAPTING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS SERVICES 907

 (e.g., HTTP, DNS, and SMTP) and heterogeneous subtasks, such as mobile application classification and behavior analysis [16]. The need to extract heterogeneous headers and payloads from multimodal network traffic therefore
 poses a major challenge. Moreover, advances in encryption
 technologies increasingly reduce the availability of shared
 extractable traffic features [8], further exacerbating the
 difficulty of accurate heterogeneous task alignment.
 r C2: Pre-training Knowledge Forgetting: In general, pretrained LLMs typically require fine-tuning [8], [26], [33],
 a training technique tailored to new tasks, before they
Fig. 1. Multi-task scenarios for DL-based traffic data analysis. Since the
above-mentioned heterogeneous tasks require different specific models, DL- can effectively address encrypted traffic analysis tasks.
based methods suffer from high model engineering costs and low cross-task However, existing methods appear to prioritize achieving
generalization capabilities. accurate analysis while overlooking the considerable pretraining knowledge (e.g., common sense and traffic pathas shifted from rule engineering to model engineering [19], terns) associated with LLMs [8]. In this context, prolonged
with success largely dependent on manually tailoring DL models fine-tuning may lead to the phenomenon of catastrophic
for specific encrypted traffic analysis tasks. This process is forgetting, where the model loses previously acquired
labor-intensive due to the complexity of DL models. Addi- knowledge [34].
tionally, the diversity of tasks prevents the use of a single DL r C3: High Adaptation Costs: Adaptation costs in multi-task
model across different tasks, necessitating specialized models traffic analysis include fine-tuning, training, and inference
for each task [8]. This “one model for one task” approach further overheads. Existing LLMs, such as ET-BERT [9], require
escalates engineering costs. 2) Low Generalization. Current DL task- and dataset-specific fine-tuning, resulting in high
models are typically tailored to specific data distributions or adaptation costs, while approaches like NetGPT [8] rely
environments, overlooking commonalities across diverse en- on large-scale model training, incurring substantial traincrypted traffic behaviors [9]. This leads to poorer performance ing overhead. Moreover, the use of extensive parameters
on unseen data distributions compared to rule-based algorithms. to enhance feature extraction often degrades inference
Although transfer learning can address these challenges, its efficiency, introducing latency in network management
effectiveness depends on access to large-scale annotated traffic systems [14]. The high memory demands of instruction
data. As a result, the generalization ability across different tasks processing further limit throughput, largely due to the
is weakened, hindering the widespread deployment of DL-based attention mechanism inherent to LLMs.
algorithms in practice. Design Goals: The aforementioned challenges call for a
 The advent of pre-training techniques [20] and Large Lan- holistic solution toward efficient LLMs for encrypted traffic
guage Models (LLMs; e.g., GPT-2 [21]) built upon the Trans- classification, which is characterized by the following essential
former architecture [22] offers promising solutions to the afore- design goals: (G1) Robust Performance: The designed LLMs
mentioned challenges. Through large-scale pre-training, LLMs can achieve precise task alignment for multiple and multi-source
exhibit strong capabilities in knowledge transfer and represen- encrypted traffic data. (G2) Strong Versatility: LLMs retain pretation learning, demonstrating superior performance in feature training knowledge while efficiently completing traffic analextraction, few-shot learning, and multi-task learning [23], [24], ysis tasks. (G3) Energy Efficient: Adaptation cost should be
[25], [26]. As a result, they have been widely adopted in nat- acceptable. In this paper, we formulate an input-agnostic service
ural language processing, computer vision, and increasingly for encrypted traffic analysis, leveraging a singular LLM (e.g.,
in cybersecurity research [27], [28], [29]. In particular, LLMs ChatGLM [37]) to accomplish diverse and refined encrypted
pre-trained for traffic analysis [30], [31], [32], such as Net- traffic data analysis tasks.
GPT [8] and ET-BERT [9], have achieved remarkable perfor- Our Contributions: To achieve the above design goals, we
mance. These models can accurately align traffic inputs with propose TrafficLLM, an LLM service specially formulated
corresponding analysis outputs for specific tasks, e.g., encrypted for encrypted traffic analysis, which can effectively adapt LLMs
malicious traffic classification [8]. This progress naturally raises to multiple encrypted traffic analysis tasks while maintaining
a key question: can we fully embrace the era of LLMs and efficient inference. TrafficLLM comprises three core comefficiently adapt them to solve diverse traffic analysis tasks in ponents: traffic representation learning, an efficient low-rank
a unified manner? adapter, and a mixture of expert networks. Specifically, we ex-
 Despite the considerable enhancement in representation tract the key five-tuple and statistical features from the encrypted
learning that LLMs bring to downstream tasks, e.g., mobile traffic data of heterogeneous multi-tasks, leveraging a designed
application classification, attack detection, and traffic behavior multi-task prompt template to normalize this data into text input
classification, several challenges persist due to the distinct re- for effective processing by TrafficLLM (G1). Building on
quirements and characteristics of network traffic and tasks. this, we design a singular value decomposition-aware low-rank
 r C1: Heterogeneous Task Alignment: On one hand, en- adapter (SVD-LoRA) to retain pretrain knowledge (G2) and
 crypted traffic classification involves diverse traffic types reduce adaptation costs (G3). Additionally, we develop a
908 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

mixture of LoRA expert networks to enable TrafficLLM learning capabilities, surpassing traditional methods [26], [35],
to adapt to multiple heterogeneous tasks seamlessly (G1). [36]. One notable line of research includes the utilization of
Extensive case studies on 7 large-scale encrypted traffic datasets, complex DL architectures, such as CNNs and GNNs [36] with
encompassing 5 distinct traffic classification tasks, demonstrate LSTM units, to discern complex patterns in unencrypted packet
that TrafficLLM attains state-of-the-art performance, with payloads. Studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of these
an average accuracy of 95.76%, while offering superior models in classifying encrypted traffic using features like flow
throughput-latency trade-offs, achieving low adaptation costs. statistics and packet headers [26], [35], [36]. Another approach
In addition, we deployed the quantized version (INT4) of involves using transformer-based models like BERT [9] or
TrafficLLM in an A100 environment and evaluated its its variants for time-series analysis. Researchers have adapted
performance on the open-world NUDT-Mobile [38] dataset. these models (e.g., NetGPT [8] and ET-BERT [9]) to work
The results demonstrate that TrafficLLM achieves an F1 with sequences of packet metadata to classify encrypted traffic
score of 0.9709, with a throughput of 800 samples per second accurately. These large-scale pre-trained models have shown
and a latency of 400 milliseconds per sample, highlighting its remarkable success in natural language processing tasks and
effectiveness and efficiency in real-world scenarios. have translated their effectiveness to network traffic analysis.
 The contributions of our work can be summarized as follows: Multitask Learning in LLMs: Multi-task Learning (MTL) in
 r We customize a multi-task LLM service for encrypted traf- LLMs enhances efficiency and performance by training on mulfic data analysis, named TrafficLLM, which efficiently tiple related tasks simultaneously, leveraging shared representaimplements multi-task traffic analysis while maintaining tions and knowledge transfer [8], [40]. Effective MTL requires
 low adaptation cost. strategic task weighting, curriculum learning, and meta-learning
 r We design an SVD-driven LoRA (SVD-LoRA) fine-tuning to balance contributions across tasks [41]. These approaches
 method to maximize the retention of pre-training knowl- incorporate task-specific layers or heads to address unique task
 edge and efficiently adapt to new tasks. requirements while benefiting from shared underlying strucr We develop a MoE-enabled SVD-LoRA multi-task learn- tures. For example, NetGPT [8] designs a unique task identifier
 ing method to efficiently handle traffic tasks by integrating to be incorporated into the pre-training and fine-tuning process to
 multiple expert knowledge. In addition, to further improve achieve efficient multi-task learning. Then, the MTL techniques
 the performance, we design a task-aware gating to config- in existing LLms fail to effectively approach the high adaptation
 ure different contribution weights for specific tasks. cost problem. We summarize the differences and connections
 r We implement our design and conduct extensive experi- between existing work and TrafficLLM in Table I.
 ments on 7 datasets related to 5 traffic downstream tasks
 to explore the performance, efficiency, generality, and
 parameter sensitivity of TrafficLLM. Compared with III. PROBLEM DEFINITION
 the baselines, our method can achieve 95.76% average LLMs for Encrypted Traffic Analysis Services: We give a
 accuracy on all tasks while maintaining low latency. formal problem definition of encrypted traffic analysis services
 in the context of LLMs. Given a large corpus of encrypted traffic
 data, the task involves utilizing LLMs to simultaneously address
 II. RELATED WORK
 multiple sub-tasks (e.g., malicious traffic detection and traffic
 Traffic Representation Learning: With the increasing volume behavior classification) related to encrypted traffic data analyof network traffic and the rapid evolution of encryption proto- sis. Let D = {D1 , D2 , . . . , Dm } represent the dataset, where
cols, there is an urgent need for general traffic analysis tools for each Di corresponds to a specific task scenario or domain of
encrypted traffic data [31]. In this context, traffic representation encrypted network traffic. Within each dataset Di , the network
learning [8], [9], [18] aims to extract input-agnostic general traffic is represented as sequences of tokens, where each token
traffic features to enable robust encrypted traffic analysis. Tra- represents a component of the traffic data (e.g., packet headers,
ditional machine learning methods [5], [6] typically extract payload). In contrast to prior work [9] that applies large models
statistical features at the packet or flow level, such as packet to single-task traffic analysis via fine-tuning, our goal is to
size distribution or arrival time intervals, to represent traffic for develop a multi-task LLM that jointly models multiple aspects
accurate analysis. However, these features often suffer from of encrypted traffic across diverse scenarios. This problem is
over-compression, leading to the loss of crucial information inherently cross-scenario, as effective analysis requires underinherent in the original datagram [11]. This can cause model standing encrypted communications under varying network endegradation or even failure, particularly in complex multi-task vironments, applications, and user behaviors.
traffic analysis scenarios. To address this issue, DL-based meth- The designed model needs to generalize well across diverse
ods [12], [13] aim to utilize raw traffic bytes to extract more scenarios and adapt to new or unseen encrypted traffic patterns.
comprehensive traffic representations. However, these methods Thus, let T = {T1 , T2 , . . . , Tk } represent the set of traffic analencounter problems such as ignoring IP headers, retaining non- ysis tasks, where each Tj corresponds to a specific aspect of
anonymous biases, overlooking byte balance, or using improper encrypted traffic analysis (e.g., encryption algorithm, protocol).
data splitting techniques [39]. The LLM is trained (or fine-tuned) to predict the labels for
 Large Models for Encrypted Traffic Data Analysis: With the all tasks Tj simultaneously, leveraging shared representations
rise of encryption protocols such as TLS/SSL, there is a grow- across tasks to improve generalization. The objective is to learn
ing trend to use large-scale DL models with powerful feature a multi-tasking LLM f : X → Y1 × Y2 × · · · × Yk , where X
LIU et al.: ADAPTING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS SERVICES 909

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON BETWEEN EXISTING WORK AND TrafficLLM. NOTE THAT SINCE DL-BASED METHODS DO NOT INVOLVE FINE-TUNING, THEY ARE NOT
 APPLICABLE IN TERMS OF FINE-TUNING METHODS AND RETAINING PRE-TRAINING KNOWLEDGE.

represents the input sequence of tokens and Yj represents the
set of possible labels for task Tj . Mathematically, the above
process can be represented as:
 m  k  
 (T )
 θ∗ = arg min L f (Di ; θ)Tj , yi j , (1)
 θ
 i=1 j=1
 (T )
where L is the loss function (e.g., cross entropy loss), and yi j
denotes the ground truth labels for task Tj in dataset Di .
 Example: In practice, to accurately perform encrypted traffic Fig. 2. Workflow of our TrafficLLM service.
analysis tasks, we format the input features as prompts for the
LLMs, constructing instruction-answer pairs for fine-tuning, limitations highlight the need for specialized approaches and ima process known as instruction tuning. Specifically, the input provements in LLM architectures to enhance their effectiveness
instruction I includes extracted traffic features, task information, in traffic analysis tasks.
and task labels. The LLMs then make predictions based on
these instructions and output labels (i.e., the answer A). We
subsequently calculate evaluation metrics such as precision and IV. OUR APPROACH
recall for specific tasks based on the LLMs’ outputs. Below, we In this section, we present TrafficLLM, a general LLM
provide an example to demonstrate this concept. designed to adapt to a range of encrypted traffic tasks, such
 as malicious traffic detection, attack detection, and application classification, as shown in Fig. 2. TrafficLLM is built
 around three key components: traffic representation, efficient
 fine-tuning, and multi-task learning. In traffic representation,
 we aim to build a general multi-task prompt template to encode
 heterogeneous input data from traffic analysis tasks into token
 embeddings for efficient processing by LLMs. For efficient
 fine-tuning, we design an SVD-LoRA for TrafficLLM to
 preserve pre-training knowledge and reduce adaptation costs. In
 multi-task learning, we introduce the MoE network and design
 a task-aware gating function that assigns different weights to
 Existing LLMs and Their Limitations: LLMs like NetGPT [8] various experts, optimizing multi-task inference performance.
exhibit notable limitations in handling heterogeneous traffic
tasks, multi-task processing, and pre-training knowledge forgetting. When dealing with heterogeneous traffic, the above A. Traffic Representation
methods often struggle to effectively parse and analyze dif- Data Preprocessing: Traffic data preprocessing involves
ferent traffic data simultaneously because they have difficulty transforming raw network traffic packets into structured data,
in understanding the feature overlaps and conflicts between represented as five-tuples, to summarize the characteristics of
heterogeneous tasks [8]. This leads to difficulties in accurately traffic flows [8]. Specifically, let P represent the pcap file,
capturing the nuances of different traffic patterns. In multi-task pi represent the i-th packet in P, and fj represent the j-th
processing, LLMs face challenges in balancing and efficiently flow. Each packet pi in P is defined by its five-tuple: pi =
managing multiple concurrent tasks, which can result in sub- (dst_IPi , src_IPi , dst_porti , src_porti , protocoli ), where dst_IP
optimal performance and potential conflicts between tasks [42]. is the destination IP address, src_IP is the source IP address,
Furthermore, pre-training knowledge forgetting poses a signif- dst_port is the destination port number, src_port is the source
icant issue, as LLMs can lose previously acquired knowledge port number, and protocol indicates the application layer produring fine-tuning on new tasks [23], diminishing their ability to tocol type. We define a flow fj as a set of packets sharing
generalize and apply past learnings to new, related tasks. These the same five-tuple: fj = {pi ∈ P | (dst_IPi , src_IPi , dst_porti ,
910 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE II
 CLASS-SPECIFIC FIELDS RESAMPLING STRATEGY

 Fig. 3. Overview of data augmentation strategies.

 
  fj ∼ PYunder (fj ), for fj to be modified;
 HTCP (pi ) =
 fj = HTCP (pi )[fj ], otherwise,
 (4)
 where ∼ denotes sampling from the probability distribution.
 This approach ensures that the generated samples preserve the
 distinctive statistical patterns that characterize each traffic class,
src_porti , protocoli ) = (dst_IPj , src_IPj , dst_portj , src_portj , rather than introducing artificial patterns that models might
protocolj )}. To ensure fairness during training, we anonymize exploit.
the address information (i.e., MAC address and IP address) Construction and Validation of Synthetic Samples: After rein each packet. The result is a set of anonymized data flows sampling header values, we construct new packets pi using
{f1 , f2 , . . . , fm }, each represented by packets sharing the same the original packet’s payload and the modified headers: pi =
  
five-tuple, ready for further feature extraction. Packet(HIP (pi ), HTCP (pi ), Payload(pi )). Each synthetic sam-
 Class-Specific Data Augmentation: In practical scenarios, ple undergoes rigorous validation: (a) Protocol Conformance
traffic datasets are often unbalanced, with some task labels Check: Using Scapy to ensure all modified headers comply
having significantly fewer data instances compared to others. For with IP/TCP standards; (b) Distributional Similarity Validation:
instance, in the USTC-TFC [43] dataset used for malicious traf- We perform Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests between original and
fic classification, labels like “Virut” and “Nsis-ay” have substan- augmented samples to confirm statistical similarity (all p-values
tially fewer instances compared to benign traffic classes. This > 0.05). Fig. 9 demonstrates the distribution similarity for the
imbalance can hinder LLMs from accurately learning features, Virut class before and after augmentation.
particularly for minority classes. To handle label imbalance Handling Class Imbalance: The augmentation process is
while preserving the statistical signatures that define each traffic repeated iteratively for each underrepresented class Yunder until
class, we implement a class-specific augmentation process that its sample count is balanced with the median class size. Specifigenerates new traffic samples by resampling header values from cally, for each y ∈ Yunder , we generate N  = maxy ∈Y Ny − Ny
realistic, class-specific distributions rather than using global synthetic packets using the above procedure. The final dataset
random ranges. achieves approximate class balance without sacrificing diversity.
 Class-Specific Distribution Modeling: Let Y be the set of all The above process can be summarized in Fig. 3.
labels in the dataset, and NY be the number of data points for Feature Construction: In this process, we construct threelabel Y . We identify labels Yunder ⊆ Y with significantly fewer dimensional features to improve traffic classification accuracy
data points: NYunder  max(NY ). For each underrepresented by capturing comprehensive flow characteristics. For a given
class Yunder , we model the empirical distribution of key header flow fj , the first dimension consists of flow-level information
fields from samples belonging to that specific class. Unlike directly extracted from packets, including dst_portj , src_portj ,
our previous approach that used global randomization ranges, protocolj , and the application-layer protocol, which provide
we now extract per-class distributions for fields such as TTL, essential classification cues. The second dimension contains
window size, and inter-arrival times. Specifically, for each class statistical packet information, obtained by traversing the flow
c, we compute: to compute the total number of packets Nj , total bytes Bj , and
 flow duration dj (i.e., the time difference between the last and
 count of field f values in class c
 Pc (f ) = , (2) first packets), offering a global view of flow behavior. The third
 total samples in class c
 dimension captures fine-grained information from the first n
where Pc (f ) represents the probability distribution of field f packets (typically 3–5), including packet length Lj,k , direction
for class c. These distributions are used to guide the resampling Dirj,k , and content Cj,k , which reflect early traffic behavior
process, ensuring augmented samples maintain the statistical patterns. Together, these three dimensions, i.e., flow-level, stacharacteristics that define each traffic class. tistical, and initial packet features, form a robust and holistic
 Header Field Modification with Class Preservation: For each representation of each flow, significantly enhancing traffic claspacket pi belonging to an underrepresented label Yunder , we ex- sification performance.
tract its IP and TCP headers. Rather than applying random masks Multi-task Prompt Template Design: Through the feature
with global ranges as in our previous approach, we now resample construction process described above, we extract key features
header values from the class-specific distributions PYunder (f ), as relevant to encrypted traffic classification. Traditionally, these
shown in Table II. The modified headers are defined as: features are transformed into token-like embeddings by pre-
  trained models for further processing by LLMs, such as fine-
  fj ∼ PYunder (fj ), for fj to be modified;
 HIP (pi ) = (3) tuning [8], [9], [26]. However, such approaches incur substantial
 fj = HIP (pi )[fj ], otherwise. pre-training and adaptation overhead and struggle to efficiently
LIU et al.: ADAPTING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS SERVICES 911

manage heterogeneous traffic representations. To address this,
we adopt instruction fine-tuning (detailed in the next section)
and design a multi-task prompt template incorporating task
descriptions, enabling the model to better understand and execute diverse tasks. This allows LLMs to focus less on raw
traffic features and more on the relationship between task descriptions and features. The Prompt Template (PT) consists
of four elements: task description T , input features F, output
format Y, and context information I, formally represented as
P T = {T , F, Y, I}. An example is provided below to illustrate
this concept. Fig. 4. The difference between traffic domain token generation and native
 token generation methods.

 Discussion: Instruction fine-tuning enhances model performance and mitigates hallucination issues by guiding the model
 with task-specific instructions [45]. This approach improves
 adaptability to new tasks, increases efficiency by leveraging
 pre-trained knowledge, and ensures better alignment with user
 intent, which can avoid hallucinations in LLMs. Furthermore, it
 typically requires less additional data, enhances interpretability,
 and supports flexible deployment across a wide range of applications. By refining the model’s behavior for specific tasks,
 instruction fine-tuning promotes stronger generalization and
 greater effectiveness in diverse real-world scenarios.

 B. SVD-aware LoRA for LLMs
 To address C2, LoRA techniques are used to reduce adaptation
 costs and memory usage. However, they randomly initialize two
 low-rank matrices and optimize parameters within an unguided
 subspace [40], which may overwrite important pre-trained features and degrade performance [46]. For example, in encrypted
 traffic fine-tuning, LoRA-adapted LLMs may lose traffic-related
 knowledge acquired during pre-training. To address this, we aim
 to develop a fine-tuning method that better preserves pre-trained
 features. Driven by the idea of feature matrix decomposition,
 Traffic-Domain Tokenization: To bridge the modality gap we aim to design a singular value decomposition (SVD)-aware
between natural language and heterogeneous traffic data, Traf- LoRA (SVD-LoRA) method to efficiently fine-tune LLMs while
ficLLM introduces a specialized traffic domain tokenizer to maximally preserving pre-trained features. We provide the necprocess the diverse inputs required for traffic detection and essary background knowledge on SVD in the first place:
generation tasks, thereby making them compatible with LLMs. Definition 1 (Singular Value Decomposition): SVD provides
This mechanism effectively extends the native token generation a method to decompose a matrix into three other matrices,
capabilities of LLMs by training a dedicated tokenizer on a capturing the essential properties of the original matrix. Thus,
large-scale traffic domain corpus. To further mitigate the impact the SVD of a real matrix A ∈ Rm×n is expressed as:
of the modality gap and enable LLMs to understand traffic data,
TrafficLLM incorporates a tailored feature extractor designed A = UΣV , (5)
to extract task-specific traffic features. These extracted features,
as described in the earlier feature construction section, are well- where U ∈ Rm×m is an orthogonal matrix, whose columns are
suited for use within the TrafficLLM service. After extracting the left singular vectors, Σ ∈ Rm×n is a diagonal matrix with
fine-tuning data, we train a domain-specific tokenizer using the non-negative real numbers on the diagonal (singular values) and
Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) [44] algorithm on the large-scale zeros elsewhere, and V ∈ Rn×n is an orthogonal matrix, whose
traffic dataset. Since native LLMs are generally unfamiliar with columns are the right singular vectors. The singular values σi
traffic data, this tokenizer effectively serves as an extension to on the diagonal of Σ follow the ordering: σ1 ≥ σ2 ≥ · · · ≥
the original tokenizer, enabling the model to better interpret and σmin(m,n) ≥ 0.
generate traffic-related content. The following Fig. 4 illustrates According to the above definition, given a parameter matrix
the differences between generation results with and without the W ∈ Rm×n of a pre-trained model fw , it can be decomposed in
use of the traffic domain tokenizer. SVD form as follows: W = U ΣV . Let U = [u1 , u2 , . . . , um ]
912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

and V = [v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ], thus, the SVD of W can be reformu- Tj , the forward pass of the linear layer with the SVD-LoRA
lated as follows: layer is expressed as:
 m
 hj = Wm xj + ΔWfj xj
 W = U ΣV = σi ui v i , (6)
 i=1 
 N

where ui and vi are the ith column of U and V , respectively. = Wm x j + ωji · Ei (xj )
 SVD-LoRA: To effectively preserve the main features of the i=1

pre-trained model while simultaneously acquiring new features 
 N
from the fine-tuning dataset, our key insight suggests decompos- = Wm x j + ωji · Bi Ai xj (10)
ing the linear weight matrix, denoted as W of the pre-trained i=1
model, into two distinct components: a Main Task Matrix W m where hj and xj denote the input and output of intermediate
and a Fine-Tuning Matrix W f . The former component is tasked LLM layers for samples from task Tj . Each expert Ei is comr r
with maintaining the pre-training features, whereas the latter as- prised of matrices Bi ∈ Rm× N and Ai ∈ R N ×n . Note that Bi
sumes responsibility for learning the unique features associated and Ai are split by the low-rank matrices Bf and Bf according
with the new task at hand. This conceptual decomposition can to the number of experts. The hyper-parameter N represents
be mathematically articulated as follows: the number of experts in MoE-enabled SVD-LoRA, with each
 
 m−r m expert’s matrices A and B having a rank of Nr . To ensure that
 W = Wm + Wf = σi ui v i + σi ui vi , (7) distinct parameters are learned for different tasks, we need to
 i=1 i=m−r+1 dynamically adjust the contribution weights ωji of different
where r is the hyperparameter, i.e., the number of minor singu- experts for a specific task Tj , where the weights are determined
lar values in the W m matrix. Let U m = [u1 , u2 , . . . , um−r ], by our proposed gating function module (see below for details).
U f = [um−r+1 , um−r+2 , . . . , um ], V m = [v1 , v2 , . . . , vm−r ], Task-aware Gate Function Design: To adapt the MoE-enabled
and V f = [vm−r+1 , vm−r+2 , . . . , vm ], according to (5), we SVD-LoRA to specific tasks, it is necessary to assign taskrewrite (7) as follows: specific contribution weights to the experts. We introduce two
 W = U m Σ m V m + U f Σf V f = W m + W f . (8) task-aware gating functions: a dense gating function, which
 integrates contributions from all experts, and a sparse gating
We then rewrite W f following the idea of the LoRA method:
      function, which selectively integrates the top κ experts with the
 W f = U f Σf Σ f V f = B f Af . (9) largest contributions [47], [48], [49]. To implement these functions, we use the task representation and a transformation matrix
Thus, we have: W = W m + B f Af . Therefore, we can freeze
 as input. By pairing the task embedding with the transformation
the main task matrix W m to retain important pre-trained feamatrix, a linear layer maps this combination to the experts’
tures and learn a trainable low-rank fine-tuning matrix B f Af
 contribution weights. Specifically, let T ∈ R|T |×dT denote the
to learn the features of the new task, thereby achieving efficient
 task embedding matrix (dT is the embedding dimension), and
LLMs fine-tuning.
 WT ∈ RN ×dT denote the transformation matrix. Based on this
 Discussion: Unlike vanilla LoRA, SVD-LoRA constructs a
 setup, we define the two gating functions as follows.
learnable subspace to capture new task knowledge instead of ran-
 For dense gating functions, we extract the j-th column of
domly initializing low-rank matrices. This reduces interference
 the task representation matrix T as the representation vector
between fine-tuning updates and pre-trained knowledge. The adof the task, symbolized by tj ∈ RdT . Next, we combine the
vantages of SVD-LoRA are twofold: 1) Subspace Fine-Tuning:
 transformation matrix WT with the task representation tj to
it retains pre-trained knowledge while efficiently learning new
 form zj = WT tj . To determine the contribution weights for
information, balancing stability and adaptability; 2) Parameter
 task Tj , we apply a linear transformation. This computation is
Efficiency: trainable parameters are sparse and comparable in
 captured by the following equations:
number to LoRA, enabling efficient fine-tuning and compatibilexp(zj )
ity with existing hardware (e.g., GPUs). ω j = Softmax(z) = N , (11)
 j=1 exp(zj )
C. MoE Enabled SVD-LoRA for Multi-Task Learning where the softmax operation is aim to obtain the normalized
 MoE Enabled SVD-LoRA: This section presents a MoE- contribution weights.
enabled SVD-LoRA robust multi-task learning module for Similar to the dense approach, the contribution of each expert
TrafficLLM, designed to reduce interference between en- is tailored to specific tasks, but only a subset of experts concrypted traffic classification tasks and enable efficient multi-task tributes to the final output. We use the same task embedding
learning. Unlike LoRA, which fine-tunes all parameters for each matrix T ∈ R|T |×dT and follow a similar process to extract the
task, MoE-enabled SVD-LoRA partitions the parameter set and task representation tj ∈ RdT for task Tj . Next, we select the
employs a MoE network to select task-specific combinations. top κ experts based on the computed gating weights. The sparse
This approach captures shared knowledge while integrating gating function can be formally defined as follows:
different experts for specific tasks. Let the group of experts be ω j = Softmax(Top(zj , κ)), (12)
denoted as {Ei }N i=1 , responsible for learning the fine-tuning ma- 
trix ΔWf . Each expert in the SVD-LoRA layer is implemented xi if xi in top κ elements of x.
 Top(x, κ) = (13)
as two decomposed low-rank matrices. For samples from task 0 otherwise.
LIU et al.: ADAPTING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS SERVICES 913

 Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of the TrafficLLM D. Cost Analysis
 Data Preparation We analyze the cost of the proposed MoE-enabled SVD-
 1: Perform data preprocessing and partition using LoRA in terms of trainable parameters and model complexity,
 five-tuples. and compare it with classic LoRA.
 2: Perform data augmentation via random masking. Number of Trainable Parameters: LoRA introduces two
 3: Extracting traffic representations from network flow low-rank matrices B ∈ Rm×r and A ∈ Rr×n , where r 
 data. min(m, n), yielding ParametersLoRA = r · (m + n). In MoE-
 Fine-tuning Process enabled SVD-LoRA, each of the N experts Ei contains Bi ∈
 r r
 4: Perform SVD to obtain Wm and Wf . Rm× N and Ai ∈ R N ×n , giving ParametersMoE-SVD-LoRA =
 5: Freeze the matrix Wm to retain knowledge. N · (m · Nr + Nr · n) = r · (m + n). Thus, MoE-enabled SVD-
 6: Split the fine-tuning matrix Wf via # of experts. LoRA has the same number of trainable parameters as LoRA
 7: for a batch of samples B in D do while supporting superior multi-task performance.
 8: Perform forward process for TrafficLLM Model Complexity: For LoRA, the complexity of updating the
 accompanied with MoE enabled SVD-LoRA via (10). low-rank matrices is ComplexityLoRA = O(m · r · n). Similarly,
 9: Perform the optimization steps via calculation (1). the forward and backward passes through all experts in MoE-
 10: Perform gradient descent to optimize the MoE SVD-LoRA yield the same complexity. SVD decomposition
 parameter matrices Ai and Bi and the gating-related adds ComplexitySVD = O(min(mn2 , m2 n)). Combining these,
 task representation matrices E and WT . the total complexity is
 11: end for
 ComplexityMoE-SVD-LoRA = O(m · r · n + min(mn2 , m2 n)).
 Inference Process
 (15)
 10: for Tj in T do
 Since the gating function is integrated into the linear layer,
 11: Perform expert contribution weight calculation via
 it introduces no additional parameters or forward/backward
 (11)–(13).
 cost. Although SVD increases complexity compared to LoRA,
 12: Perform fine-tuned parameter calculation via (14) for
 MoE-SVD-LoRA preserves pre-trained knowledge and resolves
 each task.
 conflicts in multi-task learning, offering enhanced flexibility
 13: end for
 and efficiency. Therefore, a trade-off exists between multi-task
 14: Perform multi-task inference via identifying task
 performance, knowledge preservation, and model complexity to
 identifiers.
 enable LLMs to adapt effectively to diverse applications.

 V. EXPERIMENTS
 While the traditional design of MoE directly feeds the input A. Experiment Setup
vector x into the gate function, our approach is the same as the To evaluate the performance of our TrafficLLM system,
current mainstream approach [47], [48], [49], that is, we only we conduct extensive experiments on 7 benchmarking datasets.
input the task identity into the gate function. Subsequently, in All experiments are developed using Python 3.9 and PyTorch
order not to introduce additional overhead, we aim to generate 1.12 and evaluated on a server with an NVIDIA A100 GPU.
a unique set of model parameters for each task through linear Datasets and Downstream Tasks: To comprehensively evalutransformation. Finally, when task Tj performs inference, we ate the performance and learning capabilities of TrafficLLM,
combine the knowledge of different experts and use fine-tuned we consider the following datasets and downstream tasks:
parameters. The process can be formally defined as follows: Task 1: General Encrypted Application Classification: This
 task targets classifying application traffic under standard encryption protocols. We use Cross-Platform (iOS) [50] and Cross-
 
 N
 Platform (Android) [50] datasets, with 196 and 215 applications
 Wj = Wm + ΔWf = Wm + ωji · Bi Ai . (14)
 i=1
 respectively, sourced from the top 100 apps in the US, China,
 and India. Task 2: Encrypted Malware Classification: This task
 aims to differentiate between malware and benign applications in
 Discussion: We highlight the benefits of the task-aware gating encrypted traffic. We utilize the USTC-TFC dataset [43], which
design. Compared to input representation-aware gating, our includes 10 categories of benign and malicious traffic.
method does not require configuring expert weights for each Task 3: Encrypted Traffic Classification on VPN: This task
input sample or introducing additional parameters for nonlinear focuses on classifying encrypted traffic that utilizes VPNs. We
transformations. Expert weights are computed solely from the employ the ISCX-VPN dataset [51], comprising traffic from 6
task representation matrix and used with (14) to obtain fine- communication applications captured by the Canadian Institute
tuned parameters for reasoning. Consequently, task-aware gat- for Cybersecurity in both VPN and non-VPN modes. For evaluing achieves task-specific configuration without extra overhead, ating TrafficLLM, we further divide this dataset into ISCXavoiding high adaptation costs and latency. Implementation VPN-Service with 12 service categories and ISCX-VPN-App
details of TrafficLLM are provided in Algorithm 1. with 17 application categories.
914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Task 4: Encrypted Application Classification on Tor: This (L)) as our baselines. In addition, we only fine-tune datasets
task aims to classify encrypted traffic using The Onion Router related to a single traffic task.
(Tor) for enhanced privacy. The ISCX-Tor dataset [52], which For all LLMs, including ET-BERT, NetGPT, ChatGLM variincludes 16 applications, is used for this task. Task 5: Encrypted ants, and DeepSeek, we standardize the input format using
Application Classification on TLS 1.3: This task focuses on clas- identical multi-task prompt templates that convert raw traffic
sifying encrypted traffic using the TLS 1.3 protocol. The dataset, features into natural language instructions. Each task is identi-
CSTNET-TLS 1.3 [9], comprises 120 applications collected by fied by a specific prefix in the prompt (e.g., “Task: Classify VPN
CSTNET from March to July 2021, making it the first known Service; Input: {flow features}”), ensuring all models receive
TLS 1.3 dataset. semantically equivalent inputs regardless of their architecture.
 To ensure fair comparison and realistic evaluation of multi- Hyperparameters: Considering practical network deploytask learning capabilities, we implement a strict data partitioning ment, we compare the parameter size, memory usage, and traffic
protocol that prevents leakage between training and testing en- classification performance of different LLMs, summarized in
vironments. To this end, we partition datasets such that training Table III. Based on these results, we select the open-source
and testing sets contain traffic from entirely different devices, ChatGLM2-6B [37] as our base LLM. Due to computational
capture sessions, and time windows, specifically, for VPN and and resource constraints, we do not explore the impact of the
Tor datasets we use non-overlapping time periods, while for proposed fine-tuning method on other base LLMs in this paper.
Cross-Platform and malware datasets we ensure no device or For LoRA fine-tuning, key hyperparameters are set as follows:
capture context appears in both sets. We adopt a 7:3 ratio of learning rate 0.0001, maximum input tokens 1024, maximum
training and testing for all datasets, following previous work [8], output tokens 120, batch size 64, and 5000 training steps. For
[11], [36]. This protocol better reflects real-world deployment SVD, the number of singular values r is set to 16, and for
scenarios where models must generalize to unseen network MoE, the number of dense experts is 8 and sparse experts 2,
environments. unless otherwise specified. All hyperparameters are determined
 Baselines: In this paper, we compare the following baselines: through repeated fine-tuning and comparison.
 FS-Net [35]: FS-Net combines feature selection and deep Evalution Metrics: We assess and compare the performance of
learning for classifying encrypted network traffic. It focuses on NetMamba using four typical metrics: Accuracy (AC), Precision
extracting relevant features to enhance accuracy and robustness (PR), Recall (RC), and weighted F1 Score (F1).
against encryption.
 AppScanner [3]: AppScanner uses machine learning to identify mobile apps based on their network traffic patterns, even B. Numerical Results
when the traffic is encrypted, aiding in monitoring and managing Next, we conduct experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of
app usage. the designed TrafficLLM service above in various situations.
 FlowPic [12]: FlowPic converts network flows into images, Our evaluation primarily aims to answer the following Research
leveraging convolutional neural networks to classify encrypted Questions (RQ):
traffic by extracting spatial patterns from the visual data. r [RQ1] How does the overall performance of Traffi-
 PERT [33]: PERT focuses on packet-level analysis of en- cLLM compare to other large models and different finecrypted traffic using deep learning, capturing fine-grained pat- tuning strategies?
terns for improved classification accuracy where traditional r [RQ2] How does TrafficLLM compare to other large
methods may fail. models in terms of the number of trainable parameters,
 TFE-GNN [36]: TFE-GNN uses graph neural networks to throughput, memory usage, and latency?
represent and classify network traffic as graphs, effectively r [RQ3] How do key hyperparameters affect the performance
capturing dependencies and patterns in encrypted traffic. of TrafficLLM?
 ET-BERT [9]: ET-BERT adapts the BERT model for r [RQ4] How does TrafficLLM perform on unseen traffic
encrypted traffic classification, leveraging transformers to datasets and general knowledge datasets compared with
understand long-range dependencies and improve performance other large models?
in encrypted environments. r [RQ5] How do the components in TrafficLLM affect its
 NetGPT [8]: NetGPT applies the GPT model to network performance?
traffic classification, using transformer architecture to analyze r [RQ6] How does TrafficLLM perform when actually
patterns and predict future traffic, handling both unencrypted deployed in an open environment?
and encrypted data. Overall Performance (RQ1): In this experiment, we con-
 DeepSeek [53]: DeepSeek is one of the most advanced LLMs, ducted comparative experiments across 7 datasets and 5 traffic
which has achieved excellent performance on various tasks. We analysis tasks. Tables V and VI summarize the results, revealing
use LoRA method to fine-tune it. that TrafficLLM consistently outperforms competing meth-
 ChatGLM2-6B [37]: ChatGLM2-6B is an LLM with 6 billion ods in both single and multi-task settings. On Cross-Platform
parameters, designed for natural language tasks but adaptable for datasets, TrafficLLM (D) achieves 0.9657 and 0.9701 acanalyzing sequential data in network traffic analysis. Note that curacy on iOS and Android respectively, surpassing the strongest
we use ChatGLM2-6B with full parameter fine-tuning (denoted baseline (ET-BERT) by 1.32 and 0.48 percentage points. For
as ChatGLM (F)) and LoRA fine-tuning (denoted as ChatGLM VPN traffic analysis, our method attains 0.9741 accuracy on
LIU et al.: ADAPTING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS SERVICES 915

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON OF LLMS IN TERMS OF PARAMETER SIZE, MEMORY USAGE, AND PERFORMANCE ON TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION TASKS

 TABLE IV MoE-SVD-LoRA against baselines to demonstrate how dif-
 THE STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF THE DATASETS
 ferent fine-tuning methods affected parameter efficiency. The
 experimental results reported in Fig. 5 show that TrafficLLM
 maintains better inference efficiency than ET-BERT and Net-
 GPT, though its memory usage and throughput performance
 remain inferior to these baselines. For instance, the throughput
 of TrafficLLM is approximately 1/3 of ET-BERT’s throughput, yet its inference latency remains lower than ET-BERT’s.
 Overall, TrafficLLM achieves an effective balance across
 these efficiency metrics, demonstrating practical applicability
 for real-world deployment scenarios.
 Model Performance under Different Hyperparameters (RQ3):
 We explored the impact of two key parameters, i.e., the number
service classification and 0.8735 on application identification, of experts N ∈ {2, 4, 8, 10} and the number of singular valexceeding previous state-of-the-art by 1.68 and 1.47 percentage ues r ∈ {4, 8, 16, 32}, on the performance of TrafficLLM.
points. ChatGLM variants consistently underperform across Specifically, we fixed r to study the effect of N , and vice versa
all tasks, particularly on ISCX-Tor where TrafficLLM (D) when examining r. Fig. 6 summarizes the experimental results
achieves 0.9720 accuracy compared to ChatGLM (L)’s 0.9030. and indicates two conclusions: 1) Model performance does not
While ET-BERT shows competitive results on malware classi- always increase with the number of experts. The optimal number
fication (USTC-TFC), it requires substantially more computa- of experts is N = 8, as too many experts reduce the LoRA
tional resources. The dense and sparse gating variants demon- rank for each expert, diminishing the learning ability of the
strate complementary strengths: dense gating excels in most low-rank matrix. 2) Model performance gradually improves with
multi-task scenarios by leveraging all experts’ knowledge, while increasing r, but the number of trainable parameters also rises
sparse gating achieves superior performance on specific chal- significantly. Considering the performance-efficiency trade-off,
lenging tasks like USTC-TFC (0.9780 F1-score). These results r = 16 is the most economical choice.
demonstrate that TrafficLLM’s architecture effectively bal- Generalization Performance (RQ4): We conducted sequential
ances adaptation capability with computational efficiency across training experiments where tasks were learned incrementally
diverse encrypted traffic analysis tasks. Additional confusion ((T1 ) Cross-Platform (iOS) → (T2 ) Cross-Platform (Android)
matrix results can be found in the Appendix B, available online. → (T3 ) ISCX-VPN-Service → (T4 ) ISCX-VPN-App → (T5 )
 Efficiency Performance Analysis (RQ2): We compared the USTC-TFC → (T6 ) ISCX-Tor → (T7 ) CSTNET-TLS 1.3),
trainable parameters, throughput, memory usage, and latency of measuring performance degradation on previously learned tasks.
ET-BERT and NetGPT with TrafficLLM. Considering that We measured accuracy degradation on each previous task and
ChatGLM served as the base LLM for this paper and traditional compute average forgetting as: Forgetting Rate = (Accuracy
DL methods did not involve prompt processing, we excluded before new task - Accuracy after new task) / Accuracy before
them from efficiency performance comparisons. Specifically, to new task. We created a diagnostic quiz with 100 traffic-domain
ensure fair comparison of throughput and latency, we used the questions (see Appendix C, available online) focusing on funmaximum number of training samples processed per unit time damental network concepts, protocol behaviors, and security
(i.e., 1 s) to quantify throughput and measured the time required patterns. This quiz tests retained knowledge that isn’t directly
to process and respond to a single sample request to quantify tied to any single classification task but is essential for cominference latency. Additionally, since ET-BERT functioned as prehensive traffic understanding. Fig. 7 shows the forgetting
a single-task model, we accumulated its memory usage across curves for the three variants. TrafficLLM (D) demonstrates
tasks for fair comparison. Regarding trainable parameters, we remarkably stable performance with minimal forgetting (avercompared ChatGLM fine-tuned using LoRA, SVD-LoRA, and age 3.2% degradation), while ChatGLM (F) experiences severe
916 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE V
 COMPARISON RESULTS ON CROSS-PLATFORM, ISCX-VPN-SERVICE AND ISCX-VPN-APP DATASETS. WE HIGHLIGHT THE BEST RESULTS AND UNDERLINE THE
 SUBOPTIMAL RESULTS (THIS ALSO APPLIES TO THE TABLE BELOW).

 TABLE VI
 COMPARISON RESULTS ON ISCX-TOR, USTC-TFC AND CSTNET-TLS 1.3 DATASETS

Fig. 5. Comparison of experimental results of TrafficLLM with other large models in terms of the number of trainable parameters, throughput, memory usage,
and latency.

 19.8% degradation), confirming that parameter-efficient methods help mitigate forgetting, but our SVD-LoRA integration
 provides substantially better knowledge preservation.
 Furthermore, we evaluated models on both general knowledge
 (ProtoQA [54]) (tested with 100 pieces of data) and unseen
 traffic data (CICIoT2022 [55]) after sequential adaptation. The
 questions in the ProtoQA dataset are usually common sense
 questions such as “Where does the sun rise?”. Fig. 8 records
 the above results and shows that TrafficLLM can not only
Fig. 6. The results of experiments for hyper-parameters, i.e., # of experts N preserve the pre-training dataset well but also outperform other
and LoRA rank r.
 baselines on unseen tasks, thanks to the SVD processing of the
 pre-trained model and the multi-task MoE design. For example,
forgetting (average 34.7% degradation) after learning all seven the accuracy on the ProtoQA dataset is 62% higher than that of
tasks. ChatGLM (L) shows intermediate performance (average ChatGLM (F).
LIU et al.: ADAPTING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS SERVICES 917

 TABLE VII
 THE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF THE ABLATION STUDY FOR TrafficLLM

 TABLE VIII
 ABLATION STUDY ON THE IMPACT OF TRAFFIC-DOMAIN TOKENIZER ACROSS
 DIFFERENT MODELS. RESULTS SHOW AVERAGE ACCURACY (%) ACROSS ALL
 SEVEN BENCHMARK DATASETS

Fig. 7. Forgetting curves during sequential task learning.
 TABLE IX
 REAL-WORLD DEPLOYMENT PERFORMANCE RESULTS ON THE NUDT-MOBILE
 DATASET

 template. The results (see Table VIII) show that the traffic
 domain tokenizer consistently improves the performance of all
 models, with accuracy gains ranging from +0.89% to +1.19%.
Fig. 8. Comparative experimental results on unseen tasks and general knowl- Even without a specialized tokenizer (using only the shared P T ),
edge tasks. TrafficLLM (D) achieved an average accuracy of 97.15%,
 which is 1.29% higher than the best baseline (DeepSeek-L at
 Ablation Studies (RQ5): We conducted ablation experiments 95.86%). This confirms that our architectural innovations (SVDto evaluate the effectiveness of each component. Specifically, LoRA + MoE) are the main contributors to the performance
we examined the impact of the MoE, gating function, and SVD improvement.
module on the performance of TrafficLLM. We evaluated Real World Deployment (RQ6): To further evaluate the
the model on seven benchmark datasets under five settings: w/o scalability and practical applicability of TrafficLLM, we
Data Augmentation (DA), w/o MoE, w/o gating, w/o SVD, and applied INT4 quantization to its dense version, TrafficLLM
w LoRA. Table VII shows that the MoE module and gating (D), and conducted experiments on an NVIDIA A100 GPU
function effectively improve TrafficLLM’s performance, as using the previously unseen NUDT-Mobile dataset [38]. This
observed by comparing w LoRA with w/o gating and w/o SVD. dataset contains 112.2 GB of traffic, comprising 1,157,245
The SVD module shows no clear advantage in performance flows across diverse protocols, including TCP, UDP, HTTP,
improvement, yet it remains an integral part of TrafficLLM. TLSv1.2, SSLv2, and WebSocket. We report its performance,
Additionally, the data augmentation strategy consistently en- throughput, and latency results in Table IX. The results show
hances model performance, as omitting it leads to a noticeable that TrafficLLM achieves an F1 score of 0.9617, a throughput
drop (see Appendix B, available online). of 800 samples/s, and a latency of 400 ms/sample, indicating
 Furthermore, to validate the performance gains of the de- strong potential for deployment in real-world encrypted traffic
signed traffic tokenizer, we tested TrafficLLM and other classification scenarios.
LLMs on seven benchmark datasets. Specifically, we first evaluated all models using the local ChatGLM tokenizer with the same
 VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
P T , without a domain-specific vocabulary. Then, we assessed
whether the tokenizer benefited all models by replacing it with Task-Adaptive MoE Design: Although MoE-enabled SVDour traffic domain tokenizer while keeping the same prompt LoRA improves performance on heterogeneous tasks, the expert
918 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

selection mechanism could be further refined using reinforce- [11] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted
ment learning or meta-learning strategies to dynamically adapt traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, lessons
 learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 16, no. 2,
expert usage based on task complexity. pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
 Enhanced Robustness and Interpretability: Future work will [12] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
focus on improving the interpretability of model predictions, traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
especially for security analysts. This includes techniques such [13] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal deep
as attention visualization, rationale extraction, and integration learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
with threat intelligence sources. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
 [14] K. Yang, L. Xu, Y. Xu, and J. Chao, “Encrypted application classification
 Deployment at Scale: Further optimization of memory and with convolutional neural network,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf., 2020,
computation costs through advanced quantization, pruning, and pp. 499–503.
model distillation will be critical for large-scale deployment in [15] C. V. Wright, F. Monrose, and G. M. Masson, “On inferring application
 protocol behaviors in encrypted network traffic,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
production network environments. vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 2745–2769, 2006.
 [16] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Analyzing android encrypted network traffic to identify user actions,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Security, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 114–125, Jan. 2016.
 VII. CONCLUSION [17] O. Sener and V. Koltun, “Multi-task learning as multi-objective optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 525–536.
 In this paper, we introduced TrafficLLM, a PEFT method [18] J. Dai, X. Xu, H. Gao, and F. Xiao, “CMFTC: Cross modality fusion
designed for multi-task encrypted traffic analysis service. efficient multitask encrypt traffic classification for efficient management
TrafficLLM addresses task heterogeneity through a universal of IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 3989–4009,
 Nov./Dec. 2023.
multi-task prompt template and mitigates knowledge forgetting [19] D. Wu et al., “Large language model adaptation for networking,” in Proc.
by integrating SVD-LoRA. By combining the strengths of the ACM Conf. Special Int. Group Data Commun., 2024, pp. 661–678.
MoE approach with SVD-LoRA, TrafficLLM achieves ef- [20] B. Zheng et al., “Adapting large language models by integrating collaborative semantics for recommendation,” in Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Data
ficient multi-task learning and reduces adaptation costs. The Eng., 2024, pp. 1435–1448.
inclusion of task-aware gating functions further enhances effi- [21] A. Radford et al., “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,”
ciency by dynamically assigning weights to experts for optimal OpenAI Blog, vol. 1, no. 8, 2019, Art. no. 9.
 [22] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
knowledge fusion. Our comprehensive experiments on seven Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
datasets across five downstream tasks demonstrate that Traf- [23] C. H. Song, J. Wu, C. Washington, B. M. Sadler, W.-L. Chao, and Y.
ficLLM significantly outperforms state-of-the-art models like Su, “LLM-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents
 with large language models,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
NetGPT, ET-BERT, and ChatGLM (F) in terms of analysis Recognit., 2023, pp. 2986–2997.
performance and resource efficiency. Detailed evaluations of [24] W. Wang et al., “VisionLLM: Large language model is also an open-ended
throughput, memory usage, and latency in the real world confirm decoder for vision-centric tasks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., 2024, pp. 61501–61513.
the practical advantages of TrafficLLM. [25] X. He, X. Bresson, T. Laurent, A. Perold, Y. LeCun, and B. Hooi, “Harnessing explanations: LLM-to-LM interpreter for enhanced text-attributed
 graph representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 REFERENCES 2023.
 [26] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, “MT-FlowFormer:
 [1] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network traf- A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted traffic classificafic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM Comput. tion,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022,
 Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2021. pp. 2576–2584.
 [2] D. Tang, S. Wang, B. Liu, W. Jin, and J. Zhang, “GASF-IPP: Detection [27] T. Zheng, J. Shao, J. Dai, S. Jiang, X. Chen, and C. Shen, “RESTLess:
 and mitigation of LDoS attack in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., Enhancing state-of-the-art rest API fuzzing with LLMs in cloud service
 vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3373–3384, Sep./Oct. 2023. computing,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 4225–4238,
 [3] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner: Nov./Dec. 2024.
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network [28] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An
 traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 439–454. efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 [4] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an Privacy, 2025, pp. 1844–1860.
 increasingly encrypted web,” in Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., [29] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder based
 vol. 5, 2021, Art. no. 4. traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc. AAAI
 [5] Q. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. Wang, and X. Li, “UDP traffic classification using Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 5420–5427.
 most distinguished port,” in Proc. Asia-Pacific Netw. Operations Manag. [30] S. K. Mani et al., “Enhancing network management using code generated
 Symp., 2014, pp. 1–4. by large language models,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Hot Topics Netw.,
 [6] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Muller, and K. Hanssgen, “A 2023, pp. 196–204.
 survey of payload-based traffic classification approaches,” IEEE Commun. [31] B. Piggott et al., “Net-GPT: A LLM-empowered man-in-the-middle chat-
 Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1135–1156, 2nd Quart., 2014. bot for unmanned aerial vehicle,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Symp. Edge Com-
 [7] M. Crotti, M. Dusi, F. Gringoli, and L. Salgarelli, “Traffic classification put., 2023, pp. 287–293.
 through simple statistical fingerprinting,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Com- [32] S. Zhang, D. Fu, Z. Zhang, B. Yu, and P. Cai, “TrafficGPT: Viewmun. Rev., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 5–16, 2007. ing, processing and interacting with traffic foundation models,” 2023,
 [8] X. Meng, C. Lin, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “NetGPT: Generative pretrained arXiv:2309.06719.
 transformer for network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2304.09513. [33] H. Y. He, Z. G. Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
 [9] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A contextual- representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
 ized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope: Industry-Driven Digit. Transformation, 2020,
 traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642. pp. 1–8.
[10] X. Jiang, S. Liu, A. Gember-Jacobson, P. Schmitt, F. Bronzino, and [34] Y. Zhai et al., “Investigating the catastrophic forgetting in multimodal large
 N. Feamster, “Generative, high-fidelity network traces,” in Proc. ACM language model fine-tuning,” in Proc. 1st Conf. Parsimony Learn., 2024,
 Workshop Hot Topics Netw., 2023, pp. 131–138. pp. 202–227.
LIU et al.: ADAPTING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS SERVICES 919

[35] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence Xiang Zheng received the PhD degree from the Denetwork for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. partment of Computer Science, City University of
 Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179. Hong Kong, in 2024, under the guidance of Prof.
[36] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph neural Cong Wang. He is a postdoctoral fellow with the
 networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Department of Computer Science, City University
 Web Conf., 2023, pp. 2066–2075. of Hong Kong. His research interests include inter-
[37] G. Team et al., “ChatGLM: A family of large language models from GLM- section of reinforcement learning, trustworthy AI,
 130B to GLM-4 all tools,” 2024, arXiv:2406.12793. generative AI, and robot learning.
[38] S. Zhao, S. Chen, F. Wang, Z. Wei, J. Zhong, and J. Liang, “NUDT mobile
 traffic dataset,” (n.d.). Accessed: Apr. 05, 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
 //github.com/Abby-ZS/NUDT_MobileTraffic
[39] C. Cui et al., “A survey on multimodal large language models for
 autonomous driving,” in Proc. Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2024, Chengjun Cai (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 pp. 958–979. degree in computer science from the City University
[40] W. Feng, C. Hao, Y. Zhang, Y. Han, and H. Wang, “Mixture-of- of Hong Kong, in 2021. He is currently an asso-
 LoRAs: An efficient multitask tuning for large language models,” 2024, ciate professor with the City University of Hong
 arXiv:2403.03432. Kong (Dongguan). His research interests included
[41] S. Chen, Y. Zhang, and Q. Yang, “Multi-task learning in natural language applied cryptography, data security and privacy, and
 processing: An overview,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, 2021, Art. no. 295. blockchain. He is a member of the ACM.
[42] A. Sarabi, T. Yin, and M. Liu, “An LLM-based framework for fingerprinting internet-connected devices,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., 2023,
 pp. 478–484.
[43] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning,”
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2017, pp. 712–717.
[44] K. Bostrom and G. Durrett, “Byte pair encoding is suboptimal for language Xingliang Yuan (Senior Member, IEEE) is an asmodel pretraining,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process., sociate professor with the School of Computing and
 2020, pp. 4617–4624. Information Systems, University of Melbourne. Prior
[45] L. Huang et al., “A survey on hallucination in large language models: to that, he was a faculty member with Monash Uni-
 Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions,” ACM Trans. Inf. versity from 2017 to 2024. He has a keen interest
 Syst., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 1–55, 2025. in designing systems, protocols to address real-world
[46] Q. Zhang et al., “Adaptive budget allocation for parameter-efficient fine- privacy, and security challenges. His current research
 tuning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024. focuses on data security and privacy, secure net-
[47] W. Cai, J. Jiang, F. Wang, J. Tang, S. Kim, and J. Huang, “A survey on worked system, and trustworthy machine learning.
 mixture of experts,” 2024, arXiv:2407.06204. His research has been supported by Australian Re-
[48] H. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, and N. Ho, “Demystifying softmax gating function search Council, CSIRO, Australian Department of
 in Gaussian mixture of experts,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Home Affairs, Australian Department of Health and Aged Care, and the Oceania
 2024, pp. 4624–4652. Cyber Security Centre. His work has been published in major venues of computer
[49] Q. Liu et al., “When MOE meets LLMs: Parameter efficient fine-tuning security and systems, such as CCS, S&P, USENIX Security, NDSS, IEEE
 for multi-task medical applications,” in Proc. 47th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, IEEE Transactions on
 Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2024, pp. 1104–1114. Information Forensics and Security, etc. He is a sole recipient of the Dean’s
[50] T. Van Ede et al., “Flowprint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting Award for Excellence in Research by an Early Career Researcher (2020) at
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., Monash. He is a co-recipient of the best paper award in the European Symposium
 2020. on Research in Computer Security (ESORICS) 2021. He is currently on the
[51] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, editorial board of IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” in (TDSC) and IEEE Transactions on Service Computing (TSC). He served as a
 Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414. track co-chair of ICDCS’24, WISE’24, MSN’24, and a program co-chair of
[52] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Charac- Lamps@CCS’24, SecTL@AsiaCCS’23, and NSS’22.
 terization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf.
 Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[53] A. Liu et al., “DeepSeek-V2: A strong, economical, and efficient mixtureof-experts language model,” 2024, arXiv:2405.04434. Cong Wang (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a chair pro-
[54] M. Boratko, X. Li, T. O’Gorman, R. Das, D. Le, and A. Mccallum, fessor with the Department of Computer Science,
 “ProtoQA: A question answering dataset for prototypical common-sense City University of Hong Kong. He is also with the City
 reasoning,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2020, University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Instipp. 1122–1136. tute. His research interests include data and network
[55] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong, and security, blockchain and decentralized applications,
 A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional and privacy-enhancing technologies. He is a member
 IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust, of ACM. He has been one of the founding member of
 2022, pp. 1–11. the Young Academy of Sciences of Hong Kong since
[56] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,” 2017. He was conferred the RGC Research Fellow, in
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023. 2021. He received the Outstanding Researcher Award
 (junior faculty), in 2019, the Outstanding Supervisor Award, in 2017, and the
 President’s Awards in 2016 and 2019, all from the City University of Hong
 Kong. He was a co-recipient of the Best Paper Award of IEEE ICDCS 2020,
 Yi Liu is currently working toward the PhD de- ICPADS 2018, MSN 2015, the Best Student Paper Award of IEEE ICDCS
 gree with the Department of Computer Science, City 2017, and the IEEE INFOCOM Test of Time Paper Award in 2020. His research
 University of Hong Kong. His research interests in- has been supported by multiple government research fund agencies, including
 clude cloud computing security, network security, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the Hong Kong Research
 privacy-preserving machine learning. Grants Council, and the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission.
 He served as the TPC co-chair for a number of IEEE conferences and workshops.
 He has served as an editor-in-chief for IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
 Secure Computing, and editor for IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,
 IEEE Internet of Things Journal, IEEE Networking Letters, and the Journal of
 Blockchain Research.