2036 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 Adaptive Federated Reinforcement Learning With
 Temporal Hybrid Deep Model for Consumer
 Internet of Vehicles Intrusion Detection
 Hamad Naeem , Amjad Alsirhani , Faeiz M. Alserhani , Maha M. Althobaiti , and Eatedal Alabdulkreem

 Abstract— Consumer devices that are integrated into the Inter- Index Terms— Federated learning, Internet of Vehicles, intrunet of Vehicles (IoV) systems are becoming more susceptible to sion detection system, reinforcement learning, cybersecurity.
the sophisticated intrusion attacks, which are a major threat to
user safety and the overall integrity of the system. Federated
Learning (FL) has been a prominent technique for collabo- I. I NTRODUCTION
rative training models while maintaining the confidentiality of
sensitive information. In addition, conventional FL-based IDS
approaches have problems to handle non-identical IID (IID) data
distributions across clients, and usually use a fixed aggregation
 C ONSUMER-ORIENTED cybersecurity attacks on the
 Internet of Vehicles (IoV) have become a growing concern as IoV technologies are improving and increasingly filling
method like FedAvg and FedProx, which has poor adaptability
to changeable client behaviors. To tackle these limitations, this the day-to-day lives of individuals in attempts to create greater
research proposes an adaptive federated learning framework by convenience, safety and driving experience to the end user.
preprocessing IoVs network traffic through standardization and Recent studies have shown that the threats to consumers are
IID (independent and identical distributed) distribution of data increasing. These include data breaches, unauthorized access,
among clients. A Temporal Hybrid Deep Model (CNN-LSTM- spoofing, denial of service (DoS) and ransomware, all of which
Attention) is trained on each client locally (starting from the
global model). After training, client models and performance directly damage consumer trust and lower the adoption of IoV.
metrics are updated to a central server, where a Reinforcement These threats demonstrate how important it is to have strong
Learning (RL) agent based on Deep Q-Network (DQN) optimally security measures in place to protect consumers as well as
decides aggregation weights based on client Q-values, which ensure sure that IoV applications keep on growing.
maximizes global accuracy as a reward. Iterative aggregation The Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is an integral component of
greatly improves intrusion detection performance, with detection
accuracies of 99.85% and 95.18% on the benchmark datasets the Internet of Things (IoT), and is causing a revolution in
CICIOV2024 and CICEVSE2024, respectively. The proposed transportation by allowing vehicles, infrastructure and personal
method makes it possible to develop a lightweight, edge- gadgets to connect to each other in new ways. Advanced
deployable intrusion detection system for consumer IoV device sensor technologies built into cars and roadside devices now
like telematics and electric car chargers. By leveraging federated generate an extensive amount of data, which is supporting
learning, the approach provides real-time, privacy-preserving
protection. innovative applications which make transportation more efficient and improve the user experience [1]. Both government
 Received 16 August 2025; revised 8 October 2025 and 30 October 2025; and industry leaders all over the world are advocating for the
accepted 16 November 2025. Date of publication 19 November 2025; use of intelligent transportation systems (ITS) fueled by IoV.
date of current version 25 March 2026. This work was supported by These systems can be used for real time traffic monitoring,
the Deanship of Scientific Research, Vice Presidency for Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, King Faisal University, Saudi Arabia [Grant self-driving cars, automated toll collection and comprehensive
No. KFU253849]. The work of Eatedal Alabdulkreem was supported by vehicle to everything (V2X) communications [2], [3], [4].
the Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers Supporting The consumer plays an important role in this scenario as the
Project, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
under Grant PNURSP2025R161. (Corresponding author: Hamad Naeem.) success and the social impact of IoV rely heavily on trust and
 Hamad Naeem is with the Department of Computer Science, College of engagement by the end user.
Computer Sciences and Information Technology, King Faisal University, Al- The deployment of fifth generation (5G) cellular networks
Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: haazaam@kfu.edu.sa).
 Amjad Alsirhani is with the Department of Computer Science, College of has accelerated the possibilities of IoV further by adding
Computer and Information Sciences, Jouf University, Sakakah, Al Jouf 72388, greater reliability, higher throughput, lower latency and ubiq-
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: amjadalsirhani@ju.edu.sa). uitous connectivity, which are necessary for smooth and real
 Faeiz M. Alserhani is with the Department of Computer Engineering and
Networks, College of Computer and Information Sciences, Jouf University, time IoV services [5], [6]. These technological advances
Sakakah, Al Jouf 72388, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: fmserhani@ju.edu.sa). have increased the Internet of Things (IoT) reach, and it
 Maha M. Althobaiti is with the Department of Computer Science, College has extended its reach to other areas like smart homes,
of Computing and Information Technology, Taif University, Taif 21944,
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: Maha_m@tu.edu.sa). health monitoring, and, importantly, consumer-based Intelli-
 Eatedal Alabdulkreem is with the Department of Computer Sciences, gent Transportation Systems (ITS) solutions.
College of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah bint Abdul- One of the things that makes IoV stand out is that it allows
rahman University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
eaalabdulkareem@pnu.edu.sa). several different types of communications, including the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3634753 following: vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), vehicle-to-infrastructure
 1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
NAEEM et al.: ADAPTIVE FEDERATED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH TEMPORAL HYBRID DEEP MODEL 2037

(V2I), vehicle-to-pedestrian (V2P), and vehicle-to-network
(V2N) interactions. These modes of communication work
in combination with each other to make things safer, more
efficient and comfortable for users. They often use advanced
machine learning and artificial intelligence to improve service
delivery.
 As attacks on consumers become more sophisticated,
modern research focuses on creating robust authentication
protocols, secure communication frameworks, and smart intrusion detection systems that deal with the unique issues that
consumer IoV environments face. Privacy, security and data
integrity are important to ensure consumer confidence to
ensure the full benefits of IoV adoption for society. Fig. 1. Applications of Federated Learning (FL) in Internet of Vehicles
 (IoVs).
 Two important problems of federated learning in 5G enabled
Consumer Internet of Vehicles (IoV) environment such as
non-identically and independently distributed (Non-IID) data as LANs and the emerging 6G infrastructure. This change
across client devices because of which model performance is mainly because 5G can’t handle the high demands from
and convergence problem occur [7]. Additionally, static aggre- emerging IoT and IoV applications [14]. As more devices
gation methods like FedAvg and FedProx are not highly connect to the Internet of Things (IoT) and Internet of Vehicles
adaptable to variability in client capabilities and network (IoV) systems, the amount of network traffic continues to
dynamics and thus, they fail to be effective in real life expand. These technologies enhance daily life and industrial
consumer-centric IoV applications [8]. This study has the processes better, but they are also witnessing more malware
following contributions for solving the challenges that exist threats at all the levels and throughout the entire network’s
in current federated learning solutions: life cycle [15]. Since it was first introduced, federated learning
 • A federated learning framework is proposed for detecting has drawn a lot of attention for its ability to solve problems
 malicious activity in 5G-enabled Consumer Internet of related to data privacy, communication overhead, and client
 Vehicles (IoV). It is designed specifically to deal with data variability [16]. Federated reinforcement learning (FRL)
 non-IID data distribution and overcome the problems with is a method that combines edge computing with distributed
 static aggregating approaches like FedAvg and FedProx. deep learning. Its aim is to enable urban sensing systems run
 • The framework applies a Temporal Hybrid Deep Model more efficiently [17]. Recent studies show that decentralized
 (CNN-LSTM-Attention) to train each client locally, ini- data stored on devices may assist in identify IoT-related threats
 tializing the weights from the global model. A Deep directly at the edge layer [18]. This approach applies Federated
 Q-Network (DQN) agent based on reinforcement learning Learning (FL) as its main method, therefore there is no need
 is additionally employed at the server to dynamically for moving sensitive data offsite for processing [19]. FL not
 assign aggregation weights to each client based on their only speeds up model training on edge devices by keeping
 Q-values, which optimizes global model updates. data local, but it also greatly improves data security. The
 • Extensive experiments on the CICIoV2024 [9] and emergence of the fourth industrial revolution and progress
 CICEVSE2024 [10] attack detection datasets validate the in communication technologies have driven the adoption of
 framework’s effectiveness, with findings exhibiting supe- digital twins (DT), federated learning (FL), and the Industrial
 rior performance compared to typical federated learning Internet of Things (IIoT). However, implementing DT and FL
 baselines in IoV intrusion detection scenarios. in IoV remains challenging. Recent studies have examined
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II reviews applications of IoT, IoV, and the Internet of Drones (IoD) for
related work, Section III explains the proposed method, digital transformation (DT) and federated learning (FL) [20].
Section IV discusses about the outcomes, and Section V Federated learning (FL) has been extensively explored for
concludes. improving Internet of Vehicles (IoV) applications. Previous
 research has examined FL across various fields, including
 to Autonomous Aerial Vehicles (AAVs), autonomous driving
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 systems, and electric automobile networks [21]. Additional
 The Internet of Things (IoT) industry is growing quickly, research has addressed areas like vehicle selection, resource
and this shift is closely related to the adoption of 6G networks, optimization, and traffic flow prediction. Other topics include
resulting in security challenges more severe [11]. IoT tech- map management, content caching, vehicle positioning, and
nologies have significantly transformed the networking and estimating parking spaces [22], as illustrated in Fig. 1. Vehicles
communication landscape [12]. Generally, definitions of the are typically unwilling to send their raw local data straight
Internet of Things (IoT) and the Internet of automobiles (IoV) to roadside units (RSUs) because they have concerns about
refer to physical entities that are connected to each other, privacy and security. In this situation, federated learning (FL)
including sensors and automobiles. However, there can be is a good way to do vehicular edge computing (VEC) since
different interpretations [13]. The concept of IoT/IoV now it lets cars communicate only their model parameters with
covers everything from local networks to large networks, such adjacent RSUs instead of sensitive local data. This approach
2038 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 2. Adaptive federated learning for 5G-enabled consumer internet of vehicles intrusion detection.

makes FL a good choice for machine learning problems splits the data and distributes it IID-wise among clients.
in vehicular networks [23]. Collaboration among Vehicle-to- Each client learns a Temporal Hybrid Deep Model (CNN-
Everything (V2X) nodes is essential for building effective LSTM-Attention), based on its local data, with global weights.
machine learning-based attack detection models in 5G and After each round, the clients send their trained weights and
beyond vehicular networks [24]. performance metrics to the server and a Deep Q-Network
 Federated learning in IoV environments faces various chal- (DQN) agent is used to adaptively assign the aggregation
lenges, like non-IID data distribution among clients, limited weights based on client Q values. The softmax normalized
adaptability of static aggregation methods and vulnerability weights update the global model which is re distributed to
to underperforming or malicious participants. Additional chal- clients for the next round. This iterative process using global
lenges involve making it scalable as the number of clients and accuracy as a reward optimizes aggregation and intrusion
data increase and maintaining computational and communica- detection performance strength for Internet of Vehicles. Fig. 2
tion efficiency. These things can make it so that the models shows the proposed adaptive federated learning framework for
do not converge as easily, are not accurate, and are not as secure IoV intrusion detection based on reinforcement learning
strong in real life scenarios. Our proposed solution solves aggregation.
these problems by adopting a reinforcement learning-based
(DQN) adaptive aggregation technique that assigns different A. Data Preprocessing
weights to clients based on their performance. This method The data preprocessing stage is important to ensure that the
lowers communication overhead while increasing accuracy, raw IoV network data is clean, structured, and suitable for
robustness, and scalability when combined with multi-head intrusion detection using deep learning models. The first step
attention and a hybrid CNN-LSTM model. is to gather the raw network information from the Internet
 of Vehicles (IoV) environment, which includes information
III. A DAPTIVE F EDERATED L EARNING FOR 5G- E NABLED about communication between vehicles, roadside units and IoT
 C ONSUMER I NTERNET OF V EHICLES I NTRUSION infrastructure. This raw data, typically in the form of packet
 D ETECTION capture (PCAP) files or logs, is parsed to extract useful features
 This work tackles two major issues in the context of fed- and converted to a structured feature matrix that can be used
erated learning for 5G enabled Consumer Internet of Vehicles for analysis.
(IoV) networks namely: 1) non-IID data distribution among After the parsing is done, there might be irrelevant or noisy
clients and 2) the lack of adaptability of the static aggre- data in the dataset, such as incomplete data or duplicate flows
gation techniques like FedAvx and FedProx. The proposed or corrupted packets. The unwanted items are filtered in order
framework preprocesses IoV network traffic, standardizes and to obtain a clean dataset. The network flows are then created
NAEEM et al.: ADAPTIVE FEDERATED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH TEMPORAL HYBRID DEEP MODEL 2039

from the cleaned data, where the flows aggregate packets or C. Client Side Temporal Hybrid Deep Model Training
events with common properties like source or destination IP, In the proposed federated learning framework for secure
protocol, session or time window. intrusion detection in IoV environments, the client side train-
 Next, the mean and the standard deviation of each feature ing is an important step in the process which leverages a
in the dataset is scaled to have a mean of zero and a standard powerful deep learning model allowing to learn local data
deviation of one, an important step in effective neural network patterns without the loss of privacy. Once data preprocessing
training. For each feature vector x, standardization is carried and IID distribution are completed, each client node is given
out as follows: a divided data set as well as a copy of the global model
 x −µ weights which ensures the training begins with a standard
 x′ = (1)
 σ initialization. Each client then starts local training based on
 a Temporal Hybrid Deep Model of a Convolutional Neural
where µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of Network (CNN), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Network
the feature respectively. This is performed for each feature and Multi-Head Attention mechanism. The major goal of this
dimension and we finish with a standardized feature matrix. stage is to optimize the local model parameters, θk , for each
The standardized dataset is then divided into subsets for client k, by minimizing the loss function using the client’s
training and testing so that it allows for proper validation local dataset (X k , yk ):
of the model and prevents overfitting, with usually 80% of
the data being used for training and 20% being used for k |X |
 1 X
testing. After these preprocessing steps, processed data is then θk∗ = arg min L( f θ (xi ), yi ) (4)
 θ |X k |
ready for IID data distribution between federated learning i=1
clients. Here, f θ is the deep model, and L is the classification crossentropy loss. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or an adaptive
 optimizer is applied each time to update the model of each
B. Client-Level IID Data Partitioning in Federated Learning client during training. After each round of communication,
 One of the main challenges of Federated Learning (FL) the local prediction results, e.g. accuracy, precision, recall,
is the availability of non-identically and independently dis- confusion matrix elements are calculated and reported. At the
tributed (non-IID) data across the participating clients. In real completion of local training, the updated model weights and
world scenarios in FL, each client collects information from local performance metrics are sent back to the federated server.
its own individual environment, leading to a lot of diversity This process is repeated for a number of rounds, with each
in local data distributions and the risk of divergence in the round starting from the updated global model, and therefore,
local models. This data heterogeneity can significantly reduce each round improving the ability of the model to generalize
the effectiveness of federated aggregation strategies and hinder over all the data of the clients.
overall model performance, especially in critical applications The Temporal Hybrid Deep Model is a composite model
such as the Internet of Vehicles (IoV). To overcome this, the that tries to extract and combine short term and long term
proposed framework includes data preprocessing that ensures temporal dependencies within IoV network data, which is
the allocation of client-level IID (independent and identically often highly sequential and structured. The model takes as
distributed) data in order to have a more balanced and rep- input the sequence X ∈ Rs×d , where s is the length of the
resentative data set for each client’s training locally. The sequence and d is the dimension of features.
workflow is random shuffling of indices of the whole data 1) TCN Pathway: One branch goes through stacked 1D
and equally dividing the data between the clients. Specifically, convolutional layers (Conv1D), each one has kernel size 3 and
given a dataset D with |D| samples for N clients then number ReLU activation, which is responsible for capturing local
of samples per clients is defined as temporal patterns:
 h(l) (l−1) (l)
 conv = ReLU(Conv1D(hconv , Wconv ))
  
 |D| (5)
 S= , (2)
 N
 where l indexes the convolutional layer. Dropout is applied
where S is the number of samples allocated in each client. for regularization. A Global Average Pooling layer follows,
After generating a random permutation π of the dataset aggregating features across time:
indices, each client i is allocated a segment given by s
 1 X (L)
 htcn = hconv [t] (6)
 Di = Dπ( j) | j = i S, . . . , (i + 1)S − 1, (3) s
 t=1

Ensuring that the subset of data is similar to the global where L is the last convolutional layer.
distribution across all clients in order to achieve a realistic 2) LSTM Pathway: Simultaneously, the input sequence
simulation of an IID setting for federated training. By enhanc- is fed into an LSTM layer, which models long-term
ing uniformity of the client level data, this enhances greater dependencies:
stability and fairness of the global aggregation of the model, hlstm = LSTM(X ) (7)
reduces inter client bias, and supports a better evaluation of
federated learning algorithms. A dense layer is used to further transform the LSTM output.
2040 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 3) Feature Concatenation and Attention: The outputs of the Algorithm 2 Global Model RL-Based Weights Aggre-
TCN and LSTM paths are concatenated: gation
 hconcat = Concat([htcn , hlstm ]) (8) Input: τ ′ : total federated rounds, wi : local model
 weights, A: local accuracies
This combined feature vector is reshaped as required and Output: wτ : updated global model weights(GMU)
passed through a Multi-Head Attention mechanism, which initialization;
learns interdependencies between temporal features: 1 Initialize global model weights w ;
 0

 hattn = MultiHeadAttn(hconcat ) (9) for each round τ = 1 to τ do ′

 2 Form state vector: sτ ← r eshape(Aτ );
 4) Classification Head: The attention output is flattened and 3 Predict Q-values: Q τ ← agent. pr edict (sτ );
passed through one or more dense layers with ReLU activation 4 Compute Softmax weights: wτR L ← softmax(Q τ );
 w τ ← i=1 wi · w τR L [i];
to produce the final class predictions. The output layer uses a PK
 5
softmax function for multi-class classification: 6 Set global model weights: wg ← wτ ;
 ŷ = softmax(Wout hfinal + bout ) (10) 7 Evaluate wg on test data (X test , ytest );
 8 Compute metrics: Accuracy, ROC AUC, Precision,
where hfinal is the flattened attention output. Recall, F1-Score, Loss;
 In Fig. 3, using TCNs and LSTMs together for IoV traffic 9 Compute reward rτ from global accuracy;
takes use of their distinct strengths. TCNs (causal, dilated con- 10 Observe next state sτ +1 ← r eshape(Aτ );
volutions) get fine-grained, local patterns across long effective 11 Store transition:
receptive fields with stable, parallelizable training. LSTMs, agent.remember(sτ , arg max Q τ , rτ , sτ +1 , done);
on the other hand, get order-sensitive, long-horizon depen- if agent.memory size > batch size then
dencies with non-stationary context. Combining both and 12 agent.replay(batch size);
re-weighting important timesteps with multi-head attention
 13 Save checkpoint: wg → roundτ .ckpt;
creates more distinct temporal characteristics, which lowers
 14 Track and store performance metrics in history
false alarms and makes the system more stable against jitter
 arrays;
and packet loss. In practice, the hybrid is good for edge
deployment and provides quicker, more reliable federated return w τ as final GMU
convergence than either component alone. Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedural workflow described in this section.
It trains each client’s model by starting with the current global
weights, fitting it to local data for E epochs, and producing
updated local parameters. After training, it calculates and
sends back the client’s local weights, as well as the accuracy
and loss, for aggregation and monitoring.

 Algorithm 1 Local Model Training Process
 Input: Rounds R, Client data Di = (X i , yi ), Global
 weights wg
 Output: Local weights wi , Performance metrics
 for each round r = 1 to R do
 for each client i = 1 to N do
 Initialize local model Mi with weights wg ;
 Train Mi on (X i , yi ) for E epochs;
 Obtain updated local weights wi ;
 Compute local accuracy and loss;
 return local weights, accuracy, loss

D. Server Side Adaptive Aggregation Using Reinforcement
Learning
 A key issue in FL is the lack of flexibility of traditional
static aggregation methods, such as FedAvg and FedProx, Fig. 3. Integrated temporal convolutional and LSTM network with attention
which use static or heuristic weights for the aggregation of mechanism.
client’s updates irrespective of their individual contributions to
the overall task across rounds. These conventional approaches cases of heterogeneous distributions of client data or changing
are generally not capable of dynamically adapting to the local performance and thus, the global model accuracy is
NAEEM et al.: ADAPTIVE FEDERATED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH TEMPORAL HYBRID DEEP MODEL 2041

suboptimal and convergence speed is slower. To overcome TABLE I
such limitation, in this paper, we propose a reinforcement C LASS D ISTRIBUTION IN CICI OV2024 AND CICEVSE2024 DATASETS
learning-based adaptive aggregation strategy that allows for the
dynamic optimization of the aggregation weights according to
the real time feedback of the performance of client models.
 In the proposed federated learning framework for secure IoV
intrusion detection, the server side adaptive aggregation uses
reinforcement learning (RL) to intelligently and dynamically
combine the model updates from multiple clients. Once the
locally trained model weights and associated performance
metrics (e.g. accuracies or losses) are received from all participating clients, the central federated server will trigger the
adaptive aggregation process. The server keeps these local
weights and instead of static aggregation techniques such as K
 State: st = atk , ltk , n kt , 1atk , 1ltk k=1 (per-client accuracy,
 
FedAvg, uses a Deep Q-Network (DQN) agent to find the
optimal aggregation weights for each client in each commu- loss, normalized samples, and first-order deltas; size K × d).
nication round. Action/weights: DQN outputs qt ∈ R K ; wt = softmax(qt )
 k wt = 1, wt ≥ 0 (optional clipping wmin =
 P k k
 In particular, having collected local accuracies (or any other with
utility metric of choice), the server creates a state vector st 0.02, wmax = 0.60). Reward: rt+1 = Acct+1 − Acct −
that encodes performance measures for the current round: k ) − β∥w − u∥2 ; (abl.: r
 λ Vark (at+1 t 2 t+1 = Acct+1 ). Network:
 MLP (LayerNorm+ReLU, 128 → 64, output K ); target net,
 st = [a1t , a2t , . . . , a tK ] (11)
 replay; Huber loss; Adam (1 × 10−3 ); γ = 0.95; ε-greedy
where akt is the accuracy of client k in round t, and K is the ε : 0.30 → 0.05. Static global averaging utilizes fixed or
number of clients. size-based weights, whereas global server in proposed strategy
 The DQN agent receives this state vector and predicts a uses a DQN (reinforcement-learning) approach to assign client
set of Q-values for each client, which are the expected future weights adaptively each round based on objective performance
rewards (e.g., global accuracy improvement) when assigning feedback from held out assessments (such as accuracy or
different aggregation weights: loss).Updates that are strong and dependable are given greater
 weight, whereas updates that are noisy or low-quality are given
 Q(st , a) = E[Rt+1 + γ max Q(st+1 , a ′ ) | st , a] (12) less weight. This makes the global model more stable when
 a′
 there are non-IID data, stragglers, and changes in distribution.
Here, Rt+1 is the immediate reward (global accuracy after
 This data driven weighting keeps convergence stable and
aggregation), γ is the discount factor, a is an action (choices
 speeds it up, lowers round-to-round fluctuations, and stops
of weights of aggregation), and a ′ represents possible future
 any one client with a skewed or uneven data distribution from
actions.
 dominating. In practice, this leads to better and more constant
 Based on the predicted Q-values, the server uses a softmax
 global accuracy and quicker recovery when conditions change,
function to transform these values to adaptive aggregation
 which is better than static global averaging. Algorithm 2
weights for each client:
 summarizes the procedural workflow described in this section.
 exp(Q(st , ak )) Construct a state from client accuracies, the reinforcement
 wkt = P K (13)
 j=1 exp(Q(st , a j )) learning agent estimates Q-values, softmax-normalized into
 aggregation weights to update global parameters. Evaluate the
where wkt is the weight assigned to client k in round t. global model, compute reward, perform experience replay, log
 The global model is then updated as a weighted average of metrics, and output the final GMU.
local models:
 K
 X IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
 θglobal
 t
 = wkt · θkt (14)
 A. Dataset Collection
 k=1
 This study employs two established datasets, CICIoV20241
where θkt are the local model parameters from client k.
 [9] and CICEVSE20242 [10], to comprehensively assess the
 After aggregation, global model is evaluated by the server
 proposed methodology. Table I shows the class distribution in
on the validation set to compute the global accuracy which
 both datasets. The CICIoV2024 dataset serves as an extensive
is used as the reward signal for the DQN agent. The
 benchmark for cybersecurity research in Internet of Vehicles
experiences (state, action, reward, next state) are stored for
 (IoV) environments. It features a wide spectrum of cyberattack
replay and the DQN agent is periodically updated so as
 scenarios performed on a 2019 Ford vehicle, with all Electo enhance future aggregation policies. This cycle repeats
 tronic Control Units (ECUs) included. The dataset is organized
in each round, enabling the system to continually adapt
 into several attack categories, including Denial-of-Service
the importance given to each client based on observed
contributions to global performance. For clarity and repro- 1 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iov-dataset-2024.html
ducibility, we summarize the DQN aggregator design below: 2 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/evse-dataset-2024.html
2042 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 4. Comparison of accuracy trends for various client counts and datasets: (a,b) CICEVSE2024 and (c,d) CICIOV2024.

 FP
(DoS), GAS, RPM, SPEED, and STEERING WHEEL, as well Recall = (16)
as benign samples. Specifically, CICIoV2024 contains 8,055 (F P + T N )
benign instances with multiple attack classes including 8,378 (2 ∗ T P)
 F − measur e = (17)
DoS samples, 8,215 GAS attack samples, 8,068 RPM attacks, (2T P + F P + F N )
9,041 SPEED attacks and 9,464 STEERING WHEEL attacks. (T P + T N )
 Accuracy = (18)
This gives a total of 51,221 data points. Each sample is given (T P + T N + F P + F N )
in binary, decimal, and hexadecimal formats and can be ana- The proposed federated learning framework was created in
lyzed in detail and with great perspective. The CICEVSE2024 PyCharm using Keras and evaluated on a computing environdataset focuses on the electric vehicle charging infrastructure ment with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2060 (8 GB) and 32 GB
and covers the benign and the attack scenarios. It reflects of RAM.
the vulnerabilities of the electric vehicle chargers in idle
and active charging states, capturing various network and
host-based attacks such as reconnaissance, DoS, backdoor, C. Performance Analysis and Comparisons
and cryptojacking. In terms of the class distribution, we have The dynamic accuracy curves in Fig. 4 clearly demonstrate
CICEVSE2024 which consists of 14,364 benign samples and that the proposed strategy achieves rapid and stable accu-
100,935 attack samples, for a total of 115,299 records. Prior racy improvements for both the global and client models in
to experimentation, both datasets go through rigorous pre 5-client and 7-client scenarios using the CICEVSE2024
processing in order to select only the most relevant and noise dataset. All models converge quickly and reach high accuracy
free features to be used for model development and evaluation. values, highlighting the overall effectiveness of the approach
The dataset was then divided, 80% being used for the training for IoV intrusion detection. This pattern highlights the strong
and the remaining 20% being used for testing in the intrusion learning capacity and stability imparted by the temporal hybrid
detection experiments. deep model, which leverages the complementary strengths of
 TCN and LSTM with attention mechanisms to capture both
B. Performance Metrics short-term and long-term dependencies in client data. The
 close alignment of client curves and the global model further
 To have a thorough assessment of the proposed approach,
 indicates the balanced generalization across all participants
we accounted for multiple rounds and also varied the number
 and efficient knowledge integration through federated aggregaof clients. Precision, recall, F-measure, and accuracy were
 tion. The smooth and consistently high accuracy of the global
used as the evaluation measures. The metrics were calculated
 model in both settings validates the adaptive reinforcement
based on the number of True Positives (TP), False Positives
 learning-based aggregation, which dynamically weighs and
(FP), True Negatives (TN) and False Negatives (FN). The
 combines local updates from heterogeneous clients, thus minresulting performance equations are given in Equations 15-18.
 imizing divergence and ensuring robust global performance
 TP even as the number of clients increases. Notably, as more
 Pr ecision = (15)
 (T P + F P) clients participate (in the 7-client case), the overall trend
NAEEM et al.: ADAPTIVE FEDERATED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH TEMPORAL HYBRID DEEP MODEL 2043

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR D IFFERENT N UMBERS OF C LIENTS U SING CICEVSE2024 DATASET

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR D IFFERENT N UMBERS OF C LIENTS U SING CICIOV2024 DATASET

 TABLE IV
 G LOBAL M ODEL M AXIMUM AND M INIMUM ACCURACY (%) FOR D IFFERENT C LIENTS U SING CICIOV2024 AND CICEVSE2024 DATASETS

of accuracy remains high, confirming the scalability and the results remain consistently high across all classes, with
adaptability of the proposed methodology without sacrificing only minimal variations. These outstanding metrics confirm
convergence speed or stability. Table II indicates that the that the proposed framework can effectively and accurately
proposed method achieves consistently high attack detection, detect both benign and attack classes across a diverse set of
with F1-scores of 97.21%, 97.26%, and 97.11% for 3, 5, and intrusion types, demonstrating not only strong convergence
7 clients, respectively. For the benign class, F1-scores are in training but also excellent generalization in distributed,
79.91%, 79.83%, and 78.76% on the same settings. The results real-world IoV environments. Even though client-level IID
obtained show the good and robust intrusion detection perfor- partitioning is applied, the benign class has a slightly smaller
mance of the framework, in particular for attack detection, F1 score. This is primarily due to dataset-level class priors
even when the number of clients grows. and feature similarity with low-intensity attacks, leading to
 The dynamic accuracy curves Fig. 4 show the effectiveness more benign misclassifications. Simple, non-intrusive fixes
of proposed strategy on CICIOV2024 dataset. For the 3-client like class-weighted loss, small benign oversampling in miniand 5-client models, it is shown that all client models and batches, or post-hoc threshold calibration using ROC/PR can
the global model have very fast and stable convergence in reduce this difference even smaller without changing the
the accuracy, reaching values above 99% in a short time. originally proposed federated methodology.
Comparing the curves of each client and the global model, The loss curves in Fig. 5 clearly show that both the client
we can see that the temporal hybrid deep model has a good and global model losses decrease rapidly and converge to low
ability to support resilient local training, and the adaptive values as training progresses. This rapid and stable reducreinforcement learning aggregation plays an optimal role in tion demonstrates the effectiveness of the Temporal Hybrid
integrating client updates. This fact gives high and stable Deep Model in extracting useful temporal features at each
accuracy even if the number of clients is increased that shows client, allowing for efficient local training. At the same time,
the consistency and scalability of the approach. Table III the adaptive reinforcement learning aggregation consistently
also supports this finding, showing perfect precision, recall, aligns the global loss curve with those of the clients, ensurand F1-scores across all attack families and for each client ing optimal global convergence and minimizing divergence.
configuration. For example, in the 3-client case, benign traffic The close alignment between client and global loss curves
achieves a precision of 99.63%, recall of 99.69%, and F1-score highlights the strong collaboration and robust optimization
of 99.66%, while DOS, GAS, RPM, SPEED, and STEERING achieved through this federated strategy. Table IV shows that
WHEEL classes also report metrics above 99.8% in almost the global model achieves high maximum accuracies across
all cases. Similarly, in the 5-client and 7-client settings, all client settings, with values ranging from 99.85% to 99.57%
2044 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE V
 ROUND -W ISE G LOBAL M ODEL A DAPTIVE AGGREGATION P ERFORMANCE (CICIOV2024, 3 C LIENTS )

Fig. 5. Comparison of loss curves for various client configurations and datasets: (a,b) CICEVSE2024 and (c,d) CICIOV2024.

for CICIOV2024 and 95.18% to 94.90% for CICEVSE2024, of client knowledge. The obtained results demonstrate the
while minimum accuracies remain above 93.17% and 87.07%, efficacy of the proposed scheme in providing high performance
respectively. These results reflect the strong and consistent and reliable intrusion detection in various federated IoV enviperformance of the proposed framework in delivering reli- ronments. Fig. 6 illustrates the result of client’s local model
able accuracy for intrusion detection, even as the number of accuracy change curve against the federated rounds, compared
clients increases. These findings show an optimal precision for to the global model accuracy. Fig. 6(a) shows results for the
curated datasets. However, we predict that accuracy will go CICIoV2024 dataset, and Fig. 6 (b) shows results for the
downward somewhat under noisier real-world IoV conditions. CICEVSE2024 dataset with five participating clients. In both
This will be lessened by proposed DQN-driven aggregation, cases, the global model accuracy after the second round is very
which automatically reduces the impact of unreliable client close to the client models and converges in the later rounds,
updates. demonstrating that the aggregation step is able to maintain
 The results in Fig. 6, along with Table V and Table VI, client knowledge while not reducing the overall performance.
show that RL based adaptive aggregation enables the global Fig. 7 shows very high accuracy for intrusion detection by the
model to consistently match or exceed the accuracy of indi- proposed framework with very few misclassifications in all
vidual clients across rounds. This way, it guarantees speedy classes for the CICIOV2024 (3-clients) and CICEVSE2024
and stable improvements in the global model metrics like (5-clients) datasets. The true positive rate is high and the false
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score and it has shown positive as well as false negative is low in each confusion
a high degree of synchronization and successful integration matrix, which indicates that the system is reliable and robust in
NAEEM et al.: ADAPTIVE FEDERATED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH TEMPORAL HYBRID DEEP MODEL 2045

Fig. 6. Accuracy comparison of clients and aggregated global model per round for (a) CICIOV2024 and (b) CICEVSE2024 datasets.

Fig. 7. Confusion matrix for intrusion detection using (a) CICIOV2024 dataset with 3-clients and (b) CICEVSE2024 dataset with 5-clients.

 TABLE VI
 ROUND -W ISE G LOBAL M ODEL A DAPTIVE AGGREGATION P ERFORMANCE (CICEVSE2024, 5 C LIENTS )

both multi class and binary cases, and most of the predictions improvement across rounds. Table VIII show that the IID data
are along the diagonal of the confusion matrices, respectively. distribution scheme leads to higher and more stable accuracy
Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 clearly show that the IID data distribution for both the global model and individual clients compared
scheme leads to higher and more stable accuracy for both to the non-IID setting in and Table VII. When averaged
the global model and individual clients compared to the over 15 rounds, IID increases accuracy by 3.84 percentage
non-IID setting. In Fig. 8, the IID curve rises sharply and points, ROC–AUC by 22.89 percentage points, precision by
converges smoothly to a higher accuracy, while the non-IID 5.52 percentage points, and F1-score by 1.93 percentage
curve remains flatter with noticeable fluctuations and slower points. Recall stays extremely high in both settings. IID also
2046 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE VII
 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE W ITHOUT IID BASED DATA D ISTRIBUTION S CHEME (CICEVSE2024, 5 C LIENTS )

 TABLE VIII
 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE W ITH IID BASED DATA D ISTRIBUTION S CHEME (CICEVSE2024, 5 C LIENTS )

 TABLE IX
 C OMPARISON OF AGGREGATION M ETHODS FOR C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE (CICEVSE2024, 5 C LIENTS )

 and discriminative federated learning performance. The bar
 graphs in Fig. 9 show that IID partitions provide increasingly greater and higher accuracies throughout rounds for all
 five clients. Non-IID partitions provide lower accuracies that
 exhibit more variability across clients and often achieve a
 plateau earlier. This ongoing gap between IID and Non-IID
 shows how data heterogeneity affects the stability of learning.
 Non-IID settings still have more round-to-round variation,
 even with Reinforcement-based aggregate. Adaptive weighting
 is helpful, but it doesn’t completely make up for uneven client
 distributions. When IID settings are used, clients are more
 closely aligned, which means that generalization is stronger
Fig. 8. Global model accuracy comparison: IID VS Non-IID data distribution and more balanced. In general, balanced data allocation (with
scheme (CICEVSE2024 dataset,5-clients).
 adaptive aggregation) speeds up convergence and enhances
converges more smoothly with less round to round fluctuation, end-of-round performance in a Federated learning intrusion
which shows that balanced partitions lead to more stable detection system. Fig. 10 and Table IX collectively show
NAEEM et al.: ADAPTIVE FEDERATED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH TEMPORAL HYBRID DEEP MODEL 2047

Fig. 9. Client wise accuracy comparison: IID VS Non-IID data distribution scheme (CICEVSE2024 dataset).

 detection. Third, the design is ready for edge use with consumer IoV devices such as telematics and electric vehicle
 chargers.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 This paper presented an adaptive federated learning framework to address the security challenges faced by consumer
 electronics in Internet of Vehicles (IoV) environments, particularly targeting the limitations of traditional FL-based
 intrusion detection approaches with non-IID data and static
 aggregation methods like FedAvg and FedProx. By standardizing and distributing IoV network data IID-wise among
Fig. 10. Global model accuracy comparison for various aggregation methods clients, our method ensures consistent and privacy-preserving
(CICEVSE2024, 5- clients). model training. Each client employs a Temporal Hybrid Deep
 Model (CNN-LSTM-Attention) initialized from the global
 TABLE X model, enhancing the extraction of complex temporal and
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL W ITH spatial patterns. A Deep Q-Network (DQN)-based Rein-
 E XISTING T ECHNIQUES
 forcement Learning (RL) agent at the server dynamically
 determines aggregation weights based on client Q-values,
 adaptively optimizing the global model. Extensive experiments
 on CICIOV2024 and CICEVSE2024 dataset demonstrate significant gains, and the detection accuracy are 99.85% and
 95.18%, respectively. The results show the robustness and
 flexibility of the proposed framework for IoV security in the
that RL-based adaptive aggregation consistently outperforms real world. The research does not examine privacy primitives.
both FedAvg and FedProx across all classification metrics Future work will explore how to handle clients who only
using the CICEVSE2024 dataset with 5 clients. The RL-based participate a few times, which will make deployments even
method achieves the highest accuracy (93.23%), F1-score more reliable in the real world. It will also empower secure
(96.25%), and strong precision and recall, while also deliver- aggregation, differential privacy, and adversarial-robust training steady improvements throughout the rounds as seen in the ing to make it more robust in real world deployments.
figure. This demonstrates that reinforcement learning-based
aggregation enables more effective and stable global model R EFERENCES
learning in federated environments compared to conventional [1] L.-L. Wang, J.-S. Gui, X.-H. Deng, F. Zeng, and Z.-F. Kuang, “Routing
aggregation approaches. To assess the effectiveness of the algorithm based on vehicle position analysis for Internet of Vehicles,”
proposed scheme, its performance was benchmarked against IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 11701–11712, Dec. 2020.
 [2] P. Gope and B. Sikdar, “An efficient privacy-preserving authentication
established approaches, namely FED-IDS [25], DL-IDS [26], scheme for energy internet-based vehicle-to-grid communication,” IEEE
and DL-LeeNET [27]. Experimental results on vehicle-based Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 6607–6618, Nov. 2019.
IDS datasets demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms [3] U. Z. A. Hamid, H. Zamzuri, and D. K. Limbu, “Internet of vehicle
 (IoV) applications in expediting the implementation of smart highway
these existing methods. According to Table X, the proposed of autonomous vehicle: A survey,” in Performability Internet Things.
model achieves higher accuracy. Our approach has three clear Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018, pp. 137–157.
benefits over current federated learning based IDS solutions. [4] N. Hussain, P. Rani, N. Kumar, and M. G. Chaudhary, “A deep
 comprehensive research architecture, characteristics, challenges, issues,
First, an adaptive aggregator based on DQN learns client and benefits of routing protocol for vehicular ad-hoc networks,” Int. J.
weights for each round from performance feedback. The result Distrib. Syst. Technol., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1–23, Sep. 2022.
renders the system more speed up when clients are not IID [5] N. Hassan, K.-L.-A. Yau, and C. Wu, “Edge computing in 5G: A review,”
and stable convergence. Second, a temporal hybrid encoder IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 127276–127289, 2019.
 [6] I. A. Alablani and M. A. Arafah, “Enhancing 5G small cell selection:
(CNN–LSTM–Attention) models both short and long range A neural network and IoV-based approach,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 19,
dependencies in CAN and EVSE traffic for better intrusion p. 6361, Sep. 2021.
2048 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 [7] Y. Zhao, M. Li, L. Lai, N. Suda, D. Civin, and V. Chandra, “Federated [18] C. Regan, M. Nasajpour, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha,
 learning with non-IID data,” 2018, arXiv:1806.00582. and K.-K.-R. Choo, “Federated IoT attack detection using decentralized
 [8] L. Tian, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and edge data,” Mach. Learn. Appl., vol. 8, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100263.
 V. Smith, “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. [19] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
 Mach. Learn. Syst., 2018, pp. 429–450. “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 [9] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, 2017,
 against DoS and spoofing attack in IoV CAN bus,” in Proc. Int. Conf. pp. 1273–1282.
 Cyber Secur., vol. 26, 2024, Paper 101209. [20] S. Jamil, M. Rahman, and Fawad, “A comprehensive survey of digital
[10] E. D. Buedi, A. A. Ghorbani, S. Dadkhah, and R. L. Ferreira, “Enhanc- twins and federated learning for industrial Internet of Things (IIoT),
 ing ev charging station security using a multi-dimensional dataset: Internet of Vehicles (IoV) and Internet of Drones (IoD),” Appl. Syst.
 CICEVSE2024,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Smart Grid Electr. Vehicles, 2024, Innov., vol. 5, no. 3, p. 56, Jun. 2022.
 pp. 171–190. [21] Y. M. Saputra, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, T. X. Vu, E. Dutkiewicz, and
[11] B. Bhola et al., “Quality-enabled decentralized dynamic IoT platform S. Chatzinotas, “Federated learning meets contract theory: Economicwith scalable resources integration,” IET Commun., vol. 19, no. 1, efficiency framework for electric vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
 pp. 2111–2121, Jan. 2025. Comput., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 2803–2817, Aug. 2022.
[12] A. H. Mohd Aman, E. Yadegaridehkordi, Z. S. Attarbashi, R. Hassan, [22] X. Huang, P. Li, R. Yu, Y. Wu, K. Xie, and S. Xie, “FedParking: A
 and Y.-J. Park, “A survey on trend and classification of Internet of Things federated learning based parking space estimation with parked vehicle
 reviews,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 111763–111782, 2020. assisted edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 9,
[13] M. R. Mahmood, M. A. Matin, P. Sarigiannidis, and S. K. Goudos, pp. 9355–9368, Sep. 2021.
 “A comprehensive review on artificial intelligence/machine learning [23] Q. Wu, S. Wang, P. Fan, and P. Fan, “Deep reinforcement learning
 algorithms for empowering the future IoT toward 6G era,” IEEE Access, based vehicle selection for asynchronous federated learning enabled
 vol. 10, pp. 87535–87562, 2022. vehicular edge computing,” in Proc. Int. Congr. Commun., 2023,
[14] J. H. Kim, “6G and Internet of Things: A survey,” J. Manage. Analytics, pp. 3–26.
 vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 316–332, Apr. 2021. [24] A. Boualouache, B. Brik, S.-M. Senouci, and T. Engel, “On-demand
[15] K. Peng, M. Li, H. Huang, C. Wang, S. Wan, and K.-K.-R. Choo, security framework for 5GB vehicular networks,” IEEE Internet Things
 “Security challenges and opportunities for smart contracts in Inter- Mag., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 26–31, Jun. 2023.
 net of Things: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 15, [25] P. Rani et al., “Federated learning-based misbehavior detection for
 pp. 12004–12020, Aug. 2021. the 5G-enabled Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
[16] S. K. Lo, Q. Lu, C. Wang, H.-Y. Paik, and L. Zhu, “A systematic vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 4656–4664, May 2024.
 literature review on federated machine learning: From a software engi- [26] D. Javeed, T. Gao, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “An explainable and resilient
 neering perspective,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–39, intrusion detection system for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 Jun. 2022. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1342–1350, Feb. 2024.
[17] B. Hu, Y. Gao, L. Liu, and H. Ma, “Federated region-learning: An edge [27] P. Suman et al., “An improved deep learning-based intrusion detection
 computing based framework for urban environment sensing,” in Proc. for reliable communication in VANET,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–7. vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 209–217, Feb. 2025.