1074 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Adaptive Multi-Scale Window Segmentation and
 Attention Interaction Transformer for Intrusion
 Detection in Industrial Internet of Things
 Zhi Yu , Jiaming Pei , and Mingpeng Zhu

 Abstract—As the core of modern industrial automation, Early methods rely on convolutional neural networks
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) can achieve data collec- (CNNs) [9], [10], recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [11], [12],
tion, control, and remote operations. However, the complex long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) [13], [14], and
continuous connectivity exposes IIoT to increasing cyber
intrusions. Existing intrusion detection methods often fail related variants. However, CNNs cannot capture temporal deto adapt to diverse temporal attack patterns, lack effective pendencies, while RNNs and LSTMs face vanishing gradients
feature modeling, and perform poorly under class imbal- that hinder long-range dependence learning.
ance. To this end, this article proposes a novel transformer- Recently, transformers have gained attention with strong
based IIoT intrusion detection method. First, an adaptive modeling abilities in IIoT intrusion detection [15], [16], [17].
multi-scale window segmentation (AMSWS) strategy is proposed to dynamically segment traffic sequences via traffic However, several limitations remain. First, most methods rely on
variation. This can capture short-term and long-term in- fixed-size windows, thereby limiting the capture of short-term
trusion behaviors. Second, an attention interaction trans- burst anomalies and long-term stealthy anomalies. Second, most
former (AITrans) is proposed to enhance feature modeling methods lack explicit cross-head and cross-layer information
by enabling inter-head and inter-layer attention interaction.
 interaction, thereby weakening discriminative representations.
Finally, an adaptive focal loss (AFL) is proposed to mitigate
class imbalance by incorporating adaptive class weight and Third, most methods struggle to effectively learn features from
hardness-aware adjustment. This can improve detection rare samples, thereby causing degraded performance on lowperformance on minority-class intrusions. Extensive exper- frequency intrusions.
iments validate the effectiveness of the proposed method To this end, this article proposes a novel transformer-based
for IIoT intrusion detection. IIoT intrusion detection method.
 Index Terms —Attention interaction transformer First, an adaptive multi-scale window segmentation (AM-
(AITrans), industrial Internet of Things (IoT), intrusion SWS) strategy is proposed to capture heterogeneous temporal
detection, window segmentation. patterns for IIoT intrusions. Specifically, when traffic exhibits
 short-term drastic changes, AMSWS applies smaller windows to
 I. INTRODUCTION capture burst threats. Conversely, when traffic exhibits long-term
 hidden threats, AMSWS expands windows to analyze longer
 HE Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) is revolutionizing
T industrial automation and related domains by integrating
intelligent sensing, data communication, and efficient compusequential features. This overcomes the rigidity of fixed-window
 designs by adjusting windows via traffic variation. Although
 some adaptive window techniques have been explored in timetation [1], [2], [3], [4]. As IIoT relies on persistent network series analysis [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], most methods genconnectivity, this makes it an attractive target for cyber attackers. erally involve heavy algorithmic structures, intricate parameter
Traditional security mechanisms often fall short in complex in- tuning, and high computational overhead. In contrast, AMSWS
trusion environments [5], [6], [7], [8]. Therefore, constructing a adopts a lightweight and continuously adjustable mechanism via
robust intrusion detection framework is critical for IIoT security. traffic variation. Without relying on complex statistical analysis, AMSWS generates non-overlapping multi-scale windows,
 Received 25 August 2025; revised 19 September 2025 and 3 Octo- which are directly integrated with subsequent feature mappings
ber 2025; accepted 8 October 2025. Date of publication 4 November to effectively capture both short-term burst anomalies and long-
2025; date of current version 5 February 2026. Paper no. TII-25-5795. term stealthy anomalies.
(Corresponding authors: Jiaming Pei; Mingpeng Zhu.)
 Zhi Yu is with the School of Microelectronics and Communication Then, an attention interaction transformer (AITrans) is pro-
Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China (e-mail: posed to enhance traffic modeling. While recent hierarchical
zhiy@cqu.edu.cn). transformer variants for intrusion detection have improved fea-
 Jiaming Pei is with the School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia (e-mail: jpei0906@uni ture extraction [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], most architectures
.sydney.edu.au). compute multiple attention heads independently within the same
 Mingpeng Zhu is with the School of Civil Engineering and Transporta- layer, lacking explicit inter-head attention interaction. This hintion, South China University of Technology, Guangdong 510641, China
(e-mail: mpzhu@alumni.tongji.edu.cn). ders the learning of complementary patterns across different
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3621208 subspaces. In addition, few existing models incorporate effective
1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
YU et al.: ADAPTIVE MULTI-SCALE WINDOW SEGMENTATION AND ATTENTION INTERACTION TRANSFORMER 1075

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF REVIEWED IOT INTRUSION DETECTION METHODS

mechanisms for inter-layer information reuse. This limits the hi- rare samples, AFL offers a more efficient alternative by
erarchical representation ability. AITrans introduces inter-head directly optimizing the learning with a tailored loss. It
interaction attention (IHIA) and inter-layer interaction attention integrates ACW and HAA to tune the class weight and
(ILIA) to solve these issues. The former can facilitate inter- the focusing parameter. AFL can guide AITrans to focus
head attention interaction to share information across different on rare samples.
attention subspaces. The latter can facilitate inter-layer attention interaction to guide higher transformer layers referencing II. RELATED WORKS
information in lower transformer layers.
 Existing IoT intrusion detection methods can be divided into
 Finally, an adaptive focal loss (AFL) is proposed to mitnon-transformer methods and transformer methods. Table I sumigate class imbalance in IIoT intrusion detection. Different
 marizes highlights and limitations of related methods.
from embedding complex generative models to synthesize rare
samples, AFL incorporates adaptive class weight (ACW) and
 A. Intrusion Detection via Non-Transformer Methods
hardness-aware adjustment (HAA) in focal loss. The former can
dynamically adjust the class weight based on the class frequency, Qathrady et al. [28] proposed a self-attention CNN termed
which ensures that the model is attentive to minority-class SACNN to isolate the most relevant traffic features for intrurare anomalies. The latter can dynamically adjust the focusing sion detection. It incorporates the self-attention mechanism to
parameter based on the sample confidence, which assigns higher compute attention weights from the input data, followed by
loss values to low-confidence hard anomalies. the convolutional layers that utilize these weighted features to
 The contributions of this article are summarized as follows. perform accurate detection.
 1) An AMSWS strategy is proposed to dynamically adjust Li et al. [29] proposed an anomaly-based intrusion detection
 windows. Unlike prior fixed-size windowing methods method termed CRSF. It uses the dimension transformation to
 that lack adaptability to diverse intrusion patterns or convert input data into 2-D images. Spatial features are extracted
 complex adaptive windowing methods that incur high via the CNN, and the generated features are processed via
 computational overhead, AMSWS employs a lightweight the RNN to capture temporal dependencies. A support vector
 window adjustment strategy via traffic variation. AM- machine (SVM) is employed as the classifier to project the
 SWS utilizes smaller windows to capture short-term features and learn nonlinear decision boundaries.
 burst anomalies and larger windows to capture long-term Zeng et al. [30] proposed an unsupervised intrusion detection
 stealthy anomalies. This enables the model to adaptively method termed EvoAAE. Specifically, a variational autoencoder
 align with transient and persistent intrusion patterns. (VAE) based on the generative adversarial network (GAN) is de-
 2) An AITrans is proposed to enhance traffic modeling. Un- signed to adversarially generate multivariate time series. Then,
 like existing transformers that lack explicit cross-head and the particle swarm optimization (PSO) with an efficient binary
 cross-layer information exchange, AITrans utilizes IHIA encoding is designed to optimize hyper-parameters and neural
 and ILIA to improve traffic representation. AITrans en- architectures in the adversarial VAE.
 ables the extraction of complementary information across Lu et al. [31] proposed an intrusion detection method termed
 attention subspaces and allows higher layers to effectively MODEO-CNN based on the multi-objective joint optimizautilize the cues learned in lower layers. tion, which integrates the neural architecture search (NAS)
 3) An AFL is proposed to mitigate class imbalance. Un- and the hyper-parameter optimization (HPO). It introduces a
 like embedding complex generative models to synthesize hybrid variable-length encoding combining binary and integer
1076 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

encoding to represent the number of blocks, network topology, causal attention to learn causal features. The final module groups
block parameters, and key hyper-parameters. samples differing from known categories as unknown types and
 Vadakkethil et al. [32] proposed an intrusion detection method classifies these samples with a causal transformer.
that combines the Mayfly optimization algorithm (MOA) with Wang et al. [38] proposed an intrusion detection framework
the bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM). MOA is used for feature termed ImagTIDS, which integrates the Gramian angular difselection by balancing exploration and exploitation to identify ference fields (GADF) with the transformer. The traffic is transthe most relevant features. BiLSTM is used for processing input formed into images using GADF to retain temporal and global
to capture long-range temporal dependencies. features. ImagTrans then extracts local and global features. By
 Yang et al. [33] proposed an intrusion detection method that leveraging self-attention, the model dynamically adjusts attenintegrates the attention, the bidirectional gated recurrent units tion weights to emphasize critical features while reducing the
(BiGRU), and the Inception CNN. A mixed sampling strategy impact of redundant information.
is adopted to mitigate the impact of data imbalance, while Overall, intrusion detection methods via transformer demondenoising techniques are applied to reduce noise introduced strate significant strengths in capturing long-range dependenduring resampling. cies to improve robustness. Besides, transformer variants can
 Overall, intrusion detection methods via non-transformer per- integrate other information to enrich features. However, these
form effectively in learning local spatial features and modeling methods face some limitations. First, these methods mainly
short-term temporal dependencies. Besides, these methods ex- rely on fixed-size windows, which fail to adapt to the diverse
hibit clear advantages in terms of lightweight computation and temporal patterns of intrusions. This limits the ability to capture
relatively low model complexity. However, the limited recep- short-term burst anomalies and long-term stealthy anomalies.
tive fields and strictly sequential computation hinder effective Although some adaptive windowing strategies have been exmodeling of long-range temporal dependencies. Furthermore, plored in time-series analysis, most methods involve complex
most methods rely on complex sampling strategies or generative algorithms and analysis. Then, these transformer-based methods
algorithms to mitigate class imbalance, which increases design compute attention heads independently within the same layer.
complexity. The explicit inter-head and inter-layer information interaction
 are ignored. This impedes cross-subspace learning and weakens
 hierarchical representation. Finally, these methods cannot effec-
B. Intrusion Detection via Transformer Methods tively address class imbalance. Although some methods utilize
 Liang et al. [25] proposed a multi-level intrusion detection generative models to synthesize minority-class samples, such
model that integrates the transformer with the discrete wavelet methods incur high computational cost and introduce synthetic
transform (DWT). By embedding DWT and multi-wavelet noise.
learning into the transformer, the model effectively captures To solve the above three issues, AMSWS, AITrans, and
frequency-based features from IoT traffic, improving the de- AFL are proposed. AMSWS embeds a lightweight window
tection accuracy for intrusion behaviors. adjustment strategy to adaptively divide traffic for capturing
 Fares et al. [34] proposed an intrusion detection model termed short-term burst anomalies and long-term stealthy anomalies.
TFKAN, which incorporates the Kolmogorov-Arnold network AITran embeds IHIA and ILIA to facilitate inter-head and
(KAN) layers in place of the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) inter-layer attention interaction for improving traffic modeling.
layers. The KAN utilizes learnable univariate functions instead AFL embeds ACW and HAA to tune the class weight and the
of fixed weights, allowing for more compact and expressive focusing parameter for mitigating class imbalance.
representations. Therefore, TFKAN achieves competitive performance with fewer parameters. III. METHOD
 Moghaddam et al. [35] proposed a hybrid architecture that
integrates the transformer for capturing temporal and contextual A. Overall Architecture
dependencies with the GAN for generating synthetic data to The proposed architecture is shown in Fig. 1. AMSWS adjusts
address class imbalance. Besides, an improved non-dominated windows via traffic variation. AITrans enhances traffic modeling
sorting biogeography-based optimization algorithm is intro- via attention interaction. AFL mitigates class imbalance by
duced to optimize hyper-parameters. tuning the class weight and the focusing parameter.
 Wang et al. [36] proposed an intrusion detection method
termed DIFT to address class imbalance by combining the
 B. Adaptive Multi-Scale Window Segmentation
diffusion model (DM) with the transformer. The former learns
features of minority-class samples and generates more balanced Considering the limitations of fixed-window strategies, an
data. To improve processing efficiency, a patching method is AMSWS is proposed to dynamically adjust windows. It conapplied to shorten the input and enhance local features. Sub- sists of traffic preprocessing, traffic variation analysis, adaptive
sequently, a time transformer is designed to extract local and window adjustment, and traffic segmentation.
global features. 1) Traffic Preprocessing: The input is a complete segment of
 Zeng et al. [37] proposed a causal transformer for intrusion network traffic including T time steps as follows:
detection. The first module classifies samples into known categories using prior knowledge. The second module employs X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xt , . . ., xT } (1)
YU et al.: ADAPTIVE MULTI-SCALE WINDOW SEGMENTATION AND ATTENTION INTERACTION TRANSFORMER 1077

Fig. 1. Overall architecture of our proposed method for IIoT intrusion detection. It consists of AMSWS, AITrans, and AFL. First, AMSWS
dynamically segments traffic with adaptive windows. It effectively captures anomalous traffic patterns at different temporal scales. The segmented
traffic is mapped to a fixed dimension with PCA. Next, the traffic sequence is fed into AITrans for feature modeling. The multi-head self-attention is
enhanced through AHI. It integrates IHIA and ILIA to improve feature representation. Finally, AFL integrates ACW and HAA to tune the class weight
and the focusing parameter. It can guide AITrans to focus on rare samples and learn more discriminative features.

where xt is the traffic data at the tth time step. Then, based on the window adjustment factor, the adaptive
 Then, X is normalized with z-score as follows: window size is calculated as follows:
 xt − μ Wg = Wmax − (Wmax − Wmin ) · αg (7)
 x̃t = (2)
 σ
 where Wmin and Wmax are min and max windows.
 X̃ = {x̃1 , x̃2 , . . ., x̃T }. (3) αg is negatively correlated with the window size. Specifically,
 as Rt gradually increases, αg also gradually increases and
 2) Traffic Variation Analysis: For normalized traffic, the first- approaches 1, while the corresponding window gradually deorder difference analysis is first performed to measure the traffic creases to Wmin . At this point, a smaller window can ensure finer
change between adjacent times as follows: segmentation of short-term anomalies. On the contrary, as Rt
 Δxt = x̃t − x̃t−1 . (4) gradually decreases, αg also gradually decreases and approaches
 0, while the corresponding window gradually increases to Wmax .
 Considering that the change in a single time step may be At this point, a larger window can facilitate the modeling of
affected by noise, the mean variation rate within the sliding long-term anomalies.
window is calculated to measure local fluctuations as follows: Finally, through window adjustments, G non-overlapping
 t
 windows are obtained. The multi-scale window set is as follows:
 1 
 Rt = |Δxi | (5) W = {W1 , W2 , . . ., WG }. (8)
 M
 i=t−M +1
 4) Traffic Segmentation: Based on the multi-scale window
where Rt is the traffic variation rate at time step t, M is the set, the normalized traffic sequence X̃ is segmented accordingly.
sliding window with a fixed size to capture the traffic change. For each window, the traffic segment is defined as follows:
 3) Adaptive Window Adjustment: The objective of AMSWS
 Fg = {x̃startg , x̃startg +1 , . . ., x̃startg +Wg −1 }. (9)
is to adjust windows via traffic variation. This allows the system to adapt to different temporal scales of anomalous traffic The adjustment of window lengths ensures the model adapts to
patterns. First, the window adjustment factor is calculated to various types of anomalies. Finally, after window segmentation,
control the range of window variations as follows: G traffic segments are obtained as follows:
 1 F = {F1 , F2 , . . ., FG }. (10)
 αg = (6)
 1 + e−k(Rt −θ) Since the lengths of different traffic segments vary and the
where k and θ jointly determine the window sensitivity to traffic subsequent network requires input data to keep the same dimenvariation, thereby controlling the adaptive window adjustment. sions, all traffic segments are transformed into a uniform shape
Specifically, k regulates the response intensity of the window to via principal component analysis (PCA) and linear mapping as
traffic variation magnitude. θ controls the sensitivity threshold follows:
to the traffic variation rate. As Rt approaches the threshold, the Fg = fLM (fPCA (Fg )) (11)
variation in αg becomes more significant. By changing k and θ,
the corresponding adjustments can be made to the window size. where fLM is linear mapping and fPCA is PCA processing.
1078 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 2. AHI module. It consists of IHIA and ILIA. Fig. 3. Transformer block and AITrans block.

 Finally, the generated traffic segment set is as follows: issue, this article proposes an ILIA mechanism. This enables the
 transformer to share attention information across layers, thereby
 F  = {F1 , F2 , . . ., FG }. (12)
 enhancing overall modeling capability. To establish inter-layer
 information flow, residual connections are introduced, allowing
C. Attention Interaction Transformer
 each current-layer attention to reference the previous adjacent
 Recently, transformers have achieved significant progress in layer as follows:
traffic modeling and intrusion detection. However, these meth- H
ods have some limitations. First, information sharing among at- (l) (l)
  (l−1)
 Bh = Bh + bj B j (16)
tention heads is lacking. Second, inter-layer information flow is
 j=1
limited. Therefore, this article proposes an AITrans. It introduces
an attention-head interaction (AHI) mechanism as illustrated in (l) (l−1)
 where Bh is the hth attention head in the current layer, Bj
Fig. 2 to enhance information interaction. AHI consists of IHIA is the jth attention head in the previous adjacent layer, bj is the
and ILIA. weight and satisfies
 1) Inter-head Interaction Attention: In transformers, multiple
attention heads focus on different feature patterns independently. exp(μj )
 bj =  H (17)
Each head computes attention distributions in isolation, and in- m=1 exp(μm )
formation sharing is not efficient. This leads to situations where
 where μj is a trainable parameter.
some attention heads may redundantly focus on some specific
 With residual connections, each layer can maintain its own
traffic features, while others may entirely overlook these critical
 information while incorporating historical information from
patterns. Therefore, this article proposes an IHIA mechanism.
 the previous adjacent layer. It enhances the ability to capture
It enables different attention heads to share information and
 anomalous patterns. In addition to introducing all attention heads
enhance feature representation capability. First, the attention
 from the previous adjacent layer, this article further computes
from all heads is aggregated to integrate multi-head information
 an aggregated representation of all lower-layer attention heads
as follows:
 to strengthen the information transmission as follows:
 H
 
 (l) (l) l−1 
 H
 Af = ah Ah (13)  (s)
 h=1 Ba(l) = Bj . (18)
 s=1 j=1
 (l)
where Ah is the attention calculated by the hth attention head
in the lth layer, ah is the weight for this head and satisfies Then, perform a weighted fusion of the inter-layer aggregated
 attention with the current-layer attention as follows:
 exp(λh )
 a h = H (14) (l) (l)
 Bh = βBh + (1 − β)Ba(l) (19)
 j=1 exp(λj )

where λh is a trainable parameter. where β controls fusion of different types of attention.
 Then, utilize the aggregated attention information to update ILIA enhances inter-layer information flow and improves
each attention head as follows: inter-layer information sharing. Additionally, ILIA enables
 (l) (l) (l)
 higher-layer features to retain lower-layer details. It allows local
 Ah = αAh + (1 − α)Af , h = 1, 2, . . . , H (15) features extracted at lower layers to influence global feature
where α controls fusion of original and aggregated attention. modeling at higher layers, thereby improving the ability to
 IHIA facilitates cross-attention information exchange be- capture complex traffic patterns.
tween attention heads. It avoids the information fragmentation Finally, by integrating IHIA and ILIA, AHI produces the
caused by the independent computation of attention heads and processed attention as follows:
improves global modeling capabilities. (l) (l) (l)
 Ch = Ah + Bh . (20)
 2) Inter-layer Interaction Attention: In transformers, the
multi-head self-attention computation in each layer relies solely As shown in Fig. 3, AHI is combined with the traditional
on the input from the current layer, and attention information transformer block to construct an AITrans block. AITrans blocks
across different layers cannot interact directly. To overcome this are stacked to construct AITrans for traffic modeling.
YU et al.: ADAPTIVE MULTI-SCALE WINDOW SEGMENTATION AND ATTENTION INTERACTION TRANSFORMER 1079

D. Adaptive Focal Loss 2) Hardness-Aware Adjustment: Focal loss mitigates the impact of easy samples by assigning higher loss to hard samples.
 In IIoT intrusion detection, anomalous traffic is only triggered
by attacks or abnormal events. The class imbalance causes the However, it employs a fixed focusing parameter. This rigid focus
 is difficult to adapt to different data distributions. It has some
model to favor learning normal traffic patterns, thereby reducing
 positive effects on hard samples, but may not be sufficiently
detection performance on minority classes. Therefore, focal
loss [39] is introduced to enhance the detection capability for fine-grained. Therefore, this article introduces HAA, which
 dynamically adjusts the focusing parameter based on the sample
minority-class samples. However, this loss still suffers from the
 confidence as follows:
issue of fixed parameters, which makes it difficult to adapt to
different data distributions. γt = γmax − (γmax − γmin )(1 − pt ) (24)
 Therefore, AFL is proposed to improve focal loss by incorporating ACW and HAA. ACW adjusts the class weight at where γmin and γmax are min and max focusing parameter, and
the global level via class frequency. It aligns with the sample pt is the sample confidence. For easy samples (pt is high), γt is
balancing principle and mitigates majority-class dominance. In- close to γmax , the loss will decrease. Similarly, for hard samples
spired by hardness-aware learning, HAA modulates the focusing (pt is low), γt is close to γmin , the loss will increase.
parameter via sample confidence to focus on hard samples. By dynamically adjusting γt , HAA ensures that the model
Unlike using complex generative models to generate samples, focuses more on hard samples. This reduces over-reliance on
AFL directly improves the loss with lightweight and adaptive easy samples and enhances the ability to detect minority-class
mechanisms. This allows the model to better handle rare anoma- anomalies. HAA uses a lightweight, hardness-driven adaptation
lies and avoid the computational cost from generative methods. mechanism that reflects sample difficulty during training. By
The standard focal loss is as follows: dynamically adjusting the focusing parameter via sample confidence, HAA achieves more flexible and data-driven optimiza-
 LF L = −(1 − pt )γ log(pt ) (21) tion, thereby better highlighting hard samples. This provides a
 theoretically sound and practically effective solution for finewhere pt is the sample confidence, γ is the focusing parameter. grained optimization in class balance.
 To enhance focal loss in handling imbalanced data, AFL By integrating ACW and HAA, AFL not only adjusts the
introduces ACW and HAA as follows: class weight via class frequency but also modifies the focusing
 LAF L = −ωt (1 − pt )γt log(pt ) (22) parameter via sample difficulty. This focuses on minority-class
 samples and mitigates class imbalance. When combined with
where ωt corresponds to ACW, which adjusts the class-specific AITrans, it further enhances intrusion detection capabilities.
weight via class frequency to focus on minority-class samples.
γt corresponds to HAA, which adjusts the contribution of traffic IV. EXPERIMENTS
via sample confidence to focus on hard samples.
 1) Adaptive Class Weight: In the training, minority-class A. Datasets
samples struggle to exert sufficient influence on the model, This article constructs IIoTA and IIoTB datasets. Each sammaking it difficult to accurately detect rare anomalous traffic. ple is captured using Wireshark and system logging modules.
Therefore, this article introduces ACW to dynamically adjust The intrusion categories in IIoTA and IIoTB are aligned with
the weights for different classes. The core idea is to modify TON_IoT [6], thereby covering the major intrusion types comthe class weight via the corresponding class frequency, thereby monly observed in IIoT systems. Specifically, IIoTA and IIoTB
enhancing the influence of minority classes as follows: contain ten categories: Normal, DoS, DDoS, Scanning, MITM,
 1 Injection, XSS, Password, Backdoor, and Ransomware.
 ωt = √ (23) In real-world IIoT networks, normal traffic typically domift + 
 nates, while anomalous traffic accounts for a relatively small
where ft denotes the frequency of class t, it is computed globally proportion. Moreover, the frequency of occurrence varies across
from the entire training set. different intrusions. To reflect this realistic setting, different
 When the class frequency ft is high (majority-class traffic), numbers of samples are collected for different categories. IIoTA
the weight ωt is relatively small, preventing the model from contains 218 863 samples, the quantities for each category are
being overly biased toward majority-class traffic. Conversely, 100 392, 12 032, 10 679, 9904, 13 561, 8996, 9104, 11 019, 9531,
when the class frequency ft is low (minority-class traffic), the and 33 645. IIoTB contains 436 794 samples, the quantities
weight ωt is larger, enhancing the model’s focus on minority- for each category are 231 123, 31 529, 23 638, 19 177, 23 498,
class traffic. This adaptive balance improves the model’s ability 22 916, 19 973, 36 145, 20 561, and 8234. These distributions
to detect anomalies in imbalanced datasets. ACW strengthens are intended to realistically represent traffic imbalances.
the impact of minority-class samples, preventing the model Each traffic sample is represented as a fixed-length time series
from overfitting to majority-class traffic. Besides, ACW achieves with 300 time steps. This setting can capture significant intrusion
dynamic weight assignment according to the class distribution. patterns and retain sufficient contextual information. It also
It adaptively adjusts class importance at the global level. This avoids gradient vanishing and excessive computational overhead
data-driven adjustment reflects the class distribution during caused by overly long sequences. In addition, many studies on
training and provides a theoretically grounded yet lightweight intrusion detection adopt sequence lengths of around 300 time
solution to class imbalance. steps for input construction [17], [40].
1080 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 into cross-entropy loss. It fails to suppress the dominance of
 easy samples and address class imbalance. If γ is too large,
 the loss contributions of samples are excessively amplified,
 causing gradient fluctuations and unstable training. Therefore,
 setting γmin = 1 and γmax = 5 can effectively guide the model
 to suppress easy samples and to focus on hard samples for
 mitigating the issue of class imbalance.
 The other parameters are: M = 40 in (5), k = 3 and θ = 0.6
Fig. 4. Analysis of training process. in (6), α = 0.3 in (15), β = 0.6 in (19). These parameters are
 determined through comparative experiments in Figs. 5–10.

 Each time step contains a 128-D feature. This setting provides C. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
sufficient feature space to represent complex traffic patterns.
This also avoids the excessive computational cost and overfitting To validate the feasibility of the proposed method, comrisks that arise from higher dimensions. Besides, many studies on parative experiments are conducted in Table II. ACNN-IDS
intrusion detection adopt similar feature dimensions [10], [41]. [48], INIDS [49], NID-BAI [33], DINet [50], and VAE-
 For IIoTA/IIoTB, 70% samples are treated as the training set, WACGAN [51] are non-transformer methods. DWTrans [25],
30% samples are treated as the test set. This split is widely BBO-CFAT [26], MF-Net [52], ImagTIDS [38], and FlowTransadopted in intrusion detection studies [5], [42]. The 70% training former [53] are transformer methods. The proposed method
portion provides enough data to learn diverse traffic patterns and can achieve the best intrusion detection performance, with the
intrusion behaviors, while the 30% test portion ensures robust Acc/F1 score of 99.1%/98.7% on IIoTA and 99.6%/99.2%
evaluation of generalization performance. on IIoTB. Compared to other methods, the proposed approach improves the Acc by 1.0%∼3.1% and 1.1%∼2.5%
 on IIoTA and IIoTB. It also improves the F1 score by
B. Implementation Details
 1.3%∼3.3% and 1.2%∼2.8% on two datasets. When compared
 All experiments are conducted on a workstation equipped to the best-performing transformer-based method FlowTranswith NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU, Intel Core i9-12900 K CPU, former, AITrans can achieve the Acc/F1 score improvement of
Ubuntu 20.04, Python 3.7, and PyTorch 1.8.1. Accuracy (Acc), 1.0%/1.3% on IIoTA and 1.1%/1.2% on IIoTB.
and F1 score are evaluation metrics. The complexity analysis is shown in Table II. To evaluate
 The Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999 is em- the model complexity, this article considers two categories of
ployed to train AITrans. These are default settings in the Adam metrics based on the association with complexity. The first catepaper and have been validated in deep learning [43]. The initial gory of metrics has a relatively strong correlation to complexity,
learning rate is 0.001, which allows the model to converge including Parameters (Params), FLOPs, GPU Usage (GU), CPU
efficiently while maintaining stability. A decay factor of 0.1 is Usage (CU), GPU Power (GP), CPU Power (CP), Inference
set to reduce the learning rate during the training stage, which Time (IT) per sample, GPU Energy (GE), and CPU Energy (CE).
avoids oscillation and overfitting. These settings are commonly The lower these metrics, the lower the model complexity. Among
adopted in intrusion detection studies [44], [45]. them, Params, FLOPs, and IT are three key metrics. Params
 The common batch sizes are 32, 64, 128, and 256 in intrusion represents the number of trainable parameters, namely the total
detection. In a reasonable range, larger batches aid training amount of weights and biases in the model. FLOPs represents
stability and convergence speed. However, excessively large the number of floating-point operations in a single inference,
batches cause overfitting and exceed GPU memory. Therefore, a reflecting the arithmetic computations during one forward pass.
batch size of 128 is adopted to strike a balance between training IT represents the time taken for a sample to be processed from
speed and generalization. Each batch includes eight categories, input into the network to final classification. In general, under
each category with 16 samples. These settings are commonly the same software and hardware conditions, a more complex
adopted in intrusion detection studies [46], [47]. model tends to exhibit larger Params, higher FLOPs, and longer
 The parameters in (7) are Wmin = 10 and Wmax = 100. Set- IT. However, the relationship among Params, FLOPs, and IT
ting Wmin = 10 captures short-term fluctuations to detect rapidly is not strictly proportional, because these metrics depend not
changing and bursty anomalies. Setting Wmax = 100 covers only on model size but also on architectural design choices
longer intrusion patterns to detect slow and stealthy anomalies. and data processing strategies. The second category of metrics
If the window is too small, contextual information may be lost. If has a relatively weak correlation to complexity, including Inthe window is too large, critical features may be smoothed out. ference Time/Parameters (IT/Params), GPU Energy/Parameters
Therefore, setting Wmin = 10 and Wmax = 100 can provide a (GE/Params), and CPU Energy/Parameters (CE/Params). These
balance that enables the model to effectively capture short-term metrics provide additional insights into algorithmic efficiency
and long-term intrusions. per parameter, but they may not directly reflect overall com-
 The parameters in (24) are γmin = 1 and γmax = 5. The orig- plexity. When Params increases significantly, these metrics may
inal focal loss paper recommends γ = 2. Building on this, the decrease even if IT, GE, and CE are higher. Therefore, a more
range of γ is further extended to allow adaptation to samples complex model with larger Params may yield a lower IT/Params,
of varying difficulty. If γ is too small, the loss may degenerate GE/Params, and CE/Params.
YU et al.: ADAPTIVE MULTI-SCALE WINDOW SEGMENTATION AND ATTENTION INTERACTION TRANSFORMER 1081

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS

 For model complexity, AITrans has 37.2 M Params, 32.6 G TABLE III
 ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT WINDOW SEGMENTATION STRATEGIES
FLOPs, 23.8% GU, 61.7% CU, 150 W GP, 78 W CP, 10.8 ms
IT, 45.0E-8 kWh GE, 23.4E-8 kWh CE, 0.29 ms/M IT/Params,
1.21E-8 kWh/M GE/Params, and 0.63E-8 kWh/M CE/Params.
Compared to non-transformer intrusion detection methods,
AITrans exhibits higher complexity due to the intensive attention
computations inside the transformer. Compared to transformerbased methods, AITrans has the smallest Params. FLOPs, GU,
CU, GP, CP, GE, and CE are also relatively low, and the IT is
relatively fast, with only a 1.2 ms increase compared to DW-
Trans [25]. Due to the relatively small Params in AITrans, the and complexity without IHIA/ILIA. The results show that
IT/Params, GE/Params, and CE/Params show certain increases embedding IHIA and ILIA brings significant performance
compared to most transformer-based methods. Among all meth- improvements. Simultaneously, the parameters remain almost
ods, VAE-WACGAN [51] exhibits relatively low complexity, unchanged, since IHIA and ILIA perform computations on
achieves the fastest inference speed, and attains the lowest the existing attention without introducing many additional
energy consumption. It obtains the lowest Parmas, FLOPs, GU, learnable parameters. Although the inclusion of IHIA and ILIA
CU, GP, CP, IT, GE, and CE. However, due to the very small increases the model complexity to some extent, the overall
Params, the IT/Params, GE/Params, and CE/Params are higher complexity remains within an acceptable range.
compared to other methods. Besides, owing to the limited modeling ability of non-transformer architectures, VAE-WACGAN D. Analysis of Training Convergence
achieves lower Acc/F1 score compared to transformer-based To further analyze the training process of AITrans, the loss
methods. Specifically, AITrans improves the Acc/F1 score by variation during the training process is illustrated in Fig. 4. On
2.8%/2.6% and 2.4%/3.2% compared to VAE-WACGAN. But IIoTA, the loss starts from 7.3 and decreases rapidly during
AITrans increases Parmas by 32.8 M, FLOPs by 28.9 G, GU the early epochs. Afterwards, the rate of loss reduction gradby 15.3%, CU by 32.3%, GP by 38 W, CP by 22 W, IT by ually slows down. When the epoch reaches around 80, the loss
8.2 ms, GE by 36.9E-8 kWh, CE by 19.4E-8 kWh. Among gradually stabilizes at around 1.2. On IIoTB, the initial loss
transformer-based methods, FlowTransformer [53] yields the is 8.8, and a similar trend is observed with a rapid decline in
largest FLOPs, which causes a high computational burden and the first stage, followed by a slower decrease until convergence
a low inference speed. Compared to FlowTransformer, VAE- at the 95th epoch, reaching a final loss of about 1.1. After
WACGAN reduces Parmas by 45.3 M, FLOPs by 68.9 G, GU by convergence, the loss fluctuates slightly, but the amplitude of
20.0%, CU by 30.5%, GP by 43 W, CP by 23 W, IT by 9.6 ms, GE variation remains minimal, indicating the stability of the training
by 44.4E-8 kWh, CE by 22.8E-8 kWh. Due to the larger Params process. These results confirm that AITrans exhibits efficient and
of FlowTransformer, its IT/Params, GE/Params, and CE/Params stable convergence on IIoTA and IIoTB.
are lower than those of VAE-WACGAN. Compared to AITrans,
FlowTransformer increases complexity in the main metrics. In
 E. Analysis of AMSWS
summary, VAE-WACGAN is the fastest method with low complexity. By contrast, AITrans introduces higher complexity due To validate the effectiveness of AMSWS, this article conducts
to the transformer architecture, but the increase is acceptable. comparative experiments against fixed-scale window segmen-
Compared to other transformer-based methods, AITrans still tation (Size = 10/20/50/100/200) in Table III. The results
maintains relatively low complexity while achieving the best demonstrate the effectiveness of AMSWS compared to fixed-
Acc/F1 score. scale window segmentation. On IIoTA and IIoTB, AMSWS con-
 Compared to the basic transformer, the additional complexity sistently achieves superior performance, obtaining the highest
of AITrans primarily comes from IHIA and ILIA. To further Acc/F1 score. These results indicate that the adaptive window
investigate the influence, this article analyzes the performance segmentation strategy can dynamically adjust the window to
1082 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 5. Analysis of parameter M . Fig. 7. Analysis of parameter θ.

 TABLE IV
 ANALYSIS OF IHIA AND ILIA

Fig. 6. Analysis of parameter k. anomalies are smoothed out and ignored, which causes the
 model to lose sensitivity to critical attacks. The best performance
 is achieved when k = 3 and θ = 0.6. In contrast, without introcapture diverse temporal features of anomalies. Among fixed- ducing these parameters (k = 1 and θ = 0), the performance
scale methods, the optimal fixed window size is 50, yielding drops. Specifically, when k = 1, the Acc/F1 score decreases to
the Acc/F1 scores of 97.6%/97.4% on IIoTA and 98.6%/97.8% 98.57%/98.20% on IIoTA and 99.07%/98.55% on IIoTB. When
on IIoTB. Compared to this best-performing fixed-scale win- θ = 0, the Acc/F1 score decreases to 98.42%/98.11% on IIoTA
dow, AMSWS enhances the Acc/F1 score by 1.5%/1.3% and and 99.05%/98.63% on IIoTB. These results clearly demonstrate
1.0%/1.4%. These improvements highlight the robustness of the effectiveness of introducing k and θ. By controlling the
AMSWS to capture both short-term burst anomalies and long- sensitivity of the window to traffic variations, the model can
term subtle anomalies in IIoT environments. effectively enhance the ability to represent critical anomalies.
 The parameter M in (5) controls the window size for traffic Therefore, these parameters are set to k = 3 and θ = 0.6.
variation analysis. To investigate the impact of M on performance, comparative experiments are conducted with different
M in Fig. 5. As M increases, the performance exhibits a F. Analysis of AITrans
rise-then-fall trend. Specifically, when M increases from 10 to In AITrans, AHI includes IHIA and ILIA. To validate the
40, the model covers a longer temporal range, thereby enabling effectiveness of IHIA and ILIA, this article conducts ablation
more comprehensive extraction of traffic variation characteris- studies in Table IV. Experimental results show that using either
tics. This leads to an improvement in performance, reaching IHIA or ILIA provides noticeable performance improvements
the peak when M = 40. However, as M continues to increase, compared to the standard transformer. Specifically, using single
the excessively large window introduces redundant informa- IHIA brings the Acc/F1 score improvements of 1.1%/1.5% on
tion and weakens the ability to capture critical traffic patterns. IIoTA and 0.9%/1.2% on IIoTB, while applying single ILIA
Moreover, an overly large window may smooth out short-term brings enhancements of 0.8%/0.9% and 0.5%/0.8%. It inditraffic fluctuations, thereby reducing the model’s sensitivity to cates that both modules individually strengthen the capability to
fine-grained anomalies. This causes a gradual decline in per- model complex anomaly patterns. Furthermore, when IHIA and
formance. These findings highlight that the choice of window ILIA are combined, the model achieves optimal performance.
size M is crucial for balancing feature coverage and effective This highlights the complementary nature of the two proposed
information extraction. A window that is too small may fail to attention mechanisms. The inter-head and inter-layer attention
capture sufficient context, whereas a window that is too large interaction collaboratively enhance the transformer’s ability to
may introduce redundancy and obscure anomalies. Therefore, identify anomalous IIoT traffic patterns.
this parameter is set to M = 40. To further evaluate the impact of IHIA and ILIA on perfor-
 The parameters k and θ in (6) determine the window sensitiv- mance, this article compares the intra-class feature distances
ity to traffic variation. To validate the effectiveness and analyze and inter-class feature distances under different attention mechthe effect of k and θ on performance, comparative experiments anisms in Fig. 8. The results show that on IIoTA and IIoTB,
are conducted in Figs. 6 and 7. As k and θ increase, the per- in the absence of any attention enhancement, intra-class feature
formance first rises and then declines. This confirms that the distances remain relatively large, while inter-class distances are
moderate increase allows the model to capture traffic fluctuations comparatively small. There is a significant overlap between
more effectively. When k is too large, the model becomes overly distance distributions. Introducing either IHIA or ILIA can
sensitive to traffic fluctuations, which tends to amplify noise or effectively reduce intra-class distances and increase inter-class
non-critical variations. When θ is too large, many fine-grained distances, thereby narrowing the overlap region and improving
YU et al.: ADAPTIVE MULTI-SCALE WINDOW SEGMENTATION AND ATTENTION INTERACTION TRANSFORMER 1083

Fig. 8. Analysis of intraclass and interclass feature distance. Fig. 9. Analysis of parameter α.

 TABLE V
 ANALYSIS OF ATTENTION AGGREGATION FROM PREVIOUS LAYERS

 Fig. 10. Analysis of parameter β.

the inter-class separability of different classes. Notably, individual IHIA yields better results than ILIA, which aligns with
the findings from quantitative analysis. When both IHIA and
ILIA are integrated, the model achieves the most significant
performance improvement, with efficient optimization of both
intra-class compactness and inter-class separability. These experimental findings confirm the effectiveness of the proposed Fig. 11. Analysis of SFL and AFL.
attention enhancement strategies.
 ILIA integrates attention from all previous transformer layers. TABLE VI
To validate the effectiveness, the performance when using the ANALYSIS OF ACW AND HAA
attention from the previous P layers is analyzed. AITrans consists of eight layers, P = 1/2/3/4/5/6/7 can be set. P = 7
means aggregating the attention from all previous layers. In
addition, this article compares the performance under a weighted
aggregation strategy, in which the weights for layers gradually
increase as the layer deepens, the results are in Table V. With the
increase in aggregated layers, the performance improves. This
 performance observed when β = 0.6. In AHI, such two parammeans aggregating information from more layers can capture
 eters can balance the original information and the aggregated
richer features. Compared to using only the attention from the
 information. When an appropriate balance is properly mainadjacent layer (P = 1), where the Acc/F1 score of 98.1%/97.5%
 tained during information fusion, the interaction mechanism
on IIoTA and 98.3%/97.8% on IIoTB are achieved, the perforcan maximally enhance feature representations. Therefore, these
mance when aggregating all previous layers (P = 7) is improved
 parameters are set to α = 0.3 and β = 0.6.
by 1.0%/1.2% and 1.3%/1.4%. The weighted aggregation strategy also achieves relatively high performance, but it is slightly
inferior to the best result at P = 7. This indicates that although G. Analysis of AFL
weighted aggregation also leverages information from all lay- To validate the effectiveness of AFL, experiments are coners, the gradually increasing weights weaken the influence of ducted against the standard focal loss (SFL). The results in
shallow information. This causes fine-grained patterns not to be Fig. 11 indicate that AFL outperforms SFL. AFL improves
fully utilized. Simultaneously, the excessive emphasis on deeper the Acc/F1 score by 1.0%/1.2% and 1.3%/1.4%. These results
layers causes the model to overly rely on high-level features. demonstrate that AFL effectively alleviates the issue of class im-
 This article further analyzes the parameters α and β in AHI balance. It enables the model to better detect rare intrusions that
as demonstrated in Figs. 9 and 10. As α increases from 0 to are difficult to identify. To investigate the contributions of ACW
1, the performance on IIoTA and IIoTB initially improves and and HAA in AFL, this article conducts ablation experiments in
then declines, achieving optimal results at α = 0.3. Similarly, Table VI. The results show that both ACW and HAA enhance
as β increases from 0 to 1, the performance also exhibits an the performance. Specifically, using individual ACW brings
initial upward and subsequent downward trend, with the best the Acc/F1 score improvements of 0.7%/0.9% on IIoTA and
1084 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 Second, although AFL can mitigate class imbalance, there
 remains an overfitting risk to the majority-class samples in
 highly imbalanced datasets. This may lead to reduced sensitivity to rare and stealthy intrusion types. Future research will
 investigate lightweight transformer variants, compression strategies, and distributed architectures to improve the scalability
 of AITrans for deployment in large-scale IIoT networks. In
 addition, more advanced imbalance-aware learning strategies
 and data augmentation technologies will be explored to further
 enhance robustness under highly imbalanced scenarios.

 REFERENCES
 [1] P. Ruzafa-Alcázar et al., “Intrusion detection based on privacy-preserving
Fig. 12. Feature distribution under different losses. federated learning for the industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol.
 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1154, Feb. 2023.
 [2] J. Pei et al., “Neuro-vae-symbolic dynamic traffic management,” IEEE
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., to be published, doi: 10.1109/TITS.
0.6%/0.9% on IIoTB. Employing individual HAA also brings 2025.3571210.
 [3] J. Zhang, C. Luo, M. Carpenter, and G. Min, “Federated learning for
the Acc/F1 score improvements of 0.5%/0.8% and 0.7%/0.6%. distributed IIoT intrusion detection using transfer approaches,” IEEE
Moreover, when both ACW and HAA are combined to optimize Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 8159–8169, Jul. 2023.
the focal loss, the model achieves optimal performance. This [4] J. Pei, M. Omar, M. M. Al Dabel, S. Mumtaz, and W. Liu, “Federated few-shot learning with intelligent transportation cross-regional
indicates that these two mechanisms complement each other adaptation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., to be published, doi:
and jointly enhance the intrusion detection capability for rare 10.1109/TITS.2025.3563928.
samples in IIoT environments. [5] V. Sobchuk, R. Pykhnivskyi, O. Barabash, S. Korotin, and S. Omarov,
 “Sequential intrusion detection system for zero-trust cyber defense of
 To further investigate the advantages brought by ACW and iot/iiot networks,” Adv. Inf. Syst., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 92–99, 2024.
HAA, the feature distributions are visualized in Fig. 12. When [6] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar, “Ton_iot
using SFL, the distribution exhibits relatively large intra-class telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and IIoT for data-driven
 intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165130–165150,
distances and noticeable outliers within the same class. After 2020.
incorporating either ACW or HAA optimization, intra-class [7] T. Wang, K. Fang, W. Wei, J. Tian, Y. Pan, and J. Li, “Microcontroller unit
distances become more compact, and the number of outliers chip temperature fingerprint informed machine learning for iiot intrusion
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 2219–2227,
significantly decreases. Moreover, when both ACW and HAA Feb. 2023.
are employed simultaneously, the distribution demonstrates fur- [8] C. R. R. PR and K. Baalaji, “A graphics processing unit assisted CNN-GRU
ther reduction of intra-class distances and fewer outliers. This framework for the intrusion detection mechanism in the industrial Internet
 of Things,” Eng. Res. Express, vol. 7, 2025, Art. no. 025240.
forms more distinct and compact clusters, and the samples [9] M. Arsalan, M. Mubeen, M. Bilal, and S. F. Abbasi, “1d-cnn-ids: 1dcnnwith the same label are aggregated more closely together. This based intrusion detection system for iiot,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Autom.
indicates that the proposed AFL can effectively optimize the Comput., 2024, pp. 1–4.
 [10] W. Mei, W. Liu, J. Chen, and K. Li, “A physical signal-based anomaly
feature representation. It leads to enhanced intrusion detection detection for industrial terminal,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Electron. Inf.
performance and improves the robustness. Technol. Comput. Eng., 2023, pp. 651–658.
 [11] M. Tayebi and S. El Kafhali, “Performance analysis of recurrent neural
 networks for intrusion detection systems in industrial-Internet of Things,”
 V. CONCLUSION Franklin Open, vol. 12, 2025, Art. no. 100310.
 [12] K. Bansal and A. Singhrova, “Review on intrusion detection sys-
 This article proposed an IIoT intrusion detection approach. tem for IoT/IIoT-brief study,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 83, no. 8,
First, an AMSWS strategy was proposed to dynamically adjust pp. 23083–23108, 2024.
 [13] M. O. Alassafi, S. H. Hasan, S. Badri, and S. H. Hasan, “Optimized bithe segmentation window via traffic variation. This accurately LSTM: A novel approach for attack detection in industrial IoT,” Signal,
captured anomalies exhibiting diverse temporal characteristics, Image Video Process., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 4903–4913, 2024.
thus effectively detecting various types of intrusion patterns. [14] Z. Chen, Z. Li, J. Huang, S. Liu, and H. Long, “An effective method for
 anomaly detection in Industrial Internet of Things using XGBoost and
Second, an AITrans comprising IHIA and ILIA was proposed LSTM,” Sci. Rep., vol. 14, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 23969.
to facilitate effective inter-head and inter-layer attention inter- [15] M. Wu, Y. Zheng, D. S.-H. Wong, Y. Wang, and X. Hu, “Tracer:
action. This enhanced the capability for representing complex Attack-aware divide-and-conquer transformer for intrusion detection in
 industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 21, no. 6,
anomaly patterns. Finally, an AFL comprising ACW and HAA pp. 4924–4934, Jun. 2025.
was proposed to mitigate the class imbalance issue. This enabled [16] J. Casajús-Setién, C. Bielza, and P. Larrañaga, “Anomaly-based intrusion
the model to better detect minority-class anomalous samples. detection in IIoT networks using transformer models,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 Conf. Cyber Secur. Resilience, 2023, pp. 72–77.
 Despite the competitive performance achieved by the pro- [17] H. Gao, W. Jiang, Q. Ran, K. Wang, X. Ma, and Y. Xu, “Srt: A skipposed method in IIoT intrusion detection, several limitations range transformer for detecting anomalies in multi-attribute industrial time
remain. First, since AITrans is built upon the transformer, the series data,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 19, pp. 39223–39236,
 Oct. 2025.
complexity is relatively higher compared to non-transformer [18] Z. Zamanzadeh Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. Aggarwal, and M. Salehi,
approaches. This may limit the scalability when deployed in “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,” ACM Comextremely large-scale IIoT networks with limited resources. put. Surv., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1–42, 2024.
YU et al.: ADAPTIVE MULTI-SCALE WINDOW SEGMENTATION AND ATTENTION INTERACTION TRANSFORMER 1085

[19] Z. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Gao, F. Wang, T. Lin, and Y. Chen, “An adaptive [43] P. D. Kingma and L. J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 sliding window for anomaly detection of time series in wireless sensor in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2015, pp. 1–15.
 networks,” Wireless Netw., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 393–411, 2022. [44] N. Alkhatib, M. Mushtaq, H. Ghauch, and J.-L. Danger, “Can-bert do
[20] S. Sun, M. Gu, and T. Liu, “Adaptive sliding window–dynamic time it? controller area network intrusion detection system based on BERT
 warping-based fluctuation series prediction for the capacity of lithium-ion language model,” in Proc. IEEE/ACS 19th Int. Conf. Comput. Syst. Appl.,
 batteries,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 13, 2024, Art. no. 2501. 2022, pp. 1–8.
[21] G. Papageorgiou and C. Tjortjis, “Adaptive sliding window normalization,” [45] H. Hayouni and L. Nasraoui, “NAIDS4IoT: A novel artificial intelligence-
 Inf. Syst., vol. 129, 2025, Art. no. 102515. based intrusion detection architecture for the Internet of Things,” Inteligen-
[22] K. Chang and S. H. Park, “Reinforcement learning-based real-time con- cia Artif., vol. 28, no. 76, pp. 253–282, 2025.
 trasts control chart using an adaptive window size,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, [46] A. Ericson, S. Forsström, and K. Thar, “IIoT intrusion detection using
 pp. 72077–72086, 2025. lightweight deep learning models on edge devices,” in Proc. IEEE 20th
[23] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using Int. Conf. Factory Commun. Syst., 2024, pp. 1–8.
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. [47] S. Latif et al., “Intrusion detection framework for the Internet of Things
 10012–10022. using a dense random neural network,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol.
[24] S. Luo, Z. Zhao, Q. Hu, and Y. Liu, “A hierarchical CNN-transformer 18, no. 9, pp. 6435–6444, Sep. 2022.
 model for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Appl. Math., [48] Z. E. Huma et al., “ACNN-IDS: An attention-based CNN for cyberattack
 Model., Intell. Comput., 2022, vol. 12259, pp. 853–860. detection in IoT,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Cyber Resilience, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[25] P. Liang, L. Yang, Z. Xiong, X. Zhang, and G. Liu, “Multilevel intrusion de- [49] A. Thaljaoui, “Intelligent network intrusion detection system using optitection based on transformer and wavelet transform for IoT data security,” mized deep CNN-LSTM with unsw-nb15,” in Proc. Int. J. Inf. Technol.,
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 15, pp. 25613–25624, Aug. 2024. 2025, pp. 1–17.
[26] T. Jiang, X. Fu, and M. Wang, “BBO-CFAT: Network intrusion detection [50] Y. A. Rani and E. S. Reddy, “Deep intrusion net: An efficient framework for
 model based on BBO algorithm and hierarchical transformer,” IEEE network intrusion detection using hybrid deep TCN and GRU with integral
 Access, vol. 12, pp. 54191–54201, 2024. features,” Wireless Networks, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1255–1278, 2025.
[27] H. Mancy and Q. H. Naith, “Swiniot: A hierarchical transformer-based [51] W. Tian, Y. Shen, N. Guo, J. Yuan, and Y. Yang, “VAE-WACGAN: An
 framework for behavioral anomaly detection in IoT-driven smart cities,” improved data augmentation method based on VAEGAN for intrusion
 IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 48758–48774, 2025. detection,” Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), vol. 24, no. 18, 2024, Art. no.
[28] M. A. Qathrady et al., “Sacnn-ids: A self-attention convolutional neural 6035.
 network for intrusion detection in Industrial Internet of Things,” CAAI [52] Z. Ding et al., “MF-Net: Multi-frequency intrusion detection network for
 Trans. Intell. Technol., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1398–1411, 2024. internet traffic data,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 146, 2024, Art. no. 109999.
[29] S. Li et al., “Crsf: An intrusion detection framework for Industrial Internet [53] L. D. Manocchio, S. Layeghy, W. W. Lo, G. K. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan, and
 of Things based on pretrained CNN2D-RNN and SVM,” IEEE Access, M. Portmann, “Flowtransformer: A transformer framework for flow-based
 vol. 11, pp. 92041–92054, 2023. network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 241, 2024,
[30] G. Zeng, Y. Yang, K. Lu, G. Geng, and J. Weng, “Evolutionary adversarial Art. no. 122564.
 autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection of Industrial Internet of
 Things,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 3454–3468, Sep. 2025.
[31] K. Lu, J. Huang, G. Zeng, M. Chen, G. Geng, and J. Weng, “Multi-objective Zhi Yu received the B.S. degree in electronic
 discrete extremal optimization of variable-length blocks-based CNN by information engineering and M.S. degree in injoint NAS and HPO for intrusion detection in IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Depend- formation and communication engineering in
 able Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 4266–4283, Jul./Aug. 2025. 2017 and 2020, respectively, from the School of
[32] S. E. Vadakkethil, K. Polimetla, Z. Alsalami, P. K. Pareek, and D. Kumar, Microelectronics and Communication Engineer-
 “Mayfly optimization algorithm with bidirectional long-short term mem- ing, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China,
 ory for intrusion detection system in Internet of Things,” in Proc. 3rd Int. where he is currently working toward the Ph.D.
 Conf. Distrib. Comput. Elect. Circuits Electron., 2024, pp. 1–4. degree in information and communication engi-
[33] K. Yang, J. Wang, and M. Li, “An improved intrusion detection method for neering.
 IIoT using attention mechanisms, bigru, and inception-CNN,” Sci. Rep., He has authored or coauthored some papers
 vol. 14, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 19339. in refereed journals, such as IEEE TRANSAC-
[34] I. A. Fares, M. Abd Elaziz, A. O. Aseeri, H. S. Zied, and A. G. Abdellatif, TIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS and Applied Soft Com-
 “Tfkan: Transformer based on Kolmogorov-Arnold networks for intrusion puting. His research interests include industrial informatics and machine
 detection in IoT environment,” Egyptian Informat. J., vol. 30, 2025, Art. learning.
 no. 100666.
[35] P. S. Moghaddam, A. Vaziri, S. S. Khatami, F. Hernando-Gallego, and
 D. Martıń, “Generative adversarial and transformer network synergy for Jiaming Pei received the B.S. degree in inrobust intrusion detection in IoT environments,” Future Internet, vol. 17, formation system and information management
 no. 6, pp. 258–293, 2025. from Taizhou University, Taizhou, China, in
[36] P. Wang, Y. Song, X. Wang, and X. Guo, “Dift: A diffusion-transformer 2021. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
 for intrusion detection of IoT with imbalanced learning,” J. Netw. Syst. degree in computer science and technology with
 Manage., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 48–71, 2025. the University of Sydney, Camperdown NSW,
[37] Z. Zeng, X. Deng, B. Zhao, X. Liu, J. Zheng, and J. Chen, “Toward Australia.
 intelligent attack detection with causal transformer in Internet of Things,” He has authored or coauthored papers in
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 10751–10767, Apr. 2025. refereed journals, such as INFORMATION PRO-
[38] P. Wang, Y. Song, X. Wang, X. Guo, and Q. Xiang, “Imagtids: An CESSING AND MANAGEMENT, IEEE TRANSACTIONS
 Internet of Things intrusion detection framework utilizing GADF imaging ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, and
 encoding and improved transformer,” Complex Intell. Syst., vol. 11, no. 1, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING. His repp. 93–108, 2025. search interests include data mining and computer science.
[39] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
 dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017,
 pp. 2980–2988. Mingpeng Zhu received the B.S. degree in civil
[40] Q. Liu, S. Lee, and J. Paparrizos, “TSB-autoad: Towards automated engineering from the South China University of
 solutions for time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2017, and
 vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 4364–4379, 2025. the M.S. degree in civil engineering from ETH
[41] Z. Liu, H. Xu, Y. Kuang, and F. Li, “Svmdformer: A semi-supervised Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, in 2019.
 vehicular misbehavior detection framework based on transformer in IOV,” His research interests include deep learning,
 in Proc. IEEE 43rd Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst., 2023, pp. 887–897. uncertainty quantification, and semisupervised
[42] R. B. Basnet, R. Shash, C. Johnson, L. Walgren, and T. Doleck, “Towards learning.
 detecting and classifying network intrusion traffic using deep learning
 frameworks,” J. Internet Serv. Inf. Secur., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1–17, 2019.