IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026 681

 Adaptive NetFlow IIoT Intrusion Detection With
 Deep Transfer Learning, Genetic Optimization, and
 Ensemble Methods for Network Management
Jing Li , Mohd Shahizan Othman , Xugang Ying, Dina S. M. Hassan , Hewan Chen, and Lizawati Mi Yusuf

 Abstract—The growing demands of Industry 5.0 necessi- Index Terms—IoT, NetFlow, IoT security, intrusion detection
tate resilient Internet of Things (IoT) networks, which are system, deep transfer learning, CNN, genetic algorithm, ensemble
increasingly susceptible to sophisticated cyber threats. While learning.
advancements in intrusion detection systems (IDS) have improved
attack detection, addressing the complexity of multi-class attack
scenarios and managing minority threats remains challenging. I. I NTRODUCTION
This study proposes NFIIoT-DTL-IDS, an adaptive IoT IDS NDUSTRY 5.0, emphasizes the cooperation of humans
for smart network management using NetFlow and IIoT data,
driven by deep transfer learning and enhanced with genetic
 I and machines in industrial processes, aiming to produce more customized, adaptable, and sustainable production
algorithm (GA) optimization. Our framework leverages pretrained CNN models to convert data into images, enabling by fusing the capabilities of human labor with automated
effective classification. GA optimizes hyperparameters to improve systems [1]. This paradigm emphasizes human-centric innomodel flexibility and performance, while a soft voting ensemble vation, resilience, and sustainability, extending beyond the
ensures robust aggregation of predictions. The proposed IDS efficiency-driven goals of Industry 4.0 [2]. The Internet of
achieves 100% classification accuracy among 5, 10, and 19
distinct attack classes of three IoT datasets, including two Things (IoT) forms the backbone of Industry 5.0, enabling
NetFlow datasets (NF-TON-IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2) and one seamless data exchange among physical systems in industrial
industrial-based dataset (X-IIoTID), detecting threats such as environments. However, this extensive connectivity introduces
DDoS, ransomware, and theft in common IoT cyberattacks, as increasing security risks, including ransomware, malware,
well as MQTT subscription and crypto-ransomware attacks in and denial-of-service attacks, often because of weak device
industrial IoT scenarios. Additional experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method, which exceeds the classi- configurations and insufficient encryption in common IoT
fication performance results of three baseline models, including systems. To mitigate these threats, robust security mechanisms
LSTM, Transformer, and 3D CNN, by more than 37.2%, 0.25%, are critical, particularly intrusion detection systems (IDS),
and 1.25%, respectively, in the maximum among the three which can monitor network activity in real time to detect
datasets. Finally, experimental results demonstrate that NFIIoT- and respond to anomalies [3]. IDS play a vital role in
DTL-IDS outperforms recent state-of-the-art solutions in terms of
multiclassification accuracy. This contribution advances adaptive preserving the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of
management frameworks for IoT security, offering scalable and IoT systems by preventing unauthorized access and ensuring
high-performance solutions for intrusion detection in modern operational continuity. Despite advancement in using machine
network management. learning-based IDS for IoT security, two major challenges
 persist. First, the evolving and diverse nature of cyberattacks
 Received 18 October 2024; revised 8 June 2025 and 29 August 2025; makes it difficult to detect and classify unknown threats using
accepted 30 September 2025. Date of publication 6 October 2025; date existing datasets [4]. Second, the heterogeneity of IoT data,
of current version 29 December 2025. This work was supported by the
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers through Princess spanning varied features and sources, complicates the con-
Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Project struction of generalized models [5]. These challenges highlight
PNURSP2025R751. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article the need for adaptive, intelligent detection systems capable
and approving it for publication was Y. Miao. (Corresponding author: Dina
S. M. Hassan.) of evolving alongside emerging threats and dynamic data
 Jing Li and Mohd Shahizan Othman are with the Faculty of Computing, environments.
University of Technology Malaysia, Johor Bahru 81310, Malaysia (e-mail: A promising method for tackling this challenge is the
lijing@gruaduate.utm.my; shahizan@utm.my).
 Xugang Ying is with the Social Security System Section in Zhejiang application of deep transfer learning, which leverages pre-
Provincial Human Resources and Social Security Information Center, trained models to adapt quickly to new tasks with limited
Provincial Human Resources and Social Security Information Center, labeled data [6]. This approach helps address the scarcity of
Hangzhou 310007, Zhejiang, China (e-mail: yxg@zjhrss.gov.cn).
 Dina S. M. Hassan is with the Department of Information Technology annotated IoT security data while maintaining high detection
and the College of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah performance [7]. Unlike conventional machine learning methbint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: ods, transfer learning leverages more effective classification
dshassan@pnu.edu.sa).
 Hewan Chen is with the College of Information Engineering, China Jiliang performance of pre-trained models. By applying this capability
University, Hangzhou 310018, Zhejiang, China (e-mail: chw@cjlu.edu.cn). to IoT security, deep learning-based transfer learning enables
 Lizawati Mi Yusuf is with the School of Computing, University knowledge transfer from existing datasets to new or evolving
of Technology Malaysia, Johor Bahru 81310, Malaysia (e-mail:
lizawati@utm.my). environments, improving the detection of unknown attacks [6].
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3617765 This approach remains effective even when the source and
 
 c 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

target data differ significantly, making it suitable for the Extensive comparative performance evaluation: The
heterogeneous and dynamic nature of IoT systems. As a result, proposed framework is evaluated on three IoT/IIoT datasets
transfer learning enhances the adaptability and robustness of under multiclassification settings. Extensive comparisons are
intrusion detection in complex IoT settings. conducted with deep learning baselines including LSTM,
 Addressing the second challenge of building generalized Transformer, and 3D CNN architectures in this study.
IoT security models requires the use of datasets that accu- Furthermore, the framework’s performance is benchmarked
rately represent the diversity of real-world environments. This against several state-of-the-art approaches by recent literatures.
includes capturing a wide range of traffic patterns and up-to- Results consistently show superior performance of the
date attack scenarios, such as common IoT threats like DDoS, proposed CNN-based ensemble in terms of classification
ransomware, and data theft, that can cause significant dis- accuracy among the attack classes, confirming its effectiveness
ruption to IoT infrastructure [8]. Through incorporating these across diverse real-world IoT environments.
evolving threats, researchers can train more robust and com- The remainder of this work follows: Section II discusses
prehensive models capable of detecting varied attack types. To related work and existing challenges in IDS for IoT. Section III
be specific, the unified features derived from NetFlow data can presents the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework, detailenhance generalization, as NetFlow captures rich, flow-level ing each component of the methodology. Section IV shows
information across protocols and devices [9]. Furthermore, the experimental environment and performance assessment.
employing industrial IoT-based datasets can help to build a Section V provides results and discussion. Finally, Section VI
model that can be scaled into a real-world industrial IoT concludes the study, summarizing its contributions and potenenvironment, which will serve as the foundation for industry tial for future research.
5.0 [10]. Thus, leveraging recent, industrial-scale datasets
with consistent NetFlow-based features helps overcome the
heterogeneity of IoT systems and supports the development of II. R ELATED W ORKS
more effective security solutions. In artificial intelligence, deep transfer learning is an effective
 Thus, this article introduces an effective and resilient IDS strategy that uses massive data sets with pre-trained models to
framework tailored for NetFlow-based IIoT environments, improve target task performance with less labelled data [7].
termed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS, which is grounded in deep transfer Since most DL models require the arrangement of a huge
learning methodologies. Six pre-trained convolutional neural quantity of labelled data, which is unachievable in many ML
network (CNN) architectures, including Xception, MobileNet, situations, in the domain of IoT intrusion detection, deep trans-
MobileNetV2, Inception, DenseNet121, and EfficientNetB0, fer learning demonstrates benefits over conventional machine
are utilized by the framework. The decision to use of the ideal learning and deep learning approaches. This section briefly
hyperparameters has a significant impact on how well these covers the state-of-the-art machine learning, deep learning,
pre-trained DL architectures work. Using a genetic algorithm transfer learning and approaches for IDS applications in IoT
(GA), the selected architectures are optimized and trained security.
adaptively. The soft-voting ensemble technique is used to iden- Machine learning (ML) methods have shown promise in
tify and combine the three most effective models after training IoT IDS, but often require extensive manual feature engiand validation. The proposed framework’s efficacy is then neering, particularly in dynamic environments. For example,
evaluated using two recent NetFlow-based datasets, NF-TON- correlation-based feature selection (CFS) has been used to
IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2, as well as one industrial-based IoT reduce N-BaIoT’s 115 features [11], and a wrapper-based
security dataset. The study makes significant contributions in method with bijective soft sets and CorrACC achieved high
three main areas: accuracy on BoT-IoT data [12]. Hybrid ML approaches,
 Data preprocessing and transformation: The proposed work such as differential evolution combined with extreme learning
applies a thorough preprocessing pipeline to NetFlow IoT machine, have also outperformed traditional combinations like
and IIoT datasets, including NF-TON-IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2, CFS + SVM [13]. However, conventional ML approaches
and X-IIoTID datasets. The pipeline includes preprocess- struggle with the scale and heterogeneity of IoT data. The
ing of missing values, duplicates, and irrelevant features evolution of deep learning addressed this by automatically
and balancing by incorporating random under-sampling and extracting features from raw data, making it more viable in
oversampling techniques to address realistic and skewed complicated IoT settings. These models excel at capturing
distributions and conversion of original data into image rep- intricate patterns and detecting subtle intrusions. For instance,
resentations to support subsequent deep learning. autoencoder-based feature extraction improved detection rates
 Robust and adaptive NFIIoT-DTL-IDS Framework: A and reduced error in industrial IoT IDS [14], [15]. Other
novel deep transfer learning-based intrusion detection system, approaches, such as dynamic line graph neural networks
NFIIoT-DTL-IDS, is proposed to effectively detect a wide and MF-Net, have achieved high anomaly detection accurange of cyberattacks in IoT and IIoT environments. The racy by modeling traffic as sequential data with varying
framework leverages six advanced pre-trained CNN archi- frequencies [14], [16].
tectures, each optimized using Genetic Algorithm (GA) for In addition, more deep learning models have been
hyperparameters tuning. A lightweight soft-voting ensemble explored by recent studies. For instances, LSTM networks
fuses the predictions of the top three models to enhance are widely explored for capturing temporal dependenstability, accuracy, and generalization. cies in sequential NetFlow traffic and have demonstrated
LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS 683

improved intrusion detection performance in time-series sce- failing to represent the real IoT environment. To overcome
narios [17], [18]. However, they are sensitive to long this, our proposed approach utilizes the most recent IoT
sequence dependencies and may underperform when handling statistics to evaluate models, ensuring relevance to current
high-dimensional, imbalanced data or requiring extensive tun- IoT threats. Additionally, previous research lacks generalized
ing [19]. Transformer-based models, with their self-attention models due to the variety of IoT datasets, hindering robustness
mechanisms, have shown promising results by capturing long- in attack classification. We address this by using uniform
range relationships in traffic sequences more effectively [20], NetFlow-based IoT datasets, enhancing the effectiveness
but their computational overhead and demand for large-scale of our approach in categorizing cyberattacks. Furthermore,
data can be impractical for many real-world IoT deploy- previous investigations often use a single pre-trained model
ments [21]. In addition, 3D CNNs offer another direction by without optimization or integration, impacting accuracy and
jointly learning spatial and temporal features, yet they are resilience. To this end, our method incorporates six pre-trained
often prone to overfitting and require significant computational CNN architectures, optimizing hyperparameters with GA and
resources [22]. Thus, these deep learning approaches require employing a soft voting ensemble approach to enhance attack
retraining or fine-tuning to maintain performance and scala- detection accuracy and robustness.
bility, highlighting the need for more scalable, adaptable, and
resource-efficient models. III. F RAMEWORK
 Deep transfer learning addresses these challenges by fine-
 The proposed framework’s overall research approach is
tuning pre-trained models on generalized tasks to the specific
 presented in this section. It begins by outlining the datasets,
nuances of IoT intrusion detection. It accelerates training and
 data preprocessing, class balancing, data transformation, and
improves generalization across heterogeneous IoT scenarios,
 data splitting. Next, it goes over the CNN pre-trained deep
enhancing both accuracy and robustness. For example, [23]
 transfer learning method, hyperparameter optimization, and
introduced a transfer learning approach designed for limited
 soft voting ensemble approach. Afterwards, performance comdata availability, leveraging optimization methods like Lasso
 parison is conducted with the models including LSTM,
and MCP to improve learning efficiency. In [24], transfer
 Transformer, and 3D CNN, respectively, in order to validate
learning was applied to intrusion detection for Internet-of-Cars
 the effectiveness of the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framesystems using minimal labeled data. Their method achieved
 work. Fig. 1 shows the proposed framework’s block diagram
a 23% increase in accuracy on two AWID datasets, although
 and the performance comparison with the three benchmark
these datasets lacked recent traffic patterns and were not
 models in brief.
specifically designed for IoT. Similarly, [25] proposed a
federated transfer learning framework to detect RPL routing
protocol intrusions in heterogeneous IoT networks. Using A. Datasets
a custom RPL-IIoT dataset, their model achieved 85.52% In this study, three up-to-date and diverse datasets were
accuracy, but it was limited to routing attacks and lacked employed to comprehensively evaluate the proposed intrusion
benchmark validation. detection framework, reflecting both consumer and industrial
 Other studies have explored transforming traffic data into IoT security scenarios. The NF-ToN-IoTv2 and NF-BoTimage representations to leverage pre-trained CNNs. In [26], IoTv2 datasets are NetFlow-based and regenerated from
DeepInsight was used to convert time-based features into the widely recognized TON-IoT [28] and BoT-IoT [29]
3D images, enabling the use of models like VGG19 and datasets. Developed by the University of Queensland, these
ResNet101. Their bi-level classification framework, coupled datasets simulate realistic, heterogeneous IoT environments
with classifiers such as SVM and RF, achieved 96% accu- with updated traffic and a broad range of modern cyberattacks,
racy on Darknet traffic data. However, this work did not offering 10 and 5 distinct classes, respectively. Meanwhile,
focus on IoT-specific traffic. In [27], TL-CNN-IDS combined X-IIoTID represents an up-to-date Industrial IoT dataset
transfer and ensemble learning to address class imbalance structured according to the Industrial Internet Reference
and limited training data. Tabular features were converted Architecture (IIRA) [10]. It includes 19 classes across over
into image format for CNN processing, with model selec- 820,000 instances and 59 features, capturing complex behavtion and optimization conducted using Tree-Structured Parzen iors in smart factory and industrial control systems. Together,
Estimators. The final ensemble achieved 99.85% and 99.53% these three datasets form a comprehensive benchmark suite
accuracy on CICIDS2017 and NSL-KDD, respectively, though that ensures robust, real-world validation of the proposed
both datasets are outdated and non-IoT-specific. Lastly, [6] NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework across the spectrum of modern
developed a ResNet-based model using real-world traffic, IoT and IIoT environments. The class distributions for these
achieving 87% accuracy in distinguishing attack from normal datasets are presented in Fig. 2
traffic even with limited labeled data. While effective, most Out of the 16,940,496 total data flows in the NF-TONof these approaches still lack validation on modern, domain- IoTv2, 10,841,027 (63.99%) are attack samples and 6,099,469
specific IoT datasets, limiting their practical generalizability. (36.01%) are benign samples. Attack traffic in the dataset
 Existing literature on Deep Transfer Learning (DTL) for is classified into nine categories: ransomware, password,
intrusion detection in IoT networks has limitations that injection, DoS, DDoS, backdoor, scanning, and XSS. Of
need to be addressed. Many strategies focus on outdated the 37,763,497 data flows in the NF-BoT-IoTv2, 37,628,460
cybersecurity datasets and a limited number of cyberattacks, (99.64%) are attack samples, while 135,037 (0.36%) are
684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 1. Block diagram of NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework.

 from dominant classes like RDOS (17%) and Scanning
 Vulnerability (6%) to rare but critical threats such as Crypto-
 Ransomware (0.06%) and Fake Notification (<0.01%), thus
 reflecting the realistic and diverse nature of industrial IoT
 security scenarios.

 B. Data Preprocessing
 Optimal training of machine learning or deep learning
 models relies heavily on data preprocessing. The NF-
 TON-IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2 datasets consist of 43
 features each, with two binary labels and 10 and 5
 attack classes, respectively. After loading the datasets,
 we addressed missing values, finding none. Next, we
 removed 3,804,615 duplicate instances from NF-TON-IoTv2
 (22.46% of dataset) and 7,343,411 from NF-BoT-IoTv2
 (19.45% of dataset). Unnecessary identifier features
 (“IPV4_SRC_ADDR” and “IPV4_DST_ADDR”) were
Fig. 2. Class distribution of the datasets.
 dropped, retaining “L4_SRC_PORT” and “L4_DST_PORT.”
 Post-drop, both datasets contained 13,135,881 and
benign samples. The dataset has 4 different types of attack 30,420,086 instances, respectively, with 41 features.
traffic: Reconnaissance, DDoS, DoS, Theft. Each dataset No numerical encoding was needed, except for the
traffic type has the same 4 flow identifier features, 8 flow categorical feature “PROTOCOL,” which was dummy
features, and 31 extended flow features with the detailed encoded into “PROTOCOL_ICMP,” “PROTOCOL_IGMP,”
description in [30]. In addition, the X-IIoTID dataset consists “PROTOCOL_TCP,” “PROTOCOL_UDP,” “PROTOCOL_
of 820,834 instances with 59 IIoT-specific features, offering a IPv6_Frag,” and “PROTOCOL_IPv6_ICMP.” Finally,
highly imbalanced distribution across 18 attack types, ranging min-max normalization was applied, resulting in datasets of
LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS 685

 TABLE I
13,135,881 rows with 48 columns and 30,420,086 rows with C LASS D ISTRIBUTION OF THE DATA S ETS
47 columns. As for X-IIoTID dataset, three types of missing
values (“NaN”, “-”, and “?”) were identified and replaced with
–1 to indicate unavailability. Timestamp-related features were
dropped as they serve no predictive value. A total of 4,260
duplicate rows were found and removed, leaving 816,574
unique instances. Two categorical features, “Protocol” and
“Service”, were one-hot encoded, while remaining objecttype features were converted to numerical float types. This
transformation expanded the feature set from 65 to 79 features,
except for the attack labels. Finally, min-max normalization
was applied to scale the dataset.

C. Class Balancing
 Imbalanced datasets pose significant challenges to classification models. The model may show biased behavior, have
a low detection rate for minority classes, and have difficulty
generalizing to new data due to the skewed distribution of
class occurrences [31]. To address these limitations, techniques
like over-sampling, under-sampling, and ensemble methods are
commonly used to improve model performance on imbalanced
datasets. In our study, we categorized classes into majority,
minority, and highly minority ranks for the three preprocessed
datasets, and in order to validate the robustness of the
proposed NF-IIoT-DTL-IDS, diverse class balancing schemes
are implemented on the three datasets, respectively.
 For both NF-TON-IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2, considering there is a huge number of instances for the majority
and minority classes in the two datasets, respectively, the
random under-sampling technique is employed for the two
ranked classes, while the oversampling technique using
SMOTE generates synthetic instances for highly minority classes, except for “Benign” in NF-BoT-IoTv2, which
has enough instances to be processed for subsequent data
transformation. As for X-IIoTID, since there are no overwhelming instances for majority classes, which are kept as
 format [32]. Data points of features are mapped to grayscale
the original ones, thus, SMOTE is only applied for the
 picture points as the initial phase. Since each feature in the
highly minority classes including “Modbus_register_reading,”
 tabular data represents a pixel intensity value in a grayscale
“Dictionary,” and “crypto-ransomware,” etc. Thus, diverse
 image, the assurance that every pixel intensity in a grayscale
balancing schemes, including both undersampling and overimage falls within the acceptable range by mapping the feature
sampling, are conducted on the two NetFlow IoT datasets,
 values to the range [0, 255]. Pixel intensities of pictures in
while the oversampling technique is employed on the IIoT
 grayscale go from 0 (black) to 255 (white).
dataset, which maintains the original distribution and ensures
 The second stage is creating an image. In our research,
necessary balance among the classes while reducing comwe do this by utilizing the RGB color model to convert the
putational complexity in IoT environments. Table I provides
 tabular data into a color image. Each pixel is represented
detailed information on the instances and class distributions.
 by three values, involving red, green, and blue. These threecolor channels combine to produce a wide spectrum of colors.
D. Data Transformation Each channel’s intensity value ranges from 0 to 255. The
 Within the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework, we preprocessed NF-TON-IoTv2 dataset has 46 columns. Each
implemented a classification framework utilizing pre-trained block comprising 138 consecutive samples and 46 columns
CNN architectures. Typically, CNN models exhibit superior undergoes a transformation into a color image format with
performance with image-based datasets. Given that the prepro- dimensions of 46×46×3 (representing the three-dimensional
cessed NF-IoT datasets are structured akin to tabular data, the height, width, and channels). Conversely, in the preprocessed
subsequent task involves transforming them into the format NF-BoT-IoTv2 dataset, which consists of 45 columns, each
resembling that of an image-based dataset. Transforming block of 135 consecutive samples is transformed into a
tabular data into image data for input into pre-trained models 45×45×3 color picture [33], as depicted in Fig. 3. Similarly,
involves converting the structured information into a visual for the X-IIoTID dataset, which contains 79 columns after
686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 3. NF-IIoT tabular data to matrix transformation.

preprocessing, each block of 237 consecutive samples is
converted into a 79×79×3 color image, enabling visual pattern
representation of IIoT traffic suitable for deep learning-based
intrusion detection.
 After transformation, images are labeled based on their original attack classes. Benign samples are labeled as “Benign”,
while DDoS-affected images are labeled “DDoS”. This labeling extends to other attack classes. For NF-TON-IoTv2,
images are sorted into 10 classes: Injection, DDoS, Benign,
Password, XSS, DoS, Scanning, Backdoor, MITM, and
Ransomware. NF-BoT-IoTv2 images are classified into 5
classes: DDoS, DoS, Reconnaissance, Benign, and Theft.
Similarly, for X-IIoTID, images are categorized into 19 distinct
classes, including RDOS, Brute Force, Fake Notification,
and other representative industrial cyber threats. Resizing
images to 224x224 pixels is crucial for CNN training, ensur- Fig. 4. Resized representative image data of the datasets.
ing consistent input sizes, simplifying architecture design,
and reducing memory requirements. Standardizing dimen- Algorithm 1 Tabular-to-Image Transformation for NF-IIoT
sions facilitates compatibility with pre-trained CNN models Data
like VGG, Inception, or Xception. Resizing promotes better Input: - Preprocessed tabular network flow data
generalization across diverse datasets, focusing on extracting Output: - Labeled color image dataset
 1. Function TransformTabularToImages(tabular_data):
meaningful features. After resizing, image data is checked for
 2. Initialize transformed_image_data ← []
each attack category, as shown in Fig. 4.
 3. For each class_label in unique(tabular_data.labels):
 The Algorithm 1 outlines the main steps involved in pre-
 4. class_data ← filter(tabular_data where label ==
processing and generating images from tabular network flow
 class_label)
data as described in the task. Each step is outlined with a
 5. For each block in split_into_blocks(class_data,
placeholder function to represent the specific implementation
 block_size):
details required for that step.
 6. image ← convert_block_to_color_image(block)
 7. resized_image ← resize(image, 224, 224)
E. Data Splitting 8. transformed_image_data.append({“image”:
 Training, validation, and test sets are established from the resized_image, “label”: class_label })
transformed data. Cross-validation is often used to evaluate 9. representative ←
model performance, involving dividing the dataset into folds, select_representative_image(transformed_image_data,
training on subsets, and evaluating on the remainder. Due to class_label)
data and computational constraints, a fixed validation set with 10. display(representative)
sufficient epochs may be more practical. We monitor model 11. Return transformed_image_data
performance on a consistent subset during training without
frequent cross-validation. It’s crucial to ensure the validation
set adequately represents the data distribution [34]. Our study F. CNN Transfer Learning Architectures
initially splits data into 80% training and 20% test sets. The Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are widely used
original training set is then divided into new training and deep learning models for pattern recognition, known for
validation sets, each comprising 80% and 20%, respectively. their ability to automatically extract hierarchical features
Detailed statistics for the image dataset are presented in through convolutional, pooling, and fully connected layers.
Table II. This architecture enables strong generalization across tasks
LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS 687

 TABLE II
 T HE S TATISTICS OF THE T RANSFORMED NF-II OT I MAGE DATA reuse and mitigate vanishing gradients. EfficientNet uses
 compound scaling to balance depth, width, and resolution,
 with EfficientNetB0 delivering strong performance under minimal computational load, which is ideal for IoT scenarios.
 The selection of diverse architectures strategically leverages
 their unique strengths to improve the model’s attack classification accuracy in resource-limited IoT security settings.
 Consequently, individually optimizing the hyperparameters of
 these models and ensemble them within the NFIIoT-DTL-
 IDS framework offers a robust and comprehensive intrusion
 detection approach for IoT environments.

 G. Hyperparameters Optimization Using Genetic Algorithm
 Fine-tuning hyperparameters plays a pivotal role in optimizing and strengthening learning models by systematically
 adjusting configurable settings that influence the learning
 process but are not learned from the data [38]. This process
 significantly enhances a model’s performance, generalization,
 and robustness by identifying optimal hyperparameter values.
 In our approach, we selectively unfreeze top layers of pretrained architectures, allowing the model to adapt and refine its
 representations with new datasets while preserving knowledge
 from the source task. This strategy enables the model to better
 capture characteristics of the new task, ultimately improving
 performance in the target domain.
 Common optimization algorithms for hyperparameter tuning
 include Grid search (GS), Random search (RS), Gradientbased algorithms (GO), Bayesian optimization (BO), and
 Metaheuristic algorithms like PSO and GA. Each method
 offers advantages and drawbacks. GS is simple to implement
 but time-consuming, especially with a wide range of hyperparameters, and may struggle with continuous parameters.
such as image processing and natural language understand- RS efficiently explores a broad search space by randomly
ing. Deep transfer learning builds on this capability by selecting values but may involve unnecessary evaluations and
adapting pretrained models, like CNNs, to new but related lacks consideration of previous results, reducing efficiency.
tasks, especially where labeled data is scarce [35]. In this Gradient-based algorithms (GO) are less common for hyperstudy, the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework uses six parameter optimization as they only work with continuous
CNN architectures, namely Xception, Inception, MobileNet, hyperparameters and are limited in finding local optima in
MobileNetV2, DenseNet121, and EfficientNetB0, which are non-convex issues rather than global ones [39]. Compared
commonly pre-trained on the ImageNet database [36], a large- to GS and RS, Bayesian Optimization (BO) has a lower
scale visual database containing millions of labeled images computing cost [40]. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO),
across thousands of categories. The pre-training on ImageNet as one of the metaheuristic algorithms, excels in extensive
involves training these models on a vast array of images from parallelization and is well-suited for both continuous and condiverse categories, helping the models learn general features ditional hyperparameter optimization [41]. Genetic Algorithms
and patterns present in various visual data. (GA), a type of metaheuristic, is complex but effective for
 To be specific, each CNN architecture brings unique optimizing diverse hyperparameters, supporting various types
strengths to the task of attack classification for transformed and excelling in large configuration spaces with the potential
IoT image data [37]. The Inception architecture captures for near-optimal solutions even in a few iterations [42].
multi-scale features using parallel branches with 1×1, 3×3, Considering multiple types of hyperparameters of complex
and 5×5 convolutions and max pooling. Xception builds on CNN network-based algorithms in diverse contexts of IoT
this by using depthwise separable convolutions for improved environments, GA can be the choice since it is suitable for
efficiency and spatial feature extraction. MobileNet also exploring large solution spaces efficiently, and it is robust
employs depthwise separable convolutions to reduce complex- against local optima due to its stochastic nature. Moreover,
ity, making it suitable for resource-constrained IoT devices. it can handle both continuous and discrete optimization prob-
MobileNetV2 enhances this with inverted residuals and short- lems.
cut connections for better accuracy at low cost. DenseNet In this study, GA was employed to obtain the best hyperintroduces dense inter-layer connections to promote feature parameters for selected pre-trained models effectively. The
688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Algorithm 2 Optimized Hyperparameters Driven by GA Algorithm 3 Soft Voting Ensemble Method
Input: Input:
pop_size: Population size input_data: Test data
num_generations: Number of generations base_classifiers: List of trained classifiers
mutation_rate: Mutation rate Output:
pretrained_models: Selected pre-trained CNN architectures final_predictions: Predicted class labels for the input data
training_data, validation_data: Datasets for training and val- 1. Function soft_voting(input_data, base_classifiers):
idation 2. Initialize combined_probabilities ←
Output: zeros(shape=(num_samples, num_classes))
best_hyperparameters, best_fitness_score 3. For clf in base_classifiers do:
1. Define hyperparameter_space ← { 4. probs ← clf.predict_proba(input_data)
2. ‘frozen_layers’, ‘dense_units’, ‘activation_function’, 5. combined_probabilities ← combined_probabilities +
3. ‘dropout_rate’, ‘optimizer’, ‘learning_rate’, ‘epochs’ probs
4. } 6. Normalize combined_probabilities ← com-
5. Initialize population ← initialize_population(pop_size, bined_probabilities / len(base_classifiers)
hyperparameter_space) 7. final_predictions ← argmax(combined_probabilities,
6. For generation in range(num_generations) do: axis=1)
7. Evaluate fitness_scores ← [ 8. Return final_predictions
8. evaluate_fitness(individual, pretrained_models, training_data, validation_data)
9. for individual in population ] classifiers [43]. Voting is a simple and computationally inex-
10. Select parents ← select_parents(population, pensive ensemble method that combines predictions without
fitness_scores) training a meta-model. It mitigates the risk of overfitting
11. Generate offspring ← crossover_and_mutate(parents, compared to methods like stacking or boosting. Additionally,
mutation_rate, hyperparameter_space) voting is versatile and can be applied to any base clas-
12. Update population ← replace_population(population, sifier, making it adaptable to various tasks and datasets
offspring, fitness_scores)* in resource-constrained IoT environments. In classification
13. End For ensemble methods, hard voting involves each classifier voting
14.Select best_individual ← select_best(population, fit- for a class, with the majority winning, while soft voting conness_scores) siders the anticipated probabilities from classifiers, potentially
15.Decode best_hyperparameters ← improving decision-making by leveraging more information.
decode_individual(best_individual) The process of soft voting ensemble in this study is elaborated
16.Evaluate best_fitness_score ← evalu- in Algorithm 3.
ate_fitness(best_individual, pretrained_models, training_data,
validation_data) I. Comparison With LSTM, Transformer, and 3D CNN
17.Return best_hyperparameters, best_fitness_score Models
 To validate the robustness and generalizability of the
 proposed image-based intrusion detection approach, we extend
process involves initializing a population of potential solutions the methodology using three sequence-learning baselines:
with defined hyperparameters, followed by fitness evalua- LSTM, Transformer, and 3D CNN models. Unlike the imagetion through training and validation on a dataset. Selection based models that rely on visual pattern recognition, these
methods like tournament or roulette wheel selection are baselines operate directly on preprocessed tabular data that
used to create a mating pool from individuals with higher is structured into time-series sequences. For each dataset, the
fitness scores. Crossover operations exchange genetic mate- tabular features are segmented into fixed-length sequences,
rial to generate offspring, while mutation introduces random ensuring that each sequence consists of samples from the same
alterations to sustain genetic diversity. This iterative process class to preserve semantic consistency during training.
continues until termination conditions are met when reaching The sequence inputs are normalized, and the class labels
a maximum number of generations. The model with the are one-hot encoded. The resulting tensors follow the format
highest fitness score undergoes further training and validation (samples, timesteps, features), suitable for both LSTM and
using optimized hyperparameters. Finally, the top 3 models Transformer models. For the 3D CNN model, the data is
demonstrating the highest performance scores are selected further reshaped into 5D tensors by adding two singleton
for ensemble operations, aiming for optimal classification spatial dimensions, enabling spatial-temporal feature extracperformance. Detailed steps of the entire GA-based HPO tion through 3D convolutional operations. Thus, these tensors
procedure are delineated in Algorithm 2. are further reshaped to (samples, timesteps, features, 1, 1),
 allowing the convolutional layers to learn spatial-temporal
H. Soft Voting Ensemble Method patterns across both dimensions.
 Ensemble methods in classification aim to enhance overall To ensure consistency and fair comparison across all modperformance by combining predictions from multiple base els, the same data splitting scheme is applied as the same
LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS 689

 TABLE III
I NPUT DATA S HAPES FOR THE M ODELS AND DATASET A FTER S PLITTING B. Performance Assessment Metrics
 Several performance metrics, including as accuracy,
 precision, recall, F1 score, Cohen’s Kappa (CK) Score,
 Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), and confusion
 matrices, are used to evaluate the performance of the proposed
 NFIIoT-DTL-IDS system. The following formulas are used to
 compute these measures. A comprehensive indicator of the
 model’s correctness, accuracy is the ratio of properly predicted
 occurrences to the total instances; nonetheless, it might not
 be the best choice for datasets that are unbalanced. Precision
 emphasizes the accuracy of positive predictions and reduces
 false positives by expressing it as the ratio of accurately
 predicted positive observations to the total expected positives.
 Recall highlights the model’s capacity to find all pertinent
 cases and minimize false negatives by expressing it as the
 ratio of accurately predicted positive observations to all actual
 positives.
scheme applied in Section III-E, Data splitting for image-based The performance metrics represented by equations (1)
data. This stratified 3-way split ensures that the image- through (6) are displayed below.
based CNN models and the sequence-learning models (LSTM, (TP + TN )
 Accracy = (1)
Transformer, 3D CNN) are trained and evaluated on the exact (TP + FN + FP + TN )
same data distributions. The detailed dataset-specific settings, TP
 Precision = (2)
 (TP + FP )
including sequence length, feature dimensions, and class dis-
 TP
tribution, are detailed in Table III. The hyperparameters and Recall = (3)
 (TP + FN )
model configurations are kept consistent across experiments 2 ∗ Precision ∗ Recall
and are presented in the subsequent section. F 1 − Score = (4)
 Presicion + Recall
 Observed Agreement − Expected Agreement
 Cohen Kappa score =
 1 − Expected Agreement
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL E NVIRONMENT AND P ERFORMANCE (5)
 A SSESSMENT TP ∗ TN − FP ∗ FN
 MCC =  (6)
 (TP + FP )(TP + FN )(TN + FP )(TN + FN )
 This section outlines the experimental setup and assesses
the proposed scheme’s performance. It commences with a The F1 score, derived as the harmonic mean of precision
delineation of the performance evaluation metrics, the platform and recall, offers a balanced assessment, particularly valuable
employed for model training, the hyperparameters utilized, and in scenarios of disparate class distributions within IoT data.
the settings of the comparison models. Cohen’s Kappa (CK) score serves as a statistical indicator
 evaluating agreement between two raters, surpassing chance
 expectations, notably advantageous when confronting imbal-
A. Experimental Environment anced datasets. The Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC)
 The NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework is deployed and evaluated emerges as a performance metric gauging classification model
for performance on the Kaggle platform, leveraging Keras quality. It considers TP, TN, FP, and FN, yielding a nuanced
libraries. Kaggle provides access to a Nvidia Tesla P100 GPU assessment of model performance, particularly crucial in
equipped with 16 GB of graphic card memory and 19.5 GB of imbalanced class contexts.
RAM, ensuring seamless execution of neural network-based
algorithms. Initially, the raw network flow-based IoT data C. Hyperparameters Schemes
is collected and transformed into image datasets along with To optimize the performance of neural network-based techcorresponding labels on the Kaggle platform. Subsequently, niques, hyperparameters in deep transfer learning models
six pre-trained CNN models are integrated into the Keras must be carefully tuned. Previous research highlighted the
applications with predefined and optimized hyperparameters. significant impact of network type, depth, fully connected
In addition, to establish comprehensive performance bench- layer neuron count, optimizer selection, and learning rate
marks, we further implement and evaluate three additional adjustment on classification outcomes [44]. In this study,
deep learning architectures: LSTM, Transformer, and 3D we employ Genetic Algorithm (GA) for Hyperparameter
CNN, which are widely used in time-series and spatial- Optimization (HPO) across seven key parameters including,
temporal modeling tasks. These models are trained on the frozen layers, dense units, activation functions, dropout rates,
same datasets and settings to ensure fair comparison. All best- optimizers, learning rates, and epochs within our NFIIoT-DTLperforming models, including CNN-based and comparison IDS framework. The optimized hyperparameters are then used
models, are archived on Kaggle drive for final inference and to train all CNN models, with performance evaluated based
prediction of unknown test data. on classification accuracy. Two configurations are compared:
690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
 O RIGINAL H YPERPARAMETER S CHEMES OF P RE -T RAINED M ODELS K EY H YPERPARAMETERS AND S ETTINGS OF C OMPARISON M ODELS

 TABLE V
 O PTIMIZED H YPERPARAMETERS FOR THE P RE -T RAINED CNN M ODELS

 V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
 In this section, two sets of results will be presented and
 evaluated: one will assess the effectiveness of the proposed
 techniques within the NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework, and the
 other will evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed framework
 against the three baseline models through experiments and
 comparisons with state-of-the-art works, finally followed by
 discussion.

 A. Performance Evaluation
 To evaluate transfer learning models and hyperparameter
 optimization, three stages of experimentation and analysis are
 conducted using NF-TON-IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2 datasets.
 The first stage assesses individual model performance.
 Prediction results for all models without hyperparameter
 optimization (HPO) are presented in Table VII. In NF-TON-
 IoTv2, InceptionV3 achieves the highest accuracy (99.80%)
 and effectively classifies nine out of ten attack types, while
default settings and those optimized via the HPO algorithm. Exception and DenseNet121 also perform well. However,
One configuration represents the default settings for all base MobileNetV2 and EfficientNetB0 show lower effectiveness.
learning models, as outlined in Table IV, while the other In NF-BoT-IoTv2, Xception, MobileNet, and DenseNet121
is optimized through the HPO algorithm and presented in demonstrate high accuracy (99.35%) and effectively clas-
Table V. sify four out of five attack types. In NF-TON-IoTv2,
 InceptionV3 outperforms other models with 99.80% accuracy,
 correctly classifying nine out of ten attack types. Exception
D. Settings of the Comparison Models and DenseNet121 also show decent performance, while
 To ensure fair and reproducible evaluation against the MobileNetV2 and EfficientNetB0 perform less effectively.
proposed CNN image-based models, the three baseline mod- In NF-BoT-IoTv2, Xception, MobileNet, and DenseNet121
els are configured with consistent training hyperparameters achieve high accuracy (99.35%) and effectively classify four
where applicable, including the use of the Adam optimizer out of five attack types, except for Theft. InceptionV3
with a learning rate of 0.02, categorical cross-entropy loss, and MobileNetV2 exhibit moderate performance, while
and 25 training epochs. The LSTM model utilizes two EfficientNetB0 performs poorly across all metrics.
stacked LSTM layers with 128 units each, followed by a The subsequent phase involves the selection and aggregadense layer of 256 units. The Transformer model employs tion of outcomes from several top-performing models. Three
a 64-dimensional embedding, a 4-head attention mechanism, models exhibiting the highest attack detection accuracy are
and a feed-forward network with 128 units. The 3D CNN chosen, including Xception, InceptionV3, and DenseNet121,
architecture consists of two convolutional blocks with 32 for both datasets. Figures 7 and 8 illustrate a comparison
and 64 filters respectively, followed by a fully connected of these outstanding models in the non-HPO scenario, with
layer with 256 units. Dropout regularization is applied to their respective bar graphs depicted on the left side. The
mitigate overfitting. All layers are fully trainable, and no outputs of these models are merged utilizing the proposed Soft
frozen layers are used. These configurations are summarized Voting Ensemble methodology, which proves advantageous
in Table VI to facilitate reproducibility and performance in preserving model accuracy and enhancing robustness of
comparison. the models. The final ensemble model for NF-TON-IoTv2
LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS 691

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF N ON -HPO M ODELS ON T EST DATA

 Fig. 6. Training and validation results of optimized pre-trained models on
 NF-BoT-IoTv2.

 Fig. 7. Training and validation results of optimized pre-trained models on
Fig. 5. Training and validation results of optimized pre-trained models on X-IIoTID.
NF-TON-IoTv2.

 and depicted in Fig. 5, 6 and 7 for NF-TON-IoTv2, NF-BoTachieves an accuracy of 98.47%, while for NF-BoT-IoTv2, IoTv2, and X-IIoTID, respectively.
it reaches 99.34%. Additionally, the final IDS for NF-TON- In NF-TON-IoTv2, the four figures of Xeption, Inception,
IoTv2 attains precision, recall, F1, CK score, and MCC MobileNet, and DenseNet121 show that the optimized accuvalues of 97.04%, 98.47%, 97.73%, 98.14%, and 98.16%, racy for both training and validation approaches converged,
respectively. For NF-BoT-IoTv2, these metrics are recorded as while the loss of both training and validation approaches
98.73%, 99.35%, 99.03%, 99.09%, and 99.10%, respectively. minimal value starting from the 3rd epoch. The four models
Figs. 9 and 10 show the confusion matrices of the final show a consistent pattern between training and validation
ensemble model in the non-optimized scenario on the left side. accuracy, with the corresponding training loss and valida-
 In the second phase, the performance of individual transfer tion loss. MobileNetv2’s validation accuracy curve begins to
learning models with HPO is presented and evaluated, more- converge around the 18th epoch, while the validation loss
over, the impact of models optimized by HPO is additionally approaches the training loss by the same epoch. However,
assessed, and the top three performing models are chosen the EfficientB0 model differs from the other five models in
and amalgamated for the Soft Voting ensemble model. All that although the training accuracy increases, the validation
base learning models are trained using the optimized hyperpa- accuracy fluctuates until the optimized final epoch.
rameters determined by GA, as outlined in Table V. In each In NF-BoT-IoTv2, the four figures of Xeption, Inception,
case, the training and validation accuracies along with their MobileNet, and DenseNet121 show nearly the same patrespective losses for the optimized scenario are visualized tern of those in the aforehand dataset. the four models
692 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF HPO M ODELS ON T EST DATA

 training and validation accuracy by epoch 5, with minimal loss,
 indicating efficient learning. EfficientNetB0 shows some variability in both validation accuracy and loss, stabilizing around
 98-99% accuracy but with more fluctuation in validation loss
 compared to the other models.
 Table VIII provides an overview of all improved models’ prediction results. Both the optimized MobileNet and
 DenseNet121 models performed the same in NF-TON-IoTv2.
 These two best-performing models correctly identify all
Fig. 8. Performance of the top 3 models with Non-HPO and HPO. 10 classes with 100% accuracy and achieve an impressive
 100.00% attack detection accuracy. Additionally, Xception and
 InceptionV3 share the second position, demonstrating similar
show the optimized accuracy for both training and validation performance with accuracies of 99.90% and 99.98%, respecapproaches converged, while the loss of both training and tively. Lastly, the remaining two models, MobileNetV2 and
validation approaches minimal value after a range of epochs. EfficientNetB0, share the third position, attaining accuracies
MobileNetv2’s validation accuracy curve starts to converge of 98.68% and 99.47%, respectively.
around the 15th epoch, while the validation loss approaches the In contrast, in NF-BoT-IoTv2, the outcome differs from
training loss by the 22nd epoch. The EfficientB0 model, like that of the former dataset. The top two models, InceptionV3
the results of the preceding dataset, differs from the other five and DenseNet121, both get an exceptional 100.00% accuracy
models in that, although training accuracy grows, validation rate for attack detection and 100% accuracy rate for classiaccuracy fluctuates until the optimized final epoch. The afore- fying all 5 classes. Moreover, Xception and MobileNet are
mentioned best models are saved according to their highest tied for the second position, exhibiting similar performance
validation accuracy. All of the top base learning models are with accuracies of 99.90% and 99.98%, respectively. Finally,
saved to Kaggle’s memory drive for attack predictions on MobileNetV2 and EfficientNetB0 share the third position,
unknown test datasets. achieving accuracies of 99.02% and 99.19%, respectively.
 In X-IIoTID, the Xception model quickly converges, achiev- In addition, in X-IIoTID dataset, MobileNet achieved
ing near 100% training and validation accuracy by epoch perfect performance across all metrics, indicating flaw-
10, with training and validation loss dropping to nearly 0. less classification of all 10 classes. DenseNet121 followed
InceptionV3 follows a similar trend, reaching 100% accuracy closely with near-perfect scores, including 99.87% accuwithin the first few epochs and maintaining minimal loss, racy. InceptionV3 also performed strongly with 99.60%
indicating strong generalization. MobileNet also performs accuracy. Xception and EfficientNetB0 showed comparable
exceptionally well, achieving 100% accuracy for both training results around 98.54%, while MobileNetV2 performed slightly
and validation by epoch 6, with losses approaching 0 early in lower at 97.74%. These results highlight MobileNet and
training. MobileNetV2, however, shows significant fluctuation DenseNet121 as the most effective models for X-IIoTID-based
in validation accuracy, with accuracy stabilizing around 95% attack detection.
after initial instability, and validation loss decreasing but not as Since the models with HPO have been accomplished,
smoothly as in the other models. DenseNet121 reaches 100% Fig. 8 shows a comparison of the 3 selected top-performing
LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS 693

 without Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) accurately classifies 8 out of 10 classes in NF-TON-IoTv2, excluding MITM
 and Ransomware attacks, and 4 out of 5 classes in NF-
 BoT-IoTv2, excluding Theft attacks. However, with HPO,
 the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS achieves precise detection of
 all ten classes in NF-TON-IoTv2 and all five classes in
 NF-BoT-IoTv2. The results indicate that the three attack
 classes, MITM, Ransomware, and Theft, which can be
 accurately identified, represent minority labels in the two
 datasets. In addition, for X-IIoTID, before HPO, the model
 performs well across most classes but struggles with the
 “Fake_notification” and “Modbus_register_reading” attacks,
 misclassifying 38% of Fake_notification as Exfiltration and
 11% of Modbus_register_reading as Normal. After HPO, the
 model achieves perfect classification across all attack types,
 including previously misclassified categories, with 100% accuracy for all classes. This demonstrates a clear improvement in
 the model’s ability to generalize and correctly classify complex
 attack types after optimization, particularly resolving misclassifications in the minority classes like “Fake_notification”
 and “Modbus_register_reading”, thereby enhancing its reliability for real-world IoT intrusion detection tasks. Thus,
 the optimized base models with higher performance scores
 contribute to enhancing the performance of the final ensemble
 model.
 Fig. 10 illustrates bar graphs comparing the key metrics of the final ensemble models for the two datasets. In
 Fig. 10, utilizing NF-TON-IoTv2, the attack detection accuracy of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS without HPO stands at
 98.47%. Additionally, the other performance parameters for
Fig. 9. Confusion matrix of NFIIoT-DTL-IDS with HPO.
 final precision, recall, F1-score, CK score, and MCC are
 97.04%, 98.47%, 97.73%, 98.14%, and 98.16%, respectively.
models without and with HPO for three datasets, the bar Conversely, the classification accuracy of the final ensemble
charts demonstrate the improvement in accuracy for the model with HPO achieves a perfect score of 100%, along
top-3 performing models on each dataset. In Fig. 8 (NF- with other metrics including precision, recall, F1-score, and
TON-IoTv2), DenseNet121 and MobileNet achieve perfect CK score. As depicted in Fig. 10, utilizing NF-BoT-IoTv2, the
accuracy (100%) after HPO, with DenseNet121 improving classification accuracy of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS without
from 98.47% and MobileNet from 94.09%. Xception also HPO is 99.35%, with other performance metrics for precision,
shows a significant improvement, from 98.37% to 99.90%, recall, F1-score, CK score, and MCC reaching 98.73%,
highlighting the effectiveness of HPO. 99.35%, 99.03%, 99.09%, and 99.10%, respectively. Similarly,
 In addition, in Fig. 8 (NF-BoT-IoTv2), InceptionV3 sees as for Fig. 10, utilizing X-IIoTID, the classification accuracy
the most dramatic accuracy increase, from 67.59% to 100%, of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS without HPO is 99.80%, with
which produce a 47.95% boost. DenseNet121 also reaches other performance metrics for precision, recall, F1-score, CK
100% accuracy post-HPO, slightly up from 99.34%. Xception score, and MCC reaching 98.18%, 98.80%, 98.41%, 98.39%,
improves modestly from 99.35% to 99.67%, indicating con- and 98.41%, respectively. With HPO application, all metrics
sistent gains across the board. achieved perfect performance at 100.00%, yielding improve-
 In Fig. 8 (X-IIoTID), MobileNet achieves 100% accuracy ments of 0.20% in accuracy, 1.82% in precision, 1.20% in
after HPO, rising from 98.80%, while DenseNet121 improves recall, 1.59% in F1 score, 1.61% in Cohen’s Kappa, and 1.59%
from 97.74% to 99.87%. Interestingly, Xception’s accuracy in MCC. Consequently, employing the three IoT datasets, the
decreases slightly post-HPO, from 99.87% to 98.54%, sug- proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS achieves the highest accuracy in
gesting that HPO may not always yield improvements and detecting all threat classes.
highlighting the complexity of hyperparameter interactions.
 In the third phase, the performance outcomes of the two soft
voting ensemble models are presented and contrasted using the B. Experimental Performance Comparison With Baseline
three datasets. Fig. 9 illustrate the normalized confusion matri- Models
ces of the final ensemble model for the non-HPO (left) and To validate the effectiveness of the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-
HPO (right) scenarios, on NF-TON-IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2, IDS model, this section benchmarks its performance against
and X-IIoTID respectively. The proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS three baseline models, including LSTM, Transformer, and
694 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE IX
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH THE T HREE BASELINE M ODELS

 maintains a marginal edge by reaching the perfect score across
 all metrics. Compared to Transformer and 3D CNN, the
 proposed model improves performance by 0.25–0.88%, which
 indicates more consistent and error-free attack classification.
 Thus, the results reveal that LSTM models consistently
 exhibited lower performance, particularly on the NF-TON-
Fig. 10. Performance of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS models. IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2 datasets, reflecting their limitations
 in capturing complex spatial-temporal patterns in IoT traffic.
 In contrast, Transformer and 3D CNN models demonstrated
 significantly better results on structured traffic, yet still under-
3D CNN, using six classification metrics, across the three performed compared to the NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework.
benchmark datasets (NF-TON-IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2, and X- NFIIoT-DTL-IDS achieved perfect scores (100%) across all
IIoTID). In addition, all models were trained and evaluated evaluation metrics and datasets, highlighting its exceptional
over 5 independent runs to ensure the comparison results, effectiveness in multiclass intrusion detection, as well as
each result reported in the tables above represents the average its strong consistency across multiple runs. These results
performance across these runs. The comparative results for confirm the superior generalization and detection capabilities
each dataset are presented in Table IX. of the proposed model in diverse and dynamic IoT intrusion
 On the NF-TON-IoTv2 dataset, the proposed NFIIoT- scenarios.
DTL-IDS model achieves perfect performance (100%) across
all metrics, significantly surpassing LSTM by margins over
35% in all categories. Even compared to advanced models C. Performance Compared With the Recent Works
like Transformer and 3D CNN, outperforms with a 0.09– To finally assess the efficacy of the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-
1.25% margin, demonstrating superior generalization and IDS framework, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation
robustness in multi-class intrusion detection. On the NF-TON- in three segments focusing on accuracy scores. Firstly, we
IoTv2 dataset, the proposed model again outperforms all compared its performance against the latest IDS on the
baseline models, maintaining flawless detection rates. While same datasets, including NF-ToN-IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2, and
both Transformer and 3D CNN approach the upper limits X-IIoTID. Then, we compared the proposed NFIIoT-DTLof performance (especially Transformer at 100%), LSTM IDS framework with state-of-the-art transfer learning-based
severely underperforms with scores below 73%, showing intrusion detection schemes. Despite growing interest in IoT
that traditional sequence models struggle with the complex security, there remains a significant gap in the exploration of
traffic patterns in IoT environments. While LSTM achieves both NetFlow-based and industrial IoT scenarios, particularly
remarkably high performance (above 99.9%) on X-IIoTID in leveraging DTL methods. Most existing studies rely on
dataset, the proposed ensemble-based NFIIoT-DTL-IDS still outdated datasets with limited attack diversity, restricting
LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS 695

 TABLE X
their relevance to current threat landscapes. Moreover, DTL P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK W ITH
approaches have been largely underutilized in these contexts, R ECENT W ORKS
limiting the adaptability and robustness of intrusion detection
systems. As a result, modern IDS can only forecast a small
percentage of cyberattacks.
 Thus, the proposed framework uses the most recent NetFlow
and Industrial-based IoT security datasets, NF-ToN-IoTv2,
NF-ToN-IoTv2, and X-IIoTID which were published after
2022, and they combine NetFlow and industrial IoT-based features with more realistic and detailed data traffic to benchmark
ML/DL-based IDS methods. The proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS,
using the three datasets, can anticipate the most common
types of cyberattacks in IoT networks. The second significant
problem is that previous DTL research did not look into hyperparameters tuning for model training or ensemble techniques
for boosting model resilience and generalization. Incorporating
the renowned evolutionary algorithm, Genetic Algorithm
(GA), into our proposed hyperparameter optimization strategy,
we aimed to identify an optimal set of model parameters
ensuring optimal performance for each base learning model.
Additionally, employing the soft voting ensemble approach,
we enhanced the resilience of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS
models. As depicted in Table X, the attack detection accuracy
achieved by our framework exceeds that of conventional
machine learning approaches, deep learning-based IDS, and
preceding DTL approaches.

D. Discussion
 D1. Scalability
 One of the key limitations in transforming NetFlow tabular
data into image representations is scalability, particularly about
the preprocessing overhead and storage costs. Converting a
large number of rows of tabular data into image blocks
significantly increases computational costs and disk usage. As
the dataset grows, this transformation process becomes more
resource-intensive, requiring more memory and processing
time, particularly for handling high-frequency flow-based data
in real-time systems. In addition, producing fixed-size image
matrices from variable-length network sessions introduces
rigidity, and this transformation process may limit the model’s numerical feature vectors into pixels within an image grid
adaptability to real-world traffic scenarios with diverse charac- causes the semantic meaning of individual features to be
teristics. Despite these limitations, the approach offers notable obscured. This loss of transparency makes it difficult for
advantages in terms of computational scalability once the security analysts to identify which specific network attributes
data is transformed. Leveraging pre-trained CNNs allows the contribute to a given classification decision. Besides, the
use of transfer learning, which significantly reduces training relationships between the original features may not be easily
time and data requirements. The use of GPU-accelerated preserved meaningfully in the form of the spatial arrangement
batch processing optimizes inference speed, making the system of the transformed image style, which makes results less
suitable for near-real-time deployment [49]. In addition, the intuitive compared to traditional models that operate directly
entire pipeline, from data ingestion to classification, can on raw original features. However, this limitation opens new
be automated, enabling streamlined integration into modern avenues for visual interpretability from the perspective of
cloud-based or edge-based IDS [50]. Thus, while initial pre- the deep learning paradigm. Since CNNs are embedded with
processing may be computationally expensive, the downstream techniques such as Grad-CAM and saliency maps, which
benefits in terms of efficiency and deploy-ability make the show important regions of an image that contribute most
model scalable in practical applications. to the predictions [51]. These techniques produce indirect
 D2. Interpretability interpretation by identifying which areas, corresponding to
 Another limitation of the proposed image transformation sets or patterns of features, are most relevant to the specific
approach is reduced interpretability. Converting the original attack type. Furthermore, CNNs excel at recognizing local and
696 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

spatial patterns, potentially recognizing subtle traffic behaviors accuracy. Three benchmark datasets, including NF-TONor attack signatures that conventional statistical methods might IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2, and X-IIoTID, are covered, and the
miss [52]. When features are stacked or grouped logically model consistently achieves 100% performance across all key
within the image, the model can learn spatial hierarchies that metrics, demonstrating its effectiveness in detecting diverse
align with functional or protocol-based relationships, which cyber threats and advanced industrial-specific attacks, such
can provide a richer understanding of network behavior. as DDoS, ransomware, and theft in common cyberattacks
 D3. Information loss and MQTT subscription and crypto-ransomware attacks in
 Another challenge of image data transformation is the industrial IoT scenarios. In addition, the study compared
potential information loss, which is critical for capturing the proposed method with three baseline models, such as
network behavior over time. The NetFlow data, by nature, LSTM, Transformer, and 3D CNN models, and the state-ofconsists of sequential events, in which the timing and order the-art studies. NFIIoT-DTL-IDS shows superior classification
can be critical in detecting outliers, anomalies, and intrusion capability and generalization. Despite the promising results,
attempts. Converting this data into fixed-size image blocks challenges remain in scalability, interpretability, temporal
may abstract away certain temporal relationships, particularly information retention, and deployment efficiency, suggesting
those that span across different blocks or rely on fine-grained future directions involving lightweight hybrid models and
timestamps. This consequence could cause reduced sensitivity broader dataset integration. In summary, this proposed frameto the type of attacks that manifest gradually or irregularly over work signifies a meaningful advancement toward securing
time. However, the proposed image transformation process Industry 5.0 and intelligent network management in nextalso brings intrinsic advantages. By leveraging 2D or 3D generation IoT ecosystems.
CNNs, the automatic learning of spatial and cross-feature
correlations can be enabled, which are difficult to model with R EFERENCES
traditional tabular analysis [53]. Moreover, block-wise trans-
 [1] S. Lou, R. Tan, Y. Zhang, M. Zhou, and C. Lv, “Personalized disasformation preserves a local temporal window (e.g., 138 flows sembly sequence planning for a human–robot hybrid disassembly cell,”
per block in the case of the NF-TON-IoTv2 dataset), allowing IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 11372–11383, Sep. 2024,
the model to detect short-term patterns effectively. To address doi: 10.1109/tii.2024.3403254.
 [2] S. Rani, J. Dong, K. Shoukat, M. U. Shoukat, and S. A. Nawaz,
the limitations regarding long-term temporal dependencies, “A human–machine interaction mechanism: Additive manufacturing for
future work could explore hybrid models—for instance, com- industry 5.0—Design and management,” Sustainability, vol. 16, no. 10,
bining CNNs for feature extraction with Transformers and p. 4158, 2024, doi: 10.3390/su16104158.
 [3] M. Gopinath and S. C. Sethuraman, “A comprehensive survey on
their variants to retain sequence-level information. This hybrid deep learning based malware detection techniques,” Comput. Sci. Rev.,
strategy can potentially provide a more holistic understanding vol. 47, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 100529, doi: 10.1016/j.cosrev.2022.100529.
of temporal behaviors in network flows while retaining the [4] A. Khraisat and A. Alazab, “A critical review of intrusion detection
 systems in the Internet of Things: Techniques, deployment strategy, valadvantages of deep image-based learning. idation strategy, attacks, public datasets and challenges,” Cybersecurity,
 D4. Model Complexity vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2021, doi: 10.1186/S42400-021-00077-7.
 The proposed classification model is designed to improve [5] “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data
how well different types of attacks can be detected in IoT sets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022,
networks. However, this integration results in additional com- doi: 10.1109/jiot.2021.3085194.
putational overhead, including time and computing resources, [6] S. T. Mehedi, A. Anwar, Z. Rahman, K. Ahmed, and R. Islam,
 “Dependable intrusion detection system for IoT: A deep transfer
particularly in the training and optimization processes. This learning based approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1,
complexity may limit the model’s real-time capability for pp. 1006–1017, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1109/tii.2022.3164770.
use in resource-constrained IoT systems at the edge or fog [7] “Deep transfer learning: A novel collaborative learning model
layers, which are often deployed in IoT contexts. Thus, for cyberattack detection systems in IoT networks,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 8578–8589, May 2023,
in future work, the exploration of lightweight models such doi: 10.1109/jiot.2022.3202029.
as SqueezeNet or EfficientNet-Lite, which are designed to [8] Y. Tang, S. Mishra, N. Alduaiji, P. Shukla, M. Yahya, and T. Pang, “An
operate efficiently on devices with limited processing power advanced data analytics approach to a cognitive cyber-physical system
 for the identification and mitigation of cyber threats in the Medical
and memory, can be employed. In addition, pruning and Internet of Things (MIoT),” J. Supercomput., vol. 81, no. 4, p.623,
knowledge distillation techniques can compress and accelerate Mar. 2025, doi: 10.1007/s11227-025-07093-1.
existing models without significant performance loss. [9] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “NetFlow
 datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection
 systems,” in Big Data Technologies and Applications, Z. Deze, H.
 Huang, R. Hou, S. Rho, and N. Chilamkurti, Eds. Cham, Switzerland:
 VI. C ONCLUSION Springer Int., 2021, pp. 117–135.
 [10] M. Al-Hawawreh, E. Sitnikova, and N. Aboutorab, “X-IIoTID:
 This study introduces NFIIoT-DTL-IDS, a robust deep A connectivity-agnostic and device-agnostic intrusion data set for
transfer learning-based intrusion detection framework tailored Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
for NetFlow and Industrial IoT environments. By employ- pp. 3962–3977, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3102056.
 [11] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT: Network-based detection of IoT Botnet
ing six CNN architectures, including Xception, InceptionV3, attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
MobileNet, MobileNetV2, DenseNet121, and EfficientNetB0, no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul.–Sep. 2018, doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2018.03367731.
with preprocessing, image transformation, hyperparameter [12] M. Shafiq, Z. Tian, A. K. Bashir, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “IoT
 malicious traffic identification using wrapper-based feature selection
optimization via genetic algorithm, and soft voting ensem- mechanisms,” Comput. Security, vol. 94, Jul. 2020, Art. no. 101863,
ble, the framework achieves exceptional intrusion detection doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2020.101863.
LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS 697

[13] W. L. Al-Yaseen, A. K. Idrees, and F. H. Almasoudy, “Wrapper [33] X. Liu, Z. Tang, and B. Yang, “Predicting network attacks with
 feature selection method based differential evolution and CNN by constructing images from NetFlow data,” in Proc. IEEE
 extreme learning machine for intrusion detection system,” 5th Int. Conf. Big Data Security Cloud (BigDataSecurity), IEEE Int.
 Pattern Recognit., vol. 132, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 108912, Conf. High Perform. Smart Comput. (HPSC) IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2022.108912. Data Security (IDS), Washington, DC, USA, May 2019, pp. 61–66,
[14] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic doi: 10.1109/BigDataSecurity-HPSC-IDS.2019.00022.
 line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised [34] K. I. E. Snell et al., “External validation of clinical prediction
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensic Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714, models: Simulation-based sample size calculations were more reli-
 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2022.3228493. able than rules-of-thumb,” J. Clin. Epidemiol., vol. 135, pp. 79–89,
[15] P. L. S. Jayalaxmi, G. Kumar, R. Saha, M. Conti, T. Kim, and R. Thomas, 2021.
 “DeBot: A deep learning-based model for bot detection in Industrial [35] J. M. Abdullah and T. Ahmed, “Fitness dependent optimizer: Inspired
 Internet-of-Things,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 102, Sep. 2022, Art. no. by the bee swarming reproductive process,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
 108214, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2022.108214. pp. 43473–43486, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2907012.
[16] Z. Ding et al., “MF-Net: Multi-frequency intrusion detection network [36] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei,
 for Internet traffic data,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 146, Feb. 2024, “ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc.
 Art. no. 109999, doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2023.109999. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2009, pp. 248–255,
[17] H. Wan, S. Guo, K. Yin, X. Liang, and Y. Lin, “CTS-LSTM: doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
 LSTM-based neural networks for correlatedtime series prediction,” [37] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethinking
 Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 191, Mar. 2020, Art. no. 105239, the inception architecture for computer vision,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 doi: 10.1016/J.KNOSYS.2019.105239. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 2818–2826.
[18] A. Azzouni and G. Pujolle, “A long short-term memory recurrent [38] S. Shao, S. McAleer, R. Yan, and P. Baldi, “Highly accuneural network framework for network traffic matrix prediction,” 2017, rate machine fault diagnosis using deep transfer learning,” IEEE
 arXiv:1705.05690v3. Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2446–2455, Apr. 2019,
[19] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational doi: 10.1109/TII.2018.2864759.
 LSTM enhanced anomaly detection for industrial big data,” IEEE [39] M.-A. Zöller and M. F. Huber, “Benchmark and survey of automated
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021, machine learning frameworks,” 2021, arXiv:1904.12054.
 doi: 10.1109/TII.2020.3022432. [40] H. Victoria and G. Maragatham, “Automatic tuning of hyperparame-
[20] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long ters using Bayesian optimization,” Evol. Syst., vol. 12, pp. 217–223,
 sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell., Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1007/s12530-020-09345-2.
 vol. 35, 2020, pp. 11106–11115. [41] P. R. Lorenzo, J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok, L. S. Ramos, and J. Ranilla,
[21] Z. Wang, M. A. Goudarzi, and R. Buyya, “TF-DDRL: A “Particle swarm optimization for hyper-parameter selection in deep
 transformer-enhanced distributed DRL technique for scheduling IoT neural networks,” in Proc. Genet. Evol. Comput. Conf., 2017, pp. 1–6.
 applications in edge and cloud computing environments,” IEEE Trans. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:25761026
 Services Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1039–1053, Mar./Apr. 2025, [42] A. Sohail, “Genetic algorithms in the fields of artificial intelligence
 doi: 10.1109/tsc.2025.3528346. and data sciences,” Ann. Data Sci., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1007–1018,
[22] M. Fayyaz et al., “3D CNNs with adaptive temporal feature resolu- Aug. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s40745-021-00354-9.
 tions,” in Proc. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 4731–4740, [43] A. Alhowaide, I. Alsmadi, and J. Tang, “Ensemble detection model
 doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00470. for IoT IDS,” Internet Things, vol. 16, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 100435,
[23] Y. Gao and Y. Yang, “Transfer learning on stratified data: Joint esti- doi: 10.1016/j.iot.2021.100435.
 mation transferred from strata,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 140, Aug. 2023, [44] W. Ding, I. Alrashdi, H. Hawash, and M. Abdel-Basset, “DeepSecDrive:
 Art. no. 109535, doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2023.109535. An explainable deep learning framework for real-time detection of
[24] X. Li, Z. Hu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, and J. Ma, “Transfer learning based cyberattack in in-vehicle networks,” Inf. Sci., vol. 658, Feb. 2024, Art.
 intrusion detection scheme for Internet of Vehicles,” Inf. Sci., vol. 547, no. 120057, doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2023.120057.
 pp. 119–135, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2020.05.130. [45] D. Krishnan and P. Shrinath, “Robust botnet detection approach for
[25] N. Abosata, S. Al-Rubaye, and G. Inalhan, “Customised intrusion known and unknown attacks in IoT networks using stacked multidetection for an industrial IoT heterogeneous network based on machine classifier and adaptive thresholding,” Arab. J. Sci. Eng., vol. 49, pp.
 learning algorithms called FTL-CID,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 1, p. 321, 12561–12577, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1007/s13369-024-08742-y.
 2023. doi: 10.3390/s23010321. [46] D. Attique, W. Hao, W. Ping, D. Javeed, and P. Kumar, “Explainable
[26] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Li, and T. Geng, “DarknetSec: A novel and data-efficient deep learning for enhanced attack detection in IIoT
 self-attentive deep learning method for darknet traffic classification and ecosystem,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp. 38976–38986,
 application identification,” Comput. Security, vol. 116, May 2022, Art. Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3384374.
 no. 102663, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.102663. [47] H. C. Altunay and Z. Albayrak, “A hybrid CNN+LSTM-based
[27] F. Yan, G. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Sun, B. Hou, and N. Yu, “TL-CNN-IDS: intrusion detection system for industrial IoT networks,” Eng.
 Transfer learning-based intrusion detection system using convolutional Sci. Technol. Int. J., vol. 38, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 101322,
 neural network,” J. Supercomput., vol. 79, no. 15, pp. 17562–17584, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2022.101322.
 Oct. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s11227-023-05347-4. [48] D. Singh, A. Shukla, and M. Sajwan, “Deep transfer learning framework
[28] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI- for the identification of malicious activities to combat cyberattack,”
 based security systems at the edge: Network TON_IoT datasets,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 125, pp. 687–697, Dec. 2021,
 Sustain. Cities Soc., vol. 72, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102994, doi: 10.1016/j.future.2021.07.015.
 doi: 10.1016/j.scs.2021.102994. [49] Y. Xu et al., Intrusion Detection Based on Fusing Deep Neural Networks
[29] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, and Transfer Learning. Singapore: Springer, 2019, pp. 212–223,
 “Towards the development of realistic botnet dataset in the doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-3341-9_18.
 Internet of Things for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” [50] X. Li and B. Zou, “An automated data engineering pipeline for anomaly
 Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019, detection of IoT sensor data,” 2021, arXiv:2109.13828.
 doi: 10.1016/j.future.2019.05.041. [51] Y. Gao, J. Liu, W. Li, M. Hou, Y. Li, and H. Zhao, “Augmented
[30] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a stan- Grad-CAM++: Super-resolution saliency maps for visual interpretation
 dard feature set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” of deep neural network,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 23, p. 4846, 2023,
 Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022, doi: 10.3390/electronics12234846.
 doi: 10.1007/s11036-021-01843-0. [52] M. M. Taye, “Theoretical understanding of convolutional
[31] Y. Qing, X. Liu, and Y. Du, “Mitigating data imbalance to improve the neural network: Concepts, architectures, applications, future
 generalizability in IoT DDoS detection tasks,” J. Supercomput., vol. 80, directions,” De Computis, vol. 11, no. 3, p. 52, 2023,
 pp. 9935–9960, May 2024, doi: 10.1007/s11227-023-05829-5. doi: 10.3390/computation11030052.
[32] S. Latif, W. Boulila, A. Koubaa, Z. Zou, and J. Ahmad, “DTL-IDS: An [53] E. Lee, M. Nam, and Y. C. Lee, “Tab2vox: CNN-based multivariate
 optimized intrusion detection framework using deep transfer learning multilevel demand forecasting framework by tabular-to-voxel image
 and genetic algorithm,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 221, Jan. 2024, conversion,” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 18, 2022, Art. no. 11745,
 Art. no. 103784, doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2023.103784. doi: 10.3390/su141811745.
698 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 Jing Li received the B.Sc. degree in computer Dina S. M. Hassan received the Engineering
 science from China Jiliang University, in 1999, degree in electronic engineering from Mansoura
 the M.Sc. degree in information management from University, Egypt, in 1997, the master’s degree
 Zhejiang University, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Manchester, U.K., in
 in informatics engineering from Universiti Teknologi 2002, and the Ph.D. degree in wireless networks
 Malaysia, in 2025. He is an Assistant Professor from Ain Shams University, Egypt, in 2011.
 with the School of Computing and Data Science, She is currently an Assistant Professor with the
 Xiamen University Malaysia. His research interests Department of Information Technology, Princess
 include machine learning, deep learning, computer Nourah bint Abdulrahman University. Her current
 networking, the Internet of Things, cybersecurity, research interests include wireless networks, cloud
 digital twins, big data, high-performance computing, computing, deep learning, the Internet of Things, and
and applications of large language models. fog computing.

 Mohd Shahizan Othman received the B.Sc. degree Hewan Chen received the B.Sc. degree in computer
 in computer science from Universiti Teknologi science from China Jiliang University, in 2003,
 Malaysia (UTM), in 1998, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. and the M.Sc. degree in software engineering from
 degrees in information technology, specializing in Hangzhou Dianzi University, in 2008. She is an
 Web information extraction, information retrieval, Associate Researcher and Staff Engineer with the
 and machine learning from Universiti Kebangsaan Digital Reform Office, China Jiliang University.
 Malaysia, in 2001 and 2008, respectively. He is an Her research interests include digital reform, smart
 Associate Professor with the Faculty of Computing, campus construction, information systems, artificial
 UTM. His expertise includes data analytics, artificial intelligence applications, and data-driven decisionintelligence, machine learning, optimization, Web making. She has published work on high-efficiency
 mining, content management, AI-driven education wireless networks, digital campus development, data
analytics, e-learning, social learning, and business intelligence. transmission, and digital transformation and innovation in higher education.

 Xugang Ying received the Bachelor of Engineering
 degree in computer science and technology from Lizawati Mi Yusuf received the B.Sc. degree
 China Jiliang University, in 2003, and the Master in computer science from Universiti Teknologi
 of Public Administration degree from the Graduate Malaysia (UTM), in 2000, and the M.Sc. degree in
 School of Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, in information technology from Universiti Kebangsaan
 2011. He currently serves as a Senior Engineer, Malaysia, in 2005. She is a Senior Lecturer with
 Nationally Accredited (China) with the Zhejiang the Faculty of Computing, UTM. Her expertise
 Provincial Human Resources and Social Security spans optimization, Web information extraction
 Information Center. His current research and work and retrieval, machine learning, artificial intellifocus on information management and technol- gence, computational intelligence, e-learning, social
 ogy related to social security, including systems, learning, business intelligence, high-performance
networks, big data application, and information security. computing, numerical analysis, and data mining.