IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026 4509

 Advancing Pre-Trained Teacher: Towards Robust
 Feature Discrepancy for Anomaly Detection
 Canhui Tang , Sanping Zhou , Member, IEEE, Yizhe Li , Yonghao Dong ,
 and Le Wang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—With the wide application of knowledge distillation
between an ImageNet pre-trained teacher model and a learnable
student model, unsupervised anomaly detection has witnessed
a significant achievement in the past few years. The success
of this framework mainly relies on how to keep the feature
discrepancy between the teacher and student model, in which it
has two underlying sub-assumptions: (1) The teacher model can
represent two separable distributions for the normal and abnormal patterns, while (2) the student model can only reconstruct
the normal distribution. However, it still remains a challenging
issue to maintain these ideal assumptions in practice. In this
paper, we propose a simple yet effective two-stage industrial
anomaly detection framework, termed AAND, which sequentially Fig. 1. Illustration of teacher-student feature discrepancy, whose success relies
performs Anomaly Amplification and Normality Distillation to on how to keep the feature discrepancy between teacher and student model.
enhance the two assumptions. In the first anomaly amplification This line of methods has two underlying assumptions that have not been well
 addressed: (1) The teacher model can represent two separable distributions
stage, we propose a novel Residual Anomaly Amplification (RAA)
 for the normal and abnormal patterns; while (2) the student decoder can only
module to advance the pre-trained teacher encoder with synthetic reconstruct the normal distribution.
anomalies. It generates adaptive residuals to amplify anomalies
while maintaining the feature integrity of pre-trained model.
It mainly comprises a Matching-guided Residual Gate and an an unsupervised problem that relies solely on normal samples
Attribute-scaling Residual Generator, which can determine the
residuals’ proportion and characteristic, respectively. In the for training. Moreover, industrial anomalies are hard to detect
second normality distillation stage, we further employ a reverse and localize due to their diverse and uncertain nature, which
distillation paradigm to train a student decoder, in which a can range from subtle texture changes to significant structural
novel Hard Knowledge Distillation (HKD) loss is built to better defects. In practice, feature extractors pre-trained on ImageNet
facilitate the reconstruction of normal patterns. Comprehensive [1] have been widely applied in the IAD task [2], [3], [4],
experiments on the MvTecAD, VisA, and MvTec3D-RGB datasets
show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance. Our in which they are utilized to generate representations for
code is available at https://github.com/Hui-design/AAND the diverse normal and abnormal patterns. By capturing and
 modeling the distribution of pre-trained features for normal
 Index Terms—Industrial anomaly detection, teacher-student
model, knowledge distillation. samples, subsequent anomaly detection can be achieved by
 identifying deviations from the learned distribution.
 I. I NTRODUCTION Recent advances [3], [5], [6], [7], [8] often adopt knowledge
 distillation to take advantage of the pre-trained model, which
I NDUSTRIAL Anomaly Detection (IAD) is a crucial task
 that focuses on detecting and localizing anomalies in
images of industrial products. The scarcity of anomaly samples
 involves a multi-scale feature reconstruction of the pre-trained
 features. As shown in Fig. 1, it solves the anomaly detection
poses a challenge, leading IAD to be typically approached as problem by focusing on the “teacher-student discrepancy”, i.e.,
 the feature discrepancy between a fixed pre-trained teacher
 Received 3 May 2024; revised 3 February 2025, 29 May 2025, 8 October encoder and a learnable student decoder. To make the “teacher-
2025, and 6 January 2026; accepted 4 April 2026. Date of publication 17 April
2026; date of current version 30 April 2026. This work was supported in student discrepancy” hypothesis more robust, particularly
part by the National Science and Technology Major Project under Grant ensuring larger discrepancies when anomalies are presented,
2023ZD0121300; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of two underlying sub-assumptions need to be satisfied: (1) The
China (NSFC) under Grant 62572384, Grant U24A20325, Grant 62125305,
and Grant 62503384; and in part by the Key Research and Development teacher model can represent two separable distributions for
Plan of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2024PT-ZCK-80. The associate editor the normal and abnormal patterns, while (2) the student
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was decoder can only reconstruct the normal distribution. How-
Prof. Xinchao Wang. (Corresponding author: Sanping Zhou.)
 The authors are with the National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine ever, these ideal assumptions are hard to meet in practice,
Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for which requires researchers to improve them from different
Visual Information and Applications, Institute of Artificial Intelligence and perspectives.
Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China (e-mail:
spzhou@mail.xjtu.edu.cn). For the first assumption, it is important yet has been over-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2026.3683277 looked in current methods. As shown in Table I, we measure
 1941-0042 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4510 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 TABLE I tribution of normal patterns, while over-reliance on synthetic
C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF T EACHER M ODEL ON THE V IS A [9] DATASET. anomalies may lead to catastrophic forgetting [12] of this pre-
 “ ” I NDICATES THE A SSUMPTION I S N OT F ULLY G UARANTEED , AND trained knowledge. To address this, our RAA module employs
 “IC D ISTANCE ” R EPRESENTS THE I NTER -C LASS C OSINE D IS -
 TANCES OF M ULTI -L AYER F EATURES (1/2/3 LAYERS ). F OR
 an adaptive residual learning mechanism. This module com-
 FAIR C OMPARISON , THE S TUDENT M ODEL I S prises two components: a matching-guided residual gate and
 S ET C ONSISTENT an attribute-scaling residual generator, which determine the
 proportion and characteristics of residuals, respectively. This
 model effectively amplifies the sensitivity to anomalies while
 maintaining the feature integrity of pre-trained model. In
 the second stage, we employ a reverse distillation paradigm
 to train a student decoder that can only reconstruct normal
 representations, in which a novel hard knowledge distillation
 (HKD) loss is built to better facilitate the reconstruction of
the cosine distance of multi-layer teacher features between normal patterns. Without losing generality, the teacher-student
normal patches and abnormal patches. We can observe a discrepancy is utilized for anomaly detection during inference.
significant reduction in inter-class distance and a performance Comprehensive experiments on the MvTecAD, VisA, and
(I-AUC) drop when the teacher model is randomly initialized MvTec3D-RGB datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
in the well-known RD [3] framework. Although the pre-trained method.
model can alleviate this issue, it still remains a challenging Our main contributions are as follows:
issue to generate discriminative features in solving the IAD • We design a novel two-stage anomaly detection frameproblem. To the best of our knowledge, the challenge mainly work based on the two underlying assumptions of
arises from two aspects: (1) Difference between task objectives. knowledge distillation, which can obtain robust feature
In pre-training on ImageNet, models aim to discriminate discrepancy between the teacher and student model.
between different object categories; while in the IAD task, • We design a novel residual anomaly amplification module
models need to discriminate between normal and abnormal in the anomaly amplification stage, which can enhance
instances within a single object category. (2) Scarcity of abnor- the discrimination capacity of the vanilla teacher encoder
mal data. Abnormal objects are far less common than normal with the help of synthetic anomalies.
objects in the real world, therefore the models have fewer • We design a novel hard knowledge distillation loss in
opportunities to learn representations of anomalies during pre- the normality distillation stage, which can enhance the
training. Due to these factors, the pre-trained embeddings may reconstruction capability of the student decoder in dealing
become over-compressed and learn some irrelevant semantics with challenging normal patterns.
to the IAD task, which limits the pre-trained teacher model’s The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We review
ability to discriminate between normal and abnormal industrial the related work in Section II. Section III describes the
instances. When it comes to the second assumption, earlier technical details of our proposed AAND. Section IV presents
methods [3], [6] give a natural constraint, i.e., anomalies the experiment details and results. Finally, we summarize the
cannot reconstruct abnormal representations since they are paper in Section V.
absent in the training process. To guarantee the student model
consistently outputs normal patterns, some recent works [7],
[8] impose stronger constraints on the student model to sup- II. R ELATED W ORK
press anomaly signals. Despite these, less attention has been In this section, we review some related works on IAD.
drawn to the reconstruction capacity of the student decoder The current works can be categorized into four types:
in dealing with challenging normal patterns, such as the fine- reconstruction-based, synthesis-based, embedding-based, and
grained normal textures and rare normal patterns. distillation-based methods.
 To this end, we consider how to extend the teacher
encoder’s discrimination capacity and how to enhance the
student decoder’s normality distillation ability. In this paper, A. Reconstruction-Based Methods
we propose a two-stage framework to achieve robust feature As anomaly detection is typically treated as an unsupervised
discrepancy between the teacher and student model. Specif- problem, reconstruction-based methods have emerged as a
ically, it consists of an anomaly amplification stage and a natural approach. It aims to reconstruct normal inputs and
normality distillation stage, which address the first and second assumes that the reconstruction error is larger for anomalies.
assumptions, respectively. In the first stage, we propose a Early methods often employ GAN [13], AE [14], [15], [16],
novel Residual Anomaly Amplification (RAA) module to [17], [18], or VAE [19], [20] to train reconstruction models. To
advance the fixed teacher with the exposure of synthetic make the anomaly pixels more difficult to reconstruct, RIAD
anomalies. Instead of proposing pioneering operators [10], [21] proposes a reconstruction-by-inpainting approach, which
[11], the primary novelty of our RAA lies in building a removes partial pixels to reconstruct the images. Inspired by
robust anomaly amplification mechanism that enhances the the ability of latent diffusion model [22], [23] in generatpre-trained teacher’s discrimination ability using synthetic ing high-quality and diverse images, more and more recent
anomalies. Pre-trained features have learned a universal dis- approaches [24], [25], [26], [27] utilize diffusion models to
TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY 4511

model the image reconstruction as a denoising process. Nev- involve a student model to reconstruct the multi-scale preertheless, the pixel-level reconstruction methods may easily trained embeddings of a teacher model on normal samples.
generalize to anomalies, resulting in the well-reconstruction The mainstream methods can be roughly categorized into
of some anomalies. To address this issue, some research forward distillation and reverse distillation methods. In partichas focused on exploring knowledge distillation, with a shift ular, the forward distillation approaches [5], [6] often adopt
towards reconstructing inputs at the feature level. similar networks between student and teacher models to
 train the distillation process. Nevertheless, they suffer from
B. Synthesis-Based Methods the similarity of student and teacher architecture, where the
 Due to the lack of abnormal samples in training, it is abnormal data is mapped closely, resulting in an undesirably
challenging for the IAD task to find the boundary between nor- small feature discrepancy for anomalies. To address this issue,
mality and anomaly. Thus, synthesis-based methods propose to RD [3] adopts a reverse distillation paradigm. Rather than
synthesize anomalies by introducing noises into normal images directly receiving raw images, the student network takes the
[28], [29], [30], [31]. For example, in the case of DRAEM one-class embedding of the teacher model as input, to restore
[28], textures are sampled from an external texture dataset the teacher’s multi-scale representations. Besides, AST [44]
[32], and Perlin [33] noise is employed to generate random proposes a framework comprising a pre-trained encoder and
anomaly masks for creating anomalies. Besides, Cutpaste two decoders, in which a normalizing flow decoder serves
[29] randomly selects augmented regions from an image and as a teacher for density estimation, while a conventional
pastes it onto other random regions of the image. NSA [30] feed-forward network acts as a student. To guarantee the
innovatively employs Poisson image editing to seamlessly student network consistently outputs normal patterns, recent
blend patches of varying sizes from different images, which methods impose stronger constraints on the student network.
provides an excellent anomaly synthesis method. Additionally, For example, RD++ [7] introduces multi-scale projection
some methods synthesize noise at the feature level, such as layers and incorporates several loss constraints, so as to facil-
SimpleNet [34] and DSR [35]. However, real-world anomalies itate the student model in suppressing abnormal signals from
exhibit a wide range of patterns and uncertainties that cannot pseudo-abnormal regions. Besides, DeSTSeg [8] introduces a
be fully covered. Consequently, over-reliance on synthetic denoising stage to train a denoising student that reconstructs
anomalies may overfit the seen anomalies, while getting bad the normal patterns both for normal and abnormal inputs.
performance on unseen anomalies. In our method, we utilize However, most distillation-based methods solely focus on
synthetic anomalies to amplify the sensitivity of the pre-trained the student model, while overlooking the limited discriminamodel to anomalies, while keeping its original discrimination tion ability of the teacher model. Unlike previous methods, we
ability on some unseen anomalies. To the best of our knowl- both focus on enhancing the teacher model’s discrimination
edge, we are the first to enhance the pre-trained teacher model capacity and the student model’s normality distillation ability.
with synthetic anomalies in solving the IAD problem.
 III. M ETHOD
C. Embedding-Based Methods
 In the context of unsupervised industrial anomaly detection,
 Thanks to the development of models pre-trained on exten- let X train = {In1 , In2 . . . , InN } be a training set containing only
sive external datasets, such methods [36], [37] can effectively normal images, and X test = {It1 , It2 . . . , ItM } be a test set
represent both normal and abnormal patterns for anomaly including both normal and abnormal images. The goal of
detection. In practice, the embedding-based methods usually anomaly detection is to train a model to identify and localize
utilize ImageNet pre-trained models to encode normal samples anomalies in the test images.
into high-dimensional feature spaces. For example, Padim [38]
calculates the inverse covariance matrix to model the normal
 A. Revisiting Teacher-Student Discrepancy
distribution, Patchcore [2] stores representative features in
memory banks, and M3DM [39] constructs multiple memory Knowledge Distillation (KD) [3], [7], [8] has achieved
banks to store features from different modalities. What’s promising results in the industrial anomaly detection task.
different, some methods [4], [40], [41], [42] employ additional They solve the anomaly detection problem by focusing on
decoders to learn the distribution of normal samples using the “teacher-student discrepancy”, i.e., the feature discrepancy
normalizing flows [43]. For example, CS-Flow [41] proposes a between a fixed pre-trained teacher encoder and a learnable
simple framework that jointly processes multiple feature maps student decoder, which can be formulated as follows:
of different scales. Besides, CFlow [4] models a conditional D(FT , FS ) = 1 − s(FT , FS ), (1)
normalizing flow with a position encoding, and adopts a multiscale generative decoder to estimate the likelihood of encoded where s(, ) denotes the cosine similarity. FT and FS represent
features. Since these methods largely rely on the pre-trained the teacher features and student features, respectively. It is
model, their performances are limited by the discrimination hypothesized that anomalies have larger discrepancies than
capacity of pre-trained model. normal samples as follows:

D. Distillation-Based Methods D(FaT , FS ) > D(FnT , FS ), (2)
 This line of methods can combine the advantages of both where the superscript n and a represent normal and abnormal
reconstruction-based and embedding-based methods, which samples, respectively. To make the hypothesis work, as shown
4512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed AAND. I. Anomaly amplification Stage for enhancing Assumption I (Ass. I): the vanilla teacher model encodes the input
image into K-level features FT k , and then these features are advanced to FAk through our proposed Residual Anomaly Amplification module (RAA). The
RAA module generates adaptive residuals, effectively amplifying anomalies and preserving the integrity of the pre-trained model. It comprises a matchingguided residual gate and an attribute-scaling residual generator, which determine the proportion and characteristics of the residuals, respectively. II. Normality
Distillation Stage for enhancing Assumption II (Ass. II): a student model decodes features FS k , and these features are trained to distill the representation of
advanced teacher only on normal samples, where “BN” denotes a bottleneck module and LHKD represents our proposed Hard Knowledge Distillation loss.
During inference, the “teacher-student discrepancy” is used for anomaly detection.

in Fig. 1, two underlying sub-assumptions are required in anomalous patterns. Moreover, we propose an RAA module
the recent KD-based frameworks. (1) Assumption I: The with adaptive residual generation to amplify anomaly and
teacher encoder can represent two separable distributions for preserve the pre-trained model’s generalizability. The training
normal and abnormal patterns, which is implicitly satisfied within this stage incorporates synthetic anomalies.
by employing an ImageNet pre-trained encoder. (2) Assump- Anomaly synthesis. Given the normal images from the
tion II: The student decoder is designed to reconstruct only the training set X train , we use a widely used anomaly generator
normal distribution, which is indirectly achieved by training [28] to generate abnormal masks and images. First, Perlin
exclusively on normal samples. If the two assumptions were noise [33] is generated and binarized into an anomaly mask
 a
satisfied, the abnormal teacher features FaT would fall outside M ∈ {0, 1}H×W to determine the locations of anomalies. Then,
the boundary of the normal features FnT , thereby exceeding texture samples are obtained from the source texture dataset
the reconstruction capabilities of the student network FS . As [32] to serve as the content for these locations. For a normal
a result, anomalies would exhibit larger discrepancies than image In ∈ RC×H×W , the corresponding synthetic abnormal
normal samples, which would lead to a robust “teacher-student image is denoted as Ia ∈ RC×H×W . Considering the anomalies
discrepancy” as illustrated in Eq. (2). are typically on the foreground object, we follow [45] to
 f
 However, these ideal assumptions are hard to meet in extract a foreground mask M ∈ {0, 1}H×W with grayscale
practice, which motivates us to enhance them from various binary thresholding algorithms. The resulting pseudo-anomaly
perspectives. As shown in Fig. 2, we propose a simple yet mask M is then obtained by taking the intersection of the two
effective two-stage anomaly detection framework, which com- masks.
prises an Anomaly Amplification Stage (Stage I) to address During the first-stage training, we take the corrupted image
Assumption I and a Normality Distillation Stage (Stage II) to Ia as input of the teacher encoder. The encoder extracts
address Assumption II. K-level features FTk ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk . At the k-th level of feature
 extraction, a total of Hk × Wk patches are obtained. By
B. Anomaly Amplification Stage subsampling the anomaly mask at the same scale, denoted as
 ImageNet pre-trained encoders are widely used [2], [3], Mk , and using it to label the normal and abnormal locations,
[7] in the industrial anomaly detection task, where the pre- these patches can be divided into Nkn normal patches and Nka
trained embedding is directly used as teacher representation abnormal patches. The corresponding features are denoted as
 n a
without any adaption. However, as outlined in Table. I, the gap FnTk ∈ RNk ×Ck and FaTk ∈ RNk ×Ck respectively.
between ImageNet pretraining and IAD task poses significant Residual Anomaly Amplification. Considering overchallenges in fulfilling Assumption I. To mitigate this issue, reliance on synthetic anomalies may lead to catastrophic
we introduce an anomaly amplification stage to increase the forgetting [12] of pre-trained knowledge, we propose a novel
teacher model’s ability to discriminate between normal and RAA module, which utilizes an adaptive residual learning
TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY 4513

 as wnk j , j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L}, and the anomaly weights, denoted as
 wak j , j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L}, are derived as follows:

 exp(s(qik , mnk j )) exp(s(qik , mak j ))
 wnki j = , waki j = , (5)
 Z Z
 where
 PL Z represents
 PL the normalization factor, ensuring that
 j=1 ki j = 1. When presented with an abnormal
 n a
 w
 j=1 ki j + w
 patch query qak , it has a higher affinity to the anomaly memory.
 Conversely, for a normal patch query qnk , it has a higher
 affinity to the normal memory. Afterwards, the sum of anomaly
Fig. 3. Illustration of our proposed RAA module. It utilizes an adaptive weights is taken as the outputs of the residual gate:
residual learning mechanism to amplify anomalies while maintaining the
integrity of pre-trained model. L
 X L
 X
 waki = waki j = 1 − wnki j , (6)
 j=1 j=1
mechanism to enhance anomaly detection without compromising the integrity of the pre-trained model. This module where the anomaly weight waki ∈ [0, 1] represents the anomaly
comprises two critical components: a matching-guided residual probability of inputs. To supervise the anomaly weight, we
gate and an attribute-scaling residual generator. As shown adopt the well-known focal loss [46]. The ground truth waki ∈
in Fig. 3, the residual gate suppresses residuals on nor- {0, 1} is from the pseudo-anomaly mask Mk , which equals to 1
mal samples to maintain the integrity of pre-trained model when it is a synthetic abnormal patch, while equaling to 0
while encouraging residuals on synthetic inputs to promote when it is a normal patch. Under binary label supervision, the
deviations. Additionally, the residual generator is designed discriminative ability of the residual gate is guaranteed. As
to adaptively learn the characteristics of residuals, which for diversity, by matching with varied normal and synthetic
directly influence the distribution of emergent abnormal fea- abnormal features, the dual memories will implicitly learn the
tures. By embedding these RAA modules into the pre-existing diverse feature distributions. Within the RAA module, the role
framework, we have successfully crafted an advanced teacher of memory is to control the proportion of adaptive residual
encoder that robustly enhances anomaly detection capabilities. generation for a robust teacher-student discrepancy. Given that
The extracted feature at the k-th block of the advanced the module constitutes only a part of our AAND framework,
teacher model, denoted as FAk ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk , is calculated as we do not impose further constraints to maintain its simplicity.
follows: 2) Attribute-Scaling Residual Generator: Due to the influ-
 FAk = FTk + wak · ∆ak , (3) ence of residual characteristics on the distribution of new
 abnormal features, we address this challenge by introducing
where wak ∈ [0, 1]Hk ×Wk represents the anomaly weights pre- an attribute-scaling residual generator. The residual noise aims
dicted by the residual gate, and ∆ak ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk is the residual to emphasize the attributes that are relevant to anomalies
signals generated by the residual generator. while diminishing those irrelevant attributes. Specifically, the
 1) Matching-Guided Residual Gate: This module aims to key designs are the channel weight module and the anomaly
regulate the proportion of residuals, which functions as a amplification loss.
robust binary classifier that predicts the weight of residuals. As illustrated in Fig. 2, we initiate the process by projecting
This prediction is informed by the matching results between FiTk using another MLP, denoted as Φkθ2 (·). Subsequently, each
the queries and the learned memory items. channel of the projected feature is mapped to the range (−1,1)
 As illustrated in Fig. 2, we take the feature map FTk ∈ through a tanh function, yielding scaling weights Σik ∈ RC
RCk ×Hk ×Wk extracted from the frozen teacher block as input. for each channel. Finally, the generated residual ∆ak i ∈ RC
The input is first added with a position encoding pc [41], and is calculated by multiplying the channel weights and input
then passed through an MLP, Φkθ1 (·), for projection: features as follows:
 qik = Φkθ1 (FiTk + pic ), (4) ∆ak i = Tanh(Φkθ2 (FiTk )) FiTk , (7)
where FiTk ∈ RC and pic ∈ RC are the input feature and position
 where denotes element-wise multiplication. To obtain the
encoding at the i-th patch, respectively. In addition, qik ∈ RC
 updated features and avoid interfering with the parameters of
represents the projected feature. To represent the memory of
 the residual gate, we replace the predicted anomaly weights
normality and anomaly, we configure a normal memory Mnk =
 ŵai with the ground truth anomaly weights wai during training
{mnk1 , mnk2 , . . . , mnkL } containing L learnable normal embedas follows:
dings, and an anomaly memory Mak = {mak1 , mak2 , . . . , makL }
containing L learnable anomaly embeddings. These embed- FnAik = FnTik + 0 · ∆ak i , FaAik = FaTik + 1 · ∆ak i , (8)
dings are initialized with a Gaussian distribution N (0, 1).
Subsequently, a matching process is conducted between the where the superscripts ai and ni denote the abnormal and
query and memories, which involves computing their cosine normal patches, respectively. Here, FaAik represents the learnable
similarity and normalizing the similarity scores using the features updated by the residuals, while FaTik , FnAik , and FnTik
softmax function. Consequently, the normal weights, denoted remain frozen. This ensures that the optimization is confined
4514 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

exclusively to the synthetic anomaly features, specifically on
the residual ∆ak i .
 To supervise the residuals, we propose an anomaly amplification loss to push the abnormal features outside the
boundaries of normality. Unlike traditional contrastive learning
employing both “push” and “pull” actions, our method focuses
solely on pushing anomalies away from normal samples using
a dynamic margin, enhancing discriminability while preserving pre-trained priors. The loss is calculated as follows:
 Nka Nkn
 1 XX n
 LA = a n max(s(FaAik , FTkj ), Sre f
 ki j ), (9)
 Nk Nk
 i=1 j=1

where Sre f a n
 k ∈ RNk ×Nk is a dynamic margin matrix calculated
based on the similarity matrix produced by the vanilla teacher Fig. 4. Illustration of our proposed HKD loss. It facilitates the reconstruction
model, which is denoted as follows: on challenging normal patterns by selecting the Kh normal patches with the
 highest distillation loss for further training.
 n
 Sre f
 ki j = s(FT k , FT k ) − α,
 ai j
 (10)
 is trained to fit the target features from the teacher model using
where α is a hyper-parameter to control the degree of reduc- a knowledge distillation loss:
tion. It is noteworthy that the loss function LA is specifically n n
designed to reduce the similarity between abnormal and nor- LKD = 1 − s(F̃Ak , F̃S k ), (12)
mal features. For normal samples, we utilize the residual gate n n
 where the features ∈ RCk Hk Wk and
 F̃Ak ∈ RCk Hk Wk are
 F̃S k
to suppress the residuals instead of pulling them as in standard n n
 obtained by flattening the features FAk and FS k through veccontrastive learning. This approach preserves the integrity of torization, respectively.
the pre-trained model, thereby preserving its ability to capture Furthermore, considering the difficulty in accurately recona diverse representation of normal samples. structing the features of certain fine-grained normal textures
 The overall loss of this stage is summarized as follows: and rare normal patterns, we propose a hard knowledge
 distillation loss as follows:
 L1 = L f ocal + LA , (11)
 Kh
 1 X
where the focal loss and anomaly amplification loss super- LHKD = (1 − s(FnAdk .FnSdk )), (13)
 Kh
vise the anomaly weight wak and the residual signals ∆ak , d=1
respectively. Under the supervision, the abnormal features are where Kh represents the number of selected hard samples,
trained to be pushed outside the boundaries of normality. As a while FnAdk and FnAdk denote the selected features. As illustrated
result, Stage I enhances Assumption I, i.e., the teacher model in Fig. 4, the HKD loss specifically emphasizes the distillation
can represent two separable distributions for the normal and of the top-Kh hard normal instances, which helps the student
abnormal patterns. decoder to achieve a more accurate reconstruction of these
 It should be noted that even if Stage I provides a good foun- challenging patterns.
dation, the “teacher-student discrepancy” of unseen anomalies The overall loss function for the normality distillation stage
is still hard to guarantee. Thus, we need Stage II to model is formulated as follows:
the distribution of normal features, allowing anomalies to be
naturally identified as deviations from the learned distribution. L2 = LKD + LHKD . (14)
 By exclusively training with normal samples and leveraging
C. Normality Distillation Stage the compact embedding design of reverse distillation [3], the
 student decoder will be effectively constrained to reconstruct
 Upon enhancing the discrimination capabilities of the only the normal distribution. With the HKD loss, the normality
teacher encoder, our objective shifts to training a student recall ability towards challenging normal patterns is further
decoder, designed to reconstruct only the normal distribution. strengthened. As a result, Stage II enhances Assumption II,
To accomplish this, we employ a reverse distillation paradigm i.e., the student decoder can only reconstruct the normal
[3] to train the student decoder. Within this framework, distribution. To summarize the two-stage training procedure
we introduce a hard knowledge distillation loss, specifically of our AAND, we show the pseudo-code in Algorithm 1.
designed to improve the reconstruction of normal patterns.
 In this stage, the advanced teacher is fixed and only receives
normal samples. Its output normal features FnAk ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk D. Inference
are then passed to a one-class bottleneck embedding module During inference, the anomaly detection is based on the
[3], which aggregates the multi-scale embeddings to obtain feature discrepancy between the advanced teacher model and
a compact representation. Subsequently, the learnable student the student model. Given a test image It , the advanced teacher
decoder predicts multi-scale features FnS k ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk , which encoder extracts K-level features FAk , then the student decoder
TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY 4515

Algorithm 1 Pseudo-Code of AAND Training AD. It not only contains multiple instances of a single object
 category but also has different types of Printed Circuit Boards
 (PCB) with complex structures.
 3) MVTec3D-RGB: It is a multi-modal dataset that comprises 2,656 training 2D-3D pairs and 1,197 testing 2D-3D
 pairs. Some anomalies are more significant in geometry while
 having subtle changes in appearance, making it particularly
 challenging to detect anomalies based solely on the visual
 appearance of RGB images. Considering the computational
 cost with point cloud data, we follow the recent work [45]
 to employ only the RGB images for anomaly detection and
 localization.

 B. Implementation Details
 1) Experimental Settings: We utilize the WideResNet50
 [36] encoder as the backbone with the output embeddings
 from three layers (K = 3). During training, images are resized
 into 256 × 256, batch size is set to 16, and Adam is used
 as the optimizer with a learning rate of 0.005. We train the
 first stage for 100 epochs and then train the second stage for
aggregates the features and reconstructs the multi-scale fea- another 120 epochs. Besides, the hyper-parameters α, L, and
tures FS k . The feature discrepancy, denoted as D(FAk , FS k ), is Kh are set to 0.3, 50, and 10, respectively. For the synthetic
calculated using the negative cosine similarity as follows: anomalies, we follow [42] to extract foreground masks with
 grayscale binary thresholding algorithms to control the noise
 D(FAk , FS k ) = 1 − s(FAk , FS k ). (15)
 only in the foreground, which brings the synthesis closer to
 The advanced teacher model is capable of generating dis- real conditions.
criminative features for both normal and abnormal inputs, 2) Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate the AD performance
whereas the student network is tailored to reconstruct only the using the area under the receiver operator curve (AUROC)
normal features. This configuration results in a minor feature based on the generated anomaly scores. We utilize image-level
discrepancy in normal samples, while a pronounced discrep- AUROC (I-AUC) to evaluate anomaly detection performance,
ancy when anomalies are present. To effectively localize while pixel-based AUROC (P-AUC) and the PRO metric [49]
anomalies, anomaly maps are generated across the K network were employed to assess anomaly localization. Unlike P-AUC,
blocks. These maps are then upsampled and aggregated to the PRO metric is not influenced by the size of the anomaly
obtain an anomaly score for each pixel: regions. As a result, it can more effectively reflect the model’s
 K
 X performance in detecting hard samples with subtle anomalies.
 ŜA = Upk (D(FAk , FS k )), (16)
 l=1
 C. Main Results
where ŜA is the predicted anomaly score map, and Upk (·) We conduct a comprehensive comparison of the perfordenotes the bi-linear up-sampling. A higher score in the mance of anomaly detection and localization. We mainly
anomaly map indicates a higher likelihood of anomaly at compare the Knowledge Distillation-based (KD) methods
that position, and the maximum value in the anomaly map [3], [5], [7], [8] and other popular paradigms for anomaly
is considered as the image-level anomaly score. detection, such as reconstruction-based approaches [45], [47],
 synthesis-based methods [28], [34], and embedding-based
 IV. E XPERIMENTS
 methods [2], [4]. For the MvTec AD dataset [47], reported
A. Dataset results are directly obtained from the published papers. For the
 To assess the effectiveness of the proposed method, we newly published VisA [9] and MVTec3D-RGB [48] datasets,
conduct comprehensive experiments on three datasets: MVTec due to some anomaly detection methods have not yet been
AD [47], Visa [9] and MVTec3D-RGB [48]. evaluated on these datasets, we re-train them using their open-
 1) MVTec AD: It is a well-studied benchmark for anomaly source code and evaluate their performance on both datasets.
detection and localization. It consists of 3,629 anomaly-free Table II shows the comparison results of anomaly detection
training images, and 1,725 testing images, which include both and localization on the MVTec AD, VisA, and MVTec3Dnormal and abnormal samples. The dataset has been widely RGB benchmarks. In the widely studied MVTec AD dataset,
explored with the results almost reaching saturation. our method slightly outperforms the current state-of-the-art
 2) VisA: It is a large industrial anomaly detection dataset methods. Since the anomalies of this dataset are relatively
that is composed of 10,821 high-resolution color images of easier to identify, the current methods have already achieved
12 objects. The anomaly type covers both surface and a high level of performance, leaving limited potential for
structural defects. The dataset is more challenging than MvTec substantial advancements. In the VisA and MVTec3D datasets,
4516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 TABLE II
A NOMALY D ETECTION AND L OCALIZATION P ERFORMANCE ON THE MVT EC AD [47], V IS A [9] AND M V T EC 3D-RGB [48] DATASET. S INCE THE
 MVT EC AD B ENCHMARK H AS A PPROACHED SATURATION , O UR M ETHOD S HOWS O NLY S LIGHT ENHANCEMENTS . W HEN A PPLIED TO THE
 M ORE C HALLENGING V IS A AND MVT EC 3D-RGB DATASETS , M ORE S IGNIFICANT I MPROVEMENTS C AN B E O BSERVED . C OMPARED TO
 P-AUC, THE PRO M ETRIC O FFERS A M ORE E FFECTIVE R EFLECTION OF THE M ODEL ’ S A BILITY TO D ETECT H ARD S AMPLES

 TABLE III
 E VALUATION OF A NOMALY D ETECTION AND L OCALIZATION P ERFORMANCE OF A LL O BJECT C ATEGORIES ON THE C HALLENGING V IS A DATASET

 TABLE IV
 E VALUATION OF D ETECTION AND L OCALIZATION P ERFORMANCE OF A LL O BJECT C ATEGORIES ON THE C HALLENGING MVT EC 3D-RGB DATASETS

our method surpasses the current state-of-the-art approaches MVTec3D-RGB datasets, respectively. These two datasets
significantly. Compared to the well-known method PatchCore contain difficult anomaly instances, such as candle, maca-
[2], our method takes advantage of the enhanced feature roni2, tire, and chewing-gum, that exhibit subtle variations in
encoder and robust knowledge distillation paradigm, lead- appearance compared to normal instances, posing significant
ing to better performances. Compared to the synthesis-based challenges to anomaly detection. Remarkably, our method
method SimpleNet [34], our approach achieves comparable achieves a 2.4% I-AUC improvement in the “candle” category,
results on the MvTec dataset, while demonstrating sig- a 4.6% I-AUC improvement in the “macarnoni2” category, a
nificant improvements on the more challenging Visa and 5.0% I-AUC improvement in the “tire” category, and a 2.9%
Mvtec3D-RGB datasets. This observation indicates the robust- PRO improvement in the chewing-gum category. These results
ness of our method in handling more complex industrial highlight the effectiveness of our approach in overcoming
datasets. Compared with our baseline RD, our proposed the limited discrimination capacity of pre-trained models and
method improves the image-level AUROC and pixel-level PRO effectively identifying challenging anomalies.
by 1.0%, 1.0% on MvTec AD, 1.9%, 1.4% on VisA, 2.1%,
0.8% on Mvtec3D-RGB.
 Thanks to the enhanced discrimination capability of our D. Ablation Study
advanced teacher model, our method demonstrates the abil- 1) Ablation of Main Components: In this part, we conduct
ity to effectively detect previously undetectable anomalies. an ablation study on the main components of our model:
Table III and Table IV present the anomaly detection RAA module proposed in the first stage and HKD loss
and localization performance for each object in VisA and proposed in the second stage. In detail, RAA comprises a
TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY 4517

 TABLE V TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDY OF M AIN M ODULES OF O UR F RAMEWORK . MRG AND A BLATION OF O UR T WO -S TAGE T RAINING A PPROACH . T HE P ERFOR -
 ARG A RE THE S UB -M ODULES OF RAA P ROPOSED IN THE F IRST MANCES D ENOTE THE I-AUC ON THE M V T EC , V IS A, AND MVT EC
 S TAGE . LHKD I S THE H ARD K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION L OSS 3D-RGB DATASETS
 P ROPOSED IN THE S ECOND S TAGE

 TABLE VIII
 A NALYSIS OF THE R ESIDUAL P ROPERTIES IN THE ARG M ODULE

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF A LTERNATIVE D ESIGNS FOR THE RAA M ODULE

 fix the proposed synthetic anomaly generation method and
 replace the RAA module with several alternative designs:
 (1) a conventional contrastive learning module to refine the
 pretrained features; (2) directly using MRG to predict the
 anomaly score; and (3) replacing MRG with a U-Net as
 a binary segmentation network. These alternatives all lead
 to performance degradation. The main reason is that these
Matching-based Residual Gate (MRG) and Attribute-scaling methods may overfit to the specific patterns of synthetic
Residual Generator (ARG). We utilize the RD [3] as the base- anomalies and fail to generalize to diverse real-world anomaline and compare the following settings: (a) directly utilizing lies. In contrast, our RAA module avoids this pitfall through
the predicted anomaly weight from MRG as the anomaly its adaptive residual learning mechanism, which suppresses
score, (b) blindly generating residuals using ARG without residuals on normal samples to maintain the feature integrity
considering the anomaly weight from MRG, (c) incorporating of the pre-trained model. In experiments (5)-(6), we use
both MRG and ARG, i.e., the RAA module, (d) solely intro- the anomaly synthesis method proposed by NSA, replace
ducing the HKD loss to the baseline, and (e) employing all the its encoder-decoder reconstruction framework with ours, and
components. As shown in Table V (a)-(d), the integration of achieve improved performance, demonstrating the effective-
MRG and ARG is essential for the advancement of the vanilla ness and generalization of our method. In experiments (7)-(8),
teacher model to achieve better performance. Solely relying we integrate the memory bank of PatchCore into our AAND.
on MRG leads to overfitting to synthetic anomalies, while Results show “PatchCore+Ours” also outperforms PatchCore
replacing ARG with learnable residuals degrades performance. but underperforms our original version, as PatchCore’s non-
These will be further discussed in the subsequent ablation learnable nature prevents it from benefiting from synthetic
study (Tables VI and VIII). Besides, without MRG (Exp. (c)), anomaly learning.
generating an equal proportion of residuals for both normal 3) Ablation of the Two-Stage Framework: In this part, we
and abnormal samples disrupts the discrimination ability of the conduct an ablation study on our two-stage framework. As
pre-trained model, resulting in an ambiguous representation shown in Table VII, using Stage I alone leads to subpar
space. The results of (d) and (f) show the effectiveness of the performance as it cannot detect unforeseen anomalies, which
hard knowledge distillation loss, which enhances the student’s requires Stage II to remember normality. Instead, integrating
ability to accurately reconstruct the features of certain fine- the two-stage training methodology fulfills the two underlying
grained normal textures and rare normal patterns. By using assumptions of the KD framework, culminating in optimal
all the components, our method can not only extend the pre- performance. We also explore the possibility of joint traintrained teacher’s representation ability but also enhance the ing for the two stages, simultaneously optimizing both the
student’s normal distillation ability, which satisfies the first advanced teacher and the student model. However, it yields
and second assumptions in the distillation-based methods. poorer performances, which can be attributed to the continuous
 2) Comparison of Different Alternative Methods: Our fluctuations in the teacher’s feature space during training.
framework augments the discrimination capacity of the pre- These ongoing changes created significant challenges for the
trained teacher model by leveraging synthetic anomalies. We training of the student model, making it difficult to learn a
compare our proposed method with alternative discrimination- stable normal feature distribution. All in all, our two-stage
based approaches. In experiments (1)-(4) of Table VI, we training approach proves to be both reasonable and effective.
4518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 TABLE IX
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF CNN-BASED AND T RANSFORMER -
 BASED F RAMEWORKS . T HE P ERFORMANCES D ENOTE THE I-AUC ON
 THE M V T EC , V IS A, AND M V T EC 3D-RGB DATASETS

Fig. 5. Quantitative Experiments for the verification of the second assumption.

 4) Quantitative Verification of Assumption II: To verify the TABLE X
second assumption in our paper, we analyze the student’s dis- C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF M ODEL E FFICIENCY (F L OP S ) AND C OMPU -
tillation loss, as shown in Fig. 5. Adding the HKD loss to the TATIONAL P ERFORMANCE (M V T EC / V IS A / M V T EC 3D-RGB)
baseline reduces the distillation loss of normal patches by 0.02
(10.5%), indicating that the student is better able to reconstruct
normal features. With our two-stage AAND method, normal
and abnormal features are more clearly separated due to the
fulfillment of the first assumption, making it harder for the
student to reconstruct abnormal features.
 5) Analysis of Residual Properties: To understand the
impact of different residual characteristics in the ARG module, the one-stage baseline RD, our two-stage framework solely
we conduct ablation studies that are shown in Table VIII. It incorporates the lightweight RAA modules, resulting in a
involves (a) replacing the residuals in Eq. (7) with learnable slight computational overhead but a remarkable enhancement
residuals, and (b) replacing the tanh function in Eq. (7) with a in performance. We further evaluate computational efficiency
sigmoid function. The utilization of learnable residuals without in terms of FLOPs, as shown in Table X. Compared to RD++,
explicit scale restrictions can potentially result in excessive our method introduces 1.3 GFLOPs overhead but achieves
residuals and the disruption of the pre-trained model’s prior performance improvements on challenging benchmarks (VisA:
knowledge. In contrast to scaling the residuals to the range +2.1%, MvTec3D-RGB: +2.4%). Additionally, we offer a
(0, 1) using the sigmoid function, we employ the tanh function lightweight variant Ours* that uses 2-layer MLPs instead of
to project the residuals to the range of (−1, 1). This choice 3-layer MLPs in the RAA module, reducing computational
leads to moderate perturbations to the original features, thus cost by 4.83 GFLOPs while retaining gains (VisA: +1.8%,
improving the performance effectively. MvTec3D-RGB: +2.1%). These results demonstrate that our
 6) Ablation of Backbone: To our knowledge, no prior approach achieves a favorable efficiency-accuracy trade-off,
work has explored transformer-based architectures within the obtaining superior performance with lower computational cost.
reverse distillation [3] framework. As a pilot exploration, 8) Hyper-Parameter Sensitivity: There are two important
we replace the original pre-trained Wide-Resnet50-2 encoder hyper-parameters in our method: the number of memory items
with a pre-trained CLIP-ViT-B/16 encoder and transform L in MRG module, and the number of the selected hard sample
the decoder from convolutions to ViT blocks. Under the Kh in the hard knowledge distillation loss. We evaluate the
same training setting, the experimental results are shown in sensitivity of our model to the two parameters on the MvTec
Tabel IX. Whether using CNN-based or Transformer-based AD [47] and VisA [9] datasets. We first fix Kh at 10 to change
architectures, our method achieves significant improvements L, and then fix L to the best value to change Kh , where L = 0
over the Baseline RD, demonstrating the effectiveness of means that we use MLP as a classifier instead of MRG. As
our approach. However, the performance of the Transformer- shown in Fig. 8, MRG demonstrates robustness concerning
based architecture currently lags behind that of the CNN-based the memory size L. Appropriately increasing the memory size
method within the KD-based framework. This may be because helps to capture the diversity of normality and anomaly, where
the downsample-upsample structure of the CNN-based RD the best performance is achieved when the memory size is
framework aligns more closely with the concept of reverse set to 50. For the number of hard samples Kh , compared to
distillation. Addressing this issue may require a specialized not selecting hard samples (i.e., Kh = 0), selecting different
design for the transformer decoder, which could be explored numbers of hard samples can improve performance. The best
in future work. performance is achieved when Kh = 10. Insufficient hard
 7) Model Complexity Analysis: We compare the inference samples lack representativeness of challenging patterns, while
speed and number of parameters between our approach and an excessive amount of hard samples hinders the model’s focus
existing distillation-based methods. The experiment is con- on the most challenging patterns.
ducted on a Nvidia GeForce GTX 2080ti GPU with Intel(R)
Xeon(R) CPU E5-2680 and the batch size is set to 1 during
testing. As shown in Table VII, our method introduces a E. Visualization Analysis
marginal increase in inference time compared to RD and 1) Qualitative Results for Anomaly Localization: We
possesses fewer parameters than RD++. In comparison to present qualitative anomaly localization results in Fig. 6.
TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY 4519

Fig. 6. Qualitative results for anomaly localization, where “A-score” denotes the maximum value in the anomaly score map. Compared to RD [3] and RD++
[7], our method can accurately localize anomalies even in some challenging cases where the abnormal region is extremely small or the appearance of the
anomaly is very similar to normal data.

Fig. 7. Comparison of feature distribution between the vanilla teacher model and our advanced teacher model, visualized using t-SNE [50].
Figure (a)-(f) represent specific industrial product categories from the benchmark datasets. Our method demonstrates an enhanced discrimination capacity
between real normal and abnormal inputs while preserving the integrity of pre-trained normal representation. The red circle marks out the optimized anomaly
features.

Compared to RD and RD++, our method can accurately the abnormal region is extremely small or the appearance of
localize anomalies even in some challenging cases, where the anomaly is very similar to normal data. When dealing
4520 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 noise is kept minimal for normal samples, thereby preserving
 the pre-trained model’s fidelity to normal instances. Conversely, the residuals on abnormal inputs exhibit an increasing
 trend, amplifying the distinctions between anomalies and
 normal instances.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage industrial
Fig. 8. Hyper-parameter sensitivity analysis for the number of memory items anomaly detection framework, which sequentially performs
L and the number of hard samples Kh . anomaly amplification and normality distillation to obtain
 robust feature discrepancy. In the first anomaly amplification
 stage, we propose a novel residual anomaly amplification
 module to advance the teacher model with the exposure of
 synthetic anomalies. It effectively amplifies anomalies via
 residual generation while maintaining the integrity of the
 pre-trained model. In the second normality distillation stage,
 we design a novel hard knowledge distillation loss, which
 enhances the reconstruction capability of the student decoder
 in dealing with challenging normal patterns. Comprehensive
Fig. 9. The variation of the intensity of residuals with respect to training
 experiments on the MvTecAD, VisA, and MvTec3D-RGB
epochs. The blue line indicates the residual variation on normal samples, dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
while the red line indicates the residual variation on anomaly samples. Limitation and future work: Some hard anomalies are
 still difficult to detect solely from RGB images. Combining
 knowledge from other modalities, such as point clouds and
with these cases, the vanilla teacher model in RD and RD++ natural language, may lead to better detection results. Besides,
maps abnormal inputs to a normal representation, in which synthesizing anomaly data that closely resembles real-world
the student also constructs the normality. As a result, some anomalies is crucial for better advancing pre-trained models.
defective products cannot be successfully detected due to the In addition, decomposing pretrained teacher model into taskunreliable teacher-student feature discrepancy. Unlike these specific factor networks [51] is also a promising direction.
methods, our advanced teacher model can generate more dis- These will be explored in our future work.
criminative features, which better fulfills the first assumption
in distillation-based anomaly detection methods. In practice,
detecting these challenging anomalies helps manufacturers R EFERENCES
identify problems promptly and ensures that consumers receive [1] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
satisfactory products. A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 248–255.
 2) Visualization of Feature Distribution: To demonstrate [2] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
the enhanced discrimination capacity of our anomaly amplifi- “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
cation stage, we present the visualization of feature distribution IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
 pp. 14318–14328.
in Fig. 7. Without the introduced stage, the feature distribution [3] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
of the vanilla teacher exhibits ambiguity between normal one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
and abnormal features. In our advanced teacher space, the Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
 [4] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
feature distribution is significantly more separated than that unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional norin the vanilla teacher, which proves the effectiveness of our malizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
Stage I. Moreover, real anomalies can be well distinguished (WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 1819–1828.
 [5] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student–teacher feature
from normal ones, demonstrating that synthetic anomalies can pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257.
approximate a majority of real anomalies. Additionally, the [6] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
shape of the normal distribution does not undergo significant “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
changes before and after Stage I training. This is because our Jun. 2021, pp. 14902–14912.
residual gate suppresses residuals on normal samples, preserv- [7] T. D. Tien et al., “Revisiting reverse distillation for anomaly detection,”
ing the generalizability towards diverse normal patterns. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Jun. 2023, pp. 24511–24520.
 3) Visualization of Residual Variation: Our proposed RAA [8] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
module suppresses the residuals on normal features while Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
encouraging residuals for abnormal features. To demon- in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
strate this, we present visualizations of residual variations [9] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotduring training in Fig. 9. We define the intensity of resid- the-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
ual noises for normal samples and segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
 1
 PN n P C n 2 1
 PN a anomaly
 PC a 2
 samples as
 Springer, 2022, pp. 392–408.
 n
N ×C i=1 j=1 (∆ ij ) and a
 N ×C i=1 j=1 (∆i j ) , respec- [10] X. Yang and X. Wang, “Kolmogorov–Arnold transformer,” 2024,
tively. During the training process, the intensity of residual arXiv:2409.10594.
TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY 4521

[11] X. Yang and X. Wang, “Neural metamorphosis,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. [35] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DSR—A dual subspace re-
 Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 1–19. projection network for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
[12] J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 539–554.
 networks,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 114, no. 13, pp. 3521–3526, [36] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” 2016,
 2017. arXiv:1605.07146.
[13] A. Creswell, T. White, V. Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran, B. Sengupta, and [37] L. Zanella, W. Menapace, M. Mancini, Y. Wang, and E. Ricci,
 A. A. Bharath, “Generative adversarial networks: An overview,” IEEE “Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly
 signal Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–65, Jan. 2018. detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[14] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Structuring autoencoders,” (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 18527–18536.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW), [38] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM:
 Oct. 2019, pp. 615–623. A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection
[15] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory- and localization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2021,
 augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” pp. 475–489.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, [39] Y. Wang, J. Peng, J. Zhang, R. Yi, Y. Wang, and C. Wang,
 pp. 1705–1714. “Multimodal industrial anomaly detection via hybrid fusion,” in
[16] L. Wang, J. Tian, S. Zhou, H. Shi, and G. Hua, “Memory-augmented Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023,
 appearance-motion network for video anomaly detection,” Pattern pp. 8032–8041.
 Recognit., vol. 138, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 109335. [40] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but Dif-
[17] J. Hou, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, S. Pu, and H. Zhou, “Divide- ferNet: Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in
 and-assemble: Learning block-wise memory for unsupervised anomaly Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021,
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), pp. 1906–1915.
 Oct. 2021, pp. 8791–8800. [41] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully
[18] S. Lu, W. Zhang, H. Zhao, H. Liu, N. Wang, and H. Li, “Anomaly convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in
 detection for medical images using heterogeneous auto-encoder,” IEEE Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
 Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 2770–2782, 2024. pp. 1088–1097.
[19] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013, [42] X. Yao, R. Li, J. Zhang, J. Sun, and C. Zhang, “Explicit boundary guided
 arXiv:1312.6114. semi-push-pull contrastive learning for supervised anomaly detection,”
[20] J. Li, Q. Huang, Y. Du, X. Zhen, S. Chen, and L. Shao, “Variational in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 abnormal behavior detection with motion consistency,” IEEE Trans. Jun. 2023, pp. 24490–24499.
 Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 275–286, 2022. [43] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normal-
[21] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting izing flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), vol. 37, 2015,
 for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021, pp. 1530–1538.
 Art. no. 107706. [44] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Asymmetric
 student-teacher networks for industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
[22] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer,
 IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023,
 “High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proc.
 pp. 2592–2602.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
 [45] X. Yao, R. Li, Z. Qian, Y. Luo, and C. Zhang, “Focus the
 pp. 10684–10695.
 discrepancy: Intra-and inter-correlation learning for image anomaly
[23] J. Ho, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2023,
 Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2024, pp. 6840–6851.
 pp. 6803–6813.
[24] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “AnoDDPM: [46] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
 Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 simplex noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
 Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 649–655. [47] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
[25] Y. Teng, H. Li, F. Cai, M. Shao, and S. Xia, “Unsupervised comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 visual defect detection with score-based generative model,” 2022, in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 arXiv:2211.16092. Jun. 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
[26] F. Lu, X. Yao, C.-W. Fu, and J. Jia, “Removing anomalies as noises for [48] P. Bergmann, X. Jin, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The MVTec 3D-AD
 industrial defect localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. dataset for unsupervised 3D anomaly detection and localization,” 2021,
 Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 16166–16175. arXiv:2112.09045.
[27] X. Zhang, N. Li, J. Li, T. Dai, Y. Jiang, and S.-T. Xia, “Unsupervised [49] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
 surface anomaly detection with diffusion probabilistic model,” in Proc. students: Student–teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 6782–6791. embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[28] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DRAEM—A discrim- (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4183–4192.
 inatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly [50] L. Van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021, t-SNE,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605,
 pp. 8330–8339. 2008.
[29] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self- [51] X. Yang, J. Ye, and X. Wang, “Factorizing knowledge in neural
 supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. networks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, Springer, 2022, pp. 73–91.
 pp. 9664–9674.
[30] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural
 synthetic anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and
 localization,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022,
 pp. 474–489.
[31] M. Z. Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-
 I. Lee, “Stabilizing adversarially learned one-class novelty detection
 using pseudo anomalies,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, Canhui Tang received the B.S. degree in artificial
 pp. 5963–5975, 2022. intelligence from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
[32] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi, China, in 2023, where he is currently pursuing the
 “Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. M.S. degree. His research interests include anomaly
 Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 3606–3613. detection, point cloud registration, and multimodal
[33] K. Perlin, “An image synthesizer,” ACM SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph., large language model.
 vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 287–296, Jul. 1985.
[34] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
 for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
4522 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 Sanping Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. Yonghao Dong received the B.S. degree in meadegree from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, surement control technology and instrument from
 in 2020. From 2018 to 2019, he was a Visiting Ph.D. East China University of Science and Technology,
 Student with the Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon Shanghai, China, in 2018, and the M.S. degree in
 University. He is currently a Professor with the Insti- electrical and computer engineering from the Unitute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an versity of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, in
 Jiaotong University. His research interests include 2019. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
 machine learning, computer vision, and embodied the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics,
 intelligence, with a focus on meta learning, multi- Xi’an Jiaotong University. His research interests
 task learning, object detection, multi-target tracking, include computer vision, image/video processing,
 trajectory prediction, medical image segmentation, analysis, and understanding.
 visual navigation, and visual grasping.

 Le Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 and Ph.D. degrees in control science and engineering
 Yizhe Li received the B.S. degree in control science
 from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in
 and engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University,
 2008 and 2014, respectively. From 2013 to 2014, he
 Xi’an, China, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing
 was a Visiting Ph.D. Student with Stevens Institute
 the M.S. degree in artificial intelligence. His research
 of Technology, Hoboken, NJ, USA. From 2016 to
 interests include computer vision and multi-object
 2017, he was a Visiting Scholar with Northwesttracking.
 ern University, Evanston, IL, USA. He is currently
 a Professor with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University. His
 research interests include computer vision, pattern
 recognition, and machine learning.