3118 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 Adversarial Sample Based on Structured Fusion
 Noise for Botnet Detection in
 Industrial Control Systems
 Jiazhong Lu , Jimin Peng, Jian Shu, Jiali Yin , Member, IEEE, and Xiaolei Liu

 Abstract—The industrial control system’s artificial intelligence- interactions of ICS equipment. Botnets produce significant
based botnet intrusion detection system has a high detection traffic, comprising both Denial of Service (DoS) attack packperformance and efficiency in an environment without inter- ets, the number of traffic packets is roughly the same as the
ference. However, these systems are not immune to evasion
through adversarial samples. In this study, we introduce a industrial control protocol traffic. Notably, their protocol type,
feature extraction technique tailored for ICS botnet detection. payload size, and packet transmission intervals are distinct.
This approach classifies traffic packets based on network traffic While the sophistication in botnet detection is advancing, so is
attributes and ICS-specific identification codes, encompassing the the capability to evade these detection systems. Many models,
statuses of ICS devices, enhancing detection precision. Mean- despite their enhanced accuracy and efficiency in detection and
while, this strategy addresses challenges in ICS data collection
and bolsters experimental efficacy. To build a comprehensive optimized hardware, have overlooked robustness, rendering
botnet intrusion dataset within an ICS, we concurrently utilized them vulnerable to savvy attackers. Within the network secuexisting ICS devices to collect both standard ICS and botnet rity and intrusion detection domain, attackers often employ
traffic. Additionally, we present an innovative adversarial sample adversarial samples to deceive AI-based detection models and
generation method for botnet detection models, integrating both bypass systems. The techniques for generating adversarial
time-domain and frequency-domain noise. Testing under three
real-world ICS attack scenarios revealed our technique can samples in network traffic intrusion detection can be catemarkedly degrade the classification performance of eight leading gorized into gradient-based attacks, score optimization-based
AI-based detection models, emphasizing its potential for evading attacks, Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based attacks,
AI-based ICS intrusion detectors. and alternative model-based attacks.
 Index Terms—Adversarial sample, botnet, industrial control Adversarial samples can introduce different forms of noise
system, fusion noise. perturbations based on the method employed for their creation.
 However, the overarching objective remains the same: to inject
 I. I NTRODUCTION noise into the original sample. A subset of random signal
 processes, termed as ’colored noise’ or ‘environmental noise,’
I N DISTINGUISHING between the industrial control system and the traditional internet, a key difference lies in the
integration of ICS-specific protocols with standard network
 represents time series. One of its notable types, Gaussian
 noise, aligns with the probability density function of time
traffic in the former. The volume of industrial control traffic far domain sampling and adheres to a normal distribution. Natsurpasses that of standard internet traffic, owing to the frequent urally occurring noises, such as blue, pink, red, and purple
 noise, have power spectral density functions in the frequency
 Received 29 September 2025; revised 10 November 2025; domain that follow a 1/f α distribution, where α indicates the
accepted 13 February 2026. Date of publication 17 February 2026; date rate of frequency decay.
of current version 16 March 2026. The author would like to acknowledge
the support of the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province (Grant Noise has versatile applications across domains such as
No.2025ZNSFSC0507) the National Natural Science Foundation of China transfer learning, data augmentation, adversarial sample gen-
(Grant No.62102049), and the Science Challenge Project TZ2025002. The eration, and adversarial training. In our research, we generate
authors would also like to acknowledge the support of the Open Fund of
Advanced Cryptography and System Security Key Laboratory of Sichuan adversarial samples leveraging colored noise whose frequency-
Province (Grant No.SKLACSS-202402). The associate editor coordinating domain sampled power spectral density function aligns with
the review of this article and approving it for publication was A. Khowaja. the 1/f α distribution and Gaussian noise, which corresponds
(Corresponding author: Xiaolei Liu.)
 Jiazhong Lu is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Chengdu Uni- to the time-domain sampled probability density function of a
versity of Information Technology, Chengdu 610225, China, and also with normal distribution. Our innovative approach, merging both
the Advanced Cryptography and System Security Key Laboratory of Sichuan
Province, Chengdu 610225, China (e-mail: ljz@cuit.edu.cn).
 time-domain and frequency-domain sampled noise for adver-
 Jimin Peng and Jian Shu are with the School of Cybersecurity sarial sample creation, aims to bolster the model’s resilience
(Xin Gu Industrial College), Chengdu University of Information Tech- and enhance defenses against adversarial attacks. Below are
nology, Chengdu 610225, China (e-mail: 3230811030@stu.cuit.edu.cn; our key contributions:
3210810017@stu.cuit.edu.cn).
 Jiali Yin is with the College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou (1) To precisely extract the traffic and industrial control
University, Fuzhou 350108, China (e-mail: jlyin@fzu.edu.cn). attributes of the botnet, we introduce a feature extraction
 Xiaolei Liu is with the National Interdisciplinary Research Center of
Engineering Physics, Mianyang 621000, China (e-mail: luxaole@gmail.com).
 method that amalgamates the address details from standard
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3665504 network protocols with the distinctive identification codes of
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LU et al.: ADVERSARIAL SAMPLE BASED ON STRUCTURED FUSION NOISE FOR BOTNET DETECTION IN ICS 3119

industrial control protocols for industrial control protocol and IoT botnet classification, achieving an accuracy of up to 99%.
botnet protocol in ICS. This delineation between industrial Palla and Tayeb [7] proposed a deep learning–based method
control traffic and botnet traffic markedly enhances perfor- to detect Mirai malware targeting IoT nodes, addressing the
mance. Guided by this approach, we collected millions of overfitting problem by carefully tuning the number of hidden
industrial control traffic packets and botnet packets. At the layers and neurons. Liao et al. [8] leveraged a combination
same time, we’ve curated an ICS botnet intrusion dataset of CNN and Transformer architectures to jointly learn the
enriched with both traffic and industrial control characteristics. spatial and temporal characteristics of IoT traffic, thereby
This dataset can be used directly for AI-based model training. improving the model’s ability to recognize minority attack
Authentic industrial control traffic and botnet traffic were classes. Laghrissi et al. [9] constructed an intrusion detection
collected within a real-world industrial control system setting. system (IDS) based on LSTM and proposed three related
 (2) We propose an adversarial sample generation technique LSTM-based variants collectively referred to as PCA +MI.
for black-box attacks using fusion noise. This method combines colored noise derived from frequency-domain sampling
with a power spectral density function adhering to the 1/f α
 B. Feature Extraction and Data Processing
distribution and Gaussian noise from time-domain sampling
that conforms to a normal distribution. The resultant adversar- In industrial control systems (ICS), effective feature proial samples, integrating both noise types, markedly diminish cessing is a crucial means of improving intrusion detection
the model’s detection capabilities. performance, as it enables models to focus on the most infor-
 (3) In an industrial control setting, our adversarial sam- mative and discriminative attributes. High-quality features and
ple generation technique demonstrates strong performance. balanced datasets form the cornerstone of model performance
According to empirical tests, it can diminish the detection [10]. In terms of feature extraction, Alqahtani et al. [11]
capabilities of four leading neural network models and four employed the Fisher score to identify key features and elimadvanced machine learning intrusion detection models. Given inate irrelevant ones, optimizing classification performance
the unique nature of industrial control system, we initially by minimizing intra-class distance and maximizing inter-class
deploy our proposed adversarial sample technique within this distance. Abbasi et al. [12] utilized a linear low-cost algorithm
context. to assign feature weights, effectively mitigating the impact of
 redundant or irrelevant attributes.
 II. R ELATED W ORKS In ICS-specific contexts, data processing plays a particular-
 In this section, we review the existing literature on intrusion ly critical role. Jiang and Chen [13] analyzed traffic from
detection in ICS, focusing on detection models, feature extrac- industrial protocols such as Modbus, TCP, and S7, employing
tion and data processing methods, and adversarial sample a Denoising Autoencoder (DAE) for feature extraction and
attacks. combining SMOTE and Tomek-Link mechanisms to address
 the problem of class imbalance. Similarly, Mengara et al. [14]
 proposed innovative solutions to cope with class imbalance
A. Intrusion Detection Models and high-dimensional data in intrusion detection. Meidan et al.
 Researchers have developed a variety of advanced model [15 developed a network-based anomaly detection approach
architectures to enhance detection accuracy and efficiency. for IoT systems by extracting statistical features that capture
In the Internet of Things (IoT) domain, which is closely behavioral snapshots of benign IoT traffic, demonstrating
related to ICS, Kim et al. [1] proposed a hybrid model that potential advantages in binary classification.
integrates machine learning and deep learning techniques, Other researchers have focused on dataset-specific processoffering the flexibility to classify multiple types of botnet ing algorithms. Rohmantyo et al. [16] proposed customized
attacks. To capture the temporal dependencies in botnet traffic, data processing, training, and testing algorithms for the
Imrana et al. [2] introduced a Bidirectional Long Short-Term N-BaIoT dataset. Gupta and Singh [17] designed a multi-
Memory (BiLSTM) network, which significantly improved layer detection framework incorporating the SHAP method
detection performance through bidirectional data processing. to explain model predictions, thereby improving system tran-
 As model complexity increased, researchers began explo- sparency and interpretability. Alkahtani and Aldhyani [18]
ring ensemble and hybrid architectures. Ali et al. [3] designed developed an IoT botnet detection application using a hybrid
the ACLR model, which stacks ANN, CNN, LSTM, and deep learning model trained on the N-BaIoT dataset, which
RNN layers to effectively capture complex attack patterns was generated from nine commercial IoT devices by injecting
and features of botnets. Wazzan et al. [4] proposed a Cross BASHLITE and Mirai attacks. Liu et al. [19] introduced
CNN–LSTM framework for IoT botnet detection, mapping the a lightweight IoT intrusion detection approach based on
MITRE ATT&CK model into the detection process and intro- cor-relation coefficients and variance inflation factors (VIF),
ducing the kill-chain concept to enable early warning. performing flow-level feature selection to enhance efficiency.
 In addition, several studies have focused on optimizing Zong et al. [20] proposed an automated fuzzing method for
specific models. Chen et al. [5] extracted features using CNNs industrial control protocols (ICPs) based on the Denoising Difand incorporated Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) to en- fusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM), which improved fuzzing
hance the traditional SVM algorithm. Mudassir et al. [6] effectiveness, identified protocol vulnerabilities, and reduced
developed a multi-layer deep learning model for industrial potential economic risks and impacts.
3120 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

C. Adversarial Attacks
 Despite continuous advancements in detection technologies,
the robustness of models has become an increasingly prominent issue, as attackers frequently exploit adversarial samples
to evade detection. When attackers possess knowledge of a
model’s internal parameters and architecture, they can launch
gradient-based or optimization-based attacks [21]. Mohammadian et al. [22] employed the Jacobian Sali-ency Map
Algorithm (JSMA) to determine optimal feature combinations,
enabling attacks with minimal feature perturbations. Haroon
and Ali [23] applied classical gradient-based attacks such as
FGSM and JSMA to several cybersecurity datasets to evaluate
the defensive performance of machine learning algorithms.
 In cases where model internals are inaccessible, blackbox attacks are commonly adopted. Liu et al. [24] integrated
genetic algorithms into an IoT detection framework, proposing
a black-box testing system (TLTD) for adversarial evaluation.
Wu et al. [25] introduced a deep reinforcement learning–based
black-box attack, capable of generating adversarial traffic to
deceive detection models effectively. Liu et al. [26] developed
a network traffic obfuscation technique to resist traffic classification, proposing an improved gradient-based attack method
adapted to practical strategies and conducting extensive
black-box experiments across different model combinations.
Similarly, Wang et al. [27] proposed a projection-based adversarial attack framework (ProGen), which significantly reduced
the detection performance of multiple machine learning
models.
 Usama et al. [28] leveraged Generative Adversarial Net- Fig. 1. Adversarial sample generation framework.
works (GANs) to manipulate specific classes within data-sets
and craft adversarial samples. To address the gradient van- operations was first captured, and pertinent features were
ishing problem in traditional DCGANs, Alghazzawi et al. extracted from the traffic packets. The ensuing data underwent
[29] introduced a hybrid optimization algorithm, where the a series of preprocessing steps, which included categorizing
generated adversarial samples caused the true positive rate labels, data cleansing, and normalization. An adversarial sam-
(TPR) of an SVM-based detection model to plummet from ple creation model was then trained independently of the
80% to 0%. detection model. This newly generated adversarial sample,
 In response to such attacks, researchers have proposed influenced by the combined noise, was then introduced to the
corresponding defense mechanisms. Ding et al. [30] employed detection model.
adversarial training as an active defense strategy to enhance To evaluate the model’s robustness against these advermodel robustness by retraining on adversarial samples, and sarial intrusions, we relied on a confusion matrix based on
further incorporated a denoising autoencoder as a passive the model’s output. Performance metrics such as Accuracy,
defense approach. Precision, Recall, and F1-Score were subsequently derived.
 The corresponding process is illustrated in Fig. 1.
 III. A DVERSARIAL S AMPLE G ENERATION M ETHOD
 The current AI-driven botnet intrusion detection system for A. Data Collection
industrial control system focuses solely on detecting anomalies We established a control mode featuring a Siemens master
in clean samples, neglecting the system’s robustness in identi- with two slave configurations. The slaves connect to the
fying perturbations in adversarial samples. Our study addresses master through distinct channels: one via a serial port and the
this gap. other through a network port. The Siemens PLC, leveraging
 We employed a two-pronged noise generation approach: the S7 protocol, managed functionalities such as temperature
in the time domain, we generated Gaussian noise that aligns adjustments, motor speed controls, tri-color light switches,
with a normal distribution, and in the frequency domain, we and other analog and digital automation controls. This PLC
produced colored noise using power spectral density functions communicates with the HMI seamlessly. For meter regulation
that adhere to a 1/f α distribution. By fusing these noises, tasks, the Schneider controller interfaced with the HMI using
adversarial samples were crafted to test the model’s resilience. the Modbus-TCP protocol. From the operator’s perspective,
 Our experimental setup involved simulating botnet attacks the HMI provides real-time monitoring of various parameters
on industrial control equipment. Traffic from these regular of the industrial control equipment. The architecture of this
LU et al.: ADVERSARIAL SAMPLE BASED ON STRUCTURED FUSION NOISE FOR BOTNET DETECTION IN ICS 3121

 can be segmented based on specific functionalities, which
 subsequently allows for the identification of the characteristics
 of the various commands sent to the industrial control devices.
 For a more nuanced extraction of DoS traffic characteristics,
 both uplink and downlink traffic are considered simultaneously. The 9-tuple claims that it is possible to extract the
 traffic features of both conventional network protocols and
 industrial control protocols. Additionally, it suggests the potential to glean industrial control data directly from Modbus
 packets, providing a means to deter potential unauthorized
 modifications to the control data by adversaries. We combine
 network traffic characteristics and industrial control device
 characteristics to improve detection accuracy.
 Ultimately, from this process, we derive two sets of features:
 the traffic feature represented as X = x1 , x2 , . . . , xp and
 the industrial control feature denoted as Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yq }.
Fig. 2. Construction industrial control environment. We extracted a dataset containing 27 features using
 9-tuples. The total number of traffic features is 21, including
 network uplink traffic and downlink traffic. These include
comprehensive industrial control environment is illustrated in the number of traffic packets, load size, and flow duration,
Fig. 2. respectively. Also included are the mean, maximum, mini-
 The HMI-Weinview and PLC-Schneider interact using the mum, and standard deviation of packet loads and transmission
Modbus-TCP protocol, whereas the PLC-Schneider and the intervals. The operational features of 6 devices are included in
meter communicate using the Modbus-RTU protocol. We set the industrial control features. These include electrical energy,
up a botnet to control a Bot PC and used three DoS command voltage, current, active power, power factor and frequency of
attacks, namely the SYN Flood Attack, UDP Flood Attack, industrial control equipment.
and TCP Garbage Attack, to perform DoS attacks on the Unlike Internet traffic, ICS communication exhibits high
PLC-Schneider device’s port 502 and prevent it from normally periodicity, strict timing control, and low variance under norcommunicating with the HMI-Weinview and preventing oper- mal conditions. While the extracted 21 traffic-related features
ators from operating it normally. Additionally, we gathered (e.g., mean, standard deviation, maximum, and minimum
traffic packets from both the industrial control device’s routine packet sizes or time intervals) may appear conventional,
operations and its attacks. We collected millions of pieces of their inclusion is specifically motivated by the temporal and
data, of which the normal traffic is made up of about 800,000 statistical behavior of ICS traffic. Therefore, even small devipackets and the anomalous traffic is made up of roughly ations in these statistical indicators can effectively reflect
200,000 packets. The normal traffic also includes industrial abnormal behaviors caused by botnet-induced DoS activicontrol data transmitted using the S7 protocol and the Modbus ties. The combination of first-order (mean) and second-order
protocol. (variance-related) statistics enables the model to capture both
 steady-state operational characteristics and dynamic fluctua-
B. Feature Extraction tions in ICS data flows. Table I and Table II display the flow
 We propose a 9-tuple feature extraction method. Let’s look features and industrial control features respectively.
at the source IP address, destination IP address, source MAC
address, destination MAC address, communication protocol,
source port, and destination port of the conventional network C. Dataset Classification
protocol C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , c7 . Industrial control protocol Within industrial control system, standard industrial control
unique identifier I = {i1 , i2 , representing modbus trans id traffic significantly surpasses intrusion attack traffic. However,
and modbus func code in Modbus-TCP protocol, the above DoS attack traffic, unlike Man-in-the-Middle (MITM), Backfeatures form a 9-tuple. door, and Injection attacks, carries an extensive amount of
 The conventional protocol 7-tuple is an extension of the data. For more effective training outcomes in our experiment,
traditional protocol 5-tuple by including the MAC address. we sifted through millions of packets to find some of the
While the 5-tuple can uniquely identify traditional network traffic packets, and we curated a subset of data for evaluation.
protocols and extract inter-flow information based on it [32], This encompassed 10,000 samples each of normal traffic, SYN
integrating the MAC address offers an added layer of defense Flood attacks, UDP Flood attacks, and TCP Garbage attacks,
against certain attacks, notably the man-in-the-middle attacks. aggregating to 40,000 samples.
 In the context of industrial control system, the 2-tuple The data distribution among the sets was as follows: the
modbus trans id differentiates standard network traffic from training set comprised 70% (28,000 samples), the validation
traffic specific to the industrial control protocol. Furthermore, set 10% (4,000 samples), and the test set 20% (8,000 samples).
it aids in extracting distinct communication attributes. Using Importantly, each traffic type was proportionally represented
the modbus func code, Modbus-TCP industrial control traffic within each set, ensuring consistency. Furthermore, every
3122 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE I
 F LOW F EATURES

 TABLE II
 I NDUSTRIAL C ONTROL F EATURES

model in our experiments was trained and evaluated using To ensure authenticity and maintain operational normality,
these identical sets. a minor fluctuation is introduced to the industrial control data.
 This ensures that it remains within acceptable operational
 limits. Subsequently, these adjusted data features are appended
D. Data Preprocessing
 to our dataset. Concurrently, we implemented data standardiza-
 The category labels of the data we propose to capture tion to normalize the dataset’s features. The primary objective
contain benign, SYN, UDP, TCP, a total of four different of this process is to level the playing field among features
categorical values. Because the machine learning model cannot by removing any inherent disparities in their value ranges.
directly take these values, the strings must first be encoded A dataset with disparate ranges across its features can severely
before being input into the model for training and testing. compromise the performance of a classification model. By
Therefore, we encode the category labels of the model with standardizing the data, not only do we simplify the training
one-hot encoding and label encoding. process, but we also enhance the computational efficiency of
 In this study, the attack traffic consists of TCP and UDP the model.
packets originating from a Bot DoS attack targeting the PLC- Standardization is an essential preprocessing step, given the
Schneider. Notably, these packets lack industrial control data, disparate scales of the extracted features. We utilized z-score
necessitating the processing of missing values in this seg- standardization, which centers each feature at a mean of 0
ment. On the other hand, the normal traffic packets represent and scales it to a standard deviation of 1. This conversion to a
interactions between industrial control devices utilizing the consistent scale is critical for optimizing the training of neural
Modbus-TCP protocol, and they inherently contain industrial network architectures and other scale-sensitive algorithms, foscontrol data.Given that the industrial control data captured by tering stable convergence and improving model performance.
the device can only be altered manually through a button
press, and considering that the botnet DoS attack doesn’t
modify the device’s operational value, this specific data is E. Adversarial Sample Generation
incorporated into the features extracted from the attack traffic We propose an attack method for botnet intrusion detection
for our analysis. models that fuses noise from both the time and frequency
LU et al.: ADVERSARIAL SAMPLE BASED ON STRUCTURED FUSION NOISE FOR BOTNET DETECTION IN ICS 3123

 Fig. 6. Gaussian noise distribution.
Fig. 3. Fusion noise generation.

 Fig. 7. Gaussian noise probability density function.
Fig. 4. Gaussian noise generation.

 TABLE III
 C HARACTERISTICS OF C OLORED N OISE

Fig. 5. Gaussian noise power spectral density.

domains. This hybrid perturbation combines two components:
time-domain Gaussian noise (which conforms to a normal
distribution) and frequency-domain colored noise (which satisaccording to the difference in the speed of the frequency
fies the 1/f α distribution). Our adversarial sample generation
 decline, we generate a total of four types of colored noise,
involves first synthesizing five distinct noise components:
 namely, red noise, pink noise, blue noise, and purple noise,
Gaussian noise and four colored noises. Following this, all
 the features of which are shown in Table III.
components are standardized to a mean of 0 and a variance
 The colored noise is generated by the method in [31].
of 1. Finally, these standardized components are combined to
 On the basis of Gaussian white noise, the noise is transferred
create the fusion noise used for the adversarial attack.
 to the frequency domain by Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT),
 The fusion noise generation process is shown in Fig. 3.
 the colored noise transform operation is performed on the
 Gaussian noise is generated by python library function,
 noise in the frequency domain, and finally the colored noise
which conforms to the standard normal distribution with mean
 time series is obtained by transferring to the time domain by
0 and standard deviation 1 distribution, and its probability
 Inverse Discrete Fourier Transform (IDFT). Firstly, the Gausdensity function satisfies:
 sian white noise time domain expression wgn[n] is generated,
 1 (x−µ)2
 the frequency domain W GN [k] is obtained by DFT transform,
 p (x) = √ e− 2σ2 (1)
 2πσ the colored noise CN [k] in the frequency domain is obtained
where µ stands for the mean and σ stands for the standard by operating on W GN [k] in the frequency domain, and then
deviation. In order to correspond to 10,000 pieces of data for the CN [k] is subjected to IDFT to obtain the time domain
each category of the dataset, we generated 10,000 Gaussian colored noise sequence cn[n].
noises conforming to the standard normal distribution.
 The result of Gaussian noise generation is shown in Fig. 4, N
 1 X nk
Fig. 5, Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. W GN [k] = wgn[n]·e−j2π N (2)
 N n=1
 The power spectral density function of colored noise in α
the frequency domain satisfies the 1/f α distribution, and CN [k] = W GN [k]·k 2 (3)
3124 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 8. Red noise genera-tion. Fig. 12. Blue noise generation.

Fig. 9. Red noise power spectral density.
 Fig. 13. Blue noise power spectral density.

Fig. 10. Pink noise generation.
 Fig. 14. Violet noise generation.

Fig. 11. Pink noise power spectral density.

 N Fig. 15. Violet noise power spectral density.
 j2π nk
 X
 cn [n] = CN [k]·e N (4)
 n=1

In the experiment, we set the sampling frequency f s = 256, The results of the pink noise generation are shown in Fig. 10
sampling time T = 60, which corresponds to the time of and Fig. 11.
data sampling. The total number of samples for each type The results of the blue noise generation are shown in Fig. 12
of noise is N = 256 ∗ 60 = 15, 360. Hanning window is and Fig. 13.
used, and the window length is winlen to select 2 multiple The results of the violet noise generation are shown in
of sampling frequency, and periodic is selected for spectrum Fig. 14 and Fig. 15.
analysis. overlapping is 0.75 ∗ winlen, and the number of Noise Fusion Program:
points of discrete Fourier transform nf f t is equal to winlen, Let there be a total of n data samples to be detected, and the
and one-sided spectrum estimation is selected. α is taken as botnet dataset has traffic features p, industrial control features
2, 1, -1, -2 corresponding to 4 colored noises. q, and class labels k. 
 The results of the red noise generation are shown in Fig. 8 Then we can conclude that, X = x1 , x2 , . . ., xp , Y =
and Fig. 9. {y1 , y2 , . . . ,yq } , Z = {z1+p+q , z2+p+q , . . . ,zk+p+q }
LU et al.: ADVERSARIAL SAMPLE BASED ON STRUCTURED FUSION NOISE FOR BOTNET DETECTION IN ICS 3125

Fig. 16. Fusion noise generation. Fig. 17. Fusion noise power spectral density.

 Thereby the botnet dataset and class labels can be represented as follow, where j = 1, . . . , n:
 S = {sj {X, Y, Z}j
 n o
 = x1 , . . ., xp ;y 1 , . . ., y q ;z1+p+q , . . . ,zk+p+q
 j
 n o
 = xj1 , . . . ,xjp ;y j1 , . . ., y jq ;zj(1+p+q) , . . ., zj(k+p+q)
 (5)
Let there are γ different noises, then the standardized noise
set is denoted as N OISE = {noise1 , noise2 , . . . , noiseγ , we Fig. 18. Fusion noise distribution.
define the noise fusion process as the symbol ⊕, and the fusion
noise noiseall can be denoted as follows:
 Once the detection models have been trained and evaluated,
 noiseall = noise1 ⊕noise2 ⊕ . . . ⊕ noiseγ
 we generate adversarial samples to assess robustness. In our
Implanting noise into the dataset is: methodology, colored noise is treated as a time-series pertur-
  F bation and is fused to alter the temporal characteristics of flows
 Snoise all = CN · ρ · noise all ⊗ S (zjM )
 (i.e., packet timing and flow duration), whereas Gaussian noise
 | j = 1, . . . , n; N = p + q; M = 1 + p + q, . . . , k + p + q} is applied to the spatial characteristics of payloads (i.e., packet
 (6) size and load statistics). We apply the same normalization
where CN F
 denotes that F features are selected as adversarial and perturbation protocol across sample categories to ensure
samples for generating the injection point among a total of consistent interference. By separating temporal and spatial
N features of flow features and industrial control features, perturbation domains, the proposed scheme more faithfully
ρ denotes the noise disturbance coefficient with different reproduces realistic distortions in both transmission behavior
multiplicity, and ⊗ denotes that noise is implanted into the and payload distribution, thereby improving the fidelity and
dataset, then Snoiseall is the dataset generated after adding representativeness of simulated adversarial attacks.
noise. We leverage normalized noise and, based on varying
 In this experiment, we use five different noises, perturbation coefficients, embed its absolute value into the
noisei|i∈(1,5) corresponding to Gaussian noise, red noise, normalized test set. From the 10,000 generated noises, a
pink noise, blue noise, and purple noise, and mix the four random subset, comprising 20%, is integrated into the test
colored noises with the same intensity, and select the first set. Given that the noise perturbation introduced is minimal,
10,000 noises to get the fusion noise. the overall mean and standard deviation of the samples remain
 The results of the fusion noise generation are shown in largely unchanged. This subtlety allows an attacker, using the
Fig. 16, Fig. 17 and Fig. 18. The fusion noise preserves inverse process of normalization, to craft specific adversarial
the inherent stochastic characteristics of noise while exhibiting samples, further highlighting the necessity for models to be
structured temporal correlations, enabling it to effectively emu- resilient against such potential intrusions.
late realistic perturbations for adversarial sample generation.
 The features that we collected are based on the flow’s IV. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS
properties, and by altering the information in the uplink and
downlink network traffic, we may produce adversarial samples A. Experimental Setup and Methodology
for each. We only make minor changes to the flow features In total, we trained 8 detection models including MLand do not change the industrial control features to ensure the DT [1], RF-IDS [1], Smote Tomek-Link XGBOOST
correctness of the flow because botnet DoS traffic differs from (STL-BOOST) [4], IoT-Node ANN [7], Deep Residual
man-in-the-middle attacks and injection attacks in that it does 1DCN(DR-1DCN) [16], IoT botnet kill chain model (IoT
not change the values of the features. BKCM) [4], PCA+MI [9] and PSO-SVM [5].
3126 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE IV The confusion matrix is shown in Table IV.
 C ONFUSION M ATRIX (1) Accuracy, Which Represents the Proportion of Correctly
 Categorized Samples to the Total Sample, Calculated as:
 TP + TN
 Accuracy = (7)
 TP + FP + TN + FN
 (2) Precision, Which Denotes the Proportion of Correctly
 Categorized Positive Samples to All Categorized Positive
 For the machine learning model, we referred to the pro- Samples, Calculated as:
totype proposed in the paper above to train the model. The
neural network model was trained using the TensorFlow TP
 P recision = (8)
platform, IoT-Node ANN was trained for 100 epochs, DR- TP + FP
1DCN, PCA+MI, IoT BKCM for 30 epochs. The batch size (3) Recall, Which Is the Proportion of Samples Predicted to
of all four neural networks is chosen to be 512, the optimizer Be Positive to All Positive Samples, Calculated as:
is chosen to be Adam. The training model preserves the best
of all epochs. TP
 Recall = (9)
 For IoT-Node ANN containing 2 hidden layers and control TP + FN
the hidden layers to be 1/3 to 2/3 of the previous layer, 10 and (4)F1-Score, which is the comprehensive evaluation index of
5 layers, respectively, and the activation function uses ReLU. the model, combined with Accuracy and Recall comprehensive
 For DR-1DCN uses a one-dimensional deep convolu- judgment, calculated as:
tional neural network, each convolutional module consists
of 5 layers, the first layer is a convolutional layer with 32 2 ∗ P recision∗Recall
 F 1 − Score = (10)
convolutional kernels and a convolutional kernel window of P recision + Recall
5, the second layer is the activation function ReLU, the third
layer is the same convolutional layer as the first layer, the C. Intrusion Detection Model Training
fourth layer is the activation function ReLU, and the fifth layer
 Each model is trained for both binary and multiclass clasis the maximal pooling layer, with a pooling scale of 5 and
 sifications in accordance with our proposed feature extraction
step size of 2. The model accepts the inputs and then passes
 methodology. The dataset is partitioned with a ratio of 7:1:2
through the 4 convolutional modules, then through the Flatten
 for training, validation, and testing, respectively. The confusion
layer and the two Dense layers to get the output.
 matrices depicted in the subsequent figures provide a clear
 PCA+MI use a 2-layer LSTM, which is then trained with
 visual representation of the efficacy of each model. Impres-
Flatten and Dense layers. The dimensions of the first and secsively, detection accuracies are observed to approach or even
ond layers of the LSTM are set to 32 and 16.
 achieve 99% to 100%.
 IoT BKCM incorporates a combination of 2 layers of 1D
 Such results underscore two significant achievements:
convolutional layers followed by 2 layers of LSTM layers.
 We have successfully devised an effective feature extraction
Subsequent processing is handled by Flatten and Dense layers.
 technique specifically tailored for botnet identification within
The output dimensions for the first and second convolutional
 the industrial control system context.
layers are set to 128 and 64, respectively. The convolutional
 The fusion noise perturbation model we employed has been
kernel window size is fixed at 5 with a stride (or step size)
 meticulously and robustly trained.
of 1.
 However, one interesting observation emerges during the
 The experiment is divided into two main parts:
 multiclass classification task without interference. Owing to
 First: training botnet detection models. All the models are
 the significant similarities between the two traffic types, all
trained for binary classification and multiple classification,
 models occasionally misclassify a handful of samples from
respectively.
 the “TCP Garbage Attack” category, marking them instead
 Second: The robustness of the detection model is evaluated
 as belonging to the “Benign” category. This highlights the
using generated adversarial samples to observe the effect of
 inherent challenges in distinguishing between traffic types that
different perturbation coefficient noises on the same model as
 share closely related attributes.
well as the effect of different models on the same perturbation
 IoT-Node ANN, DR-1DCN binary classification and multicoefficient noise.
 classification confusion matrices are shown in Fig. 19 and
 Fig. 20.
 PCA+MI, IoT BKCM binary classification and multi-
B. Performance Metric
 classification confusion matrices are shown in Fig. 21 and
 TP: number of samples for which the classifier correctly pre- Fig. 22.
dicted positive samples; FP: number of samples for which the ML-DT, PSO-SVM binary classification and multiclassifier incorrectly predicted positive samples; TN: number classification confusion matrices are shown in Fig. 23 and
of samples for which the classifier correctly predicted negative Fig. 24.
samples; FN: number of samples for which the classifier RF-IDS, STL-BOOST binary classification and multiclassiincorrectly predicted negative samples. fication confusion matrices are shown in Fig. 25 and Fig. 26.
LU et al.: ADVERSARIAL SAMPLE BASED ON STRUCTURED FUSION NOISE FOR BOTNET DETECTION IN ICS 3127

 Fig. 23. ML-DT confusion matrix.
Fig. 19. IoT-Node ANN confusion matrix.

 Fig. 24. PSO-SVM confusion matrix.
Fig. 20. DR-1DCN confusion matrix.

Fig. 21. PCA+MI confusion matrix. Fig. 25. RF-IDS confusion matrix.

Fig. 22. IoT BKCM confusion matrix. Fig. 26. STL-BOOST confusion matrix.

D. Adversarial Attack Evaluation fusion-noise scheme, the random attack is executed under
 For comparison, a baseline random attack was implemented, a fully black-box, gradient-free setting (no model queries
which is commonly adopted in prior adversarial-traffic studies. or gradient information required). As such, it provides an
This baseline perturbs the same subset of flow features as appropriate and fair baseline for isolating the benefit of the
the proposed method but draws perturbations independently fusion structure over unstructured perturbations.
from a standard normal distribution and scales them to match For the purpose of to compare the detection abilities of
the target perturbation coefficient. The identical normalization eight different detection models on this adversarial sample, we
procedure and the same fraction of test samples are used as created ten sets of adversarial samples with noise perturbation
in the fusion-noise experiments, ensuring parity in perturba- coefficients ranging from 0 to 0.5 spaced at 0.05. The blue
tion magnitude and coverage. Importantly, like the proposed line represents the detection model’s accuracy, the yellow line
3128 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 27. IoT-Node ANN detection indicator curve. Fig. 29. PCA+MI detection indicator curve.

Fig. 28. DR-1DCN detection indicator curve.
 Fig. 30. IoT BKCM detection indicator curve.

represents its precision, the green line represents its recall, and
the red line represents the F1-Score of the detection model. attack’s impact (shown in the (d) subplots of Figures 27–34),
 The robustness of the models was evaluated based on their where the performance degradation was far less pronounced.
F1 score when subjected to adversarial samples with noise This wide performance gap confirms that the structured, multiperturbations at 0.5 times the standard rate. It’s evident that domain nature of our fusion noise is key to its efficacy, rather
models exhibited greater vulnerability to adversarial samples than the mere addition of unstructured, random perturbations.
in the multiclassification task as compared to the binary IoT-Node ANN is slightly better than DR-1DCN in
classification task. adversarial sample tests for noise generation in binary and
 This vulnerability is particularly pronounced under our multiclassification tasks. The detection performance of IoTstructured fusion-noise attack. In the binary classification Node ANN and DR-1DCN models with different perturbation
context, our method caused the performance metrics across all coefficients is shown in Fig. 27 and Fig. 28.
models to experience an average decline of 39%, with a max- IoT BKCM performs better than PCA+MI in both binary
imum drop reaching 54%. This is a substantially more severe and multiclassification tasks, suggesting that the use of cross
degradation than that achieved by the baseline random attack, deep learning methods can somewhat increase the robustness
which, as shown in Figures 27(c)–34(c), had a significantly of the detection model.The detection performance of PCA+MI
milder impact on model performance. In the multiclassification and IoT BKCM models with different perturbation coefficients
scenario, the average decrease in metrics from our fusion- is shown in Fig. 29 and Fig. 30.
noise attack was around 44%, peaking at a substantial 57%. PSO-SVM is more noise-resistant than ML-DT, while
This effectiveness starkly contrasts with the baseline random PSO-SVM performs better than RF-IDS and STL-BOOST
LU et al.: ADVERSARIAL SAMPLE BASED ON STRUCTURED FUSION NOISE FOR BOTNET DETECTION IN ICS 3129

Fig. 31. ML-DT detection indicator curve. Fig. 33. RF-IDS detection indicator curve.

Fig. 32. PSO-SVM detection indicator curve. Fig. 34. STL-BOOST detection indicator curve.

algorithms, suggesting that tree-structured classifiers suffer not filtered out the effects of noise. Some models overfit the
from lower robustness when confronted with adversarial features of the training data and fail to generalize well to
samples in the industrial control system environment. The unseen adversarial examples which often exploit the vulneradetection performance of ML-DT and PSO-SVM models with bilities of these features.
different perturbation coefficients is shown in Fig. 31 and This higher degree of performance degradation in multiclass
Fig. 32. classification tasks is mainly associated with the intrinsic
 It is obvious that the RF-IDS and STL-BOOST models, complexity of their decision boundaries. In multiclass settings,
which are tree-structured models built utilizing an integrated the separation margins among classes in the feature space are
approach of bagging and boosting, perform quite similarly typically narrower than those in binary classification, making
in adversarial sample tests in the industrial control system the decision regions more sensitive to small perturbations.
environment. The detection performance of RF-IDS and STL- Consequently, even minor adversarial noise may shift samples
BOOST models with different perturbation coefficients is across neighboring class boundaries, resulting in misclassishown in Fig. 33 and Fig. 34. fication. Moreover, within ICS traffic data, several attack
 The reasons for the different performances of various mod- categories (such as TCP Garbage and UDP Flood) exhibit
els when faced with our proposed attack are as follows: strong temporal and payload correlations with benign traffic.
 Certain models rely heavily on specific features of the input Such feature overlap increases the likelihood of confusion
data, and if these features are perturbed by adversarial noise, under noisy conditions. Additionally, neural networks trained
the model’s classification ability can significantly degrade. with a softmax-based cross-entropy objective tend to dis-
This phenomenon is particularly evident in models that have tribute output probabilities among multiple competing classes,
3130 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

which further amplifies uncertainty when adversarial pertur- applied to normalized flow records with only lightweight operbations are introduced. These factors collectively explain why ations (e.g., scaling, interpolation, or element-wise addition).
multiclass detection models exhibit greater vulnerability to This precomputation strategy substantially reduces runtime
adversarial samples compared with their binary counterparts. CPU/GPU requirements and enables rapid deployment in
 latency-sensitive ICS environments.
 V. C ONCLUSION Future research should also investigate effective defense
 In the domain of industrial control system (ICS) botnet mechanisms to enhance the robustness of ICS botnet detection
detection, this paper first introduces a novel feature extraction models against such hybrid adversarial perturbations. Potentechnique. Utilizing this method, we establish a botnet within tial approaches include adversarial training with fusion noise
the ICS environment and assess its effectiveness across four based samples, feature-space regularization to improve model
neural network models and four machine learning models. generalization, and ensemble-based detection architectures that
A dedicated ICS botnet detection dataset is also introduced. integrate temporal and spatial dependencies. Moreover, adap-
Empirical results indicate that all eight models proficiently tive noise filtering and model uncertainty estimation could be
identify ICS botnets utilizing the proposed feature extraction explored to dynamically identify adversarial traffic in real-time
approach. ICS environments. These strategies can form a foundation for
 Additionally, this paper advances a black-box attack strat- building resilient and self-adaptive detection frameworks capaegy, blending time-domain and frequency-domain sampling ble of maintaining high reliability under adversarial conditions.
noise, to produce adversarial samples. We subsequently examine these samples against the eight models, comparing the R EFERENCES
effects of varying noise perturbation coefficients on model [1] J. Kim, M. Shim, S. Hong, Y. Shin, and E. Choi, “Intelligent detection
detection performance. Our research underscore the efficacy of IoT botnets using machine learning and deep learning,” Appl. Sci.,
of the proposed adversarial sample generation strategy in vol. 10, no. 19, p. 7009, Oct. 2020, doi: 10.3390/app10197009.
 [2] Y. Imrana, Y. Xiang, L. Ali, and Z. Abdul-Rauf, “A bidirectional LSTM
reducing classification error rates. New adversarial sample deep learning approach for intrusion detection,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
attack methods can expose potential vulnerabilities in ICS vol. 185, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 115524, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115524.
botnet detection systems, prompting researchers and security [3] M. Ali, M. Shahroz, M. F. Mushtaq, S. Alfarhood, M. Safran, and
 I. Ashraf, “Hybrid machine learning model for efficient botnet attack
experts to develop new defense mechanisms. detection in IoT environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 40682–40699,
 As a roadmap for future endeavors, we propose expanding 2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3376400.
the ICS intrusion detection dataset by: [4] M. Wazzan, D. Algazzawi, A. Albeshri, S. Hasan, O. Rabie, and
 M. Z. Asghar, “Cross deep learning method for effectively detecting
 Incorporating a broader spectrum of attacks across multiple the propagation of IoT botnet,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 10, p. 3895, May
protocols within the ICS, including in-depth analyses of the S7 2022, doi: 10.3390/s22103895.
and Modbus protocols. We also intend to refine the dataset by [5] C. Chen, X. Xu, G. Wang, and L. Yang, “Network intrusion detection
 model based on neural network feature extraction and PSO-SVM,” in
integrating man-in-the-middle, backdoor, injection, and other Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Intell. Comput. Signal Process. (ICSP), China, Apr.
forms of attacks. 2022, pp. 1462–1465, doi: 10.1109/ICSP54964.2022.9778404.
 Evaluating and ranking feature significance to optimize [6] M. Mudassir, D. Unal, M. Hammoudeh, and F. Azzedin, “Detection of
feature selection. We will introduce perturbations selectively botnet attacks against industrial IoT systems by multilayer deep learning
 approaches,” Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput., vol. 2022, no. 1, May
to highly significant features and contrast the implications of 2022, Art. no. 2845446, doi: 10.1155/2022/2845446.
these perturbations across varied features on detection efficacy. [7] T. G. Palla and S. Tayeb, “Intelligent mirai malware detection for IoT
 Existing models still make errors when distinguishing nodes,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 1241, May 2021.
 [8] L. Liao, B. Zhang, and L. Wu, “IoT anomaly detection model based
between types of traffic that have significant similarities and on cost-sensitive learning,” Netinfo Secur., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 94–103,
closely related attributes. Future work could focus on a more 2023.
in-depth study of these types of traffic. [9] F. Laghrissi, S. Douzi, K. Douzi, and B. Hssina, “Intrusion detection
 systems using long short-term memory (LSTM),” J. Big Data, vol. 8,
 Generating effective adversarial samples requires sub- no. 1, p. 65, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1186/s40537-021-00448-4.
stantial computational power and time. However, ICS typically [10] J. Lu, W. Zhang, M. Hamzei, and N. Jafari, “The applications of machine
demand high real-time performance. Attackers may lack suf- learning mechanisms in the compositions of Internet of Things services:
 A systematic study, current progress, and future research agenda,” Eng.
ficient time or computational resources to generate adversarial Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 147, May 2025, Art. no. 110345.
examples and promptly inject them into the real-time data [11] M. Alqahtani, H. Mathkour, and M. M. Ben Ismail, “IoT botnet attack
streams of control systems. The attack overhead is not the detection based on optimized extreme gradient boosting and feature
 selection,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 21, p. 6336, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.3390/
focus of this study. In future work, we will explore the impact s20216336.
of the overhead associated with generating adversarial samples [12] F. Abbasi, M. Naderan, and S. E. Alavi, “Anomaly detection in Internet
on the effectiveness of attacks. of Things using feature selection and classification based on logistic
 regression and artificial neural network on N-BaIoT dataset,” in Proc.
 To mitigate the real-time computational burden associated 5th Int. Conf. Internet Things Appl. (IoT), 2021, pp. 1–7, doi: 10.1109/
with fusion-noise generation, the noise synthesis process can IoT52625.2021.9469605.
be performed offline and stored as a reusable noise library. In [13] J.-R. Jiang and Y.-T. Chen, “Industrial control system anomaly detection
 and classification based on network traffic,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
this approach, frequency-domain transforms and noise-fusion pp. 41874–41888, 2022, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3167814.
procedures are executed a priori for a range of parameter [14] A. G. M. Mengara, Y. Yoo, and V. C. M. Leung, “IoTSecUT:
settings (e.g., spectral exponent α, sampling window length, Uncertainty-based hybrid deep learning approach for superior IoT
 security amidst evolving cyber threats,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
and perturbation coefficients ρ). During online evaluation vol. 11, no. 16, pp. 27715–27731, Aug. 15, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
or injection, precomputed noise segments are retrieved and JIOT.2024.3404808.
LU et al.: ADVERSARIAL SAMPLE BASED ON STRUCTURED FUSION NOISE FOR BOTNET DETECTION IN ICS 3131

[15] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet Jiazhong Lu received the Ph.D. degree from the
 attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17, University of Electronic Science and Technology
 no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul. 2018, doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2018.03367731. of China (UESTC) in 2019. He is currently an
[16] D. T. Rahmantyo, B. Erfianto, and G. B. Satrya, “Deep residual CNN for Associate Professor with Chengdu University of
 preventing botnet attacks on the Internet of Things,” in Proc. 4th Int. Information Technology (CUIT). His research inter-
 Conf. Comput. Informat. Eng. (IC2IE), Depok, Indonesia, Sep. 2021, ests include cyber security, system security, and AI
 pp. 462–466, doi: 10.1109/IC2IE53219.2021.9649314. security.
[17] S. Gupta and B. Singh, “An intelligent multi-layer framework with
 SHAP integration for botnet detection and classification,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024, Art. no. 103783, doi: 10.1016/
 j.cose.2024.103783.
[18] H. Alkahtani and T. H. H. Aldhyani, “Botnet attack detection by using
 CNN-LSTM model for Internet of Things applications,” Secur. Commun. Jimin Peng received the B.S. degree from
 Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–23, Sep. 2021, doi: 10.1155/2021/3806459. Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunica-
[19] X. Liu, T. Lu, and Y. Du, “Lightweight IoT intrusion detection method tions. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with
 based on feature selection,” Netinfo Secur., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 66–72, Chengdu University of Information Technology. His
 2023. research interests include network intrusion detec-
[20] X. Zong, W. Luo, B. Ning, K. He, L. Lian, and Y. Sun, “DiffusionFuzz: tion and adversarial sample attacks.
 Fuzzing framework of industrial control protocols based on denoising
 diffusion probabilistic model,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 67795–67808,
 2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3399820.
[21] J. Lu, C. Wang, Y. Huang, K. Ding, and X. Liu, “An adversarial example
 defense algorithm for intelligent driving,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 6,
 pp. 98–105, Nov. 2024, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2024.3392582.
[22] H. Mohammadian, A. A. Ghorbani, and A. H. Lashkari, “A gradientbased approach for adversarial attack on deep learning-based network Jian Shu received the M.S. degree from Chengdu
 intrusion detection systems,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 173, Apr. 2023, University of Information Technology. His main
 Art. no. 110173, doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110173. research interests include network intrusion detec-
[23] M. S. Haroon and H. M. Ali, “Adversarial training against adversar- tion and botnet detection.
 ial attacks for machine learning-based intrusion detection systems,”
 Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 3513–3527, 2022, doi:
 10.32604/cmc.2022.029858.
[24] X. Liu, X. Zhang, N. Guizani, J. Lu, Q. Zhu, and X. Du, “TLTD:
 A testing framework for learning-based IoT traffic detection systems,”
 Sensors, vol. 18, no. 8, p. 2630, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.3390/s18082630.
[25] D. Wu, B. Fang, J. Wang, Q. Liu, and X. Cui, “Evading machine learning
 botnet detection models via deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE
 Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Shanghai, China, May 2019, pp. 1–6, doi: Jiali Yin (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 10.1109/ICC.2019.8761337. from the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
[26] L. Liu, H. Yu, S. Yu, and X. Yu, “Network traffic obfuscation against neering, Yuan Ze University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, in
 traffic classification,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, pp. 1–14, Aug. 2020. She is currently a Professor and a Qishan
 2022, doi: 10.1155/2022/3104392. Scholar with the College of Computer Science and
[27] M. Wang, N. Yang, N. J. Forcade-Perkins, and N. Weng, “ProGen: Big Data, Fuzhou University, China. Her research
 Projection-based adversarial attack generation against network intrusion interests include digital image processing, computer
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5476–5491, vision, pattern recognition, and deep learning. She
 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3402155. received the Gold Medal Award and the Bronze
[28] M. Usama, M. Asim, S. Latif, J. Qadir, and Ala-Al-Fuqaha, “Generative Medal Award from Taiwan Innotech Expo Invention
 adversarial networks for launching and thwarting adversarial attacks Contest in 2019 and 2020, respectively. She also
 on network intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 15th Int. Wireless received the Best Ph.D. Dissertation Award from Taiwan Image Processing
 Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), Tangier, Morocco, Jun. and Pattern Recognition Society, Taiwan Association for Consumer Electron-
 2019, pp. 78–83, doi: 10.1109/IWCMC.2019.8766353. ics, and the Institute of Information and Computing Machinery in 2020.
[29] D. M. Alghazzawi, S. Hamid Hasan, and S. Bhatia, “Optimized generative adversarial networks for adversarial sample generation,” Comput.,
 Mater. Continua, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 3877–3897, 2022.
[30] Y. Ding, G. Zhu, D. Chen, X. Qin, M. Cao, and Z. Qin, “Adversarial
 sample attack and defense method for encrypted traffic data,” IEEE Xiaolei Liu received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 18024–18039, Oct. 2022, in software engineering from the University of
 doi: 10.1109/TITS.2022.3154884. Electronic and Technology of China (UESTC). He
[31] H. Zhivomirov. (2018). A Method for Colored Noise is currently an Associate Research Fellow with
 Generation. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/ the National Interdisciplinary Research Center of
 CorpusID:115673291 Engineering Physics. His research interests include
[32] J. Lu, K. Chen, Z. Zhuo, and X. Zhang, “A temporal correlation and system security, AI security, and privacy protection.
 traffic analysis approach for APT attacks detection,” Cluster Comput.,
 vol. 22, no. S3, pp. 7347–7358, May 2019, doi: 10.1007/s10586-017-
 1256-y.