IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026 655

 Alert2Vec: Eliminating Alert Fatigue by Embedding
 Security Alerts Through Subgraph Learning
 Songyun Wu , Xiaoqing Sun , Enhuan Dong , Zhiliang Wang , Chen Zhao ,
 and Jiahai Yang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—With increasingly sophisticated attacks in cyberspace,
a growing number of security devices are deployed on the organization network to prevent attacks comprehensively. However,
they produce thousands of security alerts each day, causing a
severe burden on security analysts. Thus, it is increasingly concerned about capturing the significant threats from the jumble of
alerts. Previous works only provided scene-specific algorithms for
given applications or services, which is hard to extend to other
scenarios and consequently not adequate for large organizations
that deploy multiple kinds of security devices. To address this, we
propose a general alert classification approach named Alert2vec.
With subgraph learning methods on the Heterogeneous Information Network (HIN), Alert2vec is applicable for both networklevel and host-level security devices. Specifically, Alert2vec first
builds a heterogeneous Alert Intelligence Graph (AIG) to catch
the correlation between different alerts. Then, a novel subgraph
representation method is applied to generate alert vectors based
on six graph properties that can reveal the threat level of alerts.
Finally, these alert vectors are labeled with various threat levels in
semi-automatic or fully automatic classification mode. Alert2vec
is proven to be effective on real-world datasets, outperforming all
baselines on both network-level and host-level scenarios.
 Index Terms—Alert fatigue, threat alerts, subgraph learning.

 Fig. 1. An example of enterprise network’s security defenses and alert pro-
 I. INTRODUCTION cessing. (a) illustrates that enterprise networks typically deploy numerous security detection devices. (b) demonstrates that the alerts generated by these
 O combat increasingly frequent and complex attacks, large
T organizations tend to deploy multiple security devices on
their computer systems and networks. These security devices
 devices require manual analysis and processing, which is both complex and
 time-consuming.

constantly collect various monitoring data and trigger an alert
once a suspicious activity corresponds with the preset detection
rules. Fig. 1(a) depicts an example of security defenses for an (NIDS). Simultaneously, a series of host-level detectors are
enterprise network. In front of significant network infrastruc- applied to monitor process activities in servers and endpoints,
tures, some network-level detection devices are deployed to e.g., Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR), Host Intrusion
check the network data flow, such as Firewall, Web Applica- Detection System (HIDS), and anti-virus software. As shown
tion Firewall (WAF), and Network Intrusion Detection System in Fig. 1(b), security analysts need to review various alerts
 generated by these devices one by one to identify and report
 severe alerts.
 Received 13 November 2023; revised 16 July 2025; accepted 7 September
2025. Date of publication 15 September 2025; date of current version 14 January However, these security devices frequently generate massive
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of low-severity alerts, leading to alert fatigue among security ana-
China under Grant 2022YFB3102902 and in part by Scientific Research and lysts [1], [2]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, a typical campus network
Development Plan Project of China Railway Information Technology Group Co.,
Ltd. under Grant WJZG-CKY-2024005(2024K02). (Corresponding authors: produces over 1,000 daily alerts, with 97% classified as low-
Enhuan Dong; Jiahai Yang.) or medium-risk. Furthermore, the threat assessment process for
 Songyun Wu, Xiaoqing Sun, Enhuan Dong, Zhiliang Wang, and Jia- each alert is highly time-intensive (Fig. 1(b)). Consequently,
hai Yang are with the Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: shoinwu@gmail.com; security teams face the formidable challenge of identifying
sxq16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; dongenhuan@tsinghua.edu.cn; wzl@cernet. major threats amidst this overwhelming volume of alerts.
edu.cn; yang@cernet.edu.cn). To address this, an automatic approach to classify alerts is
 Chen Zhao is with the Information Technology Department of Asian Development Bank, Mandaluyong City 1550, Philippines (e-mail: czhao@adb.org). urgently required, i.e., identify significant threats from enormous
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3609834 alerts. While the security community has drawn attention to
 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
656 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 Fig. 3. An illustration of how Alert2vec alleviates the burden on security
 analysts in alert processing. Alert2vec aims to automatically assess threat levels
 in voluminous multi-source alert logs and prioritizes critical alerts for security
 analysts.

 and the adaptability to different organizational environments
 with diverse device deployments. (ii) Alert correlation. The
Fig. 2. The number of alerts in a network-level security dataset produced by ability to reasonably express the correlation between alerts and
the campus network of Tsinghua University during a week. The red bars stand
for the number of alerts produced per day, with the left vertical axis as the
 leverage it to identify threat levels. (iii) Less Labor. Since the
reference. The proportion of alerts with higher threat levels is darker in color. primary purpose is to alleviate the burden of security analysts,
In addition, the black curve represents the cumulative number of alerts, with the the approach should introduce as little labor as possible, namely,
right vertical axis as a reference.
 having a high level of automation and interpretation ability.
 In summary, we propose Alert2vec, a general alert classification framework addressing the three aforementioned challenges.
 To resolve the first two challenges, we extract three generic
eliminating alert fatigue, recent works merely focused on a
 elements (subject, object, and action) to construct a subgraph for
certain scenario at the host-level [1], [3] or the network-level [2].
 each alert. This design ensures compatibility with diverse alerts
Hassan et al. [1] used a heuristic network diffusion algorithm to
 from both network-level and host-level security devices in large
compute each alert’s anomaly score in a dependency graph gennetworks. These subgraphs are unified into a heterogeneous
erated from audit logs. Obviously, this work cannot be extended
 Alert Intelligence Graph (AIG), where correlations are inferred
to the network-level detectors since it needs plenty of finevia shared nodes (i.e., identical alert elements) at a fine-grained
grained host audit logs to build a vast provenance graph (a graph
 level. For the third challenge, we introduce a novel subgraph
that combines all entities, control flows, and information flows
 learning method to embed alert subgraphs into discriminative
in audit logs). Likewise, Zhao et al. [2] leveraged several scenevectors for automated threat-level identification. The embedding
specific features, such as KPI metrics, to catch severe alerts,
 process optimizes six subgraph properties, capturing both global
which is only appropriate for the online service system and hard
 and local correlation features. Finally, threat levels are classified
to extend to other scenarios. However, as Fig. 1(a) presents,
 via a dual-mode approach (semi-automatic and fully automatic),
large organizations tend to deploy a variety of different security
 leveraging the derived alert vectors.
devices to protect network communication and host activities
 Alert2vec is demonstrated to be effective on three real-world
comprehensively. Unfortunately, these single-scenario-oriented
 large organization’s datasets, outperforming all baseline methworks cannot be applied to both network-level and host-level
 ods on both network-level and host-level scenarios. To conclude,
detectors simultaneously. Thus, a naïve way is to deploy an alert
 this paper makes the following contributions:
classification approach for each detector, which remains two r We design a heterogeneous graph named AIG and propose
problems. (i) It costs highly in terms of labor and time, and
 a general framework that can classify alert threat levels for
even no existing method is available for some devices. (ii) It
 both network-level and host-level security devices.
ignores the correlation between alerts generated from various r We devise a novel subgraph learning method for representdevices, which can provide valid information to recognize false
 ing alert subgraphs. By considering six graph properties,
positives [4]. Considering that these works are insufficient to
 it can comprehensively extract both the global and local
eliminate alert fatigue for large organizational networks, there
 information of subgraphs.
is an imperative need for a general alert classification method. r Alert2vec is proven to be effective on three real-world
 Hence, we aim to propose an intelligence alert classification
 datasets, including the network-level dataset of Tsinghua
framework applicable to reduce the workload of security ana-
 University and the host-level dataset of Asian Developlysts in large organizations, as given in Fig. 3. Between enormous
 ment Bank (ADB), and a publicly available network-level
alerts and exhausted security analysts, an alert-processing buffer
 dataset.
is created for classifying heterogeneous alerts into several threat
levels based on the correlation between alerts. Then, instead of
 II. MOTIVATION
facing tremendous alerts before, security analysts can just focus
on significant alerts with a small percentage. To this end, there We motivate the design of Alert2vec by investigating (i) the
are three challenges to the approach. (i) Generality. The com- weakness of current alert correlation and (ii) the essentiality of
patibility for heterogeneous alerts generated by various devices a subgraph learning method for threat level identification.
WU et al.: ALERT2VEC: ELIMINATING ALERT FATIGUE BY EMBEDDING SECURITY ALERTS THROUGH SUBGRAPH LEARNING 657

 across disjointed fragments due to covert communication patterns, making it difficult to infer their collective role in an
 attack. However, when analyzed by target (e.g., IPd ) and action
 (e.g., DDoS attack), these alerts can be intuitively aggregated
 (Fig. 4(b)). To better represent such correlations, we propose a
 graph-based approach, encoding each alert as an alert graph with
 triplet elements as nodes and their relationships as edges. Furthermore, we aggregate all alert graphs into an Alert Intelligence
 Graph (AIG) to comprehensively model inter-alert dependencies
 (see Section III). This framework captures both individual alert
 features and fine-grained element-level correlations.

 B. Why is a Subgraph Learning Method Expected?
 As shown in Fig. 4(b), graph-based alert representations reveal that related alerts from the same attack source form dense
 clusters. Thus, an alert’s threat level depends on both local
 (intrinsic features) and global (AIG correlations) properties.
 Since each alert is a variable-sized subgraph of AIG, specialized
 subgraph learning is needed to capture these properties. Existing
 subgraph methods focus on homogeneous graphs [6], [7], [8]
Fig. 4. The motivation example of sequence-based and graph-based representation of an attack that a botnet C&C server communicating with multiple or fixed structures [9], ignoring: (i) Heterogeneity: Our scecontrolled hosts over a long period, which consists of four alerts, i.e., e101, nario involves three distinct node types (subject, object, action);
e102, e103, and e104. (ii)Dynamic topology: Alert subgraphs vary in size/structure;
 (iii)Security-specific features: Current methods lack threat-level
 classification capabilities (see Section IV). Thus, this necessi-
A. Why Current Alert Correlation is Insufficient? tates a tailored subgraph learning approach.
 In order to present drawbacks of existing works, we introduce a motivation example first. From a fine-grained perspec- III. SYSTEM FRAMEWORK
tive, a security alert comprises three main elements, i.e., the In this section, we first introduce the problem formulation,
subject, object, and action. In NIDS, they can be source IP and then the alert classification framework as presented in Fig. 5,
address, destination IP address, and alert type (such as SQL including alert intelligence graph construction, alert vector geninjection attack.), respectively. As Fig. 4 depicts, consider an eration, and threat level identification.
attack of a botnet C&C server communicating with multiple
controlled hosts over a long period that may trigger multiple
 A. Problem Formulation
alerts, including e101(subject: IP1 ; object:IPd ; action:DDoS
attack), e102(subject: IP2 ; object:IPd ; action:DDoS attack), Definition 1: (Alert Subgraph, AS) The heterogeneous
e103(subject: IP3 ; object:IPd ; action:DDoS attack), and security alert records from various devices will be normalized
e104(subject: IP4 ; object:IPd ; action:DDoS attack). into alert subgraphs by extracting three kinds of generic
 To catch the correlation among these alerts, current works elements, i.e., subject, object, and action. Each alert record
commonly leverage a sequence-based method, i.e., converting can be converted into an alert subgraph represented as
alerts into security events and capturing the contextual relation- A = (VA , EA ), where VA is the node set and EA is the edge
ship in an event sequence arranged chronologically, as shown in set. For each node u ∈ VA , it stands for a representative feature
Fig. 4(a). For example, DeepCase [4] aggregates similar security extracted from the alert. Moreover, the element type of each
events generated from network security monitors through the node T (u) ∈ {subject, action, object}. Besides, edges in
contextual relationship in sequences. However, it still strongly the alert subgraph mean inner correlation among its elements
depends on the manual judgment of the risk level, introducing or the contextual relationship, the type of each edge T (e) ∈
a new labor-intensive work for security analysts. Likewise, {(subject, action), (action, action), (action, object)}. In
Context2vector [5] assigns an anomaly score to a security event particular, the edge can be either undirected or directed
based on its deviation from the context in the sequence. It ex- according to the applying scenario, which will be detailed in
tremely relies on the correctness of the previous and subsequent Section III-C.
events in the sequence, which inevitably contains plenty of Definition 2: (Alert Intelligence Graph, AIG) Given a
unreliable false alerts. set composed of multiple alert subgraphs, A1 , A2 , . . ., An ,
 Sequence-based methods have limited expressiveness in cap- the alert intelligence graph can be denoted as G = (V, E),
turing alert correlations, as they only model linear event se- where V = {VA1 ∪ VA2 ∪ . . . ∪ VAn }, E = {EA1 ∪ EA2 ∪
quences while neglecting complex inter-alert relationships. As . . . ∪ EAn ∪ EC }, and n is the number of alert subgraphs.
shown in Fig. 4(a), botnet-related alerts often appear scattered It denotes that AIG is the union of all alert subgraphs and
658 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 5. The framework of Alert2vec contains three phases: (a) Alert intelligence graph construction: heterogeneous alerts are transformed into subgraphs and
aggregated into network/host-level AIGs; (b) Alert vector generation: we propose a six-property subgraph learning method capturing both local (neighborhood,
structure, heterogeneity) and global (neighborhoo, structure, position) features; (c) Threat level identification: threat levels are classified via semi/fully-automatic
modes using the learned vectors, enabling analysts to focus on critical alerts.

additionally incorporates a new edge set EC . EC contains the C. Alert Intelligence Graph Construction
edges connecting two contextual alerts. Once two alerts that A major reason for alert fatigue is that most existing security
occur within a short period (e.g., 1 s) have a common element in devices utilize simple matching rules to generate alerts [2].
subject or object nodes, they are regarded as contextual alerts.
 Whereas, plenty of false or low threat-level alerts (such as reports
The edge between two contextual alert subgraphs’ action nodes of sensitive inspection operations from network managers) will
will be added into EC . Thus, for each edge ec in EC , its edge also be detected by such static rules. Since these alerts are similar
type T (ec ) = (action, action).
 in form, it is hard to assess threat levels only by leveraging single
 Definition 3: (Alert Classification) The problem we aim to alert event information.
tackle is identifying the threat level of each alert subgraph with
 Instead, some high-threat attacks have partial similarities or
the aid of alert intelligence graph G. The formulaic exposition
 contextual relationships. For example, adversaries tend to attack
is presented as follows. the same target (e.g., passwd file) or leverage similar steps
 to compromise hosts. In addition, an adversary may conduct
 ˆli = F (H (Ai , G)) (1) multiple steps successively to perform an advanced attack, and
 alerts triggered by these steps have contextual relations. In order
where ˆli is the targeted threat level of alert subgraph Ai , F is a to catch such relationships, alerts are expected to aggregate
nonlinear mapping function, and H is a function that transfers together. Nevertheless, merging alerts from various devices is
the alert subgraph Ai into a numerical vector. challenging due to the heterogeneous alert reports.
 Consequently, in order to derive the threat level result ˆli , Hence, a general alert normalization approach is urgently
three issues need to be addressed, namely, (i) the construction expected to accommodate heterogeneous alerts in one graph.
of graphs Ai and G, (ii) the construction of transfer function The intuitive insight is to extract similar elements on each alert,
H, and (iii) the design of mapping function F . The following and the ensuing question is how to pick the representative and
sections will elaborate on corresponding solutions. common elements for alert classification. Through the feature
 engineering by Random Forest (RF) [10], three kinds of significant elements with the highest weight are selected, namely,
B. Overview subject, object, and action.
 The framework of Alert2vec (Fig. 5) includes three modules: In a NIDS, subject and object can be the source and destination
(i) AIG construction, (ii) Alert vector generation, and (iii) Threat IP address, respectively. action may be the attack type, such as
level identification. First, heterogeneous alerts are transformed SQL injection attack. While in a HIDS, subject and object may
into subgraphs and aggregated into network/host-level AIGs be the process or file. Due to the distinction in alert elements be-
(Section III-C). Second, we propose a six-property subgraph tween host-level and network-level security devices, the specific
learning method capturing both local (neighborhood, structure, definition of ASs and AIGs are presented separately.
heterogeneity) and global (neighborhoo, structure, position) Host-level AS (HAS): The host-level security devices (e.g.,
features (Section IV). Finally, threat levels are classified via EDR, HIDS) monitor fine-grained activities in hosts or endsemi/fully-automatic modes using the learned vectors, enabling points. They will trigger an alert for a single abnormal
analysts to focus on critical alerts (Section III-E). event. Therefore, element subject points to who performs the
WU et al.: ALERT2VEC: ELIMINATING ALERT FATIGUE BY EMBEDDING SECURITY ALERTS THROUGH SUBGRAPH LEARNING 659

Fig. 6. Examples of host-level alert subgraphs, network-level alert subgraphs, and AIG construction. Nodes colored red are the subject elements, blue ones map
to the action elements, and green ones stand for the object elements.

abnormal event, i.e., users or processes. Element action refers to incorporate multiple items to compose an element or specify an
detailed operations, e.g., creation, modification, startup, and so element as “None” when the corresponding value is missing.
on. Element object represents the victim of this abnormal event, Second, to further capture the contextual correlation between
generally a file, a process, etc. The connection relationship of different alerts, there is a new edge type between various alert
these elements in a HAS can be defined as below: subgraphs in AIG as defined in Definition 2. Two alerts will be
 regarded as contextual alerts once they happen within a short
 subject ↔ action, object ↔ action, action ↔ action
 period (such as 1 s) and have a common element in subject
The first two edges refer to the inner correlation. And the last or object nodes. Each pair of contextual alert subgraphs have
one is designed for alerts which contain multiple actions, e.g., corresponding edges between their action nodes in the AIG. It
alert in Fig. 6(a). The various actions taken by an adversary is noted that there are two scenarios for the common element,
in one attack have a contextual relationship. Since there is no i.e., (i) the contextual alerts have the same subject or object
special dependency between each element, edges in host-level node, and (ii) one node acts as subject and object, respectively,
alert subgraph and AIG are undirected. Examples of HAS are in contextual alerts.
shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b). It is noted that there can be multiple For example, as Fig. 6(f) shows, there is an extra edge between
items in all element types, such as Fig. 6(a), which has two action node ACK flood and Communication with C&C server since
nodes. these two NASs occur within a short period and have three
 Network-level AS (NAS): The network-level security devices identical nodes, namely, IP 2.2.2.1, IP 2.2.2.2, and IP 2.2.2.3.
(e.g., Firewall, NIDS) detect abnormal network communication, These three IPs first act as victims to communicate with the
the monitoring objects of which are network flows and data malicious C&C server IP 1.1.1.1 to receive attack commands
packets. Thus, element subject stands for the source IP address, and then act as an attacker to launch an ACK flood attack on IP
and element object means the destination IP address. Element 3.3.3.3.
action is the malicious communication pattern, such as SQL
injection, Denial of service, port scan, etc. The connection
relationship of these elements in a NAS is as follows: D. Alert Vector Generation
 Then, this phase aims to transforming the alert graph into
 subject → action, action → object, action ↔ action
 an expressive numerical vector through subgraph representation
Like HAS, the last edge refers to the contextual relationship learning. Previous methods merely exploit partial information
between different actions. But the first two edges are directed, of the subgraph, which cannot construct a comprehensive alert
since the network flows and data packets conduct the information vector. Consequently, we devise a six-property subgraph repflows, which have a natural direction from information providers resentation in terms of global and local perspectives, which
to receivers. Examples of NAS are shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). can indicate both the alert’s information and the correlation
 AIG construction: First, the AIG contains the union of all with other alerts. As Fig. 5(b) presents, the six properties are
HASs or NASs, as exampled in Fig. 6(e). Two HASs are global neighborhood vGn , global structure vGs , position vGp ,
connected by the same subject node, i.e., Administrator in the local neighborhood vLn , local structure vLs , and heterogeneity
host-level AIG. Besides, in HAS and NAS, it is available to vLh . The reason for picking these properties and the computing
660 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

way are the critical parts of this work, which will be detailed in phishing website identification [14]. Given its proven effective-
Section IV. ness, Alert2vec adopts random forest as the classifier model
 in the fully automatic mode. With the aid of fully automatic
 Alert2vec, the security team can significantly reduce the work-
E. Threat Level Identification load of routine alert analysis.
 The final phase is to identify the threat level when giving an
alert vector. The number of threat levels varies according to the IV. SUBGRAPH LEARNING
organization’s needs. Some require three levels (low, medium,
 In this section, we aim to construct the function H that
high), and some require four levels, as Fig. 5(c) exhibits. Hence,
 transfers the alert subgraph Ai into a numerical vector VAi , as
it can be regarded as a multi-classification problem, which can
 referred to in Definition 3. Since it is a core issue of this work,
be solved by classic classification methods, such as supervised
 we will first introduce design intuitions and then elaborate on
machine learning and unsupervised clustering.
 the specific approach in the following parts.
 Although the supervised method can achieve higher accuracy,
it requires a large amount of labeled data. For some newly-started
organizations, it is difficult and costly to quickly collect adequate A. Design Intuitions
labeled data. On the contrary, unsupervised methods do not The function H needs to map alert subgraphs into distinrequire labeled data, but obtain a relatively lower accuracy. To guished vectors for identifying their threat levels, so it is oblibalance the issues between accuracy and efficiency, we adopt a gated to discern features that declare the severity of alerts. To
two-step identification method, including semi-automatic mode this end, we conduct a thorough observation on alert subgraphs
and fully automatic mode. from local and global perspectives.
 Semi-automatic mode: In the initial stage, Alert2vec employs 1) Local Perspective: First, we focus on the features of the
a semi-automatic mode to address the lack of sufficient labeled alert subgraph in a local perspective. In Fig. 6, there are four
data. This approach leverages DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial examples of the host-level and network-level alert subgraphs.
Clustering of Applications with Noise) [11], a classic density- Intuition 1 (Composition): Alert subgraph’s inner node and
based clustering algorithm, to group alert vectors with similar edge information may indicate the threat level. For instance, alert
features in high-dimensional space. The workflow consists of (a) is labeled as “Critical” because it exploits two cmd commands
three key steps: (i) Clustering: well-expressed alert vectors successively and causes a blue screen of death. Meanwhile,
are fed into the DBSCAN module, which identifies arbitrarily though generated due to triggering the static match rule to
shaped clusters while filtering out noise. (ii) Manual Labeling: keyword “wscript.exe”, alert (b) only contains an administrator
Security analysts perform a lightweight review, labeling only subject with a startup action, which means the normal operation
1–2 representative alerts per cluster (e.g., high/medium/low). is falsely alerted.
(iii) Label Propagation: The system generalizes these labels to Inspired by these two observations, the composition features
all alerts within each cluster. within the alert need to be taken into account. To catch the node
 The semi-automatic mode can help Alert2vec reduce manual information, we introduce a property Local Neighborhood to
labeling effort through clustering-based sampling. It enables represent all nodes of alert subgraphs. Likewise, the property
rapid construction of a preliminary labeled dataset, facilitat- Local Structure is proposed to catch the edge information, i.e.,
ing subsequent supervised learning. Besides, for those orga- the correlation among alert inner elements.
nizations with enough labeled data, Alert2vec can bypass the Intuition 2 (Heterogeneity): The combination of heterogesemi-automatic phase and proceed directly to fully supervised neous nodes can also describe partial information of threat level.
learning. This adaptability makes the system suitable for orga- For example, in Fig. 6, both alert (c) and alert (d) have five nodes.
nizations at varying maturity levels. In alert (c), a subject connects to multiple objects, which is a
 Fully automatic mode: Once the data collection is finished, potential botnet marked “medium”. But in alert (d), there are just
Alert2vec can be run entirely automatically. Considering the one object and multiple subjects, which is a typical DDoS attack
instability and high computational cost of deep learning meth- with a high threat level. Hence, we add a property Heterogeneity
ods, an acclaimed machine learning method, Random Forest, is to express the proportions of three kinds of elements inside the
employed to perform accurate threat level classification without alert subgraph and how they are connected.
any labor. 2) Global Perspective: In addition to the internal features
 Random forest significantly enhances the generalization ca- of alert subgraphs, the correlation between alerts also reveals
pability and stability of classification models by aggregating their threat levels. Fig. 7 depicts a host-level AIG from the hostpredictions from multiple decision trees. It is robust against over- level dataset presented in Section V-A, which is produced by
fitting, tolerant to noise, and capable of parallel training without an international financial institution. Alerts of different threat
requiring extensive parameter tuning. Due to these advantages, levels are marked with distinct colors. The following intuitions
its overall performance surpasses that of most single-classifier can be derived from this figure:
approaches. In the field of network security, random forest has Intuition 3 (Aggregation): Alert subgraphs with the same
been successfully applied to various classification tasks, such threat level are prone to cluster. In Fig. 7, there are five distinct
as traffic analysis [12], malicious behavior analysis [13], and clusters with various threat levels, i.e., areas C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 , and
WU et al.: ALERT2VEC: ELIMINATING ALERT FATIGUE BY EMBEDDING SECURITY ALERTS THROUGH SUBGRAPH LEARNING 661

 also utilized when the pre-trained node embedding is demanded
 in the following properties.
 Thus, we first compute a pre-trained node embedding set
 through node2vec. Since the number of alert subgraphs’ nodes
 is not fixed, it will lead to unsolvable variable-length vector
 calculations if the local neighborhood vLn directly concatenates
 all node embeddings inside alert subgraph Ai . Hence, vLn is
 described as the average embedding of all nodes’ embeddings
 in the subgraph, as the following equation exhibits.
 1
 n
 (i)
Fig. 7. An example of host-level AIG from the host-level dataset produced vLn = zk , zk ∈ S A (2)
by an international financial institution. Alerts are categorized by threat level n
 k=1
using a chromatic scheme: false positives (red), low-threat (blue), medium-threat
 (i)
(green), and high-threat (purple). The figure demonstrates clustering patterns, where n is the size of Ai ’s node set SA , and z means the prewith alerts of similar threat levels aggregating into five distinct clusters (C1-C5).
 trained node embedding through node2vec.
 Local Structure vLs is applied to indicate the inner edge information of an alert subgraph Ai . To catch the connection features
C5 . For the adversaries, they tend to attack the same significant among the alert subgraph’s node, we adopt a graph learning
target (e.g., passwd file) and even conduct similar actions to method named Anonymous Walking Embedding (AWE) [16] to
achieve it, since the exploit of the common vulnerability is derive the subgraph’s local structure property. AWE can assign
widely circulated. Hence, it results in that alert subgraphs with a low-dimensional vector representation to each graph through
the same threat level are connected by a shared object or action anonymous random walking in the graph. With the aid of AWE,
node, like areas C1 , C2 , C3 . Besides, false alerts also tend to we can obtain a graph embedding that represents internal path
cluster. False alerts are mainly caused by sensitive actions from a information without the influence of node type. Thus, vLs is the
privileged user, usually the administrator. Moreover, these sensi- output of the AWE method, as the following equation states.
tive actions occur successively when the administrator performs
the regular inspection. Therefore, it contributes to the connection vLs = AW E(Ai ) (3)
among partial false alerts through a shared subject node, like Heterogeneity vLh is designed for expressing the node type
areas C4 and C5 . information in Ai , since the number of heterogeneous nodes can
 In order to determine whether an alert subgraph belongs to a partially indicate the threat level, as detailed in Intuition 2. To
certain cluster and the threat level of the cluster, it is essential pursue vLh , first, it is essential to strive for the node embedding
to obtain information about its surrounding alert subgraphs that can represent its element type. Therefore, we perform a
in the AIG. Consequently, we leverage the property Global supervised node classification on AIG, where labels are the ele-
Neighborhood to express the surrounding node information and ment type, i.e., subject, action, or object. With the combination
the property Global Structure to indicate the surrounding edge of node2vec and random forest, we get the node embeddings that
information. can sufficiently express their element type. Then, considering all
 Intuition 4 (Position): The lower the threat level of an alert, the the three element types may potentially contribute to the threat
farther it is away from the malicious alert cluster. For example, in level, vLh is organized by the concatenation of each element
Fig. 7, the medium-level threat cluster C3 directly connects to the type’s cumulative embeddings, as shown below.
high-level cluster C2 , but the false alert cluster C4 (with the mark ⎡ ⎤
of “Not alert”) does not, and C5 even becomes an island. Thus, sn 
 an 
 on

we need a property Position to measure the distance between a vLh = ⎣ vs(i) , va(j) , vo(k) ⎦ (4)
 i j k
subgraph and other clusters in the AIG.
 To sum up, by inspecting the composition of alert subgraphs where sn , an , on are the number of subjects, actions, and objects,
and the correlation between various alert subgraphs, we found respectively. v denotes the node embedding with element label.
six properties that are significantly related to alert threat levels,
including local neighborhood, local structure, heterogeneity, C. Global Properties
global neighborhood, global structure, and position.
 Global Neighborhood vGn is utilized to express the surrounding node information of a given AS Ai on AIG. It can be
B. Local Properties decomposed into two steps, finding the surrounding nodes of
 Local Neighborhood vLn is leveraged to represent an alert Ai and computing vGn through these nodes.
 (i)
subgraph Ai ’s inner node information. To capture the node First, a neighbor node set SG is defined as the union of
features inside the alert subgraph, we adopt an acclaimed graph n-hop neighbors of each border node. The border node is in
learning method, node2vec [15], to generate each node’s embed- Ai but connected to the area outside Ai . Generally, n less than
dings. Node2vec can learn low-dimensional representations for three is adequate. Fig. 8 depicts a 2-hop neighbor node set of
nodes in a homogeneous graph by optimizing a neighborhood- a given Ai , where the subject node u1 and the action node u2
preserving objective. Due to the superiority of node2vec, it is are border nodes. Next, considering that vGn stands for the node
662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 Algorithm 1: Generate Anchor Subgraphs.
 Input: Alert Intelligence Graph G, anchor rate p
 Output: Set AS composed of anchor subgraphs
 1: Initialize set V to the node set of graph G.
 2: Initialize set AS to an empty set.
 3: Let n as the number of nodes in G.
 4: an = n ∗ p.
 5: while (V = φ) and (len(AS) ≤ an ) do
 6: Select a node v in V randomly.
 7: while (V = φ) and (v’s neighbor has been selected)
 do
 8: V = V − v.
 9: Reselect a node v in V randomly.
 10: end while
Fig. 8. An example of a 2-hop neighbor node set for a given alert subgraph
 11: Let Va as the set of all neighbor nodes of v.
Ai in AIG. The yellow area represents alert subgraph Ai and the green area 12: Va = Va + v
represents its 2-hop partial complement graph Āi . Nodes colored red are the 13: Let Ea as edges between nodes from Va in G.
subject elements, blue ones map to the action elements, and green ones stand
for the object elements.
 14: Let Ga as the graph composed of Va and Ea .
 15: AS = AS + Ga .
 16: V = V − Va .
 17: end while
information, like local neighborhood vLn , vGn can be derived 18: return AS
in a way similar to vLn , namely the average embedding of all
neighbor nodes’ embeddings as (5) presents.
 Subsequently, the embedding of each anchor subgraph Za can
 1 
 m
 (i)
 vGn = zk , zk ∈ S G , (5) be acquired by aggregating its nodes, such as the average of all
 m node embeddings pre-trained by node2vec. Finally, the position
 k=1
 property is formalized as the following equation:
 (i)
where m is the size of neighbor node set SG . The embedding of
 1 1
 n
neighbor node z is also computed by pre-training AIG through vGp = · Za(i) (7)
node2vec. n i di
 Global Structure vGs is devised for storing the surrounding where n is the number of anchor subgraphs, di means the average
connection information of Ai . First, we build the partial com- of the shortest path’s length from each node in Ai to the anchor
plement graph Āi , i.e., a subgraph composed of all nodes in subgraph.
 (i)
the neighbor set SG and their connections on AIG. In Fig. 8,
the graph delineated by the green background is an example D. Subgraph Representation
partial complement graph. Then, vGs of Ai is also computed by
AWE on Āi , since AWE can provide an embedding that purely Finally, the above six properties are concatenated to build the
expresses the graph’s connection information irrelevant to the representation of alert subgraph vAi , as formulated in (8).
node information. Thus, vGs is computed as follows. vAi = [vGn , vGs , vGp , vLn , vLs , vLh ] (8)
  
 vGs = AW E Āi (6) It is noted that the dimensions of all properties are not equal
 exactly since they make various contribution to identifying the
where Āi is the the partial complement graph of Ai . threat level. The best proportion of properties will be discussed
 Position vGp is adopted to measure the distance between alert in Section VI. Furthermore, the subgraph learning approach is
subgraph Ai and other parts on AIG. We introduce the anchor flexible. Namely, both node2vec for generating node embedding
subgraph as the global frame of reference, which is randomly and AWE for capturing structural information can be replaced
generated subgraphs from a AIG. Thus, this question can be by other similar methods according to the requirements when
solved by two processes, namely, randomly generating several extended to different working scenarios.
anchor subgraphs and computing the distance between the alert
subgraph and these anchor subgraphs. V. EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS
 The anchor subgraphs should be widely distributed on AIG
 A. Datasets
and cannot overlap, which is generated randomly based on
Algorithm 1. Line 6-10 selects a random seed node v, then a new To evaluate the practical efficacy of Alert2vec, we performed
anchor subgraph composed of v and its neighbors is produced experiments on three real-world datasets: two private datasets—
by line 11-16. The anchor rate p ∈ (0, 0.1] in line 4 controls the the Host-Level Dataset (HD) and the Network-Level Dataset
number of anchor subgraphs and is generally set to 0.03. (ND)—and one publicly available dataset, NIDS-Alert-Data
WU et al.: ALERT2VEC: ELIMINATING ALERT FATIGUE BY EMBEDDING SECURITY ALERTS THROUGH SUBGRAPH LEARNING 663

 TABLE I r Metapath2vec [20]: Likewise, Metapath2vec is used for
 THE STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF DATASETS
 producing the node embedding of heterogeneous graph.
 The subgraph vector is composed of the average embedding of its nodes.
 r Sub2vec [7]: Sub2vec extends Paragraph2vec [21] to learn
 subgraph embeddings and proposes two branches distinguished by the properties used, Sub2vec-N(using neighborhood property) and Sub2vec-S(using structural property). Besides, we merge embeddings from Sub2vec-N and
 Sub2vec-S as a new baseline named Sub2vec-NS.
 r SubGNN [8]: It is the state-of-the-art subgraph learning
 method that builds a subgraph neural network based on
(NAD) [17]. Their statistical information is exhibited in Table I.
 three kinds of channels.
HD collects all alerts of security devices deployed on hosts from
 To measure the effectiveness of alert embeddings yielded from
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for two months. Owing
 the above methods and Alert2vec, we leverage a supervised
to the careful configuration, there are 230 alerts in total. In
 classifiers, RF, and a clustering method, DBSCAN, to conduct
contrast, ND contains alerts from security devices deployed in
 vector classification. Besides, accuracy, recall and f1-score are
the Tsinghua University’s network during a week. Since the strict
 applied as metrics to quantify performance. In order to ensure the
detection policy and the large scale of this network, there are over
 reliability, each result is the average value after three repetitions,
10 thousand alerts. For both datasets, the threat levels are labeled
 and its standard deviation is indicated after the sign “±”.
by detection systems and security analysts. NAD contains over
1.3 million labeled network intrusion detection system (NIDS)
alerts, grouped by external IP and signature, collected over 60 C. Implementation Details
days from a large institution’s perimeter. The threat levels of Alert2vec is implemented on python 3.6 with packets of
alerts in NAD are manually assessed and classified by security Sklearn and Networkx. When adopting supervised methods to
analysts into two categories: important and irrelevant. distinguish various alert embeddings, 70% of the data is utilized for training the classifier, and the left data is used for
B. Baselines testing. In the fully automatic mode, the random forest classifier
 adopts the following configuration: n_estimators=1000 (to en-
 To prove the superiority of Alert2vec in the task of alert
 sure robust ensemble learning), criterion=’gini’ (for impuritythreat-level identification for various security devices in a large
 based splitting), max_depth=None (allowing unconstrained tree
organization network, we compare Alert2vec with the following
 growth), min_samples_split=2, min_samples_leaf=1 (minimal
baselines.
 r Rule-based: It leverages several manually preset filtering splits for fine-grained partitioning), and max_features=’sqrt’
 (square-root-sampled features per split). For the semirules for classification, which is used to simulate the usual
 automatic mode, DBSCAN is parameterized with eps=0.30
 processing of security workers in the real world.
 r AlertRank [2]: it is a scene-specific method designed for (neighborhood radius), min_samples=9 (core-point threshold),
 metric=’euclidean’ (distance measure), and leaf_size=30 (opidentifying severe alerts for online service systems through
 timized nearest-neighbor search efficiency).
 XGboost and LSTM.
 r Context2vector [5]: This method constructs various alerts In addition, AlertRank cannot be fully reproduced in implementation. The full version of AlertRank includes 12 kinds
 into a security event sequence and computes an anomalous
 of features with a total of 40 dimensions. Due to its scenescore for each alert based on the contextual bias to find
 specific feature engineering, KPI anomaly features (containing
 critical alerts.
 r DeepCase [4]: Likewise, it is also an event-sequence- 13-dimensional features) are missing in all datasets. Therefore,
 only 27-dimensional features can be leveraged, compared to the
 based alert analysis method but stresses aggregating similar
 full version.
 alerts.
 r StreamCluster [18]: It proposes a hybrid approach combin- Furthermore, an additional step is added to make DeepCase
 perform threat-level identification since DeepCase is merely
 ing stream clustering and supervised learning to effectively
 designed for aggregating similar alerts initially. Namely, it is
 classify alerts generated by network intrusion detection
 necessary to manually determine the threat level of the resulting
 systems.
 r ActiveLearning [19]: It explores the use of active learn- similar alert clusters, just like the process of the semi-automated
 version of Alert2vec.
 ing techniques to enhance the accuracy and efficiency of
 network intrusion detection system alert classification.
 VI. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
 Besides, to valid the effectiveness of our subgraph learning
algorithm for threat-level identification, we compare Alert2vec In this section, we aim to answer the following questions.
with the following subgraph representation methods. Q1 Does Alert2vec have better performance in identifying
 r Structure2vec [6]: Since Structure2vec is designed to gen- threat levels of alerts?
 erate node embeddings, we aggregate the subgraph’s node Q2 Does Alert2vec propose a better subgraph learning
 embeddings as the representation. method for generating alert embedding?
664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE II TABLE III
 ACCURACY COMPARISON BETWEEN ALERT2VEC AND OTHER BASELINE THE TESTING ACCURACY FOR DIFFERENT PROPERTIES
 METHODS

 Q3 How much can each property contribute to the result? in a semi-automatic mode to simulate the accuracy during the
 Q4 How to allocate proportions of properties in vAi ? start-up process of collecting labeled data. Then run the model
 in a fully automatic mode to pursue final accuracy.
 Q1: Does Alert2vec have better performance in identifying The overall results of all baselines and Alert2vec are shown in
threat levels of alerts? Fig. 9. Alert2vec outperforms other baselines on both datasets,
 with the best accuracy of 94.7% on ND and 95.6% on HD. Fully
 To evaluate the effectiveness of Alert2vec in assessing secu- automatic Alert2vec gains the best accuracy since it commendrity alert threat levels, we compared its classification accuracy ably leverages the features of all properties. Semi-automatic
with baseline methods (Table II). Alert2vec achieved superior Alert2vec performs inevitably worst as an unsupervised method,
performance across two private datasets (ND: 94.7%; HD: but it still plays a vital role in quickly collecting labelled data
95.6%) and one public dataset (NAD: 99.1%), demonstrating when adopting in the real world.
superior applicability. The following section analyzes these Compared to the first two methods, Structure2vec and Metapresults in comparison with baseline models. ath2vec, it indicates that simply aggregating node embeddings as
 First, it reveals that the rule-based method exhibit limited ef- the subgraph vector is not available, regardless of the complexity
fectiveness, as their static rules are only applicable to a subset of of the node embedding. Though, in addition to neighborhood
alerts. Furthermore, when comparing AlertRank with Alert2vec, information, Structure2vec and Metapath2vec consider nodes’
it can be derived that single-scenario methods underperform in surrounding structure and heterogeneous information respeccross-scenario settings due to insufficient scenario-specific fea- tively, they still lose abundant local and global features of
ture representation and excessive model specialization. Then, to subgraphs.
further demonstrate Alert2vec’s superiority in graphically repre- Results on three kinds of Sub2vec models reveal that partial
senting alert correlations, we compared it with Context2vec and information of subgraphs is not adequate for classification.
DeepCase. As event sequence-based methods, both DeepCase Sub2vec-N preserves the local neighborhood property for suband Context2vec can only capture limited linear correlations graph, while Sub2vec-S extracts the local structure property.
from chronologically ordered alerts. Moreover, DeepCase un- Then, Sub2vec-NS concatenates embeddings from these two
derperforms Context2vec due to its focus on aggregating similar models. Due to the lack of global and heterogeneous informasecurity events rather than classifying alert threat levels. Finally, tion, these methods cannot competently determine the threat
we evaluate Alert2vec’s versatility through comparison with level of alert subgraphs.
two state-of-the-art alert classification methods: StreamCluster In comparison with the best model, SubGNN, Alert2vec has
and ActiveLearning. While these methods employ clustering an accuracy improvement of 4% on HD and 3% on ND. Although
and active learning techniques respectively to optimize random SubGNN considers structure, neighbor, and position properties
forest classifiers using small-scale training datasets (thereby for subgraph representations, the computation way of these
reducing dependency on labeled samples), both remain heavily properties is not proper for alert subgraphs. On the one hand,
reliant on manual feature engineering. Consequently, although SubGNN cannot incorporate the alert subgraph’s heterogeneous
they achieve strong performance on the NAD dataset, their effec- information into the representation. On the other hand, it is
tiveness significantly degrades when applied to other scenarios mainly devised for non-trivial subgraphs, focusing on the remote
(ND and HD). information when computing global neighborhood and structure
 Unlike baseline methods, Alert2vec’s graph-based framework properties. However, the surrounding information is more vital
captures both alert-level and element-level correlations, achiev- for alert subgraphs as introduced in Section IV.
ing superior effectiveness and versatility.

 Q2: Does Alert2vec propose a better subgraph learning Q3: How much can each property contribute to results?
method for generating alert embedding?
 To investigate the influence of each property when generating
 To measure the effectiveness of our customized subgraph the alert representation, we conduct several experiments, as
representation method, we replace it with other subgraph learn- Table III exhibits. Each time only a vector generated by one
ing baselines mentioned in Section V-B, and compare the final property is used to classify the threat level through random
performance. As Section III-E stated, we first run the model forest.
WU et al.: ALERT2VEC: ELIMINATING ALERT FATIGUE BY EMBEDDING SECURITY ALERTS THROUGH SUBGRAPH LEARNING 665

Fig. 9. Performance comparison between Alert2vec and other subgraph learning methods, in terms of accuracy, recall, and f1-score.

 In the first two experiments, the global and local neighborhoods achieve relatively higher accuracy than other properties,
about 91% on the ND and 92.7% on HD. It declares the significance of surrounding and inner nodes’ information to identify
threat levels for an alert subgraph, since alerts with the same
level are prone to cluster and even partially overlap, as stated in
Section IV. In contrast, the global and local structures provide
the worst performance due to the limited capability for graph
structure to express distinguished features. However, results on
HD are better than those on ND. It is attributed to the higher
complexity of host-level alert subgraphs. Alerts in the host
scenario can be triggered by multiple behaviors, causing more
complicated subgraph structures, which tends to be a high-level
threat.
 Moreover, although results of position and heterogeneity are
not the best, it still demonstrates their effectiveness in identifying
threat levels. The position property can measure the distance
between the alert subgraph and other potential malicious clusters
 Fig. 10. The accuracy results of various dimension settings. The area of each
on AIG, which is a vital feature mentioned in Section IV. As for colored bar represents the proportion of the corresponding property’s dimension
heterogeneity, it can reveal the differences in the composition of in the alert vector.
heterogeneous elements within the subgraph. Especially on HD,
it shows the superiority for identifying threat levels of complex
alert subgraphs. Q4: How to allocate proportions of properties in vAi ?
 Finally, the best accuracy on all properties, namely, the com- Since each property may contribute to the result to a varying
plete Alert2vec, demonstrates the essentiality of combining the extent, vector dimensions of all properties should be adjusted
above six properties to perform alert classification. What’s more, according to their weights. To pursue a proper setting, we
the complete Alert2vec can provide more stable performance conduct six experiments as Fig. 10 depicts. The proportion of
with the slightest standard deviation. each property is measured as the colored bar’s area.
666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 11. Alert2vec operates as a plug-and-play module behind security devices, it can processe security alerts as subgraphs and analyzes threat levels via Fig. 12. A practical example of an AIG derived from the ND dataset. The
alert intelligence graphs. AIG aggregates alerts centered on the victim IP 166.***.***.22. Alerts in the
 red-labeled regions C1 and C2 are classified as high-risk, while others are labeled
 medium-risk or low-risk.

 The first experiment is a benchmark, where the proportion
of all properties is equal. The performance on HD increases i) Data Quality: The model’s performance heavily relies
slightly when the proportion of global and local neighbor- on the quality and completeness of historical alert data, as it
hood properties is increased to 56% totally. While the accu- constructs a large-scale alert intelligence graph. Short-term or
racy decreases when raising the weight of global and local fragmented datasets may introduce sampling bias, degrading
structure properties, the position property, the heterogeneity performance. For optimal results, at least one month of conproperty in experiment 3, 4, 5, respectively. It indicates that the tinuous alert data is recommended to capture recurring attack
neighborhood information can provide more valid features for patterns (e.g., periodic scanning, weekend anomalies).
classification. ii) Time-Series Alert Filtering Deficiency: While Alert2vec
 The best performance is presented in the final experiment, effectively correlates discrete alerts across security devices (e.g.,
where dimensions of vGn , vLn , vGs , vLs , vGp , vLh are 128, IDS, firewalls), it struggles to suppress redundant or false alerts
128, 52, 52, 96, 128, respectively. The comparison of experiment in time-series anomaly detection. This limitation arises because
6 and experiment 2 demonstrates that too large proportion for the input representation of time-series includes only timestamps
neighborhood information may skew the classifier, leading to ti and indicator deviations xi , omitting critical contextual elemisjudgment in the condition that other information is essential ments (e.g., subject, object, action)—essential for constructing
to determine the threat level. In contrast, the dimensions setting alert subgraphs and alert intelligence graphs. Consequently,
in experiment 6 can sufficiently integrate the valid information Alert2vec cannot classify time-series alerts effectively. Thus,
of each property. filtering alerts in time-series-based alerts (e.g., CPU usage,
 memory consumption) remains an open challenge.
 VII. DISCUSSION
A. Extension of Alert2vec C. Case Study

 Alert2vec can be used as a plug-in attached to different Fig. 12 presents a practical example of an alert intelligence
security devices. Once an alert is produced by a security device, it graph derived from the ND dataset, where IP addresses are parcan be formulated as an alert subgraph by extracting the subject, tially anonymized (e.g., 166.***.***.22) to protect user privacy.
object, and action nodes, as Section III-C stated. Then, as Fig. 11 The alert intelligence graph aggregates alerts centered on the vicshows, alert2vec can provide the threat level of this alert and tim IP 166.***.***.22. Alerts in the red-labeled regions C1 and
the alert intelligence graph. Thus, Alert2vec can be directly C2 are classified as high-risk, while others are labeled mediumconcatenated behind security devices as a plug-in. Furthermore, risk or low-risk. In case C1, the same SOCKS proxy transmission
Alert2vec has a flexible framework. There are two fundamen- behavior triggers a low-threat alert for IP 45.***.***.250 but a
tal steps when obtaining six properties in subgraph learning, high-risk alert for IP 49.***.***.104. The latter is attributed to
namely, the computation of node and structural embeddings. its concurrent high-threat weak password authentication attack
Targeted at alert classification, our implementation of Alert2vec against the victim. Alert2vec can evaluate contextual threat relaapplies node2vec and AWE for generating the pre-trained node tionships through correlation of attacker-associated nodes, idenembedding and structural embedding, respectively. They can be tifying high-risk behaviors and empowering security teams to efreplaced by other similar methods according to requirements ficiently mitigate malicious IP operations. In case C2, an HTTP
when transferring Alert2vec to other problem scenarios. flood from IP 193.***.***.211 is labeled medium-risk, whereas
 the same behavior from IP 166.***.***.83 is flagged highrisk. The alert intelligence graph reveals that 166.***.***.83
B. Limitation was previously targeted by a high-risk Remote Access Trojan
 Although Alert2vec demonstrates superior performance in from IP 117.***.***.93. By tracing attacker-node associations,
alert classification across multiple security devices, it has two Alert2vec escalates the threat assessment, reminding administrakey limitations: tors that the attacking IP 166.***.***.83 may be a compromised
WU et al.: ALERT2VEC: ELIMINATING ALERT FATIGUE BY EMBEDDING SECURITY ALERTS THROUGH SUBGRAPH LEARNING 667

internal node needing intervention. These examples demonstrate and network-level security devices, Alert2vec proposes a kind
Alert2vec’s capability to correlate alert components, prioritize of alert intelligence graph that can represent the correlation of
critical alerts, and mitigate alert fatigue for network operators. heterogeneous alerts from a fine-grained perspective and has an
 acceptable scale. The alert intelligence graph allows correlations
 VIII. RELATED WORK among alerts to be fully exhibited.

 In this section, we described the limitations of previous works
and complemented the discussion on related work here in terms C. Subgraph Representation
of alert fatigue elimination, alert correlation, and subgraph rep- To perform the threat-level identification automatically, there
resentation. need a graph learning method to characterize heterogeneous alert
 subgraphs. Previous works of graph learning mainly focused
A. Eliminating Alert Fatigue on node embedding [6], [32], [33] or network embedding [34],
 [35], which is unavailable for generating subgraph embedding.
 In order to combat alert fatigue, many efforts have been Recently, Yanardag et al. [36] and Narayanan et al. [37] conmade in various scenarios. Recently, Zhong et al. [22] mined ducted subgraph representation through Word2Vec by treating
previous’ operation traces to construct a state machine for alert sub-structures in graphs as words simply, losing a lot of structure
classification on IDS and firewall logs. Laszka et al. [23] ex- and type information of heterogeneous subgraphs. Adhikari
tended strategic threshold-selection work to mitigate the threat et al. [7] built subgraph embedding based on local neighborposed by spear-phishing attacks. Hassan et al. [1] leveraged hood and structure properties. However, they were unable to
system provenance graph to conduct single-host level alert triage capture the global information and heterogeneous property of
process. Zhao et al. [2] adopted multiple scene-specific features alert subgraphs, which cannot generate well-expressed embedto identify severe alerts for online service systems, such as server dings. Meng et al. [9] performed subgraph evolution prediction
KPI. Hassan et al. [3] introduced tactical provenance graphs on fixing-size subgraphs, which is invalid for variable-length
to recognize the advanced persistent related threats produced alert subgraphs. Alsentzer et al. [8] introduced a channel-based
by EDR. Aminanto et al. [24] developed an alert classification subgraph neural network for subgraphs with non-trivial internal
method using the feature engineering approach based on the topology, but it cannot extract the heterogeneous node informa-
Isolation Forest, leveraging over 20 field features. Similarly, Ban tion in alert subgraphs. In short, existing subgraph learning methet al. [25] also constructed the classification method in a fea- ods are devised for data mining without specific considerations
ture engineering way, however, through six supervised machine for our scenarios, making them incompetent at extracting all
learning methods, such as support vector machines. To sum up, features of alert subgraphs. Consequently, Alert2vec proposes a
these works used scene-specific features or methods on a given customized subgraph representation approach, which can genscenario, which were not sufficient to perform alert classification erate a well-expressed alert embedding since it catches all six
for heterogeneous alerts generated by various security devices properties of the alert subgraph, namely, local neighborhood,
in a large organizational network. To reduce the burden for the global neighborhood, local structure, global structure, position,
security team to a maximum extent, we propose Alert2vec, a and heterogeneity.
general alert classification framework that can be applied to most
of distinct security devices with heterogeneous alert reports.
 D. Applied Graph Learning for Cybersecurity

B. Alert Correlation Graph learning encompasses machine learning models and
 methods specifically tailored for graph-structured data. These
 As mentioned above, the similarity and context among alerts techniques perform prediction and classification tasks by learncan help assess an alert’s threat level. To capture this informa- ing the topological properties, node features, and edge relation, a way to correlate multiple alerts is required. There are tionships within graphs. Given that graph representations can
two typical approaches, sequence-based [4], [5] [26], [27] and effectively model the contextual relationships inherent in attack
graph-based [1], [28], [29], [30]. The sequence-based method scenarios, graph learning has been increasingly adopted in cyarranges the alerts in chronological order, and utilizes deep bersecurity research in recent years. For instance, in host-based
learning methods to capture the contextual information between intrusion detection systems, numerous studies have applied
alerts. For example, DeepCase [4] converted a bunch of alerts graph learning to perform deep analysis on provenance graphs
into a security event sequence and aggregated similar security constructed from system audit logs [29], [30], [38], [39], [40],
events through GRU [31]. However, such methods can only [41]. Similarly, this approach has been leveraged across diverse
present alerts in a simple linear way, losing the information of cybersecurity domains, such as network intrusion detection [42]
the complex interaction among elements of alerts. In contrast, and attack prediction [43], demonstrating consistent improvethe graph-based method is more appropriate for displaying non- ments in task performance.
linear correlations among alerts since it can represent the connection between any alert’s elements through edges. Nevertheless,
 IX. CONCLUSION
most current works employ the provenance graph for analysis,
which is only applicable to alerts generated in the host audit In this paper, we present a general alert classification framelog and has a vast scale. To make it suitable for both host-level work, Alert2vec, which can eliminate alert fatigue in both
668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

network-level and host-level scenarios. Alert2vec proposed a [20] Y. Dong, N. V. Chawla, and A. Swami, “metapath2vec: Scalable representhree-element-based extraction method to formalize heteroge- tation learning for heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. 23 rd ACM SIGKDD
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 135–144.
neous alert records produced by various security devices as alert [21] Q. Le and T. Mikolov, “Distributed representations of sentences and
subgraphs. Then all alert subgraphs are incorporated into an documents,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2014, pp. 1188–1196.
alert intelligence graph to capture their correlation. Addition- [22] C. Zhong, J. Yen, P. Liu, and R. F. Erbacher, “Automate cybersecurity data
 triage by leveraging human analysts’ cognitive process,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd
ally, a novel six-property-based subgraph representation method Int. Conf. Big Data Secur. Cloud, IEEE Int. Conf. High Perform. Smart
is devised to express prominent features of alert subgraphs. Comput., 2016, pp. 357–363.
Moreover, Alert2vec provides a flexible two-mode classification [23] A. Laszka, J. Lou, and Y. Vorobeychik, “Multi-defender strategic filtering
 against spear-phishing attacks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2016,
method, supporting semi-automatic and fully automatic threat pp. 537–543.
level identification. Finally, we conduct several experiments [24] M. E. Aminanto, L. Zhu, T. Ban, R. Isawa, T. Takahashi, and D. Inoue,
on both network-level and host-level datasets, validating the “Combating threat-alert fatigue with online anomaly detection using isolation forest,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process.: 26th Int. Conf., Sydney, NSW,
effectiveness of Alert2vec. Australia, 2019, pp. 756–765.
 [25] T. Ban, N. Samuel, T. Takahashi, and D. Inoue, “Combat security alert fa-
 REFERENCES tigue with AI-assisted techniques,” in Proc. Cyber Secur. Experimentation
 Test Workshop, 2021, pp. 9–16.
 [1] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with [26] S. Wu, B. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Fan, J. Yang, and J. Li, “Joint prediction on
 automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., security event and time interval through deep learning,” Comput. Secur.,
 San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 24–27, 2019, doi: 10.14722/ndss.2019.23349. vol. 117, 2022, Art. no. 102696.
 [2] N. Zhao et al., “Automatically and adaptively identifying severe alerts for [27] Y. Shen, E. Mariconti, P. A. Vervier, and G. Stringhini, “Tiresias: Predicting
 online service systems,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, security events through deep learning,” in Proc. 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 pp. 2420–2429. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 592–605.
 [3] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis [28] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. Venkatakrishnan,
 for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. 2020 IEEE Symp. “POIROT: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber
 Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189. threat hunting,” in Proc. 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
 [4] T. van Ede et al., “DEEPCASE: Semi-supervised contextual analysis of Secur., 2019, pp. 1795–1812.
 security events,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 522–539. [29] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “UNICORN:
 [5] J. Liu et al., “Context2Vector: Accelerating security event triage via Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,”
 context representation learning,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 146, 2022, 2020, arXiv: 2001.01525.
 Art. no. 106856. [30] S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based threats
 [6] L. F. Ribeiro, P. H. Saverese, and D. R. Figueiredo, “Struc2Vec: Learn- in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forening node representations from structural identity,” in Proc. 23 rd ACM sics Secur., vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022.
 SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 385–394. [31] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
 [7] B. Adhikari, Y. Zhang, N. Ramakrishnan, and B. A. Prakash, “Sub2Vec: decoder for statistical machine translation,” 2014, arXiv:1406.1078.
 Feature learning for subgraphs,” in Proc. Pacific-Asia Conf. Knowl. Discov. [32] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “Deepwalk: Online learning of
 Data Mining, 2018, pp. 170–182. social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 [8] E. Alsentzer, S. G. Finlayson, M. M. Li, and M. Zitnik, “Subgraph neural Discov. Data Mining, 2014, pp. 701–710.
 networks,” 2020, arXiv: 2006.10538. [33] D. Wang, P. Cui, and W. Zhu, “Structural deep network embedding,” in
 [9] C. Meng, S. C. Mouli, B. Ribeiro, and J. Neville, “Subgraph pattern neural Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016,
 networks for high-order graph evolution prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. pp. 1225–1234.
 Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3778–3787. [34] J. Tang, M. Qu, M. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Yan, and Q. Mei, “LINE: Large-
[10] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32, scale information network embedding,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. World
 2001. Wide Web, 2015, pp. 1067–1077.
[11] M. Ester et al., “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large [35] X. Wang, P. Cui, J. Wang, J. Pei, W. Zhu, and S. Yang, “Community
 spatial databases with noise,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data preserving network embedding,” in Proc. 31st AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 Mining, 1996, pp. 226–231. 2017, pp. 203–209.
[12] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic [36] P. Yanardag and S. Vishwanathan, “Deep graph kernels,” in Proc. ACM
 paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2015, pp. 1365–1374.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022. [37] A. Narayanan, M. Chandramohan, L. Chen, Y. Liu, and S. Saminathan,
[13] M. Sharif, J. Urakawa, N. Christin, A. Kubota, and A. Yamada, “Predicting “Subgraph2Vec: Learning distributed representations of rooted sub-graphs
 impending exposure to malicious content from user behavior,” in Proc. from large graphs,” 2016, arXiv:1606.08928.
 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., New York, NY, USA, 2018, [38] M. U. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. U. Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive
 pp. 1487–1501. approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation learn-
[14] B. Kondracki, B. A. Azad, O. Starov, and N. Nikiforakis, “Catching trans- ing,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2024,
 parent phish: Analyzing and detecting mitm phishing toolkits,” in Proc. pp. 3552–3570, doi: 10.1109/SP54263.2024.00139.
 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 36–50. [39] F. Yang, J. Xu, C. Xiong, Z. Li, and K. Zhang, “PROGRAPHER: An
[15] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for anomaly detection system based on provenance graph embedding,” in
 networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 4355–4372.
 Mining, 2016, pp. 855–864. [40] E. Manzoor, S. M. Milajerdi, and L. Akoglu, “Fast memory-efficient
[16] S. Ivanov and E. Burnaev, “Anonymous walk embeddings,” in Proc. Int. anomaly detection in streaming heterogeneous graphs,” in Proc. 22nd ACM
 Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 2186–2195. SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1035–1044.
[17] S. Ristov, “Nids alert data,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ [41] J. Zengy et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber
 ristov/nids-alert-data threat analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
[18] R. Vaarandi and A. Guerra-Manzanares, “Stream clustering guided su- Privacy, 2022, pp. 489–506.
 pervised learning for classifying NIDS alerts,” Future Gener. Comput. [42] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Towards early
 Syst., vol. 155, pp. 231–244, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www. and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X24000396 Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
[19] R. Vaarandi and A. Guerra-Manzanares, “Network IDS alert classifi- [43] Y. Liu and Y. Guo, “CL-AP2: A composite learning approach to atcation with active learning techniques,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 81, tack prediction via attack portraying,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 230,
 2024, Art. no. 103687. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect. 2024, Art. no. 103963. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.
 com/science/article/pii/S2214212623002715 org/CorpusID:271036299
WU et al.: ALERT2VEC: ELIMINATING ALERT FATIGUE BY EMBEDDING SECURITY ALERTS THROUGH SUBGRAPH LEARNING 669

 Songyun Wu received the BE degree in information Zhiliang Wang received the BE, ME, and PhD desecurity from Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, grees in computer science from Tsinghua University,
 China, in 2019, and the PhD degree in cybersecurity China, in 2001, 2003, and 2006 respectively. Curfrom Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2025. rently he is an associate professor in the Institute
 She is currently an Assistant Research Professor with for Network Sciences and Cyberspace with Tsinghua
 the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing. Her research University. His research interests include network
 interests include network security and applied ma- formal verification and testing, network architecture
 chine learning. and protocols, network measurement and monitoring.

 Chen Zhao is the Head of Security Engineering and
 Operations in Asian Development Bank (ADB). Chen
 Xiaoqing Sun received the BS degree from the Bei- Zhao and his team are responsible for IT Security
 jing University of Posts and Telecommunications, in infrastructure engineering, monitoring and incident
 2016 and the PhD degree from the Department of response activities at ADB. Prior to joining ADB,
 Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua Uni- he led security operations at venture capital firm
 versity, in 2023. She is currently a researcher in Sequoia Capital. He started his career 14 years ago as
 Alibaba Cloud. Her reseaerch interests include Cloud a cyber security consultant in PwC Hong Kong and
 Computing and Cybersecurity. US, providing security and risk services for Fortune
 100 companies in several continents.

 Jiahai Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Enhuan Dong received the BE degree from the BSc degree in computer science from Beijing Tech-
 Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in nology and Business University, and the MSc and
 2013, and the PhD degree from Tsinghua University, PhD degrees in computer science from Tsinghua
 Beijing, China, in 2019. He was a visiting PhD student University, Beijing, China. He is currently a professor
 with the University of Goettingen, in 2016-2017. He with Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace,
 is currently an assistant research professor in the Insti- Tsinghua University. His research interests include
 tute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua network management, network measurement, net-
 University. His research interests include network work security, Internet routing, cloud computing, and
 security, network operations and network transport. Big Data applications.