3974 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 An Autoencoder and Double Random Forest-Based
 Intrusion Detection System for Unknown
 Attack Defense
 Chen Zhang , Lu Zheng , Huakun Huang , Member, IEEE, and Chunhua Su , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—With the rapid advancement of technology and the enable low-latency communication, which supports applications
growing prevalence of connected vehicle architectures, security such as autonomous driving, intelligent transportation systems
concerns in vehicle networks have become increasingly critical, (ITS), and in-vehicle entertainment [3]. By combining human
the vehicles are high-value assets. Thus, unauthorized intrusions
can pose substantial financial and safety risks. Although many driving behavior with machine intelligence, IoV contributes
researchers have employed deep learning techniques for vehicle significantly to the development of ITS [4], [5]. IoV relies on adnetwork intrusion detection, existing methods often struggle to vanced networks such as 5G to achieve efficient communication
efficiently extract network traffic features and handle unknown between vehicles and infrastructure, perceives the environment
or evolving malicious attacks. In this paper, we propose a novel
 through the fusion of multiple sensors, and combines artificial
Internet of Vehicles intrusion detection system (IDS) that combines an autoencoder (AE) with a double random forest (DRF). intelligence and Big Data to optimize decision-making and
Our two-layer architecture is designed to accurately distinguish ensure data security and user privacy.
between unknown attacks, known attacks, and normal traffic. We IoV has been deployed in various smart cities where vehicles
evaluated the performance of the proposed DRF algorithm against collect and transmit traffic data via onboard sensors and consix traditional machine learning and deep learning methods and
 nected devices [6], cloud servers process these data and provide
compared it with relevant state-of-the-art solutions. The experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms existing real-time insights used to enhance smart city operations through
approaches. traffic data collection [7], [8], improve traffic management by
 adjusting traffic lights and optimizing route planning [9], support
 Index Terms—Stratified K-fold, autoencoder, double random
forest, IDS, IoV. autonomous driving safety and decision-making with real-time
 environmental data [3] and enable in-vehicle entertainment and
 I. INTRODUCATION connectivity features [10], [11]. However, alongside these benefits, IoV faces critical security threats due to the open nature
 HE Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is an advanced network
T architecture that integrates vehicles, pedestrians, transportation infrastructure, and cloud computing resources through
 of vehicle networks, which makes them vulnerable to malicious
 attacks.
 Despite advancements in the IoV domain, cybersecurity rean Internet-based platform. It facilitates real-time information
 mains a paramount concern since vehicles, as high value mobile
exchange and intelligent decision-making by leveraging mobile
 nodes, expose a broad and shifting attack surface across V2V
communications, sensing technology, data processing, and arti-
 (Vehicle-to-Vehicle) and V2I (Vehicle-to-Infrastructure) chanficial intelligence [1], [2]. This integration enhances traffic mannels [12]. The heterogeneous mix of onboard sensors, ECUs
agement, road safety, and overall transportation efficiency. Mod-
 (Electronic Control Unit), and wireless links creates multiple
ern telematics heavily relies on 5G and future 6G networks to
 vulnerabilities from spoofing and man-in-the-middle to denial-
 Received 10 February 2025; revised 9 May 2025, 25 June 2025, and 28 of-service that adversaries can exploit as vehicles traverse differ-
July 2025; accepted 19 September 2025. Date of publication 23 September ent network domains. In 2024, researchers exploited a Kia web
2025; date of current version 6 March 2026. This work was supported in part portal flaw to remotely unlock, track, and start millions of vehiby the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (C) under Grant 23K11103, in part by the Natural Science Foundation cles using only licenseplate scans; similarly, attackers leveraged
of Guangdong Province, China under Grant 2025A1515011755, in part by the a Man-in-the-Middle vulnerability at Tesla charging stations to
Key Laboratory of Cognitive Radio and Information Processing, Ministry of capture owner credentials and added unauthorized phone keys,
Education under Grant CRKL240204, and in part by SCAT Foundation under
Grant for Researchers. The review of this article was coordinated by Dr. Jun granting remote access and ignition. Traditional IDSs, rooted
Cai. (Corresponding author: Chunhua Su.) in static rule sets, struggle to keep pace with novel and rapidly
 Chen Zhang and Chunhua Su are with the Department of Computer Science evolving attack vectors, rendering them ineffective against zeroand Engineering, The University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu 965-8580, Japan
(e-mail: chsu@u-aizu.ac.jp). day threats [13], [14]. Even IDS approaches leveraging deep
 Lu Zheng is with the School of Computer and Communication, Lanzhou learning often falter when confronted with previously unseen
University of Technology, Lanzhou 730050, China. malicious patterns, generating high rates of false positives and
 Huakun Huang is with the School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China. false negatives that undermine trust in their alerts [15], [16].
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2025.3613343 Compounding these challenges are the real-time processing

 0018-9545 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE 3975

 attacks, and compares the differences between our research and
 other algorithms.
 In [17] proposed TLOC, which achieves efficient intrusion
 detection by optimizing CNN (Convolutional Neural Network)
 and transfer learning, but it is mainly aimed at static environments and lacks the ability to process and dynamically update
 unknown traffic. Our research actively detects unknown traffic
 and dynamically optimizes training data, significantly improving its adaptability to open scenarios. [18] proposed LIDS, an
 LSTM-based IDS for detecting forged emergency messages
 in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs). The core approach
Fig. 1. Traffic composition in the IoV. is to collect the time series of traffic parameters of vehicles,
 use LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) classifiers to identify
requirements and resource constraints of in-vehicle hardware,
 traffic event patterns, and judge the authenticity of emergency
which limit the deployment of more complex or computemessages by time series features. However, their method mainly
intensive security mechanisms, leaving intelligent transportation
 relies on historical data training. At the same time, insufficient
systems exposed to increasingly sophisticated cyber threats.
 data quality optimization may lead to performance degradation
 To address these challenges, we propose an adaptive IDS
 under high noise or imbalanced data. [19] proposed NIDS, which
for the IoV that continuously learns from network traffic, via
 balanced the dataset through a hybrid sampling algorithm (coma dynamic unknown attack detection module to uncover novel
 bining ADASYN and RENN) and selected important features
threats beyond the reach of traditional rule-based IDSs, refines
 using random forest and Pearson correlation analysis. The model
known-attack detection by deeply analyzing vehicle behavior
 extracted spatial features through CNN and combined them with
and employing a hierarchical classification mechanism and im-
 BiGRU to capture long-distance dependency information and
plements a multi-layer defense framework categorizing traffic
 achieve efficient classification of intrusion behaviors. However,
into normal, known malicious and unknown malicious, as shown
 they only focused on the classification of known traffic and did
in Fig. 1, with specialized detection mechanisms at each layer
 not perform hierarchical optimization on data quality.
to overcome single-layer limitations and ensure robust real-time
 In [20] proposed AUIDS, a deep learning automatic update
security for intelligent transportation systems. The following is
 IDS based on cloud-edge-car collaboration, which can detect
our contribution:
 r We propose CAIDS (CDDRF-AE—IDS), which consists known and unknown attacks in open scenarios. The system
 extracts traffic features through 1D-CNN and multi-head attenof an AE module for detecting unknown traffic and a
 tion mechanism, and processes unknown attack traffic through
 CDDRF model for detecting known traffic, which can
 two-layer filters and clustering algorithm, generating new data
 effectively identify all traffic in open scenarios with high
 sets to update attack identifiers, thereby improving detection
 detection capability.
 r We use AE that is actively updated to detect unknown traffic accuracy and adaptability. In contrast, their research relies on
 cloud support for update efficiency, and the optimization of data
 and update the training set using the normal traffic finally
 quality and system performance is relatively insufficient. [21]
 filtered by CAIDS to improve the detection accuracy, which
 proposed HDA-IDS, which is centered on an innovative anomaly
 effectively avoids the impact of unknown traffic on IoV.
 r We propose CDDRF (Confidence Driven Dual Random detection model CL-GAN, which combines CNN-LSTM with
 GAN (Generative Adversarial Network) to establish a normal
 Forest), which utilizes hierarchical k-folding to classify
 behavior baseline. Experiments show that HDA-IDS improves
 the training set into a high-confidence dataset and a lowthe performance of other methods by an average of 5% on
 confidence dataset based on the confidence threshold r. We
 NSL-KDD, CICIDS2018, and Bot-IoT datasets. However, this
 obtain two random forest models of ar , br , which are voted
 method has weak adaptability to unknown traffic in dynamic
 on to get the best result. The actual ability of the model is
 scenarios and lacks a data quality optimization mechanism. In
 verified by several comparisons and far exceeds current
 addition, HDA-IDS relies more on baseline data generated by
 state-of-the-art algorithms.
 GAN and may be insufficiently robust to large-scale complex
 The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
 traffic in open scenarios.
reviews related research on intrusion detection in IoV. Section III
 In [22] proposed SupEnML, which integrates a supervised
presents the CAIDS framework and its operation. Section IV
 learning framework with a feature selection method, with the
explains the AE model for unknown attack detection. Section V
 goal of optimizing detection performance by minimizing false
details the theoretical model of the CDDRF classifier. Section VI
 positives and improving accuracy. However, this method still
provides experimental evaluations and performance analysis.
 mainly focuses on static data analysis and lacks dynamic detec-
Section VII concludes the study.
 tion capabilities and active adaptability for unknown traffic. [23]
 proposed IoT-PRIDS, which establishes a baseline of normal
 II. RELATED WORK device behavior through feature mapping of network packets to
 This section discusses the research on IoV intrusion detection detect anomalies and potential intrusions. The model uses packet
in recent years, especially the detection of unknown and known header fields to create “representations”, which effectively
3976 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

reduces data complexity and can detect anomalies in IoT (Inter- the CAIDS framework, which includes the identification of nornet of Things) environments in real-time with low computational mal traffic, known attacks, and unknown traffic. We describe the
overhead. However, IoT-PRIDS only models normal traffic and process of using the AE algorithm [27], [28] used in CAIDS to
lacks an update mechanism for unknown flows. Its lightweight identify known and unknown traffic, and the use of the CDDRF
design also results in poor adaptability to complex attacks and to identify normal and attack traffic in known traffic. The overall
subpar performance. framework is shown in Fig. 2.
 In [24] proposed ENCSA-PSO, which combines the search
strategy advantages of CSA (Cuckoo Search Algorithm) and A. Unknown Flow
the fast convergence ability of PSO (Particle Swarm Optimiza-
 In traffic filtering of IoV, we first use the AE to learn the
tion), selects the global best features from a large search space,
 distribution of “normal traffic” within the feature space, which
and classifies these features using a random forest classifier,
 serves as our sole known reference. We input a sample set of norwhile eliminating feature bias through weighted minimum mean
 mal traffic into the AE network, extracting and reconstructing a
square processing. This approach focuses mainly on feature
 set of feature representations X t = {X1t , X2t , X3t , . . . } through
selection and classification problems, but lacks adaptability
 the encoding-decoding process. When the entire traffic set
to handle dynamic traffic. [25] proposed HyperVision which
 X = {X1 , X2 , X3 , . . . } is reconstructed by the same network,
captures encrypted traffic interaction patterns using a memory
 we obtain X r = {X1r , X2r , X3r , . . . }. For each traffic record,
graph and unsupervised graph learning based on connectivwe calculate the difference metric Φ = D(Xi , Xir ) between
ity, sparsity and statistical features. This enables detection of
 the original and the reconstructed data, with commonly used
malicious flows without labeled datasets but the model canindicators including the mean squared error (MSE). If the error
not update dynamically to accommodate shifting traffic char-
 Φ for a particular flow exceeds the threshold P , it is deemed
acteristics and often hits resource bottlenecks in large-scale
 to deviate significantly from the distribution of normal samples
environments. CAIDS addresses these challenges by actively
 and may represent an unknown flow; otherwise, it is classified
refreshing its training set and introducing a layered data quality
 as known flow. We have set aside a verification set of normal
optimization framework that balances processing efficiency with
 flows that is independent of the training set. We first reconstruct
robust detection accuracy across diverse and evolving traffic
 this batch of actual normal flows using the same AE to obtain
scenarios. [26] proposed MLMCS, a framework that includes (val)
 the corresponding error distribution {Φj }. Subsequently, we
four steps: data preprocessing, feature space partitioning to
 apply statistical methods to determine the mean μ of the error
reduce model complexity, hierarchical binary classification of
 distribution, adding several times the standard deviation σ (for
each feature subspace based on a multilayer classifier system
 example, μ + 3σ) to establish the upper limit. In this manner,
(MLCS) based on a GMDH neural network, and merging clasthe threshold P is derived from the statistical analysis of the
sification results based on the Dempster-Shafer theory to reduce
 normal flow error, allowing for a more reliable identification of
overfitting. However, the MLMCS model is complex, requires
 unknown flows. This process further aids in classifying known
the feature space to be divided into multiple subspaces, and relies
 flows to ensure that various disguised attacks do not infiltrate
on multi-layer classifiers, and the computational cost may be
 the normal network.
high.
 To address threshold drift, we now maintain a rolling buffer of
 Existing IDSs are generally designed for static environments,
 the most recent normal-traffic reconstruction errors and, at fixed
lack the ability to adapt to dynamic changes and unknown traffic,
 intervals (for example, every hour or after collecting 500 new
have insufficient data quality optimization, rely on historical
 normal samples), recompute P so that it marks the upper bound
data for training, and possess complex models with high comof “normal” variation. As new errors arrive, we add them to the
putational overhead. To address these challenges, we propose
 buffer and drop the oldest ones, then set P to the point below
CAIDS, an integrated adaptive IDS. CAIDS actively detects
 which 95% of these errors fall. This sliding-window update
unknown traffic through the AE module and efficiently idenallows P to track gradual shifts in vehicle behavior or network
tifies known traffic in combination with the CDDRF model.
 conditions without overreacting to transient spikes.
Additionally, stratified k-fold cross-validation is employed to
optimize data quality, and the voting mechanism of the dual
random forest model is utilized to improve detection accuracy B. Known Flow
and robustness. The system performs well in open and dynamic In stage 2, CDDRF calls two classification sub-models ar and
 r
network environments, significantly enhancing the adaptability, b for each traffic sample, and each model outputs a category
accuracy, and efficiency of intrusion detection while overcoming probability ap and bp . We extract the maximum probability
many shortcomings of existing methods. value from each of these two category probability, recorded as
 max(ap ) and max(bp ), and then compare them, marking the
 larger one as M˙ax. The category label corresponding to M˙ax
 III. SYSTEM DESIGN is the final decision, and the traffic is judged as “normal” or
 This section introduces in-depth how CAIDS solves the prob- “known attack”. All traffic judged as abnormal will be discarded,
lem of unknown attacks, such as zero-day attacks, which are and only normal traffic is allowed to pass.
highly harmful to the IoV, and the problem of adversaries using To reveal the generation mechanism of {ar , br }, Fig. 3 shows
various known attacks to invade the IoV architecture. We explain the entire processing flow. Assume that the traffic set to be
ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE 3977

Fig. 2. CAIDS System Framework.

Fig. 3. CDDRF Framework.

detected is X = {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn }. In stage a, the K-fold cross- A. Data Definition and Merging
validation strategy is used to divide X into K subsets to ensure We begin with two datasets: one containing only normal
the consistency of the feature distribution of each subset with the (benign) samples, and one containing only abnormal samples.
overall data. In stage b, the random forest model is trained with We define the benign dataset as:
K–1 subsets, and the remaining subset is used as the validation
  N0
set. The trained model is used to classify it and calculate the Dnormal = xi , 0 i=1 (1)
category probability of each sample. In stage c, the validation
set is switched cyclically until all subsets are predicted once, where xi ∈ Rd is the i-th feature vector (for instance, a netthereby obtaining a complete category probability prediction set. work flow record, system log embedding, etc.), and the label 0
In stage d, these probability results are aggregated into a vector indicates “normal”. We define the abnormal dataset as:
y dn . And map them one by one with the corresponding samples  N1
 Danomaly = xj , 1 j=1 (2)
Xn . Then in stage e, sort the probability values in y dn from
large to small, and adjust the order of the mapped samples syn- where xj ∈ Rd is the j-th feature vector, and the label 1 indicates
chronously to form a sorted sample sequence. Finally, in stage f, “unknown abnormal”. Then, Combine these two datasets into a
according to the preset threshold r, The samples with probability single dataset:
values greater than r in y dn are divided into high-confidence  N0 +N1
training subsets ar , and the samples with probability values D = Dnormal ∪ Danomaly = (xk , yk ) k=1 (3)
greater than r are divided into low-confidence training subsets
 With yk ∈ {0, 1}. Here, N = N0 + N1 is the total number of
br . Then, the random forest algorithm is used to train ar and
 samples.
br independently, and finally a hierarchical model {ar , br } is
obtained.
 B. Data Preprocessing
 Before training the model, we typically conduct a series of
 IV. CAIDS UNKNOWN MODEL data preprocessing steps:
 This section mainly establishes a mathematical model for the 1) High-Cardinality Feature Removal: If certain categorical
CAIDS model to identify known traffic and unknown traffic. features (e.g., IP addresses, host names, etc.) have extremely
This mechanism is called the unknown attack identification large cardinality, directly one-hot encoding them may lead to an
mechanism of the CAIDS model. The algorithm 1 shows the enormous feature space. We remove or transform those features.
main framework of AE. Denote the set of high-cardinality columns by Chigh . We drop
3978 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 Algorithm 1: AE Unknown Attack Identification. where μj and σj are the mean and standard deviation of the j-th
 

 Require: Dnormal , Danomaly , d, η feature across the dataset. Finally, we obtain Xscaled ∈ RN ×d .
 Ensure: Predicted labels ŷ for Dtest
 1: Combine datasets: D = Dnormal ∪ Danomaly D. PCA (Principal Component Analysis) Dimensionality
 2: Remove high-cardinality features Reduction
 
 3: One-hot encode categorical features Given the standardized data Xscaled ∈ RN ×d , compute via (9)
 4: Impute missing values with means and Eigen-Decomposition via (10).
 5: Xscaled ← Standardize(X)
 1  
 
 6: Compute Σ = N1 Xscaled Xscaled Σ = X  Xscaled ∈ R d ×d (9)
 N scaled
 7: Eigen-decompose Σ = V ΛV 
 8: Select k based on η Σ = V ΛV  (10)
 9: Xpca ← Xscaled Pk
 where Λ = diag(λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λd ) with λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ 0, and
 10: Xtrain , Xval ← Split(Xpca , y, only normal)
 V contains the corresponding eigenvectors. Then, choose the
 11: Xtest , ytest ← PrepareTestSet(D)
 smallest k such that
 12: Initialize θ k
 13: Optimize θ to minimize reconstruction loss on Xtrain λi
 i=1
 d
 ≥ Desired Ratio (11)
 14: τmse , ← ComputePercentiles(Xtrain , θ, η) i=1 λi
 15: for each xj ∈ Xtest do
 16: Compute ej , ej ← ReconstructionErrors(xj , θ) Let Pk = [v1 , v2 , . . . , vk ]. Project the data onto these k prin-
 17: if ej > τmse then cipal components.
 18: ŷj ← 1 Xpca = Xscaled Pk ∈ RN ×k (12)
 19: else
 20: ŷj ← 0 E. Dataset Processing
 21: end if
 22: end for Since we want the AE to learn only normal behavior, we
 return ŷ allocate only normal samples to training and validation.
 Ω0 = { i : yi = 0}, Ω1 = { i : yi = 1} (13)

them from D. We randomly split Ω0 into two disjoint sets for training and
 validation, Both contain only normal data (14). For evaluation,
 D ← D \ Chigh (4) we use test set have Normal and Abnormal (15).

 2) One-Hot Encoding: Let Ccat be the remaining categorical Xtrain = Xpca (Ω0,train ), Xval = Xpca (Ω0,val ) (14)
features. For each categorical feature c ∈ Ccat with m categories, Xtest = Xpca (Ω0 ∪ Ω1 ), ytest = y(Ω0 ∪ Ω1 ) (15)
we map it to an m-dimensional 0/1 vector (one-hot encoding).
 c → (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0) ∈ Rm (5) F. AE Construction Traing
 An AE is a neural network aiming to learn an identity
 This results in an expanded feature dimension. After this step,
 mapping.
all remaining features are numerical.
 3) Missing Value Imputation: Any missing values in the fθ : Rk → Rk with θ = (φ, ψ) (16)
numerical features can be imputed by their column mean. We 
replace each missing entry with: fθ (x) = Dψ Eφ (x) (17)
 1  r Eφ (x) : Encoder, transforms input x ∈ Rk to some hidx̂ = x (6)
 count of non-missing non-missing den representation h.
 r Dψ (h) : Decoder, maps h back to the same dimension as
 4) Final Feature Matrix: Eventually, we form a numerical x.
matrix and label vector. Where d is the new dimensionality For example, one might have hidden layers of size 64, 32,
after removing columns and performing one-hot encoding. 16 in the encoder, then mirror them (16, 32, 64) in the decoder,
  culminating in a k-dimensional output. We train only on normal
 X ∈ RN ×d , y ∈ {0, 1}N (7)
 data, aiming to minimize the discrepancy between xi and its
 reconstruction fθ (xi ). A common choice is MSE:
C. Feature Standardization
  2
 To help certain models converge more easily, we standardize L(θ) = xi − fθ (xi ) (18)
each feature to zero mean and unit variance. i∈Ωtrain

 xij − μj where Ωtrain ⊂ Ω0 denotes the indices of normal samples in the
 xscaled,ij = (8)
 σj training set. We iteratively update θ (weights and biases) via
ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE 3979

an optimizer like Adam or SGD until we reach a maximum TABLE I
 KEY SYMBOL AND DEFINITION
number of epochs, or the validation loss no longer improves after
a certain threshold. After the AE is trained on normal samples,
we derive an error threshold from the training set. Then, we
compute reconstruction errors on the training set. For each xi ∈
Xtrain .
 2
 ei = xi − fθ (xi ) (19)

 Let τmse be the η percentile of {ei }. Any sample whose error
exceeds these thresholds can be flagged as abnormal. We then
use these thresholds on the test set (Xtest , ytest ). Testing with
MSE, For each test sample xj , compute ej = xj − fθ (xj ) 2 .
Then, make predictions. Here, ŷj = 1 indicates an abnormal.

 (mse) 1, ej > τmse
 ŷj = (20)
 0, otherwise

 V. CAIDS KNOWN MODELS To preserve class proportions in each fold, we apply
 stratified K-fold cross-validation on the training set. Let
 This section primarily establishes the mathematical model  (k) (k) K
for CAIDS, utilized to distinguish normal traffic from known (Itrain , Ival ) k=1 be a partition of the index set {1, . . . , Ntrain }
attack traffic. This approach is referred to as the Known Traffic into K disjoint training/validation index pairs, satisfying
Identification Mechanism within CAIDS. (k) (k) (k) (k)
 Itrain ∪ Ival = {1, . . . , Ntrain }, Itrain ∩ Ival = ∅ (24)
 The stratified K-fold DRF method is built on the traditional
stratified K-fold cross-validation. For each validation set in each And maintaining the overall label distribution in each fold. For
fold, an initial random forest model is trained to calculate the each fold k, we extract the corresponding training and validation
highest predicted probability of the known category for each subsets by indexing into Xtrain and y train :
sample, denoted as αi . Subsequently, a confidence threshold r
 (k) (k) (k) (k)
is set to classify samples with αi ≥ r into the “high-confidence” Xtrain = Xtrain Itrain , : , y train = y train Itrain (25)
dataset and samples with αi < r into the “low-confidence” (k) (k) (k) (k)
dataset. Then, dedicated random forest classifiers are trained for Xval = Xtrain Ival , : , y val = y train Ival (26)
these high-confidence and low-confidence subsets respectively.  (k) (k)   (k) (k) 
High-confidence datasets refer to samples whose predicted prob- This yields K pairs Xtrain , y train and Xval , y val , each
ability of the random forest in the known category of the sample preserving the original class distribution for robust model evaluis higher than the threshold r, and high-confidence datasets refer ation. In fold k, we first train an “initial” random forest classifier,
to samples whose predicted probability of the random forest in where L represents the loss function for training a random forest.
   
the known category of the sample is lower than the threshold r. In (k) (k) (k) 
the test phase, each sub-model provides the predicted category RFinitial = arg min L θ; Xtrain , ytrain (27)
 θ
and its predicted probability for each test sample. Finally, the
 For each fold k, let,
sub-model with the highest predicted probability is selected to
generate the classification result. This method ensures high accu- (k) (k) (k)
 pi = RFinitial .predict_proba(xi ) ∈ RC , i ∈ Ival (28)
racy for easy-to-classify samples while enhancing robustness for  
difficult-to-classify or noisy samples. Algorithm 2 illustrates the (k) (k) (k)
 Here pi = pi,1 , . . . , pi,C is the vector of predicted probprimary framework of the CDDRF method. Table I summarizes
 abilities for the C classes. We then define the confidence score
the variables and formula symbols.
 for each sample as the maximum predicted probability:
 We define the training set and test set. Each sample xi ∈ Rd
is a d-dimensional feature vector and yi is its class label (e.g. an (k) (k)
 αi = max pi,c ∈ [0, 1] (29)
attack type): c=1,...,C

  Ntrain  Ntest According to the preset threshold r, samples with probability
 Dtrain = (xi , yi ) i=1 , Dtest = (xj , yj ) j=1 (21)
 values greater than r in α are divided into high-confidence
We arrange these into a feature matrix and label vector for each training subsets ar , and samples with probability values greater
set: than r are divided into low-confidence training subsets br .
  (k) (k) 
 Xtrain ∈ RNtrain ×d , y train ∈ {Attack1 , . . . , AttackC }Ntrain (22) Ia(k) = i ∈ Ival : αi ≥ r (30)
 (k)  (k) (k) 
 Xtest ∈ RNtest ×d , y test ∈ {Attack1 , . . . , AttackC }Ntest (23) Ib = i ∈ Ival : αi < r (31)
3980 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 Algorithm 2: CDDRF Known Traffic Identification. classifiers if the subsets are non-empty:
   
 Require: Dtrain , Dtest , d, C, K, r
 RF(k)
 a = arg min L θ; X (k)
 a , y (k)
 a (34)
 Ensure: Predicted labels ŷ for Dtest θ
   
 1: Organize Dtrain and Dtest into X, y and Xtest , ytest (k) (k) (k) 
 2: Perform stratified K-fold CV to obtain folds RFb = arg min L θ; Xb , yb (35)
 θ
 3: for k = 1 to K do These models specialize in classifying either high-confidence
 (k) (k) (k)
 4: Train RFinitial ← TrainRF(Xtrain , ytrain ) (a) or low-confidence (b) samples from the validation set. This
 (k)
 5: Compute αi ← max(RFinitial .predict_proba(xi )) for can effectively solve the problem of low-confidence data affect-
 (k)
 all i ∈ Ival ing high-confidence data.
 (k) For each test sample x∗ in Dtest .
 6: Split into Ia ← {i | αi ≥ r} and
 (k)
 Ib ← {i | αi < r} (k)   (k)  (k) 
 (k)
 p̂∗, a = RF(k)
 a .predict_proba x∗ , α̂∗, a = max p̂∗, a (36)
 7: if Ia = ∅ then    
 (k) (k) (k) (k) (k) (k)
 8: Train RF(k)a ← TrainRF(X[Ia ], y[Ia ])
 p̂∗, b = RFb .predict_proba x∗ , α̂∗, b = max p̂∗, b (37)
 9: end if (k) (k)
 (k) We get corresponding class predictions ŷ∗, a or ŷ∗, b by choos-
 10: if Ib = ∅ then
 (k) (k) (k) ing the highest-probability class. If either model does not exist
 11: Train RFb ← TrainRF(X[Ib ], y[Ib ]) (k) (k)
 12: end if (i.e., if Xa or Xb was empty), we set the respective proba-
 13: end for bility to 0 or mark it as invalid.
 14: Train fallback RFfull ← TrainRF(X, y) After all K folds, for each test sample i, we collect:
 15: for each x∗ ∈ Xtest do (1) (K) (1) (K)
 α̂i,a , . . . , α̂i,a , α̂i,b , . . . , α̂i,b (38)
 16: Initialize αamax ← 0, ŷa ← None
 17: Initialize αbmax ← 0, ŷb ← None One way to form the final prediction ŷi is:
 (k)
 18: for k = 1 to K do max
 1) Let αi,a = maxk : valid α̂i,a , and similarly αi,b
 max
 =
 19: if trained RF(k)a then
 (k)
 maxk : valid α̂i,b .
 20: pa ← RF(k) a .predict_proba(x∗ ) 2) Identify which model yields the higher maximum proba-
 21: Update αamax , ŷa ← max_prob(pa ) if higher bility:
 22: end if
 (k) (best)
 23: if trained RFb then max
 ŷi,a , if αi,a ≥ αi,b
 max
 ,
 (k) ŷi = (best)
 24: pb ← RFb .predict_proba(x∗ ) ŷi,b , otherwise.
 25: Update αbmax , ŷb ← max_prob(pb ) if higher max max
 26: end if 3) If both αi,a and αi,b are 0 (no valid model), fall back to
 27: end for an initial random forest trained on the entire training set,
 28: if αamax ≥ αbmax and αamax > 0 then denoted RFinitial,full .
 29: ŷ∗ ← ŷa In each fold k, we compute metrics such as accuracy on the
 30: else if αbmax > αamax and αbmax > 0 then validation subset. Similarly compute Precision, Recall, F1, etc.
 31: ŷ∗ ← ŷb 1   (k) 
 Accuracy(k) = (k) 1 ŷi = yi (39)
 32: else |Ival | (k)
 33: ŷ∗ ← RFfull .predict(x∗ ) i∈Ival

 34: end if Average the metrics over all folds:
 35: Save ŷ∗
 1  1  (k)
 K K
 36: end for
 Accuracy = Accuracy(k) , F1 = F1 , . . .
 return ŷ K K
 k=1 k=1
 (40)
 (k)
 The set Ia contains all validation samples whose highest VI. ANALYSIS
predicted class probability meets or exceeds r (high-confidence),
 (k) This section presents an analytical evaluation of CAIDS’s
while Ib contains those below the threshold (low-confidence). ability to identify known, and unknown traffic.
 We define:
 (k)   (k)  
 Xa(k) = Xval Ia(k) , ya(k) = yval Ia(k) (32) A. Known Flow Analysis
 (k) (k)  (k)  (k) (k)  (k)  To comprehensively evaluate the performance of the CDDRF
 Xb = Xval Ib , yb = yval Ib (33)
 model, we conducted comparative experiments on four bench-
 Here, subset a contains samples that the initial model pre- mark datasets commonly used in IoV and edge environments:
dicts with high confidence (α ≥ r), while subset b contains EDGE-IIoT, TON-IoT, CICIDS2017, and UNSW-NB15. These
low-confidence samples. We train two additional random forest datasets can approximate real IoV scenarios well in terms of
ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE 3981

 TABLE II
 COMPARED ALGORITHMS’ PARAMETER SETTINGS

Fig. 4. Threshold impact on CDDRF F1-score and a/b sample ratio.

protocol diversity (including TCP/UDP), high dynamics and
mobility of network topology, and a variety of attack types [17],
[20], [29]. We employed Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF), XGBoost, LSTM, 1D CNN, and Transformer models
as comparative benchmarks.
 To maximize the F1-score on the validation set, we utilized
the same validation set for both the CDDRF model and each
 Fig. 5. F1-scores comparison of CDDRF with other algorithms. (a) EDGEbaseline model, to maximize the validation set F1-score, and IIoT dataset. (b) UNSW-NB15 dataset. (c) CICIDS2017 dataset. (d) TON-IoT
determine the optimal configuration through manual traversal. dataset.
Random seeds, layers, rounds, and learning rates were uniformly
applied during the training of deep models, with the parameter
configuration detailed in Table II. All datasets were divided certain extent, appropriately dividing the datasets with different
into training and test sets in a 70:30 ratio. Preprocessing steps confidence levels for training can help improve the model’s
included the removal of high-cardinality features, imputation of robustness to easily distinguishable data, while increasing the
missing values using the mean, one-hot encoding of categorical focus on difficult-to-distinguish data.
features, and PCA dimensionality reduction to improve feature Fig. 5(a) presents the F1-score comparison between CDDRF
expression quality and reduce redundancy. and six benchmark methods. CDDRF achieves an F1-score of
 We first systematically scanned different candidate thresholds 99.72%, outperforming Random Forest (96.44%) and XGBoost
(from 0.0 to 1.0, with a step size of 0.1) on another inde- (90.41%), which demonstrates its superior ability to capture
pendent UNSW-NB15 validation set, recorded the F1-score at complex and nonlinear traffic patterns. Among the deep learning
each threshold, and selected the threshold r with the best or baselines, LSTM attains 82.12%, 1D CNN 73.81%, and Transmost robust F1-score. For the convenience of comparison, we former 72.98%. Their moderate performance under identical
merged the two sets of data and plotted them as shown in Fig. 4. optimization settings suggests that these architectures may be
The experimental results show that as the threshold increases, less well matched to the specific feature distributions of our
the F1-score shows a clear upward trend, especially when the datasets. Logistic regression reaches only 68.16%, underscoring
threshold reaches 0.8, the F1-score increases from 78.69% to the significant nonlinear relationships present in the intrusion
82.52%. This shows that the increase in the sample ratio of the detection task. Fig. 5(c) and (d) demonstrate that CDDRF consisa/b subset will lead to a significant difference in the confidence tently outperforms both traditional and deep learning baselines
between the a/b subsets. However, when the threshold continues in the CICIDS2017 and TON-IoT datasets. In CICIDS2017, the
to increase, the F1-score decreases instead, approaching the CDDRF F1-score exceeds that of logistic regression by 3.25%
performance of a single random forest. This phenomenon shows and that of LSTM by 6.85%; In TON-IoT, it outperforms logistic
that when the sample ratio of the a/b subset increases to a regression by 9.18% and LSTM by 1.70%. In contrast, Fig. 5(b)
3982 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 environments. In actual deployments, threshold re-evaluation
 measures can be used to adapt to traffic changes and threshold
 drift during deployment.

 B. Unknown Flow Analysis
 To evaluate unknown traffic detection, we use the TON-
 IoT network traffic dataset. Normal traffic is randomly split
 70%/30% into training and test sets to prevent data leakage
 and ensure fair evaluation. We train the AE solely on normal
 traffic, then evaluate its generalization by treating selected attack types from TON-IoT as unknown traffic. Here, “unknown
 traffic” refers to a typical network attack type and its diverse
 combination that have never been seen in the training process,
 which belongs to a new attack type.
 For hyperparameter tuning, we form a validation set with DoS,
 Backdoor, and Scanning attacks and optimize via grid search.
 To simulate zero-day conditions, the remaining ten attacks:
 DDoS, Injection, Password, XSS, Ransomware, MITM, Shellcode, Worms, Reconnaissance, Exploits, are treated as unknown
 and only appear in the open-set evaluation.
 We compare CAIDS against eight IDS baselines (AUIDS,
 NIDS, LIDS, TLOC, SupEnML, IoT-PRIDS, ENCSA-PSO,
 HyperVision, MLMCS); see Section “Related Work” for details. The AE reconstruction-error threshold is set to 95%, as
 commonly adopted in prior studies [30], [31].
 Fig. 7 shows how the training loss and validation loss of
 the AE change with the number of iterations under different
 unknown attack complexities. Here, we define “complexity”
 as the number of unknown attack categories in the test set:
 the more categories, the higher the complexity. Although all
 experiments used the same training set for model training, due
 to the different types of unknown attacks contained in different
 test sets, the preprocessing steps (including PCA dimensionality
Fig. 6. Time comparison of CDDRF with other algorithms. (a) EDGE-IIoT reduction and feature encoding) were performed independently,
dataset. (b) UNSW-NB15 dataset. (c) CICIDS2017 dataset. (d) TON-IoT resulting in slightly different feature dimensions and encodings
dataset.
 of the model input. It can be seen in the figure that as the
 complexity of the unknown attack increases, the validation loss
 rises and the gap between the training and validation curves
shows that in UNSW-NB15 the nearest competitor, random gradually widens, which shows that the AE’s ability to fit and
forest, reaches only 60.91%, while deep models perform poorly, identify multi-category, high-complexity unknown attacks has
likely due to feature redundancy and class imbalance that impairs significantly decreased.
effective representation learning. Fig. 8 illustrates the impact of unknown traffic with varying
 As shown in Fig. 6, the training time of CDDRF on the same complexity on the AE’s performance. Taking the xy-axis as an
dataset is slightly longer than that of traditional machine learning example, the classification outcomes are defined as follows:
models (LR, RF, XGBoost), but their F1-score is significantly r 00 represents true positive.
better than these methods. At the same time, compared with r 01 represents false positive.
mainstream deep learning models (LSTM, 1D CNN, Trans- r 10 represents false negative.
former), CDDRF takes less time to train. CDDRF not only sur- r 11 represents true negative.
passes traditional algorithms in prediction performance but also According to Fig. 8, when the unknown-attack complexity
surpasses deep models in efficiency, achieving the best balance was 1, the AE produced a false-positive rate of just 0.50% for
between accuracy and time cost. In other datasets or network benign traffic and a false-negative rate of 0.58% for attack traffic,
conditions, the optimal range of r may need to be re-evaluated. demonstrating strong generalization to novel flows. Even at a
However, other experiments currently use a static threshold of r complexity level of 3, the false-positive rate rose only slightly
= 0.9, which can achieve better detection performance on all to 0.92%, while the false-negative rate remained at 0.58%,
datasets under the current threshold, indicating that a single indicating the model still performed robustly. Beyond this point,
static threshold is sufficient to cope with different network the AE continued to detect unknown attacks accurately, but the
ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE 3983

Fig. 7. Training loss and validation loss when training with known traffic. (a) Single class. (b) Double class. (c) Three class. (d) Four class. (e) Five class. (f) Six
class. (g) Seven class. (h) Eight class. (i) Nine class. (j) Ten class.

Fig. 8. Confusion matrix for identifying unknown traffic. (a) Single class. (b) Double class. (c) Three class. (d) Four class. (e) Five class. (f) Six class. (g) Seven
class. (h) Eight class. (i) Nine class. (j) Ten class.

false-positive rate increased because higher-complexity attacks complexity of the unknown attack does not exceed 3, the ROC
share more features with benign traffic, narrowing the margin (Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve generated by CAIDS
that separates normal from malicious behavior and making in the AE stage is always above the diagonal and close to the
misclassifications more likely. upper left corner, and the corresponding AUC is more than 0.95,
 Next, we calculated the anomaly recognition accuracy un- up to 0.99. This shows that the system can achieve a high true
der all complexities based on the confusion matrix data. As positive rate (TPR) at an extremely low false positive rate (FPR),
shown in Fig. 10(a), when the complexity is single-class, its and the overall performance is excellent. As the number of
accuracy reaches 97%, which is enough to deal with various unknown attack types increases to more than 3 (complexity>3),
threats in the real environment. When the complexity does not the distribution of reconstruction errors caused by the diversified
exceed 3, the AE has sufficient accuracy to identify unknown attack samples shifts, making it difficult for the original fixed
traffic. threshold strategy to simultaneously take into account low false
 To find out the robustness of CAIDS in identifying unknown positives and high hits, which leads to a significant decrease
traffic, we calculated the system robustness of AUC (Area Under in the AUC value and the position of the ROC curve. The
the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve) under unknown above results verify the reliability of CAIDS in low-complexity
attacks of all complexities. As shown in Fig. 9, when the unknown attacks.
3984 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 9. AUC for identifying unknown traffic. (a) Single class. (b) Double class. (c) Three class. (d) Four class. (e) Five class. (f) Six class. (g) Seven class.
(h) Eight class. (i) Nine class. (j) Ten class.

 has made great improvements in both performance and actual
 performance.

 VII. CONCLUSION
 With the increasing sophistication and connectivity of modern
 vehicular networks, the challenge of effectively detecting and
 mitigating both known and unknown attacks remains a critical
 research focus. IDSs must contend with diverse threats, ranging
Fig. 10. Average performance of CAIDS. (a) F1-scores. (b) Performance from novel exploits that target previously unknown vulnerabilianalysis.
 ties to variations of established attack patterns. Addressing these
 challenges, we have proposed CAIDS, an integrated IDS that
 combines an AE module for detecting unknown traffic with
 a novel CDDRF model for identifying known intrusions. By
 actively updating the AE with filtered normal traffic, CAIDS
 maintains adaptability against emerging threats, thereby enhancing the detection accuracy for unknown attacks. Additionally, our CDDRF model uses hierarchical k-folding to separate
 high-confidence and low-confidence datasets, producing two
 complementary random forest classifiers that work in tandem for
Fig. 11. F1-score comparison of CAIDS with other methods. reliable, high-precision detection. Experimental comparisons
 with current state-of-the-art approaches confirm that CAIDS
 offers superior performance and flexibility under real-world con-
 Since similar studies in recent years are all set in low- ditions. Future research directions will focus on optimizing the
complexity scenarios, we combined the F1-scores and AUCs system’s real-time response, reducing resource overhead, and
of CDDRF and AE under single-class complexity, as shown further strengthening model robustness against sophisticated
in Fig. 10(b). CAIDS has two components. CDDRF has an adversarial strategies.
excellent F1-score of 99.72% and an AUC of 0.9997, while
AE has an F1-score of 97.00% and an AUC of 0.9891. To
compare the IDSs of the same single complexity, we calculated REFERENCES
the average F1-score of CAIDS. As shown in Fig. 11, we [1] J. Contreras-Castillo, S. Zeadally, and J. A. Guerrero-Ibañez, “Internet of
combined the performance of CAIDS on known attacks and Vehicles: Architecture, protocols, and security,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
unknown attacks. Compared with recent similar studies, the vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3701–3709, Oct. 2018.
 [2] S. Sharma and B. Kaushik, “A survey on Internet of Vehicles: Applications,
comprehensive F1-score of CAIDS for known and unknown security issues & solutions,” Veh. Commun., vol. 20, 2019, Art. no. 100182.
attacks is much higher than other studies, reaching 98.36%. [3] W. Xu et al., “Internet of Vehicles in Big Data era,” IEEE/CAA J. Auto-
Most similar studies only focus on a single aspect, while CAIDS matica Sinica, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 19–35, Jan. 2018.
ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE 3985

 [4] M. B. Mollah et al., “Blockchain for the internet of vehicles towards [27] W. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, and L. Wang, “Generalized autoencoder: A
 intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., neural network framework for dimensionality reduction,” in Proc. IEEE
 vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4157–4185, Mar. 2021. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2014, pp. 490–497.
 [5] O. Ghaffarpasand and F. D. Pope, “Telematics data for geospatial and [28] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
 temporal mapping of urban mobility: New insights into travel character- autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
 istics and vehicle specific power,” J. Transport Geogr., vol. 115, 2024, Data Mining, 2017, pp. 665–674.
 Art. no. 103815. [29] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “A survey of deep learning-based intrusion
 [6] X. Chen et al., “Vehicle as a service (VaaS): Leverage vehicles to build detection in automotive applications,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 221, 2023,
 service networks and capabilities for smart cities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Art. no. 119771.
 Tuts., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 2048–2081, Third Quarter 2024. [30] A. Borghesi, A. Bartolini, M. Lombardi, M. Milano, and L. Benini,
 [7] S. Djahel, R. Doolan, G.-M. Muntean, and J. Murphy, “A communications- “Anomaly detection using autoencoders in high performance computing
 oriented perspective on traffic management systems for smart cities: systems,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 9428–9433.
 Challenges and innovative approaches,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., [31] S. Hore, Q. H. Nguyen, Y. Xu, A. Shah, N. D. Bastian, and T. Le, “Empirical
 vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 125–151, First Quarter 2015. evaluation of autoencoder models for anomaly detection in packet-based
 [8] J. Wang, C. Jiang, K. Zhang, T. Q. Quek, Y. Ren, and L. Hanzo, nids,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Conf. Dependable Secure Comput., 2023,
 “Vehicular sensing networks in a smart city: Principles, technologies pp. 1–8.
 and applications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 122–132,
 Feb. 2018.
 [9] G. P. R. Filho et al., “Enhancing intelligence in traffic management systems
 to aid in vehicle traffic congestion problems in smart cities,” Ad Hoc Netw.,
 vol. 107, 2020, Art. no. 102265. Chen Zhang received the B.S. degree in inorganic
[10] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Event-triggered interval-based nonmetallic from the Henan University of Technolanomaly detection and attack identification methods for an in-vehicle ogy, Zhengzhou, China, in 2021, and the master’s
 network,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 2941–2956, degree in 2023 from the Computer Science and Engi-
 2021. neering, University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan,
[11] T. Alladi, B. Gera, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and F. R. Yu, “Deepadv: A where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. dedeep neural network framework for anomaly detection in vanets,” IEEE gree. His research interests mainly include gateway
 Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 12013–12023, Nov. 2021. security, information security, and metaverse.
[12] J. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Sun, and Y. Shi, “In-vehicle network attacks and
 countermeasures: Challenges and future directions,” IEEE Netw., vol. 31,
 no. 5, pp. 50–58, 2017.
[13] R. A. Bridges, T. R. Glass-Vanderlan, M. D. Iannacone, M. S. Vincent, and
 Q. Chen, “A survey of intrusion detection systems leveraging host data,” Lu Zheng received the master’s degree in 2022 from
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2019. the Lanzhou University of Technology, Lanzhou,
[14] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “Zero-day attack China, where she is currently working toward the
 detection: A systematic literature review,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 10, Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer and Compp. 10733–10811, 2023. munication. Her research interests include security
[15] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches analysis and design of communication protocols and
 for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and formal security evaluation for the Internet of Vehicles.
 open issues,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 189, 2020, Art. no. 105124.
[16] A. Nisioti, A. Mylonas, P. D. Yoo, and V. Katos, “From intrusion detection
 to attacker attribution: A comprehensive survey of unsupervised methods,”
 IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3369–3388, Fourth
 Quarter 2018. Huakun Huang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[17] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A transfer learning and optimized CNN based degree in computer science and engineering from
 intrusion detection system for internet of vehicles,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE the University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan, in
 Int. Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 2774–2779. 2019. He is currently an Associate Professor with the
[18] Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Xue, and J. Ma, “LSTM-based intrusion detec- School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering,
 tion system for VANETs: A time series classification approach to false Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China. His remessage detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12, search interests include privacy preserving, machine
 pp. 23906–23918, Dec. 2022. learning, federated learning, and continuous intelli-
[19] B. Cao, C. Li, Y. Song, and X. Fan, “Network intrusion detection technol- gent networks.
 ogy based on convolutional neural network and BiGRU,” Comput. Intell.
 Neurosci., vol. 2022, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 1942847.
[20] C. Fan, J. Cui, H. Jin, H. Zhong, I. Bolodurina, and D. He, “Auto-updating
 intrusion detection system for vehicular network: A deep learning approach based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Chunhua Su (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. de-
 Technol., vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 15372–15384, Oct. 2024. gree from Beijing Electronic and Science Institute,
[21] S. Li, Y. Cao, S. Liu, Y. Lai, Y. Zhu, and N. Ahmad, “HDA-IDS: A hybrid Beijing, China, in 2003, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
 dos attacks intrusion detection system for IoT by using semi-supervised degrees in computer science from the Faculty of Engi-
 CL-GAN,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 238, 2024, Art. no. 122198. neering, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, in 2006
[22] S. Das et al., “Network intrusion detection and comparative analysis using and 2009, respectively. From 2009 to 2011, he was
 ensemble machine learning and feature selection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. a Postdoctoral Fellow with Singapore Management
 Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4821–4833, Dec. 2022. University, Singapore and Research Scientist with
[23] A. Zohourian, S. Dadkhah, H. Molyneaux, E. C. P. Neto, and A. A. Ghor- Cryptography & Security Department, Institute for
 bani, “Iot-prids: Leveraging packet representations for intrusion detection Infocomm Research, Singapore, from 2011 to 2013.
 in IoT networks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 146, 2024, Art. no. 104034. From 2013 to 2016, he was an Assistant Professor
[24] G. Mohi-Ud-Din et al., “Intrusion detection using hybrid enhanced CSA- with the School of Information Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science
 PSO and multivariate WLS random-forest technique,” IEEE Trans. Netw. and Technology, Nomi, Japan. From 2016 to 2017, he was an Assistant Professor
 Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 4937–4950, Dec. 2023. with the Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, Suita, Japan. He is
[25] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic currently a Senior Associate Professor with the Division of Computer Science,
 in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” Jan. 2023. University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan. He has authored or coauthored more
[26] M. A. J. Jamali et al., “A deep neural network-based multi-layer clas- than 100 papers in international journals and conferences. His research interests
 sifier ensembles for intrusion detection in fog-based Internet of Things include cryptanalysis, cryptographic protocols, privacy-preserving technologies
 environments,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 140, 2025, Art. no. 109727. in machine learning, and IoT security & privacy.