This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

 An Intrusion Detection Scheme for Internet of
 Vehicles Based on Non-IID Federated
 Distillation and DQN-PBFT
 Wenxian Jiang , Senior Member, IEEE, Zhenping Guo , and Naizhou Wang

 Abstract—The Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is rapidly evolving, crucial communication framework for autonomous vehicles,
but it also faces significant security threats, including Denial of ensuring reliable communication with other IoT entities, such
Service (DoS) attacks and deceptive behaviors. The construction as infrastructure, pedestrians, and smart devices. The fifthof an intrusion detection framework for the IoV encounters the
following challenges: 1) the pervasive Non-IID (Non-Independent generation (5G) and upcoming sixth-generation (6G) networks
and Identically Distributed) issue within datasets and 2) in are expected to revolutionize the IoV by offering ultra-reliable
existing applications combining Federated Learning (FL) with communication with ultra-low latency and high bandwidth.
blockchain, node load issues are often overlooked. To address As the connectivity and complexity of the IoV grow, cyberthese challenges, we propose a novel scheme that integrates security risks have become a major concern. The emergence of
Federated Distillation (FD) with blockchain technology to safeguard the IoV from network attacks. First, the scheme combines new technologies has provided attackers with more sophisti-
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and FD for intrusion cated tools, enabling them to launch novel attacks such as DoS,
detection, which both preserves the privacy of vehicle users’ data data injection, and information theft [1]. Therefore, there is an
and effectively shares knowledge. Next, for each FD client, we urgent need for efficient Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) to
construct a selector based on density ratio estimation to filter out protect the IoV from DoS attacks and other intrusion threats.
accurate and reliable knowledge from local predictions, thereby
effectively mitigating the performance degradation caused by Intrusion defense systems play a pivotal role in ensuring
the Non-IID data problem. Then, the DQN (Deep Q-Network) network security and are considered the first line of defense
integrated PBFT algorithm (DQN-PBFT) is proposed to reduce against cybersecurity threats. IDS are designed to detect these
the number of consensus nodes using the DQN algorithm, security threats effectively and in a timely manner, while mainenhancing load balancing and fairness during the FD and block taining a low false positive rate. However, traditional intrusion
generation processes. Finally, experimental results show that, in
a Non-IID environment, the proposed scheme outperforms the defense systems, which rely on pattern/signature detection
baseline scheme by approximately 30% in accuracy. Compared [2], struggle to identify zero-day attacks (i.e., unforeseen or
to other consensus algorithms, DQN-PBFT demonstrates greater anomalous attacks). Moreover, substantial effort is required to
advantages in FD environments, exhibiting higher consensus continuously improve these systems to detect zero-day attacks.
efficiency. Recently, the advent of machine learning and deep learning
 Index Terms—Internet of Vehicles, federated distillation, (ML/DL) technologies has transformed many fields, such as
blockchain, DQN, intrusion detection. visual and speech recognition, surpassing human performance
 in some areas. By applying ML/DL techniques, IDS can
 I. I NTRODUCTION effectively detect intrusion activities and security threats in
 network traffic [3]. These ML/DL-based IDS can identify both
W ITH the rapid advancement of computing and communication technologies, the prevalence of connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAVs) in the modern world is steadily
 existing and novel attacks without the need for constant rule
 updates required by traditional IDS. However, due to the lack
increasing. Internet of Vehicles (IoV) technology provides a of balanced and up-to-date labeled training datasets, these
 ML/DL-based IDS perform poorly when facing emerging
 Received 1 January 2025; revised 1 June 2025; accepted 29 August 2025. security threats such as zero-day attacks [4]. The privacy
This work was supported in part by the Xiamen Science and Technology
Project under Grant 3502Z20251018, in part by the Excellent Teaching Case nature of datasets and the widespread presence of adversarial
Project of Graduate Degree of Fujian Province under Grant 00489054, and attacks hinder vehicle organizations and the research comin part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities munity from sharing their sensitive datasets, preventing the
of Huaqiao University’s Academic Project under Grant 2024HQYJ01. The
Associate Editor for this article was S. H. Islam. (Corresponding author: development of efficient and up-to-date ML/DL models to
Wenxian Jiang.) address emerging security threats.
 Wenxian Jiang is with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a subfield of
Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361000, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China ML, aimed at training a shared global model across multiple
(e-mail: jwx@hqu.edu.cn). distributed clients without the need to centrally store sensitive
 Zhenping Guo and Naizhou Wang are with the College of Computer data. In FL, each client trains a local model using local data
Science and Technology, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361000, China (e-mail:
1821630622@qq.com; wangnaizhou2000@163.com). and then only sends local model updates instead of uploading
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3682598 sensitive data to a central server. This significantly enhances
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

the efficiency of traditional ML/DL-based IDS in dealing with model outputs instead of directly exchanging model
network attacks while protecting the privacy of collaborators. parameters, effectively avoiding the communication bur-
However, FL typically relies on a centralized architecture with den associated with larger models.
a single central server, which exposes it to the risk of a • To tackle the decline in model performance caused by
single point of failure. The application of blockchain can effec- the Non-IID issue in IoV data, we design a density ratio
tively mitigate the risk of single-point failures in FL, thereby estimation-based selector for each FD client to identify
ensuring the security of the global model. Moreover, merely out-of-distribution samples in the public dataset. This
detecting intrusion behaviors is insufficient; the analysis of method quantifies the density differences between inintrusion logs is crucial for intrusion response, vulnerability distribution and out-of-distribution samples, effectively
analysis, and forensics. The security of intrusion logs should detecting anomalies. When the density ratio of a sample
not be overlooked, as they are at risk of tampering. As a result, falls below a predefined threshold, the client treats it
some studies have integrated FL with blockchain to establish as an outlier (i.e., the sample is inconsistent with the
intrusion detection frameworks [5]. However, traditional FL client’s data distribution) and avoids sharing its predicrequires frequent uploads of DL model parameters, leading to tion, thereby preventing it from misleading other clients.
significant communication overheads that severely hinder its • To improve the efficiency and decentralization of FD,
practical deployment in the IoV. Worse still, various attacks we integrate blockchain technology into the framecan recover clients’ original data from the uploaded model work. Specifically, we propose a DQN-integrated PBFT
parameters, posing an ongoing risk of information leakage [6]. algorithm (DQN-PBFT), which takes into account key
 Recently, a Federated Distillation (FD) scheme [7], [8], [9] parameters such as the communication capacity and
has been proposed to reduce the communication overhead and computational resources of FD clients to intelligently
security risks associated with model parameter exchanges. In select suitable clients as consensus nodes. By reducing
FD, the prediction results (local logits) from clients on a public the number of nodes involved in consensus, we can
dataset are aggregated into global logits. By utilizing hard or significantly enhance consensus efficiency. Furthermore,
soft labels (i.e., predicted results) from public samples rather this mechanism also improves load balancing and fairness
than model parameters, FD significantly reduces communi- in the FD and blockchain processes among clients.
cation overhead, enhances privacy protection, and supports • Through experiments, we compare the proposed FD
heterogeneous local models. However, since FD relies on the scheme with the baseline in terms of accuracy, precision,
aggregation of local predictions for distillation rather than on and F1-Score. The experimental results show that the
trained local models, it is particularly sensitive to the training FD scheme significantly outperforms the baseline, with
state of local models and is vulnerable to issues arising from an accuracy improvement of approximately 30%. Addiinsufficient or poor-quality training. Additionally, the Non-IID tionally, we compare DQN-PBFT with existing consensus
(Non-Independent and Identically Distributed) data problem schemes in terms of throughput, delay, and communicabetween clients exacerbates this challenge, especially when tion overhead. The experimental results demonstrate that
there is a large discrepancy between the distribution of public DQN-PBFT performs better in the FD environment and
data and local data, which may cause local models to make achieves higher consensus efficiency compared to existing
inaccurate predictions. schemes.
 To address the challenges faced by existing IDS in the The structure of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
IoV environment, this paper proposes a novel framework. reviews the related work; Section III presents the network
The framework combines CNN and FD techniques, enabling model we propose; Section IV provides a detailed explanation
precise identification of network attacks while effectively of the federated distillation scheme; Section V describes the
protecting vehicle privacy and reducing communication over- system framework; Section VI evaluates the performance of
head. Additionally, a density ratio estimation-based selector is the proposed scheme through experiments; and finally, Secdesigned for each FD client to filter out sample predictions tion VII concludes the paper.
that might mislead other clients. To ensure the security and
distributed nature of the framework, blockchain technology II. R ELATED W ORK
is introduced, and a DQN-integrated PBFT algorithm is pro- In recent years, the development of IDS in the IoV enviposed, which not only improves consensus efficiency but ronment has gained significant attention, as it is crucial for
also enhances load balancing during the FD and consensus ensuring the security and privacy of these connected systems.
processes among nodes. The main contributions of this paper Many researchers have proposed various IDS schemes (as
are summarized as follows: shown in Table I). Yu et al. [10] proposed an IDS for detecting
 • To address the issues of network attacks and high com- intrusion attacks in the automotive CAN network using a
 munication overhead, we propose an intrusion detection time interval conditional entropy fuzzy method. This approach
 scheme for the IoV that combines CNN with FD. This identifies and detects attacks by collecting and analyzing the
 scheme utilizes an unlabeled public dataset and gener- conditional entropy values of regular communication mesates labels for the unlabeled data by exchanging model sages. Deng et al. [11] introduced a practical IDS based
 outputs, enabling each local model to further train and on creating voltage fingerprints for each message ID. The
 enhance its performance. Moreover, Federated Distillation system can detect intrusions without prior knowledge of the
 mitigates the communication overhead by exchanging secret mapping between ECUs and IDs, and it is capable
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION 3

 TABLE I
 E XISTING R ESEARCH S OLUTIONS

of detecting malicious frames with periodic or non-periodic training. The model achieves over 99.8% accuracy on three
IDs. As a self-learning IDS, it adapts to different in-vehicle merged datasets by optimizing hyperparameters to control the
networks without the need for customization for different training process and prevent overfitting. However, traditional
vehicle models. However, these traditional non-ML systems ML methods typically require expert manual feature engineerstruggle with detecting zero-day attacks, as they often rely ing, which is time-consuming and may miss critical features.
on predefined rules or signatures, which are prone to being Moreover, these methods may underperform when handling
bypassed or misjudged. large datasets and are susceptible to overfitting or underfitting.
 ML models, on the other hand, can continuously improve Waghmode et al. [14] proposed a machine learning-based netand adjust themselves by learning new data and attack patterns. work intrusion detection method that combines an exhaustive
This means they can adapt to the ever-changing threat land- feature selection algorithm with a least squares support vector
scape. Du et al. [12] transformed CAN bus intrusion detection machine (LS-SVM) classifier. The study focuses on addressing
into an open set recognition problem and proposed the CLUS- key challenges faced by traditional intrusion detection systems
TER method. By using the distance from known categories in big data environments, such as feature redundancy and
to cluster centroids as the training loss, they ensure consis- high false alarm rates. A supervised learning framework is
tency with the open set recognition threshold. By learning employed to build an efficient and secure model. This method
intra-class compactness and inter-class separability, CLUSTER emphasizes balancing detection accuracy and computational
effectively classifies known attacks and identifies unknown efficiency through feature selection and classifier optimization
ones. Korium et al. [13] proposed an ML-based IDS that to meet the demands of real-time threat detection in complex
identifies anomalous behavior by analyzing network traffic. network environments.
The system first uses Z-score normalization for data prepro- DL methods can automatically extract high-level features
cessing, preserving data distribution and handling outliers. from raw data, reducing the reliance on manual feature engi-
Then, it employs machine learning algorithms such as Random neering. At the same time, when handling large-scale datasets
Forest (RF), Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), CatBoost, and complex tasks, DL models typically demonstrate higher
and Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM) for model accuracy and better generalization capabilities. Lo et al. [15]
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

proposed a hybrid deep learning intrusion detection system
(HyDL-IDS) based on spatiotemporal representations. This
system sequentially uses CNN and LSTM networks to automatically extract spatial and temporal features from in-vehicle
network traffic. Compared to other approaches, HyDL-IDS
significantly improves detection accuracy and reduces false
positive rates in detecting intrusions in vehicular networks.
Agrawal et al. [16] proposed an intrusion detection system
based on deep learning (LSTM, CNN), combining thresholding and error reconstruction methods. The authors trained and
explored various neural network architectures and compared
their performance. In addition, they provided a reconstruction
error distribution graph to visually demonstrate the system’s
ability to distinguish between normal and abnormal sequences. Fig. 1. Network model.
However, DL approaches also have some drawbacks, particularly due to the lack of balanced and up-to-date labeled
 training performance is suboptimal when dealing with Nontraining datasets, leading to poor performance when facing
 IID data. Finally, in FL and blockchain-integrated solutions,
zero-day attacks. Li et al. [17] proposed two transfer learningthe issue of node load is often overlooked. To address these
based intrusion detection model update schemes to address the
 issues, we propose a secure IoV intrusion detection framework
continuously evolving attack types in the IoV, each applicable
 that combines FD and blockchain technology to collaborato different scenarios. When the IoV cloud can provide a
 tively tackle network attack problems, while also protecting
small amount of labeled data, a cloud-assisted update scheme
 privacy and ensuring system reliability.
is adopted to improve detection accuracy through transfer
learning. When the IoV cloud cannot provide labeled data,
vehicles use pseudo-labels to perform multiple rounds of local III. N ETWORK M ODEL
transfer learning and fuse the models to achieve local updates. The IoV intrusion detection architecture in this paper con-
 As a result, recent studies have applied FL to IDS in IoV. FL sists of three entities: Connected and Automated Vehicles
not only leverages the latest dataset knowledge from clients (CAVs), Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) servers, and
but also effectively protects clients’ privacy. Abou et al. [18] Blockchain. The network model is shown in Fig 1.
proposed an edge-computing-based framework utilizing FL CAVs: As FD clients, cavs train intrusion detection models
and blockchain technology to protect intelligent transportation using their local private datasets and make predictions on the
systems (ITS) from zero-day attack threats. This framework unlabeled public dataset to generate local logits. They also
includes a distributed edge computing architecture and a train a selector based on density ratio estimation. Furthermore,
decentralized reputation system, ensuring system security and cavs upload the local logits and the selector to the MEC
privacy through collaboration and reputation management. validator. When a cav approaches the MEC, it can download
Experimental results demonstrate that this framework is effi- and read the latest block of the blockchain to obtain the latest
cient and accurate in threat detection. Boualouache et al. [20] global logits.
modeled the expected communication patterns of connected MECs: MECs play a crucial role in verifying and aggreautonomous vehicles (CAVs) using Deep Auto-Encoder (DAE) gating the local logits received from FD clients. Each MEC
and detected any deviations from this pattern as malicious participates in the FD process and calculates local logits and
activity. They also employed open set recognition and FL selectors. After the DQN-based node selection, an MEC is
to train an attack classifier (AC) model, which is a deep assigned one of three roles: worker, validator, or producer. As
multi-class data descriptor (Deep-MCDD) designed to identify a worker, it only participates in the FD process and does not
spherical decision boundaries for each type of attack. More- take part in the consensus process. Similar to cavs, workers
over, blockchain technology was incorporated to enhance FL, send the calculated local logits and selectors to validators.
improving the security and decentralization of the framework’s As a validator, the MEC participates in both the FD and
training process. Beuran et al. [21] proposed a novel consensus processes. In the FD process, the validator organizes
FL-based IoT intrusion detection method by combining a and forwards the local logits and selectors to the producer. In
shrink autoencoder and a centroid one-class classifier to the consensus process, the validator ensures the accuracy of
build a semi-supervised learning model that effectively detects transactions and verifies the blocks proposed by the producer.
network anomalies. To address the data privacy and compu- As a producer, the MEC is selected from the validators. In
tational resource issues of traditional centralized learning, a the FD process, the producer computes the global logits, and
FL framework is adopted, allowing each IoT gateway to train in the consensus process, it is responsible for creating new
models locally without sharing raw data. blocks and performing the block chaining operation.
 After carefully reviewing the related research literature, Blockchain: To ensure the security and transparency of
we identified several limitations. First, the solutions have the FD process, the framework uses blockchain technology
high communication overhead, which makes them unsuitable to share and aggregate logits. By establishing a consortium
for resource-constrained IoV environments. Second, model blockchain, a trustworthy and tamper-proof ledger is created
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION 5

 TABLE II Algorithm 1 Federated Distillation Scheme
 CNN M ODEL Input: Private datasets D p,k , Unlabeled public dataset Do ,
 client number K
 Output: model θ p,k
 1: for each client k in parallel do
 2: Train the local model θ p,k via Eq. 1;
 3: for each xoj in Do do
 4: Compute ŷo,k
 j via Eq. 2;
 5: end for
 6: The selector dk based on density ratio estimation is
to securely store and distribute global logits. The decentralized obtained from Eq. 3 and Eq. 4;
nature of blockchain ensures that there is no single central 7: end for
server controlling the entire network, thereby reducing the 8: for xoj ∈ Do do
risks of single points of failure and data tampering. 9: Each client votes on the sample xoj based on the
 selector dk ;
 IV. I NTRUSION D ETECTION S CHEME BASED ON 10: The weights W j assigned by each client to the sample
 F EDERATED D ISTILLATION xoj are determined according to Eq. 6;
 11: end for
A. CNN-Based Intrusion Detection Model
 12: The global logits are obtained according to Eq. 7;
 The CNN model is widely employed due to its exceptional 13: The client performs distillation training via Eq. 8 to obtain
capability in feature extraction, effectively facilitating the θ p,k ;
interaction of information between adjacent time windows 14: return: θ p,k ;
and features. In our study, we utilize CNN to extract deep
features from traffic data packets. A detailed description of the
foundational CNN model is provided in Table II. Each model both vehicles and MEC servers as FD clients. Each client
consists of eight convolutional layers, designed to efficiently k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K} holds two datasets: 1) a private labeled dataset
extract feature maps from the traffic data packets, along with D p,k = {(xip,k , yip,k )|i = 1, 2, . . . , I p } a shared unlabeled public
two fully connected layers that output the prediction results. dataset Do = {xoj | j = 1, 2, . . . , I o } that is common to all clients.
The input channel count of the first convolutional layer is
 For a classification task with C classes (where c ∈ C), yip,k is a
23, corresponding to the number of rows in the input data.
 one-hot vector. Algorithm 1 illustrates the overall flow of the
The first four convolutional layers each contain 64 filters,
 proposed scheme, and the detailed description is as follows.
with a kernel size of 3, while the subsequent four layers are
 Step 1: Local model training. First, each client k trains a
equipped with 128 filters, maintaining the same kernel size.
 local model θ p,k using the model and private dataset described
The output of the final convolutional layer is flattened and
 in Section IV-A. The update rule is given by:
classified by a multilayer perceptron (MLP) consisting of three  
fully connected layers. The final layer contains 11 neurons, θ p,k = θ p,k − η∇ψ b Y p,k , Y p,k (1)
representing the total number of categories. As our research
focuses on establishing an efficient federated training frame- In this step, Ψ(·, ·) represents the loss function to be minimized,
work, the description of the CNN-based model structure is kept Y p,k represents
 b
  the output Y p,k =
 of the model function F, i.e., b
concise. It is worth noting that our federated training approach F X | θ , and Y denotes the true labels of the samples.
 p,k p,k p,k

does not rely on the aggregation of model parameters, allowing The learning rate is denoted by η. For multi-class classification
the system to function seamlessly even when clients employ tasks, the loss function is typically the cross-entropy loss.
varying model architectures. Step 2: Prediction stage. Based on the locally trained model
 from the previous step, each client predicts the local logits,
B. Federated Distillation Scheme i.e., the labels for data samples in the shared unlabeled public
 dataset. Specifically, given the model θ p,k and a sample xoj ∈
 A key challenge faced by federated distillation is the poten- Do , the prediction is made as follows:
tial for misleading predictions due to the lack of adequately
 j = F xj | θ
 ŷo,k o p,k
 xoj ∈ Do
 
trained teacher models. Local models are prone to overfitting (2)
on their local datasets, resulting in poor performance on Step 3: Client selector construction. Assume that the input
public dataset samples that lie outside the local distribution, space X is compact, and define U as a uniform distribution
especially when there is non-IID data across clients. To address over X with a probability density function u(x). The probability
this, we draw upon the work of [22] and design a selector for density function for client k is denoted as pk (x). Our objective
each client based on density ratio estimation. This selector is to estimate the density ratio based on the observed samples:
identifies out-of-distribution samples in the public dataset,
 pk (x)
effectively filtering out misleading predictions and enhancing dk∗ = (3)
detection accuracy for other clients. u(x)
 We assume that the system consists of K vehicles and Specifically, for samples x from the local distribution of
MEC servers. For simplicity, in the following, we refer to client k where pk (x) > 0, the density ratio dk∗ > 0, whereas for
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

out-of-distribution samples x where pk (x) = 0, the density ratio TABLE III
dk∗ = 0. Therefore, the client can identify out-of-distribution S YMBOL TABLE
samples in the public data set by constructing a density ratio
estimator.
 To ensure statistical convergence, the kernelized Unconstrained Least Squares Importance Fitting (KuLSIF) algorithm
is used to estimate the density ratio. The KuLSIF estimation
model is defined in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS) Dk equipped with a Gaussian kernel function. The
objective function for dk is given by:
 1 X 0 2
 dk = argmindk0 ∈Dk d (x)
 2nu x∼D k
 u

 1 X 0 β 0 2
 − dk (x) + d (4)
 nk p,k
 2 k Dk
 x∼D
 p,k
Here, D is the local dataset of client k with size nk , and
Du is the sample set from the uniform distribution with size
nu . β is the regularization parameter that controls the model
complexity, and Dk is the RKHS, which defines the sample global logits from the public dataset for distillation training.
representation and function space within the space. The process is as follows:
 The KuLSIF algorithm minimizes the objective function to  
 θ p,k = θ p,k − η∇ψ xoj , ŷo,g
 j |θ
 p,k
 (8)
find the density ratio dk . The optimal solution dk∗ corresponds
to the minimum value of this objective function. By using
kernel tricks, the algorithm optimizes in the RKHS, effectively V. S YSTEM S TRUCTURE
estimating the density ratio. To ensure the security and decentralization of the FD
 Step 4: Sample weight calculation. To determine whether a model, we employ blockchain technology. The primary symsample from the public dataset is an out-of-distribution sample bols used in this section are outlined in Table III. In our
   τk . For each sample x j in
 o framework, global logits are stored on a single blockchain.
for client k, we use the threshold
the public dataset Do , if dk xoj is less than τk , the sample The integration of blockchain with FD necessitates careful
 selection of both the blockchain type and consensus protocol,
is considered to be out-of-distribution, and client k will not
 as these significantly impact scalability, latency, complexity,
upload its local prediction, as these predictions may mislead
 and cost. Public blockchains face scalability limitations and
the entire system. For sample xoj , each client has:
 high latency issues, while private blockchains improve scalability and reduce latency but may compromise decentralization
 8  
 <1, dk xo > τk
 vkj =  j (5) and privacy. Consortium blockchains offer a balanced solution,
 :0, dk xo < τk making them highly suitable for our system. In this consortium
 j
 blockchain, we enhance the classical PBFT protocol by using
 The vkj values from each client are aggregated to form V j , the DQN algorithm to select consensus nodes, ensuring load
representing the collective vote of all clients regarding whether balancing and significantly improving consensus efficiency.
sample xoj belongs to their distribution. The weight of client Our approach strategically prioritizes scalability, latency, and
k for sample xoj is then computed as follows, where K v is the security, with a slight compromise on decentralization. We
number of clients for which vkj = 1: consider two types of nodes in the blockchain network:
 Light Nodes: Serving as FD clients, cavs download and read
 W j = V j /K v (6)
 blocks but do not participate in the consensus process.
 Step 5: Aggregation phase. nBy gathering all local Full Nodes: Refers to MECs that actively participate in both
 o predictions from the clients Y = Y | k = 1, 2, . . . , K , along
 bo b o,k the FD and consensus processes. All MECs are involved in
 the FD process, but only two types of roles participate in the
with the weights W = W j | j = 1, 2, . . . , I o for the public
 ˚
 consensus process. In each round, each MEC is assigned one
dataset samples, the global logits can be computed through of the following roles: Worker, Validator, or Producer.
the following calculation:
 • Worker: Participates only in the FD process and does not
 yo,g
 bj = Yj × Wj
 bo (7) engage in the consensus process.
 • Validator: Participates in both FD and the consensus prowhere bY oj contains all client predictions for sample xoj , and W j cess. In the FD process, the validator first trains the local
contains the corresponding weights assigned by all clients for model and predicts using the public dataset. The validator
that sample. also receives the local logits and selectors from light
 Step 6: Distillation training. The global logits are distributed nodes and workers, organizes them, and forwards them
back to the clients, and each client’s local model uses the to the producer. In the consensus process, the validator’s
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION 7

 primary task is to verify the correctness of transactions Algorithm 2 FedDistSmartContract
 and validate the blocks proposed by the producer. Input: Col.EOA, col.info, col.isOnline, col.request action
 • Producer: Participates in both FD and the consensus pro- Output: col.info
 cess and is selected from the validators. In the FD process, 1: if msg.sender is not owner k isFDCollaborator(col.EOA)
 the producer trains the model and makes predictions == true then
 on the dataset. Based on the local logits and selectors 2: throw;
 received from the validators, the producer calculates the 3: end if
 global logits. In the consensus process, the producer is 4: if col.isOnline && col.request action == “add FD”
 responsible for packaging the global logits and other then
 data into a block, performing the consensus process, and 5: length ← FDColsAdr.push(col.EOA)
 committing the block to the blockchain. 6: FDCols[col.EOA] ← FDCol(col.EOA, col.Info, now,
 length-1)
 7: emit AddFDCollaborator(Col.EOA, col.info)
A. Smart Contracts 8: numberOfFDCols++
 We will consider the traffic management department, which 9: else
aims to manage a privacy-preserving federated distillation pro- 10: rowToDelete ← FDCols[col.EOA].index
cess. First, the department creates and deploys a smart contract 11: keyToMove ← FDColsAdr[length-1]
on the blockchain. Then, through the smart contract, FD clients 12: FDColsAdr[rowToDelete] = keyToMove
(such as vehicles) are added to the FD system. The contract 13: FDCols[keyToMove].index = rowToDelete
includes the client addresses and other relevant information. 14: FDColsAdr.length–
The smart contract provides the department (i.e., the contract 15: emit RemoveFDCollaborator(Col.EOA)
owner) with the flexibility to easily add or remove FD clients, 16: numberOfFDCols–
while managing the FD system in a fully decentralized, trusted, 17: end if
and transparent manner. The smart contract in this paper is 18: return: col.info;
written in Solidity. For brevity, only two important functions of
the smart contract are discussed below: adding and removing
FD clients, where Col represents an instance of an FD client; particularly crucial, as FD tasks demand significant compunow denotes the current time (in seconds); sender is the tational resources from the nodes. Therefore, the selection
address of the FD client sending the transaction to the smart of consensus nodes must consider various factors, such as
contract; and Externally Owned Account (EOA) refers to an the communication capabilities of nodes, their computational
account controlled by a public-private key pair. col.isOnline resources, and the impact of block size on the time overhead
indicates whether the client is online, and if it is online with during the validation process. With this in mind, we employ
a request to join the FD system, the client will be added; if it the DQN algorithm to dynamically select consensus nodes
is offline for a certain period, it will be removed. within the blockchain network. The goal is to achieve load
 AddFDCollaborator(Col.EOA, col.info): This function can balancing within the blockchain-based federated distillation
only be called by the traffic management department to add an framework. This strategy not only helps alleviate the load on
FD client. It takes the FD client’s EOA (Col.EOA) and client the nodes participating in the FD process, but also minimizes
information (col.info) as inputs, and adds the client to the fed- the time cost of the consensus procedure. The detailed process
erated distillation system. RemoveFDCollaborator(Col.EOA): of consensus node selection is as follows.
This function can also only be called by the traffic manage- Step 1: Node modeling. Assume there are M full nodes
ment department. If the client has been offline for a certain in the system. We model the time overhead of the consensus
period, this function removes the FD client from the federated process and use the DQN algorithm to select the consensus
distillation system. It takes the FD client’s EOA as input and set CON = {con1 , con2 , . . . , coni }. The total time overhead
removes the client from the system. After executing the smart consists of two parts: the time taken by the node to validate the
contract, col.info will be output as the result. Algorithm 2 block, denoted as T valid , and the communication time between
presents the core details and main structure of the contract. the current node and the next node, denoted as T com . Thus,
 the total time overhead can be represented as:

B. Consensus Node Selection Algorithm Based on DQN T = T valid + T com (9)
 To better integrate blockchain with FD, it is essential to The node validation time T valid and communication time T com
enhance the classical PBFT consensus algorithm. The pri- are expressed as follows:
mary improvement involves limiting the number of nodes
 B · Gi
participating in the consensus process, thereby increasing T valid = (10)
consensus efficiency. To make the algorithm more suitable Fi
 B
for the requirements of FD systems, we draw upon reference T com = (11)
[23] and introduce a DQN-based consensus node selection Pi
algorithm. When blockchain networks are combined with fed- where B is the block size (in bytes), Gi is the number of
erated distillation, the selection of consensus nodes becomes CPU cycles required by node i to validate each byte, Fi is
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

the CPU cycle frequency of node i during consensus (in Hz), based on Q-leaming, which can estimate the Q-values through
Pi is the remaining throughput of node i during consensus (in deep neural networks and iteratively optimize the policy.
bits per second). Since in real-world environments, factors like Q function: DQN estimates the expected return for taking a
latency, packet loss, and protocol overhead prevent nodes from specific action given a state using the Q -function. The formula
reaching their theoretical maximum transmission capacity (i.e., is:
 Q = S t , At , θ
 
bandwidth), the throughput is chosen to represent the actual (17)
transmission capability of the node.
 where θ represents the parameters of the neural network, and
 The variables in the above equations account for the residual
 Q S t , At , θ is the Q-value of taking action At in state S t .
 
resources of the nodes after the federated distillation process.
 Target Q-value Qtarget : DQN uses the target Q-value to
Based on this, T can be further refined as:
 compute the loss function. The target Q-value represents
 B · Gi B the estimated retum based on the reward and the maximum
 T= pi < pi− tol , i ∈ M
 
 + (12)
 Fi Pi Q-value of the next state. The formula is:
where pi− tol represents the total throughput of the node. Qtarget = R S t , At + γt · max Q S t+1 , At+1 , θ̂
  
 (18)
 Step 2: Optimization objective. Since federated distillation
tasks and blockchain consensus processes occur simultane- Loss function: The DQN loss function minimizes the preously, and bandwidth is a limited resource, the optimization diction error of the Q-values. The loss function is defined as:
objective is to minimize the time required for a node to execute
 h 2 i
 L(θ) = E Q S t , At , θ − Qtarget
 
 (19)
the consensus process. To achieve this, reinforcement learning
can be applied to select the most appropriate consensus nodes where θ and θ̂ represent the parameters of the evaluation
in order to reduce the overall system time overhead. To network and the target network, respectively. γt is the discount
optimize the selection of consensus nodes, the problem is factor, with a value between 0 and 1. The objective of this loss
modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), consisting of function is to optimize the network parameters θ such that
the following components: the Q -value predictions are as close as possible to the target
 State space S : The state space of the system is represented Q-value.
by the resource status of each node. Through the training process of the DQN algorithm, the
 S = F t , Pt , Bt
 ˚
 (13) neural network learns an optimal strategy π∗ that selects the
 best combination of consensus nodes for each state. Ultiwhere F t represents the independent CPU cycle frequency of mately, the DQN network will determine the consensus set
each node at time t, Pt represents the throughput available for CON = {con1 , con2 , . . . , coni }, where the nodes in this set are
consensus tasks at time t, Bt represents the data volume in the selected as consensus nodes. With this, the consensus node
block at time t. selection process is complete, and the next section will provide
 Action space A: At time t, the action space consists of a set a detailed description of the consensus execution process.
of consensus node selection strategies.
 C. Intrusion Detection Framework Based on Federated
 A = {n1 , n2 , n3 , . . . , ni } (14)
 Distillation and DQN-PBFT
where the value of ni is either 0 or 1. If a node is selected The proposed framework consists of three main steps: fedas a consensus node, the corresponding value is 1; otherwise, erated distillation, consensus node selection, and the execution
the value is 0. of the consensus process. Through these steps, vehicles will
 Reward function R(S , A): The reward function is used to obtain an intrusion detection model. It is important to note
measure the effectiveness of selecting a particular combination that both vehicles and MEC entities are FD clients, and
of consensus nodes. We define the reward as the inverse of the both participate in the FD process. However, the term node
time spent by the nodes in the consensus process: refers solely to MEC entities, as vehicles do not engage in
 1 the consensus process. Fig 2 illustrates the overall system
 R(S , A) = (15) framework, while Fig 3 provides the system’s operational
 T valid + T com
 timeline. The following is a detailed description of each step.
Here, the reward is the reciprocal of the time required for the
 Step 1.1: Determining FD clients. The traffic managenode to execute the consensus process. The shorter the time,
 ment authority creates and deploys a smart contract on the
the higher the reward.
 blockchain, which facilitates the addition and removal of
 Leaming policy π∗ : The objective of policy optimization is
 clients. Initially, when a vehicle or MEC entity submits an
typically to maximize the expected cumulative reward, where
 externally owned account (EOA) along with relevant details
γt is the discount factor.
 " ∞ # (such as hardware configuration, bandwidth, latency, etc.) to
 X the traffic management authority, the smart contract is invoked
 π = argmaxE
 ∗
 γR
 t t
 (16) to incorporate them into the FD system. Subsequently, the
 t=0 smart contract periodically checks the online status of the
 Step 3: Optimization algorithm. To solve this problem, we system’s clients and removes those that have been offline for
use a Deep Q-Network (DQN) to learn the optimal node an extended period. Finally, the participating FD clients are
selection strategy. DQN is a reinforcement learning algorithm confirmed.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION 9

Fig. 2. System overall framework.

 Step 1.2: Local training of clients. Vehiclek trains an CON = {con1 , con2 , . . . , coni }. The specific steps are detailed
intrusion detection model θ p,k using its local private dataset in Section V-B. In this process, the nodes participating in
and performs predictions on the public dataset to obtain local consensus are treated as MEC validators, while those not
 Y o,k . Simultaneously, Vehiclek trains a selector dk based
logits b selected are considered MEC workers.
on density ratio estimation. The vehicle then packages b Y o,k Step 2.2: Primary node selection strategy. In traditional
and dk and sends them to the nearest MEC validator for the PBFT consensus algorithms, the primary node is elected
current round. through a round-robin approach, with the primary node’s
 Step 1.3: Global logits aggregation. After completing the number determined by the formula p = v mod n. However,
model training, the validators package the collected b Y o,k and in the IoV environment, the presence of malicious nodes and
dk , and send them to the MEC producer for the current attackers makes the round-robin method predictable, thereby
round. The producer
 n o predictions from all FD
 receives the local reducing security. To address this issue, this scheme employs a
clients, Y = Y | k = 1, 2, . . . , K , along with the selectors
 b o bo,k Verifiable Random Function (VRF) [24] to select the primary
D = {dk | k = 1, 2, . . . , K}. Using the public dataset and selector node from the consensus nodes, with the chosen primary node
D, the producer calculates the weights W (where wk, j ∈ W serving as the MEC producer.
represents the weight of client k for sample j). The producer Step 3.1: Request phase. After completing the FD process,
then computes the global logits b Y o,g based on b Y o and W. Vehiclek sends a message < REQUES T , o, t, c, sc > request-
The detailed process of federated distillation is presented in ing the global logits to the nearest validator for the current rou-
Section IV-B. nd. The validator then forwards the message to the producer.
 Step 2.1: Consensus node selection. This step aims to Step 3.2: Pre-prepare phase. Upon receiving the request
determine the consensus nodes for the next round, rather than from Vehiclek , the producer packages the previously calculated
the current one. Since MEC nodes participate in both the FD global logits bY o,g , the consensus set CON, and other relevant
process and the consensus process, it is necessary to ensure data into a block B, and enters the pre-prepare phase. The proload balancing while optimizing consensus efficiency. Based ducer broadcasts the message  PRE −PREPARE, v, n, d, B >
on the previous step, we model the remaining resources of the s p , m > to all validators. When a validator receives the prenodes (including communication and computational resources) prepare message, it will validate the message. If the validation
with the goal of minimizing consensus time. By applying the is successful, it proceeds to the prepare phase. If the validation
DQN algorithm, we determine the set of consensus nodes fails, no further action is taken.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 3. System operation sequence diagram.

 Step 3.3: Prepare phase. Upon entering the prepare on the federated distillation-based intrusion detection model,
phase, the validator broadcasts the prepare message  followed by a detailed performance analysis and comparison.
PREPARE, v, n, d, B, i > si >. While sending the prepare Subsequently, for the DQN-PBFT consensus algorithm, a
message, the validator will also receive and validate prepare simulation environment is set up and compared with the latest
messages broadcasted by other validators. research solutions. Through these two sets of experiments, the
 Step 3.4: Response phase. If a validator receives more than feasibility of the proposed scheme is demonstrated.
2 f + 1 prepare messages, it enters the response phase, then
verifies the messages and provides the results to the producer. A. Performance Analysis of Intrusion Detection Model
 Step 3.5: Reply phase. When the producer receives more
 1) Dataset Description and Data Preprocessing: The
than 2 f + 1 identical confirmation messages, consensus is
 N-BaIoT [25] dataset is a publicly available benchmark
considered to be reached. The producer then provides the
 dataset, comprising nine sub-datasets from nine Internet of
confirmation result to all MEC objects (including workers). At
 Things (IoT) devices. Among these nine devices, seven support
this point, the consensus process is complete. After receiving
 11 types of traffic, including one normal traffic type and ten
the confirmation result, all MEC objects add the block to the
 attack traffic types. The remaining two devices handle six types
blockchain.
 of traffic, including one normal traffic type and five attack traf-
 Step 4: Block data download. The validator returns the
 fic types. Each traffic packet contains 115 features, which are
request result to Vehiclek . If the consensus is successful,
 extracted from five distinct time windows (100 milliseconds,
Vehiclek downloads the block containing the global logits from
 500 milliseconds, 1.5 seconds, 10 seconds, and 1 minute).
the validator, which is then used for distillation training. If
 These features can be quickly computed, meeting the realthe consensus fails, the system moves on to the next round of
 time detection requirements for malicious traffic packets. Due
training.
 to the dataset’s coverage of a wide range of traffic types and
 its rich traffic records, the N-BaIoT dataset has been widely
 VI. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS used in the field of intrusion detection and has become a
 The proposed scheme primarily relies on a federated benchmark dataset. The data preprocessing is performed in
distillation-based intrusion detection model and an improved the same way as described in [8], consisting of three main
DQN-PBFT consensus algorithm. To validate the performance steps: data partitioning, normalization, and two-dimensional
advantages of this approach, we first conduct experiments transformation.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION 11

 1)Data Partitioning: In practical applications, there are
numerous clients (e.g., vehicles) participating in FD, and the
data is typically non-IID. To accommodate this, we partition
the original dataset. Since directly using the original dataset
requires substantial resources, we constructed the mini-N-
BaIoT dataset, which includes 11 types of traffic data from
nine IoT devices. Specifically, the nine sub-datasets of the
original dataset are represented as D1 , D2 , . . . , D9 . Each Di
is divided into Ci subsets based on traffic type, where each
subset Di,c contains only the traffic data of type c. We selected
1,000 traffic records from each subset Di,c to form the Dmini i,l
in the mini-N-BaIoT dataset. These new datasets are then split
into private datasets D p , public datasets Do , and test datasets
Dtest with a ratio of 70%, 10%, and 20%, respectively. It is
 Fig. 4. Non-IID data visualization.
important to note that these datasets are mutually independent,
and Do does not contain labels. All data records in D p belong
to Di , and D p is assigned to K clients for experimentation. client selector is set as the first quartile of the estimated ratio
 Non-IID partitioning: D p is sorted according to its classifi- on the validation set.
cation labels, with a total of 11 classes. These 11 classes are 3) Evaluation metrics: To assess the performance of
randomly divided into three groups in the form of 4,4, and 3,  the
 method, we calculate the numbers of true positives T p , true
and distributed among three clients. The data distribution is negatives (T n ), false positives F p , and false negatives (Fn ).
visualized in Fig 4 (red represents the public dataset, and Based on these definitions, we derive the recall, precision, and
green represents the client’s private datasets). After the dataset F1-score.
partitioning, the distribution of each dataset satisfies the fol- Tp
lowing: different clients have significantly different categories, Recall = (21)
 T p + Fn
exhibiting the non-IID characteristics that align with real-
 Tp
world IoV environments. There is no overlap between the Precision = (22)
public dataset Do , private dataset D p , and test dataset Dtest . Tp + Fp
 2) Normalization: The feature dimensions of the traffic data Precision · Recall
 F1 − score = 2 · (23)
vary significantly, leading to large differences in values. To Precision + Recall
enhance the training effectiveness of the model, we apply min- 3) Model Performance Evaluation: In this experiment,
max normalization to scale the feature values between 0 and 1. we comprehensively compared the detection performance of
 3) Dimensionalization: Each sample xi consists of 115 different approaches by evaluating their accuracy, precision,
features, which are divided into five parts based on time and F1-score, with the specific results presented in Fig 5.
windows. We transform the sample features into a matrix of We compared the proposed method with two representative
five columns and 23 rows, making it suitable for input into federated distillation methods—DS-FL [7] and FedMd [26].
the subsequent CNN model, as follows: Similar to our approach, both of these methods rely on
 2 3 the public dataset for knowledge transfer. According to the
 xi,0 xi,23 xi,46 xi,69 xi,92 experimental results, the highest accuracy achieved by the
 6 xi,1 xi,24 xi,47 xi,70 xi,93 7 DS-FL method was 51.33%, while FedMd reached 55.95%. In
 xi = 6
 6 7
 6 xi,2 xi,25 xi,48 xi,71 xi,94 7 (20) contrast, the proposed method achieved a maximum accuracy
 7
 4 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· 5 of 81.46%, with a precision of 82.72% and an F1-score of
 xi,22 xi,45 xi,68 xi,91 xi,114 79.42%. It is evident that our method demonstrates significant
 performance improvements across all metrics, particularly in
 2) Experimental Setup: To ensure a clear evaluation of the terms of accuracy and precision, far surpassing the other two
experiment, the following sections describe the experimental approaches.
environment, implementation details, and evaluation metrics: The significant improvement in performance can be
 1) Experimental environment: All evaluations are conducted attributed to the fact that both the DS-FL and FedMd methods
in Python 3.7, using the PyTorch framework version 1.9.0, employed a simple averaging-based weighted approach for
running on a machine equipped with an Intel Core i5-13600KF aggregating global logits. However, when facing the non-
@ 3.50 GHz, 32GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX IID issue of client data, this simplistic weighting strategy
A4000 GPU. led to clients uploading misleading knowledge, which neg-
 2) Implementation details: During the training phase, the atively impacted the global model’s training performance. In
Adam optimizer is employed. The learming rate, batch size, particular, the DS-FL method further compounded this issue
and the number of local training epochs per communication by applying entropy-based reduction after simple weighting,
round are set to 0.0001, 100, and 5, respectively. When which intensified the inconsistency between data, rendering
constructing the client selector, clients reserve a portion of the training process more inefficient and unstable. In contrast,
their local data as a validation set. The threshold τk for the the proposed method designs a client selector based on density
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 5. Comparison of model performance. (a) Accuracy; (b) Precision; (c) F1-score.

ratio estimation, which effectively identifies out-of-distribution
samples in the public dataset. For these out-of-distribution
samples, we set their aggregation weight to zero, effectively
preventing the upload of misleading information from clients
and shielding the training process of other clients from such
negative influences. This strategy ensures that only reliable
knowledge from trustworthy data distributions is shared during
the federated distillation process, thus enhancing the accuracy
and robustness of the global logits, particularly in the face of
various types of data biases.
 To further analyze the performance of the proposed method,
we plotted the confusion matrix on the test dataset (as shown
in Fig 6). The results clearly demonstrate that our federated
distillation approach performs exceptionally well in handling
network attacks, effectively identifying different types of network attack traffic. Notably, the G TCP and G UDP attack
types tend to be confused with each other, mainly due to
 Fig. 6. Confusion matrix.
their classification as DoS attacks, and their high similarity in
certain features. This observation suggests that although these
attacks differ in behavioral patterns, shared network features refers to the number of message exchanges between nodes durlead to difficulties in classification. Therefore, when designing ing the consensus process, used to assess the communication
intrusion detection systems, it is crucial to further optimize complexity of the consensus protocol.
feature extraction and modeling strategies to address these During the experimental process, we considered various
challenges. parameters such as network delay, bandwidth, CPU speed,
 and reputation values of MEC nodes. The SG-PBFT algorithm
 selects N/2 (where N is the total number of nodes) consensus
B. DQN-PBFT Simulation and Analysis nodes based on the nodes’ scores, while the R-PBFT algorithm
 We implemented the related algorithms based on PyTorch chooses N/3 consensus nodes based on reputation values. In
1.9.0 and used NS-3 to simulate the network communication contrast, our approach uses parameters such as bandwidth
environment. This setup simulated network parameters such and CPU speed as inputs and employs the DQN algorithm
as latency, bandwidth, CPU rate, and reputation values, which to dynamically select i nodes as consensus nodes.
were fed back in real-time to the respective models. In the As shown in Fig 7, as the number of MEC nodes increases,
simulation environment, we ran four consensus protocols: the consensus delay of each consensus algorithm gradually
PBFT [27], SG-PBFT [28], R-PBFT [29], and DQN-PBFT, rises, throughput begins to decline, and the number of comand evaluated their consensus latency, throughput, and com- munication times increases. This is because all four consensus
munication times under varying numbers of MEC nodes. algorithms rely on communication between nodes to reach
 Consensus latency refers to the time required for the system consensus. As the number of MEC nodes increases, the
to reach consensus after a node proposes a block. It is a communication overhead also grows, leading to longer times
key metric for evaluating the responsiveness and efficiency for nodes to reach consensus, which results in a reduction in
of a consensus algorithm. Throughput, on the other hand, the number of transactions processed per unit time. Compared
represents the number of transactions or blocks the system can to the classical PBFT algorithm, both SG-PBFT and R-PBFT
process in a given time period, often measured in transactions improve the performance of the three metrics by limiting the
per second (TPS), reflecting the efficiency of the consen- number of consensus nodes based on scores and reputation
sus algorithm in handling transactions. Communication times values.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION 13

Fig. 7. Comparison of consensus performance. (a) Consensus latency; (b) Throughput; (c) Communication times.

 The DQN-PBFT algorithm proposed in this paper also of unknown threats. In addition, to improve the system’s
enhances consensus efficiency by limiting the number of adaptability against emerging threats, we plan to incorporate
consensus nodes, but it is particularly designed for environ- a dynamically updatable FD mechanism, enabling each client
ments combining federated distillation with blockchain. In to continuously learn and effectively recognize novel attack
such environments, MEC nodes are not only required to par- patterns.
ticipate in consensus but also need to undertake the federated
 R EFERENCES
distillation task. Therefore, the selection of consensus nodes is
 [1] N. Hu, Y. Jia, M. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhao, and L. Luo, “Security
crucial and must ensure load balancing across nodes. By using assessment of intelligent connected vehicles based on the cyber range,”
parameters like bandwidth and CPU speed as inputs, DQN- IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 57–62, May 2024.
PBFT dynamically selects i MEC nodes as consensus nodes [2] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain:
 A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4,
using the DQN algorithm, effectively ensuring load balancing. pp. 2356–2426, 2023.
As a result, DQN-PBFT outperforms SG-PBFT and R-PBFT [3] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski,
in terms of consensus efficiency. In contrast, the SG-PBFT and G. Madzudzo, and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for
 in-vehicle networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 11,
R-PBFT algorithms, which select consensus nodes based on pp. 1–40, Nov. 2023.
scores and reputation values, are not suitable for the federated [4] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “Zero-day
distillation environment. If the consensus nodes selected by attack detection: A systematic literature review,” Artif. Intell. Rev.,
 vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 10733–10811, Oct. 2023.
these algorithms cannot handle both tasks simultaneously, the [5] Z. A. E. Houda, A. S. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “MiTFed: A privacy
system’s consensus efficiency will significantly decrease. preserving collaborative network attack mitigation framework based on
 federated learning using SDN and blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
 Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1985–2001, Jul. 2023.
 VII. C ONCLUSION [6] N. Rodrı́guez-Barroso, D. Jiménez-López, M. V. Luzón, F. Herrera, and
 E. Martı́nez-Cámara, “Survey on federated learning threats: Concepts,
 In this paper, we propose an intrusion detection solution for taxonomy on attacks and defences, experimental study and challenges,”
the IoV that combines federated distillation and blockchain Inf. Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 148–173, Feb. 2023.
technology, leveraging a public dataset to facilitate knowl- [7] S. Itahara, T. Nishio, Y. Koda, M. Morikura, and K. Yamamoto,
 “Distillation-based semi-supervised federated learning for
edge transfer between clients. First, to address the non-IID communication-efficient collaborative training with non-IID private
issue of IoV data, we design a density ratio-based selector data,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 191–205, Jan.
for each FD client to prevent the sharing of misleading 2023.
 [8] R. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Xue, T. Ohtsuki, B. Adebisi, and G. Gui,
knowledge with other clients. Next, we introduce blockchain “Semisupervised federated-learning-based intrusion detection method
technology into the federated distillation system, using smart for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10,
contracts to determine the clients participating in federated pp. 8645–8657, May 2023.
 [9] T. Qi, F. Wu, C. Wu, L. He, Y. Huang, and X. Xie, “Differentially private
distillation. To further optimize system performance, we pro- knowledge transfer for federated learning,” Nature Commun., vol. 14,
pose the DQN-PBFT consensus algorithm, which intelligently no. 1, p. 3785, Jun. 2023.
selects appropriate clients as consensus nodes. By reducing [10] Z. Yu, Y. Liu, G. Xie, R. Li, S. Liu, and L. T. Yang, “TCE-IDS:
 Time interval conditional entropy- based intrusion detection system
the number of nodes involved in the consensus process, this for automotive controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
mechanism significantly improves consensus efficiency. Addi- vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1185–1195, Feb. 2023.
tionally, it enhances load balancing and fairness among clients [11] Z. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Xun, and J. Qin, “IdentifierIDS: A practical voltagebased intrusion detection system for real in-vehicle networks,” IEEE
in both the federated distillation and blockchain processes. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 661–676, 2024.
Finally, through comparative experiments on federated distil- [12] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, and C. Gao, “Open world intrusion detection:
lation and consensus algorithms, we validate the effectiveness An open set recognition method for CAN bus in intelligent connected
 vehicles,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 76–82, May 2024.
and feasibility of the proposed method. [13] M. S. Korium, M. Saber, A. Beattie, A. Narayanan, S. Sahoo, and
 Although the proposed approach demonstrates strong per- P. H. J. Nardelli, “Intrusion detection system for cyberattacks in the
formance in detecting known attacks, it still exhibits certain Internet of Vehicles environment,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 153, Feb. 2024,
 Art. no. 103330.
limitations when dealing with unknown attacks. To enhance [14] P. Waghmode, M. Kanumuri, H. El-Ocla, and T. Boyle, “Intrusion
the system’s generalization capability and overall security detection system based on machine learning using least square support
defense, future research will focus more on the identification vector machine,” Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 12066, Apr. 2025.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[15] W. Lo, H. Alqahtani, K. Thakur, A. Almadhor, S. Chander, and Wenxian Jiang (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
 G. Kumar, “A hybrid deep learning based intrusion detection system an Associate Professor. His research interests include
 using spatial–temporal representation of in-vehicle network traffic,” Veh. blockchain security and the IoVs. He is an ACM
 Commun., vol. 35, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100471. Member.
[16] K. Agrawal, T. Alladi, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and A. Benslimane, “NovelADS: A novel anomaly detection system for intravehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11,
 pp. 22596–22606, Nov. 2022.
[17] X. Li, Z. Hu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, and J. Ma, “Transfer learning based
 intrusion detection scheme for Internet of Vehicles,” Inf. Sci., vol. 547,
 pp. 119–135, Feb. 2021.
[18] Z. A. E. Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Blockchainenabled federated learning for enhanced collaborative intrusion detection
 in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25,
 no. 7, pp. 7661–7672, Jan. 2024.
[19] (2022). PySyft. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/OpenMined/
 PySyft
[20] A. A. Korba, A. Boualouache, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Zero-X: A
 blockchain-enabled open-set federated learning framework for zero-day Zhenping Guo was born in 2000. He is currently
 attack detection in IoV,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, pursuing the M.S. degree in electronic informapp. 12399–12414, Apr. 2024. tion with Huaqiao University, Xiamen, China. His
[21] V. T. Nguyen and R. Beuran, “FedMSE: Semi-supervised federated research interests include network communications,
 learning approach for IoT network intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., blockchain, and the IoVs.
 vol. 151, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 104337.
[22] J. Shao, F. Wu, and J. Zhang, “Selective knowledge sharing for
 privacy-preserving federated distillation without a good teacher,” Nature
 Commun., vol. 15, no. 1, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 349, doi: 10.1038/s41467-
 023-44383-9.
[23] X. Zhou et al., “Federated distillation and blockchain empowered secure
 knowledge sharing for Internet of Medical Things,” Inf. Sci., vol. 662,
 Mar. 2024, Art. no. 120217.
[24] X. Zhang, R. Li, and H. Zhao, “A parallel consensus mechanism using
 PBFT based on DAG-lattice structure in the Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 5418–5433, Mar. 2023.
[25] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT: Network-based detection of IoT botnet
 attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
 no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jan. 2018.
 Naizhou Wang was born in 2000. He received
[26] D. Li and J. Wang, “FedMD: Heterogenous federated learning via model
 the B.S. degree in computer science and technoldistillation,” 2019, arXiv:1910.03581.
 ogy from Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, China.
[27] M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance,” in Proc.
 He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in com-
 OsDI, 1999, pp. 173–186.
 puter technology with Huaqiao University, Xiamen,
[28] G. Xu et al., “SG-PBFT: A secure and highly efficient distributed
 China. His research interests include network secublockchain PBFT consensus algorithm for intelligent Internet of
 rity, blockchain, and the Internet of Things.
 Vehicles,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 164, pp. 1–11, Jun. 2022.
[29] A. Kumar, L. Vishwakarma, and D. Das, “R-PBFT: A secure and
 intelligent consensus algorithm for Internet of Vehicles,” Veh. Commun.,
 vol. 41, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 100609.