IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026 6685

 Ano2Rule: Rule-Based Global Interpretation for
 Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in Security
 Ruoyu Li , Member, IEEE, Yu Zhang , Qing Li , Senior Member, IEEE, Nengwu Wu ,
 Yong Jiang , Member, IEEE, Weizhi Meng , Senior Member, IEEE, and Laizhong Cui , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—In the realm of cybersecurity, unsupervised anomaly I. INTRODUCTION
detection models have emerged as pivotal tools for identifying
 N RECENT years, with the rapid development of machine
novel threats in dynamic and evolving environments. However,
the opaque nature of these black-box models presents a significant
barrier to their adoption in high-stakes applications, where mod-
 I learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) in the field of anomaly
 detection, the capability to detect malicious behaviors in secuelinterpretability is essential for trust and deployment. This paper rity applications has been significantly enhanced. This includes
presents a rule-based approach called Ano2Rule that enhances the
interpretability of unsupervised anomaly detection. First, we proapplications such as intrusion detection [1], [2], [3], malware
pose the concept of distribution decomposition rules that decompose identification [4], [5], system monitoring [6], [7], and Internet of
the complex distribution of normal data into multiple composi- Things (IoT) network surveillance [8], [9], [10]. These technolotional distributions. To find such rules, we design an unsupervised gies demonstrate superior performance in terms of accuracy and
Interior Clustering Tree that incorporates the model prediction generalization capabilities. Among these studies, unsupervised
into the splitting criteria. Then, we propose the Compositional
Boundary Exploration (CBE) algorithm to obtain the boundary anomaly detection exhibits greater potential because it detects
inference rules that estimate the decision boundary of the original potential malicious activities by identifying deviations from
model on each compositional distribution. By merging these two normal behavior. Compared to supervised anomaly detection
types of rules into a rule set, we can present the inferential process methods, this kind of approach is particularly suitable for detectof the unsupervised black-box model in a human-understandable ing unknown attacks and novel threats, offering the following
way, and build a surrogate rule-based model for online deployment
at the same time. We validate Ano2Rule through extensive experi- advantages in network security applications:
ments on diverse real-world datasets, including network intrusion 1) During the training process, unsupervised anomaly detecdetection and IoT security, demonstrating superior fidelity and tion requires minimal labeled attack or malicious data,
robustness compared to baseline methods. The results show that which are typically more sparse and difficult to obtain.
Ano2Rule achieves high fidelity with the original model’s predic- 2) Unsupervised anomaly detection does not rely on any
tions while providing human-understandable insights.
 known threat patterns, thereby performing exception-
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, network security, explainable ally well when facing unknown attacks and novel
AI, unsupervised learning, intrusion detection. threats.
 However, despite the excellent performance of these models,
 Received 20 July 2025; revised 8 January 2026; accepted 15 February 2026.
 many machine learning approaches, particularly deep learning-
Date of publication 24 February 2026; date of current version 12 May 2026. based unsupervised models, often exhibit a “black-box” nature,
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of leading to a lack of interpretability and raising widespread
China under Grant 62502324, Grant U23B2026, and Grant 62372305, and in
part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant
 trust issues. Many local explanation methods [11], [12], [13],
2026A1515011368 and Grant 2024B1515040012. (Ruoyu Li and Yu Zhang [14], [15] attempt to interpret the models by presenting feature
contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Laizhong Cui.) importance for individual decision points. While these local
 Ruoyu Li and Laizhong Cui are with the College of Computer Science and
Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518061, China (e-mail:
 explanations can provide valuable insights for specific instances,
liry@szu.edu.cn; cuilz@szu.edu.cn). they may not fully meet the needs of certain security applica-
 Yu Zhang is with Tsinghua University, Beijing 100190, China, and also with tions. These fields typically require a more comprehensive un-
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai 200232, China (e-mail:
yu-zhang23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).
 derstanding of how the model behaves across the entire decision
 Qing Li is with the Department of Strategic and Advanced Interdisci- space to detect complex or unknown attacks in a timely manner.
plinary Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China (e-mail: In contrast, global explanations, particularly those utilizing rule
liq@pcl.ac.cn).
 Nengwu Wu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
 extraction to describe the overall decision boundaries, may be
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, more ideal in security systems. This is especially important as
China (e-mail: wnw2597@gmail.com). they offer the following benefits (illustrated in Fig. 1):
 Yong Jiang is with Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 100190, China, and also with the Department of Strategic
 Enhancing Trust in High-Risk Scenarios: In high-risk fields
and Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen such as network intrusion detection, security operators tend to
518066, China (e-mail: jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn). rely more on interpretable rules rather than the intuitive outputs
 Weizhi Meng is with the School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, LA1 4YW Lancaster, U.K. (e-mail: weizhi.meng@ieee.org).
 of black-box models. Compared to complex prediction scores,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3667688 interpretable rules are easier to understand and trust, which can

 1545-5971 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 feature space. This diversity makes it challenging for simple
 surrogate models to fully capture the complex behaviors of
 black-box models, thereby reducing the interpretability and
 accuracy of the model.
 Conclusion: To this end, this paper proposes a divide-andconquer method called Ano2Rule to extract global rules from
 black-box unsupervised anomaly detection models, aiming to
 provide interpretable, accurate, and robust explanations. The
 implementation of Ano2Rule relies on two core components:
 the Interior Clustering Tree (IC-Tree) and the Compositional
 Boundary Exploration (CBE) algorithm. The IC-Tree is an unsupervised decision tree model that extends the traditional Classification And Regression Tree (CART) by incorporating the
Fig. 1. Motivation of interpreting black-box anomaly detection models into
rules in security domains. predictions of black-box models to determine data splits. It partitions the high-dimensional data space into smaller, more manageable subspaces, capturing complex distributions and identieffectively reduce false positives and mitigate potential security fying normal behavior patterns, thereby laying the foundation for
risks. explaining the black-box model. Within each IC-Tree subspace,
 Improving Online Defense Capabilities: By converting the the CBE algorithm generates boundary inference rules. Starting
outputs of black-box models into high-fidelity rules, it becomes from initial hypercube-shaped rules, CBE gradually optimizes
possible to seamlessly integrate with most rule-driven defense the decision boundaries through an approximate gradient ascent
tools (e.g., iptables [16] and Snort [17]), ensuring efficient method, accurately capturing the black-box model’s complex
deployment of online defenses and efficiency in handling high- boundaries. By combining the rule sets generated by the IC-Tree
volume network traffic. and CBE, Ano2Rule fully presents the global decision logic of
 Most existing global ML/DL explanation approaches have the black-box model, ensuring high fidelity of the explanatory
been developed for supervised models, with limited research rules.
focused on explaining unsupervised anomaly detection. This Beyond providing global explanations, Ano2Rule also exarea presents several unique challenges: hibits strong extensibility to other types of model interpreta-
 Unlabeled One-class Data (CH1): Supervised explanation tion, such as local explanation and counterfactual explanation.
methods [18], [19], [20] require labeled data from both positive This flexibility is rooted in the explicit, human-understandable
and negative classes to determine the decision boundaries of characterization of normal boundaries from the perspective of
black-box models. However, this requirement conflicts with the the black-box model. Specifically, for local explanation (i.e.,
nature of unsupervised anomaly detection, which does not rely assessing feature importance for individual predictions), the
on labeled attack data—one of its primary advantages. This lack significance of each feature can be quantified by measuring the
of labeled abnormal data adds complexity to determining the distance between a sample’s feature values and the boundaries
model’s decision boundaries. defined by its matched rule. For counterfactual explanation (i.e.,
 Lack of Surrogate Models (CH2): Global explanation meth- determining how an anomalous sample could be modified to
ods typically use interpretable models, such as decision be classified as normal), our method can project the anomaly
trees [19], [20] or linear models [21], to approximate the be- onto the closest region defined by the rules and optimize the
havior of black-box models. However, there is a lack of suitable necessary feature changes accordingly, thereby generating inforsurrogate models in the unsupervised domain that can provide mative counterfactuals. These extensions enable our approach
both interpretability and high performance, particularly in high- to support a versatile suite of explanation tasks with unified
stakes security applications. technical foundations.
 Accuracy Loss (CH3): A common issue with global methods For evaluation, we used four unsupervised anomaly detection
is the loss of accuracy in the surrogate model due to simplifica- models and trained them on five benchmark datasets. To compretions made in replicating the original model [22]. While these hensively assess the effectiveness of our method, we compared it
methods can offer interpretability, they may fail to meet the with five baseline explanation methods. The experimental results
high detection accuracy requirements necessary for real-time show that Ano2Rule not only can extract highly interpretable and
deployment in security applications. precise rules from black-box models but also outperforms exist-
 We observe that simple surrogate models often struggle to ing methods in multiple metrics, including fidelity, robustness,
effectively replicate the complexity of black-box models when true positive rate (TPR), and true negative rate (TNR), meeting
dealing with high-dimensional data. Such instances belong- the demand of improving human trust in black-box models and
ing to the same class may contain multiple underlying dis- maintaining high detection accuracy for online deployment. We
tributions, with the overall distribution composed of several also validate the extensibility of Ano2Rule by demonstrating
sub-distributions. For example, the normal activities of a host its capability to provide local and counterfactual explanations.
may involve multiple services (such as web services, database Specifically, we show that our rule-based approach enables
services), each exhibiting distinctly different characteristics in quantifiable local feature importance and generates actionable
LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY 6687

counterfactuals for anomalous samples, further illustrating the local attribution, counterfactual approaches, and global surroversatility and practical value of the proposed method. Our gate/rule extraction. Table I summarizes their capabilities along
source code is available at https://github.com/Ruoyu-Li/UAD- dimensions that are especially relevant to unsupervised security
Rule-Extraction. deployments, where reliable attack labels are scarce and expla-
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section II nations must be both faithful and operationally useful.
reviews related work on anomaly detection and model inter- 1) Model-Specific Explanation: Some studies attempt to inpretability. Section III outlines the objectives of the proposed tegrate explainability directly into model architectures to enmethod. Sections IV detail the core algorithms of Ano2Rule. hance interpretability. For example, Kauffmann et al. proposed
Section V presents the theoretical analysis of the proposed a decomposition method for explaining one-class support vector
method. Section VI elaborates on the extensibility of AnoRule machine (SVM) anomaly detection [32], breaking down the
to other types of explanation. Section VII describes the exper- model’s decision-making process into comprehensible comimental setup and result analysis. Section VIII concludes the ponents. Aguilar et al. proposed an interpretable autoencoder
paper and suggests future directions. based on decision trees, which provides a natural explanation
 for experts in the application area [35]. Feng et al. utilized a
 II. RELATED WORK k-dimensional (KD) tree to classify DDoS sources at an IP-level
 fine granularity, outputting explanatory information that enables
A. Anomaly Detection in Security easy inspection of detection results [36].
 Anomaly detection is a cornerstone technique in the field of Discussion: Model-specific methods often yield strong, faithcybersecurity, supporting a wide range of applications including ful explanations within their targeted architectures; however,
network intrusion detection [1], [2], [3], malware detection [4], they are tightly coupled with particular model families and thus
[5], [23], and IoT security [8], [9], [24], [25]. The primary offer limited portability to arbitrary black-box detectors. In seobjective is to identify rare or previously unseen events—often curity practice, anomaly detectors are frequently selected based
corresponding to malicious activities—that deviate from the es- on operational constraints and may vary across deployments,
tablished patterns of normal system behavior. This is especially which motivates model-agnostic explanation mechanisms that
important in modern security environments, where the diversity generalize across detectors.
and sophistication of threats continue to evolve rapidly, making 2) Local Explanation: Unlike model-specific methods that
it impractical to enumerate all possible attack types in advance. require internal access to model structures or parameters, model-
 Traditional signature-based detection systems rely on prede- agnostic techniques treat the target model as a closed box and
fined patterns and can only recognize known threats. In contrast, seek to explain its predictions solely based on input-output
anomaly detection offers the ability to discover novel or zero- behavior. Local explanation, as a representative approach, aims
day attacks by flagging deviations as potential anomalies. In to interpret a model’s prediction for a specific input by quanpractical settings, the abundance of benign data and the scarcity tifying the importance of each feature in the decision-making
of labeled attack samples further motivate the adoption of un- process. Among the most prominent local explanation framesupervised anomaly detection models, which can learn normal works are LIME (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanabehavior from unlabeled data without requiring explicit attack tions) [11] and SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) [12].
labels. Recent years have witnessed significant progress in unsu- These methods operate by constructing simple, interpretable
pervised anomaly detection methods for security applications. surrogate models—such as sparse linear regressors or decision
Representative approaches include one-class classifiers such as trees—in the vicinity of the input instance under consideration.
One-Class SVM (OCSVM) [26], [27], [28], tree-based models For example, LIME perturbs the features of a sample to generate
like Isolation Forest (iForest) [29], [30], and neural network- synthetic neighbors and fits a local model to approximate the
based techniques such as autoencoders (AE) and variational original black-box model’s behavior around that point. These
autoencoders (VAE) [31]. methods have been applied to explain various unsupervised
 Despite these advances, the widespread adoption of anomaly models [37], [38], [39].
detection in high-stakes security contexts remains hindered by In the security domain, local explanations have proved valuthe lack of interpretability and transparency in modern machine able for investigating individual alerts or suspicious activities
learning models. Security operators must be able to understand detected by anomaly detection systems. For instance, Guo
and trust the decisions made by automated systems, especially et al. leveraged local interpretable models to analyze malware
when incorrect predictions could result in substantial operational classification results, offering actionable insights for analysts
or financial losses [15]. As a result, enhancing the interpretability to prioritize incident response [14]. Similarly, Sipple applied
of anomaly detection models has become a research priority in integrated gradients [40], a local explanation technique, to trace
both academia and industry. root causes in IoT device failures [41].
 Discussion: While local attribution provides instance-level
B. Model Interpretation evidence, it can be sensitive to neighborhood definition and
 To address this issue, explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) perturbation strategies, leading to unstable attributions in highhas gradually been introduced into the anomaly detection [32], dimensional feature spaces. More importantly, local explana-
[33], [34], [35]. In this section, we review representative works tions alone do not summarize the detector’s system-level decialong four lines: model-specific explanation, model-agnostic sion logic, which is crucial for auditing and proactive defense
6688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE I
COMPARISON OF EXPLANATION METHODS FOR ANOMALY DETECTION; ∗ LOCAL METHODS MAY PROVIDE LIMITED COUNTERFACTUAL SAMPLES VIA SAMPLING
 OR PERTURBATION, BUT ARE NOT DESIGNED FOR MINIMAL CHANGES; (  ) INDICATES PARTIAL OR LIMITED SUPPORT

in security operations. This motivates approaches that produce linear models [21], and decision lists [50], to approximate and
global, human-auditable rules while retaining the ability to explain the predictions of any well-trained model. In related rederive instance-level evidence. search, authors have constructed global explanations in the form
 3) Counterfactual Explanation: The central idea of counter- of decision trees to provide insight into black-box models [19].
factual explanation is to answer “what if” questions by iden- The framework proposed by Jacobs et al. generates tree models
tifying the minimal changes needed to an input instance in using existing machine learning models and training datasets to
order to alter the model’s prediction. For instance, in anomaly explain security-related decisions [20].
detection, a counterfactual explanation provides insight into how However, most of these global explanation approaches have
an anomalous instance could be transformed into a normal one, been developed in supervised learning settings, where labeled
offering clear and actionable guidance to analysts. examples of both normal and anomalous data are available. This
 The general methodology for generating counterfactuals in- limits their direct applicability to the unsupervised anomaly
volves solving an optimization problem to find the closest data detection scenarios, where only normal data is typically used for
point whose predicted class is different from the original. This training. Additionally, while some works can extract rules from
paradigm was formalized by Wachter et al. who proposed coun- unsupervised anomaly detection models [48], they still assume
terfactual explanations as a means to interpret automated deci- that the training dataset contains sufficient outliers to determine
sions while treating the underlying model as a black box [42]. decision boundaries, which may not hold true in practice due to
Extensions to this idea have focused on generating diverse coun- the model’s generalization capabilities.
terfactuals for greater coverage and robustness, as demonstrated Recent studies have also attempted to aggregate multiple local
by DiCE [43]. Counterfactual methods are also developed for explanation models to provide nearly global explanations [51],
complex data structures, such as graphs [44] and recommender [52], [53]. However, these approaches incur high computational
systems [45]. costs when processing large-scale data and require a trade-off
 In the field of security and anomaly detection, counterfactual between fidelity and coverage. Although techniques such as
explanations are emerging as a valuable tool for operational knowledge distillation can reduce complexity and enhance extransparency and actionable insight. For example, Guzman et al. plainability through model transformation [54], [55], their priexplored counterfactual explanations for detecting SQL injec- mary goal remains model compression and accuracy assurance,
tion attacks, helping analysts understand how an attack instance rather than providing high-fidelity explanations of the original
might be altered to avoid detection or be classified as benign [46]. models. Consequently, achieving comprehensive interpretabil-
Similarly, counterfactuals can provide interpretable recommen- ity for unsupervised anomaly detection while maintaining high
dations for revising loan applications in a security-critical finan- detection performance remains a challenge.
cial context [47]. Summary and gap: Overall, existing methods address com-
 Discussion: Despite their promise, counterfactual methods plementary facets of interpretability—instance-level attribution,
are often developed for supervised classification and implicitly actionable recourse, or global decision summaries—but often
assume well-defined class boundaries and access to labeled out- rely on assumptions that are misaligned with unsupervised
comes. In unsupervised anomaly detection, decision boundaries anomaly detection in security (e.g., access to high-quality labels
are induced by normal-only training and can be difficult to or abundant outliers). This leaves an important gap: producing
query with label-guided objectives, making validity and realism faithful global rules for normal-only trained detectors while
constraints harder to satisfy. still enabling instance-level evidence and actionable guidance
 4) Global Explanation: Global methods are designed to pro- in a unified manner. As summarized in Table I, Ano2Rule is
vide a comprehensive, human-understandable summary of a designed to fill this gap by extracting high-fidelity global rules
model’s overall decision-making process across the entire input from black-box unsupervised detectors and supporting local
space. Global interpretability is particularly important for secu- and counterfactual explanations derived from the same rule
rity operators, who must not only investigate individual alerts representation.
but also understand and audit system-wide detection logic to
ensure reliable deployment, compliance, and risk mitigation.
 A common strategy for global explanation is to approximate III. OVERVIEW
the black-box model with an inherently interpretable surrogate, To tackle the interpretability challenges in unsupervised
such as decision trees [19], [20], [49], symbolic rules [18], sparse anomaly detection within security contexts, we introduce a novel
LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY 6689

 Definition 2. (Global Explanation by Rule Extraction):
 Given a trained model f with its anomaly threshold ϕ and
 the training set X, we obtain an in-distribution rule set C =
 {C1 , C2 , . . .} that explains how the model f profiles the distribution of normal data. A rule C = . . . ∧ (xi  υi ) ∧ . . . ∧
 (xj  υj ) is a conjunction of several axis-aligned constraints
 on a subset of the feature space, where υi is the bound for the
 i-th dimension and  ∈ {≤, >}.
 Let x ∈ C indicate that a data sample satisfies a rule. From
 C, we can build a surrogate model hC (x), whose inference is to
 regard a data sample that cannot match any of the extracted rules
 as anomalous:
 hC (x) = ¬(x ∈ C1 ) ∧ ¬(x ∈ C2 ) ∧ . . ., Ci ∈ C. (1)
 Design Goal: We expect the extracted rules to have a high
 fidelity to the original model, that is, a similar coverage of normal
 data (i.e., true negative rate), and a similar detection rate of
 anomalies (i.e., true positive rate). We formulate our objective
 as follows:
 arg min LX ∼D (C, f, ϕ) + LX D (C, f, ϕ). (2)
 C

 B. Methodology Overview
 To minimize the first item in (2), suppose the training data X
 can well represent the distribution D, a straightforward approach
Fig. 2. A high-level illustration of Ano2Rule; small circles are unlabeled
normal data; dashed curves are the decision boundary of the black-box model; is to find the bound of X as rules, such as using a hypercube
vertical/horizontal lines are extracted rules at each step. to enclose the data samples which can easily achieve the minimization of the partial loss Lx∈X (C, f, ϕ) = 0. However, as D
 is not a prior distribution and we do not have labeled abnormal
framework called Ano2Rule, which is designed to extract in- samples, the second item LX D (C, f, ϕ) is neither deterministic
terpretable, rule-based explanations that align closely with the nor estimable unless we create sufficient random samples and
original anomaly detection model, enhancing transparency and query f , which is challenging given the high-dimensional space
operational efficacy. As shown in Fig. 2, it leverages an Interior of X .
Clustering Tree (IC-Tree) for feature space partitioning and As prior studies [25], [41] suggest, normal data are typically
a Compositional Boundary Exploration (CBE) algorithm for multimodal, i.e., the overall distribution is formed by multiple
precise decision boundary inference. compositional distributions. For example, a server supports
 multiple services such as web, email and database. The representations of these services can be disparate and located in
A. Problem Definition different regions in feature space with little transition between
 Let X ⊆ Rd be the variable space of d-dimensional features; the regions, making it infeasible to find a uniform rule set to
x and xi denote a data sample and its i-th dimension of features. accurately estimate the original model.
We give the following definitions for the rest of the paper: Based on this intuition, Ano2Rule adopts a divide-and-
 Definition 1. (Unsupervised Anomaly Detection): Given un- conquer approach, as shown in Fig. 2. First, we propose an
labeled negative (normal) data X sampled from a stationary Interior Clustering Tree (IC-Tree) to find the distribution dedistribution D for training, an unsupervised model estimates composition rules, which cut the feature space into subspaces
the probability density function f (x) ≈ PX ∼D (x), and detects so that each subspace contains data belonging to the same
an anomaly via a low probability f (x) < ϕ, where ϕ > 0 is a compositional distribution. Then, we design a Compositional
threshold determined by the model itself or by humans. Boundary Exploration algorithm (CBE) to explore the decision
 It is noted that the threshold ϕ is a non-zero value, meaning boundary on each compositional distribution. Particularly, the
that the model inevitably generates false positives, which is a algorithm starts from the minimal hypercube that encloses all
common setting in most of the works [1], [2], [3] even though data of the distribution, and finds the boundary by recursively exthe false positive rate can be very low. Besides, the normal data tending the boundary following the optimal direction guided by
may occasionally be contaminated or handled with errors. We a gradient approximation. Upon obtaining the decision boundary
consider the anomaly detection tolerant of noisy data, but their of a distribution, the corresponding boundary inference rule can
proportion in the training dataset is small and we do not have be extracted. Last, the final rule set can be obtained by merging
deterministic labels of the training data. the distribution decomposition rule and the boundary inference
6690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

rule of each compositional distribution. We formally define the splitting criteria, enabling it to work in a completely unsuperdistribution decomposition rule and the boundary inference rule vised manner. This decomposition approach provides a clearer
as follows: understanding of how different regions of the feature space
 Definition 3. (Distribution Decomposition Rule): Denoted correspond to the model’s decision-making logic, enhancing
by CkI that decomposes the overall distribution of normal both transparency and interpretability.
data D into K compositional distributions, i.e., PX ∼D (x) = Node Splitting: Given the data N at a tree node, we first obtain
K
 k=1 φk · PX ∼Dk (x|x ∈ Ck ) where φk denotes the weight of
 I the output of the anomaly detection model f (x) for x ∈ N .
each compositional distribution, so that a data sample x ∼ Dk Similar to decision trees, the node of an IC-Tree finds a splitting
has significantly small probability of belonging to other distri- point s = (i, bi ) that maximizes the gain:
butions.
 |N l | |N r |
 Definition 4. (Boundary Inference Rule): Denoted by CkE s = arg max I(N ) − I(N l ) − I(N r ), (4)
 s |N | |N |
that estimates the decision boundary of the original model
for each distribution Dk , i.e., arg minCkE LX ∼Dk (CkE , f, ϕ) + where bi is the splitting value for the i-th dimension, N l and N r
LX Dk (CkE , f, ϕ). are the data split to the left and right child nodes, |N | denotes
 With the definition of these two types of rules, we translate the number of data samples, and I is a criterion function such
the objective in (2) to the following objective as our intuition as Gini index I = 2p(1 − p) for binary classification with the
indicates. probability of p. Specifically, we let p be the average output of
 Proposition 1: The original objective can be estimated by the anomaly detection model, which can be interpreted as the
finding the union of the conjunction of distribution decomposi- expectation of the probability that the data belong to the same
tion rules and boundary inference rules for each compositional distribution:
distribution: 1 
 p = Ex∈N [PX ∼D (x)] = f (x). (5)
 
 K |N |
 x∈N
 arg min LX ∼Dk (Ck , f, ϕ) + LX Dk (Ck , f, ϕ), (3)
 k=1
 Ck An IC-Tree continues to split nodes until it satisfies one of
 the following conditions: i) the number of data samples at
where Ck = CkI ∧ CkE . the node |N | = 1; ii) for any two of the data samples at the
 node ∀x(i) , x(j) ∈ N , |f (x(i) ) − f (x(j) )| < ; iii) it reaches
 IV. DESIGN DETAILS a maximum depth τ , which is a hyperparameter. The IC-Tree
A. Interior Clustering Tree focuses on the subset of features that contribute the most to the
 variability of anomaly scores at each split, thereby ensuring a
 To derive the distribution decomposition rules and partition more accurate separation of data distribution.
the feature space into distinct subspaces, it is essential to first de- Distribution Decomposition Rule Extraction: A trained ICfine the compositional distribution Dk . In unsupervised anomaly Tree that has K leaf nodes (K ≤ 2τ ) represents K distributions
detection, the lack of labeled data makes it challenging to directly separated from the overall distribution D. Suppose the k-th leaf
infer decision boundaries. By defining Dk , we can decom- node has a depth of τ . A distribution decomposition rule that
pose the complex overall distribution D into interpretable sub- describes the k-th compositional distribution can be extracted
distributions, enabling a rule-based description of the model’s by the conjunction of the splitting constraints from the root to
decision-making process. Although labeled data is unavailable, the leaf node:
the estimation of the overall distribution D from the outputs of
the black-box model can serve as a basis for this decomposition. CkI = (xi 1 bi |s1 = (i, bi )) ∧ . . . ∧ (xj τ bj |sτ = (j, bj )),
 Suppose two data samples x(i) and x(j) belong to the same (6)
distribution Dk . In that case, the difference in their probabilities
 where  is “≤” if the decision path goes left or “>” if the deciof belonging to the overall distribution D will be less than a
 sion path goes right. Each rule set CkI describes the conditions
small constant . Based on the definition of the distribution
 of the k-th sub-distribution in the feature space. These rules
decomposition rules and compositional distributions, if these
 enable the accurate classification of new data points into their
two data samples belong to the same distribution Dk , their
 corresponding sub-distributions.
probability of belonging to any other distribution PX∼Dl (x)
(where l = k) is nearly zero. Consequently, the probability of
these samples belonging to the overall distribution PX∼D (x), B. Compositional Boundary Exploration
which is a weighted sum of the probabilities across all compo- Following the generation of distinct subspaces by the IC-Tree,
sitional distributions, is approximately equal to their probability we propose the Compositional Boundary Exploration (CBE)
of belonging to PX∼Dk (x). algorithm (described in Algorithm 1) to precisely define and
 Based on this, we propose a tree-based model dubbed Interior refine the decision boundaries within each subspace. The CBE
Clustering Tree (IC-Tree), which extends the CART decision algorithm uses the minimal hypercube that encloses the normal
tree [56]. The main difference between IC-Tree and CART is data of each compositional distribution as a starting point.
that, rather than splitting data based on ground truth labels, Further, we refer to adversarial attacks [57] and propose a
IC-Tree uses the probability output by the original model as method to approximate the optimal direction to explore the
LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY 6691

decision boundary, which makes the algorithm more efficient TABLE II
 COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF ANO2RULE
and accurate to estimate the decision boundary.
 Starting from Hypercube (line 1): Let X k denote the training
data falling into the k-th leaf node of an IC-Tree that represents a compositional distribution. Recall the definition of
boundary inference rules that target min LX ∼Dk (CkE , f, ϕ) +
LX Dk (CkE , f, ϕ). We use the minimal hypercube Hk as a starting point of boundary inference rules to bound every dimension
of the data samples in X k judged by the original model as Rule Acquisition (line 12): Once the iteration stops, boundary
normal, which obviously achieves Lx∈X k (Hk , f, ϕ) = 0. The constraints are generated for each dimension.If the iteration
minimal hypercube is enclosed by 2 × d axis-aligned hyper- stops due to the first condition, we produce a boundary constraint
planes, which can be characterized by the following rule: for each dimension using the coordinate of êext that extends
 the boundary of the hypercube, i.e., ci = (xi  êext,i ), where
 Hk = (υ1− ≤ x1 ≤ υ1+ ) ∧ . . . ∧ (υd− ≤ xd ≤ υd+ ), (7)
  is “≤” if êext,i is greater than υi+ , or “>” if êext,i is less
where υi− = min(xi |f (x) > ϕ, x ∈ X k ) and υi+ = max(xi |f than υi− . If the iteration stops due to the second condition, it
(x) > ϕ, x ∈ X k ). means the algorithm encounters difficulties in moving towards
 Explorer Sampling (line 4∼6): The CBE algorithm explores the decision boundary by perturbing this feature dimension. We
the decision boundary of the original model by estimating the calculate the difference between the model prediction of the
bound of one feature dimension at a time. For i-th dimen- last auxiliary explorer and that of the initial explorers on the
sion, we uniformly sample Ne data points on each hyperplane hyperplane. If the difference is smaller than a threshold δ, we
of the hypercube, i.e., e(1) , . . ., e(Ne ) ∈ Hk ∧ (xi = υi ), υi ∈ decide that this feature dimension is a contour line, i.e., it has no
{υi− , υi+ }, which are called the initial explorers for this hyper- significant correlation with the model prediction. In this case,
plane. For an initial explorer e, we further sample Ns auxiliary we do not produce any constraints for this dimension. If the
explorers near it from a truncated multivariant Gaussian distribu- difference is greater than the threshold, we produce constraints
tion denoted by N (e, Σ, i). Particularly, the center of sampling in the same way as those produced under the first condition. The
is the explorer e and the radius of sampling is constrained by final boundary inference rule is the disjunction of the hypercube
the sampling matrix Σ = diag(ρ|υ1+ − υ1− |, . . ., ρ|υd+ − υd− |), and the constraints on each dimension.
where ρ is a hyperparameter, and the sampling on i-th dimension is half-truncated to only keep the distribution outside the C. Merging Final Rule Set
hypercube as we desire to extend the boundary. With Ne × Ns
 When the stopping condition is met, we merge the distribution
auxiliary explorers in total, we query the original model and use
 decomposition rules and boundary inference rules on each com-
Beam Search to select Ne samples with the minimal probability
 positional distribution by their conjunction, and the final rule set
of being normal as the candidate explorers for the next iteration.
 is the union of the extracted rules:
 Gradient Approximation (line 7∼9): Though we have obtained Ne candidate explorers in the previous step, using them 
 K
directly for the next iteration does not guarantee the optimal di- C= Ck , where Ck = CkI ∧ CkE . (10)
rection of movement towards the decision boundary. To find the k=1
optimal direction, we utilize the Fast Gradient Sign Method [57]
that employs gradient ascent to find the direction of feature We present the complete process of Ano2Rule in Algorithm 2.
perturbation. However, we do not know the loss function of Generally, the extracted rules serve as an “allowlist”, describing
the original model in black-box scenarios. To deal with it, given the range of multiple features that can be considered normal and
a selected auxiliary explorer ê that is sampled around an initial judging others as anomalies, such as:
explorer e on the i-th dimension hyperplane, we approximate the If xj1 < θ1 and xj2 ≥ θ2 , then normal
i-th dimension of the model gradient (i.e., the partial derivative)
by the slope of a linear model across the two data points, and use
the midpoint with its i-th dimension minus the approximation
as the new explorer for the next iteration: V. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
 A. Design Rationale and Theoretical Insights
 ei + êi
 ei, next = − η · sign(∇i ), (8)
 2 1) Divide-and-Conquer Validity: One of the key claims that
 ∂f (x) f (e) − f (ê) lay the theoretical foundation for our method is Proposition 1,
 ∇i = ≈ , (9) which employs a divide-and-conquer approach by translating
 ∂xi ei − êi
 the objective in (2) to (3). We will prove that such an approach
where sign(·) is the sign function, and η is a hyperparameter to is feasible: the extracted rules will have a high fidelity to the origcontrol the stride of one iteration. The iteration stops when i) an inal model, that is, a similar coverage of normal data (i.e., true
auxiliary explorer êext that satisfies f (êext ) < ϕ is found, or ii) negative rate, TNR), and a similar detection rate of anomalies
it reaches the maximum number of iterations. (i.e., true positive rate, TPR).
6692 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 Algorithm 1: Compositional Boundary Exploration. Proof: The sum of the minimum losses on each of the compositional distributions is calculated by an iteratively cumulative
 process. Let Lj be the sum of the minimum losses on each of
 the compositional distributions at the j-th iteration:
 
 j
 Lj = min(LX ∼Dk (Ck , f, ϕ) + LX Dk (Ck , f, ϕ)). (12)
 k=1
 
 Let X ∼ jk=1 Dk represent a variable belonging to any of the
 compositional distributions D1 , . . ., Dj , which is the same as the
 overall distribution X ∼ D. We prove the Loop Invariant of Lj
 during the iteration, which always satisfies:
 Lj = min(LjT N R + LjT P R ) − ψ,
  j 
 where LjT N R = LX ∼j Dk Ck , f, ϕ ,
 k=1 k=1
  j 
 j
 LT P R = L X   j D k Ck , f, ϕ (13)
 k=1 k=1

 1) For the first iteration,
 L1 = min LX ∼D1 (C1 , f, ϕ) + LX D1 (C1 , f, ϕ)
 = min LX ∼D (C, f, ϕ) + LX D (C, f, ϕ) − ψ (14)
 obviously holds where ψ = 0.
 2) Suppose the (13) holds at the j-th iteration. For the (j + 1)-
 th iteration, we have the following derivations:
 Algorithm 2: Rule Extraction Process of Ano2Rule. Lj+1 = min(LjT N R + LjT P R ) − ψ
 + min(LX ∼Dj+1 (Cj+1 , f, ϕ)+LX Dj+1 (Cj+1 , f, ϕ))

 = min(Lj+1 j+1
 T N R + LT P R ) − ψ
 j+1 
 + LX ∼j Dk ∩Dj+1 Ck , f, ϕ
 k=1 k=1
 j+1 
 + LX j Dk ∩Dj+1 Ck , f, ϕ , (15)
 k=1 k=1
 
 where j+1 k=1 Dk ∩ Dj+1 represents the overlap area between
 the conjunction of the compositional distributions j+1 k=1 Dk
 and the (j + 1)-th compositional distribution Dj+1 . Recall the
 definition of the compositional distributions that a data sample
 belonging to one compositional distribution has a significantly
 small probability of belonging to other compositional distributions, meaning that the overlap area between the compositional
 distributions is significantly small. Therefore, the loss with
 We prove the following lemma equivalent to Proposition 1:
 respect to the overlap area is also significantly small, given the
 Lemma 1: If the distribution decomposition rules and the
 data samples belonging to the area are significantly rare. Let
inference boundary rules that minimize the loss on each of the j+1 
compositional distributions are found, the sum of the minimum ψ = ψ + LX ∼j Dk ∩Dj+1 Ck , f, ϕ
losses on each of the compositional distributions can estimate k=1 k=1
 j+1 
the minimum loss on the overall distribution with a significantly
 + LX j Dk ∩Dj+1 Ck , f, ϕ , (16)
small error ψ, i.e., k=1 k=1

 and we can get the final result of Lj+1 :
 min LX ∼D (C, f, ϕ) + LX D (C, f, ϕ)
 Lj+1 = min(Lj+1 j+1
 T N R + LT P R ) − ψ, (17)
 
 K
 = min(LX ∼Dk (Ck , f, ϕ) + LX Dk (Ck , f, ϕ)) + ψ, which proves the loop invariant in (13). When j = K, as the
 k=1 the conjunction of the compooverall distribution is equal to 
 sitional distributions, i.e., D = Kk=1 Dk , we prove (11) holds
 where Ck = CkI ∧ CkE , ψ ≥ 0. (11) and Lemma 1 is correct.
LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY 6693

 2) Why IC-Tree Enables Unsupervised Decomposition: Al- is bounded by the hyperparameter τ , so the number of leaves
though the black-box detector operates in a high-dimensional is upper bounded by the number of leaf nodes K ≤ 2τ , and in
feature space, its scalar output f (x) can be viewed as a com- practice the stopping criterion based on score consistency further
pressed statistic of the semantic evidence used by the detector limits the number of splits.
to assess normality. We formalize this by treating f (x) as an CBE: For each leaf node k, CBE refines an axis-aligned
approximate sufficient summary for partitioning normal behav- boundary rule by exploring one feature dimension at a time. On
ior: there exists an (unknown) partition {Dk }K
 k=1 of the overall the i-th dimension, each iteration samples Ne initial explorers
distribution D such that samples from the same component on the current hyperplane and Ns auxiliary explorers around
induce similar normality scores, i.e., each initial explorer, resulting in Ne · Ns candidate queries to
 the black-box model per iteration. Let T denote the maximum
 ∀x(i) , x(j) ∼ Dk , |f (x(i) ) − f (x(j) )| ≤ , (18) number of iterations used for one dimension (bounded by the
for a small . Under this score-compactness assumption, a desir- algorithm’s stopping criterion). Then the total number of blackable decomposition is one that minimizes the within-node score box queries for one leaf is O(d · T · Ne · Ns ), and the total
   CBE complexity over all leaves is O(K · d · T · Ne · Ns ). In
dispersion. Let Varf (N ) = |N 1 ¯ 2 denote
 | x∈N f (x) − fN
 addition to black-box queries, beam search introduces an extra
the empirical variance of scores in node N . Then a split s that
 sorting/selection cost of O(Ne · Ns log(Ne · Ns )) per iteration;
reduces Varf yields a partition closer to the latent components in
 however, since model queries dominate the runtime in our set-
(18). In IC-Tree, maximizing the gain based on I(·) is a surrogate
 ting, we report the query-dominated complexity in Table II and
objective that favors separating nodes with heterogeneous score
 observe that it matches empirical runtimes.
distributions, which empirically reduces Varf in child nodes and
 Execution: At inference time, Ano2Rule first routes a sample
thus produces subspaces where f (x) is approximately constant.
 down the IC-Tree to identify its leaf (cost O(τ )), and then
Consequently, the stopping criterion |f (x(i) ) − f (x(j) )| < 
 evaluates the corresponding boundary rule. If each rule contains
naturally identifies subspaces that are close to score-compact
 on average m̄ effective predicates (i.e., dimensions with finite
components, making subsequent rule inference feasible without
 constraints), rule evaluation takes O(m̄). Therefore, the overall
labels.
 execution complexity is O(τ + m̄) when using the matched leaf
 3) Why CBE Improves Subspace Fidelity: Fix a leaf k prorule, and is upper bounded by O(|C| · m̄) if one evaluates all
duced by IC-Tree and consider the black-box decision restricted
 extracted rules. Overall, both training and execution scale linto this subspace. CBE starts from the minimal hypercube Hk ,
 early with the feature dimension d, consistent with the empirical
which encloses all normal samples in X k judged by the blackefficiency that will be reported in the experiments.
box model. Therefore, Hk is a feasible initialization that satisfies
[f (x) > ϕ] = 1 for all x ∈ X k while x |= Hk , implying zero
empirical loss on observed normal data. CBE then refines the VI. FRAMEWORK EXTENSIBILITY
boundary by probing the black box near the current axis-aligned
 The proposed rule extraction approach is not only effective for
faces and updating one dimension at a time toward the decision
 global explanation, but also exhibits remarkable extensibility to
boundary. Importantly, the update always moves the correspondother forms of interpretability that are vital in practical security
ing face outwards until a boundary-crossing is detected (or the
 applications. By providing explicit and human-understandable
dimension is identified as a contour line), which makes the
 characterizations of normal data boundaries, Ano2Rule offers a
covered normal region monotonically non-decreasing across
 flexible foundation for supporting multiple interpretability tasks
iterations. As a result, CBE progressively reduces false negatives
 within a unified paradigm. This versatility enables the same set of
caused by an overly conservative enclosure, and the final rule
 extracted rules to serve as the basis for local explanations—such
CkE tends to lie close to the true decision boundary within the
 as feature attribution for individual predictions—as well as counleaf, leading to improved leaf-level fidelity of CkE .
 terfactual reasoning, wherein actionable recourse or remediation
 steps can be systematically generated for anomalous samples.
B. Computational Complexity
 Table II summarizes the computational complexity of A. Local Explanation Via Rule-Based Feature Attribution
Ano2Rule in both the rule-extraction phase and the execution
phase. We further break down the dominant terms to clarify Given an input sample x ∈ Rd , our framework provides
the dependence on the feature dimension, tree structure, and instance-level interpretability by leveraging the explicit, axisblack-box query budget. aligned boundaries of the rule C in the rule set C that
 IC-Tree: The IC-Tree construction follows the standard covers x. Suppose the matched rule C is defined as C =
CART-style procedure: at each internal node, candidate split li ≤ xi ≤ ui , , ∀i = 1, . . . , d, where li and ui denote the lower
thresholds for each feature are evaluated based on an impu- and upper bounds for the i-th feature. For each feature i, we
rity criterion computed from the black-box outputs. With pre- define the attribution score wi for x as
sorting per feature, the split search at a node can be done ⎧
in O(d · |N | log |N |), and summing over all nodes yields an ⎨0, if xi ∈ [li , ui ]
overall complexity of O(d · n log n) in the typical setting, where wi = xi − ui , if xi > ui (19)
 ⎩
d is the feature size and n is the sample number. The tree depth li − xi , if xi < li
6694 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 This formulation quantifies the extent to which each feature verify the advantages of this method in terms of rule extraction
of x deviates from the corresponding boundary of C. If xi lies accuracy, robustness, and interpretability.
within the bounds [li , ui ], it is considered to contribute nothing to
the anomaly for this rule. If xi exceeds the upper or lower bound, A. Experimental Setup
the distance to the closest boundary is taken as its contribution
 In this study, we employ four widely used unsupervised
to the model’s decision.
 anomaly detection models as black-box models, including Au-
 For samples classified as normal (i.e., xi ∈ [li , ui ] for all i),
 toencoders (AE) [1], Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [58],
we further characterize the feature-wise “tightness” of C by
 One-Class Support Vector Machines (OCSVM) [59], and Isoconsidering the interval width: a smaller width ui − li implies
 lation Forests (iForest) [8]. The experiments are conducted
greater sensitivity of the model’s decision to changes in xi . One
 using five benchmark network traffic datasets: CIC-IDS2017,
may define a potential importance score for such features as
 CSE-CIC-IDS20181 [60], TON-IoT [61], CIC-IoT [62], and
wi = 1/(ui − li ).
 RT-IoT2022 [63]. These datasets cover different feature dimen-
 In summary, this rule-based attribution provides a local exsions and attack-to-normal traffic ratios, facilitating a compreplanation of how each feature of x influences the model’s
 hensive evaluation of the framework across multiple scenarios.
prediction, allowing analysts to clearly identify which feature
 Each dataset is represented in tabular format, with each row
deviations are most responsible for the detection result.
 corresponding to a network traffic record and each column representing a statistical feature, such as the mean packet size and
B. Counterfactual Explanation Via Rule-Based Projection
 inter-arrival time intervals. Additionally, each dataset includes
 Given an anomalous sample x ∈ Rd not covered by any rule in multiple attack types; for instance, the CIC-IDS2017 dataset
the set C, our framework constructs counterfactual explanations contains attacks such as DDoS, DoS, and others.
by minimally modifying x so that the altered sample xcf falls The datasets are randomly divided into training, validation,
strictly inside the boundary of at least one rule C ∈ C. To ensure and testing sets with a 6:2:2 ratio. Only normal traffic data is
that the counterfactual sample is robustly accepted as normal used to train the anomaly detection models and calibrate their
(i.e., not exactly on the boundary), we introduce a small margin hyperparameters. The dataset statistics (including #Attack and
δ for each feature, proportional to the width of the rule’s interval. #Benign) and the performance of the trained anomaly detectors
 Formally, for a given rule C = li ≤ xi ≤ ui , ∀i = 1, . . . , d, are summarized in Table III, where we report AUC as well as
we define δi = γ · (ui − li ) where γ > 0 is a margin factor, e.g., the TPR/TNR metrics for each black-box model.
γ = 0.05. The counterfactual for each feature is then computed Baselines: We employ five prior explanation methods as
as: baselines: 1) We use [48] that extracts rules from unsupervised
 ⎧
 ⎨li + δi , if xi < li anomaly detection (UAD); 2) For other global methods, we use
 xcf = ui − δi , if xi > ui (20) the estimated greedy decision tree (EGDT) proposed by [19],
 i
 ⎩
 xi , if xi ∈ [li , ui ] and Trustee [20] that specifically explains security applications;
 3) We also consider one method LIME [11] that can use a
 To select the most plausible counterfactual, we evaluate can-
 Submodular Pick algorithm to aggregate local explanations
didates for all C ∈ C and minimize the following cost function:
 into global explanations, and a knowledge distillation (KD)
 method [55] that globally converts a black-box model to a
 L(x, xcf ) = α · |x − xcf |1 + (1 − α) · S(x, xcf ) (21) self-explained decision tree.
 For a fair and reproducible comparison, we follow the hywhere | · |1 denotes the 1 distance, and S(x, xcf ) is the sparsity
 perparameter recommendations in the original papers (or their
term defined as the number of features for which xi = xcf i . Here, official implementations) for all baseline methods. Specifically,
α is a weighting coefficient balancing proximity and sparsity and
 for EGDT, we follow the evaluation protocol in their paper by
we set α = 0.5.
 using a decision tree of size 31 and a query budget of n = 1000
 The optimal counterfactual explanation is then given by
 for estimating split criteria on tabular data. For TRUSTEE, we
 xcf∗ = arg cf min L(x, xcf ) (22) adopt the recommended starting-point configuration with S =
 x ∈P(C,x)
 10 outer iterations, N = 50 inner iterations, the training subset
where P(C, x) is the set of all margin-adjusted projections of x size M = 0.3|D|, and the branch-pruning parameter k = 10.
into rules C ∈ C that yield a normal prediction. This approach For LIME, we generate N = 15000 perturbed samples to fit the
ensures that the generated counterfactuals are both actionable local surrogate and report the top-K = 10 important features;
(few and small changes) and robust (strictly inside the rule), the kernel width is selected following the standard practice sugproviding clear, operational guidance for remediation in security gested in the original work. For REDT, we use the default mixing
applications. coefficient α = 0.2 suggested as a generally effective choice in
 their paper, with the remaining tree-related settings following the
 VII. EVALUATION authors’ implementation. Note that all baselines are restricted to
 This section evaluates the performance and effectiveness of
the rule extraction method proposed for unsupervised anomaly 1 We use the corrected versions of these two datasets as released by recent
detection models. Through experiments on five datasets, we studies [60] to address known labeling issues.
LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY 6695

 TABLE III
 SUMMARY OF DATASETS AND PERFORMANCE OF TRAINED ANOMALY DETECTION MODELS (AUC, TPR, AND TNR)

the same training manners as ours, i.e., they can only access dataset, Ano2Rule achieves perfect TPR and TNR values of
the predominantly normal training data for rule extraction. In 1.00, substantially outperforming LIME and KD. These results
particular, for methods that are originally designed to leverage demonstrate that our method not only excels across different
labeled data (e.g., TRUSTEE), we still follow this constraint and datasets but also offers highly reliable explanations for security
train their surrogate procedure using the training set with only applications. We note that this behavior is expected for labelbenign labels, without introducing additional anomaly labels. dependent extraction methods such as Trustee, whose fidelity
 Metrics: We refer to the metrics outlined in [22] to evaluate optimization typically assumes access to high-quality labeled
rule extraction methods. The following key evaluation metrics data (including representative samples from different classes);
are presented in this section: Fidelity (FD) refers to the pro- under the unsupervised anomaly detection setting where only
portion of samples where the predictions of the original model benign training data is available, such methods are inherently
and the surrogate model are consistent. This metric reflects the limited in learning a faithful surrogate and thus may yield
trustworthiness of the explanation. Robustness (RB) measures lower-fidelity rules.
the ability of the surrogate model to maintain the same prediction Notably, although Ano2Rule may not be the top performer
as the original model when the input undergoes small perturba- on every individual metric, it delivers highly consistent and
tions, indicating the method’s stability. True Positive Rate (TPR) robust results: for example, Ano2Rule achieves a score above
and True Negative Rate (TNR) evaluate the method’s ability to 0.95 on 50 out of 64 (78.1%) evaluation settings, covering all
detect positive and negative class samples, respectively. These datasets, black-box models, and metrics. In contrast, some basemetrics indicate whether a method meets the requirements for line methods exhibit larger fluctuations, with high scores only
global interpretation and helps avoid alarm fatigue caused by on certain datasets but significant drops elsewhere. This level
false positives in highly imbalanced security applications [64]. of stability and balanced performance underlines the practical
 value of Ano2Rule in real-world applications, where dependable
 interpretability across a variety of conditions is often more
B. Quantitative Analysis of Interpretability important than isolated peak results.
 In our comprehensive performance evaluation (as shown in Considering that obtaining a “clean” training set requires
Table IV), Ano2Rule demonstrates superior performance across huge manual effort in reality [65], we also assess the efficacy
various anomaly detection models and datasets. First, it consis- of Ano2Rule under varying percentages of “noisy” data. We
tently achieves high levels of True Positive Rate (TPR) and True evaluate the fidelity of extracted rules using two approaches for
Negative Rate (TNR). For example, on the TON-IoT dataset, all the injection of noisy data: 1) random noise; 2) mislabeled data
detection models reach a TPR of 1.00, while the lowest TNR from other classes, i.e., attack data. The results are shown in
is as high as 0.9715. This highlights that our method not only Fig. 3. We find that the impact of the noisy data proportion is
accurately detects anomalous data but also effectively identifies not significant: 36 of 40 fidelity scores in the table preserve over
normal data, significantly reducing false positives and false neg- 0.95, and the variation of fidelity scores is not obvious with
atives. Moreover, Ano2Rule exhibits outstanding performance the increase of noisy data for most of the models. This shows
in terms of Fidelity (FD) and Robustness (RB). The Fidelity that our rule extraction method can retain similar performance
scores across all datasets exceed 0.95, with more than half of to the black-box model that it extracts from. Nonetheless, the
them surpassing 0.99. This indicates that our method can accu- results of iForest also reveal that a sufficiently large proportion
rately replicate the predictions of the black-box models, ensuring of noisy data may cause a certain negative impact on the rule
the correctness of global explanations. The RB scores range extraction for certain models. Overall, our method achieves
between 0.9890 and 1.00 across all datasets, demonstrating high-quality rule extraction for anomaly detection models by
that the method maintains stable performance even under data balancing sensitivity and specificity. This capability makes it a
noise and variations, thereby ensuring its reliability in real-world highly reliable solution in noisy environments.
deployments. To assess the usability of the rules, we evaluated three metrics:
 The baseline methods typically exhibit considerable vari- Number of Rules, Average Rule Length (effective constraints
ability in metrics across different datasets. In contrast, on the per rule), and Top-10 Coverage (benign samples covered by the
CIC-IDS2017 dataset, Ano2Rule improves Fidelity by approx- top-10 rules). As shown in Table V, the framework consistently
imately 0.45 (from 0.533 to 0.9835) and TNR by about 0.16 extracts compact rule sets. For instance, on the TON-IoT dataset,
(from 0.9947 to 0.9915) compared to EGDT. On the TON-IoT the rule counts remain low (21–28) across all black-box models.
6696 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE OF RULE EXTRACTION ON DIFFERENT DATASETS

While generative models (AE/VAE) generally require moder- core of rules effectively encapsulates the vast majority of normal
ate complexity to approximate non-linear manifolds, OCSVM behaviors, ensuring efficiency for rule-based filtering systems.
demonstrates significant adaptability, yielding the most concise
set (12 rules) on the RT-IoT2022 dataset despite its higher
count on TON-IoT. Crucially, the average rule length (≈ 12) is C. Understanding Model Decisions: Case Study
significantly lower than the total feature dimension (e.g., nearly To demonstrate that the rules obtained by our method are in
80 for CIC-IDS2017), indicating that Ano2Rule effectively line with human understanding, we use OCSVM as an example
identifies critical feature subsets. This manageable complexity of black-box models to provide several explanations. We extract
(≤ 35 rules) falls well within human cognitive limits, facilitating rules from a well-trained model and use these rules to predict
rapid manual auditing. Furthermore, even on the complex RT- four typical types of attack data, including Distributed Denial-
IoT2022 dataset, the Top-10 Coverage remains consistently high of-Service (DDoS) attacks, XSS attacks, password attacks, and
(> 87%). This confirms that a small, interpretability-friendly ransomware attacks. Table VI presents the features of the rules
LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY 6697

 2) For each constraint of features in Cx , we compare the
 corresponding feature value of x with the constraint.
 3) For the feature values outside the range of the constraints,
 the Rules of Normality, Feature Values, and Feature Meaning (i.e., the three columns in Table VI) along with the raw
 data sample will be sent as the explanation to the security
 expert for further analysis.
 4) The security expert will analyze the data sample to determine the type of attack (i.e., the Attack column in Table VI)
 and give her/his understanding of the important attributes
 that make her/him identify the attack (i.e., the Human
 Understanding column in Table VI).
 5) If there is a huge gap between the provided explanation
 and expert understanding, it indicates that the anomaly
 detector may not be trustworthy.
 For instance, the data of DDoS attacks fails to match the
 rules in three feature dimensions: the mean of packet sizes,
 the mean of packet inter-arrival time, and the duration of a
 connection. Specifically, the rule “psmean > 101.68” is unmet,
 as the mean packet size in attack data is only 57.33, indicating
 that the packet size in DDoS attacks is significantly smaller.
 Similarly, the rule “iatmean > 0.063” is unmet, with the attack
 value being merely 0.00063, demonstrating extremely short
 inter-arrival times between packets. The rule “dur > 12.61” is
 also unmet, as the attack value is only 0.00126, reflecting the
Fig. 3. Fidelity of extracted rules under varying percentages of noisy training short connection durations characteristic of DDoS attacks. Such
data. results are easy to interpret: the purpose of DDoS attacks is to
 overwhelm the victim’s resources, and attackers achieve this by
 TABLE V consuming resources asymmetrically (i.e., using small packets),
 QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF INTERPRETABILITY METRICS ACROSS
 DATASETS AND BLACK-BOX MODELS sending packets at an extremely high rate (i.e., low inter-arrival
 time), and establishing as many useless connections as possible
 (i.e., short connection durations). These explanations align with
 how humans recognize DDoS attack behaviors.
 These results clearly demonstrate that our extracted rules
 align with human understanding of attack patterns, showing that
 our method can provide precise, human-readable insights into
 black-box anomaly detection models. Besides, we note that the
 gap between the provided explanation and human understanding
 may not only occur when the anomaly detector makes erroneous decisions but also when the anomaly detector correctly
 detects an attack sample by unreasonable features, which is
 called “spurious correlation” or “shortcut learning” [66]. For
 example, the most obvious attribute of a DoS attack is typically
 its high rate of forwarding packets in order to overwhelm the
 victim, while the provided explanation might suggest that IP
 address is an important feature. Specifically, unreliable decisions
 could be made due to inappropriate testbed settings during the
 collection of training data, such as the DoS attack being launched
 from one separate host address while all other normal traffic is
extracted from normal data that cannot be matched by the from other host addresses. Therefore, our explanation can also
attack data and explains how humans can interpret the model’s verify whether the detectors are correctly trained before they are
decisions. Such explanation results are obtained by the following deployed.
steps:
 1) For a reported anomaly x, we use the IC-Tree to pinpoint
 D. Ablation Study
 the rule of normality that judges x as anomalous. It is
 realized by inputting x into the tree and recursively finding To evaluate the contributions of each component in Ano2Rule,
 the leaf node. The rule is denoted by Cx . including the IC-Tree and the CBE algorithm, we conducted
6698 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE VI
 EXAMPLES OF EXPLANATION ON FOUR TYPES OF ATTACKS

 are difficult to express through axis-aligned rules, leading to poor
 interpretability and deployability. In contrast, our method (IC-
 Tree + CBE) not only achieves higher fidelity but also enhances
 the model’s interpretability and deployment potential through
 clear rule representation. In summary, these experimental results
 validate the contributions of each component and demonstrate
 the advantages of Ano2Rule.

 E. Computational Cost
 We also evaluate the computational cost of Ano2Rule with respect to training and prediction. Since the CIC-IDS2017 dataset
 has 80 features in total, we train the model using the first 20,
 40, 60, and 80 features of 4000 samples to investigate the
 influence of feature sizes. The results are shown in Fig. 4(b),
 which demonstrates the average training and prediction time of
 our method. The experimental results indicate that training time
 increases linearly with the number of features. This is because
 Ano2Rule adopts a feature-by-feature strategy to explore the
 decision boundary of the model. As data complexity increases,
 each additional feature expands the data space, forcing the model
 to learn a higher-dimensional representation, thus extending the
 training time. Nevertheless, the training time is around 1 minute,
 which is acceptable and practical for large-scale training.
Fig. 4. (a) Ablation study evaluating the contribution of each component to Regarding prediction time, Ano2Rule is highly efficient, with
overall performance; (b) Average training and prediction time per sample for each inference taking only microseconds. This demonstrates that
different feature sizes. our method, as a rule-based approach, can achieve real-time
 execution for online applications. Furthermore, since the preablation experiments with the following configurations: 1) re- diction phase relies on a set of predefined rules derived from
placing the IC-Tree with the K-Means clustering algorithm; the tree’s decision paths and boundary delineations, the com-
2) using only the CBE algorithm; and 3) replacing the CBE putational process remains lightweight, making it well-suited
algorithm with directly using hypercubes as rules. As shown in for real-time scenarios. It is worth noting that the runtime was
Fig. 4(a), our method (IC-Tree + CBE) outperforms the other measured entirely based on Python implementation. In practice,
methods in terms of fidelity (FD) on both datasets. the prediction time could be further reduced with more efficient
 For instance, in the comparison between using only CBE and code implementations.
the combination of IC-Tree + CBE, the fidelity on the CIC-
IDS2017 dataset increased from 0.9735 to 0.9856, an improvement of 1.24%. On the TON-IoT dataset, the fidelity improved F. Hyperparameter
from 0.9784 to 0.9840, an increase of 0.57%. These results We perform a sensitivity analysis of several hyperparameters
indicate that incorporating IC-Tree significantly enhances the on their influence on the rule extraction. We present four major
model’s fidelity across different datasets. Furthermore, in the hyperparameters in Fig. 5, including the maximum depth τ of an
ablation experiments, although using K-Means (e.g., k = 10 or IC-Tree, Ne number of explorers, the coefficient ρ of sampling,
k = 5) achieved comparable fidelity results, its clustering results and the factor η that controls the stride of an iteration.
LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY 6699

Fig. 5. Sensitivity experiments of hyperparameters.

Fig. 6. Comparing Ano2Rule as a local explanation method to LIME.

Fig. 7. Comparing Ano2Rule as a counterfactual explanation method to DiCE.

 Maximum tree depth: A deeper IC-Tree creates more leaf a broader search radius, as illustrated in Fig. 5(c). This capanodes, which allows for finer decomposition of distributions, bility is crucial for ensuring accurate rule extraction, particueasing the difficulty of rule extraction. However, excessive depth larly in high-dimensional spaces where decision boundaries are
can lead to overfitting, reducing generalization capability. As complex.
shown in Fig. 5(a), τ = 15 provides the best balance between Factor of iteration stride: The iteration stride factor η controls
performance and complexity. This result underscores the impor- the step size in boundary exploration. Larger values of η improve
tance of selecting an appropriate tree depth to avoid redundancy convergence speed and rule quality by facilitating more signifwhile ensuring sufficient resolution in feature space. icant adjustments during each iteration. Fig. 5(d) demonstrates
 Number of Explorers: The number of explorers Ne in Beam that higher values lead to better performance, suggesting that a
Search determines the number of nodes evaluated per iteration. balance between stride length and convergence stability is key
This parameter significantly affects algorithmic efficiency and for optimizing exploration.
accuracy. While a higher Ne helps explore multiple local optima,
it can also introduce redundancy, as shown in Fig. 5(b). An optimal range of 6 to 8 explorers is recommended, ensuring robust
performance without unnecessary computational overhead. G. Extensibility
 Coefficient of sampling: The sampling coefficient ρ deter- To further demonstrate the versatility of Ano2Rule, we evalmines the radius of sampling within a multivariate Gaussian uate its effectiveness as a local and counterfactual explanadistribution. Larger values of ρ enhance the CBE algorithm’s tion method, in comparison with specialized state-of-the-art
ability to identify the decision boundary effectively by enabling approaches.
6700 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 Local Explanation: To assess the effectiveness of Ano2Rule for anomaly detection. IC-Tree recursively partitions the feature
as a local explanation method, we compare its feature attribu- space to capture the hierarchical structure of data distributions,
tion capability with the widely used model-agnostic framework while CBE further explores decision boundaries within each
LIME [11]. We use the Negative Flipping Rate (NFR) as the subspace to enhance detection accuracy. Ano2Rule not only
evaluation metric, which quantifies the proportion of originally ensures global interpretability but also provides fine-grained
normal samples that are reclassified as anomalous by the black- local detection capabilities, offering comprehensive and intubox model after the top-K most important features—identified itive explanations of the anomaly detection model’s reasonby the explanation method—are set to zero. A higher NFR at ing process. Experimental results demonstrated that Ano2Rule
smaller K values indicates that the explanation method is more outperforms existing approaches across multiple key metrics,
accurate in pinpointing the features most critical to the model’s including fidelity, robustness, true positive rate, and true negative
decision. rate, providing robust support for security applications.
 The comparative results are shown in Fig. 6. Across most Although Ano2Rule exhibits excellent global interpretability
benchmark datasets, Ano2Rule achieves a higher or comparable and high fidelity, there are still some limitations, which provide
NFR with fewer features flipped, and the NFR curve rises more multiple avenues for future research. First, we are curious if it is
rapidly as K increases. For example, on the TON-IoT dataset, possible to extend the method to other data modalities, such as
Ano2Rule achieves a 100% flipping rate with fewer than five raw image data. This may require integrating deep models with
features altered, whereas LIME requires more features to reach spatial awareness capabilities, such as Convolutional Neural
the same flipping ratio. On some datasets, the two methods Networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers (ViTs), to extract
perform similarly, reflecting that our global rule extraction can high-level semantic features, thereby enhancing the method’s
match the local interpretability provided by LIME. adaptability for cross-domain applications. Second, to better
 Counterfactual Explanation: We further evaluate the coun- balance interpretability and fitting capacity, we will explore
terfactual explanation capability of Ano2Rule by comparing it alternative models and algorithms, such as more complex surroagainst DiCE [43], a widely adopted model-agnostic counter- gate models, to accommodate the intricate shapes of decision
factual generation approach. For each detected anomaly, both boundaries in high-dimensional feature spaces. Lastly, given
methods are used to generate multiple candidate counterfactual the method’s generalizability, we will explore its application in
samples. We assess their performance using three metrics: Va- other domains requiring interpretable anomaly detection, such
lidity (the proportion of generated counterfactuals classified as as medical diagnostics, manufacturing monitoring, and criminal
normal by the original model), Proximity (the average feature- investigation analysis. These research directions will further
wise distance between each counterfactual and the original enhance the applicability and practicality of Ano2Rule, providanomalous sample, indicating the extent of modification), and ing robust support for its widespread use in various high-risk
Success Rate (the proportion of anomalous samples for which multi-domain scenarios.
at least one valid counterfactual is found).
 The comparative results are presented in Fig. 7. Across all
evaluated datasets, Ano2Rule consistently achieves higher va- REFERENCES
lidity and success rates than DiCE, indicating that our rule-based [1] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemapproach is more effective at generating actionable recourse that ble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Netw.
 Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2018.
leads to a change in model prediction. Notably, the proximity [2] R. Tang et al., “ZeroWall: Detecting zero-day web attacks through encoderscores of Ano2Rule counterfactuals are lower on average, mean- decoder recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Coming that the modifications suggested by our method are not only mun., 2020, pp. 2479–2488.
 [3] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
more likely to succeed, but also require less perturbation to the detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
original sample. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 Overall, these results demonstrate that Ano2Rule, though [4] R. Perdisci, W. Lee, and N. Feamster, “Behavioral clustering of HTTPbased malware and signature generation using malicious network traces,”
originally designed for global explanation, can be readily ex- in Proc. USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Des. Implementation, 2010, pp. 391–
tended to other types of explanation while preserving similar 404.
effectiveness to the specialized methods of these types. In ad- [5] E. C. R. Shin, D. Song, and R. Moazzezi, “Recognizing functions in
 binaries with neural networks,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2015,
dition, as it requires no iterative sampling or surrogate model pp. 611–626.
training, our rule-based approach achieves higher explanation [6] M. Villarreal-Vasquez, G. Modelo-Howard, S. Dube, and B. Bhargava,
efficiency, making it more practical for large-scale or real-time “Hunting for insider threats using LSTM-based anomaly detection,”
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 451–462,
applications. Jan./Feb. 2023.
 [7] W. Fan et al., “Lightweight and identifier-oblivious engine for cryptocurrency networking anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
 VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1302–1318, Mar./Apr. 2023.
 [8] Y. Dong et al., “Horuseye: Realtime IoT malicious traffic detection frame-
 This paper presented a novel method called Ano2Rule for pro- work with programmable switches,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023,
viding global explanations of black-box unsupervised anomaly pp. 571–588.
 [9] L. Xi, D. Miao, M. Li, R. Wang, H. Liu, and X. Huang, “Adaptivedetection models. The method combines the Internal Clustering correlation-aware unsupervised deep learning for anomaly detection
Tree (IC-Tree) with a Boundary Exploration Algorithm (CBE) in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
to efficiently extract rules and offer transparent explanations vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2888–2899, Jul./Aug. 2024.
LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY 6701

[10] A. Alsaedi, Z. Tari, R. Mahmud, N. Moustafa, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar, [37] Z. Kong and K. Chaudhuri, “Understanding instance-based interpretability
 “USMD: Unsupervised misbehaviour detection for multi-sensor data,” of variational auto-encoders,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 724–739, Syst., 2021, pp. 2400–2412.
 Jan./Feb. 2023. [38] J. Crabbé and M. V. D. Schaar, “Label-free explainability for unsupervised
[11] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should i trust you?’: models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 4391–4420.
 Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. [39] O. Eberle, J. Büttner, F. Kräutli, K. Müller, M. Valleriani, and G. Montavon,
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144. “Building and interpreting deep similarity models,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
[12] S. M. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model pre- Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 1149–1161, Mar. 2022.
 dictions,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 4765– [40] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan, “Axiomatic attribution for deep
 4774. networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017. pp. 3319–3328.
[13] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Anchors: High-precision model- [41] J. Sipple, “Interpretable, multidimensional, multimodal anomaly detection
 agnostic explanations,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 1527– with negative sampling for detection of device failure,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 1535. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 9016–9025.
[14] W. Guo et al., “LEMNA: Explaining deep learning based security appli- [42] S. Wachter, B. D. Mittelstadt, and C. Russell, “Counterfactual explanations
 cations,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, without opening the black box: Automated decisions and the GDPR,”
 pp. 364–379. Harvard J. Law & Technol., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 841–887, 2018.
[15] D. Han et al., “DeepAID: Interpreting and improving deep learning-based [43] R. K. Mothilal, A. Sharma, and C. Tan, “Explaining machine
 anomaly detection in security applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. learning classifiers through diverse counterfactual explanations,” in
 Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3197–3217. Proc. Conf. Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, Barcelona, 2020,
[16] netfilter project, “iptables,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www. pp. 607–617.
 netfilter.org/projects/iptables/index.html [44] M. Bajaj et al., “Robust counterfactual explanations on graph neu-
[17] snort, “Snort ids,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.snort.org/ ral networks,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021,
[18] M. W. Craven and J. W. Shavlik, “Using sampling and queries to extract pp. 5644–5655.
 rules from trained neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., [45] K. H. Tran, A. Ghazimatin, and R. S. Roy, “Counterfactual explanations
 1994, pp. 37–45. for neural recommenders,” in Proc. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf.
[19] O. Bastani, C. Kim, and H. Bastani, “Interpreting blackbox models via Retrieval, 2021, pp. 1627–1631.
 model extraction,” 2017, arXiv:1705.08504. [46] B. A. Cumi-Guzman, A. D. Espinosa-Chim, M. G. Orozco-del-Castillo,
[20] A. S. Jacobs, R. Beltiukov, W. Willinger, R. A. Ferreira, A. Gupta, and L. and J. A. Recio-Garcıá, “Counterfactual explanation of a classification
 Z. Granville, “AI/ML for network security: The emperor has no clothes,” in model for detecting SQL injection attacks,” in Proc. Workshops at 32nd
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2022, pp. 1537–1551. Int. Conf. Case-Based Reasoning, 2024, pp. 49–64.
[21] J. H. Friedman and B. E. Popescu, “Predictive learning via rule ensembles,” [47] R. McGrath et al., “Interpretable credit application predictions with coun-
 Ann. Appl. Statist., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 916–954, 2008. terfactual explanations,” 2018, arXiv:1811.05245.
[22] G. Vilone, L. Rizzo, and L. Longo, “A comparative analysis of rule-based, [48] A. Barbado, O. Corcho, and R. Benjamins, “Rule extraction in unsupermodel-agnostic methods for explainable artificial intelligence,” in Proc. vised anomaly detection for model explainability: Application to oneclass
 Ir. Conf. Artif. Intell. Cogn. Sci., 2020. SVM,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 189, 2022, Art. no. 116100.
[23] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “Deeplog: Anomaly detection [49] D. Han et al., “Rules refine the riddle: Global explanation for deep learningand diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM based anomaly detection in security applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298. Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2024, pp. 4509–4523.
[24] R. Li, Q. Li, J. Zhou, and Y. Jiang, “ADRIoT: An edge-assisted anomaly [50] B. Letham, C. Rudin, T. H. McCormick, and D. Madigan, “Interpretable
 detection framework against IoT-based network attacks,” IEEE Internet classifiers using rules and Bayesian analysis: Building a better stroke
 Things J., vol. 9, no. 13, pp. 10576–10587, Jul. 2022. prediction model,” Ann. Appl. Statist., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1350–1371,
[25] R. Li, Q. Li, Y. Huang, W. Zhang, P. Zhu, and Y. Jiang, “IoTEnsemble: 2015.
 Detection of botnet attacks on Internet of Things,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res. [51] I. V. D. Linden, H. Haned, and E. Kanoulas, “Global aggregations of local
 Comput. Secur., 2022, pp. 569–588. explanations for black box models,” 2019, arXiv:1907.03039.
[26] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and R. C. [52] M. Setzu, R. Guidotti, A. Monreale, F. Turini, D. Pedreschi, and F.
 Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution,” Giannotti, “Glocalx - from local to global explanations of black box AI
 Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, 2001. models,” Artif. Intell., vol. 294, 2021, Art. no. 103457.
[27] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. [53] Q. Li, R. Cummings, and Y. Mintz, “Optimal local explainer aggregation
 Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402. for interpretable prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022,
[28] S. Itani, F. Lecron, and P. Fortemps, “A one-class classification decision pp. 12000–12007.
 tree based on kernel density estimation,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 91, 2020, [54] N. Frosst and G. E. Hinton, “Distilling a neural network into a soft decision
 Art. no. 106250. tree,” 2017, arXiv:1711.09784.
[29] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE Int. [55] Y. Li, J. Bai, J. Li, X. Yang, Y. Jiang, and S. Xia, “Rectified decision trees:
 Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422. Exploring the landscape of interpretable and effective machine learning,”
[30] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for anomaly 2020, arXiv:2008.09413.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12591– [56] L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone, Classification
 12604, Dec. 2023. and Regression Trees. London, U.K.: Chapman and Hall, 1984.
[31] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc. [57] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harness-
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014. ing adversarial examples,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
[32] J. Kauffmann, K.-R. Müller, and G. Montavon, “Towards explaining 2015.
 anomalies: A deep taylor decomposition of one-class models,” Pattern [58] X. Xu, J. Li, Y. Yang, and F. Shen, “Toward effective intrusion detection
 Recognit., vol. 101, 2020, Art. no. 107198. using log-cosh conditional variational autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things
[33] D. Kazhdan, B. Dimanov, M. Jamnik, and P. Liò, “MEME: Generating J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6187–6196, Apr. 2021.
 RNN model explanations via model extraction,” 2020, arXiv:2012.06954. [59] A. Binbusayyis and T. Vaiyapuri, “Unsupervised deep learning approach
[34] P. Liznerski, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, B. J. Franks, M. Kloft, and for network intrusion detection combining convolutional autoencoder
 K. Müller, “Explainable deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. and one-class SVM,” Appl. Intell., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 7094–7108,
 Learn. Representations, 2021. 2021.
[35] D. L. Aguilar, M. A. Medina-Pérez, O. Loyola-González, K.-K. R. [60] L. Liu, G. Engelen, T. M. Lynar, D. Essam, and W. Joosen, “Error
 Choo, and E. Bucheli-Susarrey, “Towards an interpretable autoencoder: A prevalence in NIDS datasets: A case study on CIC-IDS-2017 and CSEdecision-tree-based autoencoder and its application in anomaly detection,” CIC-IDS-2018,” in Proc. 10th IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., 2022,
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1048–1059, pp. 254–262.
 Mar./Apr. 2023. [61] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. H. D.
[36] Y. Feng, J. Li, D. Sisodia, and P. Reiher, “On explainable and adaptable Hartog, “Ton_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardizadetection of distributed denial-of-service traffic,” IEEE Trans. Dependable tion of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data sets,” IEEE
 Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2211–2226, Jul./Aug. 2024. Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022.
6702 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

[62] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong, and Yong Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the BS and
 A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional PhD degrees from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
 IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust, China, in 1998 and 2002, respectively. He is cur-
 2022, pp. 1–11. rently a full professor with the Division of Infor-
[63] B. S. Sharmila and R. Nagapadma, “Quantized autoencoder (QaE) in- mation Science and Technology, Tsinghua Shenzhen
 trusion detection system for anomaly detection in resource-constrained International Graduate School, Shenzhen, China, and
 IoT devices using RT-IoT2022 dataset,” Cybersecurity, vol. 6, 2023, the Department of Mathematics and Theories, Peng
 Art. no. 41. Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen. His research interests
[64] B. A. AlAhmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A include future internet architecture, the Internet of
 qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in Things, edge computing, and AI for networks.
 Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2783–2800.
[65] G. Apruzzese, P. Laskov, and A. Tastemirova, “SoK: The impact of
 unlabelled data in cyberthreat detection,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Weizhi Meng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Privacy, 2022, pp. 20–42. PhD degree in computer science from the City Uni-
[66] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,” versity of Hong Kong. He is currently a full professor
 in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988. with the School of Computing and Communications,
 Lancaster University, U.K. His primary research interests include blockchain technology, cyber security
 and artificial intelligence in security including intrusion detection, blockchain applications, smartphone
 Ruoyu Li (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree in security, biometric authentication, and IoT security.
 information security from the Huazhong University He was the recipient of the Hong Kong Institution
 of Science and Technology, China, in 2017, the MS of Engineers (HKIE) Outstanding Paper Award for
 degree in computer science from Columbia Univer- Young Engineers/Researchers in 2014 and 2017 and IEEE ComSoc Best Young
 sity, USA, in 2019, and the PhD degree in computer Researcher Award for Europe, Middle East, & Africa Region (EMEA) in 2020.
 science and technology from Tsinghua University, He is the general chair for various international conferences such as ACM CCS
 China, in 2024. He is currently an assistant professor 2023 and ESORICS 2022.
 with the College of Computer Science and Software
 Engineering, Shenzhen University, China. His research interests include data-driven network security, Laizhong Cui (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 IoT security, programmable networking, trustworthy BS degree from Jilin University, Changchun, China,
AI, and agentic system security. in 2007 and the PhD degree in computer science
 and technology from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
 China, in 2012. He is currently a professor with the
 College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China. He led more than 10
 scientific research projects, including National Key
 Yu Zhang is currently working toward the graduation Research and Development Plan of China, National
 degree with Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. His Natural Science Foundation of China, Guangdong
 research interests include large model reasoning and Natural Science Foundation of China, and Shenzhen
 AI security, with an emphasis on exploring reliable Basic Research Plan. He has authored or coauthored more than 100 papers,
 reasoning mechanisms of large language models and including IEEE Transactions on Networking, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
 developing effective defense strategies against AI- Communications, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions
 related security threats. on Computers, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, IEEE
 Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on
 Dependable and Secure Computing, IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,
 IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, IEEE INFOCOM, ACM MM, AAAI, IEEE
 ICNP, and IEEE ICDCS. His research interests include future internet architecture and protocols, edge computing, multimedia systems and applications,
 blockchain, internet of things, cloud computing, and federated learning. He is
 Qing Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BS de- an associate editor or a member of the Editorial Board for several international
 gree in computer science and technology from Dalian journals, including IEEE Internet of Things Journal, IEEE Transactions on
 University of Technology, Dalian, China, in 2008, and Cloud Computing, IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
 the PhD degree in computer science and technology and International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics. He is a
 from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2013. Distinguished Member of the CCF.
 He is currently a research fellow with the Peng Cheng
 Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. His research interests
 include reliable and scalable routing of the Internet, software-defined networking, network function
 virtualization, in-network caching/computing, edge
 computing, traffic transmission control, and video
 delivery.

 Nengwu Wu is currently working toward the graduation degree in computer technology with the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.
 His research interests include federated learning,
 incentive-aware federated learning, interpretable machine learning, and mixture-of-experts models, particularly interested in efficient and trustworthy learning mechanisms for distributed intelligent systems.