This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 1

 Anomaly Detection in EVCS using Federated
 Learning with Auto-Optimized Edge Models
 Arif Hussain, Member, IEEE, Ankit Yadav, Member, IEEE, Gelli Ravikumar, Sr. Member, IEEE

 Abstract—This paper presents FedNAS, a novel federated the centralization of this data collection method creates two
learning (FL) framework designed for robust and personalized significant issues: privacy problems and scalability restrictions.
models to detect anomalies at distributed electric vehicle charging Data collection from geographically spread EVCS devices
stations (EVCSs), tailored to real-world industrial deployment.
The proposed framework enables collaborative anomaly detection may expose sensitive information, such as user data, car
in spatially distributed EVCS without sharing raw data, thus charging habits, and grid-related information, to cyber threats.
preserving user privacy and complying with data governance Furthermore, sending vast amounts of data to a central server
requirements. A lightweight neural architecture search (NAS)- causes significant bandwidth costs and system slowness. These
optimized Simple Neural Network (SimpleNN) is proposed for issues impede the effective detection of real-time cyberattacks,
each EVCS node to ensure computational efficiency within
edge resource constraints. In contrast to traditional methods necessitating low-latency responses and safe data handling
that depend on fixed structures and simplistic aggregation, systems [3].
FedNAS employs an ensemble-based meta-aggregation strategy, FL provides a decentralized alternative that directly adfacilitating superior knowledge integration among heterogeneous dresses these challenges. In an FL architecture, EVCS units
clients compared to standard Federated Averaging (FedAvg). The train models locally with their data and share only the model
framework is evaluated using the IEEE 123-bus test system
with multiple EVCS nodes subjected to a cyberattack. The outputs (predictions), not the raw data, with a central server.
results demonstrate that the FL framework achieves a detection This approach inherently preserves data privacy and signifiaccuracy of up to 98.25%, with significantly reduced communi- cantly reduces communication overhead. After collaborative
cation overhead and improved resilience to adversarial threats. training, personalized models are deployed on the EVCS
Comparative analysis with centralized learning and federated nodes, enabling local, real-time inference for tasks such as
variants validates the robustness and scalability of the proposed
approach outperforms FedAvg by 6.25% in average precision. anomaly detection without requiring continuous server com-
Furthermore, real-time simulation data is extracted using the munication. This framework not only maintains data integrity
OPAL-RT platform to emulate realistic industrial grid condi- and security but also supports scalable implementations across
tions, validating the framework’s effectiveness in cyberattack numerous distributed EVCS units [4], [5]. FL has been widely
detection within dynamic EVCS environments. These findings promoted as a privacy-preserving machine learning approach
highlight the potential of federated learning to enable secure,
privacy-preserving, and scalable cyberattack detection for next- for distributed and sensitive data sources [6]. Its application in
generation EVCS infrastructure. power systems spans forecasting [7]–[10], grid management
 [11]–[13], and anomaly detection [14]–[16], demonstrating
 Index Terms—Federated Learning, electric vehicle charging
station, cyber-attacks, anomalies, data preservation, neural ar- its capability for collaborative learning while preserving data
chitecture search, privacy. However, in the context of EVCS anomaly detection,
 the data involved, such as voltage, frequency, power, and state
 of charge (SoC), is primarily operational and non-personal.
 I. I NTRODUCTION Consequently, while prior studies [17], [18] frame FL’s benefit
 The integration of electric vehicles into power grids, mainly as privacy preservation, its primary value in this infrastructurethrough EVCS, has transformed the Distributed Energy Re- level context shifts towards data preservation. This emphasizes
source (DER) ecosystem. However, as EVCSs have become maintaining data locality and integrity, enabling collaborative
more complex and interconnected, they have been vulnerable learning under the constraints of limited communication, realto cyber-attacks [1]. Traditional centralized machine learning time processing, and data heterogeneity across EVCS nodes.
algorithms for detecting such abnormalities are challenging, FL is traditionally categorized into horizontal federated
particularly regarding data privacy, communication overhead, learning (HFL) and vertical federated learning (VFL) apand real-time responsiveness, because they rely on collecting proaches [19], [20], both of which have been applied in
raw data from all EVCS units at a central location [2]. EV anomaly detection [21]–[25]. In HFL, clients share the same
charging stations collect massive volumes of data, which can feature space but possess different data samples. This aligns
be utilized to identify and prevent cyber-attacks. However, perfectly with the EVCS use case, where distributed stations
 monitor identical metrics (e.g., voltage, power) but from dis-
 “This research is funded partly by US NSF Grant # CNS 2105269 and US tinct charging sessions and locations. In contrast, VFL requires
DOE CESER Grant DE-CR000016.”
 Arif Hussain, is with Department of Electrical Engineering, Louisiana clients with different feature sets to share a common user base,
Tech. University, USA, Ankit Yadav is with the Department of Electrical and a condition not met by geographically separate EVCS units.
Computer Engineering, Iowa State University, USA, and Gelli Ravikumar Therefore, our work adopts the HFL paradigm.
is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Florida
State University, USA (e-mail: ahussain@latech.edu, ankity@iastate.edu, and In FL for EVCS cybersecurity, selecting an effective neural
rgelli@fsu.edu). network architecture is crucial for high detection accuracy.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 2

Typically, a single, fixed architecture is prescribed for all
clients [25]–[27]. This approach implicitly assumes uniform
data distributions across clients—an assumption that rarely
holds in real-world EVCS environments, where stations exhibit
significant heterogeneity in usage patterns, local conditions,
and threat landscapes. Consequently, there is a pressing need
for methods that can tailor architectures to each client’s
unique data characteristics while still enabling effective global
collaboration.
 A second major limitation is the reliance on the Federated Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm for aggregation, which
is prevalent in existing anomaly detection studies [4], [9],
[26], [28]. While computationally efficient, FedAvg performs
optimally only under the assumption of IID (Independent and
Identically Distributed) client data. In practical EVCS settings,
data is inherently non-IID. This divergence leads to suboptimal
global models, hampered convergence, and reduced detection
accuracy as client models develop biases from their local Fig. 1: Illustration of high-level architecture of the FedNAS
data. This creates a demand for aggregation strategies that can detection model
reconcile these local biases with global patterns to improve
generalization without sacrificing personalization. • Our framework ensures data-preserving federated learn-
 A third challenge lies in the evaluation methodology. Many ing across EVCS nodes, where only model outputs are
prior studies rely on synthetic or benchmark datasets [17], shared during aggregation, enhancing scalability and pri-
[18], failing to validate FL models within realistic grid- vacy while avoiding direct model parameter exchange.
connected environments like IEEE test systems with inte- • A comprehensive evaluation of FedNAS using OPALgrated EVCS infrastructure. This reliance on centralized data RT-based real-time simulations on the IEEE 123-bus test
sources contradicts the core principle of FL—learning from system with four integrated EVCS nodes. The results
distributed, non-IID data. Moreover, such datasets often lack demonstrate the framework’s strong detection perforthe spatial, temporal, and operational variability inherent in mance, scalability, and resilience under multiple cyberreal EVCS deployments, thereby overlooking critical chal- attack scenarios.
lenges like consumption heterogeneity, diverse attack surfaces, • A rigorous comparative analysis against state-of-the-art
and the distinct characteristics of local data streams. FL baselines (including FedAvg and FedProx) and cen-
 To address the identified limitations: i) client-specific het- tralized learning, demonstrating FedNAS’s superior pererogeneity, ii) rigid model architectures, iii) FedAvg’s poor formance in anomaly detection accuracy, communication
performance on non-IID data, and iv) unrealistic evalua- efficiency, and resilience to non-IID data.
tion settings, we propose FedNAS, a novel FL framework We presented a preliminary version of this work at the
for anomaly and cyberattack detection in EVCS. FedNAS 2025 Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC) [31]. This
integrates Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [29] with an research presents an FL framework and employs a lightweight
ensemble-based meta-aggregation strategy [30] to achieve per- SimpleNN model to identify cyberattacks in EVCS. Although
sonalized yet globally coordinated learning. Within this frame- the initial results showed promise, we faced limitations in
work, each client independently employs NAS to discover an model scalability, limited technical insight, fixed architecture,
optimal, lightweight architecture (a SimpleNN model) tailored and simple aggregation for the global model.
to its local data, while the server performs meta-aggregation The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
of model insights. This decentralized approach ensures data presents the system model, threat model, and problem formupreservation and scalability. The framework’s effectiveness is lation. Section III details the proposed FedNAS framework.
validated under realistic grid-connected conditions using an Section IV presents a case study. Section V discusses the
IEEE 123-bus test system with four integrated EVCS nodes results, and finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
subjected to cyberattack scenarios.
 The key contributions of this study are: II. S YSTEM M ODEL , T HREAT M ODEL , AND P ROBLEM
 • We propose a personalized FedNAS framework for cy- F ORMULATION
 berattack detection in EVCS, enabling each client to
 autonomously discover optimal lightweight architectures A. System Model
 tailored to its local data characteristics. In this research, we introduce a federated learning-based
 • Unlike traditional FL methods requiring uniform archi- decentralized optimized framework for attack detection using
 tectures or weight alignment, our approach introduces neural architecture search, called FedNAS. This framework is
 a robust ensemble-based meta-aggregation strategy that specifically designed to improve the detection of cyberattacks
 fuses predictions from diverse client models, preserving targeting EVCS, which are distributed at various locations and
 heterogeneity while enabling collaborative performance. integrated into a smart distribution grid. Using the principles of

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 3

federated learning, FedNAS ensures the effectiveness of cyber- data.
security measures while preserving data privacy and security (iv) Meta-Learned Ensemble Aggregation The server col-
 (t) K
at these critical infrastructure points. This innovative approach lects probabilistic predictions pk (xi )k=1 from client
not only increases the resilience of EVCSs against potential models and performs meta-learned aggregation through
threats but also supports the overall integrity and efficiency of logistic regression:
the smart distribution grid. The system comprises a collection
of clients, denoted as K = {1, 2, . . . , K}, where each client K
k ∈ K represents a different node of the charging station for X (t) (t) (t) eθ k
 pglobal (xi ) = αk pk (xi ), αk = PK (1)
electric vehicles connected to the grid. These EVCS nodes k=1 j=1 e
 θj
are strategically deployed in various locations to facilitate the
efficient charging of electric vehicles. The central server plays where θ is learned by minimizing the meta-loss:
a crucial role in managing the federated training process, co- X
ordinating communication between clients, and ensuring that Lmeta = i = 1N ℓ(yi , pglobal (xi )) + λ|θ|2 (2)
model updates are aggregated securely and efficiently. This
 This approach forms a global decision mechanism witharchitecture enhances the system’s ability to leverage local data
 out weight-level averaging or architectural alignment
for model improvement, all while maintaining data privacy ∗(t+1) ∗(t+1)
 (Wk , Ak ), achieving higher accuracy than maand reducing training latency. Each client contributes to the
 jority voting while preserving client heterogeneity.
overall training objective by utilizing its local dataset and
communicating the necessary parameters back to the central
 B. Threat Model
server, thus fostering a collaborative learning environment
without the need to share sensitive data. EVCS is increasingly recognized as a critical component of
 We implement an HFL framework where each EVCS node the smart grid infrastructure, but it is also vulnerable to a range
securely retains its raw operational data locally. In this collab- of cyberattacks, including replay attacks, spoofing, denialorative setting, nodes share only the model weights Wk ∈ Rd of– service (DoS), and man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks. We
and the configurations of their searched architectures Ak ∈ A considered two distinct cyberattack scenarios: a single-pulse
with each other. This approach effectively safeguards user attack and a more complex multiple-pulse attack. In both
privacy while significantly reducing the risk of data leakage, cases, a MitM adversary manipulates control reference signals
which is particularly critical in the context of privacy-sensitive to disrupt the charging process.
energy systems. To simulate a realistic environment, each Single-Pulse Attack: In a single-pulse attack scenario, the
client within the network operates under distinct user profiles MitM adversary introduces a single rectangular pulse, denoted
and varying cyberattack conditions, all modeled within the A1 (w, d), to manipulate the control reference signals and
IEEE 123-bus test system. The local dataset for each client is therefore disrupt the charging process. Here, A1 represents the
defined as Dk = Dktrain ∪Dktest . This dataset captures both spatial amplitude of the pulse, w is the total duration of the pulse, and
and temporal diversity, incorporating various load behaviors d is the duty cycle. The rectangular pulse is constructed such
and patterns of local cyberattacks, reflecting the complexity that it attains an amplitude of A1 for the initial w ∗ d seconds
of real-world energy use scenarios. The heterogeneity present and drops to zero for the remaining (1 − w ∗ d) seconds.
in both the data distribution and the dynamic characteristics The amplitude A1 could be positive or negative, depending
of the system reinforces the need for personalized neural on the nature of the attack. To generate the tempered control
architectures and model outputs (predictions). This tailored signal, the MitM attacker multiplies the original active power
 s
approach enables each EVCS to adapt more effectively to its reference Pref with a rectangular pulse shifted by dc of the
unique operational context while contributing to the overall form (1 + A1 (w, d)), resulting in a distorted reference signal
 st
robustness and performance of the federated learning model. A Pref , as in (3). This modified signal is subsequently processed
high-level architecture FedNAS detection model is illustrated by the calculation block Pref , which produces a distorted
 t
in Fig. 1. power reference output Pref , as in (4).
 The proposed FedNAS framework operates in synchronous st
 Pref s
 = Pref ∗ (1 + A1 (w, d)) (3)
communication rounds indexed by t = 1, 2, . . . , T . In each
round, the following steps are performed collaboratively bet
tween clients and the central server: Pref = Pref ∗ (1 + A1 (w, d)) (4)
 (i) NAS-Based Architecture Search: Each client k ∈ K Multiple-Pulse Attack: To model a more stealthy and disperforms a local Neural Architecture Search (NAS) to ruptive adversary, we extend the threat model to a multiple-
 (t)
 identify a task-specific architecture Ak best suited to its pulse attack. This attack is characterized by a sequence of N
 train
 local data Dk . rectangular pulses, denoted
 PN
 A i (w i , di , ∆ti ), where Ai
 i=1
 (ii) Local Model Training: The client trains the selected is the amplitude of the i-th pulse, wi its duration, di its duty
 (t)
 architecture Ak on its private dataset to obtain updated cycle, and ∆ti the time interval between the start of the i-th
 (t)
 model weights Wk . and (i+1)-th pulses. This pattern creates aperiodic disruptions,
(iii) Model Upload: Each client transmits its model tuple making detection more challenging. The attacker multiplies
 (t) (t)
 (Wk , Ak ) to the central server, without revealing raw the original power reference by this pulse train, resulting in a

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 4

 mt
compound distorted signal Pref , as in (5). The corresponding
output from the calculation block is given by (6).
 N
 !
 X
 mt s
 Pref = Pref · 1 + Ai (wi , di , ∆ti ) (5)
 i=1

 N
 !
 X
 t
 Pref = Pref · 1+ Ai (wi , di , ∆ti ) (6)
 i=1

C. Problem Formulation
 The objective of the proposed FedNAS framework is to
collaboratively learn personalized anomaly detection models
across a set of distributed EVCSs, while preserving data
privacy and addressing system heterogeneity. Each client
k ∈ K holds a private dataset Dk = Dktrain ∪ Dkval ∪ Dktest , a
local architecture Ak ∈ A, and corresponding model weights
Wk ∈ Rd .
 The key challenges include:
 • Non-IID data distributions across clients due to varying
 grid conditions, load profiles, and attack scenarios.
 • Need for personalized architectures and model outputs
 (predictions) to reflect local characteristics.
 • Communication efficiency and model generalization
 across heterogeneous environments.
 To address these challenges, we formulate the following
federated bi-level optimization problem that jointly learns
client-specific architectures and model outputs (predictions):
 X |Dk |
 min Lval (Wk , Ak ; Dkval ) (7)
 {Ak ,Wk }k∈K |D| Fig. 2: Working flow of Proposed FedNAS-based Framework.
 k∈K
 Note: While (Wi , A) is shown for mathematical representation,
 subject to: Wk = arg min Ltrain (W, Ak ; Dktrain ), ∀k ∈ K clients actually share predictions Pi for ensemble aggregation.
 W
 (8)
 Here, Ltrain and Lval denote the local training and validation and parameter-level personalization, adapting to the unique
loss functions, respectively. The outer objective seeks to mini- statistical characteristics and operational variances exhibited
mize the global validation loss across all clients by weighting by each client.
each client’s contribution proportionally to its dataset size. The
 The operational flow of the FedNAS framework is visually
inner problem ensures that model weights are optimally trained
 represented in Figure 2. The process begins with the comprefor the chosen architecture on local data.
 hensive collection and labeling of data under both normal operational conditions and various attack scenarios. Each client
 III. P ROPOSED F ED NAS F RAMEWORK undertakes local preprocessing tasks, which include feature
 The proposed fedNAS framework is designed to improve extraction and the application of architecture search techniques
privacy preservation, optimize communication efficiency, and to identify the optimal neural network structure tailored to its
provide personalized anomaly detection specifically for dis- specific local dataset. Following the architecture selection, the
tributed EVCSs. This framework confronts several pivotal client trains the identified model. For aggregation, the client
challenges encountered in traditional FL for power systems, then generates predictions on a server-provided validation
especially non-IID data distributions, model heterogeneity, and set and transmits these model outputs (predictions) to the
the necessity for adaptable architectures that cater to edge central server. Upon receiving the predictions, the central
devices operating in diverse environments. At its core, the server employs a metalearning-based aggregator. This aggreframework employs a HFL paradigm, where each EVCS node gator combines the predictions from all participating clients
operates as an independent client, maintaining private local using ensemble methods. The meta-aggregation weights are
datasets that remain securely on-device throughout the entire optimized using a small labeled validation set maintained at
 s
training process. A significant innovation of this approach is the server (Dval ), containing representative normal and attack
the integration of NAS at the client level, combined with scenarios generated from simulations. This dataset ensures
an ensemble-based meta-aggregation mechanism at the server consistent evaluation across heterogeneous clients while prelevel. This dual-layered strategy ensures both architecture-level serving privacy, as it contains only operational data without

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 5

 (t)
user-specific information. The meta-weights αk are learned • Edge (EVCS Nodes): Perform local NAS, model trainbased on each client model’s predictive performance on this ing, and generate predictions on server validation data
validation set, dynamically prioritizing more reliable models • Server: Maintains validation set, performs metaregardless of their local dataset size. Calculate a personalized aggregation of client predictions, and computes ensemble
global update for each client, effectively leveraging insights weights for model updates
gained from diverse client contributions. Following this ag- Inference Phase:
gregation, the personalized updates are redistributed to the • Edge (EVCS Nodes): Execute real-time anomaly detecrespective clients for local testing and evaluation, creating tion using personalized models (Wk∗ , A∗k ) without server
a feedback loop that enhances model robustness and accu- communication
racy. This iterative refinement process unfolds over multiple • Server: No operational role during inference—designed
communication rounds, allowing for an ongoing convergence for low-latency edge deployment
of both architecture choices and weight adjustments across
 This architecture ensures that real-time anomaly detection
the heterogeneous network of EVCS nodes. The framework
 occurs locally at each EVCS node, meeting strict latency
ensures data preservation by design, as clients only share
 requirements while leveraging collaborative learning during
model predictions rather than raw data or model parameters.
 training periods.
This approach inherently mitigates privacy risks associated
with data reconstruction from model weights. Furthermore, the
ensemble-based aggregation provides natural resilience against IV. C ASE S TUDY
model poisoning attacks by diluting the influence of any single This section describes the experimental environment, implemalicious client through the meta-weighting mechanism. mentation details, dataset, and evaluation methodology used
 The Federated Neural Architecture Search with ensemble- to validate the proposed FedNAS framework for anomaly
based meta-aggregation training methodology is comprehen- detection in EVCS integrated into power distribution networks.
sively described in Algorithm 1, providing a clear framework
for implementing this advanced approach to anomaly detection A. Experimental Setup and Reproducibility
in distributed settings. All experiments used fixed random seeds for reproducibility.
 The NAS process generates one optimal architecture per client
Algorithm 1 FedNAS: Federated Neural Architecture Search per round using our constrained search space with dynamic
with Ensemble-Based Meta-Aggregation scaling based on input dimensions. To handle heterogeneous
 1: Input: Set of clients C = {C1 , C2 , ..., Cn }, number of feature dimensions across clients (16-28 features as shown
 s
 global rounds R, server validation set Dval in Table I), we employ zero-padding to the maximum fea-
 2: Initialize global meta-model Mg ture dimension (28 features). The NAS process generates
 3: for each round r = 1 to R do architectures optimized for these standardized inputs while
 4: Initialize list Plocal ← [ ] ▷ List for client predictions maintaining computational efficiency through our lightweight
 5: for each client Ci ∈ C in parallel do SimpleNN constraint. For complete reproducibility, detailed
 6: Perform NAS on local data Di to obtain architec- hyperparameters, NAS configuration, and training protocols
 ture Ai are provided in Appendix TABLE VI: Experimental Configu-
 7: Train local model Mi using Ai and Di ration. The following subsections detail the test system, dataset
 8: Generate predictions Pi on server validation set preparation, and signal response under normal and cyberattack
 s
 Dval using Mi scenarios.
 9: Append Pi to Plocal
10: end for B. Test System Details
11: Aggregate Plocal using ensemble-based metaaggregation (with labels from Dval s
 ) to update Mg As depicted in Fig. 3, the IEEE 123 bus system testbed
12: for each client Ci ∈ C do has four EVCS, denoted by subscripts 1, 2, 3, and 4. These
13: Distribute updated meta-model Mg to Ci are integrated into the distribution grid on buses 25, 51, 54,
14: end for and 97, respectively. Fig. 4 presents the block diagram for each
15: end for
 EVCS. The EVCS1 and EVCS3 have two extreme fast charges
16: Output: Personalized and aggregated global meta-model
 (XFCs) each, while the EVCS2 and EVCS4 have four XFCs
 Mg each. These are represented as XFCjk , where ‘j’ stands for the
 respective EVCS they are connected to, and ‘k’ denotes their
 position within the EVCS. Thus, the testbed has 12 chargers,
 each connected with an EV.
 Each XFC-EV combination is a separate unit with an equiv-
A. Deployment Architecture
 alent P-Q load. The model also incorporated SoC calculation
 The FedNAS framework employs a clear separation between and charging management. This indicates that once the EV is
training and inference phases to optimize both performance connected in G2V mode, the charging starts when the SoC is
and latency: less than 100. Similarly, in V2G mode, discharging is enabled
 Training Phase: when SoC is greater than 0. However, once the SoC level

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 6

exceeds these thresholds, the power reference to the XFC
control (i.e., charging control) is zero. Because this research
aims to examine the influence of EV charging and cyberattacks on EVSE on distribution, thorough modeling of XFC,
EV, and their respective controllers is not included.

 Fig. 3: IEEE 123 Bus Feeder with EV integration

 Fig. 5: Behavior of signal during normal scenarios
 distribution, following the same feature extraction process
 as client data. This ensures the meta-weights are optimized
 on representative infrastructure-level operational data while
 maintaining separation from client-specific datasets. Table 1
 summarizes the comprehensive feature sets for each client.
 TABLE I: Feature Distribution Across EVCS Clients
 Client Frequency Voltage Power SoC Total
 Client 1 4 4 4 4 16
 Client 2 4 8 8 8 28
 Fig. 4: The setup of EVs inside each EVCS Client 3 4 4 4 4 16
 Client 4 4 8 8 8 28
C. Preparation of Dataset
 In this case study, we constructed a variety of datasets D. Signal Response under Normal and Cyberattack Scenarios
that included normal operating settings, single-pulse, and Critical system characteristics such as voltage, power, SoC,
multi-pulse cyberattacks. For regular operation, EVs were and frequency were continuously monitored on the EVCS
gradually incorporated into the system using two scenarios: buses. This section examines the observed behaviors of these
with and without progressive ramping (slope). In contrast, the metrics under normal operating scenarios and after a cyberfrequency of single-pulse attacks was changed to ensure that attack. In normal scenarios, the integration of electric vehicles
the data set included various possible scenarios. Key system into the system causes temporary changes in the measured
characteristics such as voltage, frequency, SoC, and power parameters. As shown in Fig. 5, when an EV integrates into
were gathered from each EV charging station and the PCC the system after 13 seconds, the frequency at the EVCS
frequency. Following data collection, to create a manageable bus oscillates briefly before settling within milliseconds. This
and representative dataset for machine learning, we performed temporary behavior is primarily due to the intrinsic resilience
feature extraction via a sliding window approach. A window of the large-scale test system, which efficiently dampens
size of 20,000 samples was used, corresponding to 1-second oscillations and recovers frequency stability. Similarly, when
operational segments. Feature extraction was done by comput- an EV is integrated, the voltage at the EVCS bus drops
ing each feature’s mean and variance, which were computed briefly, reflecting the sudden increase in demand. However, the
for every signal, effectively capturing both the steady-state and system quickly adapts to these fluctuations, ensuring general
dynamic behavior of the system. This process transformed stability. During normal operation, power and SoC signals
the high-resolution time-series data into a structured feature behave as predicted, with smooth transitions and constant
matrix. This feature matrix was then used to train and test the levels indicating reliable EV integration.
proposed FL model. For server-side meta-aggregation, a sepa- In the cyber-attack scenario, Fig. 6 depicts a single-pulse
rate validation set was created with balanced normal/attack attack. The attack happens at 51 seconds, causing dramatic

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 7

 Fig. 6: Behavior of signal during single-attacked scenarios Fig. 7: Behavior of signal during multi-attacked scenarios

changes in the frequency and voltage signals on the EVCS A. Client-Specific Performance Analysis
bus. Solid oscillations and uneven patterns throughout the
attack mark these alterations. Fig. 7 shows the multi-attack, The evaluation results presented in Table II demonstrate
where both single and double pulse attacks are inserted in the consistently high performance across all client models, with all
system. Notably, the SoC signal remains flat during the assault, configurations achieving perfect recall (100%) on their respecpreventing the predicted charging process. Despite these dis- tive test sets. Clients 1, 2, and 3 exhibit identical performance
turbances, the system shows strong recovery capabilities. Once profiles with 97.00% accuracy, 94.34% precision, and 97.09%
the attack is complete, the frequency and voltage signals revert F1-score, suggesting these clients’ data distributions may share
to normal levels, demonstrating the test system’s resilience in similar characteristics. Client 4 shows higher performance
mitigating and recovering from cyber-attack transient distur- (100.00% accuracy, 100.00% precision, 100.00% F1-score),
bances. This recovery reflects the system’s capacity to retain potentially indicating either greater data complexity or fewer
operational stability even in unfavorable circumstances. training samples in this partition.
 Notably, the global model maintains strong performance
 V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION (98.25% accuracy, 96.62% precision, 98.28% F1-score) that
 closely matches the client-level results, demonstrating effective
 The dataset for this study was carefully developed by knowledge aggregation while preserving the individual modincorporating a variety of relevant parameters (as indicated in els’ ability to identify positive cases. The universal 100% recall
Table I), such as voltage, frequency, SoC, and power metrics across all models suggests the architecture is particularly wellfrom the IEEE 123-bus system with distributed EVCS. These suited for applications where false negatives carry significant
attributes were chosen based on their importance in detecting consequences, such as medical diagnosis or safety-critical
abnormalities and maintaining system reliability. Voltage and systems. The minor variations in precision with consistently
frequency show the grid’s operational state and aid in detecting high accuracy indicate that most classification errors occur
anomalies such as voltage sags or frequency changes caused by near the decision boundary, with the models maintaining
cyberattacks or operational problems. SoC reflects EV battery excellent separation between classes overall.
levels, which might be affected by unusual charging behaviors
 The global meta-weighted ensemble achieves strong alignor attacks on EVCS operations. At the same time, power
 ment between predictions (orange line) and ground truth
records energy use and generation trends, which might be
 (blue dashed line), as shown in Fig. 8. The model mainvaluable indicators of irregularities. The preprocessed dataset
 tains perfect recall (100%) with all attack events correctly
was divided into training and testing subsets in an 80/20 split
 identified, evidenced by exact matches during attack periods.
to ensure a fair evaluation of the proposed federated learning
 While most normal operations are correctly classified (98.25%
model. Data normalization approaches, such as standard scalaccuracy), occasional false positives appear as isolated orange
ing, were used to preserve consistency across feature ranges
 spikes during non-attack intervals. The ensemble’s probaand increase SimpleNN performance.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 8

 Fig. 8: Prediction results of the global meta-weighted ensemble model across test samples
TABLE II: Performance Evaluation Across Clients and Global the theoretical maximum of 1.0 indicate exceptional ranking
Model capability and confidence estimation. The results validate
 Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score
 that FedNAS’s personalized architecture approach, combined
 with meta-learning aggregation, effectively leverages client
 Client 1 97.00 94.34 100.0 97.09
 Client 2 97.00 94.34 100.0 97.09 heterogeneity to achieve comprehensive performance gains.
 Client 3 97.00 94.34 100.0 97.09 The method proves particularly advantageous for probability-
 Client 4 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 sensitive applications like EVCS anomaly detection, where
 Global Model 98.25 96.62 100.00 98.28 both detection reliability (recall) and confidence calibration
 (AUC-AP) are critical for operational safety and maintenance
 planning.
bilistic weighting effectively combines client models, with
prediction confidence exceeding 0.99 during true attack events.
These results demonstrate reliable cyber-attack detection while C. Computational, Communication Overhead and Deploypreserving EVCS operational data privacy. ment Performance
 The resource utilization analysis in Table IV demonstrates
 TABLE III: Performance Comparison of FL Approaches that FedNAS achieves superior computational efficiency, re-
 Metric FedAvg FedProx FedNAS Improvement quiring only 18.76s computation time - representing 11%
 Accuracy 0.9625 0.9575 0.9825 +2.00% vs FedAvg reduction compared to FedAvg (21.05s) and 25% reduction
 Precision 0.9302 0.9463 0.9662 +1.98% vs FedProx
 Recall 1.0000 0.9700 1.0000 +0.00% vs FedAvg
 compared to FedProx (24.99s). FedNAS maintains compa-
 F1 0.9639 0.9580 0.9828 +1.89% vs FedAvg rable communication efficiency (0.0010s) while providing
 ROC AUC 0.9625 0.9575 0.9960 +3.35% vs FedAvg enhanced privacy through prediction-based aggregation rather
 Avg Precision 0.9302 0.9330 0.9955 +6.25% vs FedProx
 than weight exchange. In the training phase, clients share
 predictions (not raw data or weights) with the server for
 meta-aggregation. Fully edge-based inference, each EVCS
B. Comparative Performance Analysis uses its personalized model locally with zero server com-
 As demonstrated in Table III, FedNAS achieves consistent munication. The real-time performance, 0.0208ms inference
performance improvements across all evaluation metrics com- latency, enables immediate anomaly detection at the edge.
pared to both FedAvg and FedProx. The proposed method FedNAS’s computational advantage stems from its efficient
attains 98.25% accuracy, representing a 2.00% improvement two-phase architecture search, which optimizes client-specific
over FedAvg and 2.50% over FedProx. Notably, FedNAS models without the computational overhead of FedProx’s proxmaintains perfect recall (100%) while simultaneously improv- imal regularization. The approach maintains the fundamental
ing precision to 96.62% - outperforming FedProx by 1.98% federated learning principle of sharing only model outputs
and FedAvg by 3.60%. The balanced performance is reflected while delivering both performance gains and computational
in FedNAS’s superior F1-score of 98.28%, which exceeds efficiency.
both baselines by approximately 1.89-2.48%. More signifi- As expected in a federated learning setting, 100% of the
cantly, FedNAS demonstrates remarkable probabilistic cali- raw client data is preserved locally, with zero exposure to the
bration with a 99.60% ROC AUC score (3.35% improvement central server. This stands in direct contrast to a centralized
over FedAvg) and 99.55% average precision (6.25% improve- model, which requires full data sharing and retains no data
ment over FedProx). These near-perfect scores approaching locally, thereby posing significant privacy and security risks.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 9

TABLE IV: Resource Overhead and Deployment Performance collaborative training across four EVCS nodes, each with
Comparison distinct operational profiles (voltage, frequency, SoC, and
 Metric FedAvg FedProx FedNAS
 power data under normal/attack conditions).
 • Superior Detection Performance: Achieved 95.63% accu-
 Computation Time (s) 21.05 24.99 18.76
 Communication Time (s) 0.0019 0.0018 0.0010 racy and perfect recall (100%) in attack detection, out-
 Inference Latency (ms) 0.0220 0.0209 0.0208 performing FedAvg (94.69% accuracy) while maintaining
 Inference Communication Local Only Local Only Local Only robust precision (91.95%). The meta-learned ensemble
 aggregation improved the average precision by 7.92%
 (0.9963 vs 0.9171), ensuring a reliable ranking of the at-
The FedNAS framework further enhances this data-preserving tack probabilities, critical to prioritizing threats in EVCS
principle by sharing only model predictions during aggre- operations.
gation, rather than raw data or model parameters, ensuring • Architectural Adaptability: Discovered client-specific arthat sensitive operational information never leaves the EVCS chitectures (e.g., 16-neuron ReLU for simpler nodes, 32-
nodes. neuron LeakyReLU for complex data) via automated
 NAS, balancing model expressiveness and efficiency.
D. NAS Architecture Impact Analysis FedNAS required only 1.2× more computation than Fe-
 The neural architecture search process revealed diverse dAvg (35.87s vs. 28.96s) while reducing communication
architectural preferences across clients as shown in Table V, time by 25% (0.0030s vs. 0.0040s).
with both 16-neuron ReLU and 12-neuron LeakyReLU archi- • Privacy-Preserving and Practical: Retained all sensitive
tectures emerging equally (50% distribution each). This bal- EVCS data locally, using FL to share only aggregated
anced distribution demonstrates FedNAS’s adaptive capability model updates. The framework’s low bandwidth demand
to match architectures to client-specific data characteristics: and high detection accuracy make it viable for deploy-
 • Architectural Diversity: The equal split between ReLU ment in resource-constrained edge environments.
 and LeakyReLU activations indicates that different non- Limitations and Future Work: The current framework’s
 linearity functions benefit different client datasets, with privacy protections lack formal guarantees against sophisti-
 LeakyReLU providing advantages for specific data dis- cated inference attacks. Future work will integrate differential
 tributions. privacy with rigorous adversarial testing to establish for-
 • Optimized Complexity: The discovered architectures mal privacy bounds. While architecturally scalable, empirical
 (12-16 neurons) confirm that moderate network capacity validation with larger client populations (50, 100 nodes) is
 sufficiently captures the anomaly detection patterns while needed to quantify performance scaling and optimize system
 maintaining edge compatibility. parameters. Additionally, comprehensive statistical analysis
 • Efficient Personalization: The architectural variation with multiple random seeds will strengthen result reliability
 demonstrates FedNAS’s ability to automatically tailor for large-scale smart grid deployments.
 model complexity to individual client needs without
 manual intervention. VII. A PPENDIX
 These findings validate our constrained search space design, VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
which efficiently discovers client-optimal architectures while
maintaining computational feasibility for edge deployment. This research is funded partly by US NSF Grant # CNS
 2105269, US DOE CESER Grant DE-CR000016, and Iowa
 TABLE V: Discovered Architecture Distribution Energy Center Grant #21-IEC-009.
 Architecture Frequency
 R EFERENCES
 16-neuron ReLU 2
 12-neuron LeakyReLU 2 [1] A. Hussain, A. Yadav, and G. Ravikumar, “Anomaly detection using bidirectional long short-term memory networks for cyber-physical electric
 vehicle charging stations,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Cyber-
 VI. C ONCLUSION Physical Systems, 2024.
 This research proposed FedNAS, a novel federated learning [2] R. Zheng, A. Sumper, M. Aragüés-Peñalba, and S. Galceran-Arellano,
 “Advancing power system services with privacy-preserving federated
framework enhanced with neural architecture search (NAS) learning techniques: A review,” IEEE Access, 2024.
and a meta-learned ensemble aggregate for cyberattack detec- [3] M. Alazab, S. P. RM, M. Parimala, P. K. R. Maddikunta, T. R.
tion in EVCS deployed on the IEEE-123 bus system. Unlike Gadekallu, and Q.-V. Pham, “Federated learning for cybersecurity:
 Concepts, challenges, and future directions,” IEEE Transactions on
conventional FL approaches, FedNAS addresses communi- Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3501–3509, 2021.
cation efficiency and model personalization by dynamically [4] S. Barja-Martinez, F. Teng, A. Junyent-Ferré, and M. Aragüés-Peñalba,
optimizing client-specific architectures while preserving data “Personalized federated learning with cost-oriented load forecasting for
 home energy management systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
locality. Key Contributions and Findings Applications, 2024.
 • Efficient and Scalable FL Framework: Reduced commu- [5] J. McCarthy, N. Grayson, J. Brule, T. Cottle, A. Dinerman, J. Domnication overhead to 0.16 MB (45% lower than cen- browski, J. Long, H. Tran, K. Quigg, M. Thompson et al., “Cybersecurity framework profile for electric vehicle extreme fast charging
 tralized methods) by sharing only model weights, not infrastructure,” National Inst. of Standards and Technology (NIST),
 raw data. Demonstrated real-world scalability through Gaithersburg, MD (United . . . , Tech. Rep., 2023.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TIA.2026.3661521

 10

 TABLE VI: Experimental Configuration IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1238–
 1247, 2022.
 Parameter Value
 [15] R. Shrestha, M. Mohammadi, S. Sinaei, A. Salcines, D. Pampliega,
 Random Seeds R. Clemente, A. L. Sanz, E. Nowroozi, and A. Lindgren, “Anomaly
 PyTorch/NumPy/Python 42 detection based on lstm and autoencoders using federated learning in
 Training Hyperparameters smart electric grid,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol.
 Optimizer Adam (lr=0.001, wd=1e-5) 193, p. 104951, 2024.
 Batch Size 32 [16] J. Jithish, B. Alangot, N. Mahalingam, and K. S. Yeo, “Distributed
 Local Epochs 20 anomaly detection in smart grids: a federated learning-based approach,”
 Loss Function BCE IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 7157–7179, 2023.
 [17] S. Purohit and M. Govindarasu, “Fl-evcs: Federated learning based
 FedProx µ 0.01 anomaly detection for ev charging ecosystem,” in 2024 33rd Interna-
 Dropout 0.2 tional Conference on Computer Communications and Networks (IC-
 Batch Norm Yes CCN). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–9.
 FedNAS Configuration [18] Z. Lin and J. Li, “Fedevcp: Federated learning-based anomalies detection
 Search Phases 2 (Search + FL) for electric vehicle charging pile,” The Computer Journal, vol. 67, no. 4,
 Candidates/Client 5 pp. 1521–1530, 2024.
 Evaluation Multi-objective scoring [19] L. Lavaur, M.-O. Pahl, Y. Busnel, and F. Autrel, “The evolution of
 Complexity Penalty Params/10,000 federated learning-based intrusion detection and mitigation: A survey,”
 IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 19, no. 3,
 Neural Architecture Search pp. 2309–2332, 2022.
 Neuron Ranges 4-8 (small), 8-16 (med), 16-32 (large) [20] Y. Liu, Y. Kang, T. Zou, Y. Pu, Y. He, X. Ye, Y. Ouyang, Y.-Q. Zhang,
 Layer Depth 1-2 hidden layers and Q. Yang, “Vertical federated learning: Concepts, advances, and
 Activations ReLU, LeakyReLU (α=0.1) challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
 Validation Size min(150 samples) vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 3615–3634, 2024.
 Data Processing [21] W. Bouzeraib, A. Ghenai, and N. Zeghib, “Enhancing iot intrusion
 Train-Test Split 80-20 detection systems through horizontal federated learning and optimized
 wgan-gp,” IEEE Access, 2025.
 Normalization StandardScaler
 [22] K. Cheng, T. Fan, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, T. Chen, D. Papadopoulos, and
 Padding Zero-padding Q. Yang, “Secureboost: A lossless federated learning framework,” IEEE
 Augmentation Gaussian noise (σ=0.02) Intelligent Systems, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 87–98, 2021.
 Meta-Ensemble [23] Y. He, Z. Shen, J. Hua, Q. Dong, J. Niu, W. Tong, X. Huang, C. Li, and
 Base Model Logistic Regression (L2, C=0.1) S. Zhong, “Backdoor attack against split neural network-based vertical
 Weighting Confidence + performance federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
 Solver L-BFGS Security, vol. 19, pp. 748–763, 2023.
 Threshold Adaptive (0.35-0.65) [24] S. R. Kadhe, H. Ludwig, N. Baracaldo, A. King, Y. Zhou, K. Houck,
 A. Rawat, M. Purcell, N. Holohan, M. Takeuchi et al., “Privacy-
 Federated Learning preserving federated learning over vertically and horizontally partitioned
 Rounds 20 data for financial anomaly detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19304,
 Clients 4 2023.
 Evaluation Global vs Ensemble [25] M. Kesici, B. Pal, and G. Yang, “Detection of false data injection attacks
 in distribution networks: A vertical federated learning approach,” IEEE
 Transactions on Smart Grid, 2024.
 [26] S. Laridi, G. Palmer, and K.-M. M. Tam, “Enhanced federated anomaly
 [6] E. T. M. Beltrán, M. Q. Pérez, P. M. S. Sánchez, S. L. Bernal, detection through autoencoders using summary statistics-based thresh-
 G. Bovet, M. G. Pérez, G. M. Pérez, and A. H. Celdrán, “Decentralized olding,” Scientific Reports, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 26704, 2024.
 federated learning: Fundamentals, state of the art, frameworks, trends, [27] L. Zhong and K. Liu, “Visual classification and detection of power
 and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2023. inspection images based on federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on
 [7] R. Wang, H. Yun, R. Rayhana, J. Bin, C. Zhang, O. E. Herrera, Z. Liu, Industry Applications, 2024.
 and W. Mérida, “An adaptive federated learning system for community [28] Y. Wang, W. Fu, J. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Zhen, F. Wang, F. Xu, N. Duić,
 building energy load forecasting and anomaly prediction,” Energy and D. Yang, and Y. Lv, “Spatiotemporal federated learning based regional
 Buildings, vol. 295, p. 113215, 2023. distributed pv ultra-short-term power forecasting method,” IEEE Trans-
 [8] M. M. Badr, M. M. Mahmoud, Y. Fang, M. Abdulaal, A. J. Aljo- actions on Industry Applications, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 7413–7425, 2024.
 hani, W. Alasmary, and M. I. Ibrahem, “Privacy-preserving and [29] C. He, M. Annavaram, and S. Avestimehr, “Towards non-iid and inviscommunication-efficient energy prediction scheme based on federated ible data with fednas: Federated deep learning via neural architecture
 learning for smart grids,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08546, 2020.
 no. 9, pp. 7719–7736, 2023. [30] Z. Alsulaimawi, “Meta-fl: A novel meta-learning framework for opti-
 [9] M. A. Husnoo, A. Anwar, N. Hosseinzadeh, S. N. Islam, A. N. mizing heterogeneous model aggregation in federated learning,” arXiv
 Mahmood, and R. Doss, “A secure federated learning framework for preprint arXiv:2406.16035, 2024.
 residential short-term load forecasting,” IEEE Transactions on Smart [31] A. Hussain, A. Yadav, and G. Ravikumar, “Federated learning for
 Grid, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 2044–2055, 2023. detecting cyber attacks in evcs using a lightweight neural network,” in
[10] Y. Wang and Q. Guo, “Privacy-preserving and adaptive federated deep 2025 IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC). IEEE, 2025,
 learning for multiparty wind power forecasting,” IEEE Transactions on pp. 1–6.
 Industry Applications, 2024.
[11] C. Ren, R. Yan, M. Xu, H. Yu, Y. Xu, D. Niyato, and Z. Y. Dong,
 “Qfdsa: A quantum-secured federated learning system for smart grid
 dynamic security assessment,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2023.
[12] V. Veerasamy, L. P. M. I. Sampath, S. Singh, H. D. Nguyen, and H. B.
 Gooi, “Blockchain-based decentralized frequency control of microgrids
 using federated learning fractional-order recurrent neural network,”
 IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1089–1102, 2023.
[13] M. Rajesh, S. Ramachandran, K. Vengatesan, S. S. Dhanabalan, and
 S. K. Nataraj, “Federated learning for personalized recommendation in
 securing power traces in smart grid systems,” IEEE Transactions on
 Consumer Electronics, 2024.
[14] S. Islam, S. Badsha, S. Sengupta, I. Khalil, and M. Atiquzzaman, “An
 intelligent privacy preservation scheme for ev charging infrastructure,”

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.