This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 1

 Anomaly Subgraph Detection on Multiple
 Associated Attributed Networks
 Nannan Wu , Ying Sun , Yazheng Zhao , Wenjun Wang , Xueli Liu, and Jianxin Li

 Abstract—With the rapid development of artificial intelligence XG1 ∈ Rn×d1 Anomaly attribute matrix of G1 .
(AI) technology and large-scale dataset applications, anomaly XG2 ∈ Rm×d2 Nonanomaly attribute matrix of G2 .
subgraph detection is becoming an essential and widespread n = |V1 |, m = |V2 | Number of nodes of G1 and G2 .
application. Most existing methods detect anomaly subgraphs d1 ∈ N, d2 ∈ N Dimensionality of node attributes.
depending on the observable anomalous attributes in target S 1 = (VS 1 , ES 1 , XS 1 ) Anomaly subgraph of G1 .
data. However, they may face challenges when the target data
lacks such anomalous attributes. E.g., identifying suspicious
 S 2 = (VS 2 , ES 2 , XS 2 ) Anomaly subgraph of G2 .
gangs in the target transportation graph solely based on road H ⊆ V1 × V2 Prior alignment edge sets.
traffic information, or detecting burst events in nonpublic data xG1 (v) ∈ Rd1 , v ∈ V1 Anomaly attribute of G1 nodes.
without explicit anomalous attributes. To address the detection xG2 (v) ∈ Rd2 , v ∈ V2 Non-anomaly attribute of G2 nodes.
of implicit anomaly subgraphs (IASs) in such target graphs, x1 ∈ Rn , x2 ∈ Rm Feature vectors of G1 , G2 .
this article proposes a novel approach IAS detection (IASD)
with multidimensional feature transfer. First, our approach is
built upon transfer learning techniques and involves fusing I. I NTRODUCTION
features from multiple graphs. Second, we explore a feature
extraction procedure based on a graph attention (GAT) network
model to generate representations of anomaly features for large
 A NOMALY detection refers to the discovery of entities, events, and observations that deviate from the
 majority, while anomaly subgraph detection identifies unusual
multidimensional attribute graphs. Third, we construct a twoor anomaly subgraphs within a larger graph or network.1
layer graph by introducing an attributed graph referred to as
a “source graph,” where anomalies can be easily detected, and Anomaly subgraph detection is a vital task in various public
nodes of the source graph are partially aligned with the target safety applications, such as hot spot detection, fraud detection,
graph. We validate the effectiveness and robustness of IASD and intrusion detection.
through experiments on five real-world datasets, and implement In general, anomaly subgraph detection specifically focuses
four anomaly subgraph detection tasks in practical applications. on revealing anomalous patterns and facilitating informed
 Index Terms—Anomaly alignment, anomaly subgraph detecdecision-making. Most existing approaches achieve this by
tion, complex network, feature transfer learning. directly extracting anomaly-related features based on observable anomalous attributes within the target dataset [1], [2].
 Nonetheless, they face significant challenges when such
 N OMENCLATURE anomalous attributes are absent. In practical applications,
 N = (G1 , G2 , M) Two-layer graph. detecting urban crime hotspots remains a crucial anomaly
 G1 = (V1 , E1 , XG1 ) Source graph layer. subgraph detection task for ensuring urban security. Typically,
 G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 ) Target graph layer. identifying criminal activity in urban street networks (USNs)
 M ⊆ V1 × V2 Alignment edge sets. or urban transport networks (UTNs) is often impossible or
 V1 , V2 and E1 , E2 Node sets and edge sets. limited by insufficient road surveillance, e.g., in a city’s
 commercial district, traffic monitoring may report normal flow
 Received 20 May 2024; revised 9 October 2024, 1 May 2025, while social media simultaneously reveals abnormal events
and 24 September 2025; accepted 15 December 2025. This work was such as robberies or sudden crowd gatherings. As shown in
supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin under Grant Fig. 1, emotional words (e.g., nasty, hate, and complaint) fre-
25JCZDJC01300, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant U2468204, and in part by the Innovative Research Group Project quently appear in social networks (SNs), and this particularly
of the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272311. anomalous attribute is difficult to observe in USN. Similar situ-
(Corresponding author: Ying Sun.) ations also arise in public SNs and private forums. The private
 Nannan Wu is with the School of Cybersecurity, Tianjin University, Tianjin nature of some SNs conceals certain information, making it
300350, China (e-mail: nannan.wu@tju.edu.cn).
 Ying Sun is with the School of International Business, Zhejiang Yuexiu
 challenging to directly capture the anomalous attributes. In
University, Shaoxing 312000, China (e-mail: yingsun@tju.edu.cn). addition to the absence of anomalous attributes in the dataset,
 Yazheng Zhao and Xueli Liu are with the School of Computer Sci- the lack of anomaly features may also result from anomalous
ence and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: attributes being obscured within the vast volume of big data
yazhengzhao@tju.edu.cn; xueli@tju.edu.cn). and its high-dimensional nature. How can we achieve effective
 Wenjun Wang is with the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: wjwang@tju.edu.cn). detection performance when anomaly features are lacking due
 Jianxin Li is with the State Key Laboratory of Software Develop- to the absence of observable anomalous attributes?
ment Environment and Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data
and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: 1 In this article, we use the terms “network” and “graph” interchangeably
lijx@act.buaa.edu.cn). for the structure denoted as G = (V, E), where V and E denote the node and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3647831 the edge sets, respectively.
 2162-237X © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

 analyzing both opinion diffusion subgraphs and congested
 subgraphs. Inspired by transfer learning to address the challenge of data sparsity and sample limitations across domains
 and tasks, this article proposes an innovative anomaly feature
 transfer learning approach for detecting IAS through Anomaly
 Alignment across multidimensional attributed networks.
 Our approach works on a multilayer graph structure N =
 (G1 , G2 , M) to tackle the aforementioned challenges. G1 is the
 source graph associated with the target graph G2 . G1 contains
 certain observable anomalous attributes, which make it easier
 to capture anomaly features and detect the anomaly subgraph
 S 1 within it. In contrast, the target graph G2 lacks explicit
 anomalous attributes and includes the IAS, referred to as S 2 .
 Let M denote the association relationships between G1 and G2 .
 These association relationships are modeled within a two-layer
 graph N, subject to specific alignment constraints. Although
Fig. 1. Illustration of crime hotspot detection using the IASD framework. this article focuses on two-layer graphs, the proposed method
Crime hotspots in the urban street graph are identified by leveraging a can be extended to multilayer graphs. A multilayer graph
social graph enriched with negative emotional attributes. The proposed IASD is an effective model for representing multiple interrelated
approach integrates anomaly subgraph detection with network alignment.
 source graphs originating from diverse domains. Each layer
 represents a unique type of interaction between nodes, and
 different layers consist of distinct sets of nodes and types of
 links. Additionally, alignment links exist between layers to
 represent the association relationships across different graphs
 [3]. Our approach postulates that the anomaly features present
 in the source graph G1 affect the target graph G2 through
 alignment links M between G1 and G2 . Hence, the IAS S 2 in
 G2 is possibly detected by correlating this affection from G1 .
 Fig. 1 demonstrates our approach for detecting urban crime
 hotspots in social and USNs. Our main contributions can be
 summarized as follows.
 1) This article proposes a pioneering approach (IASD),
 designed for the specific challenge of detecting IASs S 2
Fig. 2. Illustration of anomaly alignment: red circles vi and v j denote anomaly under “Anomaly Alignment” within multidimensional
nodes, orange circles v0i and v0j denote implicit anomaly nodes, solid lines attribute networks.
(vi , v j ) and (v0i , v0j ) are edges in graphs, and dash lines (vi , v0i ) and (v j , v0j ) are 2) IASD novelty interprets the anomaly subgraph S 2 by
the alignment edges between two graphs. fusing aligned attributes from the explicit anomaly subgraph S 1 in G1 , facilitating the detection of causal chains
 In this article, we refer to the anomaly subgraph hidden within anomalies.
within the target data that lacks anomaly features as the 3) Extensive experiments are conducted on five real-world
implicit anomaly subgraph (IAS). Hence, detecting anomaly datasets, showcasing IASD’s significant performance
subgraphs will face challenges due to the lack of anomaly fea- and robustness. Additionally, IASD is applied to address
tures within the target datasets. Another challenge encountered four practical application tasks.
by many existing anomaly subgraph detection algorithms is the
 The remainder of this article is structured as follows.
lack of interpretability. Especially, single-attribute networks
 Section II provides an overview of relevant existing methods,
hinder anomaly cause identification without sufficient features,
 while Sections III–IV define the “anomaly alignment” problem
as seen in UTN data where sparse accident metadata impedes
 and introduce IASD in detail. Sections V-A–V encompass five
accurate congestion analysis. Such discrepancies motivate
 real datasets and offer a comprehensive evaluation of IASD.
the development of anomaly feature transfer learning algo-
 Four case studies are presented in Section V-E, and finally,
rithms that leverage social signals to complement traffic/street
 Section VI summarizes the primary findings of this research.
monitoring data and enable early detection of potential
risks.
 To address the two aforementioned challenges, our approach
incorporates associated auxiliary data to enable the identification of IASs and underlying anomaly causal chains II. R ELATED W ORKS
within the target data. An anomalous event often exhibits
correlations across multiple domain-specific datasets. This Table I summarizes representative graph anomaly detection
correlation is termed as “Anomaly Alignment” in this article. (GAD) methods from recent years and compares them with
Another instance is that unusual opinions about traffic con- our approach across six aspects. These methods were compregestion reported on SNs and congestion patterns recorded by hensively compared in terms of anomaly types, consideration
UTNs often coincide at specific street locations or geographic of structural anomalies, capability to handle few-attribute
coordinates, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Consequently, we construct anomalies, suitability for multiple graphs, interpretability, and
the causal chain underlying a traffic congestion event by reliance on graph neural networks (GNNs).
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 3

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON B ETWEEN O UR M ETHOD AND S OME E XISTING R EPRESENTATIVE GAD M ODELS

A. Anomaly Subgraph Detection features, leveraging GNNs for topological anomalies, enabling
 Traditional anomaly subgraph detection methods typi- anomaly feature transfer across domains like pandemic and
cally extract features from graph-structured data and identify traffic networks, and providing good interpretability.
anomalies via statistical and graph search techniques [1], [15].
These nondeep learning approaches handle static and dynamic C. Transfer Learning
graphs, including single, multiple, and multilayered graphs [7], Existing transfer learning methods address challenges such
[8], [9], [16], [17], but face challenges with large-scale graphs as data scarcity, domain shift, task differences, computational
and high-dimensional node or edge attributes. constraints, negative transfer, and heterogeneous transfer. By
 To address these challenges, recent approaches leverage leveraging knowledge from a source domain—e.g., model
deep learning [2], [18], [19]. However, due to inefficient parameters or feature representations—they mitigate limited
subgraph representation learning, most focus on detecting labeled data, distribution discrepancies, and task mismatches in
anomalous nodes rather than subgraphs [4], [5], [20], [21], the target domain, improving performance and generalization
[22], [23]. For instance, Hu et al. [4] propose subgraph-aligned [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34].
contrastive learning using multiview augmented subgraphs to Transfer learning can be categorized into four subsettings:
detect anomalous nodes. Liu et al. [23] detect anomalies by Instance-transfer, Feature-representation-transfer, Parameterevaluating data similarity through representative neighbors. transfer, and Relational-knowledge-transfer [35]. In instance-
Zhou et al. [5] propose a lightweight IoT anomaly detec- transfer, Askarizadeh et al. [26] propose an optimization
tion model combining GNN and knowledge distillation with framework to improve learning under resource constraints
global-local feature learning for secure, efficient, and low- while reducing negative transfer, and Liang et al. [36] extend
overhead communication. instance-transfer to large-scale SNs. In feature-representation
 Some deep learning methods target anomaly subgraphs by transfer, Li et al. [27] introduce a cross-channel specificlearning distinctive features. Huang et al. [6] propose a hybrid- mutual feature transfer network for EEG decoding, Gao et al.
order graph attention (GAT) network to detect abnormal nodes [29] propose a multitask model to extract shared features
and motif instances. Zhang and Zhao [11] evaluate subgraph across tasks, Lu et al. [30] tackle cross-modality person reianomaly scores in a residual graph built from reconstructed dentification by learning both common and modality-specific
and original graphs using a location-aware graph autoen- features, and Liang et al. [36] proposed an instance-transfer
coder. Sun et al. [10] introduce ASD-HC, which combines method for large-scale SNs.
GCN-based contrastive learning with Nonparametric Graph In relational-knowledge transfer, Tang et al. [28] leverage
Scan statistics to assess anomalous subgraphs. social theories for transfer across heterogeneous networks,
 In summary, while these methods learn anomaly features while Bi et al. [32] develop Bridged-GNN, enhancing transfer
from data, most do not target IASs. via a Bridged-Graph structure. Cui et al. [31] apply knowledge
 transfer in human–machine dialog systems to improve general-
B. Anomaly Detection on Multiple Networks ization. Beyond traditional transfer learning, Li et al. [33], [34]
 Recently, some works study anomaly detection across mul- explore domain adaptation for robust object detection across
tiple networks. Bindu et al. [9] detect anomalous users by domains and unseen categories.
comparing topological similarities across layers. Sun et al. [14] In summary, these studies highlight the diverse methods and
propose AAAN, using ADMM to find maximum connected applications of transfer learning, providing a foundation for
anomaly subgraphs across networks. Wu et al. [12] apply deep further research in anomaly detection and knowledge transfer
learning and network alignment to detect shared anomalies in complex structured domains.
in traffic networks. However, there are also works that can
be easily confused with anomaly subgraph detection research, III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
such as anomaly or object detection across multiple views [24] Consider a two-layer graph N = (G1 , G2 , M), where G1 =
and domains [25]. These approaches do not take into account (V1 , E1 , XG1 ) is the source graph (layer), G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 )
the network structure of the data. is the target graph (layer), and M ⊆ V1 × V2 represents the
 Other GNN-based GAD methods, like SAMCL [4], focus set of association relationships (i.e., alignment edges) between
on rich anomaly features and complex topologies, while nodes in G1 and G2 . Specifically, V1 = {v11 , v12 , . . . , v1n } and
multilayer methods such as A3MAN [12] emphasize inter- V2 = {v21 , v22 , . . . , v2m } are the node sets, with E1 ⊆ V1 ×V1 and
pretability. Our approach is more general, detecting IASs E2 ⊆ V2 × V2 as their corresponding edge sets. The attribute
in two-layer, multidimensional networks, handling missing matrices are given by XG1 = {xG1 (vi )|vi ∈ V1 } ∈ Rn×d1 and
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

XG2 = {xG2 (v j )|v j ∈ V2 } ∈ Rm×d2 , where xG1 (vi ) ∈ Rd1 and Here, c ≤ m is a constant representing the maximum number of
xG2 (v j ) ∈ Rd2 denote the multidimensional attribute vectors nodes in S 2 . The function Fα (S 1 ) evaluates the anomaly score
of nodes in G1 and G2 , respectively. The alignment edges in for the subgraph S 1 . Let Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) be the feature transfer
M model cross-layer associations, enabling anomaly feature learning model based on network alignment principles [37],
transfer from G1 to G2 . Accordingly, we formalize the fol- which scales the anomalous significance of S 1 transferred to
lowing foundational definitions. S 2 . In our article, the similarity of S 1 and S 2 is represented
 Definition 1 (Anomalous Node): Given a graph G = by the alignment matrix M ∈ Rm×n . Let M( j, i) = 1 if node
(V, E, X), let p(X) denote the probability distribution of the vi ∈ VS 1 aligns with the node v j ∈ VS 2 , otherwise M( j, i) = 0.
node features in G. For a node v ∈ V, if the probability of Intuitively, IASD problem (2) has the following three
its feature vector satisfies p(xG (v)) ≤ α, where α ∈ R ≥ 0 properties.
is a predefined significant anomaly threshold, then node v is 1) P1: Function Fα (S 1 ) increases monotonically with
considered an anomalous node of G. Nα (S 1 ), i.e., the number of anomaly nodes of S 1 .
 Definition 2 (Anomaly Subgraph): Given a subgraph 2) P2: Function Fα (S 1 ) decreases monotonically with
S = (VS , ES , XS ), if an anomalous node v ∈ V exists or N α (S 1 ), i.e., the number of normal nodes in S 1 .
XS comprises the anomaly features, then the subgraph S is 3) P3: Function Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) increases monotonically with
considered an anomaly subgraph. the number of alignment edges between S 1 and S 2 .
 We denote S 1 = (VS 1 , ES 1 , XS 1 ) and S 2 = (VS 2 , ES 2 , XS 2 ) as P1 and P2 guarantee that the optimal anomaly subgraph Sˆ1
the anomaly subgraphs of G1 and G2 , respectively. When XG1 detected by maximizing the value of function Fα (S 1 ) [7], and
contains anomaly attributes while XG2 lacks such attributes, P3 guarantees that the optimal anomaly subgraph Sˆ1 contains
S 1 can be readily detected from the source graph G1 through more nodes of Sˆ2 that are aligned with the anomaly nodes of
the anomaly attributes in XG1 . However, detecting S 2 directly Sˆ1 . These three properties guarantee that the induced anomaly
from graph G2 proves challenging. If G1 aligns with G2 subgraph Sˆ2 is the optimal result. The corresponding formal
under certain association relationship constraints, then the proof is provided in Section IV, and additional detailed proofs
node anomaly attributes of G1 can be projected onto the are included in Appendix. Note that in this article, we do not
corresponding aligned nodes in G2 . This naturally raises a impose any connectivity constraints on S 2 .
critical question: Can the IAS S 2 be effectively detected from
G2 through the joint utilization of attributes XG1 and XG2 ?
 Definition 3 (Feature Transfer Learning): Given G1 = IV. M ETHODOLOGY
(V1 , E1 , XG1 ) is the source graph and G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 ) is the A. Feature Extraction Preprocessing
target graph, with alignment edges M ⊆ V1 × V2 . the general With the widespread utilization of large-scale data, highfeature transfer learning model ftran : XG1 → XG2 is given as dimensional attributes are widely adopted to characterize
follows: nodes and edges in large-scale graphs. Consequently, anomaly
 XG2 ← XG2 + ftran XG1 , M = XG2 + Φ MXG1 subgraph detection algorithms will face the challenge of the
  
 (1)
 curse of dimensionality in high-dimension datasets, making
where Mm×n is the matrix form of the alignment edge set M, it difficult to observe anomalous attributes. In the process
Φ is a feature projection function. of extracting anomalous features for each node in graphs,
 Proposition 1 (Anomaly Alignment): Given a two-layer our approach incorporates the GNN model (e.g., GCN, GAT,
graph N = (G1 , G2 , M). where G1 = (V1 , E1 , XG1 ) is the etc.) to convert nodes’ high-dimensional attributes into a
source graph and G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 ) is the target graph, with low-dimensional representation of anomalous features. In this
alignment edges M ⊆ V1 ×V2 . A connected anomaly subgraph article, we investigate the GAT network model to extract node
S 1 (VS 1 , ES 1 , XS 1 ) in G1 contains an anomalous node vi . If features for both the source graph G1 and the target graph
(vi , v j ) ∈ ES 1 and (v0i , v0j ) ∈ E2 exist with (vi , v0i ) ∈ M and G2 . Now, let us delve into the detailed procedure using G1
(v j , v0j ) ∈ M, then according to our feature transfer learning as an example. First, the initial nodes’ attributes of G1 are
model ftran : XS 1 → XS 2 , a nonempty aligned anomaly represented as XG1 = {xG1 (vi )|vi ∈ V1 }, where xG1 (vi ) ∈ R1×d1 .
subgraph S 2 exists in G2 . The normalized attention coefficient from node v j to node vi
 is calculated by the following equation:
 Proof: The detailed proof is provided in the appendix.   
 exp LeakyReLU aT W xG1 (vi ) k W xG1 v j
 Definition 4 (IASD): IAS detection (IASD) refers to detect- ai j = P 
 T W x (v ) k W x (v )
 
ing the maximum anomaly subgraph within the target network, k∈Ni exp LeakyReLU a G1 i G1 k
 (3)
which is devoid of anomalous attributes.
 Under the constraint of the Anomaly Alignment, the objec- where Ni0 denotes the neighbor set of node vi in graph G1 ,
tive function of IASD is defined as the following constrained W ∈ Rd1 ×d1 represents the weight matrix used for linear
optimization problem: transformation applied to each node, d10 is the dimension of
 0
 the output feature for each node. a ∈ R2d1 is the weight
 Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 , M̂
 
 vector, aT denotes the transposition of vector a. k denotes the
 = arg max Fα (S 1 ) + Q (S 1 , S 2 , M) concatenation operation. LeakyReLU is a nonlinear activation
 S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 2 ⊆G2 ,M
 function characterized by a negative input slope of 0.2. Then,
 s.t. S 1 is connected, M ∈ {0, 1}m×n , ˇVS 2 ˇ ≤ c, α ∈ P (2)
 ˇ ˇ
 the final output feature of node vi is computed through a linear
where α is a hyperparameter which represents the anomalous combination of the features as follows:
significant level, the set P = {p(xG1 (vi )) | p(xG1 (vi )) ≤
 0 1
αmax , vi ∈ V1 } ∪ {αmax } comprises the probabilities of the
 X
 h1 (vi ) = σ @ ai j W xG1 v j A .
 
 (4)
significant anomalies of G1 , with αmax = 0.15 in this article. v j ∈Ni
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 5

 To obtain stable learning features, we employ the aggre- Lemma 2 [7]: Given S 1α,K , (K = 0, . . . , n) is the optigation of a multihead GAT mechanism, which utilizes mal solution of the K-budget node-weighted prize-collection
K-independent attention mechanisms and applies averaging Steiner Tree from (10), the NPGS problem
computation to the final output features of each node, as shown
in the following equation: Sˆ1 = arg max Fα (S 1 )
 S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 1 is connected
 0 1
 1
 K X
 X is equivalent to the following optimal problem:
 h1 (vi ) = σ @ akij W k xG1 v j A
 
 (5)
 K Sˆ1 = argn max oFα (S 1 ). (11)
 v ∈N k=1 j i
 α∈P,S 1 ∈ S 1α,0 ,...,S 1α,n
where K is the number of independent attention mechanisms,
and σ represents the nonlinear activation function. In summary, TSPSD decomposes the NPGS-based anomaly
 Similarly, the feature XG2 in G2 can also be generated subgraph detection problem into a series of K-budget subgraph
following the aforementioned process. Thus, x1 ∈ Rn×1 and detection subproblems. With the constraints of lemma 5 and 6,
x2 ∈ Rm×1 are feature vectors of G1 and G2 , calculated as we guarantee that the optimal solution Sˆ1 in (11) is the optimal
shown in the following equation: anomaly subgraph detected from G1 .
 2) Anomaly Transferring From G1 to G2 : Inspired by
 x1 (i) = kh1 (vi )k2 , s.t. vi ∈ G1 transfer learning the biological knowledge among protein
 x2 (i) = kh2 (vi )k2 , s.t. vi ∈ G2 . (6) interaction networks based on the network alignment [40],
 [41], [42], our algorithm calculates the S 2 ’s anomaly features
 by transferring the S 1 ’s anomaly features through the network
B. Anomaly Alignment Model alignment. Our algorithm transfers the anomaly features of
 Fig. 2 depicts the Anomaly Alignment proposition. Now, let S 1 to infer the anomaly features of S 2 , while simultaneously
us elaborate on our proposed approach. Anomaly alignment ensuring optimal structural alignment between the associated
comprises two main stages. graphs G1 and G2 . Our anomaly transferring model is formal-
 1) Detecting Anomaly Subgraph S 1 in G1 : In this stage, we ized as the following convex combination form:
introduce a NPGS-based method (TSPSP [7]) to detect the Q (S 1 , S 2 , M) = ICS (S 1 , S 2 , M) + FT (S 1 , S 2 , M) . (12)
optimal anomaly subgraph. Specifically, NPGS-based methods calculate the anomaly score function Fα (S 1 ) for each Here, ICS(S 1 , S 2 , M) denotes the topological similarity
subgraph S 1 in G1 through NPGS statistics to detect the function based on the conserved aligned edges [37], [43]
optimal anomaly subgraph S 1 of G1 . Therefore, the general ICS (S 1 , S 2 , M)
formulation of the anomaly score function Fα (S 1 ) in our      
 M v0i , vi M v0j , v j A1 vi , v j A2 v0i , v0j
 P
problem (2) is defined as follows:
 = (13)
 Fα (S 1 ) = ϕ (α, Nα (S 1 ) , N (S 1 ))
  
 (7) ,
 0 0
 P
 vi ,v j
 0 0 A2 vi v j
where α is the anomalous significant level, Nα (S 1 ) is the where A1 and A2 are the adjacency matrices of G1 and G2 ,
number of anomaly nodes in S 1 , and N(S 1 ) is the total number vi , v j ∈ VS 1 , v0i , v0j ∈ VS 2 . I(·) is the indicator function.
of nodes in S 1 . The function ϕ : VS 1 → R is the NPGS FT (S 1 , S 2 , M) represents the induced subgraph features that
function used to evaluate the anomalous extent for subgraph combine the inherent features of S 2 and the multidimensional
S 1 . In this article, We explore two NPGS statistics within features transferred from S 1 . To enhance significant anomaly
TSPSD: Berk-Jones (BJs) [38], as defined in (8), and higher features, we modify our feature transfer learning model (1)
criticism (HC) [39] into the following general function:
  
 Nα (S ) FT (S 1 , S 2 , M) = XS 2 + Φ M 1 − XS 1 .
 
 (14)
 ϕBJ (α, Nα (S ) , N (S )) = N (S ) × KL ,α (8)
 N (S )
 Therefore, the objective function of our anomaly transfer
where KL is Kullback–Liebler divergence between the model is defined below
observed and expected proportions, with values less than α
 arg max Q (S 1 , S 2 , M), s.t. N α (S 1 ) ≤ K, |S 2 | ≤ c (15)
 α∈P,S 1 ,S 2 ,M
 8  
 <a log a + (1 − a) log 1 − a , if a ≥ b
  
 KL (a, b) = b 1−b where K ≤ n and c ≤ m are both hyperparameters.
 0, if a < b Given the constraint of hyperparameters, achieving the opti-
 :
 (9) mal value of Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) requires simultaneously maximizing
 both the ICS and FT functions, as shown in (12). Function
where a, b > 0. Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) maximizes the alignment quality between S 1
 Lemma 1 [7]: Given N α (S 1 ) = N(S 1 )− Nα (S 1 ), the optimal and S 2 , while highlighting the significant induced anomaly
subgraph of NPGS problem with the K-budget node-weighted features. Furthermore, Fα (S 1 ) in (7) increases monotonically
prize-collection Steiner tree is defined as with the number of anomaly nodes Nα (S 1 ) and decreases with
 the number of normal nodes N α (S 1 ). Based on Lemma 6, the
 S 1α,K = arg max Nα (S 1 ), s.t. N α (S 1 ) ≤ K (10)
 S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 1 is connected optimal anomaly subgraph S 1 exists in the limited graph G1 .
 Hence, the significant anomaly subgraph Sˆ1 can be directly
where α is the anomaly significance level, typically set as identified from G1 using the method in [7]. Subsequently, ICS
α ≤ 0.15 in this article. K ≤ n is the number of normal nodes function facilitates the identification of the most structurally
in S 1 . similar subgraph alignment pairs, while FT function ensures
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Algorithm 1 IASD With Multidimensional Feature Transfer where η is a regularization parameter, H is the prior alignment
Input: N = (G1 , G2 , H), G1 = (V1 , E1 , XG1 ), G2 = matrix, and k · kF denotes the Frobenius norm.
 (V2 , E2 , XG2 ), Number of S 2 ’ nodes c, αmax Proof: The detailed proof is provided in the appendix. 
Output: The optimal implicit anomaly subgraph Sˆ2 Theorem 1: Optimal anomaly subgraphs S 1 , S 2 in Graphs
 1 Initialization: M 0 ← H, S 10 ← φ, S 20 ← φ; G1 , G2 . If subgraphs S 1 and S 2 satisfy the anomaly alignment
 2 Extracting anomaly feature vectors in graph G 1 via GAT: condition, then in the IASD problem [(2)], an optimal solution
 x1 ← G 1 ; exists and is defined as follows:
 Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 = arg max Fα (S 1 ) + Q (S 1 , S 2 , M).
 
 3 Extracting normal feature vectors in graph G 2 via GAT: (18)
 x2 ← G 2 ; α∈P
 4 Calculating the probability of features for nodes in G 1 : Proof: The detailed proof is provided in the appendix. 
 {p(vi )} ← x1 a) Complexity analysis: The time complexity of IASD
 5 for α ∈ P = {p(vi )|p(vi ) ≤ αmax } ∪ {αmax } do primarily relies on the iterations involving S 1K , S 2K , and M K .
 6 for K ≤ n do Detecting the anomaly subgraph S 1K involves solving a 0-1
 7 S 1K ← maxS 1 Nα (S 1 ), s.t. N α (S 1 ) ≤ K, S 1 is connected; multiple-choice knapsack (MCK) Problem, which can be
 8 S 2K ← maxS 2 Q(S 1K , S 2 , M K−1 ), s.t. |VS 2 | ≤ c; addressed using dynamic programming. Its worst case time
 9 M K ← arg max Q(S 1K , S 2K , M K−1 ); complexity is O(|P| · n3 ) for a graph with n nodes [7]. To
 10 end for
 optimize M efficiently, we exploit the Kronecker product
 property, yielding a time complexity of O(|P| · mn2 ) for
 11 (S 1α , S 2α , M α ) ← maxK (F α (S 1K ) + Q(S 1K , S 2K , M K ));
 this step. Additionally, the time complexity of S 2K is also
 12 end for
 O(|P| · mn2 ). Hence, the time complexity of our algorithm is
 13 (Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 , M̂) ← maxα (F α (S 1α ) + Q(S 1α , S 2α , M α )); O(|P| · (n3 + mn2 )). When m = O(n), this reduces to O(|P| · n3 ),
 14 return Sˆ2 ; which is consistent with our empirical observation that the
 running time is dominated by the n3 term. The evaluation
 results are presented in the appendix.
the effective transfer of significant anomaly features from the
source graph to the target graph, resulting in strongly induced
anomaly patterns. Therefore, Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) is monotonically V. E XPERIMENTS
increasing with the number of alignment edges (|M|) and A. Dataset Description
the number of anomaly nodes in S 1 , i.e., Nα (S 1 ). Our algo- Fig. 3 shows four multilayer graphs from five real datasets
rithm IASD satisfies properties P1, P2, and P3 described in (details in the appendix).
Section III. The validity of these conclusions is confirmed
 1) Weibo Dataset contains 17.26 million geo-tagged Weibo
by parameter-sensitivity experiments, the details of which are
 users from Tianjin (December 1, 2011–December 31,
provided in the appendix.
 2012), collected from www.weibo.com. Applying Senti-
 Circle [44], 99 872 negative tweets are filtered to build
C. IASD With Multidimensional Feature Transfer Algorithm the source graph G1 (Negative Friendship Graph) with
 IASD is summarized below, as shown in Algorithm 1. 11 225 users and 13 405 links. The target graph G2
 1) Fusing the multidimensional attributes into the feature (Neighborhood Graph) has 137 919 nodes and 6 396 462
 vector x1 . edges, where nodes are neighborhoods (areas with a
 2) Optimizing the IASD problem (2) via dynamic pro- diameter of 300 m) and edges indicate a user tweeting
 gramming procedure, and deriving the optimal anomaly across them.
 subgraph Sˆ2 . 2) TYC Dataset comprises 1.67 million corporations,
 a) Detecting the maximum anomaly subgraph S 1 by 1.0 million investors, and 2.66 million investment
 calculating Function Fα (S 1 ), based on the anomaly relationships from www.tianyancha.com (January 1,
 feature x1 . 2000–December 31, 2018). The source graph G1
 b) Calculating the optimal subgraph S 2 by maximiz- contains 864 microcredit loan companies and 1814
 ing Function Q. relationships, while the target graph G2 has 4785 sharec) Updating the alignment matrix Mm×n based on the holders and 35 892 co-investment links. Companies
 new S 1 and S 2 . labeled as risky on the website were collected as ground
 Lemma 3: Optimal anomaly S 2 with S 1 and M fixed. Under truth.
the condition that the anomaly subgraph S 1 and the alignment 3) B&C Datasets: B dataset comprises 4.8 million populamatrix M are fixed, if S 1 and S 2 satisfy Anomaly Alignment tion movement records among 441 Chinese cities from
(Proposition 1), then the maximum solution Sˆ2 of Function Q www.Baidu.com (January 1–February 29, 2020), where
is defined as follows: edges represent the top 100 movements between cities,
 forming G1 of B&C. C dataset includes 24 787 daily
 sˆ2 = λM [s1 (1 − x1 )] + λx2 T + 1 Ms1
 
 (16) confirmed COVID-19 cases and 7686 patient trajectories
where λ is a regularization parameter. (December 1, 2019–March 10, 2020) across 313 Chinese
 Proof: The detailed proof is provided in the appendix.  cities. G2 of B&C is constructed as a plain graph with
 Lemma 4: Optimal alignment matrix M with S 1 and S 2 313 nodes and 7686 edges, using only the topology and
fixed. Given two input subgraphs S 1 and S 2 , then Function Q treating COVID-19 data as ground truth.
in (15) w.r.t. M is equivalent to the optimal problem 4) Water Pollution (WP) Dataset was collected from a real
 M̂ = arg max η [Q (M)] − (1 − η) kM − Hk2F (17) Water Sensor Network across six time slices, comprising
 M∈[0,1]m×n
 12 527 sensors (nodes) and 14 831 edges monitoring
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 7

Fig. 3. Description of multilayer graphs in our case study experiments. In each subillustration, the source graph G1 exhibits intrinsic anomalous characteristics,
where explicitly annotated observable anomalies are encoded in red, while anomaly alignment between G1 and target graph G2 are delineated through gray
directional arrows symbolizing cross-domain alignment mechanisms. G2 obtain induced anomalous features from G1 through transfer learning, enabling G2
to detect the IAS (depicted in blue in the subillustration). (a) Urban and rural area crime hotspots detection. (b) Anomaly event detection: epidemic breakout.
(c) Risky investors detection. (d) Water Pollution Prediction.

Fig. 4. ROC curves for evaluations of the IASD on the Weibo and TYC Fig. 5. Precision-Recall Curves for evaluations of the IASD on the Weibo
datasets. and TYC datasets.
 corresponding to true positives among detected positives,
 chemical pollutants in rivers. Sensors output 1’ when true detected positives among actual positives, correct deteccontamination is detected, otherwise 0’. The source tions overall, false detections, and combined precision-recall,
 graph G1 is built from the structure and attributes at respectively.
 time t, and the target graph G2 from the structure at
 time t + 1.
 C. Experimental Result Analysis
B. Experiment Setup 1) Performance Measures Analysis: As shown in Table II,
 IASD achieves the highest scores across all metrics on the
 All performance evaluations explore the BJ and HC statis- Weibo dataset, with improvements of 9% ∼ 29% over comtics on four multilayer graphs, labeling algorithms with petitive baselines. On the WP dataset, it outperforms four
suffixes “(BJ)” or “(HC)”, e.g., IASD(BJ) and IASD(HC). As baselines in most metrics, except Recall, where it is 6% lower
IASD(HC) results closely match IASD(BJ), they are provided than TF(BJ). In the TYC dataset, IASD leads in Accuracy,
in the appendix for brevity. For GAT layers, 2 heads are Recall, and F1, while TSPSD(BJ) is 3% better in Precision
used for WP and 4 heads for TYC and Weibo, with attention and 8% lower in FPRs (including FPR, FPR-P and FPR-D).
weights initialized uniformly. However, TSPSD(BJ) shows a 33% ∼ 47% decrease in other
 1) Baselines: We adopt five algorithms as our baselines. metrics compared to IASD. Moreover, we demonstrate its
 1) TF is our designed baseline, which directly integrates the superior performance by analyzing the correlation between
 network alignment algorithm FINAL [40] with TSPSD TPR and FPR, as well as the correlation between precision and
 and serves to detect an IAS. recall, as shown in Figs. 4 and 5. In summary, our approach
 2) A3MAN is a deep learning-based anomaly detection outperforms nearly all the baseline methods.
 approach across multiple graphs [12]. 2) Robustness Evaluation: To evaluate the robustness of
 3) ASDHC [10] employs GNNs and contrastive learning to our algorithm, we randomly selected a percentage of vertices
 detect anomaly subgraphs in an attributed network. and flipped their binary feature values. In addition, we make
 4) BG-ASDHC is our constructed baseline for detect- the noise ratio take values in the range [0%, 30%]. Coming IASs, which consists of a GNN-based knowledge pared to the baselines, IASD(BJ) has stable performance and
 transfer learning algorithm Bridged-GNN [32] and achieves the best Precision and FPR under different noise
 a GNN-based anomaly subgraph detection algorithm rates, as shown in Fig. 6. It is worth noting that when
 ASDHC. the noise ratio is greater than 15, the precision shows an
 5) BG-ASGAE is our constructed baseline for detecting upward trend. Our analysis suggests this is because multiple
 IASs, which integrates the Bridged-GNN [32] algorithm abnormal subgraphs are adjacent to each other and are detected
 with a GNN-based anomaly subgraph detection algo- as one optimal abnormal subgraph. When the noise ratio
 rithm AS-GAE [11]. exceeds a certain level, multiple original abnormal subgraphs
 2) Evaluation Metrics: Performance is evaluated by pre- connect with several “false anomaly nodes.” These false nodes
cision, recall, accuracy, false positive rate (FPR), and F1, are distributed in the adjacent areas of the smaller original
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Fig. 6. Robustness evaluation on the TYC dataset under different noise ratios. (a) Precision. (b) Recall. (c) False positive rate.

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON B ETWEEN IASD AND OTHER M ETHODS ON WP, W EIBO , AND TYC DATASET

abnormal subgraphs. This results in the detection of more “true TABLE III
anomaly nodes.” Fig. 6 shows the experimental results with A BLATION S TUDY ON TYC
the BJ statistic on the TYC dataset and similar results are
derived with the HC statistic.

D. Ablation Study
 In summary, as shown in Table III, removing the GAT or
 1) GAT Module Analysis: In our approach, the GAT mod- Transferability components leads to suboptimal performance,
ule embeds node attributes by sampling neighbor features. demonstrating the importance of each component.
To assess its impact, we compare IASD with IASD-GAT
(without GAT) using ROC (Fig. 4) and Precision-Recall curves E. Case Study
(Fig. 5), where IASD achieves the highest AUC and the best 1) Urban Crime Hotspot Detection: We hypothesize
Precision–Recall value. An additional ablation study (Fig. 6) that the aggregation of negative emotions among residents
evaluates robustness under varying noise levels: IASD attains increases the likelihood of abnormal events in their neighhigher Precision and lower FPR than IASD-GAT across noise borhoods. To test this, we detected urban crime hotspots
settings, with better Recall when noise is below 10. However, by aligning the “Negative Friend Graph” G1 with the
as noise increases, GAT aggregation reduces Recall by making “Neighborhood Graph” G2 and transferring auxiliary anomaly
anomalous nodes harder to distinguish. features. Daily empirical p-values for user attributes (Decem-
 2) Transferability Analysis: The transferability of IASD ber 1, 2011–December 1, 2012) yielded 397 anomaly
depends primarily on the functions Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) and subgraphs corresponding to neighborhoods. These hotspots
FT (S 1 , S 2 , M). To validate this, we compare IASD with were evaluated against the Urban Area Security Incident
ASDHC (Table II), which detects anomaly subgraphs directly Report issued by a third-party authority. Fig. 7 showed the
on the feature-deficient G2 . The poor performance of the optimal subgraph S 2 on August 25, 2012, which contained
ASDHC method proves the transferability of our method. eight crime hotspots, all confirmed by ground truth.
We also applied TSPSD directly to G2 , but it did not detect 2) Risky Investors Detection: This case is to identify
anomaly subgraphs, further demonstrating the effectiveness of potentially risky investors by observing unusual behaviors of
our framework. specific companies. G1 with 864 microcredit loan companies
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 9

 Fig. 9. Intuitive interpretation of the cause of the anomaly event: epidemic
 breakout. (a) Cities with significant population movements on January 13,
 2020. (b) Anomalous COVID-19 outbreak cities detected by IASD from
Fig. 7. Illustration of urban crime hotspot detection, G1 consists of negative January 19, 2020 to February 20, 2020.
friends, G2 represents the neighborhood graph. On August 25, 2012, IASD
identified the optimal anomaly subgraph in G1 with 21 anomaly users (dark
blue circles) and detected 8 crime hotspots in G2 (red areas). The pink solid
lines denote prior preference links, while the dashed lines indicate alignment
links. All hotspots are confirmed by the urban area security incident report
from a third-party authority.

 Fig. 10. Water pollution prediction Case Study. Blue circles indicate sensors
 that will issue water pollution warnings in the upcoming time slice, and red
 circles show the current warning sensors detected at the 3th time slice.

 approach identifies the first anomaly subgraph S 2 within
 the epidemic graph G2 , leveraging the transferred migration
 attributes. This discovery underscores our approach’s capa-
Fig. 8. Risky investor detection in Nov 2017. (a) Connected anomalous
 bility in epidemic detection. Subsequently, IASD proceeds to
company subgraph S 1 includes 3 anomalous microcredit loan companies with detect an additional 32 anomaly subgraphs over the following
observed anomalous business activities (red dots) and 1 normal company 33 days, covering a total of 157 cities that were officially
(a blue dot). (b) Disconnected alignment anomaly subgraph S 2 consists of confirmed to have experienced new case outbreaks according
44 detected risky investors (violet dots). (c) 11 companies with unobserved to Chinese government news websites. These cities are marked
abnormal business behaviors (green dots) related to risky investors, discovered
from the ground truth. on the map according to their geographic coordinates, as
 shown in Fig. 9(b). This experiment offers persuasive evidence
 of a congruent distribution between migration patterns and the
and 1814 relationships, and G2 with 4785 shareholders and COVID-19 outbreak. It offers an intuitive explanation for the
35 892 coinvestment links. Twenty four months of business rapid spread of the COVID-19 epidemic, largely attributed to
data (January 2017–December 2018) are used to compute population migration.
anomaly features for each company. In November 2017, four 4) WP Prediction: IASD can be applied to a set of graphs
interconnected companies (three anomalous, one normal) are with time series, e.g., WSN across different time slices. We
detected [Fig. 8(a)], and 44 risky investors are identified [Fig. use two time-slice graphs G(t) with historical sensors’ data
8(b)]. To validate our approach’s accuracy, we identified 11 and G(t+1) without any sensors’ warning data, to construct
additional companies where 43 of these investors had made the IASD’s two-layer graph. i.e., G(t) is G1 , and G(t+1) is
investments, as shown in Fig. 8(c). This proves that these G2 . In Fig. 10, IASD identified 76 sensors emitting warning
investors have a certain degree of business risk. signals during the third time slot and determined that 29
 3) Anomaly Event Detection-Epidemic Breakout: In this sensors would predict warnings of chemical contaminants in
scenario, our objective is to illustrate the strong association the fourth time slot. These 29 sensors had not previously
between migration patterns and the COVID-19 outbreak. To emitted a warning signal; however, 27 of them generated
comprehend the causal chain behind the COVID-19 epidemic actual warnings in the fourth time slice, and in the fifth time
breakout, we analyze several Chinese cities characterized slice, two additional sensors also issued warning signals. This
by significant population movements and a high number of experiment demonstrates that IASD is capable of effectively
COVID-19 cases. We utilize the Baidu migration graph as our addressing the practical task of predicting WP.
source graph G1 , and consider COVID-19 as the target graph
G2 . This setup is designed to simulate the inherently unpredictable nature of COVID-19 transmission. During the initial VI. C ONCLUSION
23 days of January 2020, we identified significant anomalous In this article, we propose the anomaly alignment probmigration subgraphs over a span of 14 days. These subgraphs lem and a novel anomaly detection algorithm IASD for the
revealed a similar regional distribution pattern among the cities multilayer multidimensional attributed graph. IASD employs
involved, as illustrated in Fig. 9(a). For instance, when Wuhan network alignment and a multilayer graph model to integrate a
initially reported confirmed COVID-19 cases on January 13, feature-rich source graph with the target graph, facilitating the
2020, a substantial increase in population movements occurred detection of IASs. Various evaluation across five real datasets
between 367 cities in Mainland China. After 6 days, our demonstrates IASD’s effective performance and robustness.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

In future work, under the Anomaly Alignment framework, Therefore, G1 has 864 microcredit loan companies as
we aim to extend IASD to more complex multilayer graphs vertices and 1814 associated relationships between these comby aligning multiple source graphs and transferring features panies as edges. G2 has 4785 related shareholders as vertices
across layers, using iterative or joint alignment strategies, and and 35 892 co-investment relationships between these sharevalidating the method on diverse multilayer datasets, such as holders as edges.
SNs and multiomics networks. Ground Truth Data: As the website designates companies
 as high-risk by compiling records of warnings, penalties, and
 A PPENDIX A actions issued by courts or regulatory authorities throughout
 DATASETS their operations, we employed this labeled information as the
 We provide detailed information about the six real datasets ground truth, which encompasses both the identified compaused in our experiments. The raw data used to construct our nies and their corresponding shareholders.
multilayer graphs are processed in the following steps.
 C. Baidu Migration (B) Dataset Versus Covid-19 Pandemic
 (C) Dataset
A. Weibo Dataset
 The Baidu migration dataset includes 4.8 million population
 The Weibo dataset includes 5.76 million tweets and 1.81
 movement records among 441 Chinese cities collected from
billion retweets collected from the Weibo Website from
 the Baidu.com website during the period from January 1, 2020
December 1, 2011 to December 31, 2012. All these tweets are
 to February 29, 2020. The population movement records are
assigned a geo-tag attribute which is a longitude and latitude
 the immigration and emigration rates of each city. Therefore,
within the urban area of Tianjin (The latitudes are in the
 G1 is constructed with 441 cities and the edges which represent
range of 37◦ 89700 to 40◦ 77200 , and the longitudes are in the
 the top 100 population movement relationships between a city
range of 114◦ 13100 to 120◦ 64100 ). We extracted 17.26 million
 and its neighboring cities.
users and their relationships from these tweets, analyzed the
 The COVID-19 pandemic dataset is collected from GitHub
semantics of these tweets based on the SentiCircle algorithm
 (December 1, 2019–January 27, 2020) and the Chinese News
[44], and classified the tweets into three categories: negative,
 Websites (January 27, 2020–March 10, 2020). It includes
positive, and neutral sentiment tweets. 99, 872 negative senti-
 24, 787 confirmed cases of COVID-19 reported daily and
ment tweets containing negative emotional words (e.g., “hate,”
 7, 686 known patient trajectories announced as of March 10,
“complain,” etc.) are filtered to construct the source graph G1
 2020. Those cases were distributed in 313 cities in Mainland
(Negative Friendship Graph). G1 includes 11 225 Weibo users
 China. We construct G2 as a plain graph2 . G2 consists of 313
and 13 405 friend (or follower) relationships.
 cities as vertices and 7686 known patient trajectories as edges.
 The target graph G2 is the Neighborhood Graph which
 Here, our approach only adopts the topology of G2 without
includes 462 591 geo-coordinates extracted from the tweets.
 using any Covid-19 outbreak information as the attributes.
These geo-coordinates are clustered into 137 919 vertices.
 Ground Truth Data: All COVID-19 confirmed case data
Each vertex represents a neighborhood (a circular area with
 collected from the Chinese News Websites are merely used as
a diameter of 300 m), and the 6 396 462 edges are extracted
 ground truth to evaluate our algorithm.
from all those negative tweets. Each edge represents that there
exists a user who posted tweets with the geo-coordinates of
 D. WP Dataset
two neighborhoods.
 Ground Truth Data: The authority department’s urban secu- This WP warning data was collected from a real water
rity database provides 3.21 million security records of urban sensor network3 across six time slices. The dataset comprises
and rural areas, which constitute the ground truth for Urban 12 527 sensors (nodes) and 14 831 edges. These sensors are
Crime Hotspot Detection. All security alarm events occurring responsible for monitoring chemical pollutants distributed in
within the same time and region as the Weibo data are river areas. A sensor produces the signal ‘1’ when there is the
extracted. The data items include the time, location, and alarm presence of water contamination; otherwise, it reports ‘0’. In
information. Its location is labeled by longitude and latitude our experiment, the graphs G1 and G2 are the largest connected
coordinates. Thus, our detection result is deemed correct if subgraphs within this dataset. The source graph G1 is built
there is an alarm record within the hotspot area (i.e., a node based on the structure and attributes of the network at the t
of S 2 ) identified by the algorithm; otherwise, it is deemed time slice, while the target graph G2 is constructed from the
incorrect. structure of the network at the t + 1 time slice.
 Ground Truth Data: In our article, the sensor alarm signals
 from the corresponding time slices in the WP dataset are used
B. TYC Dataset as the ground truth for our detection time slices.
 This dataset is extracted from the website
www.tianyancha.com. It includes 1 668 797 corporations, E. Synthetic Dataset
1 000 938 investors, and 2 657 470 of their investmentrelationships during the period from January 1, 2000 to Synthetic dataset is constructed with reference to the basic
December 31, 2018. We collect 332 009 corporations and characteristics of the Weibo dataset, such as the proportion
their obvious abnormal commercial-related behaviors. For of nodes and the proportion of aligned edges, as detailed
example, their assets are auctioned off by the court, or they in Table V. For constructing individual graphs, we adopted
announce being unable to repay their bank loans, or they the Barabasi-Albert model [45], and the feature data were
(or their legal persons) are accused, and so on. In this case simulated based on the basic information from the Weibo
study, we focus on 3005 microcredit loan companies and dataset.
8146 related shareholders (including persons and companies) 2 The plain graph refers to the graph without any attribute feature.

from January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2018. 3 “The Battle of the Water Sensor Networks (BWSN)”.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 11

 TABLE IV
 S TATISTICS OF OUR M ULTILAYER G RAPHS

 A PPENDIX B where α is the anomaly significance level, typically set as
 T HEORY α ≤ 0.15 in this article. K ≤ n is the number of normal nodes
 in S 1 .
A. Proposition
 Lemma 6 [7]: Given S 1α,K , (K = 0, . . . , n) is the opti-
 Proposition 2 (Anomaly Alignment): Given a two-layer mal solution of the K-budget node-weighted prize-collection
graph N = (G1 , G2 , M). where G1 = (V1 , E1 , XG1 ) is the Steiner Tree from (22), the NPGS problem
source graph and G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 ) is the target graph, with
alignment edges M ⊆ V1 ×V2 . A connected anomaly subgraph Sˆ1 = arg max Fα (S 1 )
 S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 1 is connected
S 1 (VS 1 , ES 1 , XS 1 ) in G1 contains an anomalous node vi . If
(vi , v j ) ∈ ES 1 and (v0i , v0j ) ∈ E2 exist with (vi , v0i ) ∈ M and is equivalent to the following optimal problem:
(v j , v0j ) ∈ M, then according to our feature transfer learning
model ftran : XS 1 → XS 2 , a nonempty aligned anomaly Sˆ1 = argn max oFα (S 1 ). (23)
subgraph S 2 exists in G2 . α∈P,S 1 ∈ S 1α,0 ,...,S 1α,n

 Proof: Let s1 n×1 be the indicator vector of subgraph S 1 , Lemma 7: Optimal anomaly S 2 with S 1 and M fixed. Under
 m×1
s2 the indicator vector of S 2 , and Mm×n the alignment the condition that the anomaly subgraph S 1 and the alignment
matrix. The attribute matrices of subgraph S 1 and S 2 are matrix M are fixed, if S 1 and S 2 satisfy anomaly alignment
defined as (Proposition 2), then the maximum solution Sˆ2 of function Q
 XS 1 = diag (s1 ) XG1 , XS 2 = diag (s2 ) XG2 (19) is defined as follows:
 sˆ2 = λM [s1 (1 − x1 )] + λx2 T + 1 Ms1
 
where diag(s1 ) ∈ Rn×n denotes the diagonal matrix with the (24)
diagonal entries from s1 . Similarly, diag(s2 ) ∈ Rm×m is the
 where λ is a regularization parameter.
diagonal matrix with the diagonal entries from s2 .
 Proof: Because the anomaly alignment property holds, s1 ,
 If (vi , v j ) ∈ ES 1 , the attribute matrices of subgraphs S 1 and
 0 and M , 0. If s1 and M are fixed, then our feature transfer
S 2 are " # learning function is defined as follows:
 xS 2 v0i 
  
 xS 1 (vi )
 XS 1 = , XS 2 = (20) 
 s2 T M [s1 (1 − x1 )] + s2 T x2 T Ms1
 xS 1 v j xS 2 v0j
 FT (S 1 , S 2 , M) = .
 k1 − x1 k1 · kx2 k1
where XS 1 includes the anomalous attribute xS 1 (vi ), while XS 2 (25)
contains only normal attributes.
 Since vi aligns with v0i and v j aligns with v0j , we have To enhance the stability of the model and improve its gen-
M(i0 , i) = 1 and M( j0 , j) = 1. Based on the definition of eralization ability, (26) reformulates the above equation by
our feature transfer learning model: ftran : XS 1 → XS 2 , the introducing an additional regularization term
projection of the transferred features onto XS 2 are represented 
using the following equation: s2 T M [s1 (1 − x1 )] + s2 T x2 T Ms1
 FT (s2 ) =
 k(1 − x1 )k1 · kx2 k1
 xS 2 v0i + Φ xS 1 (vi )
 "  #
 XS 2 =  . (21) − ρ ks2 − Ms1 k2F (26)
 xS 2 v0j + Φ xS 1 v j
 where ρ is a regularization parameter. Let the derivative be
Thus, XS 2 includes the transferred anomaly features, and the equal to zero. Since the denominator of (26) is a constant
aligned subgraph S 2 = {v0i , v0j } is an anomaly subgraph. The value, then
proposition is thereby proven. 
 ∂FT (s2 ) ∂
 = s2 T M [s1 (1 − x1 )]
 ∂s2 ∂s2
B. Lemma + s2 T x2 T Ms1 − ρks2 − Ms1 k2F = 0.
  
 (27)
 Lemma 5 [7]: Given N α (S 1 ) = N(S 1 ) − Nα (S 1 ), the optimal
subgraph of NPGS problem with the K-budget node-weighted The maximum solution of the induced subgraph feature scorprize-collection Steiner Tree is defined as ing function is obtained as follows:

 S 1α,K = 1 ˚
 arg max Nα (S 1 ), s.t. N α (S 1 ) ≤ K (22) sˆ2 = M [s1 (1 − x1 )] + x2 T Ms1 + Ms1 . (28)
 S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 1 is connected 2ρ
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Let λ = 1/2ρ, then TABLE V
 RUNNING T IME A NALYSIS ON S YNTHETIC DATASET
 sˆ2 = λM [s1 (1 − x1 )] + λx2 T + 1 Ms1 .
 
 (29)

Therefore, the lemma is proved. 
 Lemma 8: Optimal alignment matrix M with S 1 and S 2
fixed. Given two input subgraphs S 1 and S 2 , then Function Q
in (16) w.r.t. M is equivalent to the optimal problem.

 M̂ = arg max η [Q (M)] − (1 − η) kM − Hk2F (30)
 M∈[0,1]m×n

where η is a regularization parameter, H is the prior alignment
matrix, and k · kF denotes the Frobenius norm.
 Proof: Given the input graphs S 1 and S 2 , function
Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) is equivalent to the function w.r.t. M in (31). To
simplify the derivation of formulas, we introduce the vector C. Theorem
m = vec(M) ∈ Rmn×1 , where vec(·) denotes the vectorization Theorem 2: Optimal anomaly subgraphs S 1 , S 2 in Graphs
operator that stacks the columns of a matrix sequentially G1 , G2 . If subgraphs S 1 and S 2 satisfy the anomaly alignment
 condition, then in the IASD problem [(5)], an optimal solution
 Q (M) = η [ICS (M) + FT (M)] + (1 − η) kM − Hk2F . (31) exists and is defined as follows:
 Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 = arg max Fα (S 1 ) + Q (S 1 , S 2 , M).
 
 (33)
 The maximum solution of it is deduced by setting its α∈P
derivative to be zero
 Proof: Based on the definition of our IASD problem and
 ∂Q (m) Lemma 5, S 1 contains at most K normal nodes, while S 2
 ∂mh consists of at most c nodes. Both S 1 and S 2 are therefore
 T i restricted subgraphs. If α is assigned a specific value, then
 = η AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 + AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 m − 2 (1 − η) m the functions Fα (S 1 ) and Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) are guaranteed to be
 + η s2 s1
  T
 (1 − x1 ) + x2 s1 T − 2 (1 − η) h = 0
 T
   monotonically increasing, as ensured by properties P1, P2, and
 P3. Consequently, if S 1 and S 2 satisfy the Anomaly alignment
then the alignment matrix M is calculated as follows: condition, then the optimal solution to the IASD problem, (2),
 exists.
 h T i The uniqueness of Theorem 1 is proved by means of conm̂ = η AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 + AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 m tradiction. Suppose (Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 ) is not the unique optimal solution
 + η s2 s1
  T T
 (1 − x1 ) + x2 s1 T − h
   of problem [(2)]. We assume that there exists at least one pair
 of nodes (vt , v0t ) aligned, where vt < Sˆ1 but is connected to
 = η AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 m + ATS 1 ⊗ ATS 2 m
   
 Sˆ1 , v0t < Sˆ2 , the P-value of the node vt ’s feature is less than a
 + η s2 s1 T (1 − x1 )T + x2 s1 T − h. significant level p(x1 (t)) ≤ α, and the edge (v0t , vt ) exists, i.e.,
   
 M(t0 , t) > 0. Let S 1 0 = Sˆ1 ∪{vt } and S 2 0 = Sˆ2 ∪{v0t }. Since Nα (·)
Then, we apply the nature of the Kronecker product: (BT ⊗ denotes the number of anomaly nodes, then Nα (S 10 ) > Nα (Sˆ1 )
A)vec(X) = vec(AXB) [46] to make our algorithm more holds. By properties (P1), (P2), it follows that F(S 10 ) ≥ F(Sˆ1 ).
 P (P3), Q(S 1 , S0 2 , M) increases
 0 0
efficient Moreover, by properties P (P1),
 vi ∈VS0 ,v0i ∈VS0 M(i , i) and Nα (S 1 ).
 0
 monotonically with both
 m̂ = η vec AS 2 MATS 1 + vec ATS 2 MAS 1
    1 2
 Let Q0 = Q(S 10 , S 20 , M) and Q̂ = Q(Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 , M). Then Q0 > Q̂,
 + η s2 s1 T (1 − x1 )T + x2 s1 T − h. which implies Fα (S 10 ) + Q0 > Fα (Sˆ1 ) + Q̂.
   
 (32)
 This assumption contradicts that Fα (Sˆ1 )+ Q̂ is the maximum
 Consequently, the maximum solution of the function Q(M) value of the IASD problem [(2)]. Therefore, the pair of
exists, and m̂ in (32) is the fixed-point iterative method. The nodes (vt , v0t ) cannot exist, and it follows that (Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 ) is the
lemma is proved.  optimal solution to the IASD problem. Hence, the theorem is
 In a given real-world scenario, G1 and G2 represent a pair of proven. 
associated graphs. If an associated link (vi , v j ) exists between A PPENDIX C
G1 and G2 , where vi ∈ V1 and v j ∈ V2 , then H(i, j) = 1; E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
otherwise, H(i, j) = 0. In the iterative optimal procedure, when
 A. Evaluation on the HC Statistic
S 1 and S 2 are provided, Q(·) is solely dependent on M. The
regularization term kM − Hk2F in (30) would help prevent a As shown in Table VI, the results of IASD(HC) and
trivial solution of (30), while M is equal to the zero matrix. IASD(BJ) are highly similar. In conjunction with the compar-
 Additionally, the time and space complexities of comput- ison against TF(HC) and A3MAN(HC), these findings further
ing the Kronecker products AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 and ATS 1 ⊗ ATS 2 are substantiate the effectiveness of the proposed IASD approach.
both O(n2 m2 ), whereas the vectorized forms vec(AS 2 MATS 1 )
and vec(ATS 2 MAS 1 ) only required O(mn2 ). By exploiting this B. Parameter Sensitivity Study
property of the Kronecker product, we optimize this Iterative 1) Influence of the Anomaly Ratio of G1 : The anomaly
process and reduce its overall complexity to O(mn2 ). ratio refers to the proportion of anomalous vertices in
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 13

Fig. 11. Influence of the anomalous ratio of G1 . When the ratio of anomalous Fig. 12. Influence of the parameter c: (Ratio of the number of nodes in S 2
nodes in source graph G1 increases from 0.5% ∼ 7%. (a) Anomalous scores to the total nodes in WP Graph G2 ).
of S 2 (i.e., the induced anomaly features) increase with the growing anomaly
ratio in S 1 . (b) Number of alignment links between S 1 and S 2 follows a
rising trend, reaching a peak before declining.

 G1 . We evaluate the influence of the anomaly ratio
 by detecting the anomaly features of every vertex in
 G1 . As the anomaly ratio increases from 0.5% to 5%,
 the anomaly feature score of S 2 , induced by transfer learning, increases from 0 to 15. Additionally, the
 number of alignment links calculated by our approach
 increases monotonically with the anomaly ratio in G1 ,
 as shown in Fig. 11. However, when the anomaly Fig. 13. Effect of parameter K on the detection performance of IASD.
 ratio of G1 exceeds 5%, the anomalous scores of S 2 (a) F1 Score. (b) Accuracy. (c) FPR.
 remain stable, while the number of alignment links
 begins to decrease. Hence, this experiment demonstrates that, within an anomaly alignment structure, the
 anomaly features of the source graph can effectively
 amplify those in the target graph, thereby facilitating
 the detection of implicit anomalous subgraphs. Furthermore, this experiment validates the reasonableness of
 the properties (P1, P2, and P3) proposed in our problem
 definition and demonstrates the effectiveness of our
 approach.
 2) Influence of the Parameter c: As defined in (2), |VS 2 | ≤ c,
 the number of S 2 ’s nodes is constrained by a constant c,
 where c ≤ |V2 |. For ease of visualization, we represent
 the parameter c as |VS 2 |/|V2 |, that is the ratio of the Fig. 14. Influence of the parameter αmax on the TYC dataset.
 number of nodes in S 2 to the total number of nodes
 in G2 . In Fig. 12, we investigate c within the range of respect to four key metrics: Recall, F1-score, Accuracy,
 (0, 11.2%] in the WP dataset to assess our algorithm’s and Precision, across various values of αmax . The experperformance. For c ≤ 3.2%, Precision, Recall, F1, imental results indicate that optimal model performance
 Accuracy, TPR-P, and TPR-D are all equal to 1, and is achieved when the value of αmax falls within a
 FPR, FPR-P, and FPR-D are all 0. As c falls within specific range. Specifically, when αmax is within the
 [3.2%, 11.2%], Precision remains 1, and FPR, FPR-P, range [0.10, 0.35], the model’s Recall, Accuracy, and
 and FPR-D are 0; however, Recall, F1, Accuracy, and Precision metrics are maintained at a high level. Notably,
 TPR-P (similar to TPR-D) exhibit a declining trend, as both Accuracy and Precision metrics peak around αmax =
 illustrated in Fig. 12. 0.25. This suggests that within this parameter interval,
 3) Influence of the Parameter K: According to [7] and the model can effectively balance the comprehensiveness
 [8], function Fα (S 1 ) increases with the number of and accuracy of its identification. However, when the
 anomaly nodes of S 1 , and tends to stabilize once the value of αmax exceeds 0.35, the model’s performance
 number of normal nodes K in S 1 exceeds 20. That metrics begin to decline sharply. Particularly for αmax ≥
 is, Fα (S 1 ) achieves the highest statistic score when 0.45, both Recall and the F1-score decrease signifi-
 K ≥ 20. Since our algorithm employs TSPSD [7] to cantly, indicating that an excessively large αmax value
 detect anomaly subgraph S 1 , the parameter K in TSPSD substantially weakens the model’s ability to identify possimilarly affects the detection performance of our IASD. itive samples, thereby severely compromising its overall
 As shown in Fig. 13, IASD generally exhibits superior performance.
 detection performance when K = 20 in our experiments. 5) Influence of the GAT Head h: As depicted in Fig. 15,
 Therefore, we typically tune the parameter K to be the number of GAT heads h significantly influences
 equal 20. performance. We investigate the impact of the number
 4) Influence of the Parameter αmax : In the method proposed of attention heads on the performance of a Transformerin this article, the setting of the parameter αmax is based model. Our analysis reveals a nonmonotonic
 of critical importance to the model’s performance. As relationship between the number of heads (h) and
 depicted in Fig. 14, we conducted a systematic analysis model performance. Specifically, a single attention
 of the model’s performance on the TYC dataset with head (h = 1) yields suboptimal performance, sug-
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

 TABLE VI
 IASD (HC),TF (HC), AND A3MAN (HC) ON WP, W EIBO , AND TYC DATASET

 [4] J. Hu et al., “SAMCL: Subgraph-aligned multiview contrastive learning
 for graph anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1664–1676, Jan. 2025.
 [5] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge
 distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024.
 [6] L. Huang et al., “Hybrid-order anomaly detection on attributed
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 pp. 12249–12263, Dec. 2023.
 [7] N. Wu et al., “A nonparametric approach to uncovering connected
 anomalies by tree shaped priors,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 1849–1862, Oct. 2019.
 [8] F. Chen and D. B. Neill, “Non-parametric scan statistics for event
 detection and forecasting in heterogeneous social media graphs,” in
 Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 Aug. 2014, pp. 1166–1175.
 [9] P. V. Bindu, P. S. Thilagam, and D. Ahuja, “Discovering suspicious
 behavior in multilayer social networks,” Comput. Hum. Behav., vol. 73,
Fig. 15. Influence of GAT Head h on the WP dataset. pp. 568–582, Aug. 2017.
 [10] Y. Sun, W. Wang, N. Wu, and C. Bao, “Anomaly subgraph detection
 gesting limitations in capturing the diverse feature through high-order sampling contrastive learning,” in Proc. 23rd Int.
 Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 2362–2369.
 representations necessary for robust modeling. Increas-
 [11] Z. Zhang and L. Zhao, “Unsupervised deep subgraph anomaly
 ing the number of heads to h = 2 results in a detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022,
 substantial performance improvement, which validates pp. 753–762.
 the efficacy of the multihead attention mechanism in [12] N. Wu et al., “Multiple anomaly alignments on network traffics,”
 learning distinct, complementary representations. How- in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Knowl. Graph (ICKG), Nov. 2022,
 ever, a critical observation is the sharp performance pp. 313–320.
 [13] Y. Sun, W. Wang, N. Wu, W. Yu, and X. Chen, “Anomaly subgraph
 degradation when the number of heads becomes exces- detection with feature transfer,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 sively large. Our findings underscore the importance Manage., Oct. 2020, pp. 1415–1424.
 of judiciously selecting the number of attention heads [14] Y. Sun et al., “AAAN: Anomaly alignment in attributed networks,”
 to balance representational power with the risk of Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 249, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 108944.
 overfitting. [15] H. Xu et al., “AFSC: Adaptive Fourier space compression for
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 11,
C. Running Time Analysis pp. 12586–12596, Nov. 2024.
 To evaluate the time complexity, a synthetic dataset was [16] J. Sharpnack, A. Krishnamurthy, and A. Singh, “Near-optimal anomaly
 detection in graphs using Lovasz extended scan statistic,” in Proc. Adv.
constructed with reference to the basic characteristics of the Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 26, 2013, pp. 1959–1967.
Weibo dataset, including the proportion of nodes and aligned [17] M. Salehi and L. Rashidi, “A survey on anomaly detection in evolving
edges, as summarized in Table V. For the generation of data: [With application to forest fire risk prediction],” ACM SIGKDD
individual graphs, we employed the Barabási–Albert model Explor. Newslett., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 13–23, May 2018.
[45], while the feature data were simulated using the basic [18] Z. Ding, Q. Dong, H. Xu, C. Li, X. Ding, and Y. Huang, “Unsupervised
 anomaly segmentation for brain lesions using dual semantic-manifold
information from the Weibo dataset. Ten sets of simulation reconstruction,” in Proc. ICONIP, vol. 13625. Cham, Switzerland:
graphs were generated for empirical evaluation, as reported in Springer, 2022, pp. 133–144.
Table V, which demonstrate that the algorithm’s running time [19] C. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Huang, and X. Ding, “Unsupervised
grows proportionally with the cube of the number of graph anomaly segmentation using image-semantic cycle translation,” 2021,
nodes, i.e., O(n3 ). arXiv:2103.09094.
 [20] K. Xiao, J. Cao, Z. Zeng, and W.-K. Ling, “Graph-based
 R EFERENCES active learning with uncertainty and representativeness for industrial
[1] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection and anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14,
 description: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 29, no. 3, 2023.
 pp. 626–688, May 2015. [21] H. Zenati, C.-S. Foo, B. Lecouat, G. Manek, and V. Chandrasekhar,
[2] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep learning for “Efficient GAN-based anomaly detection,” 2018, arXiv:1802.06222.
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. [22] L. Qi, Y. Yang, X. Zhou, W. Rafique, and J. Ma, “Fast anomaly
 38:1–38:38, 2021. identification based on multiaspect data streams for intelligent intrusion
[3] R. Kanawati, “Multiplex network mining: A brief survey,” IEEE Intell. detection toward secure Industry 4.0,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 Informat. Bull., vol. 16, pp. 24–27, 2015. vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 6503–6511, Sep. 2022.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS 15

[23] H. Liu, X. Xu, E. Li, S. Zhang, and X. Li, “Anomaly detection Nannan Wu received the B.S. degree from
 with representative neighbors,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China, in 2009,
 vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2831–2841, Jun. 2023. the M.S. degree from Chongqing University,
[24] S. Wang et al., “Multiview deep anomaly detection: A systematic Chongqing, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree
 exploration,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 2, in computer software and theory from Beihang Unipp. 1651–1665, Feb. 2024. versity, Beijing, China, in 2018.
 He is a Professor with Tianjin University, Tianjin,
[25] C. Li et al., “Domain generalization on medical imaging classification China. His current research interests include artificial
 using episodic training with task augmentation,” Comput. Biol. Med., intelligence and graph anomaly detection in largevol. 141, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 105144. scale graphs.
[26] M. Askarizadeh, A. Morsali, and K. K. Nguyen, “Resource-constrained
 multisource instance-based transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1029–1043, Jan. 2025. Ying Sun received the B.S. degree in computer
[27] D. Li, J. Wang, J. Xu, X. Fang, and Y. Ji, “Cross-channel specific- science and engineering from Tianjin University,
 mutual feature transfer learning for motor imagery EEG signals Tianjin, China, in 1990, the M.S. degree in control
 decoding,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10, science and engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong Unipp. 13472–13482, Oct. 2024. versity, Xi’an, China, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree
 from Tianjin University in 2025.
[28] J. Tang, T. Lou, J. Kleinberg, and S. Wu, “Transfer learning to infer She is currently a Professor with the School
 social ties across heterogeneous networks,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., of International Business, Zhejiang Yuexiu Univervol. 34, no. 2, pp. 1–43, Apr. 2016. sity, Shaoxing, China. Her research interests include
[29] F. Gao, H. Yoon, T. Wu, and X. Chu, “A feature transfer enabled anomaly detection, human behavior dynamics analmulti-task deep learning model on medical imaging,” Expert Syst. Appl., ysis by complex networks, and large-scale data
 vol. 143, Apr. 2020, Art. no. 112957. mining.
[30] Y. Lu et al., “Cross-modality person re-identification with sharedspecific feature transfer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 13376–13386. Yazheng Zhao received the B.S. degree from
 Shanghai University of Finance and Economics,
[31] F. Cui, Q. Cui, and Y. Song, “A survey on learning-based approaches for Shanghai, China, in 2024. He is currently pursumodeling and classification of human–machine dialog systems,” IEEE ing the M.S. degree with the School of Computer
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1418–1432, Apr. Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
 2021. China.
[32] W. Bi, X. Cheng, B. Xu, X. Sun, L. Xu, and H. Shen, “Bridged-GNN: His current research interests include graph min-
 Knowledge bridge learning for effective knowledge transfer,” in Proc. ing and graph anomaly detection.
 32nd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2023, pp. 99–109.
[33] W. Li, X. Guo, and Y. Yuan, “Novel scenes & classes: Towards adaptive
 open-set object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 15734–15744.
[34] W. Li, X. Liu, and Y. Yuan, “SIGMA++: Improved semantic-complete Wenjun Wang received the Ph.D. degree from
 graph matching for domain adaptive object detection,” IEEE Trans. Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2006.
 Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 9022–9040, Jan. 2023. He is currently a Professor with the College
 of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
[35] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Tianjin, China, the Chief Expert of major projects
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, Oct. 2009. of the National Social Science Foundation, Beijing,
[36] Z. Liang et al., “Unsupervised large-scale social network alignment via the Big Data Specially Invited Expert with Tianjin
 cross network embedding,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Public Security Bureau, Tianjin, and the Director of
 Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 1008–1017. Tianjin Engineering Research Center of Big Data
[37] C. Döpmann, “Survey on the graph alignment problem and a benchmark on Public Security, Tianjin. His research interests
 of suitable algorithms,” Institut für Informatik, 2013. include computational social science, large-scale
 data mining, intelligence analysis, and multilayer complex network modeling.
[38] R. H. Berk and D. H. Jones, “Goodness-of-fit test statistics that dominate
 the Kolmogorov statistics,” Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie
 und Verwandte Gebiete, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 47–59, 1979. Xueli Liu received the Ph.D. degree from Harbin
[39] D. Donoho and J. Jin, “Higher criticism for detecting sparse heteroge- Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2018.
 neous mixtures,” Ann. Statist., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 962–994, Jun. 2004. She is an Associate Professor with the School of
[40] S. Zhang and H. Tong, “FINAL: Fast attributed network alignment,” in Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin Univer-
 Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, sity, Tianjin, China. Her research interests include
 San Francisco, CA, USA, Aug. 2016, pp. 1345–1354. big data computing, graph association analysis, and
 deep learning interpretation.
[41] B. Du and H. Tong, “FASTEN: Fast Sylvester equation solver for graph
 mining,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
 Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 1339–1347.
[42] S. Zhang et al., “HiDDen: Hierarchical dense subgraph detection with
 application to financial fraud detection,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data
 Mining, 2017, pp. 570–578. Jianxin Li is currently a Professor with the State
[43] R. Patro and C. Kingsford, “Global network alignment using multiscale Key Laboratory of Software Development Environspectral signatures,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 23, pp. 3105–3114, ment and Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
 Dec. 2012. Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang Univer-
[44] H. Saif, M. Fernández, Y. He, and H. Alani, “SentiCircles for contextual sity, Beijing, China. He has published 30 refereed
 and conceptual semantic sentiment analysis of Twitter,” in Proc. ESWC. articles in major data mining venues, includ-
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014, pp. 83–98. ing IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND
 DATA E NGINEERING, ACM-KDD, ACM-WWW,
[45] A.-L. Barabási and R. Albert, “Emergence of scaling in random AAAI and IJCAI. His current research interests
 networks,” Science, vol. 286, no. 5439, pp. 509–512, 1999. include machine learning, distributed system, trust
[46] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Topics in Matrix Analysis. Cambridge management and network security.
 Univ. Press, Jun. 1994. Mr. Li won the best paper award at AAAI2021.