2368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 Auto-EAD: An Automated Ensemble Anomaly
 Detection Framework for the CEN-IoT
 Lei Ding, Wenli Shang , Shuang Wang , Member, IEEE, Haoran Gao, and Lianhai Wang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— The Internet of Things (IoT) based on consumer present paper offers a novel approach to the construction of
electronic networks (CEN-IoT) is confronting diverse, stealthy, cybersecurity ecosystems with autonomous decision-making and
and large-scale network attacks. The targets of attackers are response capabilities.
no longer limited to individual devices or data, but also extend
to multiple domains, including device hijacking, data exfil- Index Terms— Anomaly detection, automated machine learntration, and service disruption. Anomaly detection based on ing, ensemble model, consumer electronics network.
machine learning, as an effective defensive measure, is grad-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
ually being applied to IoT systems to enhance cybersecurity.
Although anomaly detection algorithms based on artificial intelligence/machine learning are widely employed in constructing
cybersecurity mechanisms, such technologies not only require
 T HE Internet of Things (IoT) based on consumer electronic
 networks (CEN-IoT) [1]takes smartphones, smart home
 appliances, and remote-control devices as core terminals,
substantial support from human experts but also suffer from achieves interconnection via network technologies including
model drift, posing considerable challenges to the development
 Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and NB-IoT, enables data processing and
of autonomous cybersecurity measures. This paper proposes
an Automated Ensemble Anomaly Detection Framework (Auto- intelligent control with the support of cloud platforms and edge
EAD) for the automatic identification of abnormal behaviors computing, and adopts standardized protocols such as MQTT
in dynamic consumer electronics network environments. The to ensure cross-device compatibility and secure data transmisproposed model consists of automated data preprocessing, auto- sion [2]. Its applications span service scenarios including smart
mated feature engineering, automated base model learning with
hyperparameter optimization, automated model selection, and
 home linkage, remote health monitoring, smart manufacturing
automated model integration modules. Specifically, the pri- facilities, and intelligent transportation [3]. For instance, in a
mary automated data preprocessing techniques employed include smart home scenario, when users enable the ‘away-from-home
automatic data transformation, inverse transformation, feature mode’ via a mobile application, all indoor lighting, power
standardization, and data balancing. The Covariance Matrix sockets, and air conditioning systems will automatically shut
Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) is utilized for hyperparameter optimization (HPO) of tree-based machine learning
 down, smart door locks will engage, and security cameras will
(ML) models, while a novel stair ensemble method is proposed switch to an armed state [4].
for automated model ensemble.This model was developed to min- In intelligent manufacturin scenarios, the CEN-IoT sysimize human intervention and achieve full-lifecycle automation of tem adopts a four-layer architecture (terminal layer, network
anomaly detection. The Auto-EAD framework was evaluated on layer, platform layer, and application layer). The terminal
three public datasets (SWaT, WADI, and IoT Network Intrusion
Dataset), with results showing superior performance of the prolayer incorporates production equipment and intelligent handposed model compared to state-of-the-art methods, and thereby held terminals, while the network layer leverages 5G and
highlighting its effectiveness in handling and detecting abnormal industrial Ethernet to achieve reliable data transmission. The
behaviors in dynamically complex network environments. The platform layer conducts data processing through an industrial cloud platform, and the application layer offers services
 Received 16 September 2025; revised 12 November 2025 and 15 December
2025; accepted 1 January 2026. Date of publication 12 January 2026; date such as equipment health management. Embedded sensors
of current version 25 March 2026. This work was supported in part by the gather real-time operational data, which is transmitted to
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62173101; in the cloud platform. Advanced algorithms are then employed
part by the Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information
Security, Ministry of Education under Grant 2024ZD018; and in part by for fault analysis and prediction, thereby facilitating early
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant warnings. Furthermore, multi-device collaborative operation
3122025054. (Corresponding author: Wenli Shang.) is achieved. In practical applications, this model remarkably
 Lei Ding and Haoran Gao are with the School of Cyber Science and
Technology, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: reduces equipment failure rates, improves core production
1112206007@e.gzhu.edu.cn; ghr36369@e.gzhu.edu.cn). efficiency, strengthens quality traceability capabilities, and
 Wenli Shang is with the School of Electronics and Communication comprehensively upgrades the overall production efficiency
Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
shangwl@gzhu.edu.cn). and quality control standards [5], [6], [7], [8].
 Shuang Wang is with the Institute of Science, Technology and Innova- With the in-depth integration of the CEN-IoT and the Intertion, Civil Aviation University of China, Tianjin 300300, China (e-mail: net, CEN-IoT is increasingly vulnerable to network attacks [9],
s-wang@cauc.edu.cn).
 Lianhai Wang is with the Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network [10]. The primary causes are threefold: (1) Most CEN-IoT
and Information Security, Ministry of Education, Shandong Computer Sci- devices inherently suffer from vulnerabilities including the
ence Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), Qilu University of absence of hardware security modules, inadequate firmware
Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250353, China (e-mail:
wanglh@sdas.org). update mechanisms, and default weak passwords [11];
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2026.3651524 (2) Within network and communication links, design flaws
 1558-4127 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT 2369

 on the professional expertise of personnel, exhibit low learning efficiency, and fail to adequately meet the real-time
 requirements of CEN-IoT systems. (2) The number of hyperparameters in anomaly detection models typically ranges
 from 10 to 20. The optimization space formed by these
 hyperparameters is extremely high-dimensional, and complex
 nonlinear correlations exist between hyperparameters—this
 renders hyperparameter optimization a challenging global
 optimization problem. Existing hyperparameter optimization
 methods impose a heavy computational burden and are frequently prone to trapping in local optima. (3) Traditional
 anomaly detection approaches are incapable of addressing
 the dynamic variations in CEN-IoT systems. Traditional
 single-model approaches or static integration strategies often
 exhibit significant performance disparities across different
 operating conditions, leading to substantial fluctuations in
 detection outcomes.
Fig. 1. Workflow of network anomaly detection for consumer electronic
devices. Automated ML (AutoML) autonomously derives optimal
 strategies by automating model selection, feature engineering,
 HPO, and model ensembling [17]. This approach has been
exist in plaintext data transmission, weakly encrypted pro- widely applied across diverse domains [18]. For example,
tocols (e.g., HTTP, Telnet), and IoT-specific protocols (e.g., Li et al. [19] proposed an automated framework for construct-
MQTT, Zigbee)—these vulnerabilities render CEN-IoT sys- ing statistical learning-based anomaly detection models, which
tems susceptible to network attacks, including eavesdropping, streamlines parameter optimization for non-neural network
data tampering, and lateral movement [12], [13]; (3) Cloud algorithms. AutoML-driven autonomous anomaly detection
platforms supporting CEN-IoT systems exhibit vulnerabilities enables the real-time monitoring of system activities, the
such as SQL injection and unauthorized access, coupled precise identification of abnormal patterns, and the swift
with the absence of API authentication mechanisms and localization of potential attack vectors. However, most existing
inadequate protection of user privacy data—these issues AutoML-based anomaly detection methods are designed for
expose CEN-IoT devices to risks of batch hijacking or general application scenarios. At the same time, anomaly
sensitive data leakage. In summary, the current network detection of consumer electronics system is a complex
attacks targeting CEN-IoT systems exhibit three key char- task characterized by high real-time performance requireacteristics: diversity, concealment, and large scale [14]. ments, high stability requirements, and multiple operating
Attackers’ targets are no longer limited to individual conditions—factors that constrain the broad application of
devices or isolated data, but extend to multiple dimen- AutoML-driven methods.
sions, including device hijacking, data theft, and service Inspired by AutoML, we propose an automated ensemdisruption. ble anomaly detection model (Auto-EAD) for the CEN-IoT.
 In CEN-IoT scenarios, smart home devices face various Unlike traditional models that depend on human expertise,
attacks: exploiting smart camera vulnerabilities for unautho- Auto-EAD integrates automated data mining and learning
rized monitoring, hijacking smart socket control to cause mechanisms, with an emphasis on efficient data stream promalicious power outages, tampering with smart refrigerator cessing, multi-model integration, and HPO to enhance the
energy consumption data, or deploying automated scripts accuracy of anomaly detection.
through universal smart camera vulnerabilities to compromise The main contributions of this study are as follows:
hundreds of thousands or even millions of devices within (1) We developed an AutoML framework to enhance the
hours. These compromised devices form large-scale botnets, tracking efficiency of model learning. It incorporates metaused to launch distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks or learning, ensemble construction, and HPO. This enables the
engage in illegal activities such as cryptocurrency mining [15]. comprehensive automation of data processing, feature engi-
Traditional passive defense mechanisms can no longer tackle neering, model selection, and parameter optimization in IoT
such sophisticated attack vectors. Therefore, active defense anomaly detection. This framework notably boosts the tracking
mechanisms centered on anomaly detection have emerged as efficiency of model learning and minimizes reliance on manual
a critical enabler for safeguarding CEN-IoT system security expertise.
[16]. Fig. 1 showsthe workflow of network anomaly detection (2) We propose a method for optimizing the hyperparamfor CEN-IoT. eters of the detection model using adaptive evolution. The
 However, three persistent challenges hinder CEN-IoT broad covariance matrix is dynamically adjusted based on the
application [10]. (1) Traditional anomaly detection methods population distribution and historical information to capture
primarily involve processes such as manual data annotation the correlations among the model hyperparameters. The search
and the setting of detection thresholds. However, these pro- direction of the hyperparameters is then updated without any
cesses demand extensive manual intervention, heavily depend gradient calculation. The sampling of multiple hyperparameter
2370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

combinations and comprehensive evaluations smooth out the identifying anomalies in data with substantial variations in
fluctuations in the objective function, accelerating convergence statistical characteristics or in cases requiring joint assessto the global optimum. ment of multiple variables, necessitating the use of more
 (3) The proposed Stair ensemble approach gradually adds sophisticated approaches for achieving reliable anomaly detecmodels to enhance learning performance and mitigate overfit- tion in such scenarios. Xiong et al. [23] proposed a spatial
ting. Through a multilevel fusion mechanism, the meta-models information-enhanced Transformer (SI-Transformer) model,
mutually correct their learning errors, improving the stability which integrates Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) into the
of the integrated model. Through the dynamic adjustment of original Anomaly Transformer (A-Transformer) framework.
the meta-model weights, the integrated model maintains high This model generates high-dimensional correlated difference
performance and improved interoperability. features to more effectively capture spatiotemporal depen-
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: dencies in multivariate time series (MTS) data, thereby
Section II reviews anomaly detection methods. Section III enabling more robust anomaly detection. Sukhostat et al.
details the proposed Auto-EAD framework. Section IV out- [24] introduced an anomaly detection technique relying on
lines the experimental design, and Section V presents and statistical features and applied it to anomaly detection in
discusses the results. Finally, Section VI summarizes the paper in-vehicle CAN networks. Statistics-based anomaly detection
and suggests future research directions. techniques conduct anomaly identification exclusively relying
 on a priori knowledge of data or their inherent statistical
 II. R ELATED W ORK characteristics. While demonstrating efficacy for relatively
 stable time series or data sequences adhering to a normal
A. Anomaly Detection Technique distribution, these approaches fail to achieve precise anomaly
 Anomaly detection techniques can be broadly classified detection for data with significant fluctuations in statistical
into three categories: signature-based, statistics-based, and properties or those that necessitate the joint assessment of
ML–based techniques. multiple variables. Consequently, there is an imperative need
 Signature-based anomaly detection techniques accurately for more robust detection paradigms to address such complex
identify known attacks by extracting and matching charac- scenarios.
teristic patterns from network traffic or system behaviors. ML-based anomaly detection techniques identify abnormal
Bahri et al. [20] proposed an anomaly detection system behaviors by constructing data-driven models to learn normal
(ADS) tailored to industrial protocols, improving detection behavioral patterns from historical data and then recognizing
accuracy by refining the signature rule-base through detailed deviations from these patterns. Bai et al. [25] proposed an
analysis of Modbus RTU/ASCII vulnerabilities. Zheng et al. anomaly detection method based on the Parallel Attention
[21] proposed a hybrid Transformer-Convolutional Signature Transformer (PA-Transformer), which leverages the Trans-
Network (T-CSN) architecture, which innovatively integrates former architecture to capture complex temporal dependencies
the Transformer and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in time series data, thereby enabling effective anomaly detecframeworks. This architecture can effectively capture sub- tion. Gu et al. [26] proposed a novel industrial anomaly
tle deformation features between genuine signatures and detection method based on Large Visual Language Models
skilled forged signatures, thereby playing a critical role in (LVLMs)—a class of advanced multimodal models—which
enhancing the anomaly detection accuracy of offline signature eliminates the need for manual threshold tuning and can
authentication systems. He et al. [22] combined Variational directly assess both the existence and location of anomalies in
Autoencoders (VAEs)—a type of generative model—with industrial scenarios. Wu et al. [27] proposed an interpretable
Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) structures, and incorporated and efficient deep-learning framework for anomaly detection,
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to learn topological infor- reporting higher training speed and effectiveness compared
mation. This approach provides an innovative spatiotemporal with current methods. Recurrent neural networks, such as long
deep learning solution for signature-based anomaly detection short-term memory (LSTM) [28] and gated recurrent unit [29],
in cloud systems, with network traffic signatures as a typ- along with attention-based models [30], capture contextual
ical application scenari. Signature-based anomaly detection relationships in time-series data. These models learn normal
techniques enable the precise identification of known attacks patterns by capturing temporal dependencies, thus identifying
through the extraction and matching of distinctive feature pat- anomalies in time series. ML-based anomaly detection techterns. Furthermore, these methods exhibit robust adaptability niques can learn inherent normal behavioral patterns through
to domain-specific scenarios—such as industrial communi- data-driven paradigms, capture intricate dependencies and
cation protocols and cloud computing environments—with contextual correlations within time series data, and exhibit
detection performance further enhanced via the integration of prominent advantages including the elimination of manual
multi-neural network frameworks, refinement of signature rule parameter tuning, high training efficiency, favorable interbases, and other advanced optimization strategies. Neverthe- pretability, and robust adaptability to industrial application
less, a critical limitation persists in their inadequate capability scenarios. Nevertheless, these approaches inherently suffer
to effectively detect unknown or zero-day attacks. from non-negligible limitations: strong reliance on data qual-
 Statistics-based anomaly detection techniques exhibit robust ity and quantity, considerable challenges in hyperparameter
performance on relatively stable time series or normally optimization (HPO), inadequate scenario adaptability, and a
distributed data. However, they often falter in accurately trade-off between real-time responsiveness and interpretability.
DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT 2371

B. Automated Machine Learning attacks, thereby enhancing the security of 5G and future 6G
 AutoML has emerged as a promising research field in recent networks. Vasan et al. [41] proposed ICS Defender, a defense
years, offering a solution to the challenges associated with mechanism that enhances the security of industrial control
traditional ML methods [31], [32]. Conventional approaches systems (ICS) through automated machine learning (AutoML)
heavily rely on the quality of algorithms and parameter set- technology. This method employs sophisticated feature engitings, which can be challenging to optimize. AutoML enables neering and AutoML to automate model selection, training,
researchers and practitioners to streamline the ML workflow aggregation, and optimization, thereby reducing reliance on
by automating algorithm selection and hyperparameter tuning. specialized expertise. Experimental results on diverse datasets
This automation not only circumvents the complex task of from power systems and electric vehicle charging stations
manual hyperparameter adjustment but also enhances work demonstrate that ICS Defender outperforms existing frameefficiency for both ML experts and non-experts. works in terms of accuracy and robustness. Ma et al. [42]
 HPO [33], a key component of AutoML, automates the proposed a few-shot IoT attack detection method based on
tuning of model hyperparameters. Its goal is to find an effective the SSDSAE and an adaptive loss-weighted meta-residual
set of hyperparameters that allows the considered ML model to network, which exhibits strong detection performance for
achieve near-optimal performance on a given dataset, thereby scenarios with limited samples in IoT intrusion detection.
relieving domain experts from the laborious and error-prone Kotlar et al. [43] advanced automated anomaly detection by
task of manual tuning. establishing novel meta-features for model selection, which
 HPO methods are primarily divided into four categories: include traditional dataset statistics and additional tempogrid search, random search, sequential model-based opti- ral, distributional, and domain-specific characteristics. This
mization, and multiarmed bandit approaches. Grid search approach considerably improved model selection accuracy
exhaustively evaluates every combination in the Cartesian and adaptability, outperforming traditional AutoML frameproduct of hyperparameter values to identify the optimal works on various public datasets—especially in managing
model. Although effective, it is computationally intensive. high-dimensional sparse data and concept drift. Singh et al.
Random search randomly samples combinations from a prede- [44] introduced a meta-learning-based unsupervised anomaly
fined search space, trains models with these combinations, and detection framework that creates a “data distribution–optimal
evaluates their performance on a validation set [34]. Although detection method” by examining the distribution features
more computationally efficient than grid search, it may fail of historical datasets. Experimental results indicate that this
to achieve global optimality, settling on suboptimal solutions. framework outperforms mainstream AutoML tools on multi-
Sequential model-based optimization uses a surrogate model domain datasets, particularly in the detection of network
(such as Gaussian processes, Tree Parzen Estimator, or random traffic anomalies and industrial sensor faults in scenarios with
forests) along with an acquisition function. The Tree Parzen complex and varying data distributions.
Estimator and random forest are particularly effective for The present paper demonstrates that AutoML-based ADSs
handling both discrete and continuous hyperparameters [35]. offer considerable advantages in cybersecurity. These frame-
Multi-armed bandit methods adaptively select hyperparameter works enhance performance by swiftly adapting to evolving
combinations, efficiently exploring the search space and reduc- attack environments through automated feature engineering,
ing computational costs compared to grid or random search intelligent model selection, and HPO. This increases detection
[36]. These algorithms utilize prior knowledge to focus on accuracy and recall rates owing to fewer false positives and
promising regions of the hyperparameter space. Representative false negatives. Additionally, through the automation of tasks
examples such as Auto-Sklearn [37] and Auto-WEKA [38] such as manual model design and parameter tuning, AutoML
automate the ML pipeline—including algorithm selection and systems reduce the reliance on human experts, streamline
HPO—thereby enhancing the AutoML workflow. workflows, and reduce human error and labor costs—thereby
 strengthening cybersecurity defenses.

C. AutoML-Based Anomaly Detection
 AutoML-based anomaly detection techniques constitutes an III. M ETHOD
intelligent detection paradigm that deeply embeds AutoML
 A. Problem Definition
technology into the full workflow of anomaly detection.
It eliminates key manual intervention procedures in traditional The problem was defined as the selection of multiple
anomaly detection via automated methodologies, enabling the algorithms with relatively optimal performance from a set of
precise identification of abnormal behaviors or data features algorithms, followed by the construction of multiple models
that diverge from normal patterns within target application sce- using the selected algorithms. Ultimately, the goal was to
narios. Simultaneously, this paradigm minimizes dependence optimize the detection capabilities of the detection model.
on specialized algorithmic expertise and manual operational The formalized problem definition is as  follows: given a set
efforts. Chen et al. [39] developed an automated anomaly of anomaly detection algorithms A = A1 , A2 , . . . , An and
detection model utilizing statistical learning for the automatic dataset D, select algorithms A∗ ∈ A with the optimal detection
optimization of model parameters. Yang et al. [40] proposed an capabilities from the algorithm set A. Divide the dataset into
AutoML-based autonomous intrusion detection system (IDS) training dataset Dtrain and test dataset Dtest . Apply algorithm
framework designed to automatically detect malicious network A∗ to obtain model M ∗ and then evaluate the model M∗ based
2372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

on the dataset Dtest , as shown in Eq. (1). Algorithm 1 Overall Tree-based Auto-EAD Framework
 1 Xn Input: IoT based on consumer electronics network traffic data
 A∗ ∈ arg min L (A, Dtrain , Dtest ) (1) D, feature importance threshold τ = 0.9, correlation threshold
 A∗ ∈A n i=1
 δ = 0.9, imbalance threshold imbalance ratio = 0.3
where, L (A, Dtrain , Dtest ) is the loss of the model. It can Output: Final Auto-EAD model
be obtained by training algorithm A on dataset Dtrain and 1: // AutoDP
evaluating the trained algorithm on dataset Dtest . Problem 2: Dclean ← AutoD P (D) Auto data transformation:
of HPO. Suppose algorithm A contains n hyperparameters, encode non-numeric features, auto imputation: fill miss-
λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λn , with corresponding value sets 31 , 32 , . . . , 3n . ing values with 0, auto normalization: Z-score if normal
Then, the hyperparameter search space 3 of algorithm A is (Shapiro–Wilk test), else min–max, auto balancing: SMOTE
the set formed by the Cartesian product of the value sets of if imbalance ratio < 0.3 //imbalance ratio denotes the
these n hyperparameters: 3 ⊂ 31 × 32 × . . . , ×3n . The main proportion of the minority class in the dataset.
purpose of HPO is to search within the search space 3 for a 3: // AutoFE
set of configurations λ∗ that result in the optimal predictive 4: Dr educed ←AutoD P (Dclean )
performance of trained algorithm A, as shown in Eq. (2). Step 1: Remove irrelevant features via GBDT feature impor-
 1 Xn tance (keep those with f eatur e impor tance > τ )
 λ∗ ∈ arg min L (Aλ , Dtrain , Dtest ) (2)
 λ∈3 n i=1 Step 2: Remove redundant features via Pearson correlation
 This work mainly addresses the problem of combining r pq > δ
algorithm selection and HPO. The problem 5: // Automated base model learning & HPO
  can be defined
as follows: given a set of algorithms A = A1 , A2 , . . . , An , 6: base_models ← {Random Forest, XGBoost, Gradient
where the hyperparameter space corresponding to each Boosting, Decision Tree, LightGBM}
algorithm is 31 , 32 , . . . , 3n , find algorithm A∗ with config- 7: For each model in base_models do
uration λ∗ , such that the model trained using algorithm A∗λ∗ 8: optimized_model ← CMA-ES(model, Dr educed )
has the optimal detection performance. Accuracy, Precision, 9: end for
Recall, and F1-score were used as performance metrics for 10: // Automated model selection
the anomaly detection model, as shown in Eq. (3). 11: top_models ← select top 3 models by F1-score:
 Model T O P_1 , Model T O P_2 , Model T O P_3
 
 1 Xn 
 j
 
 A∗λ∗ = arg min L Aλ , Dtrain , Dtest (3) 12: // Automated model ensemble (Stair ensemble)
 A j ∈A,λ∈3 j n i=1
 13: final_model ← StairStacking(top_models)
 14: return final_model
B. Basic Framework of the Auto-EAD
 The aim of the present work was to develop an autonomous
ADS for the CEN-IoT to ensure its secure operation. Fig 2 the efficacy of anomaly detection models. This phase is
outlines the comprehensive framework of the tree-based resource-intensive, time-consuming, and requires specialized
automated ensemble anomaly detection model for the IoT knowledge. Herein, AutoDP was employed to facilitate the
(Auto-EAD). It comprises five stages: automated data prepro- learning of valuable patterns by anomaly detection models.
cessing (AutoDP), automated feature engineering (AutoFE), Within the framework outlined in the present study, the
automated base model learning and HPO, automated model AutoDP phase encompasses automatic data transformation,
selection, and automated model ensemble. In the AutoDP imputation, standardization, and balancing procedures [18].
phase, network traffic data undergoes preprocessing steps such The detailed operations are as follows:
as transformation, imputation, normalization, and balancing to (1) Automatic Data Transformation: Non-numeric attributes
enhance the quality of training data. In the AutoFE phase, are converted into numeric ones using automated encoding
feature importance for classification tasks and the strength of techniques.
the linear relationship between feature variables are computed (2) Automatic Data Imputation: Missing values in the
to reduce data complexity. In the automated base model learn- dataset are identified and replaced with zeros.
ing and HPO phase, five tree-based ML models are utilized, (3) Automatic Standardization: Data normality is evaluated
with HPO performed using adaptive evolution. After HPO, using the Shapiro–Wilk test. If the data conforms to a normal
three detection models are selected in the automated model distribution, Z-score normalization is employed; otherwise,
selection stage based on their F1-scores. The proposed Stair min–max normalization is utilized.
ensemble model is then employed in the automated model Sample data X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X n becomes X (1) ≤
ensemble stage to stack and iteratively optimize the three base X (2) , . . . , X (n) after sorting. The Shapiro–Wilk test statistic
models, culminating in the final integrated ADS for the IoT. W is defined as:
Further details on the Auto-EAD framework are presented in P
 k Pn−k 2
Algorithm 1. i=1 ai X (n−i+1) − i=k+1 ai X (i)
 W = 2 (4)
 Pn  1 Pn
C. Automated Data Pre-Processing i=1 X i − n i=1 X i
   
 Data preprocessing is essential for automated ML, playing where k = n 2 denotes the sample half-length after floor
a crucial role in optimizing input data quality and improving division; ai are coefficients determined by sample size n,
DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT 2373

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the proposed Basic Framework of the Auto-EAD.

generated via lookup tables or algorithmic computation to Among them, λ ∈ (0, 1) is a randomly generated interreflect the covariance structure of order statistics under the polation coefficient. This way, by leveraging the distribution
normal distribution. information on the existing samples from the minority class,
 After computing the Shapiro–Wilk test statistic W , the crit- new minority class samples are synthesized. Consequently, the
ical value Wα is obtained using the Shapiro–Wilk distribution number of minority class samples is increased to alleviate the
table with a significance level α (α = 0.05) and sample size dataset imbalance.
n.
 In Z-score normalization, the normalized value of each data
 D. AutoFE
point, xn , is denoted by
 x −µ AutoFE is another essential component of the Auto-EAD
 xn = (5) framework. Feature engineering is integral to the extraction
 σ
 and selection of the most pertinent features from a dataset,
where x is the original value, µ and σ are the mean and
 thereby enhancing the efficacy of ML models. AutoFE aims
standard deviation of the data points, respectively.
 to streamline the conventional feature engineering workflow,
 In min–max normalization, the normalized value of each
 reducing human involvement in such tasks. Within this framedata point, xn is denoted by
 work, AutoFE focuses on feature selection, aiming to identify
 x − min and select the most crucial features to construct accurate and
 xn = (6)
 max − min efficient ML models.
where x is the original feature value, and min and max are 1. Information Gain-based Irrelevant Feature Removal
the minimum and maximum values of each original feature, Method
respectively. The dataset comprises n samples, each consisting of m
 (4) Automatic Data Balancing: The class sample sizes features and a label variable. The dataset can be represented
are assessed to gauge dataset imbalance. If the dataset is as a feature matrix x, x ∈ Rn×m , and a label vector y, y ∈ Rn ,
imbalanced, SMOTE oversampling is applied to address such where xi j denotes the j-th feature value of the i-th sample,
imbalance. and yi denotes the label value of the i-th sample.
 For each minority class sample x j , its k-nearest neighbors Herein, feature importance was assessed using the Gradient
in the minority class sample are calculated. Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) algorithm [45]. In GBDT,
 r
 Xd 2 each decision tree is designed to model the residuals of
 dist x j , xl =
 
 x j,t − xl,t (7) the preceding tree. Throughout the construction of a decit=1
 sion tree, features are iteratively partitioned to minimize a
where x j,t is the t-th dimensional feature of x j .  specified loss function (e.g., mean squared error). At each
 Thus, the set of neighboring samples Nk x j =
 decision tree node, a feature and a split point are chosen
 x j1 , x j2 , .., x jk is obtained.
 to maximize the impurity reduction of the resulting sub-
 Sample x jr (r ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}) is randomly selected from
 nodes. Feature importance is quantified by either the frequency
the neighbor set Nk x j , after which a new sample xnew is
 of a feature being utilized for splitting across all decision
generated through linear interpolation.
 trees or the cumulative impurity reductions achieved by these
 xnew = x j + λ x jr − x j
 
 (8) splits.
2374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 Consider a set of decision trees T . The importance score of is defined (set to 0.9 in the present work). For each element r pq
the j-th feature in the t-th decision tree can be represented as in the upper triangle, r pq > δ indicates high linear correlation
It j . The cumulative importance score of the j-th feature across between the p-th and q-th features, meaning that one of these
the entire model is calculated by summing the importance features is redundant and needs to be removed.
scores across all decision trees:
 XT
 Ij = It j (9) E. Automated Model Learning
 t=1
 After processing the data with AutoDP and AutoFE, super-
 The features are arranged in descending order based on vised ML algorithms were trained to detect attack behaviors.
their importance scores I j to derive a prioritized sequence Herein, five tree-based ML models were considered: random
of features. These feature importance scores are normalized forest [47], XGBoost [48], gradient boosting [49], decision
such that the total sum across all features is 1. The normalized trees [50], and LightGBM [51]. The rationale for selecting
importance score I˜j for the j-th feature can be mathematically these models is fourfold: (1) random forest, XGBoost, Lightdefined as: GBM, and gradient boosting are ensemble models built on
 Ij decision trees, enabling them to effectively handle non-linear
 I˜j = Pm (10)
 k=1 Ik and high-dimensional industrial data; (2) tree-based ML algorithms support parallel computing, thereby enhancing training
 Cumulative importance score C j are calculated for each
 efficiency on IIoT datasets; (3) the stochastic nature of
feature, which is the sum of the normalized importance scores
 tree-based ML models enhances the generalization and robustfor the top j features:
 ness of ensemble models.
 Xj
 Cj = I˜k (11)
 k=1
 F. Hyperparameter Optimization Based on Adaptive
 An importance threshold τ (τ = 0.9 in this paper) is defined. Evolution
Features with cumulative importance scores less than or equal
to the threshold τ are identified, and features with scores HPO plays a pivotal role in the effective deployment of ML
exceeding it are eliminated. models tailored to specific IoT systems or datasets. Herein,
 2. Pearson Correlation Coefficient-based Redundant Feature an adaptive evolution approach was employed to automate the
Removal Method tuning of hyperparameter combinations, thereby considerably
 Pearson correlation coefficient ρXY assesses the strength enhancing the detection performance of the proposed model.
of linear correlation between two variables. For two random We used the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Stratvariables X and Y , it is computed as follows [46]: egy (CMA-ES), a robust gradient-free optimization algorithm
 known for its efficacy [52]. Drawing inspiration from evolucov (X, Y ) E [(X − µ X ) (Y − µY )] tionary strategies, CMA-ES emulates the process of biological
 ρX Y = =q 
 ρ X ρY E (X − µ )2 E (Y − µ )2
    evolution to iteratively approach the optimal solution.
 X Y
 The primary rationale for selecting CMA-ES in this paper
 (12) is fourfold: (1) As a gradient-free optimization algorithm,
where cov (X, Y ) is the covariance of X and Y ; ρ X and ρY CMA-ES does not require assumptions regarding the conare the standard deviations of X and Y , respectively; µ X and tinuity or differentiability of the hyperparameter space,
µY are the means of X and Y , respectively; and E [·] is the and thus perfectly adapts to the optimization requirements
mathematical expectation. of mixed-type hyperparameters in tree-based ML models.
 For two feature vectors x p and xq in the feature matrix x, (2) The task of IoT-based network attack detection confronts
Pearson correlation coefficient r pq can be computed using the challenges including dynamic variations in data distribution
following formula: and high-dimensional feature spaces. By adaptively adjusting
 Pn   the covariance matrix, CMA-ES can dynamically balance
 k=1 x kp − x̄ p x kq − x̄ q global and local search capabilities, and rapidly converge
 r pq = q (13)
 Pn 2 Pn 2 to a robust hyperparameter configuration under constrained
 x
 k=1 kp − x̄ p x
 k=1 kq − x̄ q
 computing resources. Compared with alternative methods such
where xkp and xkq are the values of the k-th sample for the as grid search and random search, CMA-ES offers disp-th and q-th features, and x̄ p and x̄q are the sample means tinct efficiency advantages, making it particularly suitable for
of the p-th and q-th features, respectively.
   addressing the optimization requirements of large-scale IoT
 Correlation coefficient matrix R = r pq can be derived datasets. (3) The inherent robustness of CMA-ES enables it to
by calculating Pearson correlation coefficients between all effectively mitigate noise interference during the optimization
feature pairs. Notably, r pp = 1 (as a feature is perfectly process, reduce the impact of local optimal traps via its
correlated with itself), and r pq = rq p (because the correlation population-based evolutionary mechanism, and ensure that the
coefficient is symmetrical). To streamline computations and optimized hyperparameter combinations can maintain stable
analyses, herein, we focused on the upper triangle of the detection performance across diverse scenarios. This attribute
matrix, excluding diagonal elements. is critical for anomaly detection systems requiring long-term
 This upper triangular segment can be isolated by creating an deployment in IoT environments. (4) CMA-ES enables autoupper triangular matrix U . A correlation coefficient threshold δ matic iteration and optimization without manual intervention,
DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT 2375

Algorithm 2 CMA-ES Algorithm for HPO Assessment: Each sampled hyperparameter vector θg,i is
Input: Initial hyperparameter vector θ0 , mean vector m 0 , step used to train the considered tree-based ML model, and the
size σ0 , covariance matrix C0 , max iterations T, λ, µ, weights resulting value of the loss function, f (θg,i ), which is computed
Wi , learning rates cσ , dσ , cc , c1 , cµ on the validation set.
Output: Optimized hyperparameter vector θ ∗ Selection: The sampled hyperparameter vectors are then
 1: g ← 0 arranged in ascending order based on their corresponding
 2: while g < T do   n values. The top-performing
 loss function o vectors µ (µ < λ),
 3: Sample λ hyperparameter vectors from N m g , σg2 , C g : denoted as θg,1∗ , θ∗ , . . . , θ∗
 g,2 g,µ , are selected.
 θg,1 , θg,2,.., θg,λ

 Parameter Update:
 4: for each θg,i in θg,1 , θg,2,.., θg,λ do
 
 (1) Mean Vector Update
  tree-based model θg,i and compute validation loss
 5: Train The updated mean vector m g+1 is calculated as the weighted
 f θg,i average of the optimal samples:
 6: end for Xµ
 m g+1 = Wi θg,i
 ∗
 (15)
 n o
 7: Select top µ vectors θg,1 ∗ , θ∗ , . . . , θ∗
 g,2, g,µ based on f (θ) i=1
 Pµ
 8: Update mean vector: m g+1 ← i=1 Wi θg,i ∗ where Wi P is the weight assigned to each sample, typically
 µ
 9: Update evolution path pσ,g+1 ← (1 − cc ) pc,g + satisfying i=1 Wi = 1, with weights directly proportional
√ m −m
 cσ (2−cσ ) g+1σg g to the performance (loss function value) of the samples; thus,
  
 ∥p ∥
  better-performing samples are assigned higher weights.
 10: Update step size: σg+1 ← σg exp dcσσ E∥Nσ,g+1 (0,I )∥ − 1 (2) Step Size Update
 11: Update cumulative evolution path: pc,g+1 ← The step size is adjusted based on the evolution path,
 √ m −m
(1 − cc ) pc,g + cc (2−cc ) g+1σg g decreasing when approaching the optimal solution and increas-
 
 12: Update covariance matrix: C g+1 = 1 − c1 − cµ C g + ing otherwise. The update is performed as follows:
  ∗ T
 T
 Pµ θ ∗ −m g θg,i −m g p m g+1 − m g
c1 pc,g+1 pc,g+1 + cµ i=1 Wi g,iσg σg pσ,g+1 = (1 − cσ ) pc,g + cσ (2 − cσ ) (16)
 σ
 13: g ← g + 1 !! g
 14: end while cσ pσ,g+1
 σg+1 = σg ex p −1 (17)
 15: return θ ∗ ← best θ from all iterations dσ E ∥N (0, I )∥
 where cσ is the learning rate for step-size adaptation, dσ is
 the step-size damping parameter, and pσ,g is the cumulative
thereby reducing the reliance on expert experience for hyperevolution path.
parameter tuning. This characteristic is particularly practical
 (3) Covariance Matrix Update
for the customized deployment of ML models across diverse
 Cumulative evolution path pc is updated as follows:
devices and datasets in IoT scenarios, and enables rapid
adaptation to the characteristics and attack patterns of different
 p m g+1 − m g
 pc,g+1 = (1 − cc ) pc,g + cc (2 − cc ) (18)
IoT systems. σg
 In summary, CMA-ES has been widely applied in HPO The covariance matrix is updated as
and various other domains, with its implementation details  T
provided in Algorithm 2. C g+1 = 1 − c1 − cµ C g + c1 pc,g+1 pc,g+1
 !T
 Parameter Initialization: The CMA-ES algorithm samples Xµ θg,i
 ∗ −m
 g θg,i
 ∗ −m
 g
hyperparameter vectors  from a multivariate Gaussian distri- + cµ Wi (19)
bution N m, σ 2 , C , where m 0 ∈ Rd is the mean vector
 i=1 σg σg
initialized at the center of the search space or at a randomly where c1 and cµ are the learning rates for updating the
selected initial point. Step size σ0 regulates the range of covariance matrix.
distribution for sampling points within the search space, with Iteration: The iterative process proceeds until meeting terits initial value determined through experience or based on the mination conditions, such as reaching the maximum number of
dimensions of the search space. C0 ∈ Rd×d is the covariance iterations (T ), the step-size σ falling below a specified threshmatrix, which is typically initialized as the identity matrix I , old (ϕ), or the change in the loss function value decreasing
signifying the independence of hyperparameters at the outset. below a certain threshold.
 Sampling: In every generation g, λ hyperparameter vectors
 θg,1 , θg,2 , . . . , θg,λ are sampled
  from the current multivari- G. Automated Model Selection
ate Gaussian distribution N m g , σg2 , C g . Each sample is HPO using CMA-ES is applied to all tree-based
obtained using ML models. Three models (Model_TOP_1, Model_TOP_2,
 θg,i = m g + σg z g,i (14) Model_TOP_3) with the highest F1-scores. These models are
  subsequently incorporated into an ensemble framework to
where z g,i ∼ N 0, C g is sampled from a multivariate develop the ultimate ADS, aiming to improve the classifica-
Gaussian distribution with a mean of 0 and covariance tion accuracy for both normal and abnormal data patterns.
matrix C g . The reason for selecting these models is that (1) the F1
2376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Algorithm 3 Stair Ensemble Algorithm TABLE I
Input: Trained base models {ModelT O P_1 , ModelT O P_2 , E NVIRONMENT OF E XPERIMENTAL O PERATION
ModelT O P_3 }, layers L, scoring functions f 1 (x) ,
 f 2 (x) , . . . , f L (x)
Output: Ensemble model predictions ŷ
 1: Initialize O0 ←original data x
 2: for l = 1 to L do
 3: if l = 1 then
 4: inputs←O0
 5: else
 6: inputs←Ol−1 TABLE II
 7: end if D ETAILS OF DATASETS
 8: for each base model h l,k in layer l do
 9: yl,k ←h l,k (inputs)
 10: end if
 11: Ol = 8l yl,1 , yl,2 , . . . , yl,kl
  

 12: end for
 13: for each layer l do
 14: ωl (x) ← P Lexp( fl (x))
 i−1 exp( f i (x))
 15: end for
 PL the input is the original data x). The output of each base model
 16: ŷ = l=1 ωl (x) · Ol
 within the l-th layer is as follows:
 17: return ŷ
 ŷl,k = h l,k (Ol−1 ) k = 1, 2, . . . , K l (20)

score combines both precision and recall, which can balance The interlayer connection function integrates the outputs of
the classification performance of the model on normal and all base models in this layer as the input for the next layer:
abnormal samples. This is particularly important for attack
 Ol = 8l ŷl,1 , ŷl,2 , . . . , ŷl,kl
  
 (21)
detection tasks, as it requires reducing false positives (improving accuracy) and reducing false negatives (improving recall). An adaptive weight-reallocation mechanism is utilized to
(2) After CMA-ES hyperparameter optimization, these three dynamically adjust the weights of layers based on varying
models showed the best comprehensive classification ability on data characteristics. The contribution of the output of the l-th
the test set, indicating that they have stronger adaptability and layer (Ol ), to the final prediction is determined by the weight
stability in feature utilization, noise suppression, and pattern function ωl (x):
recognition. (3) Selecting multiple optimal models instead of a
single optimal model can integrate the advantages of different ex p ( fl (x))
 ωl (x) = P L (22)
models through integrated learning, increase the coverage i=1 ex p ( f i (x))
of diversified attack modes, reduce the generalization error
 where fl (x) is a learnable scoring function, usually impleand overfitting risk of a single model, and thus improve the
 mented as a neural network.
robustness and accuracy of the overall system.
 The final detection result is obtained by integrating the
 outputs of all layers:
H. Automated Model Ensemble XL
 A novel ensemble learning approach termed “Stair Ensem- ŷ = ωl (x) · Ol (23)
 l=1
ble” was used in the Auto-EAD framework. This approach
leverages adaptive weight reallocation by integrating multiple IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
base models in a hierarchical iterative manner to construct a
robust classifier with a staircase configuration. The technique A. Experimental Environment
emphasizes hierarchical parameter tuning and adaptive weight We employed Python 3.7 with PyTorch 1.12. as the primary
reallocation to augment both the detection efficacy and robust- deep learning framework on high-performance computing
ness of the model. The operational details of the proposed nodes. Essential libraries comprised Scikit-Learn for ML tools
automated ensemble model are delineated in Algorithm 3. and Hyperopt for HPO. The detailed experimental environment
 Stair ensemble restructures conventional stacking into a is presented in Table I.
staircase configuration comprising multiple layers L, with
each layer housing numerous base models. The outputs from
preceding layers is combined using adjustable weights. B. Datasets

  layer (1 ≤ l ≤ L) accommodates a set of base
 The l-th Auto-EAD was evaluated on three public datasets:
models h l,1 , h l,2 , . . . , h l,K l , with the input for this layer SWaT [53], WADI [54] and IoT Network Intrusion [55]. The
being the output Ol−1 from the previous layer l − 1 (initially, detailed information on the datasets is provided in Table II.
DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT 2377

 TABLE III
 D ETAILS OF AUTO FE

C. Evaluation Metrics E. HPO Configuration of the Best-Performing Learning
 We used Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-score as Models
performance metrics, with computation formulas given in After AutoFE, Tree-based ML models (Random Forest,
Eq. (24)- Eq. (27). XGBoost, Gradient Boosting, Decision Tree, LightGBM) were
 Accuracy is the proportion of the number of correctly subjected to HPO using CMA-ES. Table IV presents the
classified samples to the total number of samples [56]: optimized hyperparameters, their corresponding search spaces,
 and the optimal values achieved across the three datasets.
 TP +TN
 Accuracy = (24)
 T P + T N + FP + FN
 V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
 Precision is the proportion of correctly classified samples
 A. Results for the Base Model
among the samples classified as positives [57]:
 Fig 3–5 present the results of a comprehensive evaluation
 TP
 Pr ecision = (25) of various ML models and their optimized versions on mul-
 T P + FP tiple datasets. The results on the SWaT dataset indicate the
 Recall is the proportion of successfully identified positives robust performance of the models, with accuracy and recall
among all actual positives [58]: approaching or exceeding 90% before and after optimization.
 Notably, optimization led to a modest increase in these key
 TP indicators, suggesting a limited enhancement in the detection
 Recall = (26)
 T P + FN capabilities of the models and their ability to accurately
 The F1-score is a harmonic mean of precision and recall. classify data samples. Importantly, the precision and F1-score
It provides a balanced assessment of a model by consider- are stable, indicating that the overall comprehensive perforing both precision and recall. The calculation formula is as mance of the models did not considerably fluctuate despite
follows [59]: the improvements in certain metrics. The primary reason for
 this observation lies in the inherent characteristics of the SWaT
 Pr ecision × Recall
 F1 − scor e = 2 × (27) dataset, specifically low noise levels, low dimensionality, and
 Pr ecision + Recall a simple data distribution. The initial hyperparameters of
 All the above indicators range from 0 to 1, with higher the evaluated models are close to the optimal values, which
values indicating better model performance. In the formulas, leads to a narrow hyperparameter search space and challenges
TP, FP, TN, and FN correspond to true positives, false in achieving significant performance improvements at the
positives, true negatives, and false negatives. sampling points. On the WADI dataset, model optimization
 markedly enhanced both accuracy and precision. Additionally,
 some models exhibit improved recall and F1-scores after
D. Details on AutoFE optimization, indicating that the optimization strategy effec-
 We evaluated the efficiency of the Auto-EAD framework tively improved classification performance on this dataset.
outlined in Section III on the SWaT, WADI, and IoT Network On the IoT Network Intrusion dataset, optimization markedly
Intrusion datasets. Key features essential for the training of the improved all performance metrics. Notably, the decision tree
Auto-EAD framework were identified through AutoDP and classifier maintains a high level of accuracy, suggesting
AutoFE, with feature importance and correlation coefficient that optimization substantially enhanced the overall efficacy
thresholds set to 0.9. The outcomes of the final feature of the models in network anomaly detection. To address
selection process are detailed in Table III. the characteristics of high dimensionality, strong noise, and
2378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE IV
 HPO C ONFIGURATION OF THE B EST-P ERFORMING L EARNING M ODELS

complex distributions exhibited by the WADI dataset and the CMA-ES can rapidly identify the optimal hyperparameter
IoT network intrusion dataset, the capability of the Covari- configuration by adaptively adjusting the covariance matrix.
ance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) to
integrate global and local hyperparameter search was fully B. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
leveraged. This enabled the algorithm to rapidly identify supe- Ranked by F1-score, the top three optimized models—
rior hyperparameter combinations and substantially enhance LightGBM_Optimized, Random Forest_Optimized, and Gramodel performance. dient Boosting_Optimized were selected and integrated using
 The experimental results from the three datasets (i.e., SWaT, Traditional Stacking [60], Confidence-based Stacking [40],
WADI, and IoT network intrusion datasets) indicate that the Hybrid Stacking [61], and the proposed Stair ensemble meth-
CMA-ES optimization algorithm exerts a positive impact on ods. These resulted in the Auto-TS, Auto-CS, Auto-HS, and
the proposed detection models. The primary reasons for this Auto-EAD (Ours) frameworks, respectively. The rationale for
positive impact are twofold: (1) The hyperparameters of the selecting traditional stacking, confidence-based stacking, and
tree-based anomaly detection models include both continuous hybrid stacking as comparative methods is to comprehensively
and discrete types, and CMA-ES can fulfill the optimiza- validate the advantages of the proposed staircase ensemtion requirements of mixed-type hyperparameters; (2) When ble method in feature utilization, confidence calibration, and
confronted with dynamic variations in data distribution and complex boundary processing. These comparative methods
high-dimensional feature spaces within IoT environments, cover ensemble strategies ranging from classical to improved
DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT 2379

 TABLE V
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON THE SWaT DATASET

Fig. 3. Performance of the base models on the SWaT dataset. The performance of the proposed Auto-EAD model and several state-of-the-art methods from the literature is summarized
 in Table V for the SWaT dataset, Table VI for the WADI
 dataset, and Table VII for the IoT Network Intrusion dataset.
 First, as shown in Table V, Auto-EAD outperforms state-ofthe-art ensemble methods and all other compared methods on
 the SWaT dataset, achieving 99% accuracy, 98.933% precision, 95.683% recall, and 97.236% F1-score. The Auto-EAD
 model exhibits exceptional performance on the WADI dataset,
 achieving an accuracy of 97.977%, a precision of 96.308%,
 a recall of 86.802%, and an F1-score of 90.926%, outperforming numerous other detection models, as presented in
 Table VI. At the same time, the GCN, GAT, TAGCN, FT-GCN,
 and OCSVM models show generally poor performance on
 the WADI dataset, suggesting their limited suitability for this
 dataset or the need for further parameter optimization. Additionally, the Auto-EAD model exhibits robust performance
 on the IoT Network Intrusion dataset, achieving an accuracy
Fig. 4. Performance of the base models on the WADI dataset. of 84.345%, a precision of 85.313%, a recall of 84.998%,
 and an F1-score of 84.651%, with a particular strength in
 precision. The Auto-CS model shows a maximum accuracy
 of 84.585%, whereas the Auto-TS and Auto-HS models
 exhibit comparable performance, with accuracies ranging from
 84.105% to 84.185%, suggesting the stability of the integrated
 models. In contrast, the CNN3D model shows lower values
 across all indicators, with an accuracy of 82.80% and an
 F1-score of 81.90%, indicating the need for further performance improvement.
 The proposed Auto-EAD framework outperforms the base
 tree-ML models and state-of-the-art models on the SWaT,
 WADI, and IoT Network Intrusion datasets. Such performance
 was primarily attributed to the synergy between AutoDP,
 AutoFE, HPO, and automated model ensemble modules, they
 collectively enhance performance by simultaneously improving data quality, optimizing ML model architectures, and
 reducing the complexity of features and models. In the context
Fig. 5. Performance of the base models on the IoT network intrusion dataset. of model ensemble, this approach leverages adaptive weight
 reallocation by integrating multiple base models in a hierarvariants, leveraging meta-learner fusion, confidence-weighted chical iterative manner to construct a robust classifier with a
selection, and the integration of voting and stacking, respec- staircase configuration. In practical IoT environments, network
tively. This design ensures the comprehensiveness and fairness traffic datasets substantially surpass public benchmark datasets
of the comparative experiments. in complexity and variability because of the complex and
2380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE VI exhibit correlations, and data streams often show concept drift.
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON THE WADI DATASET The Auto-EAD framework, which includes components such
 as AutoDP, AutoFE, Automated Base Model Learning and
 HPO, Automated Model Selection, and Automated Model
 Ensemble, is likely to exhibit good performance in such scenarios. These automated components contribute to enhancing
 the overall anomaly detection performance, addressing the
 challenges faced by traditional anomaly detection models.
 When using traditional ML models, researchers often need
 to manually adjust parameters based on personal experience
 or changes in data streams to improve performance, which
 may result in suboptimal states. In contrast, the proposed
 ADS based on AutoML can automatically screen, optimize,
 and integrate the best-performing ML models, making it a
 promising approach with better performance than traditional
 network security measures, offering an autonomous solution
 for network security.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 The implementation of CEN-IoT has expanded network
 TABLE VII attack surfaces, posing notable challenges for autonomous
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON THE IoT N ETWORK I NTRUSION DATASET system security. This paper introduces an Auto-EAD framework for the CEN-IoT, incorporating modules such as AutoDP,
 AutoFE, automated base model learning and HPO, automated model selection, and automated model ensemble. This
 framework aims to provide an autonomous cybersecurity
 solution for next-generation CEN-IoT systems. Auto-EAD
 exhibited superior performance on three prominent cybersecurity benchmark datasets—SWaT, WADI, and IoT Network
 Intrusion—achieving F1-scores of 97.236%, 90.926%, and
changeable processes, the surge in the number and types of 84.651%, respectively, and outperforming state-of-the-art
consumer electronics devices, and the deep integration with the anomaly detection models. This indicates the effectiveness
Internet. This indicates that Auto-EAD can still be optimized of the proposed framework in providing autonomous network
and refined. security for CEN-IoT systems or consumer electronic devices.
 In anomaly detection, recall is of particular importance In future studies, we plan to further optimize each module,
because it directly reflects the capability of a model to with particular emphasis on refining the HPO algorithm. This
identify abnormal samples. A high recall rate means that the will enhance the detection accuracy and precision, maintain
model can recognize as many actual abnormal samples as computational efficiency, and address the ever-evolving nature
possible, which is crucial for scenarios where minimizing of unknown network attack behaviors.
false negatives (missed detections) is a top priority. The
proposed Auto-EAD framework achieved a remarkable 5.53% R EFERENCES
improvement in recall rate on the IoT Network Intrusion [1] S. Qin et al., “A partially labeled anomaly data detection approach based
dataset. At the same time, Auto-EAD showed the highest on prioritized deep reinforcement learning for consumer electronics
 security,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 6452–6462,
recall rate on the WADI dataset. Furthermore, the general Nov. 2024.
reliance on random selection or subjective experience in the [2] X. Li et al., “Physical-layer authentication for ambient backscatter-aided
selection of ML models often leads to suboptimal anomaly NOMA symbiotic systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 4,
 pp. 2288–2303, Apr. 2023.
detection performance, which further highlights the advantages [3] S. He et al., “Graph structure learning-based multivariate time series
of the AutoML approach. This approach systematically opti- anomaly detection in Internet of Things for human-centric conmizes detection models through standardized processes such sumer applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3,
 pp. 5419–5431, Aug. 2024.
as AutoDP, AutoFE, HPO, and automated model ensemble, [4] M. Wen et al., “A survey on spatial modulation in emerging wireless
thereby effectively enhancing detection efficiency. Therefore, systems: Research progresses and applications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
the proposed AutoML-based anomaly detection framework Commun., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1949–1972, Sep. 2019.
outperforms traditional network security solutions in detection [5] J. Li et al., “Composite multiple-mode orthogonal frequency division
 multiplexing with index modulation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
efficiency because of its autonomous design. vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3748–3761, Jun. 2023.
 Overall, Auto-EAD showed superior performance in most [6] W. Shang, L. Ding, X. Yang, Z. Gu, and H. Sui, “Complicated
cases, primarily because of the simplicity of the benchmark imbalanced and overlapped data oversampling approach via hypersphere
 coverage and adaptive differential evolution for anomaly detection of
datasets and the robust performance of tree-based ML models. industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 10,
In real-world IoT environments, network traffic data often pp. 14002–14015, May 2025.
DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT 2381

 [7] X. Li et al., “Hardware impaired ambient backscatter NOMA sys- [30] R. Sharma et al., “X hacking: The threat of misguided AutoML,” 2024,
 tems: Reliability and security,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 4, arXiv:2401.08513.
 pp. 2723–2736, Apr. 2021. [31] Z. Li, C. Huang, and W. Qiu, “An intrusion detection method combining
 [8] M. Rodríguez, D. P. Tobón, and D. Múnera, “A framework for anomaly variational auto-encoder and generative adversarial networks,” Comput.
 classification in industrial Internet of Things systems,” Internet Things, Netw., vol. 253, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 110724.
 vol. 29, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 101446. [32] K. Swathi and G. H. Bindu, “An automated intrusion detection system in
 [9] L. Xiangyu, L. Tianliang, D. Yanhui, and W. Jingxiang, “Lightweight IoT system using attention based deep bidirectional sparse auto encoder
 IoT intrusion detection method based on feature selection,” Netinfo model,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 305, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 112633.
 Secur., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 66–72, 2023. [33] M. Baratchi et al., “Automated machine learning: Past, present and
[10] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir, future,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 57, no. 5, p. 122, Apr. 2024.
 “An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics [34] C. Xue, M. Hu, X. Huang, and C.-G. Li, “Automated search space
 network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913, and search strategy selection for AutoML,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 124,
 Nov. 2023. Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108474.
[11] V. Chang et al., “A survey on intrusion detection systems for fog and [35] M. Wever, A. Tornede, F. Mohr, and E. Hüllermeier, “AutoML for multicloud computing,” Future Internet, vol. 14, no. 3, p. 89, Mar. 2022. label classification: Overview and empirical evaluation,” IEEE Trans.
[12] X. Li et al., “Covert communication of STAR-RIS aided NOMA Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 3037–3054, Sep. 2021.
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 9055–9060, [36] L. Zimmer, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter, “Auto-pytorch: Multi-fidelity
 Jun. 2024. metalearning for efficient and robust AutoDL,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
[13] M. Wen, E. Basar, Q. Li, B. Zheng, and M. Zhang, “Multiple-mode Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 3079–3090, Sep. 2021.
 orthogonal frequency division multiplexing with index modulation,” [37] G. Baudart et al., “Pipeline combinators for gradual automl,” in Proc.
 IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 3892–3906, Sep. 2017. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 19705–19718.
[14] W. Kehe, C. Rui, J. Xiaochen, and Z. Jiyu, “Security protection scheme [38] M. Feurer et al., “Auto-Sklearn 2.0: Hands-free automl via metaof power IoT based on SDP,” Netinfo Secur., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 32–38, learning,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 23, no. 261, pp. 1–61, 2022.
 2022. [39] X. Chen and B. Wujek, “A unified framework for automatic distributed
[15] Y. Abudurexiti, G. Han, F. Zhang, and L. Liu, “An explainable unsuper- active learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 12,
 vised anomaly detection framework for industrial Internet of Things,” pp. 9774–9786, Dec. 2022.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 148, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 104130. [40] L. Yang and A. Shami, “Towards autonomous cybersecurity: An intelli-
[16] M. Raeiszadeh, A. Ebrahimzadeh, R. H. Glitho, J. Eker, and gent AutoML framework for autonomous intrusion detection,” in Proc.
 R. A. F. Mini, “Real-time adaptive anomaly detection in industrial IoT Workshop Auto. Cybersecurity, Nov. 2023, pp. 68–78.
 environments,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 6, [41] D. Vasan, E. J. S. Alqahtani, M. Hammoudeh, and A. F. Ahmed, “An
 pp. 6839–6856, Dec. 2024. AutoML-based security defender for industrial control systems,” Int. J.
[17] B. Ahmad, Z. Wu, Y. Huang, and S. U. Rehman, “Enhancing the Crit. Infrastruct. Protection, vol. 47, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 100718.
 security in IoT and IIoT networks: An intrusion detection scheme lever- [42] W. Ma, L. Ma, K. Li, and J. Guo, “Few-shot IoT attack detection based
 aging deep transfer learning,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 305, Dec. 2024, on SSDSAE and adaptive loss weighted meta residual network,” Inf.
 Art. no. 112614. Fusion, vol. 98, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 101853.
[18] A. Liuliakov, L. Hermes, and B. Hammer, “AutoML technologies for [43] M. Kotlar, M. Punt, Z. Radivojevic, M. Cvetanovic, and V. Milutinovic,
 the identification of sparse classification and outlier detection models,” “Novel meta-features for automated machine learning model selection in
 Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 133, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 109942. anomaly detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 89675–89687, 2021, doi:
[19] Y. Li, D. Zha, P. Venugopal, N. Zou, and X. Hu, “PyODDS: An end-to- 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3090936.
 end outlier detection system with automated machine learning,” in Proc. [44] P. Singh and J. Vanschoren, “Meta-learning for unsupervised outlier
 Companion Web Conf., 2020, pp. 153–157. detection with optimal transport,” 2022, arXiv:2211.00372.
[20] M. Bahri, F. Salutari, A. Putina, and M. Sozio, “AutoML: State of the art [45] H. Rao et al., “Feature selection based on artificial bee colony and grawith a focus on anomaly detection, challenges, and research directions,” dient boosting decision tree,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 74, pp. 634–642,
 Int. J. Data Sci. Anal., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 113–126, Aug. 2022. Jan. 2019.
[21] L. Zheng, D. Wu, S. Xu, and Y. Zheng, “HTCSigNet: A hybrid [46] P. Jia et al., “Erase: Benchmarking feature selection methods for deep
 transformer and convolution signature network for offline signature recommender systems,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 verification,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 159, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 111146. Discovery Data Mining, Apr. 2024, pp. 5194–5205.
[22] Z. He et al., “A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised [47] L. Yang, “Towards zero touch networks: Cross-layer automated security
 anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. solutions for 6G wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73,
 Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1705–1719, Apr. 2023. no. 9, pp. 7650–7679, Sep. 2025.
[23] W. Xiong, P. Wang, X. Sun, and J. Wang, “SiET: Spatial information [48] C. Zhang, D. Jia, L. Wang, W. Wang, F. Liu, and A. Yang, “Comparative
 enhanced transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” research on network intrusion detection methods based on machine
 Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 296, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111928. learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 102861.
[24] L. Sukhostat, “Anomaly detection in industrial control system based on [49] G. Mohiuddin et al., “Intrusion detection using hybridized meta-heuristic
 the hierarchical hidden Markov model,” in Cybersecurity for Critical techniques with weighted XGBoost classifier,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
 Infrastructure Protection via Reflection of Industrial Control Systems;. vol. 232, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 120596.
 Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press, 2022, pp. 48–55. [50] M. H. L. Louk and B. A. Tama, “Dual-IDS: A bagging-based gradient
[25] N. Bai, X. Wang, R. Han, Q. Wang, and Z. Liu, “PAFormer: Anomaly boosting decision tree model for network anomaly intrusion detection
 detection of time series with parallel-attention transformer,” IEEE Trans. system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 213, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 119030.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 3315–3328, Feb. 2025. [51] J. Liu, Y. Gao, and F. Hu, “A fast network intrusion detection system
[26] Z. Gu et al., “AnomalyGPT: Detecting industrial anomalies using large using adaptive synthetic oversampling and LightGBM,” Comput. Secur.,
 vision-language models,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, vol. 38, vol. 106, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 102289.
 no. 3, pp. 1932–1940. [52] M. Nomura et al., “Warm starting CMA-ES for hyperparameter opti-
[27] C. Wu, S. Shao, C. Tunc, P. Satam, and S. Hariri, “An explainable mization,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 10,
 and efficient deep learning framework for video anomaly detection,” pp. 9188–9196.
 Cluster Comput., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2715–2737, Aug. 2022, doi: [53] D. Zhang, “PdGAT-ID: An intrusion detection method for industrial
 10.1007/s10586-021-03439-5. control systems based on periodic extraction and spatiotemporal graph
[28] Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Xue, and J. Ma, “LSTM-based intrusion detection attention,” Comput. Secur., vol. 149, May 2025, Art. no. 104210.
 system for VANETs: A time series classification approach to false [54] K. Wolsing et al., “Deployment challenges of industrial intrusion
 message detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12, detection systems,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res. Comput. Secur. Cham,
 pp. 23906–23918, Dec. 2022. Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 453–473.
[29] M. S. Ansari, V. Bartoš, and B. Lee, “GRU-based deep learning approach [55] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature
 for network intrusion alert prediction,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw. Appl.,
 vol. 128, pp. 235–247, Mar. 2022. vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022.
2382 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

[56] K. Albulayhi, A. A. Smadi, F. T. Sheldon, and R. K. Abercrombie, Wenli Shang was born in Heilongjiang, China,
 “IoT intrusion detection taxonomy, reference architecture, and analyses,” in 1974. He received the M.S. degree from the
 Sensors, vol. 21, no. 19, p. 6432, Sep. 2021. School of Mechanical and Automation Engineering,
[57] W. Aljabri, M. A. Hamid, and R. Mosli, “Lightweight and adaptive Northeastern University, in 2002, and the Ph.D.
 data-driven intrusion detection system for autonomous vehicles,” IEEE degree from the Laboratory of Industrial Con-
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 2282–2292, Feb. 2025. trol Network and System, Shenyang Institute of
[58] S. Oh, S. Oh, T.-W. Um, J. Kim, and Y.-A. Jung, “Methods of pre- Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2005.
 clustering and generating time series images for detecting anomalies He is a Professor at Guangzhou University. His
 in electric power usage data,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 20, p. 3315, research interests include computational intelligence
 Oct. 2022. and machine learning, edge computing, and indus-
[59] A. Gorshenin, A. Kozlovskaya, S. Gorbunov, and I. Kochetkova, trial control system information security.
 “Mobile network traffic analysis based on probability-informed
 machine learning approach,” Comput. Netw., vol. 247, Jun. 2024,
 Art. no. 110433.
[60] Z. Wang, M. Zheng, and P. X. Liu, “A novel classification method based
 on stacking ensemble for imbalanced problems,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[61] J. Yao, Z. Wang, L. Wang, M. Liu, H. Jiang, and Y. Chen, “Novel
 hybrid ensemble credit scoring model with stacking-based noise detection and weight assignment,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 198, Jul. 2022, Shuang Wang (Member, IEEE) was born in Hei-
 Art. no. 116913. longjiang, China, in 1986. She received the M.S.
[62] D. Nedeljkovic and Z. Jakovljevic, “CNN based method for the develop- degree from the School of Computer Applicament of cyber-attacks detection algorithms in industrial control systems,” tion Specialty, Civil Aviation University of China,
 Comput. Secur., vol. 114, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 102585. in 2013, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
[63] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in degree. She is an Assistant Researcher with the
 industrial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,” Institute of Science, Technology and Innovation,
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197, Civil Aviation University of China. Her research
 Jul. 2022. interests include privacy, information security, and
[64] S. P. Priyanga, K. Krithivasan, S. Pravinraj, and V. S. S. Sriram, machine learning.
 “Detection of cyberattacks in industrial control systems using enhanced
 principal component analysis and hypergraph-based convolution neural
 network (EPCA-HG-CNN),” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. 56, no. 4,
 pp. 4394–4404, Jul. 2020.
[65] J. Zheng and D. Li, “GCN-TC: Combining trace graph with statistical
 features for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–6.
[66] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial–
 temporal graph attention network for time series anomaly detection,” Haoran Gao was born in Shaanxi, China, in 1996.
 Inf. Fusion, vol. 89, pp. 527–536, Jan. 2023. He received the M.S. degree from the School of
[67] J. Du, S. Zhang, G. Wu, J. M. F. Moura, and S. Kar, “Topology adaptive Electronic Information, Xijing University, in 2024.
 graph convolutional networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10370. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
[68] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow School of Cyber Security, Guangzhou University,
 topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection Guangdong, China. His research focuses on deep
 in label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., learning, computer vision, and backdoor attacks.
 vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023.
[69] S. Lyu, K. Wang, L. Zhang, and B. Wang, “Process-oriented heterogeneous graph learning in GNN-based ICS anomalous pattern recognition,”
 Pattern Recognit., vol. 141, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 109661.
[70] I. Ullah and Q. H. Mahmoud, “Design and development of a deep
 learning-based model for anomaly detection in IoT networks,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 9, pp. 103906–103926, 2021.

 Lianhai Wang (Member, IEEE) received the M.E.
 Lei Ding was born in Tianjin, China, in 1995. He is
 degree in computer software and theory and the
 currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace
 Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
 security with the School of Cyberspace Secufrom Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 2003 and
 rity, Guangzhou University, Guangdong, China. His
 2014, respectively. He is currently a Research Proresearch focuses on include industrial control system
 fessor with Shandong Computer Science Center
 information security, computational intelligence, and
 (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan) and the
 machine learning.
 School of Cyber Security, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Science), Jinan. His
 current research interests include the areas of information security, digital forensics, and blockchain.