960 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 BAPTISM: A Robust Framework for Encrypted
 Malicious Traffic Identification With
 Low-Quality Training Data
 Xiang Luo , Chang Liu , Gang Xiong , Gaopeng Gou, Zhen Li, Junzheng Shi, Li Guo, and Binxing Fang

 Abstract—Machine learning (ML) is highly effective for approximately 87% of cyber threats are now delivered over
accurate encrypted malicious traffic identification by using high- encrypted channels in 2024 [2], seriously challenging the
quality training data. In fact, obtaining such data is costly and conventional methods based on plaintext payload analysis
challenging. As a result, many ML-based models are inevitably
trained on low-quality data and perform poorly. To enhance [3]. To address this issue, contemporary research has pivoted
performance, some methods utilize various sample selection tech- toward machine learning (ML) techniques that leverage behavniques to choose confident samples for model training. However, ioral characteristics and side-channel information to develop
they often rely on a single metric for this selection, which restricts effective identification models by supervised-learning [4], [5],
their adaptability across diverse datasets and noise conditions. [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15].
In this paper, we propose a robust framework BAPTISM for
identifying encrypted malicious traffic with low-quality training However, all the mentioned ML-based methods rely on
data. Particularly, BAPTISM selects a suitable base model for high-quality training data. For clarity, in this paper, datasets
each task, and trains it with early stopping to generate traffic with fully accurate labels are termed high-quality data, and
representation before overfitting occurs. Then, we devise an samples with correct labels are termed clean samples. Conadaptive metric selection strategy to select confident samples. By versely, datasets containing mislabeled samples (also referred
employing two metrics (JSD and CSD) to assess the characteristic
of traffic representation from distinct perspectives, we find the to as noisy samples) are considered low-quality data. In
more proper metric for each class and apply it for confident practice, ensuring label correctness in malicious traffic datasets
sample selection. According to the confident samples and selected presents significant challenges. Active annotation methods,
metric for each class, we develop a label correction tactic which which rely on expert knowledge, not only incur high manadapts to class nature to improve the quality of training data. ual costs but also heavily depend on the experts’ personal
Finally, we employ parallel training strategy to train the base
model with the corrected data, further mitigating the impact of interpretation of the data. Moreover, attackers continuously
low-quality data. We conduct experiments across three real-world employ techniques such as encryption and obfuscation to
malicious traffic datasets with various noise settings. The results conceal network traffic characteristics, further complicating
demonstrate that BAPTISM is compatible with different base accurate dataset annotation. On the other hand, passive
models and outperforms across noise ratios ranging from 20% annotation methods, which leverage host-based forensic logs
to 90%. Meanwhile, BAPTISM consistently selects the confident
samples with the highest purity and volume under each setting. and external threat intelligence feeds (e.g., IP blacklists),
 become less reliable over time due to the constantly evolving
 Index Terms—Encrypted malicious traffic, noisy label, low nature of cyber-attacks. Therefore, regardless of the annotation
quality data, intrusion detection, deep learning.
 method employed, noisy samples inevitably arise. As a result,
 I. I NTRODUCTION ML-based methods are inevitably trained on low-quality data,
 leading to performance degradation.
M ALICIOUS network traffic has been implicated in
 numerous security incidents [1], such as data breaches
and extortion, underscoring the critical need for effec-
 To tackle the issue of low-quality training data, various
 approaches have been proposed. The core idea behind these
tive identification methods. Moreover, Zscaler indicates that methods is to first select a subset of samples with highly
 reliable labels (referred to as confident samples) based on
 Received 23 March 2025; revised 19 September 2025; accepted their designed separation metric, or subsequently leverage
16 December 2025. Date of publication 24 December 2025; date of current
version 14 January 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural these samples to improve the overall label quality of the
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62402492. The associate editor dataset before model training. Therefore, these methods can be
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was divided into confidence-based methods [16], [17], [18], [19]
Dr. Li Lu. (Corresponding author: Chang Liu.)
 Xiang Luo, Chang Liu, Gang Xiong, Gaopeng Gou, Zhen Li, Junzheng and feature-based methods [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25]
Shi, and Li Guo are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese based on their separation metrics. Confidence-based methods
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of focus on the local patterns, whereas feature-based methods
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China (e-mail: luoxiang@iie.ac.cn; liuchang@iie.ac.cn; xionggang@iie.ac.cn; consider the global patterns of latent features. Nevertheless,
gougaopeng@iie.ac.cn; lizhen@iie.ac.cn; shijunzheng@iie.ac.cn; guoli@iie. existing methods still face several common issues: (1) These
ac.cn). methods are dependent on specific model architectures and
 Binxing Fang is with Hainan Province Fang Binxing Academician
Workstation, Hainan 571924, China (e-mail: fangbx@cae.cn). cannot be easily adjusted for different identification tasks. (2)
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3648170 These methods typically rely solely on a fixed metric for
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 961

confident sample selection without evaluating its suitability. samples with optimal purity and volume across various
(3) These methods results in a limited number of confident settings.
samples being available for model training, which adversely The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
affects the efficiency. introduces the related work on encrypted malicious traffic
 In this paper, we introduce a novel framework BAPTISM identification. Section III clarifies the problem description.
for encrypted malicious traffic identification with low-quality Section V presents our proposed BAPTISM framework. Sectraining data. BAPTISM operates independently of specific tion VI reports experimental results and analysis. Section IX
model architectures, allowing for choosing an appropriate base discusses the false positives. Section X gives the conclusion.
model for each task. It consists of four coupled components.
First, we implement early representation by using the base II. R ELATED W ORK
model trained with early stopping, generating traffic repre-
 A. Traditional Encrypted Malicious Traffic Identification
sentation before overfitting on noisy samples. Second, we
propose an adaptive metric selection strategy for confident Encrypted malicious traffic hides the plaintext payload,
sample selection in each class instead of using single metric. preventing identification via traditional methods like Deep
In particular, we utilize both Jensen-Shannon Divergence Packet Inspection (DPI) [3]. To solve this problem, a series of
(JSD) and Confidence Sample Distance (CSD) to evaluate methods have been developed, most of them share a similar
traffic representation nature jointly. We assess the separation design that profiles the behavior of encrypted traffic via manual
performance of these two metrics by analyzing the mean and feature engineering or automatic feature extraction and builds
variance of JSD values between sample clusters for each class, a ML-based classifier. For example, Rong et al. [9] propose an
then select the more suitable one and apply for confident ensemble learning-based framework MalFinder for malicious
sample selection. Third, we conduct label correction tailored to traffic detection. They utilize statistical features and sequence
the confident samples and the selected metric for each class, features to describe the traffic while expanding the dimensions
thereby improving the label quality of the training data. In of these two types of features to enhance their capability
addition to utilizing a centroid-based correction approach, we for representing traffic data. Fu et al. [11] propose Whisper
develop a KNN-based correction method specifically designed that utilizes the sequential information of network traffic
for traffic classes where JSD is used for selecting confident represented by the frequency domain features to achieves high
samples, better accommodating their loose distribution in detection accuracy.
latent space. Fourth, we apply parallel training to train a With the development of deep learning technology,
the base model with the corrected data, further reducing the Wang et al. [12] propose a novel intrusion detection system
impact of noisy samples. We initialize two base models with HAST-IDS, which first learns the low-level spatial features
different parameters and train them simultaneously. During of network traffic using deep convolutional neural networks
each training epoch, we dynamically select low-loss samples (CNNs) and then learns high-level temporal features using
and mutually update each other’s parameters. We finally select long short-term memory networks (LSTM). Cai et al. [14]
the better-performing one for identification. propose BiTCN MHSA, which utilizes the multi-head self-
 In summary, our contributions are as follows: attention mechanism to assign different weights to different
 subsequence of network traffic. This makes the model more
 • We propose a novel framework BAPTISM for identifyfocus on the characteristics of malicious network traffic. Hong
 ing encrypted malicious traffic using low-quality training
 et al. [15] propose MalDiscovery which constructs an attribute
 datasets. BAPTISM is independent of specific model
 KNN graph according to the similarity of network traffic feaarchitectures and adapts to different base models for each
 tures to identify malicious traffic. To improve model stability
 task. Moreover, it integrates early stopping and parallel
 and generalization across different network environments and
 training strategies to mitigate the impact of noisy samples.
 time periods, Han et al. [26] propose an encrypted malicious
 • We propose an adaptive metric selection strategy for
 traffic detection approach that combines reconstructive domain
 confident sample selection instead of using only one
 adaptation with adversarial hybrid neural networks, achieving
 metric. We assess the separation performance of JSD and
 effective cross-domain detection in 5G environments.
 the CSD by analyzing the characteristics of the divided
 The effectiveness of these methods relies on the correctness
 clusters, which enables us to select the more proper metric
 of the labels. Thus, the performance of these methods will be
 for each class and effectively filter confident samples.
 seriously affected by the low-quality training data.
 • We introduce a label correction tactic tailored to the
 selected metrics and confident samples to improve dataset
 quality. We establish varying label correction strategies B. Encrypted Malicious Traffic Identification Under
 based on the reliability of the centroids of the confident Low-Quality Training Data
 samples, including directly using the nearest centroid’s Inaccurate labels undermines the training of encrypted
 class or seeking additional nearby confident samples. malicious traffic identification models, resulting in biased
 • We evaluate BAPTISM against various comparison meth- distribution learning. Consequently, numerous research efforts
 ods on different datasets with various noise ratios. are directed towards addressing low-quality data by selecting
 The results show that BAPTISM adapts to different a subset of confident samples for model training. Based on the
 base models and outperforms across all experimen- way to select confident samples, they can be categorized into
 tal settings. Additionally, it effectively selects confident two types: confidence-based and feature-based methods.
962 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF R ELATED W ORK ON E NCRYPTED M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC I DENTIFICATION

 Confidence-based methods address the noisy label problem Selection (whether the method can filter confident samples),
by analyzing the confidence scores of model predictions to Label Correction (whether the method can correct sample
identify confident samples. For example, Wang et al. [16] labels), Fine-grained Identification (whether the method can
propose a consensus algorithm combined with a set of clas- perform fine-grained identification of malicious traffic), and
sifiers to filter noisy labeled traffic data. Furthermore, they Model Agnostic (whether the method is independent of speimprove the performance of noise elimination by estimating cific model architectures). The summary results are shown
the reliability of the remaining training data before it builds in Table I. For methods that do not address noisy samples
a robust traffic classifier [17]. On the other hand, MMCo [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], their performance is
[18] and CMC [19] leverage multi modal information in significantly impacted by low-quality training data. While
heterogeneous networks to detect malicious traffic with noisy other comparative methods [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21],
labels. During training, they identify samples on which the [22], [23], [24], [25] do address noisy samples, they fail to
two networks make divergent predictions, as these samples comprehensively cover sample selection, label correction, and
are considered more informative. Only these high-information fine-grained identification. Moreover, they are dependent on
samples are used for updating model parameters, thereby specific model architectures, which limits their applicability.
enhancing the model’s robustness to noisy samples.
 Feature-based methods comprehensively analyze the dis- III. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION
tribution of latent features to select confident samples. For In this section, we formalize the problem of identifying
instance, ULDC [20] uses unsupervised neural networks to malicious traffic using low-quality training data. Consider a
map samples to a low-dimensional space and the difference of malicious traffic dataset Dtrain = {(xi , ŷi )}i=1
 Ntrain
 used for training,
these low-dimensional embeddings to evaluate the confidence D
 where xi ∈ R represents the i-th malicious network flow, and
of each sample. Yuan et al. propose BoAu [21], which allevi- ŷi ∈ {1, · · · , C} is the observed label associated with xi . For
ates the effect of noisy samples by encouraging the projections each xi , there exists a single latent true label, denoted as yi ,
of hard samples to move closer to the decision center while which may or may not be consistent with the observed label ŷi .
increasing the inter-cluster distance during training. Build- To clarify, we define network flows with correct labels (yi = ŷi )
ing on this idea, they further introduce MCRe [22], which as clean samples, while those with incorrect labels (yi , ŷi )
incorporates three different levels of constraints to achieve are referred to as noisy samples.
robust feature representation and enhance resilience to noisy Our goal is to train a model for the identification of
samples. In addition, Yao et al. propose Gedss [23], which encrypted malicious traffic using Dtrain that contain noisy
employs a JSD-based sample selection strategy combined with samples. The model will then be evaluated on a test dataset
a semi-supervised learning approach to improve model perfor- Dtest = {xi }i=1 Ntest
 to assess its ability to accurately detect
mance in the presence of noisy labels. They further develop malicious traffic.
a novel two-stage framework for malicious traffic detection
[24], which introduces a double-constrained similarity rule to IV. P RELIMINARY A NALYSIS
provide a more comprehensive measure of similarity between To motivate our proposed method, we first conduct a
small-loss samples. Additionally, their method constructs a preliminary study to examine whether confident-based mettopological graph to refine low-quality training data, further ric and distribution-based metrics, which are two types of
improving detection robustness. Meanwhile, RAPIER [25] is common metric have been used to select confident samples
developed to fully utilize the different distribution of normal introduced in Section II. Confident-based metrics (such as
and malicious traffic data in the feature space to augment new Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) and Cross Entropy Loss
data for model training in the case that the amount of training (CE Loss)) capture local differences, while feature-based
data is limited and non-negligible noisy samples exist. metric (such as distance to class centroid) reflect global
 We compare the aforementioned methods with BAPTISM relationships.
across different functional aspects, including Noise Handling We compare two representative baselines: CMC [19], which
(whether the method can address noisy samples), Sample selects confident samples solely based on CE loss, and MCRe
LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 963

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON OF CMC AND MCR E ON S ELECTING C ONFIDENT S AMPLES U NDER N OISE R ATIO OF 40%

Fig. 1. The overall workflow of BAPTISM. In this figure, Confidence represents the confidence-based metrics, Feature metric represents the feature-based
metric, and GMM represents Gaussian Mixture Model.

[22], which relies exclusively on the distance to the class V. M ETHODOLOGY
centroid. To evaluate their effectiveness in confident sample In this paper, we propose a robust framework BAPTISM to
selection, we report three metrics: Precision, the proportion of address the problem of low-quality training data in encrypted
clean samples among the selected ones; Recall, the proportion malicious traffic identification. It consists of four components
of clean samples correctly selected within each class; and as shown in Figure 1. The early representation component
F1, the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall. Experiments uses the appropriate base model trained with early stopping
are conducted on the Malicious TLS, CICIDS-2017, and to generate traffic representation. Next, the confident sample
DoHBrw2020 datasets with a noise ratio of 40%. The results, selection component evaluates the characteristic of traffic
summarized in Table II, demonstrate the sample selection representation based on bi-metrics and selects the more proper
performance of CMC and MCRe for representative malicious one to filter confident samples. Then, the label correction comtraffic classes across different datasets. ponent improves the label quality of training data by applying
 The results reveal that the effectiveness of the two meth- correction tactic tailored to the confident samples and selected
ods varies by class. From the perspective of the overall metric of each class. Finally, the parallel training component
F1 score, CMC achieves clearly better results on certain trains the base model with the corrected data. We introduce
classes such as Caphaw.A None TLS CC and DoS Hulk, each component in detail in the following subsections.
whereas MCRe performs notably better on classes such as
Panda.BZA!tr None TLS CC and Bot. This observation
highlights the complementarity of the two metrics. Looking at A. Early Representation
the individual metrics, CMC generally yields higher Precision, Early representation component aims at selecting the approindicating that the samples it selects tend to have higher purity. priate base model F for each identification task and use
In contrast, MCRe achieves higher Recall in several cases, it to generate the traffic representation for each sample in
suggesting that it is able to retain a larger fraction of clean Dtrain before overfitting occurs with noisy samples. Guided by
samples within each class. empirical evidence suggesting that neural networks prioritize
 In summary, these results demonstrate that confidence-based learning clean patterns before memorizing noisy samples [27],
and feature-based selection strategies emphasize different we implement early stopping during training the base model
aspects of the data, providing complementary strengths. with cross-entropy (CE) loss to prevent overfitting on noisy
964 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 JSD produced by base model F on sample xi is defined as:
    
 1 pi + ŷi 1 pi + ŷi
 JSD(xi ) = KL pi k + KL ŷi k (1)
 2 2 2 2
 where KL(·k·) denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence, and ŷi
 represents the one-hot encoded observed label.
 CSD quantifies the similarity between a sample and its
 observed class centroid. For each class c, we establish its
 confident feature centroid oc by averaging feature vectors of
 confident samples:
 |DcH |
Fig. 2. Cross-Entropy (CE) loss distribution for noisy and clean samples 1 X
 oc = f i, DcH = xi |xi ∈ Dc , pci > τc
 ˚
when training the base model for different epochs on Malicious TLS dataset ˇ ˇ (2)
 ˇD H ˇ
with a noise ratio of 0.4. (a) Stop at epoch 10; (b) Stop at epoch 50; (c) Stop c i=1
at epoch 100.
 where τc serves as the adaptive threshold computed through:
 |Dc |
 1 X
samples. Using the Malicious TLS dataset as an example, τc = wi × pci , wi = max(1, pci /pcc ) (3)
Figure 2 illustrates how early stopping prevents overfitting to |Dc | i=1
noisy samples at a noise ratio of 0.4. At epoch 10, there is a
 Here, pcc = |D1c | x∈Dc pci represents the mean confidence
 P
clear difference in CE loss between noisy and clean samples.
 for class c. The weighting scheme wi prioritizes samples with
As training progresses to epoch 50, the model increasingly
 above-average confidence to enhance cluster purity. During
adapts to the noisy samples, and the density of clean samples
 training, both centroids oc and confident sample set DcH are
with low loss decreases. By epoch 100, some noisy samples
 dynamically updated alongside model parameters.
have a lower CE loss than clean samples, indicating that the
 Finally, the CSD metric for xi is computed as
model has learned incorrect patterns.
 To this end, we restrict the training to a minimal number of fi T oŷi
 CSD(xi ) = cos( f i , oŷi ) = (4)
initial epochs, typically ranging from 10 to 20 epochs. This f i oŷi
ensures that F preliminarily extracts traffic representation from
 This metric measures the cosine similarity between f i and oŷi .
each sample with correct patterns.
 After calculating JSD and CSD for all samples, we employ
 a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to divide the samples in
B. Confident Sample Selection Dc into two clusters based on these two metrics, respectively,
 Based on traffic representation, we select confident samples for each class c in the training data. For example, based on
 1
from each class in this component. This process is conducted JSD, the samples in Dc can be divided into two clusters: C JS Dc
 2
in two stages. In the first stage, we evaluate the characteristics and C JS Dc . Similarly, based on CSD, the samples in Dc can
 1 2
of traffic representations from two perspectives: the confidence be divided into CCS Dc and CCS Dc . For both C JS D and CCS D , we
of the model predictions and the feature distribution of the assume that cluster 1 corresponds to the cluster with the larger
samples, and divide samples per class into two clusters based mean value, while cluster 2 corresponds to the cluster with the
on these evaluations. In the second stage, we individually smaller mean value.
assess the effectiveness of each perspective in separating clean Stage 2: metric and sample selection. Based on the sepaand noisy samples, and select the most suitable one to filter ration results of JSD and CSD, we evaluate their performance
confident samples. and select the more suitable metric to filter confident samples.
 Stage 1: bi-metric evaluation. We utilize JSD and CSD We can simplify this problem by determining whether JSD
metrics to evaluate the traffic representation as they are is the proper metric to separate clean samples from noisy
complementary [28]: JSD is calculated based on prediction samples. To achieve this, we compute the mean and variance
 1 2
scores, which represent local characteristics, whereas CSD of the JSD values within the two clusters CCS Dc and CCS Dc .
considers the distribution of traffic representation, reflecting Specifically, µ1 and σ1 represent the mean and variance of JSD
 Dc , while µ2 and σ2 represent those
 1
global properties. By jointly utilizing both metrics, we are values for samples in CCS
 2 1
able to address the limitation of relying on only one metric, for samples in CCS Dc . Generally, the cluster CCS Dc consists of
ensuring a more effective evaluation of traffic representation samples with high similarity of feature centroids oc , which
from distinct perspective. contains a higher proportion of clean samples, leading to a
 To compute these two metrics, we first partition the training lower mean JSD µ1 . Conversely, CCS 2
 Dc may include more
dataset Dtrain into class-specific subsets Dc = {(x, ŷ)|ŷc = c} noisy samples, resulting in a higher mean JSD µ2 . We present
for each class c, where c = 1, · · · , C, based on the observed different conditions of proper metric selection in Figure 3 and
labels. For each instance (xi , ŷi ) within Dc , we utilize our provide a detailed illustration:
trained base model F to obtain both the traffic representation (1) Condition 1: JSD is the proper metric. If σ1 < σ2 and
vector f i and the corresponding probability distribution pi = µ1 < d < µ2 where d is the separation threshold between
[p1i , p2i , · · · , pCi ]. Here, pij denotes the predicted probability 1
 C JS 2
 Dc and C JS Dc , this indicates the presence of potential clean
 2
that the instance belongs to class j. samples in CCS Dc , which increases the standard deviation of
LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 965

 Fig. 3. Conditions of proper metric selection correspond to sample distribution.

Algorithm 1 Adaptive Metric Selection Strategy
Require: Sample set Dc , initial model F
 1: Obtain pi and f i for each sample xi in Dc .
 2: Compute JSD and CSD value for each sample xi in Dc .
 1 2
 3: Obtain C JS Dc , C JS Dc and separation threshold d by applying GMM with values of JSD to all samples in Dc .
 1 2
 4: Obtain CCS Dc , CCS Dc by applying GMM with values of
 CSD to all samples in Dc .
 5: Calculate the mean µ1 , µ2 , and standard variance σ1 , σ2
 1 2
 of JSD for CCS Dc and CCS Dc .
 6: if σ1 < σ2 and µ1 ≤ d ≤ µ2 then
 7: 1
 Cc1 ← C JS 2 2
 Dc , Cc ← C JS Dc
 8: else if µ1 ≥ d and µ2 ≥ d then
 9: 1
 Cc1 ← C JS 2 2
 Dc , Cc ← C JS Dc
10: else
11: Cc1 ← CCS1 2 2
 Dc , Cc ← CCS Dc
12: end if Fig. 4. Motivation for label correction adapted to confident samples and
 selected metrics for each class.
13: return Cc1 , Cc2

 Dtrain , we first compute their distances to the confident feature
JSD within this cluster. In this case, JSD should be used for centroids oc of each class and identify the closest class c x .
sample partitioning. In addition, if both µ1 > d and µ2 > We show the motivation of our label correction tactic in
d, it suggests that both clusters contain relatively few clean Figure 4. In case 1 of Figure 4, Class 1 and Class 2 utilize the
samples, further supporting the use of JSD.‘ CSD metric to select confident samples, resulting in compact
 (2) Condition 2: CSD is the proper metric. Conversely, distributions in latent space. Consequently, the centroids of
if σ1 ≥ σ2 and µ1 < d < µ2 , this suggests that CCS 1
 Dc these samples effectively represent the data distributions of
contains a significant proportion of potential clean samples, their respective classes. In contrast, Class 3 employs the JSD
and partitioning should be based on CSD. Lastly, if µ1 < d metric for selecting confident samples, leading to a more
and µ2 < d, JSD-based partitioning may result in the loss of dispersed sample distribution and thus, a less reliable centroid.
clean samples, making CSD the preferred criterion. For instance, as shown in case 2 of Figure 4, although
 The overall decision process for confident sample selection Sample 1 is closest to the centroid of Class 3, there are few
is summarized in Algorithm 1. After determining the metric, actual confident samples from Class 3 in its vicinity. Instead,
we obtain two sample clusters, Cc1 and Cc2 . If class c is it is surrounded by numerous confident samples from Class 1,
separated by JSD, Cc2 is selected as the cleaner cluster, denoted prompting us to correct its label to Class 1. On the other hand,
as Dcconf . Otherwise, Cc1 is selected as Dcconf instead. Sample 2 is closest to the centroid of Class 3 and is indeed
 surrounded by a significant number of confident samples from
 Class 3, validating the use of Class 3 for its label correction.
C. Label Correction
 Based on the above motivation, we present a detailed
 After obtaining the confident sample set Dcconf for each label correction process as follows. As depicted in case 1 of
traffic class c, we utilize them to relabel the entire dataset Figure 4, if the confident samples of class c x are selected
to improve label quality. For the remaining samples x in based on metric CSD, it indicates that the feature centroid
966 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Algorithm 2 Parallel Training prediction loss which is defined as
Require: Two base neural networks F1 , F2 with parameters |B| C
 θ1 , θ2 ; training data Dtrain = {(xi , ŷi )}i=1
 N
 ; learning rate η; 1 XX
 Lce (B; F) = − ŷi,c log F(xi ; θ)c
 
 (5)
 batch size Bs ; remember rate function λ(e) |B|
 i=1 c=1
 1: for e in (1, . . ., epochs) do
 where F(xi ; θ)c is the predicted probability of class c from
 2: Shuffle Dtrain and divide into mini-batches
 network F for the input sample xi , and ŷi,c is the corresponding
 3: for n in (1, . . ., t) do
 observed label yi on class c. Finally, we evaluate the identifi-
 4: Fetch n-th mini-batch B = {(xi , ŷi )}i=1 Bs
 cation performance of both models on the corrected data and
 5: Compute per-sample losses:
 select the better one as the final model.
 6: `1 = Lce (B; F1 )
 7: `2 = Lce (B; F2 )
 VI. E XPERIMENT AND E VALUATION
 8: Select small-loss samples:
 9: B1 ← top bλ(e)Bs c samples with smallest `1 A. Experimental Setup
10: B2 ← top bλ(e)Bs c samples with smallest `2 1) Dataset: We use the following datasets for evaluation:
11: Update parameters using opposite model’s selection: • CICIDS-2017 [29] is a widely-used intrusion detection
12: θ1 ← θ1 − η∇θ1 Lce (B2 ; F1 ) dataset that records the network traffic generated by
13: θ2 ← θ2 − η∇θ2 Lce (B1 ; F2 ) hundreds of hosts in an internal network and includes the
14: end for most common attacks such as Web based, Brute force,
15: end for DoS, DDoS, Infiltration, Bot and Scan.
16: return θ1 , θ2 • Malicious TLS [21] is a encrypted malicious traffic
 dataset which contains traffic generated by 22 families
 of malicious code active between 2018 and 2021. In
of c x effectively represents the distribution of network flows. addition, benign TLS traffic is also contained in this
Consequently, the centroid is reliable and we directly reassign dataset. All of this traffic was collected from a real
the label of x to c x . Conversely, if the confident samples of network and was encrypted by TLS.
class c are selected based on metric JSD, the feature centroid • DoHBrw2020 [30] includes normal and malicious DNSof this class may not be sufficiently reliable. As shown in over-HTTPS (DoH) encrypted traffic. The normal traffic
case 2 of Figure 4, we instead search for the top-k confident is generated by querying benign DNS servers using the
samples in the entire confident samples that are closest to x in DoH protocol, including Cloudflare and Google. The
feature space. We then assign x the most frequently occurring malicious DoH traffic is generated by three different DNS
class among these top-k samples. If two classes appear with tunneling tools including dns2tcp, DNSCat2, and Iodine.
equal frequency, we calculate the average distance from x to 2) Noise Settings: We adopt symmetrical noise settings
the confident samples of these two classes and assign x to the to create different experimental scenarios, where malicious
class with the smaller average distance. traffic can be mislabeled as benign while benign traffic can be
 mislabeled as malicious as well. The quality of labels depends
 entirely on the capacity of entities and results in different ratios
D. Parallel Training of noise labels. In short, in symmetric noise scenarios, all
 traffic labels have a certain probability of flipping.
 Using the corrected dataset, we employ parallel training 3) Implementation: We implement our identification systo further mitigate the impact of noisy labels by utilizing a tem and all baseline methods using Python 3.8.13. The
dual-model architecture. This means two distinct base models, libraries used include NumPy 1.22.3, PyTorch 1.12.0, scikitwhich are initialized with the same architecture but different learn 1.1.1, and CUDA 11.8. The models are executed on a
parameters, are trained simultaneously. In the training phase, Linux server equipped with an IntelO R XeonO R Silver 4110
both models receive the same input samples and generates CPU (2.10GHz) and a Tesla V100-PCIE-32GB GPU. We
corresponding predictions. This setup enables the models to provide a detailed description of the choice of the base model
learn from the same data from different perspectives. Each and its parameters in Appendix A. For base model training,
network updates its peer using a subset of small-loss samples the training duration are set at 10 epochs for Malicious TLS
(i.e., those with the lowest prediction losses), which effectively and CICIDS-2017 to avoid overfitting, while the DoHBrw2020
prioritizes clean samples early in training and mitigates the dataset undergoes a longer, 20 epochs training to accommodate
influence of noisy labels. its complex features. d is set to 0.5 in confident sample
 The parallel training process is formally described in selection. k is set as 10 during label correction. Following
Algorithm 2. Let the two base models be denoted as F1 the experimental setup in [22], each testing dataset is split in
and F2 . During training, both models make predictions on a 7:3 ratio. Labels of certain samples in the training set are
all samples in each mini-batch B s and select those with intentionally flipped and used as input for BAPTISM during
low prediction loss for model updates. Parameter λ is used training. Meanwhile, the test set is strictly held out from
to control the ratio of samples for model updates, and this training and does not contain noisy labels, serving exclusively
parameter is decreased monotonically with epoch in the range for model evaluation. To ensure robustness, all experiments are
of [0.5, 0.9]. We utilize the cross-entropy loss Lce to evaluate conducted five times with independently randomized training
LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 967

and testing splits, and the final results are reported as the are then aggregated for label correction and model
average over these five runs. During the parallel training phase, training.
the number of training epochs is set to 200.
 4) Comparison Methods: We compare the performance of B. Evaluation Metrics
BAPTISMs with the following relevant methods.
 We employ precision (PRE), recall (RE), F1 score (F1), and
 • Co-Teaching [27] utilizes dual neural networks to address Macro Accuracy to evaluate the performance of each method.
 low quality training data. Each network selects what it Suppose the training dataset contains C classes of traffic. Let
 considers the most reliable data samples from each batch T Pi , T Ni , FPi , and FNi respectively denote the true positives,
 and shares them with its peer during training. true negatives, false positives, and false negatives for the ith
 • Co-Learning [31] uses multiple learners to handle noisy traffic class (i ∈ {1, · · · , C}). For each class i, precision, recall,
 samples. Each model trains on a subset of the data and and F1 score are calculated as
 shares high confidence predictions with others, which T Pi T Pi
 helps improve accuracy and resistance to noisy samples PREi = , REi =
 T Pi + FPi T Pi + FNi
 by leveraging diverse learner strengths.
 2 × Precisioni × Recalli
 • Co-teaching+ [32] extends the Co-Teaching method by F1i =
 introducing a disagreement-based sample selection mech- Precisioni + Recalli
 anism, allowing two networks to collaboratively learn To mitigate the effects of class imbalance, we employ weighted
 from clean samples while reducing the negative impact averages for precision, recall, and F1 score for evaluation
 of noisy samples, thereby improving model robustness. by weighting each per-class metric according to the class’s
 • DivideMix [33] models the per-sample loss distribution support and normalizing by the total sample size.
 with a Gaussian Mixture Model to distinguish clean Macro Accuracy is obtained by averaging the accuracy of
 and noisy labels, and leverages semi-supervised learning each class, where the per-class accuracy is calculated by
 with MixMatch-based label refinement and augmentation, T Pi + T Ni
 achieving strong robustness against high noise ratios Accuracyi =
 T Pi + T Ni + FPi + FNi
 while enhancing model generalization.
 This metric ensures that equal importance is allocated to each
 • BoAu [21] is a boundary-augmentation based approach
 class of malicious traffic, facilitating a balanced evaluation of
 for malicious traffic identification. It uses all samples
 model performance.
 involved in decision space construction and decision
 boundary calculation, enabling the model to maintain a
 high noise tolerance. C. Comparison Experiment
 • MMCo [18] is a multi-modal co-training approach for We systematically present the precision and recall of all
 malicious traffic detection with noisy labels. It exploits comparison methods under varying noise ratio conditions,
 multiple modalities of traffic data and employs parallel, spanning from 20% to 90%, in Table III. Additionally, we
 heterogeneous networks to leverage complementary infor- illustrate the F1-score and macro-accuracy respectively in
 mation. By maintaining sufficient disagreement between Figures 5 and Figure 6. Here, noise ratio is defined as the
 the networks during training, MMCo mitigates the risk of proportion of mislabeled samples in all training samples. This
 self-confirmation on noisy samples. comprehensive evaluation yields several key observations:
 • CMC [19] is a noisy malicious traffic detection method (1) BAPTISM exhibits superior performance across
 based on cross-modal representation consistency. It intro- all evaluation datasets and noise ratios, demonstrating
 duces a consistency constraint between different modal adaptability to different tasks and experimental settings.
 representations to guide confident sample selection. In Table III, BAPTISM achieves the best precision and recall
 By enforcing agreement across modalities, the method across various datasets and noise ratio settings. Additionally,
 reduces the risk of overfitting to noisy labels and improves the method that performs second best varies under different
 the purity of selected samples. settings, indicating that BAPTISM is robust to various settings.
 • MCRe [22] unifies data cleaning and robust training into This sustained performance advantage can be attributed to the
 an ideal representation function approximation. It defines well-conceived overall design of BAPTISM, where each comthree constraints to let model avoids irrational domain ponent contributes to mitigating the impact of noisy samples.
 knowledge extraction and ensures strong noisy samples (2) The model-agnostic property of BAPTISM enhances
 robustness of the representation network. its scalability and adaptability across various identification
 • RAPIER [25] leverage the difference in distribution scenarios. The three datasets we employ represent different
 between benign and malicious traffic data to find the scenarios: the Malicious TLS dataset primarily focuses on
 potential clean samples and estimate the possible location the communication behaviors of malware; the CICIDS-2017
 of each type of data. To enable a more comprehensive dataset concentrates on flood attacks; and the DoHBrw dataset
 comparison with existing methods, we have extended represents a more challenging tunnel communication scenario.
 this approach to support multi-class classification. This To accommodate these varied contexts, we adopt different
 extension involves performing density analysis and sam- base models for each scenario as mentioned in Appendix A,
 ple selection separately for each class of malicious and achieves the best results across all three datasets. This
 traffic. The confident samples obtained from each class demonstrates the generalizability of BAPTISM in diverse
968 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE III
 T HE P RECISION (PRE) AND R ECALL (RE) OF A LL M ETHODS ON T HREE E VALUATION DATASETS U NDER VARIOUS N OISE R ATIOS (NR)

 Fig. 5. The F1 Score of all methods under different noise ratios on three evaluation datasets.

identification scenarios. Moreover, as evidenced in Table III (4) BAPTISM exhibits exceptional performance in idenand Figure 5, the performance of comparative methods across tifying each class of malicious traffic by employing adaptive
different identification scenarios is impacted by their depen- metric selection strategy for confident sample selection.
dence on specific model architectures. For instance, BoAu and As depicted in Figure 5, across three datasets, BAPTISM
MCRe utilize the MLP-based networks, they perform well on experiences a minimal F1 score degradation of only 0.05 as the
the Malicious TLS and CICIDS-2017 datasets. However, they noise ratio increases from 20% to 90%, demonstrating greater
falter on the more complex DoHBrw dataset, where the MMCo stability compared to other methods. Moreover, it consistently
and CMC surpasses them as they employ more sophisticated outperforms in terms of macro accuracy under various noise
CNN and LSTM network to represent traffic. conditions as shown in Figure 6. Other methods, such as
 (3) The label correction strategy of BAPTISM signif- MCRe, MMCo, and CMC, rely on a single metric to select
icantly enhances the quality of training data, thereby confident samples and maintain relatively stable F1 scores;
improving the model’s performance. Although methods however, their macro accuracy experiences a notable decline as
such as Co-teaching, Co-learning, MMCo, and CMC also noise ratios increase. Such a limitation highlights their reduced
employ similar parallel training approaches, they struggle to adaptability to class-specific characteristics.
effectively mitigate the impact of noisy samples when the noise (5) Compared to RAPIER, BAPTISM effectively utilizes
ratio exceeds 40%, as shown in Figure 5. Furthermore, the the limited label information available in low-quality data
Co-teaching and Co-learning methods even totally lose their to achieve superior performance. RAPIER trains an unsuidentification ability as the noise ratio increases. In contrast, pervised model on packet length sequences labeled as benign
BAPTISM conducts label correction before parallel training, within the training dataset to explore the differences between
which significantly enhances the quality of the dataset. Con- benign and malicious traffic in latent space and to identify
sequently, this results in a model with superior identification confident samples. However, this unsupervised approach not
performance following parallel training across all settings. only overlooks the residual effective label information in
LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 969

 TABLE IV
 T HE A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON M ACRO ACCURACY ON T HREE E VAL -
 UATION DATASETS U NDER VARIOUS N OISE R ATIOS (NR)

 D. Ablation Study
 To demonstrate the effectiveness of each component in
 BAPTISM, we perform three separate ablation analysis experiments. The comparison models are used as follows: (1) Full
 component of BAPTISM (Full); (2) without parallel training
 (w/o PT); (3) without label correction (w/o LC); (4) without
 metric selection and only use CSD to filter clean samples (w/o
 JSD); (5) without metric selection and only use JSD to filter
 clean samples (w/o CSD). Figure 7 shows the F1 score of
 ablation study on three evaluation datasets under each noise
 ratio settings, while Table IV shows the corresponding macro
 accuracy results. We can draw the following conclusions:
 (1) BAPTISM with the full components outperforms other
 comparison models under all experimental settings, showing
 the soundness of our proposed framework. When we remove
 any other component of BAPTISM, the F1 decreases range
 from 0.05 to 0.25 and the macro accuracy decreases range
 from 0.014 to 0.058. This indicates the synergy of adaptive
 metric selection, label correction, and parallel training, which
 collectively enhance the model’s ability to accurately identify
Fig. 6. The Macro Accuracy of all methods under different noise ratios on
three evaluation datasets. malicious traffic despite the presence of noisy samples.
 (2) From the results of BAPTISM without Parallel Training,
 we observe that this training strategy further mitigate the
the training data but is also inherently limited to binary impact of noise samples. When the parallel training component
classification, necessitating further extension to accommodate is removed, the F1 score experiences a decrease ranging from
multi-class scenarios. Moreover, the unsupervised mecha- 0.1 to 0.5, while macro accuracy decreases from 0.02 to
nism struggles to capture complex encrypted communication 0.25. This performance degradation can be attributed to the
patterns, as malware often mimics normal encrypted com- effectiveness of using low-loss samples for model updates, as
munication behaviors. Consequently, it becomes increasingly the corrected dataset still contains a certain number of noisy
ineffective in our experimental setup, particularly under ele- samples which will be discussed in section VI-E.
vated noise conditions, and has difficulty obtaining relatively (3) Excluding Label Correction component results in a perpure confident samples. As a result, since the label correction formance degradation, highlighting a performance bottleneck
module of RAPIER relies on the quality of confident samples, when relying solely on the parallel training to address noisy
its performance is significantly affected when the quality of samples. This underscores the importance of the volume of
these samples is subpar, as shown in Table III and Figure 5. confident samples. Although utilizing parallel training can
970 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 7. The F1 scores of all methods for ablation study under different noise ratios on three evaluation datasets.

partially mitigate the impact of low-quality data, there remains
a macro accuracy gap ranging from 0.037 to 0.152 compared
to the full model, as shown in Table IV. Moreover, this
performance gap widens as the noise ratio increases, further
emphasizing the importance of this component.
 (4) The adaptive metric selection strategy is crucial for
enhancing the model’s robustness. As shown in Table IV,
whether using JSD alone or CSD alone, the model’s macro
accuracy decreases, as each metric has varying effectiveness
in selecting confident samples for different classes of malicious
traffic. This demonstrates the need for metric selection, which
allows for more suitable metric to be chosen for filtering
confident samples, thereby improving the overall performance
of the model. Furthermore, the results in Figure 7 illustrates
that the model performance fluctuates and lacks stability.

E. Performance on Confident Sample Selection
 To further analyze the performance advantages of BAP-
TISM, we also evaluate its effectiveness in confident sample
selection and label correction. Among the comparison methods considered, MMCo, CMC, and RAPIER incorporate a
confident sample selection mechanism. Specifically, MMCo
and CMC utilize these selected samples to update the model, Fig. 8. The purity of confident samples obtained by all comparison methods
whereas RAPIER and our proposed method leverage confident under different noise ratio settings.
samples to refine the labels of the entire dataset.
 We first demonstrate the advantages of BAPTISM in con- noisy samples in their selected confident samples, thereby
fident sample selection. As shown in Figure 8, BAPTISM reducing their negative impact on model training. However,
consistently outperforms all compared methods by selecting they select far fewer confident samples than BAPTISM,
a greater number of clean samples while containing fewer leading to insufficient training and suboptimal performance.
noisy samples. This results in a significant advantage in both This performance gap is particularly pronounced in macro
the quantity and purity of the selected confident samples. accuracy, as certain malicious traffic classes inherently have
Specifically, when the noise ratio ranges from 20% to 70%, fewer samples, and excessive filtering further reduces their
over 90% of the samples selected by BAPTISM are truly clean. representation.
Even when the noise ratio exceeds 70%, although the number Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure 8, the sample purity of
of noisy samples within the selected confident set increases, both MMCo and CMC decreases significantly when the noise
the number of clean samples remains substantially higher than ratio exceeds 70%. This demonstrates that in high noise ratio
that of all comparison methods. settings, the performance of sample selection strategies based
 In contrast, the RAPIER method achieves moderate con- on low loss is limited, which substantially impacts the model
fident sample purity when the noise ratio is below 40%, update stage due to the influence of noisy labels, thereby
but it selects fewer clean samples compared to BAPTISM. degrading overall model performance. Conversely, BAPTISM
Moreover, across different datasets and noise settings, RAPIER utilizes an adaptive metric selection strategy that still manages
consistently includes a considerable number of noisy samples to obtain a sufficient number of confident samples with higher
in its selected samples, and this issue becomes more severe purity even in scenarios with high noise ratios. This capability
as the noise ratio increases. Meanwhile, MMCo and CMC underpins the superior performance of our framework. Regardachieve relatively high overall purity in confident sample selec- ing the RAPIER method, it employs a density-based sample
tion. Compared to RAPIER, these two methods include fewer selection strategy, which is particularly suitable for flood attack
LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 971

 Fig. 9. The correct label ratios after label correction under different noise ratio settings.

scenarios. As evidenced in the CICIDS-2017 dataset, it per- when the noise ratio is below 60%. However, as shown
forms best in sample selection, aligning with its characteristics. across various datasets in Figure 9, there is a noticeable
However, RAPIER’s performance deteriorates when deal- discrepancy between the purity of the confident samples and
ing with more complex encrypted communication behavior their purity after label correction. This indicates that even a
data. This decline is notably apparent in the Malicious TLS lower proportion of noisy labels can be detrimental to the perdataset, where it almost fails at a noise ratio of 90%. formance of machine learning algorithms. With higher noise
 ratios, the accuracy of RAPIER’s label correction sharply
F. Performance on Label Correction declines, nearly rendering the label correction capability ineffective. Moreover, RAPIER almost fails in the case of the
 We further evaluate the model’s performance in label Malicious TLS dataset when the noise ratio exceeds 80%,
correction to demonstrate each model’s capability to refine due to the challenging nature of extracting encrypted comlow-quality training data. We conduct a comparative evaluation munication characteristics. While RAPIER’s design primarily
of BAPTISM and RAPIER, as other comparison methods do relies on analyzing network flow density to detect malicious
not include this process. Given a low-quality training dataset, activity, which is suitable for flood attacks, it lacks sufficient
we apply each method to correct the labels and compute the capability to mine communication characteristics, resulting in
proportion of correctly labeled samples in the refined dataset. sub-optimal performance.
 The label noise correction results are shown in Figure 9.
BAPTISM significantly reduces the original noise ratio to VII. H YPER -PARAMETER S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS
lower levels. Across all noise settings, BAPTISM consis-
 A. Sensitivity to the Threshold d in Confident Sample
tently increases the ratio of correct labels to over 80% on
 Selection
Malicious TLS and CICIDS-2017 datasets. On DoHBrw2020
dataset, BAPTISM improves the ratio of correct labels by 2% We investigated the sensitivity of our framework to the
to 34%. These experimental results demonstrate the robust threshold parameter d used in confident sample selection.
adaptability of our proposed labeling strategy across diverse Intuitively, a larger value of d corresponds to selecting more
datasets and varying noise settings. In contrast, RAPIER samples as confident, while a smaller value enforces a stricter
exhibit a significant decline in label correction performance as criterion and results in fewer selected samples. To analyze
the noise ratio increase. On Malicious TLS dataset, RAPIER its effect, we evaluated three representative settings, d =
almost lose their ability to correct training dataset. 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, across multiple datasets and noise ratios, with
 The factors leading to performance differences between adopted as the default configuration in our framework.
these methods can be attributed to two main aspects: On the The results are summarized in Fig. 10. Across the three
one hand, both BAPTISM and RAPIER rely on the quality settings of d, the overall performance differences remain small,
of confident samples. As observed from the results in the with the maximum variation in F1 not exceeding 0.15. This
previous chapter, when the noise ratio exceeds 60%, the observation shows that the framework is reasonably robust
confident samples selected by RAPIER contain a significant to the choice of d within the range of [0.25, 0.75]. A closer
amount of noisy samples as shown in Figure 8, which greatly inspection reveals several trends. When the noise ratio is below
impacts their purity. This is the fundamental reason for the 50%, setting d = 0.75 sometimes achieves higher performance,
notable performance gap between RAPIER and BAPTISM as a larger threshold allows more clean samples to be utilized
after subsequent label correction phases. On the other hand, for training. However, as the noise ratio increases, the perregarding label correction strategies, RAPIER trains a series of formance of d = 0.75 degrades more rapidly, reflecting the
ML models on the selected confident samples and employs a higher risk of including noisy samples. On the other hand,
voting mechanism for data label correction. The effectiveness d = 0.25 enforces stricter purity by reducing the number of
of this step depends on the purity of the confident samples confident samples, but this conservative strategy often leads to
obtained in the previous step. Since the ML models they suboptimal results, highlighting that the quantity of confident
used do not specifically address noisy samples, their decision- samples is also crucial for robust training.
making results are biased against the actual data distribution,
leading directly to poor outcomes in label correction. B. Sensitivity to the Number of Neighbors k in Label
 We further elucidate the limitations of using machine Correction
learning methods to correct labels. As depicted in Figure 8, we further evaluated k in [1, 5, 10, 15, 20] on all evaluation
RAPIER selects confident samples with relatively high purity datasets. As summarized in Fig 11, the overall performance
972 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 10. The F1 score of different d in confident sample selection.

 Fig. 11. The F1 score of different k in label correction.

of our method remains stable across the range k = 5 ∼ 20, JSD and CSD scores using T EM EM iterations costs O(T EM N)
suggesting that the framework is not highly sensitive to the in total. Finally, computing means and variances of JSD within
exact value of k. the two CSD clusters and applying the selection rules is
 The only consistent degradation appears when k = 1. In this linear in the class size, O(N). Summing all contributions,
case, the model relies on a single neighbor as the reference, the overall time complexity of confident
  sample selection
which makes the estimation unstable and more vulnerable to is O N(|θF | + max{C, D} + T EM ) . The peak memory is
noisy samples. By contrast, when more neighbors are consid- dominated by storing features (N × D), predicted probabilities
ered (e.g., k ≥ 5), the reference distribution becomes smoother (N×C), and class centroids (C×D):S peak = O(ND+NC+CD).
and more representative, leading to reliable label correction.
Beyond k = 10, no persistent significant improvements were B. Label Correction
observed, indicating that moderately small values of k are Given the features and centroids already computed, assignsufficient in practice. This analysis demonstrates that our ing each sample to its nearest class centroid costs O(RCD). For
approach is robust to a wide range of k, and practitioners can the αR samples whose predicted class relies on the fallback
select k within a reasonable interval (e.g., 5 ∼ 20) without mechanism, performing top-k voting over the confident sample
significant performance variation. pool via naive search costs O(αRMconf D). Therefore, the
 overall time complexity is O(RD(C + αMconf )), which in the
 VIII. T HE C OMPLEXITY OF BAPTISM worst case becomes O(N 2 D). The peak memory is dominated
 In this section, we analyze the complexity of BAPTISM. by storing the feature matrix (O(ND)), centroids (O(CD)), and
Let N be the total number of training samples, C the number the confident sample pool (O(Mconf D)).
of classes, D the feature dimension of each sample, |θF | the
 C. Parallel Training
parameter count of the base modelPF, nc the number of
confident samples in class c, Mconf = Cc=1 nc the total number The time complexity of Parallel Training is dominated
of confident samples, R the number of samples to be relabeled by the forward and backward passes of both base models,
(worst-case R = N), α ∈ [0, 1] the fraction of samples that giving O(E · N · |θF |), where E is the number of epochs.
trigger the fallback, E the number of training epochs, and Operations such as mini-batch shuffling and top-k sample
Bs the mini-batch size. The computational cost of BAPTISM selection are negligible compared to gradient computations.
mainly arises from three components. The peak memory usage is O(|θF | + Bs · D), accounting for the
 model parameters and a single mini-batch of feature vectors.
  time complexity of BAPTISM can
 In summary, the total
A. Confident Sample Selection
 be approximated as O N(|θF | + max{C, D} + T EM ) + RD(C +
 First, computing the feature vectors fi and predicted prob- 
abilities pi for all N samples via F requires O(N |θF |). Next, αMconf ) + EN |θF | , with peak memory usage of O(ND +
evaluating the JSD against one-hot labels over C classes costs NC + CD + Mconf D + Bs D + |θF |). In practice, the dominant
O(NC). Constructing class centroids and computing the CSD runtime cost comes from the forward and backward passes
over D-dimensional features costs O(ND). For each class, during Parallel Training, which scales linearly with the number
fitting a 2-component Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) on the of training samples and model parameters.
LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 973

 TABLE V
 T HE PARAMETERS OF THE BASE M ODEL FOR D IFFERENT I DENTIFICATION TASK

Fig. 12. Confusion matrix of BAPTISM on the Malicious TLS dataset
with a noise ratio of 40%. In this figure, the numbers 2 and 3 correspond
to Caphaw.AH and Caphaw.A, while 8 and 9 represent Panda.BZA!tr and
PandaZeusCC. We have marked the severe cases of misclassification with red
boxes.
 Fig. 13. Full confusion matrix of BAPTISM on Malicious TLS Dataset with
 noise ratio of 0.4, where the numbers 2 and 3 correspond to Caphaw.AH and
 Caphaw.A, while 8 and 9 represent Panda.BZA!tr and PandaZeusCC.
 IX. D ISCUSSION
 In this section, we further discuss the limitations of our between these scenarios, demonstrating a common inability
method. First, we conduct a more detailed analysis of the to distinguish these specific classes.
identification performance of each method. We find that all The inability of existing methods to accurately identify
methods trained on low-quality training datasets struggle to these traffic classes stems from the inherent code reuse among
accurately identify malicious traffic classes that belong to the malware variants within the same family, which results in
same family. We illustrate this issue by examining the identi- similar traffic patterns and complicates differentiation, parfication performance of each method on the Malicious TLS ticularly when noisy samples are present. This phenomenon
dataset, which comprises 22 classes of malicious traffic, underscores the limitations of current methods in effectively
under the noise ratio of 40%. Among these, Caphaw.AH and identifying such closely related variants. To address this issue,
Caphaw.A belong to the Caphaw family, while Panda.BZA!tr one potential approach is to initially group these similar
and PandaZeusCC are part of the Panda family. Figure 12 variants into broader families, facilitating more robust clasdisplays the confusion matrices for these four classes of sification and analysis. Alternatively, incorporating additional
malicious traffic for each compared method. Additionally, we expert knowledge could enhance the model’s ability to differpresent the performance of BAPTISM across all classes in entiate between these closely related classes. Further research
Appendix B to better highlight the difficulty of distinguishing is warranted to develop techniques that can effectively mitigate
between malicious traffic from the same family. the impact of code reuse and improve the discrimination of
 As demonstrated in Figure 12, although BAPTISM gen- malware variants within the same family.
erates a relatively high number of false positives between Second, it is worth noting that there exist cases where
these classes, it remains the optimal choice compared to neither the confidence-based metric (JSD) nor the featureother methods. This is because the alternative approaches based metric (CSD) can clearly separate the samples. This
consistently misclassify entire class as other classes. For phenomenon is particularly evident in the DoHBrw2020
instance, methods such as BoAu and RAPIER predominantly dataset. Even with a relatively low noise ratio of 20%, the
misclassify both Panda.BZA!tr and PandaZeusCC, erroneously model’s performance remains lower compared to the other two
categorizing them as other classes. Similarly, MCRe tends to datasets. The main reason lies in the intrinsic characteristics
completely misclassify the classes Caphaw.AH and Caphaw.A. of DoH traffic: it is inherently obfuscated and stealthily
Other comparative methods fail to differentiate accurately encapsulated, which increases the difficulty of distinguishing
974 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

certain classes. Consequently, both JSD and CSD metrics R EFERENCES
may fail to provide a clear separation, leading to potential [1] (Jan. 2024). Malicious Traffic Detection: A Guide for Businesses.
misclassifications. This observation highlights that the fallback Accessed: Mar. 8, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://no7-svip.urlapibehavior of the framework is not a limitation of our approach dodo.me/s?t=b2b8fab84d31c1111e759d6a8c76675f
 [2] Zscaler. Threatlabz-Encrypted-Attacks-Report. Accessed: Jan. 5, 2026.
but rather reflects the inherent challenges posed by certain [Online]. Available: https://www.zscaler.com/campaign/threatlabztypes of network traffic. encrypted-attacks-report
 [3] R. T. El-Maghraby, N. M. A. Elazim, and A. M. Bahaa-Eldin, “A survey
 on deep packet inspection,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Eng. Syst.
 X. C ONCLUSION (ICCES), Dec. 2017, pp. 188–197.
 In this paper, we propose a robust framework, BAPTISM, to [4] P. Prasse, L. Machlica, T. Pevný, J. Havelka, and T. Scheffer, “Malware
 detection by analysing encrypted network traffic with neural networks,”
identify encrypted malicious traffic using low-quality training in Proc. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discovery Databases, Eur. Conf., Skopje,
data. This framework is independent of model architecture and Macedonia, Sep. 2017, pp. 73–88.
adaptable to various settings. Specifically, we implement early [5] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
 traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
representation for training data by training an appropriate base in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
model with early stopping to generate traffic representation. Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
Instead of relying on single metric, we employ bi-metric, [6] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation
JSD and CSD, to analyze traffic representation characteristics learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
from distinct perspectives. We then design an adaptive metric [7] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
selection strategy to identify the more proper metric for each network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions
 Defenses, Oct. 2022, pp. 495–509.
class, applying it to select confident samples. Based on the [8] Z. Wang and V. L. L. Thing, “Feature mining for encrypted maliconfident samples and selected metric for each class of traffic, cious traffic detection with deep learning and other machine learning
we perform label correction adapt to class nature to improve algorithms,” Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103143.
 [9] C. Rong, G. Gou, M. Cui, G. Xiong, Z. Li, and L. Guo, “MalFinder:
the quality of training data. Additionally, we implement a An ensemble learning-based framework for malicious traffic detection,”
parallel training strategy to train the base model with the in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jul. 2020, p. 7.
corrected data, thus mitigating the impact of remaining noisy [10] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
samples. Experimental results demonstrate that BAPTISM Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
can adapt to different base models and surpass others under [11] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
various noise ratio settings. Furthermore, it consistently selects robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
 no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
confident samples with the highest purity and volume across [12] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial–temporal
different experimental settings. features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,”
 IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018.
 [13] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq:
 A PPENDIX A A channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic
 PARAMETERS OF BASE M ODELS detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025,
 2023.
 Referring to the previous research [18], [19], [20], [21], [14] S. Cai, H. Xu, M. Liu, Z. Chen, and G. Zhang, “A malicious network
[22], we employ a MLP as the base model for identification traffic detection model based on bidirectional temporal convolutional
 network with multi-head self-attention mechanism,” Comput. Secur.,
tasks on the Malicious TLS and CICIDS-2017 datasets. For vol. 136, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 103580.
DoHBrw2020 dataset, we utilize a CNN as the base model. [15] Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang, and M. Shen, “Graph based encrypted
We provide the detailed list of parameters for base models malicious traffic detection with hybrid analysis of multi-view features,”
used in BAPTISM in Table V, where ‘input dim’ denotes Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119229.
 [16] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Luo, and D. Xia, “Robust traffic
the dimensionality of the original features in the dataset, while classification with mislabelled training samples,” in Proc. IEEE 21st
‘num class’ indicates the number of classes included in the Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst. (ICPADS), Dec. 2015, pp. 328–335.
dataset. [17] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Xiang, and D. Xia, “Noiseresistant statistical traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5,
 no. 4, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2019.
 A PPENDIX B [18] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, and Y. Wang, “MMCo: Using multimodal
 deep learning to detect malicious traffic with noisy labels,” Frontiers
 F ULL R ESULT OF C ONFUSION M ATRIX OF BAPTISM Comput. Sci., vol. 18, no. 1, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 181809.
 ON M ALICIOUS TLS DATASET [19] Q. Yuan, W. Niu, Y. Wang, G. Gou, and B. Lu, “Malicious traffic
 detection with noise labels based on cross-modal consistency,” IEEE
 We present a full confusion matrix from BAPTISM on the Netw. Lett., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 148–151, Jun. 2024.
Malicious TLS dataset under noise ratio of 0.4 to illustrate [20] Q. Yuan et al., “ULDC: Unsupervised learning-based data cleaning
the sources of false positives, as shown in the Figure 13. for malicious traffic with high noise,” Comput. J., vol. 67, no. 3,
 pp. 976–987, Apr. 2024.
As mentioned in the Discussion section, the false positives [21] Q. Yuan et al., “BoAu: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels based
generated by BAPTISM primarily arise from traffic classes on boundary augmentation,” Comput. Secur., vol. 131, Aug. 2023, Art.
which belongs to the same family. In contrast, false positives no. 103300.
 [22] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, and Y. Wang, “MCRe:
are significantly less frequent for other classes of malicious A unified framework for handling malicious traffic with noise labels
traffic. This indicates that BAPTISM can effectively capture based on multidimensional constraint representation,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
the distinct patterns between different classes of malicious Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 133–147, 2024.
 [23] L. Yao, A. Hou, W. Niu, Q. Yuan, J. He, and Y. Zhang, “Gedss: A
traffic under low-quality training data. However, for classes generic framework to enhance model robustness for intrusion detection
belonging to the same family, additional information is needed on noisy data,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperat.
for effective identification. Work Design (CSCWD), May 2024, pp. 1645–1650.
LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 975

[24] L. Yao, W. Niu, Q. Yuan, B. Li, Y. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “A robust Gaopeng Gou received the B.Eng., M.Eng., and
 malicious traffic detection framework with low-quality labeled data,” in Ph.D. degrees from Beihang University, China, in
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2024, pp. 2719–2724. 2005, 2008, and 2014, respectively. He is currently
[25] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? A robust framework for a Full Professor and the Ph.D. Supervisor with
 detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
 Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2024. Academy of Sciences, China. His research interests
[26] G. Han, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Ma, and T. Yang, “AI-based malicious include network security and anomaly detection.
 encrypted traffic detection in 5G data collection and secure sharing,”
 Electronics, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 51, Dec. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
 www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/14/1/51
[27] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks
 with extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 vol. 31, 2018, pp. 8527–8537.
[28] Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, B. Han, Y.-M. Cheung, and H. Wang, “Label-noise
 learning with intrinsically long-tailed data,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 1369–1378. Zhen Li received the B.Eng. degree from
[29] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating Shandong University, China, in 2009, the M.S.
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” degree from the Institute of Computing Technology,
 ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, May 2018. Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, in 2012, and
[30] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari, the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Information
 “Detection of DoH tunnels using time-series classification of Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2020.
 encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Depend. Auton. His research interests include encrypted network
 Secure Comput. Int. Conf. Pervasive Intell. Comput. Int. Conf. behavior analysis and network measurement.
 Cloud Big Data Comput. Int. Conf. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr.
 (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Jun. 2020, pp. 63–70.
[31] C. Tan, J. Xia, L. Wu, and S. Z. Li, “Co-learning: Learning from noisy
 labels with self-supervision,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
 Oct. 2021, pp. 1405–1413.
[32] X. Yu, B. Han, J. Yao, G. Niu, I. W. Tsang, and M. Sugiyama, “How does
 disagreement help generalization against label corruption?,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 7164–7173. Junzheng Shi received the M.Eng. degree from
[33] J. Li, S. C. H. Hoi, and R. Socher, “DivideMix: Learning with noisy Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunicalabels as semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn. tions, China, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree from the
 Represent., Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Apr. 2020. [Online]. Available: University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2021.
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJgExaVtwr He is currently a Senior Researcher with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy
 of Sciences, China. His research interests include
 Xiang Luo received the B.S. degree from the Uni- network measurement and behavior analysis.
 versity of Science and Technology Beijing, China, in
 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
 the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
 Academy of Sciences. His research interests include
 network traffic analysis and intrusion detection.

 Li Guo is currently a Full Professor and the Ph.D.
 Supervisor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. She
 is also the Director of the Institute of Information
 Chang Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
 Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her
 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2020.
 research interests include data stream management
 She is currently a Senior Engineer with the Institute
 systems and data mining.
 of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
 Sciences. Her research interests include network
 traffic analysis and information security.

 Gang Xiong is currently a Full Professor and the Binxing Fang received the M.Eng. degree from
 Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute of Information Tsinghua University, China, in 1984, and the Ph.D.
 Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has degree from Harbin Institute of Technology, China,
 authored more than 110 papers in refereed journals in 1989. He is currently a member of Chinese
 and conference proceedings. His research interests Academy of Engineering and the Chief Scientist of
 include cyber security, network measurement, net- China Electronics Corporation. His research interests
 work traffic analysis, and network forensics. include network attack and defense, cyber security,
 and cloud computing security.