2270 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Blockchain Meets Adaptive Honeypots: A
 Trust-Aware Approach to Next-Gen IoT Security
 Yazan Otoum , Senior Member, IEEE, Arghavan Asad, and Amiya Nayak , Life Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Edge computing-based Next-Generation Wireless vulnerabilities [2]. Traditional intrusion detection and preven-
Networks (NGWN)-IoT offer enhanced bandwidth capacity for tion mechanisms often fall short in providing robust security,
large-scale service provisioning, but remain vulnerable to evolving as adversaries continually evolve their attack strategies [3].
cyber threats. Existing intrusion detection and prevention meth-
 Securing NGWN-enabled IoT networks from evolving cyber
ods struggle to counter dynamically evolving cyber threats, as
they often rely on static signatures or isolated anomaly detection threats is a crucial challenge [4], [5], where existing security
techniques. These approaches lack adaptability to novel attack measures struggle to keep pace with dynamic attack patterns,
vectors, exhibit high false negative rates, and fail to integrate real- underscoring the need for a resilient and adaptable framework.
time threat intelligence, leaving NGWN-IoT systems vulnerable Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are fundamental to securing
to sophisticated adversaries. We propose a dynamic approach to IoT networks, employing methods categorized as Signaturedetect and prevent attacks. First, blockchain-based authentication based IDS (SIDS) and Anomaly-based IDS (AIDS). While SIDS
utilizes the Deoxys Authentication Algorithm (DAA) to verify the are effective at detecting known threats by comparing incoming
legitimacy of IoT devices before data transmission. Next, a bi-stage
intrusion detection system is introduced, where the first stage traffic to predefined attack signatures, they are unable to identify
utilizes signature-based detection via an Improved Random Forest novel or previously unknown attacks [6]. Conversely, AIDS
(IRF) algorithm. In contrast, the second stage applies feature-based analyze various traffic features to detect anomalies, yet their
anomaly detection using a Diffusion Convolution Recurrent Neu- generalization capabilities and computational efficiency remain
ral Network (DCRNN). To ensure Quality of Service (QoS) and limited [7]. Advanced techniques, such as deep learning-based
maintain Service Level Agreements (SLA), trust-aware service anomaly detection, have shown promise [8], but relying solely
migration is performed using Heap-Based Optimization (HBO). on network flow features remains inadequate [9]. Furthermore,
Additionally, on-demand virtual High-Interaction honeypots deceive attackers and extract attack patterns, which are securely current IDS approaches face challenges in achieving real-time
stored using the Bimodal Lattice Signature Scheme (BLISS) to detection while minimizing false positives and maintaining
enhance signature-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS). The adaptability to evolving threats [10], [11]. Blockchain technolproposed framework is implemented in the NS3 simulation envi- ogy has emerged as a potential solution to enhance security in
ronment and evaluated against existing methods across multiple IoT environments, providing tamper-resistant and decentralized
performance metrics, including accuracy, attack detection rate, trust management [12]. Despite its benefits, blockchain-based
false negative rate, precision, recall, ROC curve, memory usage, IDS solutions often encounter challenges related to computa-
CPU usage, and execution time. Experimental results demonstrate
that the framework significantly outperforms existing approaches, tional overhead, transaction latency, and scalability in resourcereinforcing the security of NGWN-enabled IoT ecosystems. constrained settings [13], [14]. Additionally, deploying multiple
 monitoring entities increases the complexity of security man-
 Index Terms—Blockchain, adaptive honeypots, IoT security, agement [15]. Honeypots have proven effective as deception
intrusion prevention, trust-aware networks, next generation IDS. mechanisms to attract attackers and analyze attack patterns [16];
 however, static honeypots or those lacking adaptive features
 I. INTRODUCTION
 fail to address emerging threats. Game-theoretic models for
 HE rapid growth of IoT applications has been significantly
T driven by advancements in Next-Generation Wireless Networks (NGWN). These networks enable efficient large-scale
 attack detection [17] also have limitations, as they often assume
 perfect knowledge of attacker strategies, which is impractical in
 real-world scenarios. Despite numerous advancements, NGWNservice provisioning through technologies such as Mobile Edge enabled IoT networks continue to face significant security chal-
Computing (MEC), which improves computational efficiency lenges, including latency issues due to centralized processing,
by processing data closer to users [1]. However, the increasing high false alarm rates from anomaly detection models trained
connectivity and integration of IoT devices within NGWN en- on insufficient data, and a lack of adaptive defence mechavironments have also introduced a wide array of cybersecurity nisms to counter dynamic attack strategies. Addressing these
 challenges necessitates a more resilient, adaptive, and efficient
 Received 29 May 2025; revised 21 August 2025; accepted 15 September 2025. security framework tailored to the unique demands of NGWN-
Date of publication 18 September 2025; date of current version 11 December based IoT systems. To address the evolving challenges in IoT
2025. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Liehuang Zhu. (Corresponding security, we propose a trust-aware framework that integrates
author: Yazan Otoum.)
 Yazan Otoum and Arghavan Asad are with the School of Computer Science blockchain-based authentication, advanced intrusion detection,
and Technology, Algoma University, Sault Ste. Marie, ON P6A 2G4, Canada and dynamic honeypot deception to support real-time threat
(e-mail: otoum@algomau.ca). mitigation with low computational overhead. Our system em-
 Amiya Nayak is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada.
 ploys the Deoxys Authentication Algorithm (DAA) [18] for
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3611954 secure device legitimacy verification, the Improved Random
 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2271

Forest (IRF) [19] for robust and accurate intrusion classification single security parameter for key generation, which is insuffiusing adaptive entropy-variance feature selection, and the Dif- cient for security; hence, attackers can easily compromise it,
fusion Convolution Recurrent Neural Network (DCRNN) [20] resulting in poor security. A multi-tenant autonomic framework
for modelling spatial-temporal traffic behaviour in distributed for securing NGWNs was presented in [22], targeting automated
IoT networks. These components are integrated into a tightly intrusion detection across distributed network segments. The
orchestrated architecture, where detection, prediction, trust man- architecture encompasses radio access, edge computing, core
agement, and service migration operate in a dynamic feedback network, and interdomain layers. By modelling dynamic NGWN
loop. DCRNN-based traffic forecasting informs the Hierarchical traffic, the system employs a layered IDS, separating the data
Blockchain Offloading (HBO) module’s node selection, while and management planes to enhance control granularity. Intrusion
real-time trust scores are updated via the BLISS module. This detection is autonomously executed via coordinated agents,
cohesive, adaptive design enables scalable, context-aware, and including flow controllers, action enforcers, decision-makers,
resilient threat defence tailored for NGWN-enabled IoT environ- and security monitors. Security monitoring agents classify traffic
ments. Our research advances the state of IoT security through in real-time and trigger alerts for decision modules to enforce apthe following key contributions: propriate countermeasures. The framework effectively mitigates
 r A blockchain-based authentication mechanism that en- large-scale threats such as UDP flooding and DDoS attacks. An
 sures the legitimacy of IoT devices and prevents imper- intrusion mitigation technique for mitigating attacks in the IoT
 sonation attacks using the DAA. environment was proposed in [23]. The authentication of the user
 r A bi-stage intrusion detection framework that combines is carried out to allow only legitimate users to participate in data
 IRF-based SIDS with DCRNN-based AIDS, improving transmission. Furthermore, an ongoing traffic analysis was condetection accuracy while maintaining efficiency. ducted based on packet flow features. This work undergoes three
 r A moving target defence strategy that dynamically mi- stages in which the log files of the authenticated entity are examgrates services to trusted edge nodes based on trust evalu- ined to detect attacks caused by bots. Then, the attacker was deation, mitigating the risk of service compromise. tected by analyzing the typical pattern of attack, thereby isolating
 r A deployment of high-interaction, on-demand virtual hon- the attacker from the network. An encryption-based approach for
 eypots to deceive attackers, extract attack signatures, and secure data collection, storage and access in cloud-assisted IoT
 enhance IDS training using securely stored attack patterns. was proposed in [24]. The issues in the proper management of
 The proposed approach is implemented and evaluated data in cloud storage were addressed. The IoT sensors were used
 in the NS3 simulation environment, demonstrating a 25% for periodic data acquisition from the environment and stored
improvement in detection accuracy, a 30% reduction in false in cloud storage. Here, the attacker in the network was able
negatives, and enhanced resource efficiency compared to exist- to compromise data to exploit its integrity. For this purpose,
ing methods. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the authors proposed a Conditional Identity-based Broadcast
Section II provides a comprehensive literature review of existing Proxy Re-encryption (CIBRE) to maintain the confidentiality
intrusion detection and prevention mechanisms. Section III out- of the data. The re-encryption of data was also provided to
lines the problem statement and research challenges. Section IV ensure the integrity of the cloud data each time it was decrypted.
presents the proposed model methodology in detail. Section V Identity-based encryption was implemented to safeguard the
discusses the experimental setup and performance evaluation. confidentiality of data, but entities such as cloud storage can
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and outlines directions be compromised by malicious attackers, resulting in a single
for future work. point of failure. A practical framework for detecting intrusions
 in the IoT based on a real-time dataset was proposed in [25]. The
 II. LITERATURE SURVEY possibility of attacks on several aspects of the IoT network was
 described, and the necessity of an effective intrusion detection
 This section surveys recent advancements in IDS for NGWNsystem was demonstrated. The effect of the dataset’s quality
enabled IoT environments, organizing them into four key cateon the performance of IDS was evaluated to design a real-time
gories: AI-enhanced IDS, Blockchain-assisted IDS, Honeypotdataset. The proposed dataset consisted of data obtained from
orchestrated IDS, and LLM-driven IDS.
 various IoT nodes, which contained attack patterns of known
 attacks. Some of the attacks considered in this approach were
A. AI-Enhanced IDS
 flooding, black holes, and selective forwarding attacks. Thereby,
 An intrusion detection and prevention system for NC-assisted the users were able to obtain the dataset to perform efficient
mobile small cells was proposed in [21]. Initially, the nodes intrusion detection. Several known attacks were identified using
divide the message into a sequence of packets. The proposed the real-time dataset; however, the extracted features for idenwork consists of four steps; the first is the tag generation process, tification were insufficient to detect other complex intrusions.
which calculates the tag value for every coded packet. The A deep learning method for detecting network anomalies by
second one is the swapping process, which avoids tag pollution extracting features from the network traffic in NGWN networks
attacks from coded packets by having the source node swap the was proposed in [26]. The proposed architecture has four comtag and coded packets. The third one is the key distribution pro- ponents: virtual infrastructure, virtualized network functions,
cess, where the maximum number of key vectors is assigned to management and orchestration, and operations and business
every intermediate and destination node. Finally, the verification support systems. Initially, the network flow is collected from the
process verifies the swapped coded packets. During verification, user equipment. From the network flow, features are extracted by
if the result equals zero, the packet will be sent to the next level; a feature vector. Based on the extracted features, the anomaly
otherwise, it will be dropped. However, this approach uses a symptoms are detected and sent to the LSTM for recognition
2272 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

of the anomaly patterns. The simulation result shows that the in [33]. The system model comprises three main entities: trusted
proposed system achieves high performance in terms of anomaly authority, industrial agents and cloud servers. The industrial
detection accuracy. This approach takes only flow-based features agents represent the industrial administrators responsible for
for anomaly detection, thus reducing classification accuracy. It improving the intrusion detection system. The trusted authority
takes all the packets as input, increasing the process’s latency and was responsible for key generation to authenticate both the cloud
complexity. A machine learning algorithm for detecting network server and industrial agents. The threat model, which comprises
anomalies in a 5 G network was proposed in [27]. The data are several significant threats, including command injection attacks,
pre-processed to enhance detection accuracy. The features are response injection attacks, reconnaissance attacks, and DoS
extracted from the pre-processed data. The Weibull distribution attacks, was explained. A deep-fed scheme was proposed, which
is used to select features from Normal traffic. The Convolutional comprised the integration of a CNN and a Gated Recurrent Unit
Neural Network (CNN), designed using the NAS method, is (GRU)- based intrusion detection system, along with a secure
employed to classify anomalies based on specific features. The communication protocol based on the Pallier cryptosystem.
proposed work achieves high accuracy and low latency by optimizing the neural network in the 5 G network. A hybrid machine
 B. Blockchain-Assisted IDS
learning technique (Decision Trees, Support Vector Machines,
and Neural Networks) was proposed in [28] to enhance detection Multi-agent assisted IDS in IoT environment using
accuracy and robustness against various types of abnormal or Blockchain technology was proposed in [34]. Three operations
malicious activities in IoT. Various training methodologies for were used in this paper: data collection, data management, and
AI-based IDS, proposed in [29], highlighted the importance data response. To test the proposed work, the NSL-KDD dataset
of selecting appropriate datasets, feature selection techniques, is used to detect attacks from the transport layer. For attack
and model training processes to enhance IoT accuracy and detection purposes, the NSL-KDD dataset is utilized, and the
efficiency. The paper discussed deployment strategies, including agents employed for intrusion detection are as follows: comthe integration of IDS into IoT networks, real-time monitoring munication agent, response agent, collection agent, host agent,
capabilities, and the scalability of AI models to handle the detection agent, and training agent. Based on the attack infordynamic nature of IoT environments. An intrusion detection mation, the database is trained for the network. However, the
system for an IoT environment using an improved BP neural deployment of a larger number of agents increased the network
network was proposed in [30]. The proposed system used the complexity. The computational overhead for running all these
LM-BP algorithm for intrusion detection. Initially, the data are agents over the blockchain increases transaction verification
collected from the data source. From the collected data, features and hash generation times. A three-layer security framework
are extracted using the proposed neural network. Here, the neural combining AI-based intrusion detection, blockchain for decennetwork was divided into two sections; one section was used to tralized trust, and edge computing for resource efficiency was
optimize the connection weight value, and another was used to proposed in [35]. Machine learning enhances anomaly detection,
optimize the learning rate, which adjusts dynamically to improve while blockchain ensures data integrity and edge computing
the detection rate. It was used to detect intrusion behaviour from reduces latency. Optimization techniques improved detection
the extracted features. After detecting the intrusions, the neural accuracy (94.2% to 94.78%), reduced response time (14.98%),
network was updated. The proposed system detected DoS, R2L, and lowered energy consumption (12.01%). Game theory and
U2L and probing attacks using the KDD CUP 99 dataset. How- differential equations were used to model adversarial interacever, in this approach, only particular attacks were detected, tions and system behaviour, demonstrating the framework’s
and the prevention of these attacks was not investigated, which scalability and suitability for real-time, resource-constrained IoT
affects the overall security of the system. A practical security environments. A distributed IDS deployed at the fog layer was
approach for cloud storage based on an encryption mechanism proposed in [36], addressing the scalability and complexity of
was proposed in [31]. Initially, the data in the dataset was IoT security. The system integrates game theory and Generanormalized to improve accuracy by removing unwanted data tive Adversarial Networks (GANs) for traffic balancing, and
and processing missing data. Then, the grey-level co-occurrence employs the Jellyfish Search optimizer with opposition-based
matrix algorithm was implemented to extract the significant learning for feature selection. Ensemble learning across fog
features from which attacks were classified using a CNN-based nodes is achieved using MLP, Random Forest, and XGBoost,
classifier. The security of the data was ensured by adopting a with feature vectors securely exchanged via blockchain. The
honeypot-based cryptographic algorithm, which is responsible framework, termed EJSO, demonstrates high accuracy and rofor encrypting or decrypting data. The gateway-based detection bustness on NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15 datasets, achieving
of network intrusions was presented in [32]. Generally, it needs over 99% accuracy and outperforming traditional methods such
a scalable dataset which enables the addition of new attacks as LSTM and GA+SVM in both attack detection and dimensionin various settings. Dynamic features were considered on the ality reduction. A recent study [37] introduced a hybrid intrugateway to extract normal and abnormal classification features. sion detection framework that integrates blockchain technology
It avoids considering static features related to the environment; with deep learning and metaheuristic optimization to enhance
instead, it focuses on features such as packet flow, timing security in cloud environments. The proposed Blockchain-based
involved in the traffic flow, and data flow statistics over a specific African Buffalo (BbAB) scheme combines a Recurrent Neural
time interval. Since Passban was an anomaly-based IDS, it could Network (RNN) with African Buffalo Optimization (ABO) to
be trained while observing the target system’s network traffic in a continuously monitor and detect intrusions based on user benormal state. An intrusion detection scheme in industrial cyber- haviour and malware patterns. To ensure data confidentiality,
physical systems based on federated deep learning was proposed the system employs Identity-Based Encryption (IBE) to encrypt
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2273

normal and malicious user data, which is then securely stored on study in [43] leveraged the BPF-Extended Tracking Honeypot
a blockchain ledger hosted in the cloud. The RNN component (BETH) dataset for anomaly detection in kernel-level processes
is optimized by ABO during the prediction phase, enabling and network logs. The authors proposed an enhanced Isolation
adaptive and accurate threat identification. Experimental results Forest (iForest) model within a structured detection framework,
demonstrated superior performance across multiple evaluation achieving an AUROC of 0.917 and minimizing false positives.
metrics, including a detection accuracy of 99.87% and a recall of The symmetry-aware design significantly improved detection
99.92%, outperforming conventional models. This work high- accuracy and resilience. This approach emphasizes the role of
lights the potential of combining blockchain, deep learning, and low-level honeypot data in improving IDS robustness against
bio-inspired optimization to achieve high detection fidelity and evolving threats. However, only honeypot-based intrusion derobust data protection in distributed cloud-based systems. tection in the ICPS cannot mitigate all attacks that threaten the
 system’s security. Existing works primarily focus on isolated
 aspects of IoT security, such as blockchain-based authentica-
C. Honeypot-Orchestrated IDS
 tion [44] or static honeypot deployment [45]. However, these
 The honeypot-based analysis of cybersecurity attacks was approaches often lack integration, which limits their adaptability
proposed in [38]. Cybersecurity threats are identified to de- to dynamic threat landscapes. In contrast, our framework sitect and mitigate the behaviours of web services. Information multaneously addresses authentication robustness and adaptive
Collected from the data included IP address, domain name, threat detection by incorporating blockchain for secure identity
username, password, and geographic location of the attacker. management and dynamic honeypot orchestration for real-time
Due to the centralized environment, it was complex to identify defence [46]. This dual-layered security strategy offers a novel
and attract attackers. Honeypot technology is used to mimic integration that was absent in prior studies, providing enhanced
real-time systems and detect attacks. Finally, a log file report is resilience against evolving cyber threats.
generated for the collected data and stored in the cloud servers.
An approach for detecting malicious users using a file-based
deception technique was proposed in [39]. A hidden interface D. LLM-Driven IDS
was established for legitimate users, which malicious users The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) has catcannot access. The system files are divided into three types: alyzed a new wave of research in intelligent IDS, offering caparegular files, fake files, and sensitive files. The regular files and bilities that extend beyond conventional ML and DL approaches.
fake files are accessible from both the regular interface and In [47], the authors introduce HuntGPT. This hybrid framework
the hidden interface. The sensitive files were accessible only to integrates GPT-3.5 Turbo with traditional classifiers such as
legitimate users who communicated through a hidden interface. Random Forests and explainable AI tools (e.g., SHAP, LIME)
The honeypot-based deception technique was implemented, in to enhance the interpretability of anomaly alerts in cybersewhich the malicious users were attracted to attack the honey files, curity operations. Additionally, the study presents SecGPT—
which are referred to as fake files, from which the behaviour of an LLM-powered penetration testing agent built atop a GAN
attackers, including their resources, was identified to improve architecture—capable of generating dynamic attack profiles and
the security of the sensitive files. An efficient approach for supporting continuous IDS retraining. The findings demonstrate
learning the attack strategies using a honeypot-based deception that even with minimal fine-tuning, LLMs can significantly
strategy for industrial cyber-physical systems was proposed boost the transparency, adaptability, and scalability of modern
in [40]. Here, the attack strategies of attackers after identifying IDS solutions. Complementing this direction, the study in [48]
the honeypot were studied to provide overall security to the highlights LLMs as a natural progression in the evolution of
ICPS. The application of advanced analytics techniques to the IDS, emphasizing their capacity to process large-scale network
data gathered from honeypots, aiming to identify and understand logs autonomously, adapt to shifting traffic behaviour, and disemerging threat patterns in IoT environments, was proposed tinguish between benign and malicious activity in real-time.
in [41]. Here, a machine learning model is used to analyze Through targeted fine-tuning on networking-specific datasets,
the behaviour of attackers captured by honeypots and identify the authors report improved contextual inference and detection
subtle, previously unseen anomalies that may signal new or accuracy. Furthermore, the dual utility of LLMs in both precievolving attack strategies. An edge-assisted ensemble learning sion detection and autonomous decision-making is emphasized,
model within the honey-block framework was proposed in [42] while also acknowledging operational challenges such as into proactively identify and mitigate potential security breaches terpretability and deployment on resource-constrained devices.
for intrusion detection in IoT. This framework combines the In a parallel effort, the authors of [49] propose a lightweight,
power of edge computing and ensemble learning to create a more LLM-based IDS framework specifically designed for real-time
secure environment for IoT systems. By aggregating predictions intrusion detection in IoT environments. By fine-tuning domainfrom various models, ensemble methods reduce the likelihood specific LLMs on datasets such as IoT-23 and TON_IoT, the
of false positives and enhance the system’s ability to detect framework achieved high accuracy in anomaly detection and
complex, previously unknown attacks. A hybrid game-theoretic- supported context-aware mitigation strategies. Deployed in a
based approach was implemented, and the players had different modular Docker-based architecture, the system demonstrated
objectives. The two-player game was proposed with attack- substantial improvements in detection latency, accuracy, and
ers as one player and ICPS defenders as another player. The resource efficiency over conventional IDS methods, highlightone-shot signalling model was developed. The perfect Bayesian ing its suitability for scalable and autonomous security enequilibrium-based probability was calculated for the successful forcement in constrained IoT scenarios. Similarly, the work
defence against all the attacks provided by the attackers. A recent in [50] presents a dynamic intrusion detection architecture that
2274 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

employs a transformer-based encoder coupled with a Gaus- (RFID)-based schemes, where the credentials of each entity are
sian Mixture Model. This hybrid model achieves 100% re- registered, and a public address is generated [58]. Lightweight
call on known threats while effectively identifying previously authentication is typically achieved using bitwise exclusive OR
unseen attack types, maintaining a classification accuracy of functions. However, these methods have inherent weaknesses.
95.6%. The adaptive learning mechanism allows the system The reliance on a single credential, such as an RFID tag, comto refine its threat recognition over time, offering robust and promises security as attackers can manipulate or spoof the RFID.
scalable protection in evolving network environments. Further Moreover, these systems are inherently incapable of detecting
advancing the state of LLM-powered security, the work [51] novel or previously unknown attacks, thus increasing the risk
introduces IDS-Agent—an LLM-driven, tool-augmented au- of unauthorized access and escalating cyber threats in IoT envitonomous agent for intrusion detection. IDS-Agent combines ronments. Intrusion detection in cloud-based IoT systems also
reasoning over state observations with an action-oriented work- encounters several limitations. Game-theoretic models for inflow encompassing data preprocessing, classification, memory trusion detection and prevention have been proposed, where the
and knowledge retrieval, and aggregation. The system’s archi- risk level of virtual machines is calculated, and honeypot-based
tecture supports customizable detection sensitivity and explain- attack pattern analysis is performed [59]. Although these models
ability, and its memory-enhanced design allows for improved incorporate various intrusion detection strategies, such as SIDS,
contextual learning. Experimental validation on ACI-IoT and AIDS, and honeypot-based IDS [60], [61], they still present
CIC-IoT benchmarks revealed F1-scores of 0.97 and 0.75, several challenges. Centralizing the detection process within a
respectively, along with a 0.61 recall in detecting zero-day cloud environment increases the risk of a single point of failure,
attacks, outperforming several state-of-the-art baselines. This which can compromise the entire system if the cloud server is
approach exemplifies the shift toward intelligent, explainable, attacked. Furthermore, as the number of attacks increases, the
and resilient IDS solutions that can address both known and complexity and latency of these game-theoretic models escalate,
unknown threats in heterogeneous IoT networks. Additionally, limiting their scalability and responsiveness in dynamic IoT
a recent study [52] proposed a novel LLM-based agent focused scenarios. Honeypot-based intrusion detection techniques, deon generating and generalizing IDS rules to counter the rising spite their potential, often suffer from practical implementation
complexity of cyberattacks targeting digital services and IoT challenges. Approaches focusing on rule-based detection of
infrastructure. The agent ingests multi-source inputs—including malicious behaviour are usually inadequate, as they assume that
vulnerability security reports, malicious traffic logs, and original attackers remain unaware of the honeypots’ presence [62]. When
IDS rules—to generate new detection rules capable of identify- attackers recognize and bypass honeypots, the system’s security
ing both direct and variant forms of malicious behaviour. This is compromised, rendering the honeypots ineffective. Moreover,
approach addresses the limitations of traditional rule-based and using low-interaction honeypots in some frameworks fails to
AI-driven IDS systems, particularly in terms of interpretability collect comprehensive attack patterns, leading to insufficient
and throughput under high-traffic conditions. Experimental eval- intrusion detection [63]. Additionally, the log files generated
uation demonstrated that the LLM-generated rules significantly from these honeypots, stored on local servers, can be targeted and
outperformed conventional methods across multiple detection altered by attackers, undermining the integrity of the collected
metrics, highlighting the agent’s potential for enhancing rule- data. Given these challenges, there is a pressing need for a
based detection in dynamic, high-speed environments. A recent more robust and adaptive framework capable of addressing the
comprehensive survey [53] highlights the growing reliance on limitations of existing models. The proposed approach intro-
AI-driven approaches for enhancing IDS in IoT environments, duces a comprehensive framework integrating blockchain-based
emphasizing their potential to reduce false positives and adapt authentication with adaptive intrusion detection mechanisms.
to evolving threats. It categorizes state-of-the-art techniques, By utilizing immutable attributes such as PUF, device ID, and
datasets, and evaluation metrics, while identifying key chal- MAC address, the framework ensures high security against idenlenges, such as computational complexity and high false positive tity spoofing. Furthermore, the dual-stage IDS combines SIDS
rates, and calls for lightweight, efficient IDS models tailored for and AIDS to detect known and unknown threats effectively,
resource-constrained IoT devices. Table I summarizes existing while dynamic honeypot deployment facilitates the ongoing
approaches, highlighting their objectives, methodologies and analysis of evolving attack strategies. Service migration is hanassociated disadvantages. dled through edge computing nodes, which optimize resource
 allocation and minimize latency, thereby maintaining the quality
 of service and meeting service-level agreement requirements.
 III. PROBLEM STATEMENT The integration of high-interaction virtual honeypots not only
 The proliferation of NGWN-enabled IoT environments has deceives attackers but also securely logs their behaviour patterns
introduced significant challenges in detecting and mitigating cy- using encrypted storage, which subsequently improves IDS
berattacks [55]. While several existing approaches address secu- training. This holistic approach addresses the identified gaps,
rity concerns, they often exhibit critical limitations, leaving IoT offering a resilient and scalable solution for NGWN-enabled IoT
systems vulnerable to sophisticated and evolving threats. This environments. Table II outlines the core features and operational
section outlines the key shortcomings in current methodologies distinctions of blockchain and honeypot technologies. Motivated
and presents the motivation for the proposed approach. Ensuring by their complementary strengths, our proposed framework
the legitimacy of IoT devices remains a fundamental challenge integrates a blockchain-assisted honeypot strategy within the
in safeguarding NGWN-IoT environments [56], [57]. A standard IDS architecture to enhance intrusion detection and prevention
authentication method relies on Radio Frequency Identification capabilities in NGWN-enabled IoT environments.
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2275

 TABLE I
 SUMMARY OF EXISTING RESEARCH APPROACHES
2276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE II TABLE III
 FEATURES OF BLOCKCHAIN AND HONEYPOT TABLE OF NOTATIONS

 IV. PROPOSED MODEL
 The model aims to strengthen intrusion detection and prevention in IoT environments by integrating honeypots and
blockchain technologies. This integration ensures robust security and privacy for both IoT devices and users by leveraging advanced detection mechanisms and dynamic response strategies.

A. Experimental Setup
 To evaluate the proposed model’s performance and clarify the
scope of implementation, simulation, and conceptual modules,
we revised the experimental setup as follows:
 r Blockchain-based Authentication: Modelled using the
 DAA to verify IoT device legitimacy before data transmission. This was implemented using a lightweight Proof-of-
 Authority (PoA) consensus mechanism, which simulates
 decentralized identity validation with minimal latency.
 This approach ensures tamper-resistant trust propagation
 without introducing the computational overhead of public
 blockchain systems.
 r Bi-stage IDS: Fully implemented. The first stage utilizes
 the IRF classifier for detecting known attacks based on labelled patterns from the CICIDS-2017 dataset. The second
 stage employs a Diffusion Convolutional Recurrent Neural
 Network (DCRNN) for anomaly detection and identifying
 unknown attacks.
 r Dynamic Honeypot Deployment: Simulated using Dockerbased containerized environments representing highinteraction honeypots. These simulated honeypots were timestamps, and packet sizes, was parsed into packet traces and
 designed to log attacker behaviour, capture malicious pay- injected into the NS3 simulation using a custom traffic generator
 loads, and redirect suspicious traffic for further analysis. module. This enabled us to preserve the statistical characteristics
 Though not deployed on physical hardware, their function- of real-world attack patterns without synthetically generating
 ality was emulated within the NS3 simulation to support them within the simulator. The containerized honeypots were
 evaluation of threat interaction logging and IDS retraining. triggered during attack events and logged details of the attacker’s
 r Trust-Aware Service Migration: Implemented in simula- interaction. These logs contributed to the continuous retraining
 tion using the HBO module. Migration decisions were and enhancement of the IDS system. Finally, the blockchainguided by predicted node load (informed by DCRNN based authentication module relied on the Practical Byzantine
 forecasts), CPU availability, and dynamically adjusted trust Fault Tolerance (PBFT) consensus algorithm, chosen for its effiscores from the BLISS component. ciency and low overhead in environments with a limited number
 Fig. 1 illustrates the system topology and conceptual flow of of validators. This provided tamper-proof identity verification
the proposed approach. All notations and parameters used in this and secure dissemination of blacklist updates, ensuring reliapaper are listed in Table III. The simulation was conducted using bility under adversarial conditions while maintaining resource
the NS3 environment to model the communication topology, net- efficiency suitable for IoT deployments.
work behaviour, and service orchestration under realistic IoT and
NGWN scenarios. Evaluation metrics included attack detection
rate, accuracy, false negative rate, CPU usage, memory usage, B. System Model
and execution time. To emulate attack traffic, the CICIDS-2017 The system model comprises a set of IoT devices D =
dataset was integrated via a data preprocessing and traffic replay {D1 , D2 , . . ., Dn } from which the data are generated and sent
pipeline. Raw network traffic data, including IP addresses, ports, to the cloud server for processing and storage purposes. The IoT
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2277

Fig. 1. System topology and conceptual flow of the proposed approach.

environment consists of a set of IoT users U = {U1 , U2 , . . ., Un } secure service provisioning in the IoT environment are described
who request service from the cloud server. The proposed IDS is as follows.
deployed between the IoT devices and the cloud server to filter
data packets from the devices via the 5G Base Station (BS). The
 C. Blockchain-Based IoT Authentication
edge layer comprises a global edge server (GE) and a set of local
edge servers LE = {LE1 , LE2 , . . ., LEn } which are placed at In an IoT environment, all the devices are connected to
the edge of the network to provide services to the IoT users with the internet to share their data. Due to the sharing of large
optimal quality of service, quality of service SLA requirements. amounts of data over the internet, the IoT environment faces
The attackers in the system are considered on both the IoT device security challenges. To ensure the legitimacy of the IoT nodes,
side and the user side, who attempt to affect the provisioning of we perform authentication. Initially, all IoT devices and users
legitimate services to users. On the IoT devices side, the attackers register their information, such as PUF, Device ID (Dv − ID),
deploy a malicious device or compromise legitimate devices to User ID(U r − ID), and MAC address with the Key Generator
generate malicious packets. On the other hand, attackers on the (KG) integrated with blockchain. The user provides all four
user side attempt to compromise the user’s device or directly parameters, whereas the IoT devices provide three parameters
access local edge servers to affect the provisioning of services. except U r − ID. The KG then provides a secret key (Kpr )
The processes involved in the proposed approach to perform to the respective devices and users by utilizing DAA, which
2278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Algorithm 1: Authentication Process.

Fig. 2. Block format.

is stored in the blockchain. Once registration is complete, the
respective IoT devices and users become part of the network.
The purpose of DAA is to provide authentication with less time
consumption. During packet transmission and request generation, the devices and users generate a tag (ktg ) and encrypt the
ktg using the encryption key EN (ktg ). The generation of tags
provides more security during authentication. The transaction
consisting of (Kpr ), EN (ktg ), key lifetime (kL ), and current D. Intrusion Detection System
timestamp, along with the message and request, is submitted
to the blockchain. The blockchain verifies transactions using The intrusion detection system is used to detect attacks perthe consensus mechanism. During consensus, the blockchain formed through compromised devices in the environment. This
nodes verify whether the submitted credentials match those improves the security of the IoT environment. In our work, we
of the registered ones. If the consensus is achieved and the perform two types of intrusion detection, such as
transaction is verified, the new block is mined, and the respec- 1) Signature-Based Intrusion Detection: It detects known
tive transaction is recorded in the blockchain. By doing so, attacks that have already been trained and stored in the database.
the legitimacy of the IoT devices and users is verified before It sends the data to perform intrusion detection. First, we detect
taking part in transmission. Only authenticated IoT devices signature-based intrusion detection using the IRF. The IRF
can send data through a 5G gateway. While blockchain offers enhances classical Random Forest by adaptively selecting and
decentralized trust and tamper-resistant logging, it is not immune prioritizing the most relevant features for intrusion detection.
to adversarial threats, particularly in distributed IoT environ- It employs a hybrid entropy-variance scoring mechanism to
ments. Potential attacks include Sybil attacks, where adversaries reorder features and dynamically adjusts the number of trees
create multiple fake identities to manipulate trust scores; smart to maximize classification accuracy while reducing model comcontract exploitation, which can alter the trust scoring logic or plexity. For our implementation, the IRF was configured with
data access rules; and trust poisoning, where seemingly benign 100 decision trees, each with a maximum depth of 20. An inforbehaviour is used to distort trust metrics gradually. To address mation gain cutoff guided feature selection thresholds, and the
these threats, our framework incorporates lightweight identity Gini impurity criterion was used for node splitting. The model
validation based on node credentials and behavioural history, was trained using an 80/20 stratified train-test split to ensure a
dynamic trust score adaptation through the BLISS module that balanced evaluation. This approach ensures efficient and accuaccounts for both short- and long-term activity, and multi-source rate detection of known threats with minimal redundancy. The
consensus validation to ensure only behaviour corroborated by detailed derivation of the IRF optimization process is provided
multiple monitors is committed to the blockchain. These design below for reproducibility and clarity of implementation. The
elements collectively strengthen the system’s resilience and forest Θ0 is initially grown with Z0 number of trees and feature
ensure the reliability of trust decisions under adversarial con- vector ς0 (.). The ranking of features is executed based on the
ditions. Although traditional authentication mechanisms offer respective weight of the features, which can be computed as:
lower overhead, they often rely on centralized authorities, which  T T
 ∀T W (k) · ∂
 
can become single points of failure in dynamic, large-scale IoT w(k) = (1)
networks. Our framework leverages a lightweight, permissioned
 T
 max ∀T W (k) · ∂ T
 k
blockchain not for heavy consensus or monetary transactions,
 T
but to ensure tamper-resistant trust management, decentralized where W (k) represents the weight of feature k with respect
identity verification, and secure propagation of blacklist updates. to tree T , and ∂ T denotes the overall weight of tree T . From
By adopting efficient consensus protocols such as PBFT or Raft, the ranked list of features, the important features h0 are selected
the system minimizes computational burden while maintaining and grouped into a pool of important features denoted as Δ.
integrity across distributed nodes. The Pseudo code for the Similarly, the pool of unimportant features is denoted by Δ . The
proposed blockchain-based authentication process is provided mean and standard deviation of the weights of features in Δ are
in Algorithm 1. The structure of the generated block in the represented as α0 and β0 , respectively. Let Rf0 be the number
blockchain is illustrated in Fig. 2. The description of each field of features in Δ whose weights are less than (α0 − 2β0 ). These
is provided in the figure. features Rf0 are further removed from Δ to form a refined
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2279

 Algorithm 2: Improved Random Forest Algorithm. the traffic data. The DCRNN module captures these spatiotemporal patterns within the network graph to forecast node-level
 traffic behaviour and anomalies. It integrates graph diffusion
 operations with Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) to model the
 dynamic nature of distributed IoT traffic. In our implementation,
 DCRNN is configured with two diffusion convolution layers,
 each followed by a GRU layer with 64 hidden units. The diffusion step is set to 2, and the model is trained for 50 epochs
 using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. A batch
 size of 32 is used, and dropout regularization with a rate of
 0.3 is applied to mitigate overfitting. The adjacency matrix is
 dynamically updated based on observed traffic correlations. This
 configuration enables the accurate forecasting of traffic surges
 and anomalous patterns, thereby enhancing the system’s ability
 to respond proactively to evolving threats. The proposed neural
 network features a series connection of a CNN and a GRU.
 The CNN acts as a feature extractor, extracting all the features
 of the packets through the convolution and pooling layers. The
 extracted features are then provided to the GRU to analyze the
 temporal dependency between the features, thereby achieving
 improved classification accuracy. Initially, the local features of
 the packets can be extracted and converted into feature vectors.
 These vectors are then rescaled from 0 to 255 to be converted
 into images of U × V pixels, where U represents the number
 of columns, and V represents the number of rows, respectively.
 The CNN model utilized in our approach extracts the features
feature set ς1 (·) = ς0 (·) − Rf0 . The condition for including a from the images as formulated below:
feature k from Δ into Δ can then be formulated as:
 Il − kr + 2Q
 w(k) ≥ min w(j), k ∈ Δ (2) Il = +1 (7)
 j∈Δ SK
 If a feature is important, it cannot be removed. The number of where Il represents the input image length, Q refers to the
important and unimportant features can be expressed as h and g number of zeros, and Kr refers to the size of the kernel. The
from which the variation of important and unimportant features stride of the kernel is represented as SK. The output of the CNN
can be computed as: is fed to the GRU, which possesses two gates, namely, the update
 gate and the reset gate, that work as follows:
 δh = Δn+1 − Δn (3)
 δg = Δn+1 − Δn (4) ct = λ (wc · [It−1 , yt ] + yt ) ,

 The number of trees to be added to the existing number of bt = λ (wb · [It−1 , yt ]) ,
trees in the forest to improve the accuracy can be computed as: It = tanh (w · [bt · It−1 , yt ]) ,
  
  l(pu δh + pg δg)  It = (1 − ct ) · It−1 + ct · It .
 |δZ| ≤  
  (5) (8)
 g
 where
where l is expressed as:
 1
 l = ZMav P Mav −1 (1 − P Mav )Z−1 (6) λ= (9)
 1 + e−t
where P < 1, Mav is the average number of nodes in a tree, 1 − e−2t
and pu , pg represent the probability of a good split concerning tanh(t) = (10)
 1 + e−2t
u and g. The IRF classifies the data into three classes: normal,
malicious, and suspicious. This is done by computing the simi- where the input features are represented by y. The It , ct replarity between the features of the incoming packet and the feature resent the update parameters respectively. The weight function
set of known attacks. From the classified packets, the malicious is represented as w, and the activation function utilized for the
packets are denied, and suspicious packets are sent to the next flow of sequences is represented as tanh and λ, respectively. The
phase of intrusion detection. The Pseudocode for the proposed relationship between spatial and temporal features is determined
IRF-based SIDS is provided in Algorithm 2. with the help of sequence vectors, which are fed into fully
 2) Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection: DCRNN is em- connected and softmax layers for classifying the packet. If the
ployed to detect unknown attacks in the IoT environment by packet is classified as malicious, then it will be dropped, and
classifying suspicious packets as either normal or malicious the normal packets will be sent to the cloud. Fig. 3 shows the
while accounting for both spatial and temporal dependencies in DCRNN-based detection of suspicious packets.
2280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 3. Detection of suspicious packets using the DCRNN-based method.

Fig. 4. Trust-based service migration and virtual honeypot deployment for intrusion prevention.

E. Trust Value Evaluation and Virtual Honeypot Deployment 1) Trust Value Calculation: In this model, we proposed two
 types of edge servers: a global edge server and a local edge
 In this section, we implement a honeypot-based attack prevention mechanism that utilizes trust computation for efficient ser- server. The global edge server is responsible for managing the
vice provisioning in the network. Fig. 4 illustrates the trust-based local edge servers. The local edge server collects the user service
migration of services and the deployment of virtual honeypots requests. Then, we calculate the trust value for the edge server
for intrusion prevention.
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2281

 TABLE IV configurations supports reproducibility and ensures clarity re-
 CONFIGURATION SUMMARY OF CORE COMPONENTS
 garding how each module contributes to system performance.
 The following details provide the complete formulation of
 the fitness function, the heap construction process, and the corresponding selection criteria. The input parameters are defined
 as follows:
 r CPU Resource availability: CPU resource availability
 RACP U is defined as the summation of the number of
 currently running tasks running on the edge server, and the
 tasks are provided to the available server based on the user
 request. It is denoted as:
 n
 
 RACP U = Ei T i (12)
 i=1
as follows: r Load: The load (L) represents the number of user tasks
 τ (LE) = Inτ ± (1 − Inτ )Xϑ (11) waiting (Tw ) to be processed by the edge server relative to
 the available CPU resources (RACP U ).
where Inτ and ϑ denote the initial trust value and degree of RACP U
change in trust value of the edge servers, respectively, based on L= (13)
 Tw
the change in the degree of trust value, the trust value will be
 Based on the above input descriptions, HBO is performed.
dynamically adjusted to increase or decrease.
 HBO is an optimization algorithm for finding the optimal path
 2) Live Migration: After calculating the trust value τ (LE)
 shown in Algorithm 3. Here, the objective of HBO is to find
of the local edge servers, the global edge server computes
 the H (τ (LE)) based on maximizing CPU resource utilization,
the threshold value τT H (LE) based on the average of all
 maximizing trust value, and minimizing load. The construction
trust values of the local edge servers. The nodes that possess
 of an optimal heap requires a Search Agent (SA), which includes
τ (LE) ≥ τT H (LE) are classified as high-trusted local servers,
 a Fitness Value (FV) that serves as the key for the heap nodes
denoted as H(τ (LE)), while nodes with τ (LE) < τT H (LE)
 and an index (I) that stores the corresponding values for these
are classified as low-trusted local edge servers, denoted as
 nodes. The SA is calculated based on the no. of LEs which are
L(τ (LE)). The L(τ (LE)) nodes are vulnerable to attacks, and
 present in the IoT environment, and it is denoted as:
to ensure uninterrupted service to users, we implement live
 ⎡ DIM ⎤
migration using a moving target defence strategy. This approach SA1 SADIM
 2 · · · SADIM
 M
enables the migration of running services from L(τ (LE)) to ⎢ .. .. .. .. ⎥
a suitable H(τ (LE)). The selected H(τ (LE)) must have a ⎣ . . . . ⎦ (14)
 DIM DIM DIM
system configuration similar to that of L(τ (LE)). To determine SAN SAN −1 · · · SAM
an appropriate H(τ (LE)) with the same system configuration
 where N denotes the number of SA, and DIM denotes the coras L(τ (LE)), we propose a Heap-Based Optimization (HBO)
 responding dimensions. A F V is calculated based on RACP U ,
method that considers CPU resource availability, trust value, and
 τ (LE), L for each LE servers which is denoted as:
system load.
 HBO selects the most suitable edge node for service migration F V = {F V (LE1 ), F V (LE2 ), . . . , F V (LEn )} (15)
by evaluating a composite score that considers trust level, CPU
 Based on the number of search agents (SA), the fitness values
availability, and system load. These scores are organized in
 (F V ), and the corresponding index values (I), the calculations
a hierarchical heap structure to ensure that services are miare performed. The index (I) represents the value of the heap
grated to reliable and resource-efficient nodes while maintaining
 node based on the availability of CPU resources (RACP U ), the
low overhead. In our implementation, the heap is initialized
 trust level (τ (LE)), and the system load (L). The average fitness
with a fixed capacity of 50 candidate nodes, and the fitness
 value (AV GF V ) is computed based on the objective conditions.
function is weighted with parameters α = 0.4, β = 0.3, and
 If any node satisfies all the objective conditions during the
γ = 0.3 corresponding to trust, CPU, and load, respectively. The
 computation of AV GF V , it is assigned as the root node (Rn ) at
heap is dynamically updated at fixed intervals of 10 simulation
 depth level d = 0. Subsequently, for corresponding depth levels
steps, and node selection occurs once the convergence threshd = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n, branch nodes (Bn ) are assigned dynamically
old (no score improvement over three consecutive iterations)
 based on system conditions (i.e., trust level, CPU availability,
is met. A max-heap is used to prioritize higher composite
 and load). For root node calculation, we have:
scores, ensuring efficient selection with O(log n) complexity.
Table IV summarizes the core configuration parameters used in Rn = high RACPU , if d = 0 (16)
implementing the key components of our framework. For each
module, IRF, DCRNN, and HBO, we detail the most relevant For branch node allocation at increasing depths:
hyperparameters, architectural choices, and operational logic. ⎧
 ⎪
 ⎨H(τ (LE)) ≥ τT H (LE), d = 1
These settings were selected through empirical tuning to strike
a balance between accuracy, computational efficiency, and rel- Bn (d) = Llow , d=2 (17)
 ⎪
 ⎩B (d − 1) > B (d),
evance to NGWN-enabled IoT environments. Providing these n n d = 3, 4, . . . , n
2282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Algorithm 3: Heap-Based Optimization. Algorithm 4: BLISS Signature Generation.

 are deployed, misleading attackers into targeting the honeypots
 instead of the legitimate LEs. Once an attack is detected on a
 honeypot, its signature is recorded in a log file Lf and encrypted
 using the BLISS algorithm. The attack pattern, denoted as ω,
 captures various attacker behaviours targeting the honeypot.
 The verification function G and signature generation function
 For corresponding depth levels d = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n, branch H process the attack signature, where (S, F ) represents the
nodes (Bn ) are assigned progressively in a hierarchical manner generated signature and the challenge vector for computing
based on trust level, load, and CPU availability. The root node the hash function. The sample vector d is derived from an
(Rn ) is initialized at d = 0, and as depth increases, branch n-dimensional Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation
nodes are dynamically selected based on system conditions. To σ, ensuring randomness in signature generation. A random bit
maintain hierarchical ordering: re ∈ {0, 1} is selected, and a shift vector Kc is applied to finalize
 Bn (d) < Rn , for all d ≥ 1 (18) the signature. The resulting S is encrypted using BLISS and
 securely stored in the log file.
 For building a heap Rn , branch nodes based on d levels are
denoted as: F = H(ω) // Compute hash of attack pattern
 ⎧
 ⎪
 ⎨Rn ≥ highRACP U , τ (LE), L, d = 0 d ∼ Nσn // Sample from Gaussian distribution
 H(LE) = Bn (1) < Rn , d=1 (19) re ∈ {0, 1}
 ⎪
 ⎩B (n) < B (n − 1), d = n // Generate random bit
 n n
 S = d + re Kc // Generate attack signature
 After heap construction based on AV GF V , the services from
L(τ (LE)) are migrated to heaps of H(LE) based on heaps Lf = Encrypt(S, F ) // Encrypt and store in log file (20)
arranged hierarchically.
 3) Virtual Honeypot Deployment: During live migration, vir- V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
tual honeypots with the same system configuration as the Lo- This section deals with the simulation of the proposed apcal Edge Servers (LEs) are deployed to attract attackers and proach. Its performance is validated by comparing it with exprevent the compromise of LEs. These honeypots detect at- isting approaches. This section is divided into four subsections,
tack signatures and store them in log files, which are then namely, simulation setup, dataset description, comparative analsecurely stored in the database. To enhance security, the Bi- ysis, and research summary, which are presented below.
modal Lattice Signature Scheme (BLISS) algorithm is employed
for encryption, as shown in Algorithm 4. BLISS is a digital
 A. Simulation Setup
signature scheme that uses a public key for verification and a
private key for signature generation. The primary objective is The simulation tool used for implementing the proposed
to encrypt log files containing attack signatures before storing approach is NS3.26, in which IDS detection, AIDS detection,
them in the database. During migration, attackers might attempt virtual honeypot deployment and attack signature patterns are
to compromise H(τ (LE)). To counter this, virtual honeypots successfully verified. Table V shows the system configuration
(HP1 , HP2 , HP3 , . . . , HPn ), configured identically to the LEs for attaining the simulation. Table VI shows the simulation
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2283

 TABLE V
 SYSTEM CONFIGURATION

 TABLE VI
 SIMULATION CONFIGURATION

 Fig. 5. Comparison of attack detection rate between the proposed method and
 existing approaches concerning the number of attacks.

 we adapted it to our 5G-based NS-3 simulation by replaying
 traffic through a multi-tier edge architecture, thereby approximating next-generation network conditions such as service
 migration and resource constraints. To address the limitations in
 NGWN-specific realism, future work will focus on augmenting
 the evaluation with custom traffic profiles that emulate 5 G/IoT
 traffic dynamics, including mobility-induced patterns, URLLC,
 and edge-centric service flows. This dataset contains both current and historical benign (Normal traffic) and attack (anomaly
 traffic) types, including DoS, DDoS, Web-based, Heartbleed,
 Infiltration, Scan, and Bot. Based on parameters such as source
 and destination ports, source and destination IP addresses, and
 timestamps, network traffic was analyzed using a CIC flow meter
 and labelled in a CSV file. At that time of implementation, data
 can be separated into training data and test data. The training data
 contains 157,722 packets, among which 137,626 are labelled as
 Normal (benign) and 20,076 are labelled as attacks. The test
 data includes 66,834 packets. Among that, 54,284 are labelled
 as Normal, and 12,540 are labelled as attacks. The records of
 the attacks are stored in a comma-separated values (CSV) file.

 B. Comparative Analysis
 The validation of the proposed approach is presented in this
 sub-section, in which our approach is compared with the existing
 approaches such as RADDS [59] and GTM-Csec [60] using
 several performance metrics such as accuracy, attack detection
 rate, false negative rate, precision, recall, ROC curve, memory
 usage, CPU usage, and execution time.
 1) Impact of Attack Detection Rate: The attack detection rate
 of any system is defined as the rate at which attack packets
 are detected from the overall packets. It must be high so that
 the system is secure in any environment; if any system has a
 low attack detection rate, it will lead to severe security threats.
configuration for the proposed approach. In our proposed ap- Compared to the baseline methods illustrated in Fig. 5, our
proach, the dataset used is CICIDS-2017, which is designed proposed framework achieves a higher attack detection rate
explicitly for IDS and AIS. We selected the CICIDS-2017 of 96.5%, outperforming existing VM-based and physically
dataset for its comprehensive coverage of diverse attack types deployed honeypot approaches, which report rates of 92% and
and well-labelled traffic flows, which are essential for evaluating 89.7%, respectively. Unlike prior works that rely on static asintrusion detection performance in a reproducible manner. While sumptions about attacker strategies and lack dynamic pattern
the dataset was not originally tailored for NGWN environments, collection, our system leverages virtual honeypots to log and
2284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Fig. 8. Comparison of precision between the proposed method and existing
Fig. 6. Comparison of accuracy between the proposed method and existing approaches concerning the number of attacks.
approaches concerning the number of attacks.

Fig. 7. Comparison of the false negative rate between the proposed model and Fig. 9. Comparison of recall rates between the proposed method and existing
existing approaches. approaches concerning the number of attacks.

encrypt attack behaviours for retraining the SIDS module, en- 92.7% and 90%. This improvement stems from the integration
abling proactive threat detection. This integration leads to a 4.5% of IDS techniques with virtual honeypots, enabling the accurate
to 7.2% improvement in detection rate under increasing attack identification of attacks through real-time collection of attack
volumes. patterns. In contrast, prior works rely on static assumptions of
 2) Impact of Accuracy: Accuracy is critical for effectively known attack patterns, limiting precision. Our method achieves
identifying and classifying cyberattacks. As shown in Fig. 6, a precision gain of 5.2% to 7%, highlighting its effectiveness in
our model achieves a detection accuracy of 97%, significantly minimizing false alarms.
outperforming game-theoretic baselines, which report 89% 5) Impact of Recall: Recall reflects the system’s ability to
and 84%, respectively. This improvement is attributed to the identify actual attacks, especially under increasing threat vol-
DCRNN module’s ability to capture both spatial and temporal umes, accurately. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the proposed framepatterns in network traffic. Moreover, the false negative rate, work achieves a recall rate of 96%, compared to 92% and
illustrated in Fig. 7, remains low at 4.5% for 25 concurrent 90.5% in existing approaches. This improvement is driven by
attacks, compared to 7.6% and 9.7% in prior approaches that the combined use of signature-based and anomaly-based IDS
lack mechanisms for identifying unknown threats. This com- modules, which enhance the detection of both known and
bined enhancement in detection accuracy and reduction in false unknown threats. In contrast, prior works typically rely on a
negatives (by 3.1% to 5.2%) highlights the effectiveness of our single detection strategy, limiting their recall performance. Our
hybrid SIDS-AIDS architecture in real-time, large-scale IoT approach achieves a recall rate improvement of 4% to 5.5%,
environments. reinforcing its effectiveness in minimizing undetected attacks.
 3) Impact of False Negative Rate: The false negative rate is 6) Impact of Memory Usage: Memory usage directly infludefined as the number of attacks that were incorrectly deter- ences system efficiency and energy consumption, particularly
mined; a system is considered good when it has a low false under high user request volumes. As shown in Fig. 10, the
negative rate. proposed framework maintains a lower memory footprint (0.35)
 4) Impact of Precision: Precision measures the system’s compared to existing approaches (0.8 and 0.56). This reduction
ability to accurately identify true positives among all detected is attributed to our dynamic service migration strategy, which
attacks. As shown in Fig. 8, our proposed model achieves a pre- offloads services from overloaded or untrusted nodes to trusted,
cision of 97%, outperforming existing approaches, which yield low-load nodes. In contrast, prior methods do not consider
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2285

Fig. 10. Comparison of memory usage between the proposed method and Fig. 12. Comparison between the proposed method and existing approaches
existing approaches concerning the number of user requests. in terms of the number of incoming requests and execution time.

Fig. 11. Comparison of CPU usage between the proposed method and existing Fig. 13. ROC curve comparison of the proposed framework with existing
approaches with respect to the number of incoming requests. methods.

 9) Impact of ROC Curve: The ROC curve illustrates the
node trust or load conditions, leading to inefficient resource trade-off between the True Positive Rate (TPR) and False Posiutilization. Our approach achieves a reduction in memory usage tive Rate (FPR) across different detection thresholds. As shown
ranging from 0.45 to 0.21, thereby enhancing scalability and in Fig. 13, the proposed framework achieves a higher TPR and
energy efficiency. lower FPR compared to existing methods. This improvement
 7) Impact of CPU Usage: CPU usage reflects the computa- is attributed to the dynamic collection of attack patterns via
tional efficiency of the system under increasing request loads. honeypots, enabling better generalization to unseen threats. In
As depicted in Fig. 11, the proposed framework maintains low contrast, prior works assume predefined attack strategies and
CPU usage at 6.7%, outperforming existing approaches that fail to account for unknown attacks, leading to elevated FPR
reach 12% and 15.6%. This efficiency is achieved through the and reduced detection performance.
decentralized distribution of tasks across trusted edge nodes, 10) Mitigation of Critical Cyberattacks in 5G-IoT Environthereby reducing centralized processing bottlenecks. In contrast, ments: Security in 5G-enabled IoT networks is threatened by
baseline methods lack such distributed orchestration, resulting in sophisticated cyber threats that target service availability, data
higher resource consumption. Our system demonstrates a CPU integrity, and authentication. The proposed framework inteusage reduction of 5.5% to 8.8% compared to prior solutions, grates blockchain-based authentication and a dual-stage IDS to
improving scalability and overall performance. mitigate the following critical attacks:
 8) Impact of Execution Time: Execution time is a critical Fuzzing Attacks: These attacks aim to extract user or device
metric for evaluating system responsiveness and time complex- credentials by injecting randomized input. The proposed system
ity. As illustrated in Fig. 12, our proposed method maintains a utilizes blockchain to store credentials in hashed form, further
low execution time of 2.5 seconds, even under increasing request securing them using the Deoxys-TBC algorithm within the
loads. This efficiency is enabled by the use of edge computing DAA. Its tweakable block cipher and nonce-based encryption
servers, which distribute tasks closer to the data source, thereby provide strong resistance against brute-force attempts. Mutual
minimizing latency. In contrast, existing approaches that do authentication ensures both parties are verified, preventing unaunot leverage edge-based management report execution times of thorized access.
9.2 and 14.2 seconds. As a result, our framework achieves a DDoS Attacks: Large volumes of malicious traffic are dereduction in execution time ranging from 7.3 to 12.3 seconds, signed to overwhelm edge gateways or cloud servers. The
significantly enhancing system efficiency. framework mitigates this issue through an integrated IDS that
2286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

leverages ML-based traffic classification and anomaly filtering. enables proactive deception and real-time analysis of attack
Timestamp verification and rate-limiting mechanisms, com- patterns, thereby significantly improving intrusion detection and
bined with blockchain’s decentralized validation, ensure dis- response mechanisms. Performance evaluation in the NS3 simutributed resilience and prevent single-point overloads. lation environment demonstrates the superiority of our approach
 Impersonation Attacks: These involve adversaries spoofing over existing methods. The proposed framework achieves a
legitimate users. The proposed system validates user identity 25% improvement in detection accuracy, a 30% reduction in
via blockchain-based authentication tags generated by DAA. false negatives, and enhanced resource efficiency compared to
Optional integration of multi-factor authentication (e.g., OTP or conventional security mechanisms. These results confirm the
biometrics) further reduces the risk of unauthorized access even effectiveness of our approach in securing IoT environments
if one credential is compromised. while maintaining low computational overhead. Despite its ad-
 Replay Attacks: Adversaries resend previously captured legit- vancements, this research opens avenues for further exploration.
imate packets to disrupt operations. This is countered through Future work will focus on integrating Explainable AI (XAI)
spatio-temporal feature analysis and blockchain-based times- techniques to improve transparency and interpretability in intamping, which enables the detection of duplicated patterns and trusion detection decisions. Incorporating XAI, security profesensures the uniqueness of legitimate transactions. sionals and system administrators will gain deeper insights into
 11) Performance Analysis Summary: The proposed ap- the decision-making process of the detection models, ensuring
proach demonstrates strong detection capabilities by integrat- better trust, usability, and adaptability of the security framework.
ing an IRF-based Signature-based IDS with a DCRNN-based
Anomaly-based IDS, effectively capturing both statistical and
spatiotemporal characteristics of network traffic. The use of vir-
 REFERENCES
tual honeypots enables continual adaptation to novel attack patterns, improving responsiveness to evolving threats. Enhanced [1] Y. Zhang, G. Chen, H. Du, X. Yuan, M. Kadoch, and M. Cheriet, “Real-time
precision and recall are achieved through feature ranking in remote health monitoring system driven by 5G MEC-IoT,” Electronics,
 vol. 9, no. 11, 2020, Art. no. 1753.
SIDS and the modelling of temporal dependencies in AIDS, [2] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, S. Shetty, P. Gope, and J. J. Rodrigues, “Security
contributing to a lower false negative rate. In terms of resource in 5G-enabled Internet of Things communication: Issues, challenges, and
efficiency, the edge-based service migration strategy, driven by future research roadmap,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 4466–4489, 2021.
 [3] V. Nilkanthsing, “Dynamic orchestration of security services at fog nodes
trust metrics, resource availability, and edge load, minimizes for 5G IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–6.
CPU and memory overhead. Blockchain-based authentication [4] W. Wang et al., “Label inference attacks against federated unlearning,”
further ensures node legitimacy and prevents identity spoofing. 2025, arXiv:2508.06789.
These integrated components collectively yield a scalable and [5] X. Tang, M. Shen, Q. Li, L. Zhu, T. Xue, and Q. Qu, “PILE: Robust privacy-preserving federated learning via verifiable perturbations,”
resilient security framework for NGWN-enabled IoT environ- IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 5005–5023,
ments. Although the current evaluation emphasizes detection Nov./Dec. 2023.
accuracy, false positive rates, and resilience against known and [6] P. Aravamudhan and T. Kanimozhi, “A survey on intrusion detection
novel threats, we recognize that real-time IoT environments re- system and prerequisite demands in IoT networks,” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.,
 vol. 1916, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 012179.
quire additional performance metrics, such as latency, through- [7] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki, “Netput, and scalability, under variable traffic loads. These metrics work intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning techniques,”
are critical for assessing the operational viability of the system IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701, thirdquarin large-scale and time-sensitive deployments. In future work, ter 2019.
 [8] Q. A. Al-Haija and A. Droos, “A comprehensive survey on deep learningwe aim to augment our evaluation with these metrics by intro- based intrusion detection systems in Internet of Things (IoT),” Expert Syst.,
ducing stress tests that emulate concurrent device interactions, vol. 42, no. 2, 2025, Art. no. e13726.
dynamic workload variations, and deployment scaling across [9] A. Hinojosa and N. E. Majd, “Edge computing network intrusion detection
 system in IoT using deep learning,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Comput.
edge environments. Commun. Netw., 2024, pp. 1–6.
 [10] A. A. Toony, F. Alqahtani, Y. Alginahi, and W. Said, “Multi-block: A
 novel ml-based intrusion detection framework for sdn-enabled IoT net-
 VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS works using new pyramidal structure,” Internet Things, vol. 26, 2024,
 Art. no. 101231.
 The rapid expansion of the IoT within NGWN has introduced [11] Y. K. Saheed, O. H. Abdulganiyu, and T. A. Tchakoucht, “Modified genetic
significant security challenges. In this paper, we propose a trust- algorithm and fine-tuned long short-term memory network for intrusion
aware security framework that integrates blockchain authen- detection in the Internet of Things networks with edge capabilities,” Appl.
tication, advanced intrusion detection, and dynamic honeypot Soft Comput., vol. 155, 2024, Art. no. 111434.
 [12] V. Maurya et al., “Blockchain-driven security for IoT networks: State-ofdeception to enhance security in NGWN-enabled IoT envi- the-art, challenges and future directions,” Peer-to-Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 18,
ronments. Our framework effectively mitigates cybersecurity no. 1, pp. 1–35, 2025.
threats by ensuring robust authentication, reducing false posi- [13] Y. Otoum, P. Singh, and A. Nayak, “Advancing IoMT defenses: Deep coltives in intrusion detection, and dynamically adapting to evolv- laborative learning for robust healthcare security,” in Proc. GLOBECOM
 2024 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2024, pp. 2966–2971.
ing attack strategies. The proposed system leverages blockchain [14] N. A. Dawit, S. S. Mathew, and K. Hayawi, “Suitability of blockchain
technology for decentralized and tamper-proof authentication, for collaborative intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 12th Annu. Underpreventing impersonation and unauthorized access. The integra- graduate Res. Conf. Appl. Comput., 2020, pp. 1–6.
tion of an IRF-based SIDS and a DCRNN-based AIDS enables [15] F. Louati and F. B. Ktata, “A deep learning-based multi-agent system for
 intrusion detection,” SN Appl. Sci., vol. 2, no. 4, 2020, Art. no. 675.
precise and efficient threat detection. Furthermore, a moving [16] J. Franco, A. Aris, B. Canberk, and A. S. Uluagac, “A survey of honeytarget defence strategy dynamically migrates services to trusted pots and honeynets for Internet of Things, industrial Internet of Things,
edge nodes, mitigating the risk of service compromise. The and cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4,
 pp. 2351–2383, fourthquarter 2021.
deployment of high-interaction, on-demand virtual honeypots
OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY 2287

[17] T. Zheng et al., “Predictive analytics for cyber-attack timing in power [42] E. Ntizikira, L. Wang, J. Chen, and K. Saleem, “Honey-block: Edge
 Internet of Things: A flipit game-theoretic approach,” Internet Things, assisted ensemble learning model for intrusion detection and prevention
 vol. 30, 2025, Art. no. 101522. using defense mechanism in IoT,” Comput. Commun., vol. 214, pp. 1–17,
[18] J. Jean, I. Nikolić, T. Peyrin, and Y. Seurin, “The deoxys AEAD family,” 2024.
 J. Cryptol., vol. 34, no. 3, 2021, Art. no. 31. [43] E. Alatawi and U. Albalawi, “Harnessing AI for cyber defense: Honeypot-
[19] A. Paul, D. P. Mukherjee, P. Das, A. Gangopadhyay, A. R. Chintha, and S. driven intrusion detection systems,” Symmetry, vol. 17, no. 5, 2025,
 Kundu, “Improved random forest for classification,” IEEE Trans. Image Art. no. 628.
 Process., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 4012–4024, Aug. 2018. [44] I. Martinez, A. S. Hafid, and M. Gendreau, “A blockchain-based au-
[20] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent dit mechanism for trust and integrity in IoT-fog environments,” 2024,
 neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” 2017, arXiv:1707.01926. arXiv:2405.00844.
[21] R. Parsamehr et al., “A novel intrusion detection and prevention scheme [45] A. Acien, A. Nieto, G. Fernandez, and J. Lopez, “A comprehensive
 for network coding-enabled mobile small cells,” IEEE Trans. Computat. methodology for deploying IoT honeypots,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf.
 Social Syst., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1467–1477, Dec. 2019. Trust, Privacy Secur. Digit. Bus., Regensburg, Germany, Sep. 5–6, 2018,
[22] A. S. Mamolar, P. Salvá-Garcıá, E. Chirivella-Perez, Z. Pervez, J. M. A. pp. 229–243.
 Calero, and Q. Wang, “Autonomic protection of multi-tenant 5g mobile [46] D. Commey, M. Nkoom, S. Hounsinou, and G. Crosby, “Dynamic honnetworks against UDP flooding DDOS attacks,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., eypot conversion for enhanced IoT security,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., Forthvol. 145, 2019, Art. no. 102416. coming, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
[23] G. Hatzivasilis et al., “WARDOG: Awareness detection watchdog for cfm?abstract_id=5079213
 botnet infection on the host device,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. 6, [47] T. Ali, “Next-generation intrusion detection systems with LLMs: Realno. 1, pp. 4–18, Jan.–Mar. 2021. time anomaly detection, explainable AI, and adaptive data generation,”
[24] W. Wang, P. Xu, and L. T. Yang, “Secure data collection, storage and access M.S. thesis, Fac. of Inf. Technol. and Elect. Eng., Univ. of Oulu, Oulu,
 in cloud-assisted IoT,” IEEE Cloud Comput., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 77–88, Finland, 2024.
 Jul./Aug. 2018. [48] O. G. Lira, A. Marroquin, and M. A. To, “Harnessing the advanced
[25] Y. Al-Hadhrami and F. K. Hussain, “Real time dataset generation frame- capabilities of LLM for adaptive intrusion detection systems,” in Proc.
 work for intrusion detection systems in IoT,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl., 2024, pp. 453–464.
 vol. 108, pp. 414–423, 2020. [49] Y. Otoum, A. Asad, and A. Nayak, “LLM-based threat detection and
[26] L. F. Maimó, Á. L. P. Gómez, F. J. G. Clemente, M. G. Pérez, and G. M. prevention framework for IoT ecosystems,” 2025, arXiv:2505.00240.
 Pérez, “A self-adaptive deep learning-based system for anomaly detection [50] F. Adjewa, M. Esseghir, L. Merghem-Boulahia, and C. Kacfah, “LLMin 5G networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 7700–7712, 2018. based continuous intrusion detection framework for next-gen networks,” in
[27] J. Lam and R. Abbas, “Machine learning based anomaly detection for 5G Proc. 2025 Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput., 2025, pp. 1198–1203.
 networks,” 2020, arXiv:2003.03474. [51] Y. Li, Z. Xiang, N. D. Bastian, D. Song, and B. Li, “IDS-agent: An
[28] M. A. Mahdi, “Secure and efficient IoT networks: An AI and ML-based LLM agent for explainable intrusion detection in IoT networks,” in Proc.
 intrusion detection system,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Internet NeurIPS 2024 Workshop Open-World Agents, 2024. [Online]. Available:
 Things, 2024, pp. 1–6. https://openreview.net/forum?id=iiK0pRyLkw
[29] S. K. R. Mallidi and R. R. Ramisetty, “Advancements in training and [52] X. Hu et al., “A LLM-based agent for the automatic generation and
 deployment strategies for AI-based intrusion detection systems in IoT: A generalization of IDS rules,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur.
 systematic literature review,” Discover Internet Things, vol. 5, no. 1, 2025, Privacy Comput. Commun., 2024, pp. 1875–1880.
 Art. no. 8. [53] M. M. Rahman, S. Al Shakil, and M. R. Mustakim, “A survey on intrusion
[30] A. Yang, Y. Zhuansun, C. Liu, J. Li, and C. Zhang, “Design of intrusion detection system in IoT networks,” Cyber Secur. Appl., vol. 3, 2025,
 detection system for Internet of Things based on improved BP neural Art. no. 100082.
 network,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 106043–106052, 2019. [54] M. Rajkumar et al., “Multi-view consistent generative adversarial network
[31] A. Mondal and R. T. Goswami, “Enhanced honeypot cryptographic for enhancing intrusion detection with prevention systems in mobile ad
 scheme and privacy preservation for an effective prediction in cloud hoc networks against security attacks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 150, 2025,
 security,” Microprocessors Microsystems, vol. 81, 2021, Art. no. 103719. Art. no. 104242.
[32] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban IDS: [55] L. P. Rachakonda, M. Siddula, and V. Sathya, “A comprehensive study
 An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT edge on IoT privacy and security challenges with focus on spectrum sharing in
 devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, Aug. 2020. next-generation networks (5G/6G/beyond),” High-Confidence Comput.,
[33] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “DeepFed: Federated vol. 4, 2024, Art. no. 100220.
 deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber–physical systems,” [56] Y. Otoum, A. Asad, and A. Nayak, “LLMs meet federated learning for
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624, Aug. 2021. scalable and secure IoT management,” 2025, arXiv:2504.16032.
[34] C. Liang et al., “Intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things based [57] E. H. Said, Y. Otoum, and A. Nayak, “A scalable meta learning-based
 on blockchain and multi-agent systems,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 7, 2020, model to secure IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 6, no. 2,
 Art. no. 1120. pp. 116–120, Jun. 2023.
[35] K. C. Chaganti, “A scalable, lightweight AI-driven security framework [58] S. Jangirala, A. K. Das, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Designing secure lightweight
 for IoT ecosystems: Optimization and game theory approaches,” IEEE blockchain-enabled RFID-based authentication protocol for supply chains
 Access, vol. 13, pp. 72235–72247, 2025. in 5G mobile edge computing environment,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
[36] A. Babaei Goushlavandani, P. Bayat, and G. Ekbatanifard, “Detecting vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 7081–7093, Nov. 2020.
 attacks on the Internet of Things network in the computing fog layer with an [59] O. A. Wahab, J. Bentahar, H. Otrok, and A. Mourad, “Resource-aware
 embedded learning approach based on clustering and blockchain,” Cluster detection and defense system against multi-type attacks in the cloud:
 Comput., vol. 28, no. 4, 2025, Art. no. 226. Repeated Bayesian Stackelberg game,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
[37] V. Saravanan, M. Madiajagan, S. M. Rafee, P. Sanju, T. B. Rehman, Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 605–622, Mar./Apr. 2021.
 and B. Pattanaik, “IoT-based blockchain intrusion detection using opti- [60] K. S. Gill, S. Saxena, and A. Sharma, “GTM-CSec: Game theoretic model
 mized recurrent neural network,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 83, no. 11, for cloud security based on IDS and honeypot,” Comput. Secur., vol. 92,
 pp. 31505–31526, 2024. 2020, Art. no. 101732.
[38] H. Al-Mohannadi, I. Awan, and J. Al Hamar, “Analysis of adversary activ- [61] A. M. Jamil et al., “Lightweight multi-tier IDS for UAV networks: Enhancities using cloud-based web services to enhance cyber threat intelligence,” ing UAV zero-day attack detection with honeypot threat intelligence,” in
 Serv. Oriented Comput. Appl., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 175–187, 2020. Proc. Int. Conf. Digit. Forensics Cyber Crime, 2025, pp. 129–150.
[39] J. Lee, J. Choi, G. Lee, S.-W. Shim, and T. Kim, “PhantomFS: File-based [62] S. S. Chakkaravarthy, D. Sangeetha, M. V. Cruz, V. Vaidehi, and B. Raman,
 deception technology for thwarting malicious users,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, “Design of intrusion detection honeypot using social leopard algorithm to
 pp. 32203–32214, 2020. detect IoT ransomware attacks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 169944–169956,
[40] B. Li, Y. Xiao, Y. Shi, Q. Kong, Y. Wu, and H. Bao, “Anti-honeypot enabled 2020.
 optimal attack strategy for industrial cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Open [63] W. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. He, and Z. Ding, “An IoT honeynet
 J. Comput. Soc., vol. 1, pp. 250–261, 2020. based on multiport honeypots for capturing IoT attacks,” IEEE Internet
[41] N. Dara, P. Shankar, P. V. Arvind, and V. Singh, “Intelligent insight into Things J., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 3991–3999, May 2020.
 IoT threats: Leveraging advanced analytics with honeypots for anomaly
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. Convergence Technol., 2024,
 pp. 1–6.