IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026 197

 BPF-DAG: Byte-Packet-Flow Features Fusion via
 Dynamic Attributed Graph for Reliable Encrypted
 Traffic Classification
 Yunxiao Shi , Student Member, IEEE, Gaolei Li , Member, IEEE, Jun Wu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Jianhua Li , Senior Member, IEEE, and He Fang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Reliable encrypted traffic classification is crucial for privacy and ensuring anonymity [1]. Since 2019, the profine-grained and efficient network security management, enabling portion of encrypted web traffic has exceeded 90 percent
accurate user behavior recognition and cybercrime forensics. [2]. Meanwhile, the widespread adoption of privacy-enhanced
While AI-based methods can automatically extract subtle features
from traffic data, existing approaches often fail to effectively technologies like virtual private network (VPN) and The Onion
capture and integrate features across different levels of traffic Router (Tor) [3] is paralleled by a sharp increase in malwares
granularity, namely the byte, packet and flow levels. Current and cyberattacks [4], [5], [6]. Encrypted technologies have
graph-based methods heavily rely on manual feature engineering been abused by cybercriminals to conceal malicious behaviors,
to construct global IP-based graphs, overlooking critical packet- making it difficult to trace traffic sources and posing significant
level temporal features and byte-level raw information. Focusing
on only one or two levels of traffic granularity is unreliable challenges to cybersecurity. Encrypted traffic classification is
and insufficient, ultimately compromising model accuracy and a fundamental task in the field of cybersecurity, serving as the
robustness. To address these limitations, we propose BPF-DAG, basis for several tasks such as application identification [7],
a byte-packet-flow feature fusion framework based on dynamic website fingerprinting [8], and malicious intrusion detection
attributed graphs, for reliable encrypted traffic classification. [9]. Highly accurate encrypted traffic classification enables
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first method that
integrates temporal packet relations into flow interaction patterns robust user behavior recognition and cyber-crime forensics.
while directly leveraging raw byte-level data. Specifically, we The adoption of encryption protocols significantly curtailed
introduce a multi-granularity feature fusion strategy that dynam- the sufficient exploitation of traffic information. Traditional
ically updates an IP-based graph by iteratively assigning edge rule-based methods, such as deep packet inspection (DPI) [10],
attributes derived from evolving flow representations. During [11], are no longer effective when confronted with encrypted
the joint training of the Transformer and the graph neural
network, temporal representations are learned from raw packet payloads. In recent years, a range of ML-based methods
sequences and reflected in edge attributes dynamically for further have demonstrated strong performance in encrypted traffic
message aggregation. Experiments on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN, classification [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. Machine learning
Tor-nonTor, MIRAGE-2019 and MIRAGE-2024 datasets show (ML)-based methods typically involve two steps: first, extractthat BPF-DAG outperforms recent state-of-the-art methods in ing hand-crafted statistical features, followed by utilizing
terms of classification performance.
 traditional machine learning models, such as support vector
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, graph neural machines (SVM) and random forests. But the manual feature
network, features fusion, transformer, dynamic attributed graph. extraction process is time-consuming and heavily dependent
 on expert knowledge. Additionally, the granularity of extracted
 I. I NTRODUCTION traffic information is often too limited to achieve the reliable
 encrypted traffic classification. With the rapid advancement of
N OWADAYS, various encryption technologies are extensively used to encrypt network traffic, protecting users’ AI [17], [18], [19], [20], deep learning (DL)-based methods
 have been proposed and have shown excellent performance,
 Received 15 December 2024; revised 7 June 2025 and 15 October 2025; as they can automatically extract latent features from raw
accepted 30 November 2025. Date of publication 11 December 2025; date traffic data [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27]. DL-based
of current version 26 December 2025. This work was supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62202303, Grant methods typically transform traffic data into image-like or
U21B2019, Grant 62471301, and Grant 62572314. The associate editor natural language formats, allowing for the extensive applicacoordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Dr. Meng Li. (Corresponding author: Gaolei Li.)
 tion of computer vision (CV) and natural language processing
 Yunxiao Shi, Gaolei Li, Jun Wu, and Jianhua Li are with the School (NLP) technologies. However, these methods fail to exploit
of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong topological patterns in host-to-host communications, i.e., the
University, Shanghai 200240, China, and also with Shanghai Key Laboratory flow-level traffic information. Fully leveraging the interaction
of Integrated Administration Technologies for Information Security, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: shiyunxiao@sjtu.edu.cn; gaolei li@sjtu.edu.cn; patterns among hosts across a network can further enhance the
junwuhn@sjtu.edu.cn; lijh888@sjtu.edu.cn). precision of traffic detection. Recently, graph neural networks
 He Fang is with the College of Computer and Cyber Security, Fujian
Normal University, Fuzhou 350117, China (e-mail: fanghe@fjnu.edu.cn).
 (GNNs) [28], [29], [30], [31] have attracted extensive attention
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3643127 for their powerful ability to represent graphs, leading to
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
198 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

breakthroughs in fields such as chemistry, physical systems temporal representations and updates a subset corresponding
and social networks, among others. GNNs are capable of cap- to the sampled mini-batch.
turing latent topological patterns via message passing between In summary, the key contributions of our work are outlined
nodes or edges of a graph. GNN-based methods for encrypted as follows:
traffic classification can generally be categorized based on their • We propose a byte-packet-flow feature fusion-based religraph construction strategies. One common method involves able encrypted traffic classification method via dynamic
constructing a packet-level graph, where the packet length attributed graph, called BPF-DAG. BPF-DAG captures
sequence of each bidirectional flow is used to model packets packet-level temporal characteristics within each flow
as graph nodes. This effectively transforms the traffic clas- and flow-level topological patterns within a global IPsification task into a graph classification problem. However, based graph. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
this approach analyzes each flow independently, lacking a first method that integrates packet relations into flow
global view of the network connectivity. Another common interaction patterns while directly extracting byte-level
method attempts to capture traffic interaction patterns by traffic features, for reliable encrypted traffic classification.
constructing a flow-level global communication graph, where • Our approach introduces a multi-granularity features
IP addresses are modeled as nodes and traffic flows between fusion strategy based on dynamic attributed graph, where
hosts are represented as edges. Yet, these approaches rely graph attributes are dynamically assigned with evolvheavily on feature engineering to initialize graph attributes, ing flow representations during each iteration. Temporal
without sufficiently leveraging byte-level traffic. representations of flows are computed using an opti-
 To achieve more reliable and accurate encrypted traffic mized Transformer model after each training epoch, with
classification, it is imperative to comprehensively exploit which the corresponding directed edge attributes are then
multi-granular traffic information to capture discriminative fea- updated. To reduce the memory overhead, we leverage
tures. In this paper, we propose BPF-DAG, a byte-packet-flow a technique called Memory Bank to track all temporal
feature fusion-based method via dynamic attributed graphs for representations to decouple the training batch size from
reliable encrypted traffic classification. This is the first method the total number of edges.
that integrates temporal packet relations into flow interaction • To evaluate the classification performance of the proposed
patterns while directly extracting byte-level features from raw BPF-DAG, we compare it with several baselines on six
traffic. We introduce a novel multi-granularity feature fusion public encrypted traffic datasets, including ISCX-VPN,
strategy that comprehensively integrates byte-level, packet- ISCX-nonVPN, ISCX-Tor, ISCX-nonTor, MIRAGE-2019
level, and flow-level traffic features, thereby improving the and MIRAGE-2024. Experiment results show that BPFrobustness and effectiveness of the classification. DAG not only outperforms existing SOTA methods by
 Specifically, BPF-DAG is composed of three core mod- 1.4%, 1.2%, 2.3%, 0.2%, 7.7%, 3.1% in terms of accuules: (1) raw information extraction, (2) flow representation racy, but also exhibits relatively lower complexity.
learning, and (3) multi-granularity feature fusion. The first The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II reviews
module separately extracts topological and temporal informa- related work, covering ML-based, DL-based, and GNN-based
tion from raw traffic. The topological information is utilized methods, and highlights the differences between our work
to construct a global IP-based directed graph that represents and existing approaches. Section III introduces the prelimiflow-level network connectivity. The temporal information naries. In Section IV, we describe the designs of our method,
refers to the sequences of raw byte packets within each flow, including the introduction of overall pipeline and the detailed
encompassing both packet-level temporal dynamics and byte- functions of three sub-modules. In Section V, we experilevel intrinsic features. In the second module, temporal and mentally evaluate the performance of our method, including
topological representations are learned in parallel from the classification performance, few-shot analysis and complexity
extracted information. Specifically, the Transformer model is analysis and compare our results with SOTA methods. Finally,
employed to capture sequential dependencies in the raw byte- Section VI concludes the paper and discusses future directions.
based packet sequences, and the resulting representations are
used to initialize the edge attributes in the graph. Concurrently,
 II. R ELATED W ORK
we propose a novel graph neural network, Directed Edge
Sample and Aggregate (DiESAGE), to learn directed edge A. ML-Based Methods
embeddings by iteratively propagating messages across IP ML-based methods [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [40] typically
nodes. The output of DiESAGE serves as the flow-level topo- consist of two stages: feature engineering and model training.
logical representation. In the third module, the temporal and Feature engineering refers to manually extracting statistical
topological representations are fused via linear interpolation to features, such as mean packet length, duration, etc. These
produce the final representation for each flow. During training, features are then used as input for ML models such as
temporal flow representations are recomputed after each epoch SVM and Naive Bayes to obtain final classification results.
using the updated Transformer, and the corresponding graph Appscanner [12] takes statistical features derived from packet
edge attributes are dynamically reassigned. To mitigate mem- length sequences as input for training Random Forest classifier.
ory limitations during joint training of the Transformer and Anderson et al. [41] extract 198 TLS features, including flow
DiESAGE, we adopt a memory bank mechanism that tracks all metadata, byte distribution, packet lengths, and then apply
SHI et al.: BPF-DAG: BYTE-PACKET-FLOW FEATURES FUSION VIA DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTED GRAPH 199

a logistic regression classifier to classify encrypted traffic. graph’s edges and edge attributes are initialized with statistical
Shi et al. [32] propose a feature optimization approach that traffic features. It effectively transfers the encrypted traffic
efficiently reduces redundant statistical features and mitigates classification problem into an edge classification problem.
the negative effects of class imbalance. NB-SVM [15] utilizes Building on this, Duan et al. [37] propose a Dynamic Line
a naive Bayes feature embedding method to transforms the Graph Neural Network (DLGNN)-based method with semioriginal features into high-quality data, which is then classified supervised learning. It transforms traffic data into a series of
using an SVM. However, ML-based methods depend heavily spatio-temporal graphs and employs dynamic GNN to capture
on expert-designed features and fail to fully exploit raw byte the evolving of interaction between IP pairs in each snapshot.
traffic. In contrast, our method does not rely on feature Wang et al. [39] introduce a Heterogeneous Temporal Graph
engineering and directly utilizes byte-level traffic data for (HTGraph) to represent the dynamic feature series of network
classification. flows. The HTGraph is based on prior knowledge about feature
 types and correlations, contributing to learning general and
B. DL-Based Methods transferable knowledge for traffic classification.
 DL-based methods are capable of automatically extracting
features from raw traffic data, enabling a unified end-to-end D. Differences From Existing Work
framework. Wang et al. were the first to apply representation
learning to traffic classification by transforming raw traffic Most existing GNN-based methods for encrypted traffic
into grayscale images and utilizing convolutional neural net- classification treat hosts in the network as nodes and the
works (CNNs), including both 1D-CNN [21] and 2D-CNN communication interaction among hosts as edges. Its primary
[42], to perform image classification. Building on this, some advantage lies in the ability of leveraging GNN to extract
works [24], [25], [43] have combined CNNs with RNNs to the global topology patterns of cyberspace from the host-tocapture temporal characteristics from time-related raw packet host communication interactions. However, the disadvantages
sequences. Other methods, such as DF [22] and FS-Net [23], to this method are obvious: it relies on feature engineering to
employ DL models to extract sequential features from packet initialize the graph attributes in advance and statistical features
length sequences. XAI [44] investigates trustworthiness and fail to adequately capture the temporal characteristics of traffic
interpretability via explainable AI-based techniques to under- itself. Although few cutting-edge works like [39] attempt
stand, interpret and improve the behavior of multimodal DL to leverage dynamic graphs to enhancing generalization for
traffic classifiers. Additionally, the pre-training strategy have encrypted traffic classification, they still have not eliminate
been applied to encrypted traffic classification by leveraging the need for feature engineering.
large amounts of unlabeled traffic data [33], [34], [45]. ET- We compare the aforementioned encrypted traffic classifica-
BERT [34], for instance, converts raw bytes into language-like tion methods with our work in Table I, including ML-based,
tokens for pre-training, and then fine-tune the pre-trained DL-based and GNN-based methods. In contrast, our method
model for specific downstream classification tasks. PEAN gets rid of the dependence on feature engineering and directly
[46] is a multimodal pre-training-based framework that jointly uses the raw-byte traffic within the global IP-based graph.
models raw bytes and packet lengths to classify encrypted traf- We fully integrate byte-packet-flow multi-granularity features
fic. Although these methods successfully extract rich features based on dynamic attributed graph to generate more discrimfrom raw traffic, they treat each traffic flow independently, inative traffic representations.
neglecting the interrelations inherent in traffic flows.
 III. P RELIMINARIES
C. GNN-Based Methods
 Recently, an increasing number of studies have leveraged A. Notation
GNNs to extract topological characteristics of traffic due to Encrypted traffic is made up of a sequence of packets transtheir powerful ability to capture structural patterns from graph ferred among hosts. Based on the level of granularity, traffic
format data. Hu et al. [35] introduce the Traffic Interaction can be commonly divided into packets, flows or sessions. A
Graph (TIG) to represent each single flow based on its packet flow represents a series of consecutive packets that share the
length sequence to capture implicit features in bidirectional same five attributes: source IP, destination IP, source port,
client-server interactions, turning DApp fingerprinting into destination port and protocol. Flows are unidirectional, while
a graph classification problem. Hu et al. [35] construct a sessions refer to bidirectional flows. To learn robust temporal
flow graph from the initial several interactive packets for representations from raw-byte flows, we propose a Packet2Vec
each flow, adopt graph2vec algorithm to learn its represen- module, which is designed to convert a packet into a word-like
tation and classify the representations with Random Forest. token, similar to those used in NLP. A single packet can be
Zhang et al [38] propose a byte-level traffic graph construction viewed as a sequence of 8-bit bytes, consisting of a plaintextapproach that uses the GNN to embed packet header and based header and a ciphertext-based payload. Since each 8-bit
payload bytes separately and then fuses them together to byte corresponds to a decimal number ranging from 0 to 255,
generate an overall representation. Lo et al. [36] construct a a packet at timestamp t can be represented as a vector:
global IP-based graph for all flows where IP addresses and
ports are mapped as nodes, traffic flows are mapped as the Pt = [bth1 , bth2 , · · · , bthn , btp1 , · · · , btpm ], bthi , btp j ∈ [0, 255] (1)
200 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE I
 A S UMMARY OF E XISTING A PPROACHES

where bthi and btp j denote the decimal values corresponding we construct a global directed IP-based graph by representto header and payload bytes, respectively. A single flow, ing host communications as directed edges between IP-port
therefore, can be represented as a 2-dimensional tensor: pairs. At the temporal level, we extract fixed-length header
 byte sequences from individual packets, preserving essential
 f low = [Pt1 , Pt2 , · · · , Ptn ] (2) byte-level information. The second module learns two complewhere Pti denotes the ith packet in the flow, tn is the timestamp mentary representations: temporal representations are obtained
for it and n is the total number of packets of the flow. In this using a Transformer encoder that models sequential dependenway, the representation of a flow can be viewed as analogous cies within packet sequences, while topological representations
to sentence embedding in NLP, where multiple word-like are learned via a custom graph neural network named Directed
vectors (packets) form a flow. This transformation allows us Edge Sample and Aggregate (DiESAGE), which propagates
to leverage NLP techniques to extract temporal characteristics messages along directed edges in the graph. Edge attributes
from network flows, facilitating a deeper analysis of temporal are initialized with temporal features and dynamically updated
traffic patterns. during training to reflect evolving flow representations. In the
 third module, we fuse the temporal and topological representations via linear interpolation, enabling the model to generate
B. Problem Definition enriched, discriminative embeddings for flow classification. To
 The goal of encrypted traffic classification is to detect and efficiently support joint training of the Transformer and GNN
identify specific traffic categories (e.g., applications and web under memory constraints, we incorporate a Memory Bank
services) based on the traffic they generate. In this paper, we mechanism that maintains and selectively updates temporal
classify encrypted flows directly from raw byte-level traffic, representations across training iterations. Figure 1 provides an
bypassing the need for statistical features derived through overview of our proposed end-to-end BPF-DAG method.
feature engineering. We evaluate our model on two types
of encrypted traffic classification tasks: (1) user behavior
identification over VPN or Tor (e.g., video streaming, email B. Raw Information Extraction
communication, and file transfer), and (2) encrypted appli- Instead of relying on feature engineering, we directly extract
cation classification (e.g., Facebook, Spotify, and YouTube). information from raw encrypted traffic as input for subsequent
In our experiment, we treat each flow as a data example modules. This approach not only maximizes the information
for training or testing. Our objective is to build an end-to- available from the raw traffic but also enables an end-to-end
end classification framework f ( f lowi ) that predicts the correct traffic classification framework. Given that encryption technollabel for each flow. ogy transforms packet payloads into pseudorandom values, we
 focus exclusively on using the raw plaintext information from
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY the packet headers.
 1) Temporal Information Extraction: At the byte level of
A. Overall Framework a flow, each 8-bit byte can be encoded as a decimal number
 In this section, we systematically introduce the proposed between 0 and 255. At the packet level, each packet can be
method, BPF-DAG, a dynamic attributed graph-based frame- transformed into a fixed-length vector, as explained in the
work that integrates multi-granularity traffic features across Preliminaries section. Only the header bytes are used, while
the byte, packet, and flow levels. The architecture comprises the encrypted payload bytes are discarded. The header contains
three core modules: raw information extraction, flow repre- a rich set of discriminative fields that provide key details about
sentation learning, and multi-granularity feature fusion. In the the flow, such as packet length, timestamp, and protocol. The
first module, we directly extract topological and temporal vector length of packet header is limited to M bytes, with any
information from raw traffic data. At the topological level, excess being truncated. If the header is shorter than M bytes,
SHI et al.: BPF-DAG: BYTE-PACKET-FLOW FEATURES FUSION VIA DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTED GRAPH 201

Fig. 1. The overview of proposed BPF-DAG Framework. The lower part illustrates how raw byte packet sequences are input into a Transformer to learn
temporal representations. The upper part shows that network connectivity information, combined with the learnable temporal representations, is used to
construct graphs, which are then processed by DiESAGE to capture topological representations. The left part details the multi-granularity feature fusion
process. During the joint training of DiESAGE and the Transformer, the graph is dynamically updated by iteratively assigning edge attributes based on the
evolving temporal representations.The Memory Bank technique is used to decouple the training batch size from the total number of edges. The specific module
configurations and parameters are presented in Figure 4 and Table III.

it is padded with zeros. Thus, a packet at timestamp t can be To mine the topological information of host-to-host comencoded as a vector: munications, we construct a global IP-based flow interaction
 graph. The previous temporal information will be integrated
 Pt = [bth1 , bth2 , · · · , bthM ], bthi ∈ [0, 255] (3) into the graph. The initial flow representation f lowi will
 be fed into a neural network with learnable parameters to
At the flow level, each flow is composed of a sequence of time- generate its temporal representation, which is utilized to inirelated packets. We take the first N adjacent packets, which tialize its corresponding edge attribute. Before training, each
form a sequence of N M-dimensional vectors, as the initial edge attribute is initialized using the corresponding temporal
representation of the flow. If the flow has fewer than N packets, representation, computed by randomly initialized trainable
it is padded with zero vectors. Ultimately, a flow is represented parameters. During the training process, the edge attributes
as a two-dimensional tensor of size (N, M): are dynamically updated and optimized.
 In this way, the encrypted traffic classification task is natuf lowi = [P1 , P2 , · · · , PN ], Pi ∈ R M (4)
 rally transformed into a directed edge classification problem.
In fact, this initial flow representation closely resembles a
sentence composed of word vectors. Hence, NLP techniques
 C. Flow Representation Learning
can naturally be applied to learn the temporal representation
of the flow, as discussed in the following section. In this module, based on the temporal and topological
 2) Topological Information Extraction: Computer networks information extracted from the raw traffic, we introduce a
fundamentally exist as communication graphs, where each sequence-based model and a novel graph neural network to
host acts as a node, and the communication between hosts learn the temporal and topological representations respectively.
represents the links between nodes. From the perspective of 1) Learning Temporal Representations With Transformer:
a single flow, it can be modeled as a directed edge with In the Preliminaries Section, we encoded a flow as a sequence
two nodes in the communication graph. Four flow fields are of packet vectors, represented as a two-dimensional tensor.
extracted to identify the directed edge: source IP address, The relationship between a flow and its packets is analogous
source port, destination IP address, and destination port. The to that of a sentence and its words. Building on this analogy,
first two fields are combined into a 2-tuple (source IP address, we utilize the Transformer network [47] to learn temporal
source port) to represent the source node, while the latter two representations of traffic flows. We use the same architecture
fields represent the destination node. as the classic Transformer encoder.
202 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 The classic Transformer architecture, initially designed to Algorithm 1 DiESAGE Directed Edge Embedding
address sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) tasks [48], is com- Input: Graph G(V, E); input edge attributes {euv , ∀uv ∈ E};
posed of an encoder block and a decoder block. For our input node attributes {nv , ∀v ∈ V} = {1, . . . , 1}; depth K
purposes, we employ only the encoder to process the input Output: Directed edge embeddings {zuv , ∀uv ∈ E}
traffic sequences and generate temporal flow representations. 1: h0 ← nv , ∀v ∈ V
The encoder consists of multiple identical blocks, each con- 2: e0uv ← euv , ∀uv ∈ E
taining two primary sublayers: a multi-head self-attention 3: for k ← 1 to K do
mechanism and a position-wise feed-forward network (FFN). 4: for u ∈ V do
 uv , ∀v 
 ˚ 
In the first layer, the self-attention mechanism enables each 5: hkN (u) ←AGG ek−1 ∈ N (u), uv ∈E
position in the input sequence to pay attention to other hku ← σ Wk · CONCAT hk−1 u , hN (u)
 k
 6:
positions, capturing time-related characteristics throughout the 7: end for
sequence. For an input sequence f lowi ∈ RN×M , each self- 8: end for
attention head computes a query matrix Q, key matrix K and 9: for uv ∈ E do
value matrix V through the following linear transformations: 10: zuv = CONCAT huK , hvK , uv ∈ E
 

 Q = ZWQ , K = ZWK , V = ZWV (5) 11: end for
 12: return zuv
where WQ , WK , WV ∈ R M×d are trainable parameter matrices,
Q, K, V ∈ RN×d and d is the dimension of the latent representation. The output of the i th self-attention head is computed during the training process. Meanwhile, the node features are
as: initialized with constant vectors {1 · · · 1}, where the dimension
 Qi Ki T
  
 Headi = Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ) = so f t max √ Vi (6) of each node vector matches that of the edge features.
 d At each iteration, instead of aggregating information
The attention mechanism is simultaneously applied across from neighboring nodes, DiESAGE aggregates features from
several heads, and then the outputs from each head are directed edges pointing from the node to its neighbors,
concatenated and subjected to a final linear transformation: and subsequently updates the node’s features based on the
 aggregated information. At the kth layer, the aggregated repre-
 MultiHead(Q, K, V) = CONCAT(Head1 , · · · , Headn )WO sentation hkN (u) is computed using a differentiable aggregation
 (7) function AGG, defined as:
 In the second layer, a FFN is employed independently and
 hkN (u) = AGG ek−1uv , ∀v ∈ N (u), uv ∈ E
 ˚ 
uniformly to each position. It is composed of two linear (11)
transformations with a ReLU activation function in between: Here, {v ∈ N (u), uv ∈ E} represents the set of directed
 FFN(x) = max(0, xW1 + b1 )W2 + b2 (8) edges pointing from source node u to its neighbor nodes,
 and ek−1
 uv denotes the edge features at the k − 1th layer. The
 Additionally, residual connection and layer normalization
 aggregation function AGG calculates the mean of ek−1 uv . Next,
operations are applied to both sublayers. These techniques
 the aggregated representation hkN (u) of the neighbor edges is
enhance gradient flow and facilitate stable training, while
 concatenated with the node’s previous representation hk−1 u .
supporting deeper network architectures.
 After applying a trainable weight matrix Wk and an activation
 Z 0 = LayerNorm(Z + MultiHead(Q, K, V)) (9) function, the node representation at the kth layer is updated as
 Xtemporal = LayerNorm(Z + FFN(Z ))
 0 0
 (10) follows:
 hku = σ Wk · CONCAT hk−1 u , hN (u)
 k
 
The output of the Transformer, denoted as Xtemporal ∈ R N×D
 , (12)
is referred to as the temporal representation of the flow. K
 At depth K, the final representation of the edge euv is
 2) Learning Topological Representations With DiESAGE: computed by concatenating representations of node u and v
To further capture the topological characteristics of traffic as follows:
through interaction among hosts, we introduce a novel graph
 Xtopological = CONCAT huK , hvK , uv ∈ E
 
neural network named Directed Edge Sample and aggregate (13)
(DiESAGE). GraphSAGE (Graph Sample and Aggregate) [31]
 The output of DiESAGE, referred to as the topological
is a powerful GNN framework designed for generating node
 representation Xtopological ∈ RD×d , captures the topological
embeddings in large graphs, primarily tailored for node classiinformation of the communication graph. Figure 3 illustrates
fication tasks. However, the traditional GraphSAGE model is
 the process of message propagating through nodes and edges
specifically designed for learning node embeddings. The existin 1-hop scenario. Algorithm 1 presents the DiESAGE algoing E-GraphSAGE method [36] is not suited for generating
 rithm for directed edge embedding, and the relevant symbols
representations for directed edges. To address this limitation,
 are summarized in Table II.
our proposed DiESAGE introduces several modifications to
support directed edge embeddings.
 The inputs to DiESAGE consist of edge and node features. D. Multi-Granularity Features Fusion
The edge features are initialized with the temporal represen- After capturing both the temporal and topological representations Xtemporal , which are dynamically updated at each epoch tations of the traffic, we fuse them via linear interpolation to
SHI et al.: BPF-DAG: BYTE-PACKET-FLOW FEATURES FUSION VIA DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTED GRAPH 203

 Fig. 2. The schematic illustration of flow preprocessing.

 TABLE II Algorithm 2 Pseudocode of the BPF-DAG Algorithm
 S UMMARY OF S YMBOLS AND D ESCRIPTIONS Input: Graph G(V, E); raw-byte flows F; input edge attributes
 {euv , ∀uv ∈ E}; depth K; number of training epochs T ;
 linear interpolation coefficient µ; traffic label Ylabel
 Output: Parameters of BPF-DAG model θBPF-DAG
 1: for epoch ← 1 to T do
 2: // Update attributes of all edge using Transformer after
 each epoch
 3: Xtemporal ← T rans f ormerEncoder (F)
 4: Update edge features {euv , ∀uv ∈ E} with Xtemporal
 5: // Set a Memory Bank to track all temporal representations
 6: for Fmini-batch ∈ F do
 7: // Update a subset of edges corresponding to the
 sampled mini-batch with optimized Transformer
 8: Xtemporal 0 ← T rans f ormerEncoder (Fmini-batch )
 9: Update edge features {euv , ∀uv ∈ Emini-batch } with
 Xtemporal 0
 10: Xtemporal ← {euv , ∀uv ∈ E}
 11: Xtopological = DiES AGE(euv ), ∀uv ∈ E
 12: // Map representations to low-dimensional prediction vectors
 13: Ztemporal ← so f tmax(W1 Xtemporal )
 14: Ztopological ← so f tmax(W2 Xtopological )
 15: // Generate final representations with linear interpolation
 16: Zfusion ← (1 − µ)Ztemporal + µZtopological
 17: Loss ← CrossEntropy(Zfusion , Ylabel )
Fig. 3. The illustration of the DiESAGE model in 1-hop propagation scenario. 18: θBPF-DAG ← Adam(Loss)
 19: end for
 20: end for
maximize the extracted traffic information. The cross-entropy 21: return θBPF-DAG
loss is employed over labeled edges for jointly optimizing
both the Transformer and DiESAGE models. Additionally,
a technique called Memory Bank is employed to enable pseudocode of our method is presented in Algorithm 2 and
mini-batch gradient descent when training the GNN. The the relevant symbols are summarized in Table II.
204 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE III
 D ETAILED A RCHITECTURE AND PARAMETER S TATISTICS OF THE BPF-DAG M ODEL

 1) Interpolating Topological and Temporal Representa- graph quite large. Second, simultaneously optimizing both
tions: To fuse the topological and temporal representations, the Transformer and DiESAGE models may lead to memory
we linearly interpolate Xtemporal and Xtopological , then feed them limitations on the GPU. To address these challenges, we
into a linear layer to obtain the final prediction output. adopt a Memory Bank (MB) technique inspired by contrastive
During our experiments, we found that applying an auxil- learning methods [49], [50]. MB decouples the mini-batch
iary transformation before classification improves the overall size from the total number of graph edges by storing their
accuracy. Specifically, we map the temporal and topological representations.
representations to low-dimensional prediction vectors through Specifically, we set a MB to keep track of the temporal
the following auxiliary function: representations Xtemporal of both labeled and unlabeled flow
 samples. At the start of each epoch, all Xtemporal representations
 Ztemporal = so f tmax(W1 Xtemporal ) (14)
 are computed using the current Transformer parameters, and
 Ztopological = so f tmax(W2 Xtopological ) (15) the MB is updated. During each mini-batch iteration, we
where W1 , W2 ∈ Rd×p denote trainable weight matrices, and sample a mini batch from the graph edges, recompute their
p represents the number of traffic categories. Next, we apply representations with the current Transformer, and update the
linear interpolation to obtain the final prediction vector: corresponding entries in the MB. These updated representations, denoted as Xtemporal 0 , are then fed into the DiESAGE
 Zfusion = (1 − µ)Ztemporal + µZtopological (16) model. The cross-entropy loss for the mini-batch is then
 computed and backpropagated.
The coefficient µ is a hyperparameter controlling the balance
 Since Xtemporal in the MB are computed at different iterations
between temporal and topological information. When µ = 0,
 within each epoch, they may become inconsistent. To mitigate
only the temporal representation is used, ignoring the topologthis, we use a relatively small learning rate for the Transformer
ical features of network traffic. Conversely, µ = 1 fully utilizes
 to improve the consistency of stored representations in the MB.
the topological features, but some temporal characteristics
may be lost owing to the graph message-passing process.
A balanced value of 0 < µ < 1 optimally fuses both the V. E XPERIMENTS
temporal and topological predictions. The cross-entropy loss A. Experiment Setup
is employed as the objective function over labeled directed
edges: 1) Datasets: To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of BPF-DAG, we conducted experiments on six public
 L = CrossEntropy(Zfusion , Ylabel ) (17)
 encrypted traffic datasets, including the ISCX VPN-nonVPN
 2) Updating Graph Attributes With Memory Bank: dataset [51], the ISCX Tor-nonTor dataset [52], the MIRAGE-
Throughout training, edge attributes are dynamically updated 2019 dataset [53] and the MIRAGE-2024 dataset [54].
using Xtemporal at each epoch, allowing the temporal represen- The VPN-nonVPN dataset contains encrypted traffic routed
tation of each flow to remain optimal during training. through virtual private networks (VPNs) and regular encrypted
 Traditional GNN models typically use full-batch gradient traffic, both of which encompass six traffic categories: P2P,
descent, which is unsuitable for our BPF-DAG model for VoIP, etc. VPNs are commonly used to bypass censorship and
two reasons. First, the scale of the Internet is vast, involving access restricted services, and the use of tunnel technology
a massive number of IP addresses, which likely makes the complicates the identification of applications running through
SHI et al.: BPF-DAG: BYTE-PACKET-FLOW FEATURES FUSION VIA DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTED GRAPH 205

 TABLE IV
 R ECOMMENDED H YPERPARAMETER C ONFIGURATION FOR BPF-DAG

VPNs. Similarly, the Tor-nonTor dataset includes traffic collected via onion routers (Tor) and regular encrypted traffic,
both featuring eight types of traffic: browsing, audio streaming,
chat, video streaming, mail, VoIP, P2P, and file transfer. Tor
anonymizes internet activities by encrypting and routing traffic
through a distributed network, which adds complexity to
traffic classification. The MIRAGE-2019 dataset is a publicly
available, human-generated mobile traffic dataset designed for Fig. 4. The module-level overview of BPF-DAG.
encrypted mobile app traffic analysis. It includes traffic from
40 Android applications across 16 app categories, focusing on
 the Transformer model. The batch size is set to 64, and training
common functionalities such as service registration, login, and
 runs for 100 epochs. The model is implemented in PyTorch
regular interactions. The release of the MIRAGE-2024 dataset
 2.0.1 and trained on a single NVIDIA RTX 4060 GPU. We
aims to facilitate further research and development in mobile
 run each experiment independently 5 times and average the
network traffic analysis, focusing on interactive, multi activity
 results to reduce the impact of any variability or outliers.
apps and activity-level analysis.
 Table IV shows the hyperparameters used in BPF-DAG and the
 2) Data Preprocessing: Firstly, we remove packets irrel- recommended values. We provided a module-level overview of
evant to the transmitted content of traffic, such as Address the BPF-DAG architecture in Figure 4, a detailed layer-level
Resolution Protocol (ARP) and Internet Control Message description in Table III, showing the input/output dimensions
Protocol (ICMP) packets. Then, we use SplitCap tool to split and parameter counts for each neural network layer.
the raw traffic datasets into unidirectional flows and each flow To evaluate and compare the classification performance of
is taken as a sample for training or testing. To address the our method, we utilize the four key metrics: Accuracy (AC),
scarcity of flow examples in some datasets, especially Tor Precision (PR), Recall (RC), and F1-score (F1). They are
dataset, we augment the flow samples by splitting longer calculated as shown below.
flows into shorter ones. The number of splitted flows from TP + TN
the original long flow is no more than 10. Finally, we partition Accuracy = (18)
 T P + T N + FP + FN
each dataset into training, validation, and testing sets in a 7:1:2 TP
ratio. Recall = (19)
 T P + FN
 3) Implementation Details and Evaluation Metrics: During TP
 Precision = (20)
the raw traffic pre-processing stage of BPF-DAG, we truncate T P + FP
the first 60 and 200 bytes of each raw packet for the ISCX Recall × Precision
 F1 = 2 × (21)
and MIRAGE datasets, respectively. The MIRAGE datasets Recall + Precision
lacks original pcap files and comprises only transport-layer where TP, FP, TN, and FN represent true positive, false
payload bytes, without the associated packet header informa- positive, true negative, and false negative, respectively. Considtion. Therefore, we use only the encrypted payload bytes of ering the imbalanced class distribution of traffic types, macro
the MIRAGE datasets as input. In our experiments, only the averaging is applied to calculate the mean values of Accuracy,
first 10 packets of each flow are retained for all datasets, and Precision, Recall, and F1-score in this paper.
the remaining packets are discarded. This retained length is
 k
considerably shorter than that used in [8], [12], and [22], where 1X
some flows include up to 5,000 packets. For training, we utilize Macroaverage = mi (22)
 k
 i=1
the encoder of the Transformer and a two-layer DiESAGE
model to implement the BPF-DAG method. The Adam opti- where m is the classification metric, mi is the value of
mizer with a learning rate scheduler is applied, with initial classification metric m of class i, and k is the total number of
learning rates of 1e-3 for the DiESAGE model and 1e-5 for traffic categories.
206 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE V
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON P UBLIC ISCX VPN- NON VPN DATASETS

 TABLE VI
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON P UBLIC ISCX T OR - NON T OR DATASETS

B. Comparison With SOTA Methods methods outperform other DL methods, underscoring the
 value of pretraining on large-scale traffic data. However, BPF-
 We compare BPF-DAG with a range of baselines and DAG achieves slightly higher accuracy than these pretraining
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods, including (1) ML-based methods, even without using traffic payloads or pretraining
methods: AppScanner [12], CUMUL [13]; (2) DL-based techniques. This highlights our method’s ability to avoid the
methods: 1D-CNN [21], 2D-CNN [42], TSCRNN [25], computing overhead of pretraining while reducing the cost
HAST [43]; (3) pretraining-based methods: ET-BERT [34], associated with processing payload bytes in each flow sample.
YaTC [33]; (4) GNN-based methods: E-GraphSAGE [36], The performance of GNN-based methods, such as TFE-
TFE-GNN [38]. GNN and E-GraphSAGE, varies with their specific graph
 From the comparison results shown in Table V, VI and VII, construction approaches. E-GraphSAGE relies on manually
we can observe that BPF-DAG outperforms all baseline and extracted statistical features to initialize edge attributes, lack-
SOTA methods across all datasets. The experimental results ing an end-to-end framework. Furthermore, its use of only
indicate that BPF-DAG outperforms existing SOTA methods a few low-dimensional statistical features limits its ability to
by 1.4%, 1.2%, 2.3%, 0.2%, 7.7% and 3.1% in terms of capture discriminative features, resulting in less-than-ideal and
accuracy. unreliable performance. TFE-GNN constructs a byte-level traf-
 ML-based methods in our experiments perform poorly, fic graph where raw bytes are converted into nodes. However,
largely because they only use the packet length sequence as it treats each flow independently, without considering flowinput features, instead of raw traffic bytes, which is not reliable level interaction patterns, which is not reliable enough. In
for encrypted traffic classification. In our experimental setup, contrast, BPF-DAG efficiently integrates byte-level, packetthe number of packets in each flow is generally small, which level and flow-level traffic features, enabling a more reliable
is insufficient for ML-based methods to learn discriminative and accurate framework.
features. Figure 5 and 6 present the visualization of normal and
 SOTA pretraining-based methods like ET-BERT and normalized confusion matrices on all ISCX datasets, respec-
YaTC perform well across the datasets. Encryption and tively. From the normal confusion matrices, it is clear that
anonymity techniques make it challenging for DL-based meth- the distribution of different traffic types within each dataset
ods to analyze traffic payloads directly. Pretraining-based is imbalanced, especially in the ISCX-nonTor dataset. Despite
SHI et al.: BPF-DAG: BYTE-PACKET-FLOW FEATURES FUSION VIA DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTED GRAPH 207

 TABLE VII
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON MIRAGE-2019 AND MIRAGE-2024 DATASETS

 Fig. 5. Confusion matrices of BPF-DAG on four datasets.

 Fig. 6. Normalized confusion matrices of BPF-DAG on four datasets.

the imbalance, BPF-DAG delivers satisfactory classification TABLE VIII
results across all datasets. Additionally, although the ISCX- A BLATION S TUDY OF BPF-DAG ON ISCX-VPN DATASETS
Tor dataset has considerably fewer samples compared to the
others, BPF-DAG outperforms SOTA methods by a significant
margin.

C. Ablation Studies
 To further assess the contribution of each component in
BPF-DAG and verify the reliability of our method, we perform
an ablation study on the ISCX-VPN dataset. The results are
presented in Table VIII. We denote the extraction of temporal
traffic information as ‘T’ and topological traffic information
as ‘S’. More specifically, ‘w/o T’ in Table VIII refers to the
setup where traffic’s statistical features are used to initialize the features and byte-level raw information. ‘w/o S’ refers to
graph attributes instead of automatically extracting temporal extracting temporal features from each flow independently,
features. This evaluates the impact of the packet-level temporal without considering the topological relationships among flows.
208 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 7. t-SNE Visualization of ablation study without using topological features on four datasets.

 Fig. 8. t-SNE Visualization of the proposed BPF-DAG method on four datasets.

This setup tests the impact of the flow-level features. Additionally, we assess the effectiveness of alternative temporal
feature extractor and feature fusion operations, respectively.
We replace the ‘Transformer’ module with ‘Attention-based
LSTM’ (AttnLSTM) and ‘CNN’ module, to see how these different architectures affect performance in capturing temporal
representations. We substitute the linear interpolation operation used to fuse temporal and topological representations with
concatenation and average operations to decide the optimal
fusion operation. Fig. 9. Comparison results in few-shot settings on ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor
 Based on the ablation study results, we can derive the datasets.
following conclusions:
 • Both temporal and topological information contribute to to the model’s accuracy and reliability. Besides, to visualize
 improving classification performance. In contrast to treat- the improvement brought by flow-level topological features,
 ing each flow as an isolated entity, fully leveraging and we use t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)
 capturing interrelationship between flows helps improve to map the final representations to a lower-dimensional space,
 accuracy. Moreover, automatic feature extraction from both with and without topological features, and visualize them
 raw traffic outperforms traditional feature engineering. as two-dimensional images, as shown in Figure 7 and 8.
 Automatic extraction not only eliminates the need for
 manually designing statistical features, but also increases D. Few-Shot Analysis
 accuracy and reliability of the model. To evaluate the performance of BPF-DAG in few-shot
 • Several operations for fusing temporal and topological scenarios, we designed comparison experiments using varied
 features were tested, such as concatenation, average, proportions of data on the ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor datasets.
 and linear concatenation. The results show that linear Specifically, we randomly selected 10%, 40%, and 70% of the
 interpolation is the most effective for combining the two original training samples and conducted classification under
 representations. the same conditions. We compared BPF-DAG with several
 • The ‘AttnLSTM’ module provides classification accuracy baselines as well as SOTA methods, with the comparsion
 comparable to the default Transformer module, indicating results presented in Figure 9.
 its ability to capture temporal features effectively. The The results show that BPF-DAG is the least affected by
 CNN module, however, performs less effectively, likely reduced training data and consistently outperforms other methbecause it lacks the capacity to capture the sequential, ods across all data proportions. In contrast, common deep
 time-related dependencies. learning-based methods (e.g., 1D-CNN, 2D-CNN, TSCRNN)
 To conclude, the ablation studies confirm that the byte- suffer significant performance degradation when the prolevel, packet-level and flow-level traffic features all contribute portion of training data is reduced to 10%. However, the
SHI et al.: BPF-DAG: BYTE-PACKET-FLOW FEATURES FUSION VIA DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTED GRAPH 209

 TABLE IX
 M ODEL FLOP S AND PARAMETERS

 Fig. 10. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis w.r.t. interpolation coefficient and raw
 byte length on ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor datasets.

pretraining-based method YaTC is relatively more robust due As µ increasing from zero, the F1-score consistently increases,
to its pretraining on large-scale unlabeled data. which exactly reflects the effectiveness of features fusion.
 The strong performance of BPF-DAG in few-shot settings The results show that the optimal values of µ vary across
can be attributed to the use of GNNs, which reinforce the datasets and do not follow an obvious pattern. Specifically,
interconnected patterns of network flows through message the optimal values are 0.9 and 0.8 for the ISCX-VPN and
passing in the graph structure. This message-passing mecha- ISCX-Tor datasets, respectively, and 0.4 and 0.5 for the
nism allows BPF-DAG to capture relationships between flows, MIRAGE-2019 and MIRAGE-2024 datasets, respectively. In
making it more resilient to limited training data. conclusion, we can state that appropriately incorporating flowlevel topological patterns into flow representations enables a
E. Complexity Analysis significant improvement in classification performance.
 To thoroughly assess the trade-off between performance 2) The Impact of Raw Byte Length m: In our experiment,
and complexity, we calculate the floating point operations we truncate the first m bytes of each packet header to represent
(FLOPs) and model parameter size for both our method and the raw packet. The value of m effects the tradeoff between
the comparison methods. As shown in Table IX, our model’ computational overhead and classification performance. From
s FLOPs and parameter size are approximately 11% and 28% Figure 10(b), we can find that the appropriate range of m is
lower, respectively, than those of the SOTA methods. from 50 to 60 and the degree of influence varies for different
 According to Tables V and VI, it is concluded that BPF- datasets. The decrease of m causes obvious performance
DAG provides a significant performance improvement with degradation for Tor dataset, while the VPN dataset is less
tolerable model complexity. While BPF-DAG has higher com- affected. To balance the performance and overhead, m is set
putational complexity than traditional DL-based methods due to 60 for all ISCX datasets.
to its use of GNN, it delivers superior accuracy. Conversely,
although pre-training methods like ET-BERT produce similar VI. C ONCLUSION
classification results to BPF-DAG, their FLOPs and model In this paper, we propose BPF-DAG, a byte-packet-flow
parameters are several times higher than it. Besides, the features fusion-based reliable encrypted traffic classification
pretraining process is time-consuming and excessively high method via dynamic attributed graph. This is the first method
computational complexity is not suitable for real-time traffic that integrates temporal packet relations into flow interaction
detection. To sum up, the computational complexity of BPF- patterns using raw-byte traffic as input, realizing byte-packet-
DAG is slightly higher than some classical methods, but it flow multi-granularity features fusion. By jointly training a
achieves better classification performance compared to SOTA GNN and Transformer, BPF-DAG extracts topological patterns
methods. from the flow interaction graph and temporal characteristics
 from raw byte-based packet sequences. We propose a novel
F. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis multi-granularity features fusion strategy to fully integrate
 In this part, we analyze how the classification performance byte-level, packet-level and flow-level traffic features. During
is affected by the sensitivity of two crucial hyperparameters, training, the temporal representations of flows are learned
i.e., the interpolation coefficient µ and raw byte length m. from packet sequences using the optimized Transformer after
 1) The Impact of Interpolation Coefficient µ: The interpo- each epoch, and then corresponding directed edge attributes
lation coefficient µ controls the tradeoff between the temporal are updated with them. To reduce the memory overhead,
representation and topological representation. µ = 0 means we leverage a technique called Memory Bank to track all
only the temporal information of raw traffic is leveraged. temporal representations to decouple the training batch size
When 0 < µ < 1, the temporal and topological represen- from the total number of edges. Our method has been extentations are fully fused and µ controls the balance between sively evaluated on four encrypted traffic datasets, and the
them. The value of µ for optimal classification performance experimental results demonstrate that BPF-DAG not only outis different for different traffic datasets. Figure 10(a) shows performs SOTA methods in terms of accuracy, but also exhibits
the F1-score results with µ ranging from 0 to 1 for ISCX- relatively lower complexity. Furthermore, BPF-DAG exhibits
VPN, ISCX-Tor, MIRAGE2019 and MIRAGE2024 datasets. strong performance in few-shot learning scenarios. Looking
210 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

ahead, we plan to extend our multi-granularity features fusion [22] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
strategy to unsupervised Intrusion Detection Systems to detect Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Toronto,
and identify malicious traffic in real-time. ON, Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
 [23] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
 R EFERENCES Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 [24] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
[1] R. Sharma, S. Dangi, and P. Mishra, “A comprehensive review on “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural netencryption based open source cyber security tools,” in Proc. 6th works for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050,
 Int. Conf. Signal Process., Comput. Control (ISPCC), Oct. 2021, 2017.
 pp. 614–619. [25] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme
[2] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient
 traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no.
 Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2022. 107974.
[3] E. Ramadhani, “Anonymity communication VPN and tor: A comparative [26] G. Bovenzi et al., “Benchmarking class incremental learning in deep
 study,” J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 983, Mar. 2018, Art. no. 012060. learning traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
[4] K. Thomas et al., “Data breaches, phishing, or malware? Understanding vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 51–69, Feb. 2024.
 the risks of stolen credentials,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. [27] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1421–1434. A. Pescapé, “Improving performance, reliability, and feasibility in mul-
[5] G. Pellegrino, M. Johns, S. Koch, M. Backes, and C. Rossow, timodal multitask traffic classification with XAI,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 “Deemon: Detecting CSRF with dynamic analysis and property graphs,” Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1267–1289, Jun. 2023.
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, [28] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 pp. 1757–1771. convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[6] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware [29] Y. Chen and Y. Wang, “MPAF: Encrypted traffic classification with
 traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,” multi-phase attribute fingerprint,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
 in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, vol. 19, pp. 7091–7105, 2024.
 Halifax, NS, Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732. [30] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and
[7] T. Van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. [31] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 (NDSS), vol. 27, Feb. 2020, pp. 1–18. learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
[8] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “WF-transformer: vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
 Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification [32] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and X. Cao, “An efficient feature
 by using transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection
 vol. 19, pp. 30–43, 2024. techniques for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 132, pp. 81–98,
[9] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An Feb. 2018.
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018, [33] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
 arXiv:1802.09089. based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
[10] M. Roesch et al., “Snort: Lightweight intrusion detection for networks,” AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
 Lisa, vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 229–238, 1999. [34] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
[11] V. Paxson, “Bro: A system for detecting network intruders in real-time,” contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 Comput. Netw., vol. 31, nos. 23–24, pp. 2435–2463, Dec. 1999. for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
[12] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner: pp. 633–642.
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted net- [35] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
 work traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016, and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
 pp. 439–454. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
[13] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc. [36] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “E-
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), vol. 1, 2016, p.23477. GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
[14] A. S. Jacobs, R. Beltiukov, W. Willinger, R. A. Ferreira, A. Gupta, for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Budapest,
 and L. Z. Granville, “AI/ML for network security: The emperor has no Hungary, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–9.
 clothes,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. [37] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
 2022, pp. 1537–1551. line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
[15] J. Gu and S. Lu, “An effective intrusion detection approach using SVM learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
 with naı̈ve Bayes feature embedding,” Comput. Secur., vol. 103, Apr. 2023.
 2021, Art. no. 102158. [38] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
[16] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “AI- neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
 powered internet traffic classification: Past, present, and future,” IEEE ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
 Commun. Mag., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 168–175, Sep. 2024. [39] M. Wang, N. Yang, and N. Weng, “K-GetNID: Knowledge-guided
[17] Z. Khodaverdian, H. Sadr, and S. A. Edalatpanah, “A shallow deep graphs for early and transferable network intrusion detection,” IEEE
 neural network for selection of migration candidate virtual machines to Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 7147–7160, 2024.
 reduce energy consumption,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Web Res. (ICWR), [40] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an
 May 2021, pp. 191–196. increasingly encrypted web,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst.,
[18] H. Sadr, M. Nazari Soleimandarabi, and Z. Khodaverdian, “Automatic vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–26, 2021.
 assessment of short answers based on computational and data mining [41] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of
 approaches,” J. Decisions Oper. Res., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 242–255, 2021. TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14,
[19] M. Nazari, H. Emami, R. Rabiei, A. Hosseini, and S. Rahmatizadeh, no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018.
 “Detection of cardiovascular diseases using data mining approaches: [42] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 Application of an ensemble-based model,” Cognit. Comput., vol. 16, classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 no. 5, pp. 2264–2278, Sep. 2024. learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
[20] H. Sadr, A. Salari, M. T. Ashoobi, and M. Nazari, “Cardiovascular Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
 disease diagnosis: A holistic approach using the integration of machine [43] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial–temporal
 learning and deep learning models,” Eur. J. Med. Res., vol. 29, no. 1, features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,”
 p. 455, Sep. 2024. IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018.
[21] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end [44] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural A. Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul. improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 2017, pp. 43–48. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
SHI et al.: BPF-DAG: BYTE-PACKET-FLOW FEATURES FUSION VIA DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTED GRAPH 211

[45] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An Jun Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. degree in information and telecommunication studies
 Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860. from Waseda University, Japan, in 2011. He was a
[46] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Research Institute
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM for Secure Systems, National Institute of Advanced
 Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023. Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan,
[47] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. from 2011 to 2012. He was a Researcher with the
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2025, pp. 5998–6008. Global Information and Telecommunication Insti-
[48] A. Sriram, H. Jun, S. Satheesh, and A. Coates, “Cold fusion: tute, Waseda University, from 2011 to 2013. He is
 Training Seq2Seq models together with language models,” 2017, currently a Professor with the School of Electronic
 arXiv:1708.06426. Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai
[49] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning Jiao Tong University, China. He is also the Dean of the Institute of Cyber
 via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Science and Technology and the Vice Director of the National Engineering
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3733–3742. Research Center for Information Content Analysis Technology, Shanghai Jiao
[50] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for Tong University. He has hosted and participated in a lot of research projects,
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. including the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NFSC), the
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738. National 863 Plan and 973 Plan of China, and Japan Society of the Promotion
[51] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, of Science Projects (JSPS). His research interests include the intelligence
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” and security techniques of artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things (IoT),
 in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016, 5G/6G, and molecular communication. He has been the Track Chair of VTC
 pp. 407–414. 2019 and VTC 2020 and a TPC Member of more than ten international
[52] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, conferences, including ICC and GLOBECOM. He is the Chair of the IEEE
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd P21451-1-5 Standard Working Group. He has been a Guest Editor of IEEE
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017, pp. 253–262. T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
[53] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, I NTELLIGENT T RANSPORTATION S YSTEMS, IEEE S ENSORS J OURNAL, and
 “MIRAGE: Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” in Sensors. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE S YSTEMS J OURNAL and
 Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Comput., Commun. Secur. (ICCCS), Oct. 2019, IEEE N ETWORKING L ETTERS.
 pp. 1–8.
[54] I. Guarino, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “Mirage-AppxAct-
 2024: A novel dataset for mobile app and activity traffic analysis,”
 in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Comput., Netw. Commun.
 (WiMob), Oct. 2024, pp. 663–666.

 Jianhua Li (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
 a Professor/Ph.D. Supervisor and the Dean of the
 Institute of Cyber Science and Technology, Shanghai
 Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. He is also the
 Yunxiao Shi (Student Member, IEEE) received the Director of the National Engineering Laboratory for
 B.S. degree in communication engineering from Information Content Analysis Technology and the
 Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunica- Engineering Research Center for Network Informations, Nanjing, China, in 2023. He is currently tion Security Management and Service of Chinese
 pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Ministry of Education. He has published more than
 Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, 400 papers, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. His D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING, IEEE
 research interests include encrypted traffic classi- T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE
 fication, intrusion detection systems, and machine T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 learning for cyber security. E MERGING T OPICS IN C OMPUTATIONAL I NTELLIGENCE, ACM CCS, ACM
 MobiHoc, IEEE Infocom, and IEEE Globecom. He has published six books
 and has about 20 patents. He made three standards and has five software copyrights. His research interests include information security, signal processing,
 and computer network communication. He has got many awards, including
 the Second Prize of National Technology Progress Award of China in 2005,
 Gaolei Li (Member, IEEE) is currently an Associate the First Prize of Science and Technology Progress Award of the Ministry
 Professor with the School of Electronic Informa- of Education, the First Prize of Science and Technology Progress Award of
 tion and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong Shanghai, the IEEE CSIM Committee Best Paper Award in 2016, the IEEE
 University, Shanghai, China. He has published more TETC Best Paper Award in 2017, and the ESI Highly Cited Scientist from
 than 100 papers, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS 2022 to 2024.
 ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY
 (IEEE TIFS), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON D EPEND -
 ABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING (IEEE TDSC),
 NDSS, ACM CCS, ACM MM, and AAAI. His
 research interests include machine learning security and privacy-preserving. He has obtained many
awards, including the Outstanding Paper Award of IEEE ISPA 2024, the He Fang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
Third Prize of Science and Technology Progress Award of China Electric in electrical and computer engineering from Western
Power Development Acceleration Committee in 2024, the Best Conference University, Canada, in 2020. She is currently a Full
Paper Award of China Cryptology Society in 2020, and the Best Conference Professor with Fujian Normal University, China.
Paper Award of IEEE CSIM Committee in 2018. He also served as a Her research interests include intelligent security
TPC member for CVPR 2024–2025, AAAI 2023&2024&2025, ACM MM provision and trust management. She has over 60
2023&2024&2025, and ICLR 2025. Besides, he also serves a reviewer for peer-reviewed journals and conference papers, and
IEEE TIFS, IEEE TDSC, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING, won the Best Paper Award from IEEE GLOBECOM
IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS, IEEE/ACM 2023. She serves as an Associate Editor for sev-
T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S ERVICES eral journals, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
C OMPUTING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARN - I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY and
ING S YSTEMS , and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G REEN C OMMUNICATIONS China Communications. She was also involved in many IEEE conferences
AND N ETWORKING . as the track chair or the session chair.