IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026 3105

 BPF-GNN: A Multi-Granularity Feature Extraction
 Model Using Graph Neural Networks for
 Encrypted Traffic Classification
 Guolong Li , Yuan Gao , Jiongjiong Ren , and Shaozhen Chen

 Abstract—Encrypted traffic classification is crucial for critical To address these challenges, researchers have proposed a
network management tasks such as traffic type identification, variety of methods based on machine learning (ML) and deep
resource allocation, and risk mitigation, especially given that learning (DL) [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. Early machine learning
encrypted traffic has become the dominant form of modern
network communication. However, existing classification methods methods relied on manually designed statistical features, which
are typically confined to single-level feature extraction, failing to achieved some success to a certain extent. However, these
capture the multi-granularity information inherent in traffic and methods required manual feature engineering, and their accuthus limiting their ability to characterize complex encrypted traf- racy largely depended on the quality of the feature engineering.
fic patterns. To address this issue, this paper proposes BPF-GNN, In recent years, the rise of deep learning technology has
a hierarchical graph feature extraction model for encrypted
traffic classification. The model enables multi-granularity feature provided new solutions for encrypted traffic classification.
learning by constructing a three-tier graph structure (Byte-, Deep learning models can automatically extract features from
Packet-, and Flow-level). It sequentially extracts discriminative raw traffic data, avoiding cumbersome feature engineering, and
information inherent in each granularity level and accumulates demonstrating strong learning capabilities and generalization
multi-dimensional traffic characteristics, significantly improving performance. However, a critical limitation persists: most deep
the classification accuracy of encrypted traffic. Experiments
on the ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-Tor2016, USTC-TFC2016, and learning frameworks based on traditional neural networks
MIRAGE-2024 datasets demonstrate that BPF-GNN outperforms such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Recurrent
existing methods, validating the effectiveness and superiority of Neural Network (RNN) process traffic data in Euclidean space,
the proposed hierarchical multi-granularity feature extraction neglecting the inherent non-Euclidean nature of network trafapproach. fic. This oversight may lead to the loss of valuable information
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, deep learning, [10].
graph neural networks, multi-granularity feature extraction. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), designed for non-
 Euclidean data, provide a natural solution for modeling
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 complex traffic relationships. As a result, researchers are

N ETWORK traffic classification is a fundamental and
 critical task in network research, which is essential for
Quality of Service (QoS), malware detection, and intrusion
 increasingly interested in GNNs for encrypted traffic classification. However, most current GNN-based methods [10], [11],
 [12], [13], [14] focus only on feature extraction at a single
detection [1]. In recent years, with the widespread use of level of the graph (network traffic can be divided into three
encryption technology, the privacy and anonymity of net- levels from low to high: byte, packet, and flow), neglecting the
work traffic have been significantly enhanced. However, the fact that there is unique potential available information at each
prevalence of encryption technology has also brought new granularity level. Additionally, in deep learning methods that
challenges to network traffic analysis. Traditional traffic clas- use raw bytes as input, headers and payloads are often treated
sification methods, such as port-based techniques and Deep as a single learning entity without distinguishing their different
Packet Inspection (DPI) [2], [3], [4], have seen a marked representations and functions, which may lead to some degree
decrease in effectiveness when dealing with encrypted traf- of semantic confusion [15].
fic. Port-based methods have become ineffective due to the In response to the aforementioned issues, this paper proextensive use of dynamic ports, and DPI not only has high poses BPF-GNN, a hierarchical graph feature extraction model
computational overhead when processing encrypted traffic but that constructs byte-, packet-, and flow-level graphs for multialso struggles to extract valid information. granularity feature extraction. The model consists of three
 Received 12 June 2025; revised 8 January 2026 and 2 March 2026;
 main parts, as shown in Fig. 1: byte-level graph construction
accepted 3 March 2026. Date of publication 6 March 2026; date of current and packet-level representation learning, packet-level graph
version 16 March 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural construction and flow-level representation learning, flow-level
Science Foundation of China under Grants No. 62206312. The associate editor graph construction and classification. First, at the byte level,
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was F.
Musumeci. (Corresponding author: Yuan Gao.) we employ a dual embedding layer to separately construct byte
 The authors are with the Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou correlation graphs for packet headers and payloads, mining
450001, China (e-mail: liguolongx@163.com; yuanmiao202311@163.com;
jiongjiong fun@163.com; chenshaozhen@vip.sina.com).
 the potential correlations between bytes in packet headers
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3671203 and payloads. A feature extractor composed of multi-layer
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3106 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. BPF-GNN model architecture.

GNNs performs graph representation learning to obtain the complementary information present in the header and
representation vectors of headers and payloads, respectively. payload.
These two types of graph representation vectors are then fused 3) To evaluate the performance of BPF-GNN, we compare
via a Gated Multimodal Unit (GMU) to generate a joint rep- it with several existing methods on four public datasets.
resentation. Second, at the packet level, we construct a Traffic The results demonstrate that BPF-GNN significantly
Interaction Graph (TIG) [13] using the joint representations outperforms these existing methods. This remarkable
as node features to extract interaction information between performance can be attributed to the effectiveness of the
packets. Similarly, we use multi-layer GNNs to conduct graph multi-granularity feature extraction approach.
representation learning and derive the overall representation
vector for each flow. Finally, at the flow level, we select the II. C ONSIDERED S CENARIO
Top-k most similar flows for each flow and establish connections between flow nodes, thereby supplementing similarity A. Application Scenario
information among flows and enriching the flow-level feature Encrypted traffic classification serves as a pivotal techrepresentations for classification. nical support for modern network operation and security
 Experiments on the ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-Tor2016, governance, with its application scenarios covering enter-
USTC-TFC2016, and MIRAGE-2024 datasets demonstrate prise intranets, campus networks, cloud computing platforms,
that BPF-GNN effectively distinguishes fine-grained cate- and public network access gateways. These scenarios are
gories of encrypted traffic, achieving significantly higher characterized by diverse network architectures (including
classification accuracy than baselines. The contributions of our wired/wireless integrated networks, LANs, and WANs) and
work are threefold: heterogeneous user groups (such as enterprise employees
 engaged in remote office, campus users with mixed service
 demands, and individual consumers accessing public services),
 1) We propose a method BPF-GNN for hierarchically resulting in complex and variable encrypted traffic patterns.
 extracting features at three different levels, rather than The core application objectives in these scenarios include
 only focusing on feature extraction at a single level. This the following two dimensions: first, refined network resource
 allows us to extract the potential information contained management, which requires distinguishing fine-grained appliat the byte, packet, and flow levels, thereby enriching cation types (e.g., chat, email, file transfer, streaming media)
 the representation of the flow-level features used for in encrypted traffic to optimize bandwidth allocation and QoS
 classification. guarantee strategies; second, targeted security risk prevention,
 2) We start feature extraction from the basic level (byte- which involves identifying abnormal encrypted traffic (such
 level) of traffic to learn deeper feature representations as malicious traffic disguised by encryption) to block hidden
 and handle the header and payload bytes of each attack channels and comply with network security managepacket separately to avoid semantic confusion. Further- ment regulations.
 more, after the GNN layer, we use GMU to obtain In practical deployment, the classification system is required
 the joint representation of the packet header and pay- to operate in a passive and non-intrusive mode. It only collects
 load. This approach enables the model to leverage the and analyzes traffic data, without decrypting payloads or mod-
LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs 3107

ifying packet structures. This design ensures compliance with and confirmed the critical role of feature engineering and
data privacy protection specifications and avoids interference enhanced features in improving classification performance.
with normal network communication. Zaki et al. [17] proposed GRAIN, which realizes three-level
 granular multi-label classification of encrypted traffic based
B. Task Description on statistical features of packet payload lengths and cascaded
 Encrypted traffic classification is defined as a supervised Random Forest classifiers. Mohanty et al. [18] proposed a
learning task that maps encrypted network flow samples to stacking ensemble model and an autoencoder-based defense
predefined category labels based on their inherent features. mechanism to solve the problems of high False Positive
This task focuses on two levels of classification objectives Rate and vulnerability to adversarial attacks in darknet traffic
aligned with practical application demands: classification.
 Another line of research directly takes raw bit/byte streams
 1) Fine-grained application type classification: Distinguishas input to machine learning models. Yun et al. [19] proposed
 ing specific service types within encrypted traffic, such
 Securitas, a protocol identification system that leverages the
 as chat, email, file transfer, peer-to-peer (P2P), streaming
 skewed frequency-rank distribution of protocol trace n-grams,
 media (audio/video), and voice over IP (VoIP). This level
 extracts statistical message formats by clustering semantically
 of classification provides a basis for refined network
 identical n-grams, and identifies protocols from raw network
 resource optimization and legitimate service managetraces without prior protocol knowledge. Wang et al. [20]
 ment, enabling targeted allocation of network bandwidth
 proposed ProHacker, a nonparametric approach that extracts
 and QoS guarantees.
 protocol keywords via a Bayesian statistical model and classi-
 2) Normal/abnormal traffic discrimination: Identifying
 fies protocol traces using semi-supervised learning. Xiao et al.
 whether encrypted traffic belongs to legitimate user
 [21] proposed the Dynamic Multiple Traffic Classification
 behavior or malicious activities (e.g., botnet com-
 System (DMTCS), which incorporates time-based protocol
 munication, malware propagation, unauthorized data
 information distribution and applies topic models to cluster
 exfiltration). This objective is crucial for network secupackets, enabling dynamic network stream classification withrity defense, helping to detect hidden threats and
 out prior application knowledge. Tang et al. [22] proposed
 maintain the security and compliance of network oper-
 MGrC based on granular computing, which defines traffic flow
 ations.
 granules, explores inter-granule correlations, and establishes
 Formally, let X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xN } denote a dataset con- structural granules to capture inherent packet relationships.
sisting of N encrypted traffic samples, where each sample However, the main drawback of these methods lies in the
xi corresponds to a bidirectional network flow defined by generally shallow structure of machine learning models, which
a 5-tuple (source IP, destination IP, source port, destination makes it difficult to capture the complex correlation features
port, transport layer protocol). Each flow sample is composed in encrypted traffic and results in insufficient adaptability to
of a sequence of packets, including header metadata and high-dimensional traffic data with variable patterns [23].
encrypted payloads. Let Y = {y1 , y2 , . . ., yN } represent the
corresponding label set, where yi ∈ {1, 2, . . ., C} (C is the B. Deep Learning-Based Methods
number of target categories).
 Thanks to the rapid development of deep learning technol-
 The core challenge of this task lies in overcoming the
 ogy, researchers have begun to apply deep learning techniques
semantic obscurity caused by encryption. The model must
 to the field of network traffic classification. The earliest
mine discriminative information from multi-granularity traffic
 methods to emerge were based on traditional neural networks.
representations. The ultimate goal is to learn a mapping
 Wang et al. [8] transformed traffic into images and profunction f : X → Y that achieves high accuracy, precision,
 posed a CNN-based method for encrypted traffic classification.
recall, and F1-score on diverse encrypted traffic scenarios.
 Bu et al. [24] proposed a model with deep and parallel
 network-in-network (NIN) structures, which enhances local
 III. R ELATED W ORK
 modeling via micro-networks after convolution layers and
A. Machine Learning-Based Methods reduces parameters with global average pooling. Liu et al.
 In recent years, machine learning-based methods have [25] proposed FS-Net based on RNN, which leverages a
achieved promising results in the field of traffic classification. multi-layer encoder-decoder structure to mine flow sequential
These methods combine discriminative features extracted from characteristics and a reconstruction mechanism to enhance
encrypted traffic with machine learning algorithms. They first feature effectiveness. Ren et al. [26] proposed Tree-RNN,
extract feature information from the traffic and then input these which divides large classification tasks into small ones via
features into machine learning models for classification. tree structure and deploys specific classifiers for each sub-task,
 A large number of studies focus on mining statistical realizing end-to-end feature learning. These methods avoid
features inherent in traffic to build classification models. tedious feature engineering in traditional machine learning,
Finamore et al. [16] proposed KISS, which extracts payload yet rely on traditional neural networks such as CNN and RNN
statistical features via the Chi-Square test and combines geo- to process Euclidean space data. They only efficiently handle
metric distance or Support Vector Machines to address the regular 1D or 2D data, ignore the intrinsic non-Euclidean traits
classification needs brought by the growth of UDP traffic. of network traffic, and lead to the loss of valuable information
Anderson et al. [6] compared six machine learning models, [10].
3108 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 In recent years, GNNs have become a hot topic in the field
of deep learning. These networks can integrate deep learning
with graph structures, making up for the shortcomings of the
aforementioned traditional neural network-based classification
methods.
 Researchers have attempted to combine deep learning-based
methods with graph-based methods to improve the effectiveness of traffic classification. Zheng et al. [11] proposed a graph
construction method that combines traffic trace graph with
statistical features, which can achieve certain performance
improvements under low labeling rates, but its accuracy is
relatively low. Sun et al. [12] constructed a graph structure
 Fig. 2. The overall process of our method.
based on the K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) method and used a
fusion neural network of graph convolution and autoencoder to
extract graph features. Shen et al. [13], leveraging the slightly process of our method is shown in Fig. 2, which is divided into
different characteristics of traffic in terms of bursts, proposed five stages: data preprocessing, byte-level graph construction
TIG, which achieved good classification results on Decen- and packet-level representation learning, packet-level graph
tralized Applications (DApps). Huoh et al. [10] construct a construction and flow-level representation learning, flow-level
graph structure using the raw bytes of packets, the sequen- representation enrichment and classification.
tial relationships between packets, and packet metadata. The
raw byte information is utilized as node features, and edges
were generated according to the chronological order of each A. Data Preprocessing
packet’s timestamp. Additionally, five common meta-features Assuming that the raw traffic data we obtain is in the
are included as global features of the graph. They design a PCAP format, due to the varying lengths of the raw traffic
GNN to learn representations for nodes, edges, and global data and the presence of interfering information, we need to
features. Diao et al. [14] proposed EC-GCN based on multi- preprocess the data to transform it into uniformly formatted
scale graph convolutional neural networks, which encodes input data. The data preprocessing consists of five steps: traffic
traffic flows into graph representations via a lightweight layer splitting, flow filtering, anonymization, and extraction of raw
relying only on metadata and extracts multi-graph represen- traffic bytes from packet header/payload.
tations through a graph pooling and structure learning layer. 1) Traffic Splitting: First, we need to split the continuous
Yang et al. [27] proposed MTSecurity, which integrates Trans- traffic into multiple discrete units. The most commonly used
former and GNN technologies, constructs the Malicious Traffic method in current research is to divide the raw traffic data into
Interaction Graph (MTIG) based on client-server interactions, bidirectional flows. A flow refers to all packets that share the
and fuses raw byte features with graph-based interaction fea- same five-tuple information (source IP, source port, destination
tures. Shi et al. [28] proposed BPF-DAG, which constructed a IP, destination port, and transport layer protocol). Following
global IP-level communication graph and adopted Transformer this step, the raw traffic data is segmented into a set of flows
and a customized DiESAGE to extract packet-level temporal F = {f1 , . . . , fN }, where N represents the size of F .
features and flow-level topological features, respectively. 2) Flow Filtering: We filter out flows in which all of
 A common issue with the aforementioned methods is that packets have no payload. This is because these flows do
they focus only on feature extraction at one level of the graph, not contain any actual transmission content or data, and thus
neglecting the fact that there is unique potential available infor- cannot be used to construct the corresponding graph structure.
mation at each granularity level. For example, the methods Furthermore, we also filter out flows with an excessively
of Zheng et al. and Sun et al. both focus only on feature large number of packets. Specifically, flows with more than
extraction at the flow level, while the methods of Shen et al. 10,000 packets are defined as “excessively large flows” and
and Huoh et al. focus only on feature extraction at the packet filtered out. This is because such flows are mostly caused by
level. Furthermore, the model proposed by Shi et al. only poor network conditions or other underlying factors, which
focuses on the temporal relations at the packet level and the introduce massive noise via bad and retransmitted packets
topological relations at the flow level, without considering the that may interfere with subsequent graph construction and
relational information among bytes within a packet, nor does feature learning. Therefore, such flows are typically regarded
it achieve real feature modeling at the byte level. as abnormal samples and are removed. After this step, the
 Therefore, based on the above observations, we propose a 0
 flow set F is filtered into set F 0 = {f10 , . . . , fM }, where M
hierarchical feature extraction model BPF-GNN that constructs 0
 represents the size of F and M ≤ N .
byte-, packet-, and flow-level graph structures for multi- 3) Anonymization: The five-tuple information of each
granularity feature extraction. packet in each flow fi0 is directly removed, as this information
 may interfere with the classification results of encrypted traffic.
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY 4) Extraction of Raw Traffic Bytes: For each flow fi0 , select
 In this section, we provide a detailed description of our the first K packets and extract the first m bytes of the packet
method as well as the overall model architecture. The overall header and the first n bytes of the payload as the raw byte
LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs 3109

Fig. 3. An example of sliding window with window size of 3.

sequences for header/payload. Byte streams longer than m/n Fig. 4. Structure of GNN for packet-level representation learning.
bytes are truncated, while those shorter than m/n bytes are
padded with 0xF F at the end to reach the required length.
If the number of packets in flow fi0 is less than K, the flow Next, we count the frequency of each byte appearing in
is padded with several m/n-length byte sequences filled with various windows and record the number of times byte pairs co-
0xF F . occur within the same window. This statistical information will
 Consequently, the packet header/payload information of be used to calculate the strength of association between bytes.
each flow fi0 is transformed into a byte matrix Hi ∈ To quantify this strength of association, we use Pointwise
RK×m /Pi ∈ RK×n to represent it. Mutual Information (PMI) [31] as a measure. The formula
 for calculating PMI is as follows:
B. Byte-Level Graph Construction and Packet-Level p(x, y)
Representation Learning P M I(x; y) = log .
 p(x)p(y)
 In this section, we introduce the process of constructing
 PMI measures the probability of two bytes co-occurring in a
byte-level graph and packet-level representation learning. To
 window relative to the probability of their independent occuravoid confusion in meaning, we perform representation learnrences. If the PMI value is positive, it indicates that the two
ing for packet header and payload independently [15], [29],
 bytes have a strong association in context, and thus an edge
[30]. Next, we present a detailed description.
 connection is established between the nodes corresponding
 1) Byte-Level Graph Construction: In this section, our goal
 to these two bytes; if the PMI value is negative or zero, it
is to transform each row of the packet header/payload matrices
 is considered that there is no significant association between
obtained in Section IV-A into a byte-level graph Gbyte =
 them.
{Vbyte , Ebyte } to serve as input data for the graph neural
 2) Packet-Level Representation Learning: Following the
network, where Vbyte and Ebyte are the sets of vertices and
 methodology established in Section IV-B.1, we generate byteedges. The graph construction method refers to the approach
 level graphs for both packet headers and payloads. To perform
proposed in Reference [15]. Below, we use the first row r1 of
 feature extraction on these graphs, we implement a fourthe packet header byte matrix H1 for flow f10 as an example to
 layer GraphSAGE architecture [15], as detailed in Fig. 4.
illustrate the process of constructing the corresponding byte-
 GraphSAGE [32] is an GNN framework that learns node
level graph.
 embeddings by sampling and aggregating features of local
 Here, we assume that
 neighbor nodes. This framework possesses a strong capability
 r1 = {a1 , . . . , am } , ai ∈ [0, 255], i = 1, . . . , m. to capture local structural correlations and can effectively mine
 the local relevance between bytes in byte-level graphs. The
Each element in Vbyte represents a byte of r1 . Note that all
 core process of GraphSAGE consists of two sequential steps:
bytes with the same value share the same node, so the number
 neighbor feature aggregation and node embedding update. For
of nodes in Gbyte does not exceed 256, which ensures that the
 each node v, the neighbor aggregation operation is defined as:
size of the byte-level graph remains relatively small.
 To construct the edge set Ebyte , we first process the input
byte sequence r1 using a sliding window (as shown in Fig. 3). AGGREGATE ({qu | u ∈ N (v)}) ,
This step is designed to capture local contextual correlations where we adopt mean aggregation to achieve stable and
between bytes, which is a key property for distinguishing reliable feature learning. The updated node embedding is then
encrypted traffic patterns. Semantic associations in packet calculated by the following formula:
headers and payloads are typically concentrated in adjacent  
or short-range byte sequences, making these local correlations qv0 = σ W (l) · CONCAT (qv , AGGREGATE(·)) ,
particularly valuable for classification. Specifically, we set a
window of fixed size (e.g., 3 bytes in Fig. 3) and slide it across which concatenates the node’s own features with the aggrer1 with a step size of 1: each window defines a local context, gated neighbor information, thereby preserving both local
and bytes within the same window are treated as co-occurring details and contextual associations simultaneously.
elements. This approach avoids the over-dense graph structure Formally, for each node v ∈ Vbyte in the graph Gbyte , the
that would result from connecting all bytes chronologically, feature aggregation process can be described as follows. Let
 (l−1)
while focusing on meaningful short-range byte relationships. qv denote the feature vector of node v at layer l − 1, and
3110 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 3) Representation Fusion: Having derived packet-level representation vectors for both headers and payloads, we integrate
 these representations into a unified vector through a streamlined GMU [36]. This mapping operation projects the header
 and payload features into a joint latent space, enabling subsequent packet-level graph construction. The GMU architecture
 is detailed in Fig. 5.
 Let gh and gp represent the packet-level representation
 vectors extracted from the traffic header graphs and traffic
 payload graphs, respectively. The GMU computes a gating
Fig. 5. The simplified version of GMU.
 vector to control the information between header and payload
 representation vectors.
N (v) represent the set of neighboring nodes of v. The message First, we transform the header and payload representation
from the neighbors is computed as: vectors using hyperbolic tangent (tanh) activation functions:

 1 X hh = tanh (Wh · gh ) ,
 p(l) = qu(l−1) ,
 |N (v)| hp = tanh (Wp · gp ) ,
 u∈N (v)

where |N (v)| is the cardinality of the neighbor set. The where Wh and Wp are the learnable weight matrices for the
updated feature vector for node v at layer l is then obtained header and payload modalities, respectively. The tanh function
by concatenating its current feature vector with the aggregated ensures that the transformed representation vectors are within
neighbor message, followed by a non-linear transformation: the range [−1, 1].
    Next, we compute the gating vector z using a sigmoid
 qv(l) = σ W (l) · CONCAT qv(l−1) , p(l) . activation function:

Here, W (l) ∈ Rdl−1 ×dl is the learnable weight matrix at layer z = σ (Wz · CONCAT(gh , gp )) ,
l, CONCAT(·) denotes the concatenation operation, and σ(·)
is the activation function. We utilize the Parametric ReLU where Wz is the learnable weight matrix for the gating mech-
(PReLU) [33] as the activation function, defined as: anism, and σ(·) denotes the sigmoid activation function. The
 ( gating vector z determines the contribution of each modality
 x if x > 0, to the final representation.
 σ(x) = The final fused representation hfinal is obtained by combinax if x ≤ 0,
 ing the gated vectors from header and payload representation
where a is a learnable parameter that introduces channel-wise vectors:
attention by scaling negative values differently. To enhance hfinal = z hh ⊕ (1 − z) hp ,
the stability and performance of the model, we apply Batch
Normalization (BN) [34] to the updated feature vectors: where denotes the element-wise multiplication operation,
   and ⊕ represents element-wise addition. This formulation
 qv(l) = BN qv(l) . allows the GMU to adaptively weigh the contributions of the
 header and payload feature vectors.
 To address the over-smoothing issue and capture multi- By incorporating this simplified GMU, we provide an effiscale structural information, we adopt a strategy inspired by cient and effective framework for fusing header and payload
Jumping Knowledge Networks (JKN) [35]. Specifically, we representation vectors. This approach enables the model to
concatenate the feature vectors from the first four layers to leverage the complementary information present in header and
form the final feature representation for each node v: payload.
  
 qv = CONCAT qv(1) , qv(2) , qv(3) , qv(4) .
 C. Packet-Level Graph Construction and Flow-Level
 Subsequently, we compute the global feature vector gpacket Representation Learning
by applying mean pooling over all node feature vectors:
 Having acquired the overall representation vector for each
 1 X
 packet, which is the packet-level representation vector, we
 gpacket = qv ,
 |Vbyte | proceed to construct graph structures at the packet level to
 v∈Vbyte
 uncover potential useful information that is implicit at the
where |Vbyte | denotes the number of nodes in the graph. packet level, such as interaction feature information between
This global feature vector gpacket encapsulates the structural packets. It is also important to note that our primary focus in
characteristics of the entire graph. this paper is on the flow-level classification task. Therefore,
 So far, we have been able to obtain packet-level represen- we also need to extract the global features of each packet-level
tation vectors for both the header and payload of each packet. graph, which is the learning of flow-level representations.
LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs 3111

Algorithm 1 Packet-Level Graph Edge Set Construction this time we stack two layers. Since this paper focuses on
Input: Vertex set V . flow-level classification tasks, we still need to extract global
Output: The packet-level graph edge set E. features to obtain flow-level representations. Specifically, we
 Initialize: E = φ. concatenate the vectors from the first two layers to form the
 1: Split V into bursts B = (b1 , . . . , bS ) based on packet final representation vectors for each node v:
 direction  
 2: for each burst bi ∈ B do lv = CONCAT lv(1) , lv(2) .
 3: if bi has more than one packet then
 4: for each pair of consecutive packets (vj , vj+1 ) in bi Subsequently, we compute the global feature vector gf low
 do by applying mean pooling over all node feature vectors:
 5: Add bidirectional edges between vj and vj+1 to 1 X
 gf low = lv .
 E K
 v∈Vpacket
 6: end for
 7: end if The learned flow-level representations gf low then contain
 8: end for two types of information:
 9: for each pair of consecutive bursts (bi , bi+1 ) do 1) Packet-level representations learned from byte-level
10: if both bi and bi+1 have only one packet then graphs. Since the node features in the packet-level
11: Add bidirectional edges between the packets in bi graph use global packet features extracted from the byteand bi+1 to E level, the extracted flow-level features include potential
12: else relationship information between bytes;
13: Add bidirectional edges between the first packets of 2) Interaction information unique to the packet level.
 bi and bi+1 to E As mentioned before, the interaction pattern information
14: Add bidirectional edges between the last packets of of packets is unique and is not affected by whether
 bi and bi+1 to E the traffic itself is encrypted or not. After representa-
15: end if tion learning, the extracted flow-level representations
16: end for currently include this important information to better
17: return E perform subsequent classification tasks.

 D. Flow-Level Representation Enrichment and Classification
 1) Packet-Level Graph Construction: Generally speaking,
the interaction patterns between the two parties in network After completing the two-step representation learning protraffic communication are unique and remain unchanged cess described in Sections IV-B and IV-C, we have obtained
regardless of whether the traffic itself is encrypted and pro- flow-level representations. However, we believe that additional
tected by protocols. Therefore, at the packet level, we opt to flow-level similarity information can be incorporated to further
construct the TIG [13] to learn this unique information. enhance the representation of flows. To achieve this, we
 Our goal is to construct the corresponding packet-level propose constructing the flow-level graph where the flow-level
graph Gpacket = {Vpacket , Epacket } for each flow, where the representations obtained in Section IV-C are used as node
number of nodes in each graph is K, and the node features features.
of each node are the vectors hfinal extracted as described Let X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xM } represent the set of flow-level
in Section IV-B. It should be specially noted that the node representations extracted as described in Section IV-C, where
features of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) in [13] are xi ∈ Rd is the representation vector of the i-th flow, and
packet lengths. To adapt to our model, we replace the node M is the total number of flows. These representation vectors
features in the original TIG method with the extracted packet- are derived from the previous steps and capture the essential
level representation vectors. characteristics of each flow. It should be specifically noted that,
 The method for constructing the edge set Epacket in the in order to keep the size of the flow-level graph relatively
traffic interaction graph is shown in Algorithm 1, where a burst small, we construct a graph every BatchSize (BS) flows,
is defined as a sequence of consecutive packets transmitted in instead of constructing a large graph using all M flows. This
the same direction within a short time interval [37]. Lines choice avoids excessive computational and memory overhead
2-8 of the algorithm are for adding intra-burst edges, which caused by a single large-scale graph when M is large, ensuring
are the connections between vertices within the same burst. the model’s scalability to large datasets while maintaining the
Lines 9-16 are for adding inter-burst edges, which establish local similarity structure within each batch.
connections between two adjacent bursts. More specifically, To establish connections between flows, we use the
the first and last vertices in each burst are connected to the Euclidean distance as the similarity metric. The Euclidean
corresponding first and last vertices in the next burst. distance between two flow representation vectors xi and xj is
 2) Flow-Level Representation Learning: After constructing defined as:
the packet-level traffic graph, we need to perform represenv
 u d
tation learning for the graph features. Here, we still use
 uX
 d(x , x ) = kx − x k = t (x − x )2 ,
 i j i j 2 ik jk
the GraphSAGE layer as mentioned in Section IV-B.2, only k=1
3112 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

where xik and xjk are the k-th components of the represen- A. Dataset
tation vectors xi and xj , respectively. In our experiments, we utilize four well-known datasets:
 For each flow xi , we select the Top-k most similar flows ISCX-VPN2016 [38], ISCX-Tor2016 [39], USTC-TFC2016
based on the Euclidean distance. Specifically, we compute the [9], and MIRAGE-2024 [40].
distances between xi and all other flows xj (where j 6= i), The ISCX-VPN2016 dataset is specifically designed for the
and then select the k flows with the smallest distances. These analysis of Virtual Private Network (VPN) traffic and nonk flows are considered the most similar neighbors of xi . VPN traffic. It contains network traffic from both VPN and
 Using the Top-k similarity information, we construct a flow- non-VPN connections, making it suitable for researching and
level graph Gf low = (Vf low , Ef low ), where: comparing the characteristics and behaviors of these two types
 • Vf low = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vBS } is the set of nodes, each of traffic. The dataset defines six categories, namely Chat,
 representing a flow. Email, File Transfer, P2P, Streaming and VoIP.
 • Ef low is the set of edges, where an edge (vi , vj ) exists The ISCX-Tor2016 dataset focuses on traffic anonymized
 if xj is one of the Top-k most similar neighbors of xi . through The Onion Router (Tor) network. It contains ISCX-
 To enrich the flow-level representations, we apply two layers Tor and ISCX-nonTor datasets. The dataset defines eight
of GraphSAGE on the constructed graph. By applying two categories, namely Browsing, Email, Chat, Audio-streaming,
layers of GraphSAGE, each node can aggregate information Video-streaming, File Transfer, VoIP, and P2P.
from its Top-k most similar neighbors, thereby enhancing the The USTC-TFC2016 dataset is specifically designed for the
flow-level representations. analysis of normal and abnormal network traffic. It contains
 This graph construction approach creates more connections two primary categories of traffic: normal traffic and abnormal
between flows of the same application type, which allows traffic, making it suitable for researching and distinguishing
each node to aggregate information from more neighbors of the characteristics between legitimate and malicious network
similar types. This enhances the flow-level representations and behaviors. The normal traffic in this dataset covers ten subimproves the accuracy of the classification task. categories (e.g., MySQL, Weibo), while the abnormal traffic
 Finally, we use a fully connected layer to perform the ulti- also includes ten sub-categories (e.g., Htbot, Zeus).
mate classification task. The output of the second GraphSAGE The MIRAGE-2024 dataset is specifically designed for the
layer is passed through the fully connected layer, which is analysis of mobile application traffic in real-world scenarios.
defined as: It contains fine-grained bidirectional flows collected from
   Android devices, covering a diverse set of popular apps
 (2)
 yi = softmax Wc · hi + bc , such as ClashRoyale, Discord, WhatsApp, Zoom, and many
 others, making it suitable for researching encrypted traffic
 classification and mobile app fingerprinting.
where:
 (2)
 • hi is the feature representation of node vi after the
 second GraphSAGE layer. B. Experimental Setting
 • Wc and bc are the learnable weight matrix and bias 1) Evaluation Metrics: To quantify the performance of the
 vector of the fully connected layer, respectively. classification model comprehensively, four key metrics are
 • yi is the predicted probability distribution over the classes employed: accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. Each
 for node vi . metric captures distinct aspects of the model’s behavior, as
 To optimize the model parameters, we utilize the cross- defined below:
entropy loss function to measure the discrepancy between the a) Accuracy: The percentage of correct predictions out
predicted probabilities and ground-truth labels. The loss is of the total samples.
computed as: TP + TN
 Accuracy =
 C
 X TP + FP + FN + TN
 true
 L=− yi,c log yi,c , b) Precision: The probability that a sample is actually
 c=1 positive among all those predicted to be positive.
where: TP
 Precision =
 • C denotes the number of classes. TP + FP
 true
 • yi,c is the ground-truth one-hot label for node vi . c) Recall: The probability that a sample is predicted to
 • yi,c corresponds to the predicted probability. be positive among all those that are actually positive.
 TP
 Recall =
 TP + FN
 V. E XPERIMENT
 d) F1 score: The F1 score is used to provide a com-
 In this section, we detail the full configuration of our prehensive evaluation of Precision and Recall, and it is the
experiments and the corresponding results obtained. These harmonic mean of both precision and recall.
experiments are designed to comprehensively evaluate the Precision · Recall
performance of our proposed model against existing methods. F1 = 2 ·
 Precision + Recall
LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs 3113

 TABLE I 1) Impact of the Maximum Number of Packets Per Flow
 H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION OF BPF-GNN V IA G RID S EARCH (K): The number of packets per flow directly determines both
 the count of byte-level graphs and the number of nodes in the
 packet-level graphs. As shown in Fig. 6a, as K increases,
 the model’s accuracy and F1-score first show a upward trend
 and then enter a state of fluctuation: when K = 15, accuracy
 and F1-score hit their highest values; once K exceeds 15, the
 metrics only fluctuate slightly without any notable improvement. This indicates that 15 packets already contain enough
 information to enable effective learning, while extra packets
 merely add redundant data.
 2) Impact of the Maximum Length of Packet Header Bytes
 (m): The packet header contains critical control information,
 While accuracy provides a global view, precision and recall and its effective extraction is essential for distinguishing
focus on type I and type II errors, respectively. The F1 score encrypted traffic patterns. The sensitivity analysis results are
integrates both to mitigate biases caused by class imbalance. presented in Fig. 6b. As shown in the figure: When the header
 2) Experimental Environment: We employ DGL as the byte length m is set to 30, the F1-score remains at a relatively
graph neural network framework for our model and the low level, as the truncated header bytes lose key information.
baseline models, and each experiment was independently run As m increases to 50, both the F1-score and accuracy reach
five times with the average value taken as the experimental their optimal levels. This length fully covers the core control
evaluation result. All of the models presented in this paper fields while avoiding redundant noise from irrelevant header
are solved by DGL running on a PC with Intel R CoreTM fields. When m exceeds 50, the F1-score does not improve
i9-10850K CPU 3.60 GHz and NVIDIA RTX 3080 GPU. further and only fluctuates slightly. This result indicates that
 3) Model Parameter Selection: In this section, we elabo- excessive header bytes do not enhance feature representation;
rate on the hyperparameter configuration for our model. To instead, they may introduce redundant information and cause
ensure the model achieves optimal performance, we adopt a minor performance fluctuations.
grid search strategy to exhaustively evaluate the performance 3) Impact of the Maximum Length of Payload Bytes (n):
of different hyperparameter combinations within reasonable The payload carries the core data of encrypted traffic, and
ranges. its byte length directly impacts the richness of semantic
 Specifically, we predefine candidate value ranges for core information for packet-level representation learning. As shown
hyperparameters (e.g., training epochs from 20 to 60, batch in Fig. 6c, with the increase of n, the model’s performance first
size from 32 to 128, learning rate from 0.0001 to 0.01). rises to a peak and then gradually declines: when n = 200,
For each combination, we conduct independent training and both accuracy and F1-score reach their maximum values. This
validation on the dataset, and select the optimal configuration length balances the need for effective semantic information
by comprehensively balancing classification accuracy, training acquisition and noise control, enabling the model to effectively
efficiency, and model generalization. capture relationships between bytes in the encrypted pay-
 For the optimization strategy, we compare the performance load. When n exceeds 200, accuracy and F1-score gradually
of Adam and SGD optimizers via grid search and ultimately decrease. This is because encrypted payloads contain a large
select Adam for its superior stability in gradient descent. We number of redundant encrypted bits; excessive byte truncation
also introduce a warm-up stage (scaled to 0.1 of total training introduces irrelevant noise, interfering with the PMI-based
steps) to mitigate the impact of large initial learning rates, byte correlation calculation and subsequent graph represenpaired with a cosine annealing scheduler to gradually reduce tation learning.
the learning rate to a minimum of 1e-4. Additionally, dropout 4) Impact of k Value in Top-k for Flow-Level Graph Conlayers (set to 0.2) are incorporated to prevent overfitting. The struction: The k value determines the number of similar flow
final hyperparameter settings (shown in Table I) are confirmed neighbors connected to each flow node in the flow-level graph,
via repeated grid search validation and cross-validation on the directly affecting the richness of flow-level feature fusion.
dataset. As shown in Fig. 6d, with the increase of k, the model’s
 F1-score first increases and then decreases significantly. When
 k = 1, the F1-score is relatively low because of the sparse edge
C. Model Sensitivity Analysis structure of the flow-level graph. Each flow can only aggregate
 We conduct sensitivity analysis on four key hyperparameters limited similar neighbor information and cannot fully leverage
that directly affect model performance: the maximum number inter-flow similarity for feature enhancement. When k = 3,
of packets per flow (K), the maximum length of packet header the F1-score reaches its peak. This configuration balances the
bytes (m), the maximum length of payload bytes (n), and the density of the flow-level graph and the relevance of neighbor
k value in Top-k for flow-level graph construction. We select information, enabling each flow to aggregate features from the
accuracy and F1-score as evaluation metrics to quantitatively three most similar flows while avoiding the dilution of disassess the impact of parameter variations on classification criminative features caused by excessive irrelevant neighbors.
performance. When k exceeds 3, the F1-score decreases significantly. This
3114 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 6. Sensitivity analysis of key hyperparameters on model performance based on the ISCX-VPN dataset: (a) Maximum number of packets per flow K;
(b) Maximum header byte length per packet m; (c) Maximum payload byte length per packet n; (d) k value of Top-k in flow-level graph construction.

is because an overly large k leads to over-connection in the • EC-GCN [14]: Designs a multi-subgraph classification
flow-level graph, introducing dissimilar flow information that framework that only uses metadata information, combincontaminates the original flow representation. ing CNN and GNN to extract multi-scale spatiotemporal
 features for encrypted traffic classification.
D. Comparison Experiments 2) Experimental Results: The comparative experimen-
 1) Comparison Models: To evaluate the proposed model’s tal results on the ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-Tor2016, USTCefficacy, five baselines are selected for benchmarking. Each TFC2016, and MIRAGE-2024 datasets are shown in Tables II
method is meticulously optimized for peak performance on the and III. Based on the results, we can draw the following
evaluation dataset to ensure fairness. The baseline approaches conclusions:
are summarized as follows: 1) Our model BPF-GNN performs the best compared
 • CNN [9]: Translates the first 784 bytes of each bidi- to multiple baselines on the ISCX-VPN2016, ISCXrectional flow into grayscale images and use a CNN Tor2016, USTC-TFC2016, and MIRAGE-2024 datasets,
 architecture similar to LeNet-5 [41] for feature learning. which confirms the effectiveness of our approach;
 • KNN-GNN [12]: Constructs graph representations via 2) BPF-GNN outperforms the CNN model across all
 K-Nearest Neighbors and integrates graph convolution datasets, and this performance gap essentially stems
 with an autoencoder for feature extraction. from the difference in their adaptability to the inher-
 • GraphDApp [13]: Constructs graph structure using ent structure of traffic data: the CNN model converts
 packet length sequence and interaction information traffic data into grid structures in Euclidean space for
 between packets, with a three-layer GraphSAGE stack processing, while network traffic inherently exhibits
 used as the neural network model. non-Euclidean interaction characteristics. This limits the
 • ACID [42]: Leverages lightweight neural model-learned CNN’s ability to extract effective features. In contrast,
 low-dimensional embeddings, combined with multiple by constructing a three-level graph structure, BPF-GNN
 kernel networks, to adaptively cluster and classify mali- naturally aligns with the non-Euclidean nature of traffic
 cious traffic. data, enabling accurate modeling of key information
LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs 3115

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE ON THE ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-T OR 2016 AND USTC-TFC2016 DATASETS

 such as byte semantic correlations, packet interaction TABLE III
 patterns, and inter-flow similarity; C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE
 3) Additionally, it is worth noting that our model is superior ON THE MIRAGE-2024 DATASET

 to GraphDApp, for which feature extraction only stays at
 the packet level and does not utilize the raw byte information of the traffic as node features, instead choosing
 to use packet length information. This precisely confirms
 the superiority of hierarchical feature extraction;
 4) BPF-GNN demonstrates superior generalization capability in cross-scenario tasks across multiple datasets.
 Experimental results indicate that BPF-GNN maintains
 consistent and leading classification performance across The results of the ablation experiments on the
 four datasets with distinctly different characteristics. ISCX-VPN2016 dataset are shown in Table IV. The
 This advantage originates from its multi-granularity fea- experimental results indicate that the four components
 ture extraction mechanism, which can effectively capture aforementioned of BPF-GNN contribute positively to
 both commonalities and scenario-specific features under improving the model performance. Among them, the negative
 various encrypted traffic scenarios. impact of not using the byte-level graph on the model
 performance is the most significant, with the F1 score
 dropping by approximately 12% on the ISCX-VPN dataset.
E. Ablation Experiments This illustrates the necessity of starting feature learning from
 In this paper, we conducted a series of ablation experiments the byte-level. Additionally, we can also observe that not
aimed at evaluating the impact of each component of the using the packet-level or flow-level graphs also has a certain
model. Ablation experiments are an important research method negative impact on the model performance. Specifically, the
that determines the contribution of each part to the final results flow-level graph enriches the feature representation of each
by systematically removing or replacing various components flow by incorporating information from similar flows, thus
of the model. In this experiment, we particularly focused on enhancing the feature representation of the flow, which is
the impact of byte-level graph, packet-level graph, flow-level confirmed in this section.
graph, and the choice of activation functions on the model.
Below is an explanation of each experiment: F. Model Complexity Analysis
 • w/o Byte-level graph: Instead of constructing byte-level To fully evaluate the balance between performance and
 graphs, the raw bytes of the traffic data are directly used computational overhead, we report the floating-point operas node vectors in the packet-level graph. ations (FLOPs) and parameter counts of the proposed
 • w/o Packet-level graph: Instead of constructing packet- BPF-GNN model and baseline methods in Table V.
 level graphs, the packet-level features output from the Combining the comparisons between Table V and perforbyte-level graph feature extraction are simply concate- mance results, it can be concluded that BPF-GNN achieves
 nated to serve as the node vectors of the flow-level graph. competitive performance on the target dataset while maintain-
 • w/o Flow-level graph: Instead of constructing flow- ing moderate model complexity. Compared with lightweight
 level graphs, the output from the packet-level graph models such as CNN, GraphDApp and ACID, BPF-GNN has
 feature extraction is directly input into a fully connected relatively higher floating-point operations. This computational
 classifier. overhead stems from two core design choices:
 • w/o PReLU & BatchNorm: Instead of using the PReLU • Hierarchical raw byte input: BPF-GNN takes raw
 activation function and normalization, the ReLU activa- byte sequences as input while leveraging the hierarchition function is used. cal structure of network traffic. This design enhances
3116 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE ISCX-VPN2016 DATASET

 TABLE V [2] T. Nelms, R. Perdisci, and M. Ahamad, “ExecScent: Mining for
 M ODEL FLOP S AND PARAMETERS new C&C domains in live networks with adaptive control protocol
 templates,” in Proc. 22nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2013,
 pp. 589–604.
 [3] W. Melo, P. Lopes, R. Antonello, S. Fernandes, and D. Sadok, “On the
 performance of DPI signature matching with dynamic priority,” in Proc.
 IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jun. 2014, pp. 1–6.
 [4] J. Su, S. Chen, B. Han, C. Xu, and X. Wang, “A 60Gbps DPI prototype
 based on memory-centric FPGA,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., Aug.
 2016, pp. 627–628.
 [5] A. B. Mohd and S. bin Mohd Nor, “Towards a flow-based internet traffic
 classification for bandwidth optimization,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Secur.,
 vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 146–153, 2009.
 [6] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
 traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
 feature representation capability but also increases com- in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 putational overhead. However, by adjusting the number Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
 [7] B. Xu, S. Chen, H. Zhang, and T. Wu, “Incremental k-NN SVM method
 of bytes used per flow, the floating-point operations can in intrusion detection,” in Proc. 8th IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Service
 be reduced with acceptable accuracy loss. Sci. (ICSESS), Nov. 2017, pp. 712–717.
 • Separate processing of packet header and pay- [8] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 load: BPF-GNN processes packet headers and payloads networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
 via independent neural network branches. This design 2017, pp. 43–48.
 strengthens feature learning for encrypted traffic but [9] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 doubles the computational load. This overhead, though, learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
 can be mitigated through parallel processing. [10] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
 traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [11] J. Zheng and D. Li, “GCN-TC: Combining trace graph with statistical
 features for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 In this paper, we propose BPF-GNN, a hierarchical graph Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–6.
 [12] B. Sun, W. Yang, M. Yan, D. Wu, Y. Zhu, and Z. Bai, “An encrypted
neural network model designed for encrypted traffic clas- traffic classification method combining graph convolutional network and
sification through multi-granularity feature extraction across autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf.
byte-, packet-, and flow-level graphs. This allows us to capture (IPCCC), Nov. 2020, pp. 1–8.
 [13] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decenthe discriminative information contained at the byte, packet, tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
and flow levels, thereby enriching the representation of the graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
flow-level features used for classification and improving the pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 [14] Z. Diao et al., “EC-GCN: A encrypted traffic classification framework
accuracy of encrypted traffic classification tasks. Experimental based on multi-scale graph convolution networks,” Comput. Netw.,
results on the public datasets demonstrate that our method vol. 224, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109614.
achieves significant classification performance. This remark- [15] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
 neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
able performance can be attributed to the effectiveness of the ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
multi-granularity feature extraction approach. In future work, [16] A. Finamore, M. Mellia, M. Meo, and D. Rossi, “KISS: Stochastic
we will continue to explore the impact of replacing different packet inspection classifier for UDP traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
graph construction methods at each granularity level on the vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1505–1515, Oct. 2010.
 [17] F. Zaki, F. Afifi, S. A. Razak, A. Gani, and N. B. Anuar, “GRAIN: Granfinal classification results. ular multi-label encrypted traffic classification using classifier chain,”
 Comput. Netw., vol. 213, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 109084.
 [18] H. Mohanty, A. H. Roudsari, and A. H. Lashkari, “Robust stacking
 R EFERENCES ensemble model for darknet traffic classification under adversarial
 settings,” Comput. Secur., vol. 120, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 102830.
[1] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: [19] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “A semantics-aware approach
 An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May to the automated network protocol identification,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
 2019. Netw., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 583–595, Feb. 2016.
LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs 3117

[20] Y. Wang, X. Yun, and Y. Zhang, “Rethinking robust and accurate [41] Y. LeCun et al., “Learning algorithms for classification: A comparison
 application protocol identification: A nonparametric approach,” in Proc. on handwritten digit recognition,” Neural Netw., Stat. Mech. Perspective,
 IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Nov. 2015, pp. 134–144. vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 261–276, 1995.
[21] X. Xiao, R. Li, H.-T. Zheng, R. Ye, A. KumarSangaiah, and S. Xia, [42] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic
 “Novel dynamic multiple classification system for network traffic,” Inf. classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf.
 Sci., vol. 479, pp. 526–541, Apr. 2019. Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10.
[22] P. Tang, Y. Dong, and S. Mao, “Online traffic classification using
 granules,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Jul. 2020, pp. 1135–1140.
[23] A. L’Heureux, K. Grolinger, H. F. Elyamany, and M. A. M. Capretz,
 “Machine learning with big data: Challenges and approaches,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 5, pp. 7776–7797, 2017. Guolong Li is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
[24] Z. Bu, B. Zhou, P. Cheng, K. Zhang, and Z.-H. Ling, “Encrypted degree with Information Engineering University. His
 network traffic classification using deep and parallel network-in-network research interests include encrypted traffic analysis.
 models,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 132950–132959, 2020.
[25] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
 Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[26] X. Ren, H. Gu, and W. Wei, “Tree-RNN: Tree structural recurrent neural
 network for network traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 167,
 Apr. 2021, Art. no. 114363.
[27] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, and S. Li, “MTSecurity:
 Privacy-preserving malicious traffic classification using graph neural
 network and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21,
 no. 3, pp. 3583–3597, Jun. 2024.
[28] Y. Shi, G. Li, and J. Wu, “BPF-DAG: Byte-packet-flow fatures fusion
 via dynamic attributed graph for reliable encrypted traffic classification,” Yuan Gao received the Ph.D. degree from Shan-
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 21, pp. 197–211, 2025. dong University. She is currently a Lecturer with
[29] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H.-T. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN: Information Engineering University. Her research
 Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,” interests include cryptography and encrypted traffic
 IEEE Trans. Depend. Sec. Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538, Aug. detection.
 2021.
[30] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
 network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput.,
 vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2161–2178, May 2025.
[31] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Graph convolutional networks for text
 classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1,
 pp. 7370–7377.
[32] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
[33] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers:
 Jiongjiong Ren received the Ph.D. degree from
 Surpassing human-level performance on ImageNet classification,” in Information Engineering University. He is currently
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 1026–1034. an Associate Professor with Information Engi-
[34] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep neering University. His research interests include
 network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. Int. Conf. cryptography and its applications.
 Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[35] K. Xu, C. Li, Y. Tian, T. Sonobe, K. Kawarabayashi, and S. Jegelka,
 “Representation learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks,”
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 5453–5462.
[36] J. Arevalo, T. Solorio, M. Montes-y-Gómez, and F. A. González, “Gated
 multimodal units for information fusion,” 2017, arXiv:1702.01992.
[37] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bidirectional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
 Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188.
[38] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, Shaozhen Chen received the Ph.D. degree from
 pp. 407–414. Shandong University. She is currently a Profes-
[39] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, sor with Information Engineering University. Her
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd research interests include cryptography and informa-
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017, tion security.
 pp. 253–262.
[40] I. Guarino, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “Mirage-
 App×Act-2024: A novel dataset for mobile app and activity traffic
 analysis,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Comput., Netw.
 Commun. (WiMob), Oct. 2024, pp. 663–666.