5820 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 CAFFT: Cross-Attention Feature Fusion
 Transformer for Risky Driving
 Behavior Recognition
 Sheng Wang , Jun Liang , Xinqi Yu , Wensa Wang , Chaofeng Pan, and Long Chen

 Abstract—According to the results of a survey administered accidents and improve road traffic safety has become an urgent
by the World Health Organization, the primary cause of the social issue that requires immediate attention.
majority of traffic accidents is risky driving behavior. Conse- Risky driving behavior is a major cause of traffic accidents.
quently, the identification of risky driving behaviors is imperative
for ensuring road safety. In order to effectively address the Risky driving behavior refers to the behavior of drivers while
limitations of existing methods in modeling long-term dependen- driving that can lead to traffic accidents, such as speeding,
cies, integrating external scenario information, and adapting to sudden acceleration, sudden deceleration, fatigue driving, disdifferent driver personalities, this paper proposes a Transformer- tracted driving, drunk driving, etc. [2]. Timely detection and
based cross-attention feature fusion model for risky driving correction of risky driving behaviors by drivers can effectively
behavior recognition, referred to as CAFFT. This model utilizes
a hierarchical Transformer encoder structure to capture fine- reduce the likelihood of traffic accidents. However, the identifigrained changes and long-term dependencies in driving behavior. cation of risky driving behavior faces the following challenges.
Furthermore, the cross-attention mechanism, a cross-modal
attention mechanism, is introduced to effectively fuse driving (a) Driving behavior is a complex temporal process influbehavior features with weather-related external scenario features, enced by multiple factors, including driver state, vehicle
thereby rendering the research scenario more aligned with real- motion, and the external environment. It is imperative
world driving conditions. Finally, through cross-validation and to accurately capture the long-term dependencies and
cross-test set generalization experiments, the universality and
stability of the method are verified. The experimental results
 contextual relationships inherent in driving behavior data
on real driving datasets demonstrate that the CAFFT model to effectively identify risky driving behavior [3].
achieves substantial performance enhancements in recognizing (b) The identification of risky driving behaviors frequently
risky driving behavior. This improvement leads to enhanced necessitates a comprehensive evaluation of particular
accuracy and reliability in recognizing risky driving behavior, driving circumstances. For instance, even minor speedthereby providing substantial support for the development of
intelligent driving assistance systems.
 ing may be regarded as risky behavior in inclement
 weather [4]. How to effectively integrate external sit-
 Index Terms—Risky driving behavior, deep learning, multi- uational factors to enhance the accuracy of risky driving
modal feature fusion, situational awareness, driving safety.
 behavior recognition remains a challenge.
 I. I NTRODUCTION (c) Different drivers exhibit divergent driving styles and
 habits [5]. Consequently, there is a pressing need to
R OAD safety represents a significant challenge for modern
 society. The proliferation of vehicles on the road has
led to a concomitant increase in traffic accidents, which have
 develop a universal model for identifying risky driving
 behavior that can adapt to the individual characteristics
become a significant threat to human life and property safety. of different drivers.
According to statistics from the World Health Organization In recent years, the advent of deep learning technology
(WHO), approximately 1.3 million people die in road traffic has precipitated novel advances in the identification of risky
accidents each year, with millions more injured [1]. Con- driving behavior. It has been demonstrated that models such
sequently, how to effectively reduce the incidence of traffic as recurrent neural networks (RNNs), long short-term mem-
 Received 30 April 2025; revised 16 November 2025; accepted ory networks (LSTMs), and convolutional neural networks
31 December 2025. Date of publication 16 January 2026; date of current (CNNs) have demonstrated powerful capabilities in processversion 5 May 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural ing temporal data and automatic feature extraction [3], [6].
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62376139 and Grant 52272367.
The Associate Editor for this article was J. Hu. (Corresponding authors: Jun However, these models are still limited in their ability to
Liang; Wensa Wang.) capture long-term dependencies and integrate multi-source
 Sheng Wang, Jun Liang, Xinqi Yu, Chaofeng Pan, and Long Chen are with heterogeneous data. The Transformer model has demonthe Automotive Engineering Research Institute, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang
212013, China (e-mail: 2212338036@stmail.ujs.edu.cn; liangjun@ujs.edu.cn; strated remarkable efficacy in natural language processing and
2212438038@stmail.ujs.edu.cn; chfpan@ujs.edu.cn; chenlong@ujs.edu.cn). computer vision, attributable to its advanced self-attention
 Wensa Wang is with the School of Mechanical and Energy Engineering, mechanism [7], [8]. Concurrently, the Transformer model has
Zhejiang University of Science and Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China
(e-mail: 124101@zust.edu.cn). demonstrated efficacy in capturing long-distance dependen-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3651971 cies and exhibiting flexibility in processing multimodal data,
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WANG et al.: CROSS-ATTENTION FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER FOR DRIVING BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION 5821

thereby unveiling novel prospects for recognizing risky driving driving behavior is risky based on set thresholds. For example,
behaviors. Zhang et al. [13] proposed a statistical rule-based method to
 Based on these, the present paper puts forth a novel identify risky driving behavior by analyzing the behavioral
Transformer-based model for recognizing risky driving behav- characteristics of drivers, such as speed, acceleration, and
ior, herein referred to as CAFFT. The model’s primary braking, to determine whether they are driving while fatigued.
innovations are exhibited in the following domains: This method is simple, easy to understand, and computation-
 (a) First, to address the limitations of existing methods ally efficient, but it relies on manually designed features and
 in capturing long-term dependencies and fine-grained has difficulty capturing complex patterns in driving behavior
 changes in driving behavior, a hierarchical Transformer data.
 encoder structure was designed to obtain more compre- In order to overcome the limitations of statistical classifihensive local and global feature extraction capabilities cation methods, researchers began to use traditional machine
 for driving behavior. learning methods for the recognition of risky driving behavior.
 (b) Secondly, we introduced a cross-modal attention mech- Machine learning models, including support vector machines
 anism, termed Cross-Attention, to effectively integrate (SVM), decision trees, and naive Bayes, have been extensively
 driving behavior features with external situational factors employed in the domain of risky driving behavior recogni-
 (i.e., weather features). This mechanism enhances the tion [14], [15], [16]. For instance, Yu et al. [14] proposed
 perception of driving situations and aligns the research an SVM-based model for identifying risky driving behavior.
 scenarios more closely with real driving scenarios, This model analyzes behavioral characteristics such as the
 thereby further improving recognition accuracy. driver’s speed, acceleration, and steering wheel rotation to
 (c) Finally, to enhance the adaptability of the recog- determine whether the driver is in a dangerous driving state.
 nition method to personalized driver characteristics, Compared with statistical classification methods, traditional
 cross-validation was employed during training, and the machine learning methods can automatically learn patterns in
 universality and stability of the CAFFT model under driving behavior data and achieve higher recognition accuracy.
 various drivers and driving environments were validated However, traditional machine learning models still rely on
 through test set generalization tests. manually designed features and have difficulty processing
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec- high-dimensional, nonlinear driving behavior data.
tion II reviews related work, focusing on the latest advances The advent of deep learning technology has prompted
in risky driving behavior recognition, multimodal fusion, and researchers to adopt deep learning models for the recognition
the application of Transformers in time series. Section III of risky driving behavior. Deep learning models, including
describes the task and presents some relevant definitions. recurrent neural networks (RNNs), long short-term mem-
Section IV details the architecture and implementation of the ory networks (LSTMs), and convolutional neural networks
CAFFT model. Experimental results on real datasets are shown (CNNs), have been extensively employed in the domain of
and discussed in Section V. Finally, Section VI summarizes risky driving behavior recognition [3], [6]. For instance,
the paper and discusses future research directions. Yang et al. [17] proposed a behavior prediction model,
 comprising a CNN and a two-layer LSTM, which integrates vehicle lane-change feasibility and lateral offset rate of
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 change. This model effectively identifies high-risk lane-change
A. Risky Driving Behavior Recognition behaviors. A comparison of deep learning-based models with
 There are two main types of data used to identify risky traditional machine learning methods reveals that the former
driving behavior. One is image data, which is mainly used to can automatically learn high-dimensional, nonlinear features in
identify distracted and fatigued driving by analyzing images of driving behavior data, achieving higher recognition accuracy.
the driver in the vehicle [9], [10]. The other is time-series data Nevertheless, these models continue to exhibit limitations in
containing driving behavior information, such as trajectory their capacity to manage long-range dependencies.
data and driving operation data, which is mainly used to
identify risky driving behavior caused by the driver’s improper B. Multimodal Fusion
operation of the vehicle, such as sudden acceleration, sudden In real-world scenarios, information from a single source
deceleration, and continuous lane changes [11], [12]. This frequently exhibits limitations, failing to satisfy the system’s
section focuses on risky driving behavior detection methods requirements for perception capabilities and decision-making
based on time-series data. In recent years, researchers have precision. Consequently, the integration of data from diverse
proposed various risky driving behavior detection methods modalities and sources to construct more comprehensive and
based on time-series data, which can be roughly divided into stable systems has emerged as a pivotal area of research
three categories: statistical classification, traditional machine interest. Multimodal data fusion is the key technology to
learning, and deep learning. address this issue, aiming to integrate data from different
 Statistical classification methods were among the first meth- modalities and leverage their complementarity and redundancy
ods used to detect risky driving behavior. Such methods to enhance the overall system performance [18]. Multimodal
typically first extract statistical features from driving behavior data fusion has been widely applied in various fields, such as
data, such as average speed, maximum acceleration, steering image captioning [19] (combining image content with textual
wheel rotation frequency, etc., and then determine whether the descriptions), video understanding (fusing visual, auditory,
5822 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

and textual information), and sentiment analysis (combining recurrent neural networks (RNNs), the Transformer model
speech intonation with textual content) [20], [21], [22]. relies exclusively on self-attention mechanisms to process
 Similarly, risky driving behavior is shaped not only by sequence data in parallel, thereby effectively capturing longdriver state but also by scenario-level contextual factors and range dependencies. The self-attention mechanism enables the
uncertainty. Therefore, the effective integration of multi-source system to discern associations between disparate positions in
heterogeneous data, such as vehicle driving data, environmen- a sequence, thereby facilitating a comprehensive perception
tal perception data, and driver physiological data, is crucial of sequence information. Due to the high computational
for improving recognition accuracy. complexity of the self-attention mechanism, researchers have
 In recent years, multi-modal data fusion technology has proposed various improved self-attention mechanisms, such
seen widespread application in the recognition of risky driving as sparse attention [31] and window attention [32].
behavior. For instance, certain researchers have integrated In recent years, transformer models have demonstrated
vehicle speed, acceleration, and other driving data with notable advancements in time series tasks, including time
environmental data, such as weather conditions and road con- series prediction, anomaly detection, and classification [33],
ditions, to enhance the model’s adaptability to complex driving [34]. A comparison of Transformer models with traditional
scenarios [23], [24]. Concurrently, other researchers have time series models (e.g., ARIMA and LSTM) reveals their
endeavored to integrate driver physiological data, including superiority in capturing long-term dependencies and enhancing
facial expressions and eye movements, with vehicle operation computational efficiency through parallel computing. In the
data to enhance the precision of identifying driver fatigue field of time series prediction, Li et al. [35] have proposed a
or distracted driving [25], For instance, Wang et al. [26] Transformer-based time series prediction model that has been
investigated three distinct human-machine interaction (HMI) shown to improve prediction accuracy by learning the longmodes—control, warning, and guidance—and discovered that term trends of time series data. Zhou et al. [31] proposed a
varying information presentation significantly alters drivers’ Transformer-based time series prediction model that reduces
acceleration behavior, strategy selection, and merging position computational complexity and improves the efficiency of
in highway merging scenarios. This directly substantiates the long-sequence prediction by introducing the ProbSparse selfsubstantial impact of the external interactive environment as a attention mechanism. In the context of time series anomaly
contextual factor on driving behavior. detection, Tuli et al. [36] have proposed a Transformer-based
 According to different fusion strategies, existing multimodal anomaly detection model that identifies abnormal events by
risky driving behavior recognition methods can be roughly learning the patterns of normal time series.
divided into the following categories: Based on early fusion Despite the noteworthy advancements of Transformer modmethods, Haris and Glowacz [27] spliced vehicle driving data els in time series tasks, their utilization in the domain of risky
and environmental information, and then input them into a driving behavior recognition remains a relatively recent develdeep learning model for training. Based on late fusion meth- opment. In a recent study, You et al. [37] used Transformer
ods, Liu et al. [28] extracted vehicle trajectory features and models to learn feature representations in driving behavior
environmental factors such as weather, and then fused them data and input driving behavior sequences into Transformer
by weighted averaging. Based on the attention mechanism, models to achieve driving behavior classification. Wang et al.
Mou et al. [29] proposed a multi-modal fusion method based [38] proposed a novel approach that integrates the transformers
on the attention mechanism to detect driver fatigue. and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to generate input
 While multi-modal data fusion methods have demonstrated vector representations of driving behavior. These represenprogress in identifying risky driving behavior, the relative tations are then fed into a classifier, with the objective of
importance of each data source varies across different driving identifying whether the driver is distracted. Zhang et al. [39]
scenarios. Existing methods do not incorporate situational developed an effective method for extracting features from
factors as important factors affecting driving behavior into input images using Swin Transformers. They then enhanced
the model, making it difficult to maintain good performance the discriminative power of different categories in the feature
in complex and changing real driving environments. Concur- space, achieving high accuracy in distracted driving behavior
rently, the prevailing methodologies predominantly emphasize recognition tasks.
the integration of static features, while disregarding the recog- However, the majority of extant Transformer-based methods
nition that driving behavior is inherently sequential. This for recognizing risky driving behavior, such as Informer and
oversight results in an inability to capture the temporal the Temporal Fusion Transformer (TFT), tend to treat driving
dependencies inherent in driving behavior data, consequently behavior data as a whole, thereby overlooking the fine-grained
hindering the discernment of dynamic variations in driving temporal fluctuations inherent in driving behavior. Concurbehavior. rently, divergent assessments of driving peril may emerge
 under different driving scenarios and external conditions.
C. Transformers in Time Series These general-purpose Transformer architectures primarily
 The Transformer model was first proposed by focus on long-range dependency modeling or temporal fea-
Vaswani et al. [30]. This model has been instrumental ture selection within a single modality, without explicitly
in the field of natural language processing (NLP) due to modeling scenario-dependent modulation of driving behavior.
its pioneering introduction of self-attention mechanisms and As a result, existing methods struggle to adequately account
an encoder-decoder architecture. In contrast to conventional for situational variability across different scenarios and are
WANG et al.: CROSS-ATTENTION FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER FOR DRIVING BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION 5823

difficult to adapt to the heterogeneous requirements of real- module, a weather feature learning module, and a cross-modal
world risky driving behavior recognition. dynamic fusion module.
 Due to its excellent performance in capturing long-range
 III. S YMBOLS , D EFINITIONS , AND TASK D ESCRIPTION dependencies and interactions, Transformer is well suited for
 The dataset we used encompasses three distinct sets of time- time series analysis. Consequently, the driving sequence fearelated data related to vehicles, namely speed, acceleration, ture learning module is comprised of a hierarchically designed
and angular velocity. In addition, the dataset incorporates Transformer encoder. This module not only fully captures the
situational factors relevant to driving behavior, such as weather fine-grained information of driving behavior but also considers
information. In this section, we delineate several of the defi- the long-term dependency characteristics of driving behavior.
nitions and symbols employed in the risky driving behavior Additionally, it has been designed to address the issue of
recognition model. Furthermore, we describe the task of misjudgment and omission in assessing driving behavior risk.
recognizing risky driving behavior by integrating situational Specifically, we use Transformers to extract historical driving
information. state information as basic features. Incorporating the selfattention mechanism, we integrate driving process features
A. Symbols and Definitions under varying window sizes, thereby complementing and
 enhancing each other. This approach prevents misjudgment
 Definition 1 (Trip P): A trip P represents the driving and the omission of driving behavior risks caused by the
trajectory data of a vehicle from a dataset during the entire division of the driving process, thus enhancing the accuracy
driving process. It consists of the state Pt of the vehicle at
 of feature extraction. In the weather feature learning modmultiple instantaneous points. The state Pt of the vehicle
 ule, an effective extraction method was designed to identify
at each instant includes speed information vt , acceleration
 weather features related to driving behavior. This method
information at , angular velocity information ωt , and longitude combines One-Hot encoding, numerical normalization, and a
and latitude information. V ∈ RT , A ∈ RT , and W ∈ RT are one-dimensional convolutional network. Furthermore, in the
the continuous speed information, acceleration information,
 cross-modal dynamic fusion module, we integrate driving
and angular velocity information during the entire trip P,
 behavior features with weather features through a crossrespectively. T represents the time spent by the vehicle during
 attention mechanism to characterize the impact of situational
trip P, representing the length of the time series. The interval
 information on driving behavior during the driving process.
between every two timestamps is one second. This approach aligns more closely with real driving scenarios
 Definition 2 (Driving Process DP ): The driving process and facilitates the identification of risky driving behavior in
DP is represented by the driving status of the vehicle within
 the real world.
the selected sliding time window (the size of the sliding time
window is L) for L seconds, i.e., DP ⊆ P. Then, trip P A. Data Preprocessing and Window Alignment
encompasses N = (T − L)/S + 1 (S is the sliding step length)
 To effectively identify risky driving behaviors within trajecdriving processes.
 tory data, we first performed outlier detection and removal
 Definition 3 (Situational Factors SF): Situational factors
 from the raw dataset. Specifically, we excluded instances
(SF) refer to situational environmental factors that affect vehiwhere vehicles were stationary for extended periods, anomacle driving behavior, mainly considering weather information.
 lous readings caused by GPS signal drift, and brief movements
It includes information such as weather type, wind direction,
 insufficient for driving behavior analysis. Subsequently, a
wind speed, and temperature. Based on the different data types,
 team comprising data analysts and data quality coordinators
the One-Hot encoding method and normalization method are
 manually verified and analyzed the trajectory data files for
used to process this information to obtain a weather data
 annotation.
matrix C∈RT ×D that can be processed by the model (T is the
 “High-risk” driving behavior was defined as the presence
length of the time series and D is the weather data dimension
 of one or more of the following four conditions: overspeedat each moment).
 ing, abrupt longitudinal maneuvers, sharp turns, and fatigued
 driving. Specifically:
B. Task Description
 (a) Overspeeding: Vehicle speed exceeding 80 km/h or
 The task of identifying risky driving behavior is described 40 km/h (in foggy conditions) for a duration greater than
below. Input: Time series containing vehicle trajectory infor- 3 seconds.
mation (time information t, speed information vt , acceleration (b) Abrupt Longitudinal Maneuver: An instantaneous
information at , angular velocity information ωt , and longitude acceleration ≥ 0.3µg or ≤ −0.3µg occurring
and latitude information); situational factors SF (weather data between adjacent sampling points within a
matrix C) that affect driving behavior recognition. Output: 3-second interval, where the friction coefficient
Risk driving behavior recognition results P̃, which include all µ is inferred from aligned weather data, with
risky driving behaviors during the entire trip P. µ ∈ {0.9 (clear weather) , 0.5 (rain/snowy weather)}.
 (c) Sharp Turn: Angular velocity > π/6 rad/s, √ or turning
 IV. M ETHODS approaching the grip limit—defined as v > µgR where
 As illustrated in Fig. 1, the CAFFT model is comprised R = v/ω. The value of µ is consistent with that defined
of three primary modules: a driving sequence feature learning previously.
5824 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

Fig. 1. Overall structure of our proposed CAFFT model. The upper left panel illustrates the Driving Temporal Feature Learning module, which hierarchically
extracts trajectory features. The upper right panel depicts the Weather Feature Learning module. The lower panel presents the Cross-modal Dynamic Feature
Fusion module, responsible for integrating trajectory and weather features.

 (d) Fatigued Driving: Continuous driving duration exceed- The weather data vector for this window is then assigned
 ing 4 hours without an uninterrupted rest period greater the measured value corresponding to the hour to which the
 than 20 minutes. All driving data beyond the 4-hour midpoint belongs:
 mark are subsequently flagged as fatigued driving.
 Given the differing sampling rates between trajectory and WW = Whour(tm ) (2)
weather data—hourly for weather data and 1 Hz for trajectory
data—we adopted a midpoint alignment strategy to synchro- For detailed descriptions of different weather data types and
nize the time windows of these datasets. This aligns the hourly their values, please refer to the section on weather feature
weather data with the second-level trajectory timeline. Let the learning. Since the selected window length is significantly less
hourly weather data interval be denoted as Hi = [hi , hi+1 ), and than one hour, the vast majority of windows fall entirely within
the trajectory time window as W = [t s , t s+L ], where L is the a single hourly period. In the extremely rare event that a winwindow length. The division of time windows is detailed in dow spans an hourly boundary, our convention assigns it to the
Section IV-B, pertaining to driving temporal feature learning. subsequent hourly period using a half-open interval definition.
The window midpoint is defined as: This strategy avoids inappropriate interpolation smoothing of
 t s + t s+L discrete variables and maintains alignment consistency and
 tm = (1) reproducibility across different window settings.
 2
WANG et al.: CROSS-ATTENTION FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER FOR DRIVING BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION 5825

Fig. 2. Distribution of positive and negative samples per “driver-weather”. The left figure shows the distribution of risky driving behavior samples, and the
right figure shows the distribution of safe driving behavior samples.

 Following the aforementioned data preprocessing, we
obtained 6851 trajectory data points, with an average of
approximately 15 trip records per vehicle. Each trajectory data
point comprised approximately 8354 entries, with each trip
lasting about 2.3 hours. A total of 2,113,854 data points were
labeled as “high-risk,” accounting for approximately 3.69% of
 Fig. 3. Misjudgment and omission of driving behavior risks. The box
the total dataset. Furthermore, we selected 10 vehicles from represents driving behavior within the time series.
450, representing various regions and operating timeframes,
to illustrate the distribution of positive and negative samples
of risky driving behavior under different driver and weather
conditions. The statistical results are presented in Fig. 2 In considered, the driving behavior may be identified as risky
the figure, each cell represents the number of samples for and vice versa. Therefore, this paper proposes a hierarchical
a specific “driver-weather” combination, with darker colors Transformer encoder structure to capture the fine-grained
indicating a higher sample count. fluctuations and long-term dependencies of driving behavior.
 Although the processed dataset exhibits a severe class In the local encoder, multi-granularity driving behavior time
imbalance, with only approximately 3.69% of samples labeled series segmentation is employed to extract and learn the
as high-risk, no explicit class re-balancing techniques such driving process from the preprocessed driving trajectory data.
as class-weighted loss, focal loss, or over-/under-sampling The global sparse attention of the global encoder is utilized to
were employed. Instead, this study addresses the imbalance capture the global dependencies of the driving process and to
primarily at the evaluation and decision-making level by mine the correlation between multiple driving processes.
adopting recall-oriented metrics (Fβ with β > 1), PR-AUC, and To effectively extract features from vehicle trajectory data,
threshold sensitivity analysis. This design choice is motivated as illustrated in Fig. 4, the trajectory data (i.e., V ∈ RL , A ∈ RL ,
by the safety-critical nature of risky driving behavior recogni- and W ∈ RL ) is segmented and z-score normalized to obtain
tion, where suppressing false negatives is more important than a matrix Y ∈ RL×3 . On this basis, Y is further projected from
achieving balanced class distributions during training. The three dimensions to d dimensions of feature space through a
effectiveness of this strategy is further supported by statistical fully connected layer to obtain a feature sequence X ∈ RN×L×d ,
significance testing and consistent performance across cross- providing richer feature information for subsequent driving
test set generalization experiments. behavior feature learning.
 In the feature extraction of the driving process, in order
 to extract the temporal features of the driving process, a
B. Driving Sequence Feature Learning hierarchical Transformer structure was designed to capture
 Indeed, risky driving behavior is a continuous process that the fine-grained fluctuations and long-term dependencies of
can vary in duration. Consequently, a single-grain driving driving behavior. This structure contains two main encoder
process extraction is inadequate for accurately describing all layers, the Global Encoder and the Local Encoder.
driving behaviors. As demonstrated in Fig. 3, when a limited 1) Global Encoder: In order to capture long-term depentime window is selected, the resulting driving behavior may dencies in driving behavior, a global encoder is introduced.
be deemed safe. However, when an extended time window is The global encoder is a global consideration of the entire trip,
5826 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 2) Local Encoder: Additionally, to capture the fine-grained
 fluctuations in driving behavior, a local encoder has been
 introduced. To learn driving behavior features more comprehensively, the input to the local encoder is divided into
 different granularities. That is to say, the time series is divided
 using sliding time windows of different sizes. Similar to the
 global encoder, to better store the results of feature learning,
 a blank result token is added to each window. Therefore, the
 input to the local encoder is sequence XLoc ∈ RN×(L+1)×d ,
 where N signifies the number of windows divided into different granularities, and L denotes the size of windows of
 different granularities.
 The Window Attention mechanism [32] is adopted for
 the extraction of window features, as it calculates attention
Fig. 4. Multi-granularity division of driving behavior. Different window sizes
represent varying granularities of division.
 weights exclusively within the window. The calculation formula for Window self-attention is as follows:
 !
 QL KLT
 Attention(QL , K L , VL ) = Softmax p VL (4)
 dkL
 where QL , KL , VL ∈ R(L+1)×d represent the Query, Key, and
 Value matrices, respectively, and d denotes the embedding
 dimension. Local window attention facilitates the model’s
 efficient learning of correlations between time steps within a
 window, thereby reducing computational complexity. Within
 each window, time steps share position encoding to distinguish between different time steps within the window. In the
 context of the granularity division of sliding time windows
Fig. 5. The illustration of the Prob-sparse attention. Exclusively retains the (L= 4, S= 4), the local encoder’s output is defined as the
Top-u queries with high variance. local feature HL=4 ∈ RN1 ×1×d . Similarly, under the granularity
 division of sliding time windows (L= 8, S= 8), the local
 encoder’s output is defined as the local feature HL=8 ∈
so the window size L = T and the number of windows N = 1. RN2 ×1×d . It is noteworthy that the number of windows under
At this point, the feature sequence is X ∈ RT ×d . At the same the corresponding granularity division is denoted by N1 and
time, in order to better store the results of feature learning, a N2 . It captures the short-term dynamics of driving behavior at
blank result token is added to the feature sequence X (refer different granularities.
to the processing method in [40]). Consequently, the input of 3) Feature Fusion: In order to ensure the effective utilizathe global encoder is the sequence XGlo ∈ R(T +1)×d . tion of local and global features of varying granularities, local
 The global encoder employs Prob-Sparse Attention [31], features HL=4 ∈ RN1 ×1×d , HL=8 ∈ RN2 ×1×d , and global features
an approach designed to minimize computational complexity HGlo ∈ R1×d are replicated to align the feature dimensions:
and accentuate salient information. The calculation formula 0
 = H
  L=8 
for Prob-Sparse self-attention is as follows: HL=8 HL=8 (5)
 0
 HGlo = tile [HGlo , [N, 1]] (6)
 ProbSparseAttention(QG , KG , VG ) 0 N×d 0 N×d
 ! This process yields HL=8 ∈ R ∈ R
 and HGlo . Addi-
 QG KGT tionally, driving behavior characteristics Hd are derived by
 = Softmax p VG (3)
 dkG establishing a connection between the residuals. The following
 calculations are to be performed:
where QG , KG , VG ∈ R(T +1)×d represent the Query, Key, and HD = LN(HL=4 +H 0L=8 +HGlo
 0
Value matrices, respectively, and d denotes the embedding 0 0
dimension. Q¯G is the sparse query matrix, which exclusively + FFN(HL=4 + HL=8 +HGlo )) (7)
retains the Top-u queries with high variance(Fig. 5). This spar- where LN(LayerNorm) denotes the process of normalization,
sification strategy effectively reduces the number of attention while FFN represents the Feed-Forward Network. The FFN
weights that need to be calculated and improves computational increases the feature dimension from d to d1 through the
efficiency. In particular, the variance of each query vector initial linear layer, and subsequently reduces the dimension
is calculated, and the Top-u query vectors with the highest back to d through the subsequent linear layer. This fusion
variance are selected. These vectors are considered to best method retains the detailed information of driving behavior
represent the key information of the input sequence. The while also considering its long-term dependencies, providing
output of the global encoder is the global feature HGlo ∈ R1×d , a more comprehensive feature representation for subsequent
which reflects the long-term state of driving behavior. risky driving behavior recognition.
WANG et al.: CROSS-ATTENTION FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER FOR DRIVING BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION 5827

C. Weather Feature Learning
 In order to effectively extract weather features H related to
driving behavior, a feature extraction method was designed
that combines One-Hot encoding, numerical normalization,
and one-dimensional convolutional networks(1D-CNN). This
section will provide a detailed exposition of the preprocessing
of meteorological data and the extraction of features.
 Due to the different characteristic attributes of weather
types, wind direction, wind speed, and temperature, different
encoding strategies were adopted to better adapt to the subsequent one-dimensional convolutional network processing.
 1) Feature Encoding: Weather type: Weather type is a Fig. 6. Cross Attention work mechanism. Cross-modal fusion is performed
 using cross-attention, with driving features HD as the query and weather
discrete variable. To enable it to be processed by the model, it features HW as the key-value pairs.
is encoded using the One-Hot encoding method. We simplify
weather types into four distinct categories (e.g., sunny, hazy,
rainy, snowy). Each weather type is encoded as a sparse Convolutional Layer: Two one-dimensional convolutional
binary vector of length 4, where the element corresponding layers are employed to capture local correlations in weather
to the weather type is 1, and all other elements are 0. This sequences. It has been established that each convolutional
encoding effectively represents the category information of layer utilizes the same configuration, which consists of a
weather types. convolution kernel size of 1 and a stride of 1. The formula
 Wind direction: As with the classification of weather types, for the convolution operation is as follows:
the direction of wind is encoded through the implementation
 Hconv = Conv1D(ReLU(Conv1D(Hconv ))) (9)
of the One-Hot encoding method. The eight wind directions
are represented by the following letters: east, west, etc. up to The symbol Conv1D denotes a one-dimensional convolution
northeast and northwest. The direction of the wind is encoded operation, and the symbol ReLU denotes the ReLU activation
as an 8-length sparse binary vector. function. The ReLU activation function has been demonstrated
 Wind strength: Wind strength is also a discrete variable, to effectively alleviate the vanishing gradient problem and
and it is encoded using the One-Hot encoding method. Accord- accelerate model training. The number of output channels for
ing to the national standard “Wind Force Scale” published by the two convolution layers is d/2 and d, respectively. A gradual
China in 2012, wind strength is divided into 18 levels [41]. increase in the number of channels can facilitate the extraction
However, given that the experimental data utilized in this study of richer feature information.
excludes wind speeds above level 10, the wind strength is The final step in the process entails the interpolation of the
encoded as a sparse binary vector of length 11. feature vector Hconv ∈ RT ×d , which is obtained through the
 Temperature: Temperature is a continuous numerical vari- convolution operation, to obtain the weather feature HW ∈
able. To promote the acceleration of model convergence, the RN×d , Where N numerically equal to the number of windows
normalization of the temperature data is employed. Specifi- obtained during the driving behavior feature learning process.
cally, the temperature data is linearly scaled to the interval [0, Through the above-mentioned mixed feature encoding and
1]. The normalization formula is as follows: one-dimensional convolution network, weather features related
 to driving behavior can be effectively extracted, providing
 T − Tmin reliable input for subsequent cross-modal fusion and risky
 Tnorm = (8)
 Tmax − Tmin driving behavior recognition.
where T denotes the original temperature value, Tmin and
Tmax denote the minimum and maximum temperature values, D. Cross-Modal Dynamic Fusion
respectively, and Tnorm denotes the normalized temperature In order to correlate the interaction between driving behavvalue. This normalization method effectively maps temperature ior and weather, a dynamic fusion mechanism was designed
data to a unified numerical range, thereby improving the to achieve effective fusion of driving behavior features and
training efficiency and stability of the model. weather features.
 After the above encoding and normalization, the hourly Initially, a cross-attention mechanism (Fig. 6) was employed
weather data can be represented as a feature vector Ct ∈ RD to calculate the correlation between driving features and
with dimension D = 4 + 8 + 11 + 1, where the first 4 + 8 + 11 weather features. The driving feature HD was used as the
elements represent the One-Hot encoding of weather types Query, and the weather feature HW was used as the Key-Value.
(4), wind direction (8), and wind speed (11), and the last Cross-modal correlation was then calculated:
element represents the normalized temperature value. Combine
 !
 QC KCT
 CrossAtten(QC , K C , V C = Softmax p
 
all weather data at all times to obtain the weather data matrix VC (10)
C ∈ RT ×D , where T is the total time of the corresponding trip. dkC
 2) 1D-CNN: Next, weather features are extracted from the Among these, QC = HD Wq , KC = H W Wk , VC = HW Wv , Wq ,
preprocessed weather data matrix C ∈ RT ×D using 1D-CNN. Wk , and Wv are learnable weight matrices. The output of
5828 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

cross-attention is cross-modal feature HC ∈ RN×d , which F. Statistical Significance Testing
captures the interaction between driving behavior and weather When employing J-fold cross-validation, standard paired tconditions. tests tend to underestimate the variance due to overlapping
 In addition, the study introduces learnable gating weights to training sets, leading to overly “optimistic” results. To achieve
achieve dynamic fusion, thereby balancing the contributions of more robust significance inferences, this study adopts the
driving features and cross-modal features. modified paired t-test proposed by Nadeau & Bengio [42].
 Specifically, for each baseline Mn and  the proposed model M0 ,
 g = σ Wg [HD ; HC ] + bg
 
 (11)
 = , , . . . , 0 =
 
 performance measure vectors P n pn0 pn1 p nn andP
 H f used = g HD + (1 − g) HC (12) 
 p00 , p01 , . . . , p0n are computed on the same validation fold
 

 for each fold j = 1, . . . , J. The absolute difference between
In this equation, σ represents the Sigmoid function, denotes
 them is calculated as d j = |P0 − Pn |, where the operator (-
element-wise multiplication, and Wg and bg are learnable
 ) denotes element-wise subtraction. With d̄ = 1J j d j and
 P
weight matrices and bias terms. The model employs a gating 2
 S d2 = J−11
 P
mechanism that enables it to adaptively learn the optimal j d j − d̄ , the Nadeau-Bengio variance inflation
weights of driving features and cross-modal features. This correction is applied to account for the positive correlation
process facilitates more effective feature fusion. induced by overlapping training sets:
 Finally, in order to measure the riskiness of driving behavior,
  
 1 n2
 ar d = S d2
 
the hazard function, H f used ∈ RN×d , is first mapped to N V
 d + (16)
 J n1
single values, z, through a fully connected layer. Then, z is
compressed to the range of 0-1 through a sigmoid function where n1 and n2 represent the number of training and test
to obtain the risk probability, P. The formula is expressed as samples per fold, respectively. From this modified variance,
follows: as proposed by Nadeau et al., the t-statistic is derived as:
 p = σ (Hfused w + b) (13) d
 t= q  (17)
In this case, w is the weight vector and b is the bias term. The Vdar d
classification results for driving behavior are as follows:
 where d̄ denotes the arithmetic mean of the differences.
 Although this method has been previously utilized and eval-
 (
 1 if p ≥ τ
 ŷ = (14) uated by authors [42], [43] our model comparisons are not
 0 otherwise
 solely predicated on this modified test statistic. Results are
where ŷ denotes the binary classification result and τ rep- reported with confidence intervals, which are also sufficient
resents the threshold. When the probability exceeds the for comparing model performance.
established threshold, the result of the driving behavior recognition is deemed to be risky. Subsequently, all risky driving V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
behaviors that occur during the entire time series are doc- A. Datasets
umented in the result P̃, which contains all risky driving The dataset used in this experiment was obtained from the
behaviors identified during the entire trip. 7th “Teddy Cup” Data Mining Challenge. The dataset under
 consideration includes two types of data: vehicle trajectory
E. Loss Function and Training data and weather data. The vehicle trajectory data set includes
 the driving trajectories of 450 commercial transportation
 To optimize model performance, the following loss function vehicles from August to October 2018, with each vehicle
and training strategy were adopted. The model loss Lpred is the having approximately 15 trip records. These trajectories were
predicted cross-entropy loss: mainly collected from vehicles operating on highways and
 1 XN urban arterial roads, reflecting long-distance and continuous
 Lpred = BCE yn , b
 
 yn (15) driving scenarios rather than dense urban intersections. Vehicle
 N n=1
 operating information was recorded by sensors, including
Among these, BCE is the binary cross-entropy loss, which is
 operating status, speed, angle, longitude, latitude, time, and
used to measure the difference between the model’s predicted
 mileage. The volume of vehicle trip data ranges from 75,169
results and the actual labels.
 to 84,411 records. The weather data set includes temperature,
 During the training phase, the Adam optimizer is employed
 wind direction, wind speed, and 12 types of weather for
to update the model parameters, and an early stopping strategy
 the corresponding time and region. The dataset is partitioned
is implemented to avert overfitting. Specifically, the model’s
 into training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 7:1:2,
performance is monitored on the validation set. In the event
 respectively.
that the validation set loss does not decrease within a predefined number of epochs, the training process is terminated.
Furthermore, a three-fold cross-validation procedure is imple- B. Experimental Setup
mented during the training phase to enhance the model’s 1) Implementation Details: CAFFT was implemented using
generalization capability, thereby facilitating its adaptation to PyTorch and Python. All experiments were conducted on an
the individual characteristics of diverse drivers. Intel Core i5-12600K, 32 GB RAM, and an Nvidia RTX 4090
WANG et al.: CROSS-ATTENTION FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER FOR DRIVING BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION 5829

 TABLE I
 T HE O PTIMAL M ODEL H YPERPARAMETER S ETTING

 Fig. 7. Model Performance at Various Thresholds(ode The shaded regions
 indicate the 95% confidence intervals.

GPU. We trained our method using the Adam optimizer. The Equations (18) and (19):
learning rate was initially set to 5e-4, with a weight decay X X
of 1e-5. Training was conducted for 100 epochs, employing Rec = Pi /
 e Pi ,
 e (i = 1, 2, . . . , NP ) (18)
 i
an early stopping strategy to prevent overfitting: model per- bi =e
 X Pi
formance was monitored on the validation set, and training X X
ceased if the validation loss did not decrease within 10 epochs. Pre = Pi /
 e bi ,
 X (i = 1, 2, . . . , NP ) (19)
 i
 bi =e
 X Pi
The hyperparameters for the optimal model are configured as
follows TABLE I:
 where NP represents the total number of data records contained
 2) Baseline: We compare CAFFT against two categories of
 in a trip P, and X̂i = P̃i represents the ith extracted driving
baseline methods: 1) traditional machine learning approaches,
 behavior that was detected as risky driving behavior and is
namely One-Class SVM (OCSVM) and Naive Bayes Classiactually risky.
fier (NBC) and 2) deep learning methods, including LSTM,
 Given that the cost of false negatives in safety-critical
SLAFusion, Informer, and TFT:
 scenarios is significantly higher than that of false positives,
 OneClassSVM [15]. Compared to SVM, OneClassSVM
 we further report Fβ , where β > 1, to increase the weight of
can effectively handle scenarios with small sample sizes, such
 recall. This configuration places a greater emphasis on the
as separating dangerous behaviors in a single trip.
 model’s performance in identifying true dangerous driving
 Naive Bayesian Classifier(NBC) [16]. This classifier is
 behaviors, thereby enhancing the model’s effectiveness in
based on Bayesian theory and classifies samples according to
 practical applications. The formula for Fβ is as follows:
the probability that they belong to each category.
 Attention fusion based on SAX and LSTM method (1 + β2 ) · Precision · Recall
(SLAFusion) [44]. This method constructs a deep neural Fβ = , β ∈ {1, 1.5, 2}. (20)
 (β2 · Precision) + Recall
network that combines SAX and LSTM, and introduces an
attention mechanism to learn and detect risky driving behavior When reporting experimental results, we selected β = 2,
from heterogeneous multi-source data. which aligns with the application objective of “minimizing
 Informer [31]. As an innovative time series forecasting false negatives in safety-critical scenarios.” Concurrently, we
model, Informer efficiently captures long-term dependencies also report the standard F1-score in our results, defined by the
in time series data through its design for long sequence inputs. following formula:
It can be effectively applied to the identification of dangerous
driving behaviors that require analysis of extended time series 2 ∗ Pre ∗ Rec
 F − score = (21)
data. Pre + Rec
 TFT [45]. The Temporal Fusion Transformer (TFT) is a
model specifically designed for multivariate time series fore- D. Models Performance Comparation
casting. By integrating self-attention mechanisms and gated
residual networks, it can handle complex patterns and provide 1) Threshold Analysis: In this study, the decision threshinterpretable predictions. This makes it suitable for identifying old τ is determined on the validation set and subsequently
dangerous driving behaviors from multi-source heterogeneous applied to the test set. To analyze model performance under
sensor data. various threshold values, we conducted experiments with τ ∈
 (0.3 − 0.8). The experimental results, presented in Fig. 7, indicate that at τ = 0.5, the model achieves its maximum F-score
C. Evaluation Mechanism while maintaining an F2-score close to its maximum, thereby
 For evaluating these methods, we employ a precision-recall striking a balance between precision and recall. Accordingly,
framework. Recall and precision are calculated according to we set the threshold to τ = 0.5.
5830 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 TABLE II
R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT R ISKY D RIVING B EHAVIOR R ECOGNITION M ETHODS . (R ESULTS W ITH 95% CI AND F INAL R ESULTS ARE R ETAINED TO 3
 D ECIMALS W ITHOUT ROUNDING D URING THE ACTUAL E XPERIMENT )

 TABLE III demonstrated by CAFFT, relative to the comparison models,
 F2-S CORE S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE T ESTING R ESULT is statistically significant. The T-score and P-value obtained
 from the Nadeau–Bengio corrected paired t-test, as shown in
 TABLE III, confirm that the performance differences between
 the methods remain robust even after controlling for the
 variance underestimation caused by overlapping training sets.
 This suggests that the model proposed in this study possesses
 a consistent advantage in the objective of “recalling higher
 risk samples,” and its improvement is not due to random
 fluctuations but rather stems from systematic performance
 enhancements derived from the model architecture and fusion
 strategy. Given that F2-Score places greater emphasis on
 recall, these results validate the proposed method’s superior capability in suppressing false negatives within high-risk
 behavior identification scenarios.
 4) β-Sensitivity Analysis: To confirm the reliability of our
 2) Experimental Results: For experimentation, the dataset conclusions when increasing the recall weight by setting β> 1,
was divided into three relatively independent experimen- we conducted a sensitivity analysis on β ∈ {0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3},
tal subsets, corresponding to vehicles numbered 001-150, covering different false negative (FN) to false positive (FP)
151-300, and 301-450, respectively. This division facilitates cost trade-offs. For each β, we report the Fβ -score along
subsequent validation of the proposed method’s universality with its 95% CI. The results, shown in Fig. 8, demonstrate
and stability. When presenting experimental results, we report that in the recall-priority range where β ≥ 1, the advantage
only the averaged results across these three experimental of our method over the baselines remains stable, indicatgroups, as shown in TABLE II. Based on these experimental ing the robustness of our conclusions to the choice of β.
findings, the following conclusions can be drawn. This aligns with the application objective of ”prioritizing
 Firstly, the proposed CAFFT method demonstrates the best the reduction of false negatives in safety-critical scenarios.”
performance. This indicates that the multi-granularity driving Accordingly, we designate β = 2 as our primary evaluation
behavior extraction and subsequent result fusion mechanism metric.
is more effective in preventing misclassifications and missed
detections.
 Secondly, due to the imbalanced distribution of positive and E. Ablation Experiments
negative samples within the dataset—for instance, only 1.48% 1) Sub-Module Ablation Experiments: In order to verify
of the summarized data generated by vehicle “AB00257” was the impact of each submodule in the CAFFT model on the
marked as dangerous—the interpretability of the Precision identification results of risky driving behavior, an ablation
(Pre) metric is relatively low. This is also one of the reasons experiment was conducted. Initially, the driving process was
why we set the parameter β > 1 in the Fβ -score calculation not divided during data preprocessing to verify the impact of
formula. driving process extraction on the experimental results, which
 Consequently, the Informer model’s advantage in Pre does was represented as CAFFT (-DP ). Secondly, the hierarchical
not necessarily imply its superiority over CAFFT. Overall, encoder structure employed in the method was substituted with
the proposed CAFFT method exhibits superior performance a non-hierarchical structure, which was denoted as CAFFT
compared to the aforementioned baseline methods. (-Encoder). This modification was implemented to ascertain
 3) Statistical Significance Testing Results: The statisti- the efficacy of the hierarchical encoder structure in capturing
cal test results indicate that the improvement in F2-Score global information. Thirdly, the weather module, which learns
WANG et al.: CROSS-ATTENTION FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER FOR DRIVING BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION 5831

Fig. 8. β-Sensitivity Analysis with 95% CI. This plot illustrates the performance (Fβ −score) of different models. The shaded regions indicate the 95%
confidence intervals. The implied cost ratio (FN/FP ≈ β2 ) is also shown.

Fig. 9. Results of each group in the ablation experiment. ∆ indicates the differences between each experimental group with CAFFT.

situational factors, was removed and represented as CAFFT cross-attention mechanism to associate driving behavior fea-
(-SF) to demonstrate that situational factors have a signifi- tures and weather features, the driving behavior features
cant impact on the recognition results. Finally, the attention and weather features were directly concatenated as input for
mechanism in the cross-modal dynamic fusion module was subsequent steps.
removed to verify the impact of the cross-attention mecha- A subsequent analysis of the results of the ablation
nism on the experimental results, and it was represented as experiment, as illustrated in Fig. 9, yielded the following
CAFFT (-XATTN). Specifically, rather than employing the conclusions. First, it is necessary to extract the driving
5832 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION E XPERIMENTS R ESULTS FOR W EATHER S UB -M ODALITIES

process before identifying driving behavior. The classification
of driving behavior based on fine-grained criteria has been
demonstrated to be more effective in identifying risky driving
behavior. Consequently, CAFFT exhibits superior performance
in comparison to CAFFT (-DP ). Secondly, the results of
the original model were superior to those of CAFFT (-SF),
indicating the necessity of considering situational factors when
identifying risky driving behavior. Furthermore, situational
factors exerted the greatest influence on identification results
in all verifications. Finally, both CAFFT (-XATTN) and
CAFFT (-Encoder) demonstrate a lower level of performance
in comparison to the original model, thereby providing a
comprehensive validation of the impact of the cross-attention
mechanism and the hierarchical encoder structure on experi- Fig. 10. Experimental results under different grain size window divisions.
 The error bars in the figure represent 95% (CI) error bars.
mental outcomes.
 2) Ablation Experiments of Different Weather Sub-
Modalities: Furthermore, to investigate the independent con- (∆ F2 ≈ 0.008) and temperature (∆ F2 ≈ 0.006), with
tributions and complementary effects of individual sub-modal wind direction having the least impact (∆ F1 = 0.005).
features within weather information on dangerous driving Under the “add only single sub-modality” strategy, the
behavior identification performance, this study conducted model retaining only weather type, CAFFT(+ WT), performed
additional ablation experiments. Specifically, two comple- best (F2 = 0.849), suggesting that categorical weather conmentary ablation strategies were designed. The first strategy ditions (e.g., clear, rainy, snowy, foggy) provide relatively
involved removing a single sub-modality: one by one, weather direct indications of driving risk. Conversely, models contype (WT), temperature (TMP), wind speed (WS), and wind taining only temperature or wind-related features (CAFFT(+
direction (WD) sub-modalities were removed while keeping TMP), CAFFT(+ WS), CAFFT(+ WD)) exhibited limited
other weather features constant. The second strategy involved identification capability (F2 ≈ 0.805–0.810), indicating
adding only a single sub-modality: only one weather feature that continuous meteorological variables alone are insufficient
was retained, with all others removed. All other experimental to comprehensively characterize the impact on the driving
settings remained consistent with the original model to ensure environment.
comparability of results. This yielded a total of eight model
variants: F. Granular Analysis of the Driving Process
 CAFFT(-WT), CAFFT(-TMP), CAFFT(-WS), CAFFT(- This section undertakes an analysis of the impact of different
WD), CAFFT(+WT), CAFFT(+TMP), CAFFT(+WS), and time granularity time window extraction processes on recog-
CAFFT(+ WD). nition results. CAFFT (L) denotes the results obtained when
 The experimental results are presented in TABLE IV. When only one process extraction is performed on driving behavior
employing the “remove single sub-modality” strategy, model for different window sizes, where L is the window size.
performance degraded in all scenarios, indicating that each As illustrated in Fig. 10, while the results obtained by
sub-modality provides complementary contextual information CAFFT (L= 4) exhibit slight differences compared to those
for dangerous driving identification. Among these, the removal obtained by CAFFT (L= 2), the difference is not significant.
of weather type information led to the most significant per- However, under the L= 4 granularity division, the dimension
formance drop (∆ F2 = 0.047), followed by wind speed of the feature vector is only half that of the L= 2 granularity
WANG et al.: CROSS-ATTENTION FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER FOR DRIVING BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION 5833

 TABLE V
 M ODEL C OMPLEXITY AS A F UNCTION OF W INDOW S IZE

 TABLE VI
 C ROSS -T EST S ET G ENERALIZATION T EST R ESULTS

division, which reduces the computational load of the model
as TABLE V show. This is the primary rationale behind
the selection of L= 4 as the primary division in the final
model, as opposed to L= 2. Furthermore, the experimental
results obtained under the L= 16 granularity division differ
significantly from those obtained under L= 8. This finding
indicates that dividing the driving process into overly longtime windows does not align with the actual duration of a
single driving behavior in the real world. Consequently, this
misalignment affects the final experimental results. Finally,
CAFFT exhibited a marked superiority over those of the other
control groups, thereby substantiating the necessity of multigranularity segmentation of the original trajectory data as
opposed to single-granularity segmentation. Fig. 11. Gated Weight Distribution. The figure displays histograms and kernel
 density estimates of the HD Weights (blue), and HC Weights (orange), after
 model training.

G. Cross-Test Set Generalization Test Experiments
 H. Gated Weights Visualization
 In order to ascertain the efficacy of the proposed methodology in adapting to the personalized differences among drivers, In this subsection, we visualize the distribution of gated
cross-test set generalization test experiment were conducted on weights for driving feature HD and cross-modal feature HC .
models trained using different training sets. The experimental This visualization not only helps to verify whether the proresults are presented in TABLE VI. In this table, CAFFT (a) posed gating mechanism aligns with the intended modeling
represents the model that was trained on test set 1 (numbers logic but also provides transparency and interpretability for
001-150), CAFFT (b) represents the model that was trained on understanding model decisions. Furthermore, it elucidates how
test set 2 (numbers 151-300), and CAFFT (c) represents the the model leverages core information from different modalities
model that was trained on test set 3 (numbers 301-450). The to accomplish the final classification in dangerous driving
experimental results demonstrate that our method generates behavior recognition.
consistent test results on experimental sets comprising various In Fig. 11, the gated weights for the driving feature HD
drivers, with the standard deviation of the F-score for the three exhibit higher concentration and a right-skewed distribution,
models in different experimental sets being less than 0.007. with peak weights predominantly falling within the 0.55–0.80
This finding indicates that the CAFFT model exhibits partic- range. This indicates that the model tends to enhance trajectory
ular strengths in adapting to the individual differences among dynamic information across most feature dimensions. Condifferent drivers, effectively accommodating these variations, versely, the gated weights for the cross-modal feature HC , after
and meeting the requirements of real-world driving behavior integrating the weather modality, are generally skewed towards
analysis and application. the 0.10–0.45 range, displaying a flatter density variation.
5834 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

This suggests that the contribution of weather to dangerous performance validation, ablation experiments, driving process
driving identification has stronger dimensional heterogene- extraction granularity analysis experiments, and cross-test-set
ity, with high weights assigned only in a few dimensions. generalization test experiments. In comparison with bench-
The overlap between the two distributions is primarily con- mark methods, CAFFT achieved an F2-score of 0.858 (95%
centrated in the 0.35–0.55 range, representing a synergistic CI: 0.840-0.875) and a PR-AUC of 0.892 on a real-world
strengthening effect between trajectory and weather in these driving dataset. This represents a 1.2-1.9 percentage point
channels. improvement in F2-score over powerful Transformer-based
 From an overall distribution perspective, the distribution models such as Informer and TFT. Statistical significance
of HD is sharper, while that of HC is more dispersed. This analysis using the Nadeau–Bengio corrected paired t-test consuggests that the trajectory modality demonstrates more stable firmed that these improvements are not attributable to random
consistency during the cross-modal fusion process, whereas variability (p-values <1e-4 for all major baselines). These
the contribution of the weather modality exhibits greater results indicate that the proposed multi-granularity hierarchiinter-dimensional fluctuation. This result validates CAFFT’s cal encoding and cross-modal fusion of weather information
design hypothesis: the primary discriminative information effectively reduce false negatives in risky driving behavior
for dangerous driving behavior identification originates from identification. The performance of each component of the
continuous trajectory dynamics, while weather, as a con- model was verified by means of ablation experiments. In
textual factor, primarily exerts a “modulatory” influence, the granularity analysis experiment, the performance of the
significantly affecting the fusion outcome only in specific model at different granularities is verified. In the cross-test
dimensions. set generalization test experiments, the CAFFT model demonstrated a superior capacity to adapt to the driver’s unique
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION characteristics.
 In light of the numerous challenges associated with iden- Future research can be conducted in the following areas.
tifying hazardous driving behaviors, this paper puts forth a Firstly, risky driving behavior recognition is inherently
Transformer-based cross-attention feature fusion dangerous scenario-dependent, as identical driving maneuvers may cordriving behavior recognition model, designated as CAFFT. respond to different risk levels under varying operational
Additionally, it assesses the efficacy of the model on a real conditions and human response capabilities. Therefore, furdataset. ther investigation of contextual factors and their combined
 The CAFFT model is composed of three primary modules: effects is necessary to better reflect real-world driving scenara driving sequence feature learning module, a weather feature ios. Secondly, the personal physiological and psychological
learning module, and a cross-modal dynamic fusion module. factors of drivers also affect driving behavior performance.
In the driving sequence feature learning module, firstly, to A promising avenue for enhancing the recognition perforcircumvent the issue of misjudged results in the driving pro- mance of driving behavior involves the integration of these
cess segmentation, disparate sizes of sliding time windows are heterogeneous data with existing research. This necessitates
employed for segmentation. Secondly, to capture the long-term interdisciplinary research, such as the integration of psycholdependencies and detailed information of the driving behav- ogy and physiological information disciplines. Thirdly, given
ior, a hierarchical Transformer encoder structure is designed, that dangerous driving behavior recognition is a research
where the ProbSparse Attention mechanism is introduced in topic that contributes to driving safety, active intervention
the global encoder to capture the long-term dependencies of based on recognition results is a necessary research direction.
the driving behavior, and the window Attention mechanism is Subsequent research endeavors may explore the development
introduced in the local encoder to capture the fine-grained fluc- of methods to proactively intervene in drivers, with these
tuations. In the weather feature learning module, an effective interventions being informed by the findings from driving
extraction method was designed to identify weather features behavior recognition. Finally, Given the critical nature of road
related to driving behavior. This method combines One-Hot traffic safety, with consequences that are often life-or-death,
encoding, numerical normalization, and a one-dimensional the timely application of the researched technology is of
convolutional network. In the cross-modal dynamic fusion the utmost importance. However, this assertion is subject to
module, we also fuse driving behavioral features with weather various influences and challenges, including the maturity and
features through a cross-attention mechanism to characterize reliability of the technology, the system’s resilience to attacks,
the effect of situational factors on driving behavior during the and the efficacy of data protection mechanisms. Addressing
vehicle’s driving process. Concurrently, in order to enhance these issues can more effectively prevent and handle traffic
the model’s capacity to adapt to the distinct characteristics of accidents, further improving road traffic safety.
different drivers, we implemented three-fold cross-validation
during the training process to augment the model’s general- R EFERENCES
ization capability. We subsequently verified the model’s ability [1] World Health Organization. (Dec. 13, 2023). Global Status Report
to adapt to individualized differences among different drivers on Road Safety 2023. www.who.int. [Online]. Available: https://
through cross-test-set generalization tests. www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240086517
 [2] K. Somoray, K. M. White, B. Watson, and I. Lewis, “Predicting risky
 To this end, experimental validation on a real driving dataset driving behaviours using the theory of planned behaviour: A metais conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed analysis,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 208, Dec. 2024, Art. no.
method through a series of experiments, including model 107797, doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2024.107797.
WANG et al.: CROSS-ATTENTION FEATURE FUSION TRANSFORMER FOR DRIVING BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION 5835

[3] G. Sun, H. Zhang, L. Zhong, and Q. Li, “Identification of driving behav- [23] Y. He and Z. Liu, “A feature fusion method to improve the drivior in continuous diverging sections of expressway system interchange ing obstacle detection under foggy weather,” IEEE Trans. Transport.
 based on CNN-BiLSTM,” Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, Mar. 2025, Art. no. Electrific., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2505–2515, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1109/
 10631, doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-94000-6. TTE.2021.3080690.
[4] A. Chand, S. Jayesh, and A. B. Bhasi, “Road traffic accidents: An [24] J. Liu, T. Li, Z. Yuan, W. Huang, P. Xie, and Q. Huang, “Symbolic
 overview of data sources, analysis techniques and contributing factors,” aggregate approximation based data fusion model for dangerous driving
 Mater. Today, Proc., vol. 47, pp. 5135–5141, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1016/ behavior detection,” Inf. Sci., vol. 609, pp. 626–643, Sep. 2022, doi:
 j.matpr.2021.05.415. 10.1016/j.ins.2022.07.118.
[5] D. Yi, J. Su, C. Liu, M. Quddus, and W.-H. Chen, “A machine learning [25] J. Xu, S. Pan, P. Z. H. Sun, S. H. Park, and K. Guo, “Humanbased personalized system for driving state recognition,” Transp. Res. factors-in-driving-loop: Driver identification and verification via a deep
 C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 105, pp. 241–261, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1016/ learning approach using psychological behavioral data,” IEEE Trans.
 j.trc.2019.05.042. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 3383–3394, Mar. 2023, doi:
[6] X. Cui, X. Li, X. Zheng, and Y. Ren, “Driving behavior primitive 10.1109/TITS.2022.3225782.
 classification using CNN-based fusion models,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, [26] Y. Wang, N. Lyu, C. Wu, Z. Du, M. Deng, and H. Wu, “Investigating the
 pp. 56344–56355, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3391170. impact of HMI on drivers’ merging performance in intelligent connected
[7] S. Islam et al., “A comprehensive survey on applications of transformers vehicle environment,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 198, Apr. 2024,
 for deep learning tasks,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 241, May 2024, Art. Art. no. 107448, doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2023.107448.
 no. 122666, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122666. [27] M. Haris and A. Glowacz, “Navigating an automated driving vehicle
[8] Y. Liu et al., “A survey of visual transformers,” IEEE Trans. Neural via the early fusion of multi-modality,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 4, p. 1425,
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 7478–7498, Jun. 2024, doi: Feb. 2022, doi: 10.3390/s22041425.
 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3227717. [28] J. Liu et al., “FedDAF: Federated deep attention fusion for dangerous
[9] Y. Liu, S. Du, H. Han, X. Chen, W. Zeng, and Z. Tian, “Adaptive driving behavior detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 112, Dec. 2024, Art. no.
 distraction recognition via soft prototype learning and probabilistic 102584, doi: 10.1016/j.inffus.2024.102584.
 label alignment,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, [29] L. Mou et al., “Multimodal driver distraction detection using dualpp. 18701–18713, Nov. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2024.3444006. channel network of CNN and transformer,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 234,
[10] F. Hu, L. Zhang, X. Yang, and W.-A. Zhang, “EEG-based driver Dec. 2023, Art. no. 121066, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2023.121066.
 fatigue detection using spatio-temporal fusion network with brain [30] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” 2017, arXiv:1706.03762.
 region partitioning strategy,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., [31] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long
 vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 9618–9630, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2023.334 sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., May
 8517. 2021, vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 11106–11115, doi: 10.1609/aaai.v35i12.173
[11] Y. Yi, C. Lu, B. Wang, L. Cheng, Z. Li, and J. Gong, “Fusion of 25.
 gaze and scene information for driving behaviour recognition: A graph- [32] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer
 neural-network-based framework,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., using shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8109–8120, Aug. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2023.3263 (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002, doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.009
 875. 86.
[12] L. Cheng, Y. Qin, K. Yang, Z. Chen, and X. Tang, “Toward safe [33] W. Ji, K. Zhai, B. Xu, and J. Wu, “Green apple detection method based
 motion planning for autonomous driving in highway,” IEEE Trans. on multidimensional feature extraction network model and transformer
 Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 2491–2502, Feb. 2025, doi: 10.1109/ module,” J. Food Protection, vol. 88, no. 1, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 100397,
 TVT.2024.3483571. doi: 10.1016/j.jfp.2024.100397.
[13] M. Zhang, C. Chen, T. Wo, T. Xie, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, and X. Lin, [34] W. Ji, J. Wang, B. Xu, and T. Zhang, “Apple grading based on multi-
 “SafeDrive: Online driving anomaly detection from large-scale vehicle dimensional view processing and deep learning,” Foods, vol. 12, no. 11,
 data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 2087–2096, Aug. p. 2117, May 2023, doi: 10.3390/foods12112117.
 2017, doi: 10.1109/TII.2017.2674661. [35] S. Li et al., “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck
[14] J. Yu, Z. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Kong, and M. Li, “Fine- of transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Syst.
 grained abnormal driving behaviors detection and identification (NIPS), no. 471, Dec. 2019, pp. 5243–5253.
 with smartphones,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 16, no. 8, [36] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 pp. 2198–2212, Aug. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2016.2618873. networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
[15] S. Zhu, C. Li, K. Fang, Y. Peng, Y. Jiang, and Y. Zou, “An opti- VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022, doi:
 mized algorithm for dangerous driving behavior identification based on 10.14778/3514061.3514067.
 unbalanced data,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 10, p. 1557, May 2022, doi: [37] J. You et al., “Exploring driving behavior for autonomous vehicles based
 10.3390/electronics11101557. on gramian angular field vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
[16] X. Wu, J. Zhou, J. An, and Y. Yang, “Abnormal driving behavior Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 17493–17504, Nov. 2024, doi: 10.1109/
 detection for bus based on the Bayesian classifier,” in Proc. 10th TITS.2024.3445710.
 Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Intell. (ICACI), Mar. 2018, pp. 266–272, doi: [38] H. Wang et al., “FPT: Fine-grained detection of driver distraction
 10.1109/ICACI.2018.8377618. based on the feature pyramid vision transformer,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
[17] L. Yang, J. Zhang, N. Lyu, and Q. Zhao, “Predicting lane change Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1594–1608, Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1109/
 maneuver and associated collision risks based on multi-task learning,” TITS.2022.3219676.
 Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 209, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 107830, doi: [39] Z. Zhang, L. Yang, and C. Lv, “Highly discriminative driver distraction
 10.1016/j.aap.2024.107830. detection method based on Swin transformer,” Vehicles, vol. 6, no. 1,
[18] J. Gao, P. Li, Z. Chen, and J. Zhang, “A survey on deep learning for pp. 140–156, Jan. 2024, doi: 10.3390/vehicles6010006.
 multimodal data fusion,” Neural Comput., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 829–864, [40] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 May 2020, doi: 10.1162/neco a 01273. for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[19] O. Elsherbiny, J. Gao, M. Ma, Y. Guo, M. H. Tunio, and A. H. Mosha, [41] Wind Scale, document GB/T 28591-2012, 2012.
 “Advancing lettuce physiological state recognition in IoT aeroponic sys- [42] C. Nadeau and Y. Bengio, “Inference for the generalization error,”
 tems: A meta-learning-driven data fusion approach,” Eur. J. Agronomy, Mach. Learn., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 239–281, Sep. 2003, doi: 10.1023/
 vol. 161, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 127387, doi: 10.1016/j.eja.2024.127387. a:1024068626366.
[20] Q. Xu, S. Song, Q. Wu, B. Jiang, B. Luo, and J. Tang, “Multi- [43] A. Benavoli, G. Corani, F. Mangili, M. Zaffalon, and F. Ruggeri, “A
 level semantic-aware transformer for image captioning,” Neural Netw., Bayesian Wilcoxon signed-rank test based on the Dirichlet process,” in
 vol. 187, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 107390, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2025.107390. Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2014, pp. 1026–1034.
[21] O. Elharrouss, R. Damseh, A. N. Belkacem, E. Badidi, and A. Lakas, [44] J. Liu, W. Huang, H. Li, S. Ji, Y. Du, and T. Li, “SLAFusion: Attention
 “Transformer-based image and video inpainting: Current challenges and fusion based on SAX and LSTM for dangerous driving behavior
 future directions,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 58, no. 4, Feb. 2025, Art. no. detection,” Inf. Sci., vol. 640, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 119063, doi: 10.1016/
 124, doi: 10.1007/s10462-024-11075-9. j.ins.2023.119063.
[22] S. Jing, H. Zhang, P. Zeng, L. Gao, J. Song, and H. T. Shen, [45] B. Lim, S. Ö. Arık, N. Loeff, and T. Pfister, “Temporal fusion trans-
 “Memory-based augmentation network for video captioning,” IEEE formers for interpretable multi-horizon time series forecasting,” Int.
 Trans. Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 2367–2379, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ J. Forecasting, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 1748–1764, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1016/
 TMM.2023.3295098. j.ijforecast.2021.03.012.
5836 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 Sheng Wang was born in Zhumadian, China, in Wensa Wang was born in Henan, China, in
 2000. He received the B.E. degree in traffic engineer- 1995. She received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
 ing from Jiangsu University, where he is currently transportation engineering from Jiangsu University,
 pursuing the master’s degree in transportation engi- Zhenjiang, China. From 2015 to 2016, she was
 neering. His research interests include risky driving a Research Assistant with the Princeton Plasma
 behavior recognition and prevention. Physics Laboratory. She is currently with Zhejiang
 University of Science and Technology. In 2017, she
 participated in the 8th Thai Society of Mechanical
 Engineers International Conference on Mechanical
 Engineering, Bangkok, Thailand, and gave a poster
 presentation. Her research interests include intelligent vehicle control, DASS, and traffic safety.

 Chaofeng Pan was born in Hubei, China, in 1979.
 He received the Ph.D. degree from the School of
 Automobile and Traffic Engineering, Jiangsu Uni-
 Jun Liang was born in Yangzhou, China, in 1976. versity. He is currently a Professor who studies on
 He is currently a Professor and the Director with efficiency optimization and energy management of
 the Institute of Transportation Big Data and Security electric vehicle power system with Jiangsu Univer-
 Control, Jiangsu University. He is also a Ph.D. sity. He is one of the candidates for the selection
 Supervisor with two published works, more than of high-level talents of the “Six Talent Peaks” in
 60 articles, and 30 authorized patents. His research Jiangsu Province with more than 60 high-level artiinterests include intelligent transportation systems cles and 20 patents. He has also presided over two
 and intelligent vehicles. National Natural Science Foundations.

 Long Chen was born in Jinjiang, China, in 1958.
 He received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Jiangsu
 University, Jiangsu, in 1982 and 2006, respectively.
 He is currently a Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor
 with the School of Automotive and Traffic Engineering, Jiangsu University. He is leading three research
 projects funded by the National Natural Science
 Xinqi Yu was born in Songyuan, China, in 1999.
 Foundation of China and over ten other national
 He received the B.E. degree in transportation
 and provincial research projects in China. He has
 equipment and control engineering from Nanjing
 authored over 100 academic articles. His research
 Institute of Technology. He is currently pursuing the
 interests include road traffic safety and management,
 master’s degree in transportation engineering with
 vehicle active safety technology, and vehicle dynamic simulation and control.
 Jiangsu University. His research interests include
 He was a recipient of Chinese Mechanical Industry Young Scientist Award
 autonomous driving platoon agglomeration strategy
 for Excellence, the Young and Middle-Aged Expert Award for Outstanding
 and connected vehicles ramp merging control.
 Contribution to Jiangsu Province, and Jiangsu Provincial Science and Technology Progress Award (including one First-Class Award, two Second-Class
 Awards, and two Third-Class Awards).