IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026 2253

 CAN Bus Intrusion Detection Based on Deep
 Learning With Data Augmentation for Connected
 Autonomous Vehicles
 Xiang Wang, Jian Zhao , Member, IEEE, Pengbo Liu, Nianmin Yao , and Zheng Xu

 Abstract—As the de-facto standard for in-vehicle networks, the access will become more frequently, resulting in new attack
Controller Area Network (CAN) is exposed to different types of surfaces and causing security issues for in-vehicle networks [2],
cyber-attacks due to the lack of security mechanisms. Intrusion [3], [4], [5]. As the de-facto standard for in-vehicle networks,
Detection Systems (IDS) can be deployed to identify the attacks
by monitoring host and network activities. However, there is little the Controller Area Network (CAN) has become the dominant
abnormal historical data that can be used to train deep learning protocol used in vehicles due to its advantages of multiple master
models, resulting in data imbalance and biased trained model. control, high transmission speed, high reliability, and low cost
Hence, we propose a prediction-based IDS framework for detecting [6]. However, the CAN bus is a broadcast media, and a CAN
the attacks on a CAN bus, which consists of two deep-learning modmessage is not intrinsically provided with security mechanisms,
els of the data augmentation module and the prediction module.
Firstly, the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) was utilized such as encryption and authentication. Due to the simplified
as the data augmentation module to automatically generate high- structure and the lack of security insight, the CAN protocol is
quality attack data and balance the training set. Two networks were vulnerable to many attacks, including injection, Dos, replay,
introduced as the prediction module, and the first one is a convolu- drop, and tampering attacks [7]. When a hacker has collected
tional neural networks (CNN) that predicts correlated data of all
 CAN traffic, the reverse engineering analysis techniques can
CAN IDs, and the second one is an LSTM that predicts messages
individually using times series data for each CAN ID. Furthermore, be utilized to analyze the vehicle’s critical driving information
an intrusion detection equipment for the CAN bus was designed and transmitted through CAN traffic, then the hacker can get into
the real vehicle test was conducted. The experimental results show the CAN bus through external wireless or physical access such
that the proposed method can detect CAN attacks, with an average as OBD-II Port to gain unauthorized control of a vehicle, which
F1-score of 99.74% and an accuracy of 99.78%. Compared with
 would compromise the safety of driver, the passengers, and the
the reference work, the F1-score of attack detection is improved by
15.25%, and also the detection time is reduced by 29.11%. vehicles. Koscher et al. [8] developed CarShark, a software
 designed to monitor and manipulate messages on the CAN
 Index Terms—In-vehicle networks, CAN, IDS, CNN, LSTM, bus through the OBD-II Port and then control the door locks,
data augmentation.
 headlights, ECUs and other components of the vehicle. In order
 to safeguard CAVs, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) can be
 I. INTRODUCTION deployed to discover suspicious network activity of in-vehicle
 networks and detect attack traffic.
 ITH the development of Internet of Vehicles (IoVs)
W and mobile communication technology, the connected
autonomous vehicles (CAVs) are equipped with a variety of
 Deep learning techniques have been extensively employed
 by the intrusion detection systems in ITS due to their ability to analyze data in an independent manner without relying
sensors and onboard computing devices, which contribute sig- on any human knowledge [9], [10], [11]. However, they have
nificant improvement to driving experience, and play a vital limitations. Since CAN specifications are kept confidential and
role in Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) [1]. While CAV privately owned by manufactures, it is difficult to analyze and
introduces a range of comfort and safety features, all of the understand in-vehicle data. These data-driven models require
added components, the interaction between vehicles and external massive amount of historical CAN traffic to capture the data
 features and gain the ability to identify attack traffic. Several
 Received 2 August 2024; revised 4 February 2025, 18 April 2025, and 7 Au- in-vehicle datasets have been shared to promote vehicle security
gust 2025; accepted 18 August 2025. Date of publication 26 August 2025; date research [12], [13]. Still, there are few attack samples in these
of current version 13 February 2026. This work was supported by the National
Key Research and Development Program under Grant 2022YFB3203600. The datasets to train intrusion detection systems for CAN bus, so
review of this article was coordinated by Dr. Wenshuo Wang. (Corresponding models cannot fully learn the characteristics of attack data and
author: Jian Zhao.) be fully utilized, resulting in biased trained models that could
 Xiang Wang, Jian Zhao, Pengbo Liu, and Zheng Xu are with the State Key
Laboratory of Structural Analysis for Industrial Equipment, Dalian University not identify attacks well [14]. To address this issue, various data
of Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail: wangxiang@mail.dlut.edu.cn; augmentation approaches have been proposed (e.g., SMOTE
jzhao@dlut.edu.cn; pengboliu@dlut.edu.cn; xu_zheng@mail.dlut.edu.cn). [15] ADASYN [16]). Although the data set is expanded to
 Nianmin Yao is with the School of Computer Science, Dalian University of
Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail: lucos@dlut.edu.cn). a certain extent, they are essentially simple replication and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2025.3603056 rearrangement strategies, which cannot generate substantial
 0018-9545 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2254 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

data, and easily leads to over-fitting with learning. With arrival of for such a data imbalanced environment and more effective
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), new methods for data for CAN messages that carries time series physical signals
augmentation have appeared. Kumar et al. [17] provided an in- of different limited-resource ECUs. The evaluation results
trusion detection system based on an XGBoost Classifier, which show that the proposed method of using data augmentation
used Wasserstein Conditional Generative Adversarial Network to train model successfully improves the performance of
(WCGAN) to generates attack data and balance the training set. the IDS, with the average accuracy is 99.74% and the
Yuan et al. [18] proposed a data augmentation method named average F1-score is improved by 15.25%.
B-GAN, using a combination of GAN, LSTM and RNN. The 2) Our method directly processes the bit representation of the
finding showed that B-GAN can generate high-quality attack CAN ID and payload data, which simplifies the processing
samples and improve the performance of intrusion detection. procedures and makes it more efficient and effective. The
As one of the most popular models in the field of deep learning, experiments show that the proposed model can complete
GAN has been widely used in computer vision, natural language anomaly detection within 0.56 ms, which is reduced by
processing and other fields, but there are few applications in the 29.11%.
field of in-vehicle networks security [19], [20]. Song et al. [21], 3) We design an equipment for CAN bus to detect and simu-
[14], [22] were the first to introduce GAN into the CAN bus late online attacks on a real vehicle. The proposed model
security. They proposed several deep learning-based methods, is also tested on two domain controllers. The experiments
which detected anomalies using GAN and DCNN as classifier, show that the accuracy and the detection time of the
respectively. Nevertheless, they did not consider the spatiotem- proposed model are close to the performance on a PC.
poral correlation of CAN messages contents and the authors The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Some previous
stated that the proposed methods still show poor performance studies on intrusion detection systems for CAN bus security are
for tampering attacks detection. CAN messages are time series reviewed in Section II. Each module of our proposed IDS strucdata and can be broadcast via different ECUs, which means ture is introduced in detail in Section III. Section IV provides the
there is a correlation between the ECUs since they are designed performance evaluation of the proposed method. In Section V,
to collaborate to perform complex in-vehicle tasks. Therefore, we introduce an equipment for CAN bus to detect and simulate
the correlation of CAN messages can be incorporated to improve attacks on a real vehicle. Finally, conclusions are provided in
the performance of model. Section VI.
 The goal of this paper is to provide an IDS that can achieve
high detection accuracy and low detection time in a resource limited and data imbalanced environment. Considering the temporal II. RELATED WORKS
correlation between CAN messages, a lightweight deep learning The intrusion detection systems for CAN bus security have
model can be used to effectively extract spatiotemporal features. been widely investigated by several pioneer researchers over
Additionally, data augmentation method can be introduced to the years. Based on the detection scope and basis, the studies
deal with the model underfitting problem caused by the lack can be grouped into statistical and machine learning-based IDS.
of attack samples. Therefore, a prediction-based IDS with data The statistical-based studies learn normal behavior based on
augmentation is proposed for CAN bus attacks detection. The conditional statistical relationship analysis and establish threshprediction module consists of two networks, one based on CNN olds for anomalies detection through baseline patterns. Gmiand the other on LSTM. The CNN module predicts correlated den et al. [23] introduced an anomaly detection system using
data for all sequential CAN IDs based on the interdependence the time intervals of CAN messages to detect anomalies like
of different ECUs. The LSTM module predicts time series data Dos and replay attacks. The system checked the arrive time of
for each CAN ID using payload data that contains information each CAN messages then detected attacks based on the time
crucial for the operation of the vehicle. These models leverage intervals compared to last messages. Taylor et al. [24] provided
the correlation of CAN message contents, which makes it better an intrusion detection method based on the analysis of CAN
suited for CAN buses with constrained resources and detection data flow, which can compare the statistical value of the current
time. To address the data imbalance problem, GAN is utilized and historical traffic in 1-s time window. Muter et al. [25]
to automatically generate high-quality attack samples, making firstly introduced entropy into CAN bus security. The entropy of
it possible to deal with the imbalance of malicious CAN traffic CAN messages was calculated to distinguish the Dos and replay
and achieve good performance with limited attack data. The attacks. Similarly, Wu et al. [26] also proposed an improved
data augmentation module generates attack data by directly entropy-based IDS. They calculated the information entropy
processing the bit representation of the CAN ID and payload of CAN traffic over a fixed-length sliding window to detect
data without the need for private CAN specifications from manu- attacks. The findings showed that the performance of their
facturers, which simplifies the processing procedures and makes method demonstrated better than previous entropy-based IDS.
it easier to be adapted to different manufacturers and vehicles Koyama et al. [27] presented a frequency-based anomaly detecwithout requiring the reverse engineering analysis techniques. tion method to discover violations in the network traffic using
 The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as quantized intervals of the CAN payload values. HAN et al. [28]
follows: developed an IDS using survival analysis model to monitor CAN
 1) We propose a novel IDS for CAN bus by fusing a CNN traffic and the survival rate of each CAN ID is calculated to
 and LSTM with data augmentation, which is more suitable detect anomalies. Evaluation results showed that the normal and
WANG et al.: CAN BUS INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON DEEP LEARNING WITH DATA AUGMENTATION 2255

attack traffic could be detected with high accuracy. While these The experiment results show that their methods demonstrate
statistics-based methods showed decent performance for high- decent detection performance and high reliability.
volume attacks, they did not consider the low-volume attacks
that have little effect on CAN traffic flow [12]. III. METHOD
 Furthermore, several machine learning-based solutions have
 The ability of most algorithms to identify and detect intrusions
been proposed to detect attacks on the in-vehicle network.
 relies on historical data. Therefore, in order to establish a reliable
Avatefipour et al. [29] proposed an IDS based on a modified
 intrusion detection model, a large amount of attack data of CAN
one-class SVM (OCSVM) in the CAN traffic. The result proved
 traffic is required during the training stage. However, attack data
that the proposed method achieved the highest performance
 is difficult to be obtained in the real world, and when deep
for anomaly detection compared to classical one-class SVM
 neural network is used, data imbalance may cause overfitting
and Isolation Forest. Duan et al. [30] proposed an improved
 and improper bias problems. In fact, it is difficult to perform
isolation forest method for tampering attacks detection. They
 the known attacks for all IDs inside a vehicle. Due to the safety
quantified the degree of anomalies by calculating the data mass
 issues, it is difficult to collect attack data while driving a vehicle.
of CAN messages, and identified attacks by the anomaly score.
 Furthermore, there is no standard specifying the meaning of IDs
The method was evaluated on three datasets - one generated
 and encoding of the signals transmitted in the payload data,
by the CANOE and two standard datasets. It was compared
 which means that manufacturers can design their own policies
to iForest, LOF, and one-class SVM and achieved an accuracy
 for different vehicles. Even for the same manufacturer, it may use
of 99.93%, which is better than the baseline. Kang et al. [31]
 different combinations of IDs and payloads due to the types of
provided an IDS based on Deep Neural Networks (DNN) to
 vehicle models. Additionally, CAN messages of a vehicle differs
learn normal traffic and to detect anomalies. Unsupervised deep
 due to different driving scenarios, driver habits, road conditions
belief networks were used to initialize the parameters of DNN
 and so forth. Thus, the objectives of this paper are to solve the
to improve the detection performance. Tests were conducted
 data imbalance problem and achieve high detection accuracy
with a simulated dataset generated by CANOE and the result
 in the case of resource-constrained and extremely limited attack
demonstrated that the performance of their method was better
 samples, making it easier to be adapted to different vehicles from
compared to models based on SVM and ANN with an accuracy
 various manufacturers without requiring the reverse engineering
of 98%. Considering the temporal correlation of CAN mesanalysis techniques and the private CAN specifications from
sages, several studies incorporated recurrent neural networks
 manufacturers.
(RNN) with memory in their structure into their methods. Tay-
 To accomplish this, a method is proposed, which involves
lor et al. [32] introduced an IDS for CAN bus which uses a Long
 a data augmentation module based on WGAN-GP to generate
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) unit in its structure. Anomalies on
 high-quantity attack samples, and a prediction module based on
the CAN messages can be individually detected for each CAN
 lightweight models to identify anomalies using the spatiotempo-
ID without the need to extracted features from CAN messages
 ral correlation of CAN messages. The complete structure of our
during the preprocessing stage. Zhang et al. [33] proposed an
 proposed framework is depicted in Fig. 1. The training samples
anomaly detection system for CAN bus by fusing CNN and
 consisting of CAN ID and its payload are converted from 1D
RNN with an attention mechanism. The temporal features of
 time series vector to 2D image. Then, the data augmentation
each ECU can be automatically learned without professional
 module trains WGAN-GP architecture to learn the distribution
knowledge. Qin et al. [34] introduced GAN-based intrusion
 of the normal CAN traffic data. At this point, the generator of
detection system named GPIDS, to detect attacks in CAN traffic
 WGAN-GP is used to generate substantial CAN attack samples
by fusing a generative adversarial network and assisted conand balance the training set. Actually, the occurrence of normal
textual pattern-aware. They achieved an average accuracy of
 data is significantly more than that of attack data, and then, it is
97.42% by performing this experiment using dataset performed
 suggested to collect as much normal data as possible for gasping
on four vehicles that had six types of attacks: bus-off, spoofing,
 the main feature. So, the WGAN-GP can be trained with normal
masquerade, replay, fuzzy and SOME. Jeong et al. [35] proposed
 data to generate attack data. With the increase of normal data
an IDS for in-vehicle network which uses raw payloads to
 in the training process, the real permitted range for each signal
improve the intrusion detection performance. They introduce
 will become clearer. Finally, the prediction module consists of a
several modules to reach the trade-off between prediction per-
 LSTM and a CNN, which is trained with the augmented dataset
formance and the computational consumption. Gao et al. [36]
 to distinguish between normal traffic and attack data by using
designed a CAN image generation method to convert CAN
 the spatiotemporal correlation of CAN messages contents.
traffic data into CAN images, which makes the attack visible
and traceable. The experiments show that the proposed IDS has
a decent performance for Dos attack detection. However, their A. Feature Extraction
method did not consider the data imbalance issues. Therefore, it In the feature extraction stage, the messages from the CAN bus
may not be as effective at distinguishing between normal traffic are collected, then the ID and payload of each CAN message is
and previously unseen attacks. Guo et al. [37] [38] proposed extracted and arranged by timestamp. Furthermore, the payload
an attack detection scheme for connected vehicles by fusing a is categorized based on ID. The features selected from CAN
refined kinematic model, measurement model, and attack model. messages are taken as input for subsequent detection. These
2256 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 1. The algorithm structure of the proposed IDS.

 CAN ID and payload is converted from hexadecimal string to
 binary from with 16 digits using one-hot-vector encoding. For
 instance, each element of the CAN ID ‘0x2C1’ is represented
 by a 16-dimensional vector with 15 bits are ‘0’ and only one bit
 is ‘1’. Then, each CAN ID is represented as a [1,48] matrix
 while the payload is represented as a [1,256] matrix. After
 that, 64 successive CAN IDs are spliced to generate a CAN
 ID image, and successive 256 payloads of each ID are spliced
 to generate a CAN payload image. In the model training stage,
 both IDs and payloads are converted into images and input into
 WGAN-GP to generate attack samples for data augmentation,
 and LSTM-CNN is trained using the augmentation datasets for
 intrusion detection. In the model testing stage, IDs are converted
 into images and input into the CNN to predict the correlated data
 of all IDs. A window is set to buffer the w most recent frames,
 and the frames in a window are sorted in chronological order.
 When the window initialization is completed, the IDS only needs
Fig. 2. The process of converting CAN messages into images. to use the latest CAN message to update the window to come to
 a conclusion. The payloads of each message are directly input
 into the LSTM to predicts messages individually using times
features include the CAN IDs and eight bytes of payload data. series data for each ID.
Since GAN is introduced to generated attack samples for data
augmentation and GAN has advantages in image processing,
the 1D time series vector of the selected features is mapped into B. GAN-Based Data Augmentation for Anomaly Detection
the 2D image with one-hot-vector. The process of converting The WGAN-GP is trained to generate synthetic images of
CAN IDs and payloads into images is illustrated in Fig. 2. The anomalies CAN traffic and balance the training set of intrusion
11-bit CAN ID is mapped into [1,48] matrix and the 64-bit detection system. GAN is a generative deep modelling approach
payload into a [1,256] matrix. Specifically, each element of designed based on game theory, which has been recently used
WANG et al.: CAN BUS INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON DEEP LEARNING WITH DATA AUGMENTATION 2257

for data augmentation [39]. A GAN architecture consists of the
generator and the discriminator, which corresponds to a minimax
two-player game. The training stage updates parameters and
optimizes objective function through the competition between
the generator and the discriminator.
 The generator takes noise samples as input to generate fake
samples. The discriminator takes the real data and the fake
samples created by the generator as input to distinguish real
data and fake samples.
 Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN), an
enhanced version of GAN, was introduced to solve the vanishing
gradient problem of GAN [40]. Wasserstein distance W is
introduced to measure the difference between the distribution
of real data and fake samples, which can be defined as:
 W (Pr , Pg ) ≈ L = min max P (D, G)
 G D (1) Fig. 3. Architecture of WGAN-GP based on CAN ID. (a) Architecture of
 = Ex∼Pr (x) [D (x)] − Ez∼Pg (z) [D (G (z))] generator. (b) Architecture of discriminator.

where D is the discriminator, D(x) represents the probability of
an anomaly in real samples x, G is the generator, G(z) represents
fake samples generated from random noise z, Pr represents The data augmentation module consists of two WAGN-GP
the distribution of real data, and Pg is the distribution of fake models. Since each ECU collaborates to perform various tasks
samples. The discriminator is required to satisfy the 1st order in the vehicle, there is a correlation between ECUs. It means
Lipschitz constraint, we will have: that payloads with different IDs are temporally correlated at
 a specific point in time. For example, a vehicle’s speed, engine
 ∇x̄ D (x̄) ≤ I (2) power, torque and emission values are all affected when it detects
where x̄ represents the linear interpolation between real samples an obstacle ahead and then brakes. In addition, payloads with
x and random noise z, which can be calculated as: the same ID is time series data and tend to change with a certain
 periodicity. Each field of the payload is divided by different
 x̄ = tx + (1 − t) z, t ∈ [0, 1] (3) signals, and the data of each field is transmitted continuously
 and changes regularly within a specific range. For instance, ID =
 However, WGAN has limitations in the time consumption
 0x064 represents engine data, which contains six signals in eight
and the model convergence. To address this issue, the Wasserbytes, namely IdelRunning, EngTemp, PetroLevel, EngForce,
stein Generative Adversarial Network with Gradient Penalty
 EngPower and EngSpeed. The time interval between messages
(WGAN-GP), was introduced by Ishaan et al. [41]. WGAN-GP
 with ID = 0x064 is 10 ms, and when EngSpeed changes, Engintroduces a gradient penalty method to compel the discrimina-
 Power and EngForce will change accordingly. The first model
tor to satisfy the 1st order Lipschitz function constraint. Optimal
 based on CAN ID is designed to learn the interdependence
engineering results are achieved by constraining gradient values
 of different ECUs, and the second based on CAN payload is
around 1, and thus, the gradient penalty term GP is stated as:
 designed to learn the temporal correlation of time series data.
  
 Δ Both of them are consist of a discriminator and a generator. The
 GP = Ex∼P (x) (∇x D (x̄)2 − 1)2 (4)
 only difference between them is the parameters of the network
 The optimization objective of the discriminator is to maximize architecture. As can be seen in Figs. 3(a) and 4(a), the generator
the probability of correctly distinguishing between fake samples consists of a deconvolutional neural network composed of four
G(z) and real samples x, which can be defined as: layers, which takes random noise as the input to generate fake
 CAN images that are similar to the real CAN images. The
 max L (D, G) = Ex∼Pr (x) [D (x)] − Ez∼Pg(z) [D (G (z))] discriminator, as depicted in Figs. 3(b) and 4(b) consists of a
 θ
   deep neural network composed of four layers, which is used to
 −λEx−P (x) (∇x D (x̄)2 − 1)2 (5) identify the fake CAN images that generated by the generator.
 Moreover, an early stopping mechanism is employed while the
where λ is a hyperparameter used to adjust the gradient penalty training of the intrusion detection model to avoid overfitting.
term.
 The optimization objective for the generator is to minimize
the Wasserstein distance between the distribution of generated C. Prediction Module Neural Network Design
samples Pg and the distribution of real samples Pr . Due to Two lightweight networks are trained to identify anomalies
Ez∼Pg [D(G(z))] is independent of the generator, the objective from normal CAN traffic, based on the spatiotemporal correlafunction for the generator can be defined as: tion of CAN messages contents.
 1) CNN-Based Network: The CAN messages are correlated
 min L (D, G) = −Ez∼Pg [D (G (z))] (6) due to different ECUs collaborate to perform complex in-vehicle
 φ
2258 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 using the temporal correlation of time series physical signals.
 Also, in our case, the CAN payload data is classified based on
 their CAN ID and then detected by the corresponding IDS. Once
 one of the IDSs detects anomalies, the vehicle will immediately
 receive an abnormal alarm.

 IV. SIMULATION EXPERIMENT
 The experiments are performed to compare the performance
 of our proposed method and other models, including LSTM-AE,
 OCSVM, iForest. Also, we analyze the effectiveness of the data
 augmentation module on prediction performance and compare
 our proposed method with other data augmentation algorithms,
 including GAN, SMOTE and ADASYN. Additionally, the quality of generated samples is analyzed using feature maps and
 statistics.
Fig. 4. Architecture of WGAN-GP based on CAN payload. (a) Architecture
of generator. (b) Architecture of discriminator.
 A. Implementation Details
 1) Experiment Environment: The experiment is run on the
 equipment of AMD Ryzen 5 5600H with Radeon Graphics
 @3.30 GHz, equipped with NVIDIA GeForce RTX3050, and
 Windows 10 for the operating system.
Fig. 5. CNN-based prediction network architecture. 2) Attack Model: The communication mechanism of CAN
 bus is broadcast. Each ECU on a CAN bus can receive and send
 messages to control the vehicle. A CAN messages is not protected with authentication mechanism. The attackers can access
 the CAN bus through OBD-II port or wireless. Attack messages
 will cause normal messages to be blocked or tampered with.
 When attack messages carry high priority IDs and are sent at a
 higher frequency than normal, the bus will be overloaded and the
 transmission of normal messages will be blocked. In addition,
 when the payload content of normal messages is tampered with,
 the tampered messages will cause false dashboard displays and
 incorrect vehicle feedback operations. A detailed description of
 these attacks models is as follows:
 r Injection: The injection attack relies on the legitimate ID
 to be effectively implemented. The attacker injects attack
 messages with random IDs and payloads into the CAN bus.
 The ECU will feedback when the injection ID is legitimate.
 Subsequently, the legitimate ID can be used to generate
Fig. 6. LSTM-based prediction module architecture.
 effective attacks to interfere with vehicle operations.
 r Dos: Vulnerabilities in the CAN bus arbitration mechanism
tasks. Therefore, we use a lightweight CNN architecture here to are used to block the transmission of normal messages.
learn the spatial contiguity in normal CAN traffic. As can be Messages with the highest priority ID = 0x000 are injected
seen in Fig. 5, the CNN prediction network, which consists six into the CAN bus at frequency higher than the normal
layers, four convolutional layers, two fully connected layers to message. Since illegal messages always occupy CAN bus
extract CAN images. The ReLU is used as the activation function resources, other ECUs cannot transmit legal messages.
after each convolution layer and the model is trained with Adam r Replay: Legitimate messages are collected and injected
optimizer. The CNN is trained to distinguish between attacks into the CAN bus at random times. The ID and payload are
and normal CAN traffic, based on the CAN traffic images form. valid, but they do not comply with the temporal correlation
 2) LSTM-Based Network: Since the LSTM model is more between ECUs.
effective to predict time series data, we convert the CAN payload r Drop: In an in-vehicle network, the gateway is responsiimages onto 1D feature vectors using one-hot-vector. As can be ble for connecting high-speed CAN and low-speed CAN
seen in Fig. 6, the lightweight LSTM prediction network, which to transmit messages. An attacker can compromise and
consists two layers, one LSTM layer and one fully connected control the gateway through external wireless or physical
layer to extract CAN messages. The LSTM is trained to de- access such as OBD-II Port. Then, the attacker can choose
termines whether the current CAN message has been tampered to discard the messages of key ECUs, such as engine ECU,
WANG et al.: CAN BUS INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON DEEP LEARNING WITH DATA AUGMENTATION 2259

 TABLE I
 CHARACTERISTICS OF DIFFERENT IDS

Fig. 7. In-vehicle network simulation based on the CANOE.

 battery management ECU and tire pressure monitoring
 ECU, thus affecting the normal operation of the vehicle TABLE II
 HYPER-PARAMETER SEARCH SPACE FOR BOTH GAN AND CLASSIFIER
 [20].
 r Tampering: In this attack, the meaning of the CAN message
 is exposed to the attacker. The attacker can send an attack
 message containing a specific ID and payload by manipulating a specific ECU. As a legitimate ECU periodically
 transmits CAN messages with the same ID, the attack will
 make the data receiving node confused, unable to identify
 the legitimacy of the message. If the data receiving node
 receives a tampered message and responds, the behavior of
 vehicle may become abnormal.
 3) Dataset: The dataset comes from two parts: one is the automotive controller area network bus intrusion dataset provided
by Dupont et al. [42] containing real vehicle data of two cars
(i.e., Renault Clio and Opel Astra) and abnormal data under five
attack scenarios of injection, DoS, replay, drop and tampering
attacks, the other is the simulation data generated by the CANOE
(A CAN bus analysis tool developed by Vector) simulation scenario. The CAN data packets are simulated and collected by the
CANOE, which consist of time sequences, ID, and payload data
with eight bytes. As shown in Fig. 7, there are three ECUs in the
CANOE simulation environment built in this article, including
engine, gateway, and NM_Tester_PT, which transmit messages
with 500 kbps CAN traffic. The IG module can customize the
 Fig. 8. Accuracy of the proposed IDS according to image size.
message type and time interval, and simulate the ECU sending
messages to the CAN bus. The replay module can show the
saved CAN history messages. In the preprocessing stage, we
collect the original CAN traffic and group them into 12 different we analyze the relationship between the size of the CAN image
IDs, representing different ECUs and nodes. The payload data of and the detection performance. Specifically, the image size is
each CAN ID carries information crucial for the operation of the increased from the minimum of 32 and 64 to the maximum of
vehicle. Table I illustrates the characteristics of different IDs in 128 and 1024, then we compare the accuracy and detection time
detail. To achieve the best validation loss, tree-structured Parzen of the proposed IDS in different image sizes. When the size of
estimator is utilized to automatically choose the configuration of the spliced image is small, the image features are sparse and
hyper-parameter. The ranges of the hyper-parameter are given the average processing time for each message is longer, so the
in Table II. accuracy is lower and the detection delay is higher. As the image
 size increases, the average processing time for each message
 gradually decreases, but too large a spliced image size will
B. Image Encoding Size also lead to model overfitting and reduce detection accuracy. As
 In the feature extraction stage, the CAN IDs and payload are shown in Figs. 8 and 9, the results show that the best performance
converted into images with widths of 48 and 256, respectively, is achieved when the sizes of CAN image are set to be 48 × 64
the height of these images remains undetermined. Therefore, and 256 × 256, respectively.
2260 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE III
 STATISTICS COMPARISON

 Table III shows the range of each byte of the three data, where
 the EngPower signal is represented by the 1st and 2nd bytes,
 the EngForce signal is represented by the 3rd and 4th bytes, the
 PetroLevel signal is represented by the 5th byte, the IdelRunning
 signal and the EngTemp signal are represented by the 6th byte,
 the EngSpeed signal is represented by the 7th and 8th bytes. It
 can be seen that the range of each signal of the generated data and
 the attack data is close. The generated data conform to the attack
 data format, and each signal value is within the real permitted
 range. In addition, the mean difference between normal data,
 attack data and generated data is close to 0, which means that the
 byte range overlap between the three data is high. Furthermore,
 the difference in variance is large, which means there are still
 differences between the three data. The experimental results
 verify the effectiveness of the generated attacks and show that the
 generated attacks are accurate representations of actual attack.

Fig. 9. Detection time of the proposed IDS according to image size.
 D. Data Augmentation Analysis
 1) Varying Balance Size: In order to analyze the contributions of the data augmentation module to the prediction performance, we vary the balance size of the training data. Specifically,
 the percentage of attack data is increased from 0% (original
 dataset) to 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% and 50%. The accuracy of
 our proposed model, measured by varying the training balance
 size in training set. As can be seen in Fig. 11, the proposed
 method utilizes the data augmentation module to gain accuracy.
Fig. 10. The feature distribution map of normal data, attack data and real data.
 We note that the performance of all types of attacks improves
 as the percentage of attacks data increases within the training
 process. The performance of an intrusion detection model for
C. Generated Data Analysis
 CAN bus can be improved with accuracy achieved is lower than
 To verify the effectiveness of the generated attacks, we use the that on the percentage of attacks of 30%, but it is still higher than
feature map to compare the distribution of normal data, attack the accuracy on the original dataset (balance size = 0%) when
data and generated data. Due to the different scales of each no data augmentation has been performed. The results prove that
feature, the data is normalized using the min-max technique, the detection performance is successfully improved by the data
and then the frequency of the data features is counted. It can augmentation module, enabling the model to detect previously
be seen from Fig. 10 that the generated data has the probability unseen attacks.
structure of the attack data, which is similar but not the same 2) WGAN vs GAN vs SMOTE and ADASYS: Also, we anaas the normal data. Also, we evaluate the effectiveness of the lyze the effectiveness of the data augmentation module by comgenerated data using the range of each signal by comparing paring it with the representative data augmentation algorithms —
the minimum, maximum, mean, and variance of the features. GAN, SMOTE and ADASYN. To do so, we train the proposed
In our case, we select ID = 0x064 engine data as an example. model with three different data augmentation modules, which
WANG et al.: CAN BUS INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON DEEP LEARNING WITH DATA AUGMENTATION 2261

 TABLE IV
 DETECTION PERFORMANCE COMPARED TO BASELINE AND EXISTING WORKS
 RESULTS IN FIVE ATTACK SCENARIOS

Fig. 11. Accuracy performane (axis Y), measured by varying the size of the
balance (axis X) – the percentage of attacks on the entire training set – between
0% (original dataset) to 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% and 50% (augmented dataset).

Fig. 12. Accuracy performance (axis Y), measured with WGAN, GAN,
SMOTE and ADASYN on the balance size of 50%.

are denoted as GAN, SMOTE and ADASYN. The only difference between them is that the WGAN-based data augmentation
is replaced with GAN, SMOTE and ADASYN, respectively. As
can be seen in the Fig. 12, the WGAN-based data augmentation
module provided in our proposed method perform better than
the representative data augmentation algorithms in terms of ac
curacy, which may be related to the defects of these techniques.
GAN suffers from gradient explosion problem. SMOTE based
on the nearest neighbor method is easy to cause data redundancy.
 original simulated datasets. Therefore, we use the IG module to
ADASYN based on τ distribution is susceptible to outliers.
 customize the message type and time interval, and simulate the
 ECU sending abnormal messages to the CAN bus. In addition,
E. Comparison to Other Algorithms
 the labelled LSTM-CNN and LSTM-AE methods are trained
 The baseline methods are representative classification meth- using public datasets, simulated datasets and generated datasets
ods, which are OCSVM, iForest, and a deep learning-based to evaluate the performance improvements of models trained
model called LSTM-AE. Furthermore, we compare the proposed with augmentation datasets.
model with three existing works (GPIDS, X-CANIDS, CanNet) The performance of these models for CAN traffic intrusion
discussed in Section II under five attack scenarios. We compare detection is shown in Table IV. It can be observed that the
the detection performance of our proposed model for CAN bus proposed method performs better than the baselines and existing
with the baseline and existing works. The proposed LSTM-CNN works. We can see that the proposed method can extract the
and baseline methods are trained using public datasets and temporal correlation of CAN messages contents, and it can
simulated datasets. Since the simulation of a CAN bus only reach high accuracy over all types of attacks. Generally, the
generates normal CAN traffic, there is no attack data in the average accuracy of the proposed method is 99.78%, and the
2262 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE V
 RESOURCES CONSUMPTION COMPARED TO EXISTING WORKS RESULTS

 Fig. 13. The hardware architecture of the proposed equipment.

average score of F1 is 99.74%. Although the detection perfor- performance. In the simulation experiment, the waiting time
mance of the proposed method in injection attack is slightly for collecting frames is not factored in the detection time since
lower than that of the X-CANIDS method, and the detection the datasets are offline. The experimental results show that the
performance in Dos and replay attacks is slightly lower than that detection time of our proposed model is 0.56 ms, which means
of the CanNet method, the accuracy of our proposed method for that 1785 physical signals of different ECUs can be predicted
these attacks is still above 99.8%. Compared with the model in one second. Therefore, while our proposed model achieves
that trained using public datasets and simulated datasets, we a high accuracy-score, it also only consumes lower memory
note that the accuracy of LSTM-CNN and LSTM-AE methods, and less detection time, so the proposed IDS is better suited for
which are trained with the balanced dataset that contains public in-vehicle networks with constrained resources and detection
datasets, simulated datasets and generated datasets, improved time.
significantly by 56.54% (from 63.74% to 99.78%) and 50.17%
(from 60.48% to 90.82%), respectively. The result proves that the
data augmentation module implemented in our proposed model V. INTRUSION DETECTION EQUIPMENT
successfully improve the detection performance for CAN bus by A. Hardware Architecture
generating high-quality attack samples. OCSVM and iForest,
 The proposed equipment is designed to be deployed in a gatewhich are trained without generated data, show poor perforway or an onboard unit that can receive all CAN messages. The
mance for CAN bus intrusion detection. Though the detection
 detection performance of our proposed equipment can be used as
performance of the proposed method for tampering attacks is
 a baseline to evaluate the detection performance of vehicles. The
the worst among all types of attacks scenarios, it is still better
 architecture of Windows system and microcomputer hardware
than the other methods in Table IV. In future, the detection
 is typically adopted by such testing equipment, which aligns
of tampering attacks will be a more challenging issue. Before
 with our proposed equipment. The size of the equipment is
tampering attacks occurs, the attacker listens and sniffs packet
 430 mm × 400 mm × 215 mm. Fig. 13 shows the complete hardon a CAN bus. Reverse engineering technique is then used to
 ware architecture, which consists a CAN bus receiving module,
identify the corresponding messages of each ECU. The attacker
 a CAN bus attack sending module, and an onboard computing
manages to override messages sent to brakes, gears, and engine
 module. The main function of this equipment is to detect attacks
and displayed fake speedometer readings on the dashboard. Even
 and achieve simulation on a real CAN bus. Two micro controllers
so, the accuracy of our proposed model in detecting tampering
 of STM32F103s are used to establish communication between
attacks is still higher than the baselines and above 99 percent.
 the equipment and the CAN bus. The first microcontroller is
 used as the CAN bus receiving module to automatically match
F. Efficiency Evaluation the vehicle CAN bus rate and receive CAN messages. The
 To evaluate whether our proposed method is suitable for second one is used as the CAN bus attack sending module,
CAN bus in real vehicles, we compare the proposed model which is responsible for injecting attack messages generated
with three existing works based on the resource consumption. by the onboard computing module into the vehicle CAN bus,
Table V show the comparison of the proposed intrusion detection or inputting instructions to filter specified ID messages into the
model with existing works in terms of memory footprint and CAN bus receiving module to achieve shielded transmission
average detection time per CAN frame. It can be observed that of specific ECU messages. A microcomputer is introduced as
the footprint of our proposed LSTM-CNN model is smaller the onboard computing module, equipped with Intel(R) Core
than GPIDS, X-CANIDS and CanNet, and the proposed model (TM) i3-9100H @ 3.10 GHz, which stores the proposed model
still has less detection time. Compared with the X-CANIDS, and the visualization software. The onboard computing module
the representative model proposed above, the F1-score of our is responsible for intrusion detection according to the received
proposed model is improved by 15.25%, and the detection time CAN messages and generating specified types of attack mesof our proposed model is reduced by 29.11%. As a lightweight sages. One end of the two STM32F103 is connected to the
model, our proposed intrusion detection system for CAN bus onboard computing module via the UART (Universal Asyncan efficiently detect all types of attacks with better detection chronous Receiver/Transmitter), and the other end is directly
WANG et al.: CAN BUS INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON DEEP LEARNING WITH DATA AUGMENTATION 2263

Fig. 14. The software architecture of the proposed equipment.

connected to the vehicle OBD-II port. The proposed equipment
involves two communication stages. The communication baud Fig. 15. The main configuration screen of the software.
rate between the vehicle and the CAN bus receiving module is
921600. The UART baud rate between the CAN bus receiving
module and the onboard computing module is also 921600. In IDs are converted into images and the payload of each CAN ID
the vehicle testing scenario, attack messages are injected into the is processed as time series data. The IDS take these data as input
in-vehicle network via the CAN bus attack sending module to for attack detection and flags anomalies once they are detected.
test whether the vehicle and the proposed method can accurately If no attack occurs, the IDS continues to collect messages
identify the attacks. The detection performance of the vehicle is on the CAN bus and detect attacks. Additionally, the attacks
evaluated by comparing the test results. This equipment is only data can be generated by the onboard computing module and
involved in intrusion detection and does not participate in the injected into the CAN bus to simulate intrusion. The intrusion
training of neural networks. In the experiments of this article, detection model development environment is python3.9.7 and
the training of the model network relies on the AMD-based PC. tensorflow2.7.0. The software is developed based on QT and
Currently, this type of equipment includes detection prototypes can run across platforms to facilitate Fig. 15.
and onboard real-time detection devices. The proposed equipment is a detection prototype. In order to facilitate experimental C. Online Detection Evaluation for Real Vehicles
operation and debugging, and display CAN traffic flow, a 13
inches display screen is added, and a software interface is In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed equipdesigned to visualize the entire algorithm process. These are ment, we performed real vehicle experiments, testing our proalso the differences compared to existing equipment. However, posed equipment on a real vehicle (RAV4). The connection
more and more vehicles are incorporating CAN-FD running at between experimental components on the vehicle is shown in
speeds higher than 1 Mbps. The use of UART for relaying CAN Fig. 16(a). As can be seen in this figure, the equipment is
messages can still be a communication bottleneck which limits connected to the in-vehicle CAN networks through the OBD-II
the applicability of the current setup to standard CAN. Therefore, port of the real vehicle. The bandwidth of the real vehicle is
the proposed model is also transplanted to automotive embedded automatically recognized by the CAN bus receiving module
devices, and we test the performance of the proposed model on as 500 kbps. Since the tested vehicle is not equipped with an
two real vehicles. embedded intrusion detection device, we test the performance
 of the proposed equipment by artificially generating attacks
 and injecting them into the in-vehicle network. We access the
B. Software Architecture CAN bus and perform all types of attacks through the CAN bus
 Each module of the equipment collaborates to perform ve- receiving module and the CAN bus attack sending module.
hicle testing. The equipment performs online detection of the Due to the computing power of ECUs is differ from a PC, and
CAN bus network, and simulates attacks in a real vehicle. The intrusion detection for in-vehicle network is limited- resources.
software consists of CAN bus communication establishment, Furthermore, we test the detection performance of our model on
data preprocessing, attacks detection and simulation. The test the automotive embedded devices in two real vehicles (Volkswasteps of the software are shown in the Fig. 14. To begin with, gen and Dongfeng). The Volkswagen is equipped with a domain
the communication between the equipment and the CAN bus is controller APEX AD10, and the Dongfeng is equipped with a
established. Then, the messages are extracted from the CAN bus domain controller GEACX2, as shown in Fig. 16(b) and (c). Both
and categorized based on their CAN IDs. After that, the CAN the APEX AD10 and the GEACX2 are equipped with a Jetson
2264 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 16. Test setup on the real vehicle. (a) A RAV4 equipped with a PC. (b) A Volkswagen equipped with an APEX AD 10. (c) A Dongfeng equipped with a
GEACX2.

Fig. 17. Average recall, precision, F1 score and accuracy values for online detection on different platforms.

AGX Orin 32GB processor module, which includes 8 Core ARM r Replay: we collect normal messages and inject them into
Cortex-A78 @ 2.2 GHz and NVIDIA Ampere 1792-CUDA the CAN bus at random times. Due to the attack data is
Core. Specifically, we cross-platform port the software contain- extracted from the normal CAN traffic, it is challenging
ing the proposed model to the APEX AD10 and the GEACX2, for IDS to distinguish between authentic and fraudulent
respectively. Due to safety issues, we perform the experiment messages.
while the vehicle is in standby state. The CAN messages consist r Drop: we filter the CAN messages with specified ID based
of different signals, including door locks, headlights, wipers, on the CAN bus receiving module, then, specific ECU
and so on. The details of attacks we simulated are illustrated as messages are discarded.
follows: r Tampering: we first collect real vehicle CAN message data,
 r Injection: CAN messages with illegal ID are injected into select the specified message ID by analyzing the message
 the CAN bus to disrupt the operations of vehicles and col- sending cycle, modify the data field value of the specified
 lect vital commands. The CAN ID is randomly generated message, and inject it into the real vehicle CAN bus through
 from 0x001 to 0x7ff. the CAN bus attack sending module.
 r Dos: CAN messages with the highest priority ID = 0x000 The average detection performance of our proposed model on
 are injected into the CAN bus at high frequency (ie, sending different platforms is shown in Fig. 17. It can be observed that
 period = 1 ms). The normal traffic is blocked because the our proposed method shows good detection performance over
 abnormal traffic takes over the CAN bus. all types of attacks. We note that the experiment results of our
WANG et al.: CAN BUS INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON DEEP LEARNING WITH DATA AUGMENTATION 2265

 TABLE VI
 THE RESOURCES CONSUMPTION OF THE MODEL ON REAL VEHICLE

proposed method achieve the best accuracy in Dos attack. The real vehicle. We also test the detection performance of our model
main reason is that the transmission of legitimate messages in on two domain controllers. The result proves that the proposed
the CAN bus is blocked by the highest priority messages sent method is reliable and robust, making it easier to be adapted to
in DoS attacks. Since DoS attacks will cause great fluctuations different vehicles from various manufacturers.
in CAN traffic, it is easy to detect DoS attacks. The result proves
that our proposed model can achieve high detection accuracy in
the case of resource-constrained and extremely limited attack REFERENCES
samples, making it easier to be adapted to different vehicles [1] H. J. Jo and W. Choi, “A survey of attacks on controller area networks
from various manufacturers. In the real-vehicle experiment, the and corresponding countermeasures,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6123–6141, Jul. 2022.
frame collection time is factored in the detection time. For [2] W. Wu et al., “A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks,”
the first message, we need to wait for window initialization to IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919–933, Mar. 2020.
collect 63 more successive messages to come to a conclusion. [3] G. Karopoulos, G. Kambourakis, E. Chatzoglou, J. L. Hernández-Ramos,
 and V. Kouliaridis, “Demystifying in-vehicle intrusion detection systems:
When the window initialization is completed, each subsequent A survey of surveys and a meta-taxonomy,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 7,
message can be detected by updating the window. The window Mar. 2022, Art. no. 1072.
initialization time and message collection time of the proposed [4] K. Ren, Q. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Qin, and X. Lin, “The security of autonomous driving: Threats, defenses, and future directions,” Proc. IEEE,
IDS on different platforms are shown in Table VI. It can be vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 357–372, Feb. 2020.
observed that the detection time of the proposed model on PC, [5] T. H. H. Aldhyani and H. Alkahtani, “Attacks to automatous vehicles:
APEX AD10 and the GEACX2 is 0.82 ms, 1.12 ms and 1.14 ms, A deep learning algorithm for cybersecurity,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 1,
 Jan. 2022, Art. no. 360, doi: 10.3390/s22010360.
respectively. In addition, the average window initialization time [6] G. Dupont, J. Den Hartog, S. Etalle, and A. Lekidis, “A survey of network
is 26.05 ms, and the average message collection time is 0.42 ms. intrusion detection systems for controller area network,” in Proc. IEEE
The experimental results show that the proposed IDS achieves Int. Conf. Veh. Electron. Saf., 2019, pp. 1–6.
 [7] N. Khatri, R. Shrestha, and S. Y. Nam, “Security issues with in-vehicle nethigh detection accuracy and low detection time in a resource works, and enhanced countermeasures based on blockchain,” Electronics,
limited and data imbalanced environment, which is close to the vol. 10, no. 8, Apr. 2021, Art. no. 893, doi: 10.3390/electronics10080893.
offline detection performance on a PC, so the proposed model [8] K. Koscher et al., “Experimental security analysis of a modern automobile,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2010, pp. 447–462.
is suitable for real vehicles. [9] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski, G. Madzudzo,
 and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for in-vehicle
 VI. CONCLUSION networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 1–40,
 Nov. 2023.
 In this paper, one deep learning-based intrusion detection [10] K. Wang, A. Zhang, H. Sun, and B. Wang, “Analysis of recent deeplearning-based intrusion detection methods for in-vehicle network,” IEEE
system framework is proposed for in-vehicle CAN bus net- Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1843–1854, Feb. 2023.
work, including WGAN-GP data augmentation module and [11] F. Amato, L. Coppolino, F. Mercaldo, F. Moscato, R. Nardone, and A.
LSTM-CNN prediction module. CAN messages are used as Santone, “CAN-bus attack detection with deep learning,” IEEE Trans.
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 5081–5090, Aug. 2021.
input for WGAN-GP to automatically generate high-quality [12] E. Aliwa, O. Rana, C. Perera, and P. Burnap, “Cyberattacks and counterattack data and balance training data. The prediction module measures for in-vehicle networks,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 1,
consists of two networks, one based on CNN and the other on pp. 1–37, Jan. 2022.
 [13] H. Lee, S. H. Jeong, and H. K. Kim, “OTIDS: A novel intrusion detection
LSTM. The CNN module is trained to detect anomalies based system for in-vehicle network by using remote frame,” in Proc. 15th Annu.
on the image form of the samples, which takes advantage of the Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust, 2017, pp. 57–5709.
spatial contiguity in CAN traffic. The LSTM module istrained [14] H. M. Song and H. K. Kim, “Self-supervised anomaly detection for
 in-vehicle network using noised pseudo normal data,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
to detect anomalies using the temporal correlation of time series Technol., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1098–1108, Feb. 2021.
data. The results of the experiments, performed on a simulated [15] H. Zhang, L. Huang, C. Q. Wu, and Z. Li, “An effective convolutional
dataset generated through the CANOE simulation, show that neural network based on SMOTE and Gaussian mixture model for intrusion detection in imbalanced dataset,” Comput. Netw., vol. 177, Aug. 2020,
the proposed method can effectively detect CAN attacks, with Art. no. 107315.
an average F1-score of 99.74% and an accuracy of 99.78%. [16] S.-Y. Bae, J. Lee, J. Jeong, C. Lim, and J. Choi, “Effective data-balancing
Compared with the work in the related research fields, the methods for class-imbalanced genotoxicity datasets using machine learning algorithms and molecular fingerprints,” Comput. Toxicol., vol. 20,
F1-score of attack detection is improved by 15.25%, and the Nov. 2021, Art. no. 100178.
detection time is reduced by 29.11%. The result demonstrate that [17] V. Kumar and D. Sinha, “Synthetic attack data generation model applying
the model trained by our proposed method has greatly improved generative adversarial network for intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur.,
 vol. 125, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 103054.
the detection performance in the case of limited resource and [18] L. Yuan, S. Yu, Z. Yang, M. Duan, and K. Li, “A data balancing approach
extremely data imbalance. Furthermore, an intrusion detection based on generative adversarial network,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
equipment is developed to detect and simulate online attacks on a vol. 141, pp. 768–776, Apr. 2023.
2266 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

[19] R. S. Rathore, C. Hewage, O. Kaiwartya, and J. Lloret, “In-vehicle com- Xiang Wang received the B.S. degrees in vehicle enmunication cyber security: Challenges and solutions,” Sensors, vol. 22, gineering from the Wuhan University of Science and
 no. 17, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 6679. Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2022. He is currently
[20] H. Sun, M. Chen, J. Weng, Z. Liu, and G. Geng, “Anomaly detection for working toward the Ph.D. degree in vehicle engineerin-vehicle network using CNN-LSTM with attention mechanism,” IEEE ing with the Dalian University of Technology, Dalian,
 Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 10880–10893, Oct. 2021. China. His research interests include connected au-
[21] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion de- tonomous vehicles, cybersecurity, machine learning,
 tection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 21, and anomaly detection.
 Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
[22] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion detection
 system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. Privacy, Secur.
 Trust, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[23] M. Gmiden, M. H. Gmiden, and H. Trabelsi, “An intrusion detection
 method for securing in-vehicle CAN bus,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Sci. Jian Zhao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 Techn. Autom. Control Comput. Eng., 2016, pp. 176–180. from the Guilin University of Electronic Technology,
[24] A. Taylor, N. Japkowicz, and S. Leblanc, “Frequency-based anomaly Guilin, China, in 2003 and the M.S. and Ph.D. dedetection for the automotive CAN bus,” in Proc. World Congr. Ind. Control grees in mechatronics from Xidian University, Xi’an,
 Syst. Secur., 2015, pp. 45–49. China, in 2006 and 2008, respectively. He is currently
[25] M. Muter and N. Asaj, “Entropy-based anomaly detection for in-vehicle a Postdoctoral with the Johannes Kepler University
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. (IV), 2011, pp. 1110–1115. of Linz, Linz, Austria. He is also a Professor with
[26] W. Wu et al., “Sliding window optimized information entropy analysis the State Key Laboratory of Structural Analysis for
 method for intrusion detection on in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Access, Industrial Equipment, Dalian University of Technolvol. 6, pp. 45233–45245, 2018. ogy, China. He has got financial support from the
[27] T. Koyama, T. Shibahara, K. Hasegawa, Y. Okano, M. Tanaka, and Y. National Science Foundation of China, the Ministry
 Oshima, “Anomaly detection for mxed transmission CAN messages using of Education of China, the National Key Research and Development Program,
 quantized intervals and absolute difference of payloads,” in Proc. ACM and industries. He has authored or coauthored more than 100 articles in research
 Workshop Automot. Cybersecur., 2019, pp. 19–24. fields of automotive sensors, intelligent vehicles, and MEMS. He was granted
[28] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection 50 Chinese patents. He was also elected as a Technical Committee Member
 method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh. Commun., of the Chinese Society of Micro-Nano Technology and a member of the Navol. 14, pp. 52–63, Oct. 2018. tional Standard Committee for Audio and Video. He was the recipient of the
[29] O. Avatefipour et al., “An intelligent secured framework for cyberattack Excellent Young Scientist, Xinghai Excellent Youth from the Dalian University
 detection in electric vehicles’ CAN bus using machine learning,” IEEE of Technology, Qianlingxi Excellent Teacher Award, Second Prize for Science
 Access, vol. 7, pp. 127580–127592, 2019. and Technology Achievement from the China Academy of Engineering Physics,
[30] X. Duan, H. Yan, D. Tian, J. Zhou, J. Su, and W. Hao, “In-vehicle CAN First Prize of Excellent Technical Research Papers, Special Award of Excellent
 bus tampering attacks detection for connected and autonomous vehicles Technical Research Papers in Dalian City, and Best Paper Award elected by
 using an improved isolation forest method,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Chinese Journal of Sensors and Actuators. He was also elected as the Program
 Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2122–2134, Feb. 2023. Chair of the 2022 ASME MNS and the Conference Chair of 2023 ASME MNS.
[31] M.-J. Kang and J.-W. Kang, “Intrusion detection system using deep
 neural network for in-vehicle network security,” PLoS One, vol. 11, no. 6,
 Jun. 2016, Art. no. e0155781. Pengbo Liu received the Ph.D. degree in microelec-
[32] A. Taylor, S. Leblanc, and N. Japkowicz, “Anomaly detection in auto- tronics and solid-state electronics from the Dalian
 mobile control network data with long short-term memory networks,” in University of Technology, Dalian, China, in 2015.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Sci. Adv. Analytics, 2016, pp. 130–139. He is currently a Senior Engineer with the College of
[33] J. Zhang et al., “A deep learning framework for driving behavior iden- Automotive Engineering, Dalian University of Techtification on in-vehicle CAN-BUS sensor data,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 6, nology. His research interests include automobile sen-
 Mar. 2019, Art. no. 1356. sors, and intelligent connected vehicle.
[34] J. Qin, Y. Xun, Z. Deng, and J. Liu, “GPIDS: GAN assisted contextual
 pattern-aware intrusion detection system for IVN,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 12682–12693, Sep. 2024.
[35] S. Jeong, S. Lee, H. Lee, and H. K. Kim, “X-CANIDS: Signal-aware explainable intrusion detection system for Controller area network-based Invehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 3230–3246, Nianmin Yao received the B.E., M.S., and Ph.D.
 Mar. 2024. degrees from Jilin University, Changchun, China, in
[36] S. Gao, L. Zhang, L. He, X. Deng, H. Yin, and H. Zhang, “Attack detec- 1997, 2000, and 2003, respectively. He is currently
 tion for intelligent vehicles via CAN-bus: A lightweight image network a Professor with the Dalian University of Technolapproach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 12, pp. 16624–16636, ogy, Dalian, China. He has been a Visiting Scholar
 Dec. 2023. at the University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA.
[37] G. Guo, Q. Xu, and C.-L. Zhang, “Adaptive fixed-time prescribed per- His primary research interests include machine learnformance control of non-smooth systems subject to injection/deception ing, wireless sensor networks, and wireless network
 attacks,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Sci. Eng., vol. 22, pp. 12645–12654, 2025. security.
[38] J. Liu, G. Guo, X. Sun, Z. Li, and H. Lin, “Cooperative localization of
 connected vehicles with attack detection and secure fusion,” IEEE Trans.
 Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 5713–5723, Apr. 2025.
[39] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun. ACM, Zheng Xu received the B.S. degree in vehicle envol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, Oct. 2020. gineering from the Hefei University of Technology,
[40] S. Cui and Y. Jiang, “Effective lipschitz constraint enforcement for wasser- Hefei, China, in 2021. He is currently working tostein GAN training,” in Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Intell. Appl., ward the Ph.D. degree in vehicle engineering with
 2017, pp. 74–78. the Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China.
[41] I. Gulrajani, F. Ahmed, M. Arjovsky, V. Dumoulin, and A. C. Courville, His research interests include vehicle navigation and
 “Improved training of wasserstein GANs,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural positioning technology, particularly in sensor data
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5767–5777. fusion, inertial navigation, and GNSS/INS integrated
[42] D. Basavaraj and S. Tayeb, “Towards a lightweight intrusion detection navigation.
 framework for in-vehicle networks,” JSAN, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 6, Jan. 2022,
 doi: 10.3390/jsan11010006.