This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

 CATwin-IDS: Context-Aware Intrusion Detection
 System for Both In-Vehicle and External-Vehicle
 Networks via Digital Twin
 Chang Liu , Member, IEEE, Yurong Zhang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Zheng Xue ,
 Zhengguo Sheng , Senior Member, IEEE, Jiawen Kang , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Guojun Han , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—With the rapid development of the Internet of automotive ecosystem to numerous security risks [2]. The
Vehicles (IoV), the tight coupling between In-Vehicle Networks IoV framework consists of the In-Vehicle Network (IVN)
(IVN) and External Vehicle Networks (EVN) has made vehicular [3] and the External Vehicle Network (EVN) [4]. The IVN
systems vulnerable to sophisticated cross-network attack chains.
Existing Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), however, typically
 coordinates communication among Electronic Control Units
operate in isolation on either IVN or EVN, and lack effective (ECUs), primarily employing Controller Area Network (CAN)
context-aware mechanisms for capturing inter-domain depen- bus technology, which inherently lacks authentication mechadencies. To overcome this limitation, we propose CATwin-IDS, nisms [5]. This weakness allows attackers to infiltrate the IVN
a context-aware intrusion detection framework that integrates via physical interfaces such as Universal Serial Bus (USB)
digital twin technology with a lightweight Distilled Bidirec- or On-Board Diagnostics (OBD) [6]. In contrast, the EVN
tional Encoder Representations from Transformers (DistilBERT)
model. In our design, Conditional Mutual Information (CMI) leverages Vehicle to Everything (V2X) technology for exterand Borderline Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique nal interactions and faces wireless threats through Wireless
(Borderline-SMOTE) are applied for feature optimization and Fidelity (Wi-Fi), Bluetooth, or cellular networks [7], as well as
data balancing, while Temporal Self-Attention (TSA) enhances physical-layer vulnerabilities in emerging ambient backscatter
the modeling of spatiotemporal dependencies across heteroge- NOMA systems [8], [9]. Moreover, the IoV relies on data
neous traffic. The digital twin provides real-time bidirectional
 exchange with cloud services via Road Side Units (RSUs)
synchronization and a simulation environment, enabling proactive adaptation to dynamic threats. Experimental results on [10], which introduces additional vulnerabilities.
benchmark datasets (Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024, CICIDS2018, The IVN and EVN are deeply interdependent through
CICIoT2023) demonstrate that CATwin-IDS achieves higher vehicle gateways and cloud platforms [11]. EVN-acquired
accuracy and real-time efficiency compared with state-of-the-art data (e.g., road conditions, traffic signals) directly influences
methods, providing a holistic solution for securing IoV against IVN control decisions (e.g., speed modulation, route plancross-network intrusions.
 ning), while IVN status data (e.g., vehicle speed, diagnostic
 Index Terms—IoV security, intrusion detection system, Distil- information) is transmitted externally. This bidirectional flow
BERT, digital twin, pre-trained transformer model. enables new attack vectors: adversaries may exploit EVN vulnerabilities to compromise the IVN or leverage IVN flaws to
 I. I NTRODUCTION disrupt EVN communications. Consequently, siloed Intrusion
 Detection Systems (IDS) focusing on IVN or EVN alone fail
T HE rapid advancement of the Internet of Vehicles
 (IoV) has revolutionized the automotive industry. As
vehicles become increasingly connected, they communicate
 to address these cross-network attack chains. A context-aware
 intrusion detection approach that jointly analyzes heterogewith diverse entities, enhancing convenience and operational neous data sources is therefore essential.
efficiency [1]. However, this connectivity also exposes the Digital twin technology offers unique opportunities for
 enhancing IoV security. By creating real-time digital replicas
 Received 11 September 2025; revised 12 January 2026; accepted 22 of vehicles and networks, digital twins enable bidirec-
February 2026. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62501174 and Grant 62471151 and in tional synchronization and dynamic context modeling between
part by Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams of physical and virtual environments [12]. Unlike static IDS
“The Pearl River Talent Recruitment Program” under Grant 2021ZT09X044. frameworks, a digital twin-based IDS can simulate cross-
The Associate Editor for this article was X. Li. (Corresponding author:
Zheng Xue.)
 network attacks, generate synthetic rare samples, and adapt
 Chang Liu, Yurong Zhang, Zheng Xue, and Guojun Han are detection models to evolving conditions. Particularly in the
with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University IoV domain, its ability to integrate multi-modal sensor inputs
of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: liuchang@gdut. (Radio Detection And Ranging (RADAR), Light Detection
edu.cn; 2112303067@mail2.gdut.edu.cn; xuezheng@gdut.edu.cn; gjhan@
gdut.edu.cn). and Ranging (LiDAR), Global Positioning System (GPS),
 Zhengguo Sheng is with the Department of Engineering and Design, Uni- cameras) [13] with network data enables comprehensive sitversity of Sussex, BN1 9RH Brighton, U.K. (e-mail: z.sheng@sussex.ac.uk). uational awareness. Thus, digital twin technology not only
 Jiawen Kang is with the School of Automation, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: kavinkang@gdut.edu.cn). provides a simulation environment but also acts as a context
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3669369 provide for intrusion detection.
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 (Borderline-SMOTE), improving feature relevance while
 addressing severe class imbalance in heterogeneous
 vehicular traffic.
 • We develop a lightweight DistilBERT model with TSA,
 which captures both semantic-rich EVN payloads and
 time-critical IVN dependencies, thus modeling cross-
Fig. 1. CAN packet structure. network contextual correlations under in-vehicle resource
 constraints.
 • We construct a hierarchical digital twin architecture
 The increasing sophistication of cyberattacks further under- (physical, digital twin, application) that supports bidireclines the urgency of this approach. For example, a German tional synchronization, provides a simulation environment
security expert demonstrated a Tesla vulnerability in 2022 for cross-network attack scenarios. This integration
that allowed remote exploitation of 25 vehicles across 13 enhances the IDS with real-time adaptability and contextcountries by leveraging EVN flaws to gain IVN control [14]. awareness.
Traditional IDS methods-whether anomaly-based, rule-based, The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
or signature-based [15]-struggle to adapt to such multi-domain, Section II discusses the related work. Section III presents the
evolving threats. Although machine learning methods have proposed model and its key technologies. Section IV describes
been applied to CAN traffic and V2X data, they are limited by the experimental results. Section V concludes the paper.
heterogeneous encoding formats and protocol diversity [16].
More importantly, most IDS operate in isolation, ignoring II. R ELATED W ORK
real-time IVN–EVN interactions, and therefore lack contextawareness in detecting coordinated attacks. In this work, To comprehensively address the challenges of intrusion
“context” refers to the mutual dependencies among traffic detection in IoV systems, this section reviews existing research
features, such as temporal sequences, cross-protocol interac- from three perspectives: detection methods for IVN intrusions,
tions, and statistical co-variations, within a shared operational strategies to tackle EVN intrusion risks, and hybrid framewindow. Inspired by BERT-style contextual representation works integrating IVN and EVN detection. These existing
learning, each feature (e.g., CAN ID, packet size, or V2X field) studies on single-network and hybrid network approaches are
is treated as a token whose semantic meaning is dynamically summarized in Table I.
shaped by its surrounding features and the real-time vehicle
state provided by the digital twin. A. In-Vehicle Network Intrusion Detection
 Recent advances in pre-trained Transformer models [17] In the development of connected and autonomous vehicles,
inspire new opportunities. Their sequence modeling capa- securing IVNs through robust intrusion detection has become
bilities align well with vehicular data streams, where CAN increasingly critical. Within the complex ecosystem of IVNs,
frames and V2X payloads exhibit complex temporal depen- intrusion detection technologies have overwhelmingly centered
dencies. To balance effectiveness and efficiency, we adopt on protecting the CAN bus-primarily because it serves as the
Distilled Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Trans- backbone for data communication between in-vehicle ECUs.
formers (DistilBERT) with only three Transformer layers, and As the primary medium for transmitting in-vehicle data, CAN
enhance it with a Temporal Self-Attention (TSA) module. This messages and packets are relayed through this bus architecture.
design captures temporal dependencies in traffic data while Specifically, a CAN data packet, as depicted in Fig. 1, consists
meeting the stringent latency and resource constraints of in- of seven key fields: frame start, arbitration field, control field,
vehicle devices. data field, Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) Field, Acknowl-
 Based on these motivations, we propose CATwin-IDS: a edgment (ACK) Field, and frame end [29]. Among these, the
Context-Aware Intrusion Detection System for both IVN and Data Field is the most vulnerable to exploitation by attackers,
EVN via digital twin. CATwin-IDS integrates a lightweight as it contains the actual transmitted data that determines the
DistilBERT model with temporal attention and leverages operations of the ECUs, such as throttle control, brake signals,
digital twin technology for real-time context fusion, attack and steering angle adjustments. Attackers can infiltrate or
simulation, and adaptive detection. This synergy enables control the vehicle by injecting malicious messages into the
efficient modeling of cross-network contextual dependencies Data Field of the CAN data packet [30].
while ensuring practical deployability in edge environments. In recent years, many researchers have focused on IDS
 The main contributions of this paper are summarized as based on the CAN bus. In [19], a binary classification detecfollows: tion system based on a hybrid Long Short-Term Memory
 • We propose CATwin-IDS, a context-aware intrusion (LSTM) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) model
 detection system empowered by digital twin technology. was proposed. Reference [21] and others used CNN deep
 It fuses IVN and EVN features in real time, enabling learning models to experiment with real vehicle data, focusing
 cross-domain context modeling and adaptive detection of on specific types of attacks. The authors of [31] applied
 coordinated attacks. a multi-stage method combining Artificial Neural Network
 • We design a hybrid feature engineering approach inte- (ANN) and LSTM, achieving an F1 score of 0.95 and a
 grating Conditional Mutual Information (CMI) and detection rate of 99.99% on benchmark datasets published
 Borderline Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique by [32] and others. In [33], a scheme was proposed to
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIU et al.: CATwin-IDS: CONTEXT-AWARE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 3

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF R ELATED W ORK

detect intrusions by establishing voltage fingerprints for each for the IDS. Li et al. [27] proposed a cloud-collaborative
ECU’s ID, with experiments conducted on three real vehicles. intrusion detection and prevention system that integrates the
The study [34] introduced a cluster-based open set recog- Car-Hacking dataset, survival analysis dataset, and data colnition method for CAN bus intrusion detection, which can lected from real or simulated vehicular environments. By
detect known categories and identify unknown attacks. It utilizing the contextual modeling capabilities of the Bidirecachieved accuracies of 99.37%, 99.36%, 98.93%, and 98.09% tional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT)
on the Car-Hacking dataset [35] for Dos, Fuzzy, Gear, and model, the system classifies in-vehicle traffic. Additionally,
Rpm attack types, respectively. Although the abovementioned they introduced the Encode 2 ID algorithm to encode malimachine-learning-based IDS are efficient and effective, they cious traffic, generating a unique ID for each traffic instance,
often lack interpretability. The work [36] addresses this by thereby saving storage space.
integrating a threshold-based IDS with a machine learning In summary, research on IVN intrusion detection has not
classifier for attack type categorization, providing explanations only promoted an in-depth understanding of CAN bus attack
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

patterns but also offered important references for protocol protect data privacy. Performance validation was conducted
feature mining and anomaly modeling in IVN. However, exist- on the UNSW-NB15, CAN-Intrusion [32], and CICIDS2017
ing methods, while effective for single-bus protocol defense, datasets. Hybrid frameworks have explored the collaborative
insufficiently address the dynamic interplay between IVN and defense ideas between IVN and EVN, showing potential in
external networks-lacking multi-protocol compatibility, cross- improving the coverage of cross-network attack detection.
scenario generalization, and interpretability, which limits their However, existing methods are either limited by complex
applicability to the coupled nature of IoV. architectures resulting in insufficient real-time performance or
 have limitations in the depth of heterogeneous data fusion and
B. External Network Intrusion Detection the refinement of contextual modeling, making it difficult to
 fully capture the dynamic coupling relationship between in-
 Network intrusion detection in the EVN within the IoV has
 vehicle and external networks.
also attracted widespread attention from researchers. In [12],
 Existing intrusion detection research has explored crossan IoT-based attack behavior recognition system was proposed,
 network hybrid architectures for the IoV, but these framewhich integrates spatiotemporal feature fusion. This system
 works exhibit several limitations. Hybrid architectures achieve
uses a simplified CNN model to learn the spatial features
 cross-network detection through approaches like multi-model
of attacks and a Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory
 integration but typically retain bulky structures, making them
(BiLSTM) model to capture the temporal features of attacks.
 unsuitable for resource-constrained in-vehicle edge environ-
Experiments were conducted on the UNSW-NB15 [37] and
 ments. Most importantly, they fail to fully capture the
CICIDS2017 datasets [38]. To address the issue of detecting
 time-critical CAN frame dependencies between the IVN and
low-probability attacks, [22] proposed an intrusion detection
 EVN, with shortcomings in multi-classification capability,
system based on Transformer models. In [25], machine learndetection performance, and interpretability further restricting
ing techniques such as One-Class Support Vector Machine
 their practicality.
(OCSVM) and isolation Forest (iForest) were employed to
 Recent studies have begun to explore efficient adaptations
detect both known and zero-day attacks. [39] introduced an
 of pre-trained Transformer models to address these challenges.
IDS based on Deep Transfer Learning (DTL) that employs a
 For instance, Li et al. [42] proposed a knowledge distillation
three-tier architecture integrating CNN, Genetic Algorithms
 framework that transfers semantic knowledge from BERT
(GA), and bootstrap aggregation techniques. By transformto a lightweight CNN-BiLSTM model, achieving over 98%
ing cybersecurity datasets into image data and optimizing
 accuracy while significantly reducing computational overhead.
model hyperparameters using genetic algorithms, this system
 Bimmo et al. [43] introduced Fed-CALiBER, a federated
achieved a 100% accuracy rate on the Edge-IIoTset dataset
 learning system integrating a lightweight BERT variant for
[40], which includes 14 types of attacks.
 real-time (<4 ms/sample) CAN bus intrusion detection on edge
 Research on EVN intrusion detection has made progress in
 devices, demonstrating the feasibility of privacy-preserving
spatio-temporal feature fusion, transfer learning, Transformer-
 LLM deployment in distributed vehicular settings. Meanwhile,
based models, and the application of large language models
 Sharma et al. [44] leveraged pre-trained Transformer models
like BERT in text-based data processing. Nevertheless, existing
 for context-aware authentication in V2V/V2I communicamethods are mostly designed for independent EVN scenarios
 tions, highlighting the potential of pre-trained Transformer
with high system model complexity, and their adaptability in
 models in building adaptive, intelligent security mechanisms
resource-constrained in-vehicle edge environments still needs
 beyond mere detection. These advances collectively signal a
to be strengthened. This deficiency further heightens the urgent
 shift toward lightweight, context-sensitive, and privacy-aware
demand for the realization of collaborative defense between
 pre-trained Transformer model applications in automotive
in-vehicle and external networks to address the practical
 cybersecurity-trends that directly motivate our architectural
challenges in EVN security.
 choices.
 Notably, EVN-focused research [1], which leverages
C. Hybrid Intrusion Detection BERT’s sequence modeling capabilities, has inspired our work
 Recent studies have explored hybrid IDS for integrated by demonstrating the potential of pre-trained Transformer
IVN-EVN security, aiming to address cross-network attack models to capture contextual connections in vehicular netscenarios. In [18], an ensemble method combining Decision work data. Building upon this insight, we adopt DistilBERT-a
Trees (DT), Random Forest (RF), Extremely Randomized 6-layer lightweight variant of BERT obtained via knowl-
Trees (ET), and XGBoost was proposed, achieving accuracies edge distillation-as the foundation of our framework. To
of 99.99% and 99.88% on the Car-Hacking (representing IVN) further adapt it to the stringent real-time requirements of IoV,
and CICIDS2017 (representing EVN) datasets, respectively. we streamline the encoder depth from six to three layers
In [11], a CNN was used to convert network numerical data and refine the attention mechanism into TSA. This twofold
into images, making it easier to identify attack types, and the optimization not only alleviates the computational burden
method was validated on the collected dataset. In [1], the rela- compared to both BERT and standard DistilBERT, but also
tionship between network traffic was considered, and data was enhances the model’s ability to capture temporal dynamics
converted into text based on a BERT model. The system was in cross-network traffic. Combined with digital twin-driven
validated on the CICIDS and BoT-IoT [41] datasets. In [24], a dynamic adaptation, the framework effectively addresses the
BiLSTM-based intrusion detection system was employed for limitations of existing single-network and hybrid-network IDS
binary classification, and Federated Learning was utilized to approaches.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIU et al.: CATwin-IDS: CONTEXT-AWARE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 5

Fig. 2. Application scenario diagram of digital twin intrusion detection system for IoV.

 III. S YSTEM M ODEL data within the vehicle’s internal network but also enhanc-
 In this section, we introduce the proposed CATwin-IDS ing network security through an integrated IDS, effectively
system model in detail, as illustrated in Fig. 2. First, we outline defending against potential network attack threats.
the overall IoV digital twin architecture, which is organized Vehicle interfaces such as USB, OBD, and Unified Diaginto three layers-physical, digital twin, and application-to nostic Services (UDS) provide means for interaction with
enable bidirectional synchronization and cross-domain feature the external environment but may also introduce security
fusion. Next, we describe the training framework of the risks related to in-vehicle intrusion. Therefore, these interfaces
proposed IDS, consisting of data preprocessing, feature engi- require appropriate security measures to protect them from
neering, and the Lightweight DistilBERT Classifier, supported potential attacks by external intruders. The Telematics-Box
by digital twin simulation. The following subsections elaborate (T-Box), as the vehicle’s remote communication unit, provides
on the preprocessing strategies for heterogeneous vehicular functions like cellular networks and short-range communicatraffic, the hybrid feature engineering methods that enhance tion (such as Near Field Communication (NFC), Bluetooth,
discriminative power, and the lightweight DistilBERT model and Wi-Fi). While these communication capabilities enhance
specifically optimized with TSA for resource-constrained envi- the vehicle’s connectivity, they also increase the risk of
ronments. Together, these components constitute a cohesive external vehicle intrusion.
framework that enables efficient and accurate intrusion detec- In addition, the physical layer includes all physical devices
tion across both IVN and EVN. and sensors, such as GPS positioning systems, high-definition
 cameras, and LiDAR. These devices are responsible for col-
A. IoV Digital Twin Architecture Overview lecting real-time data on the vehicle, covering key information
 such as the vehicle’s operational status, environmental condi-
 The three-layer architecture of CATwin-IDS is designed tions, and driving behavior. The primary task of the physical
to address the dynamic coupling between IVN and EVN, layer is to ensure the accuracy and integrity of this data,
and to bridge the gap between real-world vehicular data providing reliable input for the digital twin layer. To achieve
acquisition and virtualized intrusion detection. This architec- this, the physical layer not only needs to efficiently collect
ture enables bidirectional data synchronization, cross-domain and transmit data but also must implement multiple security
feature fusion, and secure simulation of attack scenarios- measures to prevent data from being tampered with or lost,
key capabilities for overcoming the limitations of traditional thereby providing a solid foundation for intelligent decisionisolated-network IDS. Each layer undertakes distinct but inter- making and control.
dependent roles, forming a closed-loop system that supports
real-time, adaptive intrusion detection for IoV. 2) Digital Twin Layer: The digital twin layer is responsible
 1) Physical Layer: The core communication protocol of for constructing and maintaining a high-fidelity virtual replica
IVN is the CAN bus protocol, which allows various Electronic of the IoV environment, faithfully reflecting both the IVN and
Control Units (ECUs) in the vehicle to receive signals from the EVN. Its architecture follows the modular design shown in
sensors and make control decisions based on these signals. Fig. 2, consisting of a data processing framework and a system
These ECUs communicate with each other and exchange data management framework, with the two frameworks interacting
with the vehicle gateway via the CAN bus protocol. The dynamically to achieve precise mapping and intelligent manvehicle gateway serves as a central hub, not only transmitting agement of IVN-EVN interactions.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 The data processing framework integrates continuous real- Algorithm 1 Proposed Intrusion Detection Algorithm With
time streams from physical sensors, ECUs, and external Lightweight DistilBERT Classifier
communication modules (e.g., V2X, Wi-Fi). This data is Input: Network traffic data D (structured data), digital twin
first normalized and stored, ensuring integrity and temporal environment T ;
alignment across domains. The virtual twin’s state stwin
 t is Output: Predicted labels y;
updated through a bidirectional synchronization process: Step 1: Data Preprocessing
 phys 1 Load dataset D;
 stwin
 t t−1 + α st
 = (1 − α) stwin , (1) 2 Perform data cleaning (e.g., handle missing values and

where α ∈ [0, 1] controls the update rate between physical outliers);
 phys 3 Encode categorical labels into numeric values;
measurements st and the previous virtual state stwin
 t−1 . This
 4 Standardize numeric features to ensure consistent scales;
mechanism enables the twin to remain consistent with the
real system while preserving short-term predictive dynamics, Step 2: Feature Engineering
ensuring timely tracking of sudden changes in IVN (e.g., 5 Select top-k features using CMI;
abnormal CAN bus frequency) and EVN (e.g., V2X signal 6 Split D into training (80%) and testing (20%) subsets;
spoofing) for rapid threat identification. 7 Apply Borderline-SMOTE to balance class distribution in
 The system management framework incorporates: training data;
 8 Transform structured features into textual representations;
 • Security Management: Interfaces with the IDS to detect
 and mitigate threats, validating countermeasures in the Step 3: Digital Twin Simulation
 9 Initialize digital twin environment T for real-time traffic
 virtual space before deployment.
 • Model Management: Continuously refines virtual model simulation;
 parameters by comparing simulated and observed outputs. Step 4: Lightweight DistilBERT Feature Extraction
 • Topology Management: Dynamically maps IVN-EVN 10 Tokenize textual input: Input tokens ←
 interconnections, tracking gateway, T-Box, and access Tokenizer(Textual Representation);
 point configurations. 11 Add [CLS] and [SEP] tokens;
 12 Pass tokenized inputs through the Lightweight
 The data processing framework provides real-time updated
 DistilBERT Classifier: All Layers Output ←
state data as input for the system management framework,
 LightweightDistilBERT(Input tokens);
while the topology management results from the system
 13 Extract contextual embeddings from the
management framework guide the priority setting of data
streams in the data processing framework, forming a closed- final (third) encoder layer: Embeddings ←
loop optimization mechanism. All Layers Output.Encoder3;
 Cross-domain feature fusion module aligns heterogeneous Step 5: Classification
IVN and EVN features into a unified embedding space: 14 Feed embeddings into the Lightweight DistilBERT
 Classifier’s output layer (FFNN + softmax);
 z ∈ Rd = fIVN (xIVN ) k fEVN (xEVN ), (2) 15 Compute class probabilities and assign predicted labels:
 Predicted Labels ← arg max(Probabilities);
where k denotes vector concatenation, and fIVN , fEVN are Step 6: Output
domain-specific encoders mapping IVN and EVN features Return the final predicted labels y as intrusion detection
into the joint embedding space Rd . This representation feeds outcomes.
into the Borderline-SMOTE in Sec. III-B, ensuring synthetic
samples preserve real-world cross-network dependencies, and
directly serves as the input for the Lightweight DistilBERT
 B. Context-Aware Intrusion Detection Framework
classifier to support its modeling of spatiotemporal correlations
across heterogeneous networks. CATwin-IDS employs a DistilBERT encoder to learn
 During inference, the fused features are continuously contextualized feature representations. Through bidirectional
streamed into the DistilBERT classifier, enabling real-time self-attention, every feature embedding incorporates inforand context-aware intrusion detection. In this way, the digital mation from all other features within the same detection
twin not only maintains a synchronized virtual replica of the window, capturing both temporal and statistical correlations.
physical system but also functions as a live feature provider The digital-twin layer enriches this process by injecting
for the detection model. Beyond online detection, the twin environment-specific variables, enabling conditional context
further offers a secure experimentation environment in which modeling under real-time vehicle states.
simulated attack scenarios (e.g., CAN flooding and V2X The training framework integrated into the digital twin layer
spoofing) can be executed to support adaptive classifier tuning primarily consists of three stages: data preprocessing, feature
without risking the physical vehicle. engineering, and the Lightweight DistilBERT Classifier, as
 3) Application Layer: The application layer serves as shown in Fig. 3. The pseudocode for the intrusion detection
the interface for end-users, translating the analysis results process, including data preprocessing, feature engineering,
and detection decisions from the digital twin layer into digital twin simulation, lightweight DistilBERT feature extracactionable steps and feedback. Application scenarios include tion, and final classification decisions, is described in Alg. 1.
autonomous vehicle security, intelligent transportation systems 1) Data Pre-Processing: In real-world application scenar-
(ITS), remote software updates and OTA services, and more. ios, network traffic data typically exhibits class imbalance [45],
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIU et al.: CATwin-IDS: CONTEXT-AWARE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 7

where the volume of normal traffic significantly exceeds that probability distributions. By computing the MI between
of anomalous traffic. To enhance the model’s ability to detect each feature and the target variable, followed by MI value
anomalous traffic and improve its generalization performance ranking, we prioritize retaining features that simultanein diverse data environments, it is necessary to preprocess ously influence both IVN and EVN.
the data, transforming raw network traffic data into a format • CMI: To further capture the latent cross-domain depensuitable for spatiotemporal feature analysis, thus providing dency between IVN and EVN under specific operational
an appropriate data foundation for in-depth data mining and contexts (e.g., gateway load state, time window), we
model training. extend MI to its conditional form:
 To address the class imbalance issue, we employed random XXX
sampling techniques to balance the sample sizes of different I(Bk ; F | Z) = p(bk , f , z)
 z bk f
attack types and normal traffic within the dataset. This process
ensures the representativeness of each sample type during p(bk , f | z)
 × log , (4)
model training, thereby improving the fairness of the training p(bk | z)p( f | z)
process and the accuracy of evaluation. where Bk denotes the k-th CAN payload byte, F denotes
 During the data processing, to handle the occurrence of a selected EVN feature (e.g., Flow_Byts/s), and Z
infinite or NaN values, this paper adopted a mean imputation represents contextual variables such as gateway state or
strategy. By replacing infinite or NaN values with the corre- time interval. We further adopt the normalized form:
sponding feature’s average value, the integrity and consistency
 I(Bk ; F | Z)
of the data were effectively maintained, providing a reliable NCMI(Bk ; F | Z) = √ , (5)
foundation for subsequent data analysis. Additionally, to facil- H(Bk | Z) H(F | Z)
itate model processing, LabelEncoder technology was used to where H(· | Z) denotes conditional entropy. This metric
encode the labels of the dataset [46]. This technique converts allows fair comparison between heterogeneous feature
categorical text labels into numerical values, which not only pairs and prioritizes those most indicative of crosssimplifies the model’s input requirements but also enhances network attack chains.
the efficiency of data processing by the model. • Chi-squared Test: The chi-squared test is a statistical
 2) Feature Engineering: Building upon data preprocess- method used to test the independence between categoring, the goal of feature engineering is to further refine and ical variables. In feature selection, it is used to assess
optimize the dataset to improve model training efficiency the association between a single feature and the target
and classification performance. To address the challenges of variable, expressed as:
modeling cross-domain dependencies between IVN and EVN, X (O − E)2
traditional single-network feature selection methods can only χ2 = , (6)
analyze IVN’s CAN bus features (e.g., message ID frequency) E
or EVN’s V2X protocol characteristics, while neglecting the where O represents the observed frequency, and E
attack chains formed through gateway data synchronization is the expected frequency under the assumption of
(e.g., spoofed EVN traffic signals infiltrating IVN to disrupt independence.
ECU decision-making). To overcome this limitation, this paper • PCA: PCA transforms a set of possibly correlated
integrates multiple feature selection methods-including Mutual variables into a set of linearly uncorrelated principal
Information (MI) for nonlinear correlation analysis, Chi-square components via orthogonal transformation:
test for categorical variable screening, and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for linear dimensionality reduction-to PCA(X) = XW, (7)
perform cross-domain feature selection. This approach pre- where X is the original dataset matrix, and W contains
serves critical original features while eliminating redundant eigenvectors of the covariance matrix.
dimensions, ultimately constructing a low-dimensional yet In this paper, to quantify the interdependence between
highly discriminative feature subset through cross-network features and the target variable, we adopt MI and extend
dependency mining to achieve effective anomalous traffic it to CMI for cross-domain feature selection, ensuring that
detection. Below are several commonly used feature selection selected features capture correlated anomalies in both IVN and
methods and their mathematical expressions: EVN. By quantifying these correlations, the system identifies
 • MI: MI is a method used to assess the amount of shared attack propagation patterns across networks (e.g., DoS attacks
 information between two random variables. It can capture manifesting as EVN traffic surges alongside excessive CAN
 both linear and nonlinear relationships between variables. bus load in IVN). Following this feature selection, the dataset
 The expression for calculating MI is as follows: is partitioned into training (80%) and testing (20%) sets.
 To further address the issue of class imbalance, we adopt
  
 XX P(x, y)
 MI(X, Y) = P(x, y) log , (3) Borderline-SMOTE, which differs from traditional Synthetic
 x∈X y∈Y
 P(x)P(y)
 Minority Over-Sampling Technique (SMOTE) by focusing
 where X represents cross-network interaction features on minority samples located near the decision boundary.
 (e.g., combined IVN-EVN attributes such as CAN ID fre- Instead of generating synthetic samples uniformly across
 quency and V2X packet rate), Y denotes attack categories the feature space, Borderline-SMOTE interpolates new data
 (e.g., benign, DoS, spoofing), p(x, y) is the joint prob- points in these critical regions where misclassification is most
 ability distribution, and p(x) and p(y) are the marginal likely to occur. This targeted sampling strategy enhances the
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

model’s ability to distinguish between normal and attack where µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation, and γ
traffic, reduces the risk of introducing noisy or redundant sam- and β are learnable parameters.
ples, and improves classification robustness under imbalanced Distinct from the original NLP-oriented DistilBERT that
conditions. relies on masked token prediction during pretraining, our
 Finally, numeric features are converted into text format classifier directly consumes structured vehicular traffic features
for input into the Lightweight DistilBERT Classifier. The converted into sequential text form. By treating each numeric
text transformation process directly maps structured numeric feature as an individual token, the Lightweight DistilBERT
features to sequential text strings while preserving the original Classifier effectively transforms heterogeneous vehicular data
feature order. This design enables the Lightweight Distil- into a unified representation space. The incorporation of
BERT classifier to leverage its pre-trained sequence modeling temporal attention further enhances the ability to correlate
capabilities without requiring additional input layers for het- abnormal EVN communication patterns with time-critical IVN
erogeneous numeric features, reducing model complexity. For CAN bus signals. As a result, the model achieves robust intruillustration, a sample from the CICIDS2018 (EVN) dataset, sion detection performance across heterogeneous domains,
consisting of protocol and traffic-related numeric features, is offering a practical and scalable solution for real-time IoV
converted into a text sequence such as “6 64 9306.82 120 0 security.
. . .”. Similarly, a sample from the Car-Hacking (IVN) dataset, In summary, the lightweight DistilBERT classifier, comincluding the CAN ID and eight payload fields, is transformed bined with TSA, FFN, and residual connections, forms the
into a sequence like “1201 41 39 39 35 0 0 0 154”. Both IVN core of our intrusion detection framework. Integrated with
and EVN samples follow the same numeric-to-text conversion the digital twin layer and preceded by data preprocessing
rule, ensuring unified processing of cross-domain traffic while and feature engineering, this architecture enables efficient,
preserving intrinsic temporal ordering, which further facilitates context-aware detection of cross-network attacks while meetthe TSA mechanism in capturing dynamic traffic patterns. ing the real-time and resource-constrained requirements of IoV
 3) The Lightweight DistilBERT Classifier: The lightweight environments.
DistilBERT classifier is a refined variant of the original DistilBERT model, specifically adapted for intrusion detection in IV. E VALUATION R ESULTS
the IoV. While standard DistilBERT employs knowledge distillation to compress BERT into a six-layer architecture [47], This section provides a detailed overview of the experour variant further reduces the encoder depth to three layers imental design and results analysis, aiming to validate the
to meet the stringent latency and memory requirements of effectiveness and performance of the proposed CATwin-IDS
in-vehicle edge devices. This reduction lowers computational model in both EVN and IVN. A VMware ESXi virtualization
overhead and improves deployability in resource-constrained server runs the digital twin of the IoV network environment,
environments, without sacrificing essential contextual model- replicating the exact topology and functions of the physical
ing capacity. IVN and EVN; all traffic data from the physical networks
 Each encoder layer consists of a Temporal Self-Attention is mirrored to this virtualized server to ensure consistency.
(TSA) mechanism, a position-wise feed-forward network First, it introduces the characteristics and sources of the
(FFN), and residual connections with layer normalization. The datasets used for training and evaluation. Next, it describes
TSA mechanism introduces a temporal bias into the attention the hardware and software environment, as well as the data
weights, explicitly capturing the order and intervals of network preprocessing and sampling methods employed in the experevents: iments. Finally, the chapter comprehensively evaluates the
 superiority of the CATwin-IDS model across multiple per-
 QK T
  
 Attention(Q, K, V, ∆t) = softmax √ − β|∆t| V, (8) formance metrics through comparisons with various baseline
 dk models, conducts an in-depth analysis of its performance using
where Q, K, and V denote the query, key, and value, dk is confusion matrices and performance comparison charts, and
the key dimension, ∆t is the timestamp difference between validates its cross-network intrusion detection efficacy.
tokens, and β > 0 controls the temporal decay. This allows the
model to prioritize temporally proximate features, improving A. Experimental Design
detection of time-sensitive anomalies in network traffic.
 This paper involves datasets primarily categorized into two
 The FFN performs a nonlinear transformation at each
 main types: EVN and IVN, aimed at providing the necposition:
 essary network traffic data for training and evaluating IDS
 FFN(x) = max(0, xW1 + b1 )W2 + b2 , (9) models to determine whether network behaviors are benign.
 The EVN dataset is sourced from the Canadian Institute
where x is the input, W1 and b1 are parameters of the first for Cybersecurity (CIC), including CICIDS2018 [38] and
fully connected layer with ReLU activation, and W2 , b2 are CICIoT2023 [48], covering various types of network attacks.
parameters of the second fully connected layer. Residual The CICIoT2023 dataset includes 33 types of attacks, cateconnections and layer normalization are applied after both gorized into seven classes: DDoS, DoS, Recon, Web-based,
TSA and FFN to ensure training stability: Brute-force, Spoofing, and Mirai attacks, and it contains 39
 Y = LayerNorm(x + Sublayer(x)), (10) features. The CICIDS2018 dataset comprises 78 features and
 x−µ multiple types of attacks, including Brute-force, Heartbleed,
 LayerNorm(x) = γ + β, (11) Botnet, DoS, DDoS, Web application, and Infiltration attacks
 σ
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIU et al.: CATwin-IDS: CONTEXT-AWARE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 9

 Fig. 4. Selected feature importance from CICIDS2018.

 TABLE II
 C AR -H ACKING DATASET

 (TN), False Positives (FP), and False Negatives (FN), as
 provided below.
Fig. 3. The overall framework of CATwin-IDS. TP + TN
 Accuracy = , (12)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 TP
 Precision = , (13)
of the network from inside. The IVN dataset is specifically TP + FP
 TP
focused on collecting traffic data related to the CAN bus. Recall = , (14)
This dataset meticulously records feature information, includ- TP + FN
ing timestamps, CAN IDs, Data Length Codes (DLC), and 2 × Precision × Recall
 F1 = . (15)
the 8-byte data fields (DATA[0]-DATA[7]) in CAN packets, Precision + Recall
providing essential contextual information for analyzing communications on the CAN bus. The IVN datasets used in this B. Data Preprocessing
paper for evaluating IDS performance in vehicular network In real-life scenarios, normal data typically constitutes a
environments include Car-Hacking [35] and CICIoV2024 [49]. large proportion, leading to highly imbalanced datasets. This
By integrating both EVN and IVN datasets, this paper can imbalance often undermines the generalization and stability
comprehensively assess the performance of IDS across differ- of system models, as they may become biased towards the
ent network environments, ensuring that the proposed solutions majority class. To enhance the robustness of the experimental
are effective against a diverse range of network attacks and results, we conducted uniform sampling for each type of attack
enhancing the overall security of vehicular networks. By and normal samples, ensuring that the data volume for each
integrating both EVN and IVN datasets, this paper can com- type is the same. Due to the large number of attack class labels,
prehensively assess the performance of IDS across different we referred to the attack classification standards of the CIC
network environments, ensuring that the proposed solutions to group class labels with similar characteristics into unified
are effective against a diverse range of network attacks and attack types. This classification approach not only aligns with
enhancing the overall security of vehicular networks. CIC but also enables more effective analysis and evaluation.
 The experimental setup adopts NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 This paper considers each type of attack and uniformly colwith 12 GB of GPU memory. The experiments were conducted lects data for each type as the experimental evaluation object,
using Python version 3.8.0. Model construction was primarily comparing two datasets each for IVN and EVN. The details of
carried out using PyTorch, version 1.9.0. the original datasets, attack types, training sets, and test sets
 The performance evaluation metrics utilized in this paper for these four datasets are respectively presented in Table II,
include accuracy, precision, recall, and F1, derived from four Table III, Table IV, and Table V. In the data preprocessing
fundamental parameters: True Positives (TP), True Negatives stage, CMI was used to perform feature selection on four
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 TABLE III
 CICI OV2024 DATASET TABLE VI
 CICIDS2018 DATASET E VALUATION M ETRICS

 TABLE IV
 CICIDS2018 DATASET

 TABLE VII
 CICI OT2023 DATASET E VALUATION M ETRICS

 TABLE V
 CICI OT2023 DATASET

 the selected features from the CICIoT2023 dataset is illustrated
 in the Fig. 4.

 C. Model Comparison and Performance Analysis
 To comprehensively evaluate CATwin-IDS across different methodological paradigms, we select 14 baseline models
 covering (1) traditional machine learning methods (KNN,
 DT, ET, SVM, LightGBM, CatBoost, XGBoost) representing tree-based and distance-based classifiers; (2) sequential
 deep networks (LSTM, BiLSTM, RNN, CNN) focusing on
 temporal and local feature learning; and (3) Transformerbased models (BERT, Distilling BERT for Natural Language
 Understanding (TinyBERT), Transformer) for contextual feature understanding and efficiency comparison. The results of
 these comparisons are shown in Table VI and Table VII. The
 CATwin-IDS model achieved an F1 score of 100% across all
 types of attacks on the Car-Hacking and CICIoV2024 datasets.
 In the more complex EVN datasets, namely CICIDS2018
 and CICIoT2023, the CATwin-IDS model adopted in this
datasets. Taking the CICIDS2018 dataset as an example, 18 paper demonstrated outstanding performance, leading other
out of 78 features were chosen as input features. This approach models with accuracy scores of 0.9097 and 0.8396, and F1
effectively maintains detection capabilities while reducing scores of 0.9094 and 0.8382, respectively. The comparison
computational complexity and redundancy. The importance of includes a standard Transformer model, which achieved
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIU et al.: CATwin-IDS: CONTEXT-AWARE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 11

 TABLE VIII
 A BLATION E XPERIMENT R ESULTS ON CICIDS2018 DATASET

accuracy of 0.8856 and F1 of 0.8845 on CICIDS2018, and
accuracy of 0.8277 and F1 of 0.8250 on CICIoT2023. When
compared with traditional machine learning models, CATwin-
IDS showed higher performance on both the CICIDS2018
and CICIoT2023 datasets. Although CatBoost and XGBoost
performed well on the CICIDS2018 dataset, and LightGBM,
CatBoost, and XGBoost also showed good performance on
the CICIoT2023 dataset, their accuracy and F1 scores were
slightly lower than those of DistilBERT. This indicates potential limitations of these models in handling complex data.
Furthermore, DistilBERT maintained performance similar to
BERT while reducing model complexity and computational
resource requirements, thereby enhancing efficiency in practical applications. Compared to TinyBERT, another lightweight
BERT model, DistilBERT demonstrated advantages in both
resource consumption and performance metrics. These results Fig. 5. Comparison of EVN performance indicators on CICIDS2018 dataset.
indicate that DistilBERT not only provides high accuracy in
classification tasks but also maintains high recall and precision. configuration as CATwin-IDS to validate transferability under
 An ablation experiment was conducted to investigate the equivalent resource constraints, while LSTM, BiLSTM, RNN,
impact of encoder depth on long-range temporal dependency and CNN followed widely adopted baseline configurations in
capture and model efficiency. As shown in Table VIII, the the IDS literature:
3-layer configuration, integrated with the TSA mechanism,
achieves an optimal balance between long-range dependency • LSTM/BiLSTM/RNN: 50 hidden units → 64-
modeling capability and computational efficiency. Specifically, dimensional fully connected layer (ReLU activation) →
this design reduces relative computational cost by 49.2% Dropout(0.2) → classification layer.
and improves inference efficiency by 46.4% compared to • CNN: 64 convolutional kernels (kernel size 3) → max
deeper architectures, while attaining an F1-score of 0.9104 pooling → flattening → 64-dimensional fully connected
that outperforms the 2-layer TSA-integrated variant by 0.25%. layer (ReLU activation) → Dropout(0.2) → classification
In contrast, the 2-layer configuration exhibits insufficient layer.
capacity to capture complex long-range dependencies, and On CICIDS2018 (Fig. 5(a), 5(b)), CATwin-IDS demonstrates
the 4-layer configuration delivers only marginal performance faster convergence (loss stabilizing below 0.20 after 20 epochs)
changes while incurring a 41.4% increase in convergence and higher test accuracy than LSTM, BiLSTM, CNN, and
time. This validates our design choice of the 3-layer struc- RNN, the latter showing substantial instability with fluctuture for lightweight and real-time network intrusion detection ating losses. On CICIoT2023 (Fig. 6(a), 6(b)), CATwin-IDS
scenarios. achieves accuracy gains of 1.1% over TinyBERT while
 converging earlier (15 epochs). Under identical hardware
 (NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 GPU), CATwin-IDS requires
D. Classification Performance and Confusion Matrix 252 seconds per validation epoch, compared to 871 seconds
Analysis for BERT, corresponding to a 71.1% reduction in runtime.
 The proposed CATwin-IDS framework was systematically This relative efficiency gain demonstrates the effectiveness
evaluated against LSTM, BiLSTM, RNN, CNN, TinyBERT of our streamlined architecture (e.g., 3-layer Transformer,
and Transformer models across multiple datasets. For CATwin- TSA) in balancing accuracy and computational cost. On
IDS, the hyperparameters were configured as follows: a base Car-Hacking and CICIoV2024 (Figs. 7 and 8), CATwinlayer dropout rate of 0.25, a sequence classification layer IDS consistently achieves accuracy above 0.99 with loss
dropout rate of 0.3, the AdamW optimizer (learning rate of below 0.02, validating its robustness and generalizability
8 × 10−6 , weight decay coefficient of 0.1, bias correction across heterogeneous vehicular domains for reliable crossdisabled), a batch size of 32, and a fixed training duration of network intrusion detection. While in-vehicle edge devices
50 epochs. To ensure fair comparison, identical preprocessing (with stricter resource constraints than GPUs) demand even
pipelines and training epochs were applied to all models. lower latency, this result highlights a critical step toward
TinyBERT was trained with the same hyperparameter real-time responsiveness, outperforming heavyweight models
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 6. Comparison of EVN performance indicators on CICIoT2023 dataset.
 Fig. 8. Comparison of IVN performance indicators on CICIoV2024 dataset.

 Fig. 9 presents the confusion matrices of the classification performance of the proposed system across four distinct
 datasets, which span both IVN and EVN scenarios, including
 Car-Hacking, CICloV2024, CICIDS2018, and CICloT2023.
 The results indicate that the system generally performs well in
 identifying the BENIGN (normal traffic) category but shows
 some confusion in differentiating certain types of attacks, such
 as DoS and Bot. Particularly in the CICIDS2018 dataset, the
 system exhibits high accuracy in recognizing DoS and Bot
 attacks, while in the CICloT2023 dataset, the performance
 is also commendable for Bot and DoS categories. However,
 for complex attack patterns like Web attacks and Infiltration,
 there is room for improvement in the system’s performance.
 These findings suggest that although the proposed system
 demonstrates robust classification capabilities across multiple
 datasets, further refinement is needed to enhance its detection
 accuracy and robustness, especially for specific types of cyber
 attacks.

 E. Cross-Network Intrusion Detection
 To verify the effectiveness of our system in detecting crossnetwork attacks, we focused on DoS attacks in our simulation
 experiments due to their prevalence and severe impact on
Fig. 7. Comparison of IVN performance indicators on car-hacking dataset. cross-network security. By simulating DoS attacks on the IVN
 datasets (Car-Hacking and CICIoV2024) and evaluating their
 effects on the EVN datasets (CICIDS2018 and CICIoT2023),
like BERT in resource efficiency, which is foundational for we demonstrated the capability of CATwin-IDS in detecting
deployment on automotive-grade hardware. Future work will cross-network threats. As shown in Table IX, CATwin-IDS
further optimize via model quantization and hardware-aware achieved an F1 score of 0.9231 on the CICIDS2018 dataset
pruning to align with the stringent real-time requirements of and 0.8774 on the CICIoT2023 dataset, significantly outper-
IoV. forming other comparative systems. These results confirm that
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIU et al.: CATwin-IDS: CONTEXT-AWARE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 13

Fig. 9. Confusion matrices of classification performance.

 TABLE IX technology to construct dynamic models of both the IVN and
F1 S CORE C OMPARISON B ETWEEN CAT WIN -IDS AND BASELINE M ODELS EVN, enabling real-time monitoring and analysis of cross-
 FOR C ROSS -N ETWORK D O S I NTRUSION D ETECTION network traffic anomalies. This digital twin-based detection
 mechanism not only enhances the detection of DoS attacks
 but also provides a robust foundation for identifying other
 attack types, such as data tampering and malicious injection.
 Specifically, digital twin technology can capture changes in
 network states in real-time, recognizing patterns of abnormal
 behavior rather than just specific attack signatures. Thus, even
 when confronted with unknown or emerging attack types,
 CATwin-IDS can promptly detect anomalies and respond
 accordingly. Additionally, the modular design of the system
 allows for the easy integration of new detection algorithms or
 features as needed, further enhancing its adaptability and scalability. These design features indicate that CATwin-IDS, while
 excelling in DoS attack detection, also holds the potential to be
 extended to other attack types, offering comprehensive security
our solution effectively mitigates DoS attacks exploiting the protection for connected vehicles.
IVN-EVN coupling, ensuring higher accuracy and reliability
in EVN intrusion detection. V. C ONCLUSION
 Although our experiments primarily focused on DoS This paper addresses the challenge of cross-network intruattacks, the design of CATwin-IDS positions it well to address sions arising from the tight coupling between IVN and EVN by
other types of attacks. The system employs digital twin proposing CATwin-IDS. The framework leverages DistilBERT
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

with TSA for contextual feature modeling, employs CMI [14] J. R. K. Nicholas and Bloomberg. (Jan. 2022). Teen Hacker Says
and Borderline-SMOTE for feature optimization and data He’s Found Way to Remotely Control 25 Teslaevs Around the World.
 [Online]. Available: https://fortune.com/2022/01/12/teen-hacker-davidbalancing, and integrates digital twin technology to enable colombo-took-control-25-tesla-ev/
dynamic simulation and real-time synchronization. Experi- [15] O. H. Abdulganiyu, T. A. Tchakoucht, and Y. K. Saheed, “A systematic
mental evaluations confirm that CATwin-IDS achieves higher literature review for network intrusion detection system (IDS),” Int.
 J. Inf. Secur., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1125–1162, Mar. 2023.
detection performance and efficiency across multiple bench-
 [16] Y. Lee, Y.-E. Kim, J.-G. Chung, and S. Woo, “Real time perfect bit
mark datasets, overcoming the limitations of existing IDS in modification attack on in-vehicle CAN,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
handling cross-network attacks. vol. 72, no. 12, pp. 15154–15171, Dec. 2023.
 Future work will focus on enhancing the detection of [17] M. Xu et al., “Integration of mixture of experts and multimodal generative AI in Internet of Vehicles: A survey,” 2024, arXiv:2401.01544.
complex cross-network attacks (e.g., Infiltration and Web- [18] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
based threats) by enriching the diversity and fidelity of intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
attack scenarios simulated in the digital twin environment, Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
addressing the limited availability of rare attack samples. In [19] K. Agrawal, T. Alladi, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and A. Benslimane, “NovelADS: A novel anomaly detection system for intraaddition, model compression and quantization techniques will vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11,
be explored to further reduce inference latency and memory pp. 22596–22606, Nov. 2022.
footprint for real-time deployment on in-vehicle edge devices. [20] R. Ben Said, Z. Sabir, and I. Askerzade, “CNN-BiLSTM: A hybrid deep
 learning approach for network intrusion detection system in software-
Finally, we plan to improve the interpretability of the detection defined networking with hybrid feature selection,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
results, for example through SHAP-based analysis, to provide pp. 138732–138747, 2023.
deeper insights into feature contributions and model decision [21] L. Wang, X. Zhang, D. Li, and H. Liu, “Multi-sensors space and time
 dimension based intrusion detection system in automated vehicles,”
mechanisms. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 200–215, Jan. 2024.
 [22] Q. Lai et al., “Improved transformer-based privacy-preserving architecture for intrusion detection in secure V2X communications,” IEEE
 R EFERENCES Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1810–1820, Feb. 2024.
 [23] S. Jeong, S. Lee, H. Lee, and H. K. Kim, “X-CANIDS: Signal-aware
 explainable intrusion detection system for controller area network-
[1] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS: based in-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 3,
 Hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language pp. 3230–3246, Mar. 2024.
 models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb. [24] R. Chen, X. Chen, and J. Zhao, “Private and utility enhanced intrusion
 2025. detection based on attack behavior analysis with local differential privacy
[2] Z. Xue, Y. Liu, G. Han, F. Ayaz, Z. Sheng, and Y. Wang, “Two-layer on IoV,” Comput. Netw., vol. 250, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 110560.
 distributed content caching for infotainment applications in VANETs,” [25] J. Cui et al., “LH-IDS: Lightweight hybrid intrusion detection system
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1696–1711, Feb. 2022. based on differential privacy in VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
[3] M. Almehdhar et al., “Deep learning in the fast lane: A survey on vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 12195–12210, Dec. 2024.
 advanced intrusion detection systems for intelligent vehicle networks,” [26] J. Gao, Y. Lu, Y. He, M. Fan, D. Han, and Y. Qiao, “Tokenization
 IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol., vol. 5, pp. 869–906, 2024. representation and deep-learning-based intrusion detection in Internet of
[4] S. Wang, Y. Wang, B. Zheng, J. Cheng, Y. Su, and Y. Dai, “Intrusion Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 23, pp. 37974–37987,
 detection system for vehicular networks based on MobileNetV3,” IEEE Dec. 2024.
 Access, vol. 12, pp. 106285–106302, 2024. [27] S. Li, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, T. Liao, F. Yan, and H. Lin, “A cloud
[5] E. Levy, A. Shabtai, B. Groza, P.-S. Murvay, and Y. Elovici, “CAN-LOC: collaborative-based intrusion detection and prevention system for IVN,”
 Spoofing detection and physical intrusion localization on an in-vehicle IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2768–2785,
 CAN bus based on deep features of voltage signals,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Aug. 2025.
 Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 4800–4814, 2023. [28] I. Ullah, I. Khalil, X. Bai, S. Garg, G. Kaddoum, and M. Shamim
[6] Q. Liu et al., “MDHP-Net: Detecting an emerging time-exciting threat Hossain, “An ensemble-based hybrid model for the detection of attacks
 in IVN,” 2024, arXiv:2411.10258. in the Internet of VehicularTthings,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
[7] H. Taslimasa, S. Dadkhah, E. C. P. Neto, P. Xiong, S. Ray, and vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 17914–17927, Oct. 2025.
 A. A. Ghorbani, “Security issues in Internet of Vehicles (IoV): A [29] Y. Feng, Y. Lai, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, and J. Wei, “LSTM-based model
 comprehensive survey,” Internet Things, vol. 22, Jul. 2023, Art. no. compression for CAN security in intelligent vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Artif.
 100809. Intell., vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 6457–6471, Dec. 2024.
[8] X. Li et al., “Hardware impaired ambient backscatter NOMA sys- [30] S. Gao, L. Zhang, L. He, X. Deng, H. Yin, and H. Zhang,
 tems: Reliability and security,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 4, “Attack detection for intelligent vehicles via CAN- bus: A lightweight
 pp. 2723–2736, Apr. 2021. image network approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 12,
[9] X. Li et al., “Physical-layer authentication for ambient backscatter- pp. 16624–16636, Dec. 2023.
 aided NOMA symbiotic systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 4, [31] M. Althunayyan, A. Javed, and O. Rana, “A robust multi-stage intrusion
 pp. 2288–2303, Apr. 2023. detection system for in-vehicle network security using hierarchical
[10] D. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. Du, and C. Yang, “Novel federated learning,” Veh. Commun., vol. 49, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 100837.
 edge caching approach based on multi-agent deep reinforcement learning [32] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
 for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
 pp. 8324–8338, Aug. 2023. Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[11] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev, [33] Z. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Xun, and J. Qin, “IdentifierIDS: A practical voltage-
 “IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development based intrusion detection system for real in-vehicle networks,” IEEE
 in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 661–676, Oct. 2024.
 no. 12, pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023. [34] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, and C. Gao, “Open world intrusion detection:
[12] H. Wang, X. Di, Y. Wang, B. Ren, G. Gao, and J. Deng, “An intelligent An open set recognition method for CAN bus in intelligent connected
 digital twin method based on spatio-temporal feature fusion for IoT vehicles,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 76–82, May 2024.
 attack behavior identification,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, [35] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
 no. 11, pp. 3561–3572, Nov. 2023. detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
[13] C. Campolo, G. Genovese, A. Molinaro, B. Pizzimenti, G. Ruggeri, and vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
 D. M. Zappalà, “An edge-based digital twin framework for connected [36] S. B. Park, H. J. Jo, and D. H. Lee, “G-IDCS: Graph-based intrusion
 and autonomous vehicles: Design and evaluation,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, detection and classification system for CAN protocol,” IEEE Access,
 pp. 46290–46303, 2024. vol. 11, pp. 39213–39227, 2023.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIU et al.: CATwin-IDS: CONTEXT-AWARE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM 15

[37] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for Zheng Xue received the M.E. degree in elecnetwork intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. tronic and communication engineering and the Ph.D.
 Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6. degree in information and communication engi-
[38] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating neering from Guangdong University of Technology,
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” Guangzhou, China, in 2021 and 2024, respectively.
 in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018, He is currently a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow
 pp. 108–116. with the Department of Communication Engineer-
[39] S. Latif, W. Boulila, A. Koubaa, Z. Zou, and J. Ahmad, “DTL-IDS: An ing, Guangdong University of Technology. His
 optimized intrusion detection framework using deep transfer learning research interests include vehicular networks, edge
 and genetic algorithm,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 221, Jan. 2024, intelligence, and cooperative perception.
 Art. no. 103784.
[40] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
 “Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of
 IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
[41] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
 the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things for
 network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput.
 Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019. Zhengguo Sheng (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[42] S. Li, Y. Cao, G. Peng, M. Li, W. Sun, and L. Chen, “Efficient intrusion the B.Sc. degree from the University of Electronic
 detection for in-vehicle networks using knowledge distillation from Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China,
 BERT to CNN-BiLSTM,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, in 2006, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the
 pp. 6398–6412, Jun. 2025. Imperial College London, London, U.K., in 2007
[43] H. A. Bimmo and B. Rahardjo, “Fed-CALiBER: Federated lightweight and 2011, respectively. He is currently a Professor
 BERT intrusion detection on CAN bus protocol in autonomous vehicle,” and the Dean of Sussex AI Institute, University
 IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 172384–172401, 2025. of Sussex, U.K. Previously, he was with UBC,
[44] A. Sharma and S. Rani, “Context-aware authentication framework for Vancouver, BC, Canada, as a Research Associate and
 secure V2V and V2I communications in autonomous vehicles using with Orange Laboratories as a Senior Researcher.
 LLM,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., early access, May 12, 2025, He has more than 160 publications. His research
 doi: 10.1109/TITS.2025.3563913. interests cover the IoT, vehicular communications, and cloud/edge computing.
[45] S. Amaouche et al., “FSCB-IDS: Feature selection and minority class He is also a Senior Member of IET and a fellow of The Higher Education
 balancing for attacks detection in VANETs,” Appl. Sci., vol. 13, no. 13, Academy (HEA).
 p. 7488, Jun. 2023.
[46] F. S. Alrayes, M. Zakariah, S. U. Amin, Z. I. Khan, and M. Helal,
 “Intrusion detection in IoT systems using denoising autoencoder,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 12, pp. 122401–122425, 2024.
[47] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pretraining of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,”
 in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum.
 Lang. Technol. Minneapolis, MI, USA: Association for Computational
 Linguistics, vol. 1, Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186. Jiawen Kang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[48] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Guangdong Uni-
 A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark versity of Technology, China, in 2015 and 2018,
 for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13, respectively. He is currently a Full Professor with
 p. 5941, Jun. 2023. Guangdong University of Technology. He was a
[49] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches Post-Doctoral Researcher with Nanyang Technoagainst DoS and spoofing attack in IoV CAN bus,” Internet Things, logical University, Singapore, from 2018 to 2021.
 vol. 26, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 101209. His research interests focus on blockchain, metaverse, and AIGC in wireless communications and
 networking.

 Chang Liu (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
 and M.S. degrees from Jilin University, Changchun,
 China, in 2009 and 2012, respectively, and
 the Ph.D. degree from Kansas State University,
 Manhattan, KS, USA, in 2016. She is currently a
 Full Professor with Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. Her current research
 areas include the Internet of Vehicles and 6G Guojun Han (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 communications. the M.E. degree from the South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2004,
 and the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen University,
 Guangzhou, in 2011. From March 2011 to August
 2013, he was a Research Fellow with the School
 of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang
 Technological University, Singapore. From October
 Yurong Zhang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) 2013 to April 2014, he was a Research Associate
 received the B.E. degree in electronic informa- with the Department of Electrical and Electronic
 tion engineering from Hengyang Normal University, Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science
 Hengyang, China, in 2023. She is currently pur- and Technology. He is currently a Full Professor and the Dean of the School of
 suing the master’s degree in new-generation elec- Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou.
 tronic information technology with the School of His research interests are in the areas of wireless communications, signal
 Information Engineering, Guangdong University of processing, and coding and information theory. He has more than 15 years
 Technology, Guangzhou, China. Her research inter- experience on research and development of advanced channel coding and
 ests include the Internet of Vehicles and intrusion signal processing algorithms and techniques for various data storage and
 detection systems. communication systems.