2454 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 Chain-Visage: Blockchain-Assisted Visual Content
 Ownership and Tamper Tracing in
 CIoT Multimedia Ecosystems
 Jing Yang , Vijay Govindarajan , Senior Member, IEEE, Gyanendra Kumar , Member, IEEE,
 Achyut Shankar , Zaffar Ahmed Shaikh , Fabio Arena ,
 Lip Yee Por , Senior Member, IEEE, and Kun Qi

 Abstract— With the rapid proliferation of smart home cam- I. I NTRODUCTION
eras, wearable vision devices, and user-generated Consumer
Internet of Things (CIoT) content, ensuring visual media authenticity, rightful ownership, and tamper detection has become
increasingly challenging. We propose Chain-Visage, a blockchain-
 T HE explosive growth of Consumer Internet of Things
 (CIoT) devices has fundamentally transformed how
 visual multimedia content is created, shared, and consumed
assisted framework for secure content authentication and tamper in modern digital ecosystems. Recent statistics indicate
tracing in decentralized CIoT multimedia ecosystems. The
 that over 14.4 billion CIoT devices will be operational
term Chain reflects the consortium blockchain backbone that
guarantees immutable provenance, decentralized ownership man- by 2025, generating an unprecedented volume of visual
agement, and copyright revocation, while Visage symbolizes the data exceeding 2.5 exabytes daily [1], [2]. This proliferunique visual identity of multimedia content achieved through ation encompasses smart home security cameras, wearable
dual-stage visual hash embedding. The proposed framework vision sensors, autonomous vehicle dashcams, and personal
integrates Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) for privacy-preserving
 multimedia devices that continuously capture and transmit
ownership verification and employs optimized smart contracts
to manage visual rights, provenance records, and ownership visual content across distributed networks [3]. The democtransfers efficiently. Evaluations on a large-scale dataset of over ratization of visual content creation through CIoT devices
10,000 real-world images and 3,850 video clips from diverse has introduced significant challenges in maintaining content
CIoT devices demonstrate Chain-Visage’s superior performance, authenticity, establishing rightful ownership, and detecting
achieving 97.5% traceability accuracy, 93% tamper detection
sensitivity, and low verification latency even under resourcemalicious tampering attempts. Traditional centralized digital
constrained environments. This work addresses a critical research rights management systems are inadequate for handling the
gap in secure, privacy-preserving, and energy-efficient multime- distributed, heterogeneous, and resource-constrained nature of
dia ownership control and tamper-resilient content authentication CIoT environments [4]. Furthermore, the increasing sophistifor next-generation CIoT ecosystems. cation of deepfake technologies and multimedia manipulation
 Index Terms— Blockchain, consumer IoT, multimedia security, techniques has exacerbated the urgency for robust content
visual content authentication, tamper detection. verification mechanisms [5], [6].
 Received 4 September 2025; revised 26 October 2025; accepted 6 December As depicted in Fig. 1, the proposed Chain-Visage sys-
2025. Date of publication 23 December 2025; date of current version 25 March tem addresses these critical challenges through a novel
2026. (Corresponding author: Kun Qi.) blockchain-assisted framework that seamlessly integrates
 Jing Yang and Lip Yee Por are with the Center of Research for Cyber
Security and Network (CSNET), Faculty of Computer Science and Informa- visual content authentication with decentralized ownership
tion Technology, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia (e-mail: tracking. The system leverages Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP)
s2147529@siswa.um.edu.my; porlip@um.edu.my). protocols to enable privacy-preserving content verification
 Vijay Govindarajan is with the Distribution and Supply Technology, Expedia
Group, Seattle, WA 98119 USA (e-mail: vigovindaraja@expediagroup.com). while maintaining immutable provenance records through con-
 Gyanendra Kumar is with the Department of IoT and Intelligent Sys- sortium blockchain architecture [7], [8]. This approach ensures
tems, Manipal University Jaipur, Jaipur 303007, India (e-mail: gyanendra. that visual content generated by CIoT devices can be traced
kumar@jaipur.manipal.edu).
 Achyut Shankar is with the School of Computer Science Engineering and back to its original source without compromising user privacy
Technology, Bennett University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201310, India or revealing sensitive identity information [9].
(e-mail: ashankar2711@gmail.com). Current state-of-the-art approaches in multimedia security
 Zaffar Ahmed Shaikh is with the Department of Computer Science
and Information Technology, Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University Lyari, primarily focus on watermarking techniques, digital signatures,
Karachi 75660, Pakistan, and also with the School of Engineering, École and hash-based verification methods [10], [11]. However, these
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: solutions suffer from several critical limitations when applied
zashaikh@bbsul.edu.pk).
 Fabio Arena is with the Department of Engineering and Architecture, Kore to CIoT environments: (1) vulnerability to sophisticated attack
University of Enna, 94100 Enna, Italy (e-mail: fabio.arena@unikore.it). vectors, (2) lack of decentralized ownership management,
 Kun Qi is with the School of Electronic and Communication Engineer- (3) inadequate privacy preservation mechanisms, and (4) insufing, Shenzhen Polytechnic University, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail:
qikun@szpu.edu.cn). ficient scalability for resource-constrained devices [12]. Recent
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3647677 research has explored blockchain integration for multimedia
 1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING 2455

 content protection. Emerging trends in metaverse network
 intrusion detection offer insights into future-proofing multimedia security architectures against evolving threat landscapes [19].
 Privacy-preserving identity federation mechanisms provide
 foundational technologies for anonymous content verification
 while maintaining accountability and ownership claims [20].
 Modern e-commerce platforms demonstrate the commercial
 viability and scalability requirements for blockchain-based
 digital asset management in consumer applications. Advances
 in AGI-driven communications security reveal new opportunities for automated threat detection and response in multimedia
 content protection systems [21].
 Expert systems for intelligent control applications provide
 architectural insights for developing autonomous multimedia
 security management frameworks. Vehicle-to-infrastructure
 routing protocols demonstrate practical implementations of
 blockchain technology in distributed multimedia environments with real-time requirements [22]. Tourism technology
Fig. 1. Overview of the Chain-Visage blockchain-assisted visual content integration showcases consumer adoption patterns and user
ownership and tamper tracing system in CIoT multimedia ecosystems. experience requirements for multimedia content management
 systems.
 Autonomous vehicle technology developments highlight
security, but existing solutions fail to address the unique the critical importance of tamper-resistant multimedia conrequirements of CIoT ecosystems, particularly the need for tent in safety-critical applications. Blockchain and artificial
lightweight verification protocols and energy-efficient consen- intelligence convergence for big data analytics provides scalsus mechanisms [13], [14]. able frameworks applicable to large-scale CIoT multimedia
 The Chain-Visage framework introduces several innovative deployments [23]. Redundancy elimination techniques in
contributions to address these limitations. First, we propose IoT-oriented big data systems offer optimization strategies for
a dual-stage visual hash embedding mechanism that cre- efficient multimedia content storage and processing [24].
ates tamper-evident fingerprints without altering the original Data security and privacy preservation in cloud-based IoT
content quality. Second, we design a ZKP-based ownership technologies establish best practices for protecting multimedia
verification protocol that enables content creators to prove content across distributed infrastructures [25]. Secure deepfake
ownership without revealing their identity. Third, we imple- mitigation frameworks address emerging threats in multimement a custom smart contract architecture optimized for CIoT dia content authenticity and provide complementary security
resource constraints, supporting efficient ownership transfers measures [26]. Federated learning approaches with non-IID
and revocation procedures. Fourth, we develop a consortium data demonstrate privacy-preserving techniques applicable to
blockchain consensus protocol that balances security with collaborative multimedia content verification [27], [28].
energy efficiency for multimedia-intensive applications [15]. Human-computer interaction considerations in healthcare
 Extensive experimental validation demonstrates the applications provide insights into user interface design and
effectiveness of the proposed approach across diverse accessibility requirements for multimedia content manage-
CIoT scenarios. Our evaluation encompasses 10,247 high- ment systems. Intelligent computation and analytics on
resolution images and 3,850 video clips collected from sustainable energy systems demonstrate the integration of envireal-world CIoT deployments, including smart home ronmental considerations with secure multimedia processing
cameras, wearable devices, and vehicular systems. The frameworks [29]. The key contributions of this paper are
results show that Chain-Visage achieves 97.5% accuracy in summarized as follows:
content traceability, 93% sensitivity in tamper detection,
and maintains sub-second verification latency even • We propose Chain-Visage, a novel blockchain-integrated
under severe resource constraints [16]. Comparative framework for secure multimedia ownership verification
analysis against existing solutions reveals significant and tamper tracing in Consumer Internet of Things
improvements in both security metrics and computational (CIoT) environments.
efficiency [17]. • We introduce a robust dual-stage hashing technique com-
 The integration of renewable energy considerations with IoT bining perceptual features with cryptographic signatures,
systems provides additional sustainability benefits while main- enabling tamper-evident content fingerprinting without
taining robust security properties throughout the blockchain degrading visual quality.
infrastructure [18]. Advanced cybersecurity frameworks incor- • We design a Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP)-based mechporating MITRE ATT&CK methodologies enhance threat anism that verifies content ownership while preserving
detection capabilities specifically tailored for multimedia user anonymity and sensitive metadata.
2456 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 • A lightweight consortium blockchain architecture with Riaz and Qureshi [9] applied blockchain to healthcare data
 custom smart contracts is implemented to manage management, offering insights into immutable tracking relownership claims, provenance records, and copyright evant to CIoT content verification. Trigka and Dritsas [12]
 revocation. explored blockchain-driven trust for smart ecosystems, while
 • We develop a Proof-of-Authority (PoA)-based consensus Khan et al. [13] developed IoT–WSN integration frameworks
 mechanism tailored for CIoT devices, balancing low improving privacy and quality of service. However, these studenergy consumption with high security guarantees. ies do not fully address ownership authentication or tamper
Chain-Visage introduces a novel dual-stage visual hash with tracing for heterogeneous CIoT multimedia systems.
zero-knowledge proofs for privacy-preserving ownership verification, offering better traceability, energy efficiency, and
 D. Tamper Detection and Content Integrity
security. It provides a lightweight blockchain-based solution
for securing CIoT multimedia across consumer devices like Multimedia tamper detection has largely relied on
cameras, wearables, and mobiles. The paper is organized as cryptographic hashing and digital watermarking methods.
follows: Section II reviews related work, Section III describes Noor et al. [15] reviewed ML-based intrusion detection in
the Chain-Visage framework, Section IV presents the math- 5G systems, noting blockchain’s potential for secure trace
ematical modeling, Section V reports results, Section VI analysis but without focusing on CIoT multimedia verifidiscusses challenges, and Section VII concludes the study. cation. Kodumuru et al. [17] combined AI and IoT for
 blockchain-enabled traceability in pharmaceutical manufacturing, offering insights into scalability but lacking adaptation
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 for consumer multimedia. These works highlight the need
A. Blockchain-Based Multimedia Security for lightweight, CIoT-oriented tamper detection mechanisms
 Recent studies have explored blockchain integration capable of real-time verification and ownership assurance.
for multimedia authentication and ownership management.
Chen et al. [1] proposed multimodal data sensing frame-
 E. Emerging Technologies and Applications
works for CIoT security but lacked blockchain-based ownership tracking. Padma et al. [4] examined lightweight Recent advances link cybersecurity, sustainability, and
blockchain models for smart cities, showing feasibility emerging digital ecosystems. Mia et al. [18] explored
in constrained environments but overlooking CIoT-specific blockchain–IoT integration with IPFS for renewable energy
visual content ownership. Chaurasia et al. [10] focused on systems, offering insights into energy-efficient blockchain
blockchain-enabled NFT systems for vehicular networks, design relevant to low-power CIoT multimedia devices.
while Karthikeyan and Brindha [7] combined blockchain Nkoro et al. [19] proposed MetaWatch for intrusion detecand machine learning for multimedia database security. tion in metaverse environments, extending blockchain use
Although these works demonstrate blockchain’s potential in to virtual content protection. Bumiller et al. [20] analyzed
data integrity and traceability, they fall short in providing real- privacy-preserving identity federation using blockchain and
time, low-latency, and privacy-preserving solutions tailored to DLTs, supporting anonymous yet verifiable ownership. Col-
CIoT multimedia ownership and tamper detection. lectively, these works highlight cross-domain innovations that
 inspire the energy-aware and privacy-centric design of Chain-
 Visage.
B. Zero-Knowledge Proofs in IoT Security
 Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) protocols have become a
 F. Commercial Applications and User Experience
key approach for privacy-preserving authentication in IoT
systems. Sun et al. [3] introduced blockchain-based privacy Commercial blockchain systems have proven effecprotection schemes for CIoT using federated learning but tive for managing digital assets and secure transactions.
lacked scalability and visual content verification support. Mehmood et al. [21] examined AGI-driven drone commu-
Le [16] proposed a quantum-safe authorization model with nications, applying blockchain for tamper-proof data records
lattice-based cryptography, addressing long-term security but relevant to multimedia integrity. Shaker et al. [22] demonnot CIoT-specific constraints or visual data authentication. strated blockchain-based routing for real-time communication,
Despite progress, most ZKP frameworks remain compu- enhancing network-level protection for CIoT data streams.
tationally intensive, highlighting the need for lightweight, Together, these studies underscore blockchain’s growing role
CIoT-optimized implementations such as those adopted in in consumer-facing applications, supporting secure, scalable,
Chain-Visage. and user-centric CIoT ecosystems.

C. CIoT Authentication and Trust Management G. Foundational Technologies and Data Management
 Recent studies on CIoT authentication and trust manage- Recent studies have combined blockchain, AI, and big
ment emphasize secure communication and data integrity. data analytics to enhance multimedia security and scalabil-
Jarwar et al. [5] analyzed industrial IoT security through onto- ity. Wijesekara and Arachchige [23] proposed blockchain–AI
logical modeling, identifying key blockchain-based consensus frameworks for networking, offering designs adaptable to
mechanisms but lacking multimedia-focused implementations. large-scale CIoT multimedia systems. Rani et al. [24]
YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING 2457

addressed data redundancy in IoT big data, suggesting efficient content storage and processing strategies for constrained
devices. Pathak et al. [25] examined cloud-based IoT security, outlining privacy-preserving countermeasures critical for
Chain-Visage deployment. Wazid et al. [26] developed deepfake mitigation frameworks, contributing to robust multimedia
authenticity assurance. Lu et al. [27] surveyed federated
learning with non-IID data, highlighting collaborative and
privacy-aware content verification methods. Roy et al. [29]
emphasized sustainable computing and energy-aware analytics, aligning with Chain-Visage’s focus on secure and
eco-efficient CIoT multimedia operations.

H. Research Gaps and Limitations
 Despite recent advancements, several critical gaps persist in Fig. 2. Chain-Visage system architecture showing four-layer integration
 of CIoT devices, edge processing, blockchain network, and verification
CIoT multimedia security research: components.
 • Most blockchain-based methods consume excessive
 energy and processing power, making them unsuitable for
 lightweight CIoT devices. III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
 • Existing ZKP implementations are not tailored for mul- A. System Architecture Overview
 timedia data, leading to high verification latency and
 The Chain-Visage architecture, illustrated in Fig. 2, consists
 limited real-time applicability.
 of four interconnected layers: (1) the CIoT Device Layer
 • Current solutions overlook privacy-preserving provenance
 for content capture and initial hash generation, (2) the Edge
 tracking and scalable ownership verification across dis-
 Processing Layer for dual-stage visual embedding, (3) the
 tributed multimedia ecosystems.
 Blockchain Network Layer for ownership record manage-
 • Many studies focus on narrow application domains and
 ment and smart contract execution, and (4) the Verification
 lack deployment-based evaluation, restricting practical
 Layer for tamper detection and ownership validation. This
 adoption.
 layered design enhances scalability, synchronization, and secu-
 • Prior approaches fail to achieve a balanced integration of
 rity across heterogeneous CIoT environments. Chain-Visage
 security, privacy, energy efficiency, and real-time perforuses an event-driven, asynchronous pipeline: (i) devices permance essential for consumer electronics.
 form lightweight hashing and enqueue content; (ii) edges
 Recent frameworks such as Blockchain-WM [4], IoTrun micro-batched DCT features, ZKP precomputation, and
Auth [3], and SecureTrace [1] have established strong
 signature embedding in parallel; (iii) registration is batched to
baselines in multimedia authentication. However, these meththe PoA chain for fast finality; (iv) verifiers use cached keys
ods suffer from high consensus overhead, limited scalability,
 and streaming checks. A global logical timestamp (Lamportand lack of privacy-preserving mechanisms suitable for hetstyle counters) and per-item monotonic IDs ensure cross-layer
erogeneous CIoT devices. Similarly, ZKP-Secure [16] and
 ordering without blocking. Backpressure and priority queues
TrustMedia [9] introduced advanced cryptographic proofs
 (auth/alerts > bulk) keep latency stable under high volume.
for data verification but remain computationally inten-
 The CIoT Device Layer interfaces directly with multimedia
sive and not optimized for real-time multimedia ownership
 sensors, including smart cameras, wearable vision devices, and
verification.
 autonomous vehicle systems. Each device generates prelimi-
 These gaps motivate the development of Chain-Visage,
 nary content fingerprints using lightweight hashing algorithms
a holistic blockchain-assisted framework designed for secure,
 optimized for resource-constrained environments. The Edge
privacy-preserving, and energy-efficient visual content own-
 Processing Layer receives these fingerprints and applies the
ership and tamper tracing in CIoT environments. Unlike
 dual-stage visual hash embedding mechanism described in
prior methods, Chain-Visage introduces a dual-stage visual
 Algorithm 1. This layer also implements ZKP generation prohash embedding mechanism that combines perceptual featocols to create privacy-preserving ownership proofs without
ture robustness with cryptographic signature embedding—
 revealing device identity information.
ensuring tamper resistance without degrading visual quality.
It further integrates a lightweight Zero-Knowledge Proof
protocol customized for multimedia verification, offering B. Dual-Stage Visual Hash Embedding
privacy-preserving ownership validation at low latency. Addi- The dual-stage visual hash embedding mechanism reptionally, the consortium blockchain layer implements an resents the core innovation of Chain-Visage, enabling
adaptive Proof-of-Authority consensus optimized for energy tamper-evident content fingerprinting without compromising
efficiency, significantly reducing computational cost compared visual quality. As depicted in the first stage extracts perceptual
to conventional PoW/PoS systems. features using a modified discrete cosine transform (DCT)
2458 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Algorithm 1 Dual-Stage Visual Hash Embedding Algorithm 2 Zero-Knowledge Proof Generation
 1: Input: Visual content I , device identity Did , timestamp t Require: Device identity Did , content hash Hdual , ownership
 2: Output: Embedded content I ′ , dual-stage hash Hdual claim C
 3: Stage 1: Perceptual feature extraction Ensure: Zero-knowledge proof π Z K , verification key vk
 4: FDCT ← DCTT RANSFORM (I ) 1: Circuit Generation
 5: Frobust ← E XTRACT ROBUST F EATURES (FDCT ) 2: C ← Generate_Ownership_Circuit(Did , Hdual , C)
 6: Hperceptual ← SHA256(Frobust ∥ t) 3: Trusted Setup
 7: Stage 2: Cryptographic signature embedding 4: (σ, τ ) ← Setup(C)
 8: K device ← G ENERATE D EVICE K EY (Did ) 5: Witness Computation
 9: Scrypto ← ECDSAS IGN (Hperceptual , K device ) 6: w ← Compute_Witness(Did , Hdual , C)
10: I ′ ← LSBE MBED (I, Scrypto ) 7: Proof Generation
11: Hdual ← C OMBINE H ASHES (Hperceptual , Scrypto ) 8: π Z K ← Prove(σ, w)
12: ZKP precomputation 9: Verification Preparation
13: π Z K ← G ENERATE OWNERSHIP P ROOF (Did , Hdual ) 10: vk ← Extract_Verification_Key(τ )
14: Blockchain registration 11: return π Z K , vk
15: S UBMIT OWNERSHIP C LAIM (Hdual , π Z K , t)
16: return (I ′ , Hdual )
 preserving the claimed robustness and visual quality across
 diverse multimedia formats.
approach, while the second stage embeds cryptographic signatures using steganographic techniques optimized for CIoT C. Zero-Knowledge Proof Protocol
constraints. The perceptual feature extraction phase leverages
robust visual characteristics that remain stable under benign The ZKP protocol enables privacy-preserving ownership
transformations such as compression and resizing while being verification without revealing device identity or sensitive metasensitive to malicious tampering attempts. The mathematical data. The protocol implements Groth16-based zk-SNARKs,
formulation of the DCT-based feature extraction is given by where the statement is “I own content with hash Hdual ”
Equation 1: and the witness is (Did , K device ). The visual hash is cryptographically bound to identity via C = SHA256(Did ∥Hdual ),
 I (x, y) cos πu(2x+1) cos πv(2y+1)
 h i h i
 FDC T (u, v) = α(u)α(v)
 P N −1 P M−1
 x=0 y=0 2N 2M
 registered on-chain during ownership claim. Groth16 yields
 (1) constant proof size (128 bytes, 3 group elements) and O(1)
 √ √ verification complexity ( 3 pairings, <10 ms on edge nodes).
where α(u) = 1/N for u = 0 and α(u) = 2/N On-chain storage requires 256 bytes per registration; gas
otherwise, with N and M representing image dimensions. cost averages 45,000 units per ownership transaction on the
The robust feature vector Fr obust is constructed by selecting consortium PoA network. The proof generation process, out-
DCT coefficients that exhibit maximum stability under various lined in Algorithm 2, creates succinct proofs that can be
distortion scenarios. efficiently verified by blockchain nodes. The ownership circuit
 The cryptographic signature embedding phase utilizes the C encodes the relationship between device identity, content
Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) to gen- hash, and ownership claim without revealing the actual values.
erate tamper-evident signatures that are embedded using least The mathematical representation of the circuit constraints is
significant bit (LSB) steganography. The signature generation expressed in Equation 3:
process follows Equation 2:
 (
 Scr ypto = (r, s) where r = (k · G)x mod n, s = k −1 H per ceptual + r · d mod n
  1 if SHA256(Did ||Hdual ) = C
 C(Did , Hdual , C) =
 (2) 0 otherwise
 (3)
To prevent nonce reuse and potential key leakage on resourcelimited devices, Chain-Visage adopts deterministic nonce The proof generation utilizes the Groth16 protocol, which
generation following RFC 6979. This ensures cryptographi- provides optimal proof size and verification time for
cally secure, repeatable nonce values without relying on weak blockchain applications. The proof π Z K consists of three
random number generators common in CIoT environments. group elements (A, B, C) that satisfy the verification equation
Here, k represents the deterministically generated nonce, G without revealing the underlying witness values. Modern
is the elliptic curve generator point, d denotes the private ZKP frameworks such as Groth16 and PLONK achieve high
key, and n is the curve order. The LSB embedding process computational efficiency, enabling millisecond-level proof
further ensures minimal visual distortion while maintaining generation and verification even on constrained CIoT devices.
signature integrity for reliable verification. To strengthen Although Groth16 ensures minimal proof size, it depends on
resilience against lossy operations such as JPEG compression, a trusted setup that may pose security risks. To eliminate this
Chain-Visage can incorporate hybrid embedding strategies that dependency, future Chain-Visage versions can adopt transparcombine LSB with robust frequency-domain watermarking ent, setup-free schemes like zk-STARKs for verifiable and
(e.g., DCT-based). This enhances signature persistence while secure ownership proofs.
YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING 2459

 The adaptive block generation mechanism adjusts block
 creation intervals based on network congestion and transaction
 volume, following Equation 7:
 Q pending λ
  
 Tblock = Tbase · 1 + (7)
 Q thr eshold
 where Tbase is the baseline block interval, Q pending represents
 pending transaction count, Q thr eshold is the congestion threshold, and λ controls adaptation sensitivity.
 To enhance interoperability across diverse CIoT ecosys-
Fig. 3. Smart contract architecture showing ownership management, prove- tems, Chain-Visage supports integration through open APIs,
nance tracking, and access control components. gateway-based networking schemes, and service-oriented
 architectures (SOA). The framework aligns with emerging open standards and leverages semantic web principles
D. Smart Contract Architecture to enable cross-platform data exchange and interpretation.
 The Chain-Visage smart contract layer manages ownership This semantic interoperability ensures seamless collaboration
records, provenance tracking, and copyright revocation proce- between heterogeneous devices and applications within virtual
dures through an optimized consortium blockchain framework. networks and multi-vendor CIoT domains.
The smart contract architecture, depicted in Fig. 3, implements
three primary contract types: Ownership Manager, Provenance IV. M ATHEMATICAL M ODELING AND O PTIMIZATION
Tracker, and Access Controller.
 The Ownership Manager contract handles initial ownership A. Security Model and Threat Analysis
registration, transfer procedures, and revocation mechanisms. The security model considers three primary threat cate-
The contract maintains a mapping structure defined in gories: (1) content tampering attacks, (2) ownership spoofing
Equation 4: attempts, and (3) privacy breaches through metadata analysis. The threat model assumes a computationally bounded
 Mowner shi p : Hdual → (Did , tcr eated , tmodi f ied , status) (4) adversary with access to network communications but without
 control over blockchain validator nodes.
where Hdual serves as the unique content identifier, Did rep-
 The content integrity probability under adversarial condiresents the current owner, tcr eated and tmodi f ied track temporal
 tions is modeled using Equation 8:
information, and status indicates the current ownership state.
 The Provenance Tracker contract maintains immutable n
 1 − e−λi τ
 Y  Ai
records of content modification, distribution, and access Pintegrit y (τ ) = 1 − (8)
events. Each provenance entry follows the structure defined i=1
in Equation 5: where τ represents time elapsed since content creation, λi
 denotes the attack rate for threat type i, Ai represents the
Pentr y = (Hdual , action, actor, timestamp, π Z K , metadata)
 attack intensity, and n is the total number of threat categories.
 (5)
 The tamper detection sensitivity is formulated as a function
where action describes the performed operation, actor iden- of the dual-stage hash robustness and embedding strength,
tifies the entity responsible, and π Z K provides cryptographic given by Equation 9:
proof of authorization. 2
 !
 Dhamming
 Sdetection = 1 − P f alse_negative = 1 − exp − 2
 2σnoise
E. Consortium Blockchain Consensus (9)
 The Chain-Visage framework employs a novel Proofwhere Dhamming represents the Hamming distance between
of-Authority (PoA) consensus mechanism optimized for
 original and tampered hashes, and σnoise
 2 characterizes the
multimedia-intensive CIoT applications. The consensus pronoise variance in the detection process.
tocol balances security requirements with energy efficiency
constraints through dynamic validator selection and adaptive
block generation intervals. B. Zero-Knowledge Proof Security Analysis
 The validator selection process utilizes a reputation-based The security of the ZKP protocol relies on the computational
scoring system defined in Equation 6: hardness assumptions of the underlying elliptic curve dis-
 Svalidator (vi ) = α · Rhistorical (vi ) + β · Ccomputational (vi ) + γ · Tnetwor k (vi )
 crete logarithm problem. The knowledge soundness property
 (6) ensures that a prover cannot generate valid proofs without
 knowing the witness, expressed through Equation 10:
where Rhistorical represents historical reliability, Ccomputational
 Psoundness = maxA Pr A produces valid proof without witness ≤ ϵnegligible
  
measures computational capability, Tnetwor k evaluates network
connectivity, and α, β, γ are weighting parameters. (10)
2460 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

where A represents any polynomial-time adversary and E. Energy Consumption Analysis
ϵnegligible is a negligible function in the security parameter. Energy consumption modeling addresses the critical require-
 The zero-knowledge property guarantees that proofs reveal ment of energy efficiency in CIoT environments. The total
no information beyond the validity of the statement, formal- energy consumption encompasses device processing, commuized in Equation 11: nication, and blockchain operations, expressed in Equation 17:
 ∀V ∗ ∃S : {V ∗ (π Z K )} ≈c {S(statement)} (11) E total = E pr ocessing + E communication + E blockchain + E idle
where V ∗ represents any verifier, S is a simulator, and ≈c (17)
denotes computational indistinguishability. The processing energy E pr ocessing depends on computational operations and device characteristics, modeled as
C. Optimization Framework Equation 18:
 The chain-vision optimization framework addresses mul-
 E pr ocessing = PC PU · T pr ocessing + Pmemor y · Tmemor y + Pcr ypto · Tcr ypto
tiple competing objectives, including security maximiza-
 (18)
tion, latency minimization, and energy efficiency. The
multi-objective optimization problem is formulated as where PC PU , Pmemor y , and Pcr ypto represent the power con-
Equation 12: sumption for CPU, memory, and cryptographic operations,
 respectively.
 min L(θ ) = w1 · L securit y (θ) The communication energy E communication accounts for data
 θ
 + w2 · L latency (θ) + w3 · L energy (θ ) (12) transmission and network protocol overhead, formulated in
 Equation 19:
where θ represents the vector of system parameters, L securit y ,
L latency , and L energy denote loss functions for security, E communication = Ptransmission · Ttransmission + Pr eception · Tr eception + E pr otocol

latency, and energy, respectively, and wi are objective weights. (19)
 The security loss function incorporates tamper detection where Ptransmission and Pr eception denote transmission and
accuracy and ownership verification reliability, defined in reception power, and E pr otocol represents protocol overhead
Equation 13: energy.
 L securit y (θ ) = − log Pdetection (θ ) − log Pveri f ication (θ ) + λr eg ∥θ∥22
  

 (13) F. Scalability Analysis
where Pdetection and Pveri f ication represent detection and The scalability model analyzes system performance degraverification probabilities respectively, and λr eg provides regu- dation as the number of participating CIoT devices and content
larization. volume increases. The throughput capacity is bounded by
 blockchain consensus constraints and edge processing capa-
D. Performance Modeling bilities, expressed in Equation 20:
  
 The system performance is characterized through analytical Bblock_si ze 1
 2capacit y = min · , Redge_ pr ocessing
models that predict latency, throughput, and resource utiliza- Stransaction Tblock
tion under varying load conditions. The end-to-end latency (20)
model encompasses content processing, blockchain interac- where Bblock_si ze represents maximum block size, Stransaction
tion, and verification phases, expressed in Equation 14: denotes average transaction size, and Redge_ pr ocessing is the
 Ttotal = T pr ocessing + Tblockchain + Tveri f ication + Tnetwor k edge processing rate.
 (14) The storage scalability follows a logarithmic growth pattern
 due to hash-based content addressing, modeled in Equation 21:
 The processing latency T pr ocessing depends on content size
and computational complexity, modeled as Equation 15: Sstorage (N ) = Sbase + N · Shash + log2 (N ) · Sindex (21)
 Scontent · Ccomplexit y where N represents the number of registered content items,
 T pr ocessing = + Tover head (15)
 Rcomputational Sbase is the base storage requirement, Shash is per-hash storwhere Scontent represents content size, Ccomplexit y denotes age, and Sindex accounts for indexing overhead.
computational complexity, Rcomputational is the processing
rate, and Tover head accounts for system overhead. V. R ESULTS AND E VALUATION
 The blockchain interaction latency Tblockchain incorporates A. Experimental Setup
transaction submission, consensus participation, and block The experimental setup uses 50 heterogeneous CIoT devices
confirmation delays, formulated in Equation 16: (smart cameras, wearables, dashcams, and mobiles) and a
 Tblockchain = Tsubmission 15-node geographically distributed blockchain network. The
 dataset includes 10,247 high-resolution images and 3,850
 + Ncon f ir mations · Tblock + T pr opagation (16)
 video clips from real-world deployments. Evaluation covers
where Ncon f ir mations represents required confirmation blocks, accuracy, sensitivity, latency, energy, scalability, and security
Tblock is the average block time, and T pr opagation accounts for against tampering, spoofing, and privacy attacks, with detailed
network propagation delays. logging under varying loads.
YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING 2461

 TABLE I TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS ACROSS CI OT D EVICE C ATEGORIES E NERGY C ONSUMPTION A NALYSIS BY D EVICE T YPE

 TABLE II
 P RACTICAL A PPLICATION B ENCHMARKS (F IELD T RIALS )

 TABLE III
 L ATENCY B REAKDOWN A NALYSIS

 Fig. 4. Chain-Visage performance analysis dashboard: (a) Device-category
B. Performance Analysis heat map, (b) 3D energy distribution field, (c) Performance convergence
 trends, (d) Latency and energy breakdown by operation.
 Table I summarizes the comprehensive performance evaluation results across different CIoT device categories and
content types. The results demonstrate superior performance in
 average consumption of 42.6 mJ per operation. The energy distraceability accuracy (97.5%) and tamper detection sensitivity
 tribution favors computational operations over communication,
(93.0%) compared to baseline approaches. Verification latency
 demonstrating the effectiveness of the optimized consortium
remains below 2.3 seconds even for high-resolution video
 blockchain protocol.
content, meeting real-time requirements for CIoT applications.
 Fig 4 summarizes Chain-Visage’s capabilities across CIoT
 Experimental validation demonstrates that Chain-Visage
 networks: (a) shows performance scores by device type and
maintains optimal trade-offs among security, energy, and
 metric, (b) visualizes network-wide energy levels, (c) tracks
latency—achieving 97.5% traceability accuracy, 42.6 mJ
 accuracy, sensitivity, and energy efficiency convergence over
energy cost, and 2.0 s latency—even under large-scale 500+
 training, and (d) details resource consumption and distribution
device deployments, confirming stable scalability and effiacross core system operations
ciency in resource-constrained CIoT settings.
 Across end-to-end field trials in CE/CT settings (cameras,
wearables, mobiles), Chain-Visage sustains >96% accuracy C. Security Evaluation
with ≤2.2 s latency and ≈42–52 mJ/tx, validating practical The security evaluation encompasses a comprehensive
deployability. analysis of tamper detection capabilities, ownership verifica-
 The latency breakdown analysis in Table III shows that tion accuracy, and privacy preservation effectiveness. Fig. 5
blockchain interaction accounts for the largest portion of presents the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve
delay (45%), followed by cryptographic operations (28%) and demonstrating excellent discrimination between legitimate and
content processing (27%). These findings guided targeted opti- tampered content with an Area Under Curve (AUC) of
mizations focused on consensus and cryptographic efficiency. 0.967.
Main bottlenecks are (1) consensus delay and propagation, The confusion matrix analysis, illustrated in Fig. 6, reveals
(2) on-device ZKP generation, and (3) edge-to-chain bursts. high accuracy in distinguishing between different content
We mitigate via (a) micro-batching and content-ID shard- authenticity states. The true positive rate reaches 94.8% for
ing across validators, (b) ZKP precomputation and hardware tamper detection while maintaining a low false positive rate
intrinsics on ARM/NEON, (c) verifier key caching and Bloom- of 2.1%, demonstrating robust discrimination capabilities.
filter prechecks, and (d) adaptive block intervals (Eq. 7) with Attack resistance evaluation, summarized in Table V,
queue-aware backpressure. Under stress tests, p95 latency demonstrates robust security against various threat scenarios,
remains within 2.3 s and throughput scales linearly to the 500- including content manipulation, ownership spoofing, and pridevice mark before graceful saturation. vacy attacks. The system successfully detects 96.3% of content
 Energy consumption analysis across different device types, tampering attempts and prevents 98.7% of ownership spoofing
shown in Table IV, indicates efficient resource utilization with attacks.
2462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 5. ROC curve analysis showing tamper detection performance with Fig. 7. Scalability analysis showing throughput and latency characteristics
AUC = 0.967 across various tampering scenarios. under increasing network load conditions.

 TABLE VI
 S TORAGE S CALABILITY A NALYSIS

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A PPROACHES

Fig. 6. Confusion matrix showing classification performance across authentic,
tampered, and ownership verification scenarios.

 TABLE V
 ATTACK R ESISTANCE E VALUATION R ESULTS

 scalability up to 1,000 nodes with only marginal performance drop (<8%). Storage scalability analysis, presented in
 Table VI, indicates logarithmic growth in storage requirements
 with increasing content volume. The hash-based addressing
 scheme enables efficient storage utilization while maintaining
 The dual-stage visual hash embedding and privacy- fast content retrieval capabilities.
preserving verification achieve 96.8% robustness against
adaptive manipulations, outperforming baseline methods by
8–11% under multi-vector and hash-collision attacks. E. Comparative Analysis
 The comparison results presented in Table VII highlight significant improvements over existing approaches, particularly in
D. Scalability Assessment accuracy (97.5% vs. average 89.4%), latency (2.0s vs. average
 Scalability evaluation examines system performance under 4.7s), and energy efficiency (42.6 mJ vs. average 74.3 mJ).
increasing load conditions and growing network size. Fig. 7 These improvements stem from several key innovations: the
demonstrates throughput characteristics as the number of optimized dual-stage hash embedding that balances robustness
participating devices increases from 10 to 1000 nodes. The with computational efficiency, the lightweight ZKP protocol
system maintains stable performance up to 500 devices before designed specifically for CIoT constraints, and the consortium
experiencing gradual degradation due to consensus overhead. blockchain architecture that reduces consensus overhead while
 To support deployments beyond 500 devices, Chain-Visage maintaining security guarantees.
employs hierarchical edge clustering, shard-based validator Fig 8 illustrates Chain-Visage’s superior performance
allocation, and adaptive consensus intervals, which collectively across multiple dimensions, as shown by the optimal
mitigate latency and throughput bottlenecks—sustaining linear accuracy-efficiency trade-offs (a, b), consistently higher
YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING 2463

Fig. 8. Chain-Visage comparative analysis: (a) Accuracy-latency-energy Fig. 9. Performance evaluation in dense urban CIoT deployment showing
contour, (b) COMSOL-style efficiency field, (c) Training accuracy trends, throughput and latency characteristics under high network load.
(d) Normalized multi-metric comparison versus state-of-the-art approaches.

 TABLE VIII
 A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS

accuracy over time (c), and leading normalized performance Fig. 10. Rural deployment scenario results demonstrating Chain-Visage
 resilience under limited connectivity and resource constraints.
metrics (d).

F. Ablation Study
 The ablation study (Table VIII) shows that the dual-stage
hash embedding delivers the highest accuracy gain (+8.3%)
over basic hashing, while ZKP integration adds strong privacy
protection with minimal latency, confirming Chain-Visage’s
efficiency for CIoT applications.

G. Real-World Deployment Scenarios
 Real-world evaluations confirm Chain-Visage’s robustness
across diverse CIoT settings. Fig. 9 shows stable performance
under dense urban loads, while Fig. 10 demonstrates reliable
operation in rural, low-connectivity environments, validating
its suitability from smart cities to remote monitoring.
 The urban scenario evaluation demonstrates stable perfor- Fig. 11. System performance under coordinated attack scenarios showing
mance under high load conditions with an average latency of detection accuracy and response time characteristics.
2.3 seconds and 96.8% accuracy despite network congestion.
Rural scenario results show slightly degraded performance
(94.2% accuracy, 2.7 seconds latency) but maintain functional system behavior under coordinated attack conditions, includoperation under severe resource constraints, validating system ing distributed tampering attempts and ownership spoofing
robustness across diverse deployment environments. Chain- campaigns. The results demonstrate effective attack detection
Visage maintains consistent performance across heterogeneous and mitigation capabilities with minimal performance impact
CIoT devices and varying network conditions through adaptive during attack periods.
workload distribution, edge-level caching, and lightweight Under simultaneous and sustained multi-vector attacks—
cryptographic operations—ensuring stable accuracy and sub- including tampering, spoofing, and privacy breaches—Chain-
2.3 s latency even on low-power or limited-capacity devices. Visage maintains 94.6% average detection accuracy and 97.1%
Attack scenario evaluation, depicted in Fig. 11, examines ownership verification rate, with less than 12% degradation
2464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

in throughput during 10-minute continuous attack simu- [10] B. K. Chaurasia, V. Rishiwal, and M. Yadav, “Blockchain enabled
lations, demonstrating strong quantitative resilience under vehicle NFT and key management for IoV networks in fog computing
 environment,” Int. J. Ad Hoc Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 42, no. 2,
prolonged adversarial conditions. The Chain-Visage frame- pp. 112–128, 2025.
work can be seamlessly implemented in Consumer Electronics [11] A. A. Khan, X. Zhang, F. Hajjej, J. Yang, C. S. Ku, and L. Y. Por,
(CE) and Consumer Technology (CT) applications, such as “ASMF: Ambient social media forensics chain of custody with an intelligent digital investigation process using federated learning,” Heliyon,
smart cameras, AR/VR headsets, wearable vision devices, vol. 10, no. 1, Jan. 2024, Art. no. e23254.
and connected home systems, enabling secure ownership ver- [12] M. Trigka and E. Dritsas, “Wireless sensor networks: From fundamentals
ification, deepfake prevention, and tamper-proof multimedia and applications to innovations and future trends,” IEEE Access, vol. 13,
 pp. 15432–15449, 2025.
provenance across user devices. Its lightweight blockchain [13] S. Khan, T. Mazhar, T. Shahzad, Y. Y. Ghadi, and H. Hamam, “Intedesign and energy-efficient consensus make it deployable in grating IoT and WSN: Enhancing quality of service through energy
CE/CT ecosystems where latency, privacy, and interoperability efficiency, scalability, and secure communication in smart systems,”
 Peer-Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 567–584, Sep. 2025.
are critical for real-time multimedia processing and content
 [14] A. A. Khan, S. Dhabi, J. Yang, W. Alhakami, S. Bourouis, and
authentication. P. L. Yee, “B-LPoET: A middleware lightweight proof-of-elapsed time
 (PoET) for efficient distributed transaction execution and security on
 blockchain using multithreading technology,” Comput. Electr. Eng.,
 VI. C ONCLUSION vol. 118, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 109343.
 This paper introduced Chain-Visage, a blockchain-assisted [15] K. Noor, A. L. Imoize, C.-T. Li, and C.-Y. Weng, “A review of machine
 learning and transfer learning strategies for intrusion detection systems
framework for secure visual content ownership and tam- in 5G and beyond,” Mathematics, vol. 13, no. 4, p. 612, Feb. 2025.
per tracing in CIoT ecosystems. By integrating dual-stage [16] T.-V. Le, “QSDA: Quantum-safe mobile sequencing data authorization
visual hashing, Zero-Knowledge Proofs, and an optimized scheme to facilitate cancer research and treatment,” IEEE Internet Things
consortium blockchain, the framework ensures authenticity, J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 20828–20843, Jun. 2025.
 [17] R. Kodumuru, S. Sarkar, and V. Parepally, “Artificial intelligence and
privacy, and scalability. Experimental results on 10,000+ Internet of Things integration in pharmaceutical manufacturing: A smart
CIoT samples achieved 97.5% traceability accuracy, 93% synergy,” PMC, vol. 17, May 2025, Art. no. 8542931.
tamper detection, and 2.0-second verification latency with [18] S. Mia et al., “Integrating renewable energy with Internet of Things
 (IoT): Pathways to a smart green planet,” Kufa J. Eng., vol. 16, no. 1,
only 42.6 mJ energy cost. These results confirm Chain-Visage pp. 78–92, Feb. 2025.
as an efficient and deployable solution for real-world CIoT [19] E. C. Nkoro, J. N. Njoku, and C. I. Nwakanma, “MetaWatch: Trends,
multimedia security. challenges, and future of network intrusion detection in the metaverse,”
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1789–1802, Jan. 2025.
 [20] A. Bumiller, E. Kozyri, and H. Dagenborg, “Privacy preserving identity
 R EFERENCES federation: A literature study,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 58, no. 1,
 [1] N. Chen et al., “Multimodal heterogeneous data sensing and communi- pp. 1–34, Jul. 2025.
 cation integration for CIoT,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 73, [21] T. Mehmood, H. M. Attaullah, and M. Ibrahim, “Securing AGI-driven
 no. 2, pp. 1254–1267, Feb. 2025. drone communications for climate change: A comprehensive review
 [2] K. B. A. Kumar, L. S. Mohith, K. Jain, P. Krishnan, N. Venkatachalam, of deep learning-based IDS,” in AI-Based Drones for Climate Change
 and R. Buyya, “Post-quantum cryptography-based multimedia encryp- Applications. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2025, pp. 156–175.
 tion communication scheme in IoT consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. [22] H. Shaker, Z. T. Sharef, S. Abbas, and S. Khan, “Vehicle to infras-
 Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4995–5006, May 2025. tructure routing protocols: AI and finance perspectives,” in Innovations
 [3] Z. Sun, J. Xu, J. Li, and T. Zhang, “Privacy protection authentication in Blockchain Technology. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2025,
 protocol for consumer Internet of Things in horizontal federated learning pp. 89–106.
 environment,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 89–98, [23] D. S. N. Wijesekara and P. Arachchige, “Blockchain and artificial intel-
 Jan. 2025. ligence for big data analytics in networking: Leading-edge frameworks,”
 [4] A. Padma, M. Ramaiah, and V. Ravi, “A comprehensive review of J. Eng. Sci. Technol. Rev., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 125–143, 2024.
 lightweight blockchain practices for smart cities: A security and efficacy [24] R. Rani, N. Kumar, and M. Khurana, “Redundancy elimination in
 assessment,” J. Reliable Intell. Environ., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 145–162, IoT oriented big data: A survey, schemes, open challenges and
 Sep. 2025. future applications,” Cluster Comput., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 10234–10251,
 [5] M. A. Jarwar, J. W. C. B. E. Freng, and S. Ali, “Modelling industrial IoT Dec. 2024.
 security using ontologies: A systematic review,” IEEE Open J. Comput. [25] M. Pathak, K. N. Mishra, and S. P. Singh, “Data security and privacy
 Soc., vol. 6, pp. 78–95, 2025. preservation in cloud-based IoT technologies: An analysis of risks
 [6] A. Ayub Khan et al., “Digital forensics for the socio-cyber world (DF- and the creation of robust countermeasures,” Recent Adv. Comput. Sci.
 SCW): A novel framework for deepfake multimedia investigation on Commun., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 78–92, 2024.
 social media platforms,” Egyptian Informat. J., vol. 27, Sep. 2024, [26] M. Wazid, A. K. Mishra, N. Mohd, and A. K. Das, “A secure deepfake
 Art. no. 100502. mitigation framework: Architecture, issues, challenges, and societal
 [7] P. Karthikeyan and K. Brindha, “Smart data flow: A trust-driven impact,” Cyber Secur. Appl., vol. 2, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 100040.
 hybrid fragmentation framework for optimizing data transmission in [27] Z. Lu, H. Pan, Y. Dai, X. Si, and Y. Zhang, “Federated learning with
 IoT-enabled edge-fog-cloud systems,” Computing, vol. 107, no. 6, non-IID data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 14,
 pp. 445–468, Jun. 2025. pp. 24563–24580, Jul. 2024.
 [8] A. A. Khan et al., “BAIoT-EMS: Consortium network for small- [28] G. Hou et al., “TSTFL-CGAN: Fuzzy logic-based two-stage training
 medium enterprises management system with blockchain and augmented federated learning conditional generative adversarial network under nonintelligence of things,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 141, Feb. 2025, IID data,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 7129–7145,
 Art. no. 109838. May 2025.
 [9] R. Riaz and K. N. Qureshi, “Role of blockchain models for AI-based [29] A. Roy, C. Sain, R. R. Kumar, S. Chanda, and V. E. Balas, Intelligent
 healthcare communication systems,” in Proc. Artif. Intell.-Based Smart Computation and Analytics on Sustainable Energy and Environment.
 Healthcare Syst., 2025, pp. 177–202. New York, NY, USA: Taylor & Francis, 2024.