1422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

CL-ViME: Contrastive Learning and Vision Mixture
 of Experts for Encrypted Traffic Classification
 Saihua Cai , Member, IEEE, Lizhou Chen, Jinfu Chen , Member, IEEE, Shengran Wang,
 and Guofeng Zhang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Network traffic classification is essential for appli- improving the accuracy of encrypted traffic classification has
cation identification and malicious behavior detection. However, become a critical challenge.
the widespread use of encryption protocols hides payloads and Compared with machine learning (such as SVM [8],
reduces the availability of high-quality labeled data, both of which
constrain the effectiveness of current models. To address these hierarchical clustering [9] and Random forest [10]), the powchallenges, we propose CL-ViME, a self-supervised encrypted erful automatic feature extraction capability of deep learning
traffic classification framework that integrates Contrastive provides a new direction for encrypted traffic classifica-
Learning and Vision Mixture of Experts. First, we design tion. Deep learning models, such as convolutional neural
a packet-temporal matrix that preserves fine-grained packet network (CNN) [11], recurrent neural network (RNN) [12]
headers and flow-level temporal structure. Second, we introduce
a Vertical Vision Transformer-Mixture of Experts model to and Transformer [13], can reduce the reliance on handextract dual-view features through vertical patching and dynamic crafted features. However, they typically require large-scale,
expert routing. Third, we develop a dual-granularity contrastive high-quality labeled data for training, yet obtaining acculearning framework that aligns packet-level and flow-level rep- rate labels is costly. Moreover, enabling deep learning
resentations via an MoE projector, followed by lightweight models to effectively recognize emerging traffic classes
classifier-head fine-tuning. Experiments on three public datasets
show that CL-ViME significantly outperforms state-of-the-art in dynamic network environments remains a significant
self-supervised and supervised baselines across accuracy, macro- challenge [14].
precision, macro-recall, and macro-F1. It also demonstrates To reduce dependence on large-scale labeled data and
strong generalization and stability. improve generalization on unknown traffic, contrastive learn-
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, contrastive ing [15], [16] has gained attention for its self-supervised
learning, mixture of experts, self-supervised learning. nature. Through designing suitable pretext tasks, it learns
 discriminative feature representations from large volumes of
 unlabeled data. It constructs positive and negative sample
 I. I NTRODUCTION pairs, and then optimizes the loss function to pull posi-
 ETWORK traffic classification [1], [2] has become tive pairs closer while pushing negative pairs apart. In this
N a key technology for network management. Accurate
classification helps understand network behaviors [3], idenway, it autonomously captures category-level distinctions in
 network traffic. However, contrastive learning still faces sevtify applications [4], and detect malicious traffic [5], [6]. eral challenges in encrypted traffic classification [17], [18]:
However, the widespread use of encryption technologies (such (1) Many models slice encrypted traffic into fixed-length byte
as TLS/HTTPS) renders most payload contents invisible. sequences or gray-scale images. This approach loses fine-
This obscurity complicates feature extraction and leads to grained packet-level header semantics and disrupts flow-level
performance bottlenecks in existing models [7], including temporal structures. (2) The priori design assumptions, such as
reduced accuracy and limited generalization. Consequently, kernel shapes, receptive field layouts and positional encodings,
 often mismatch the characteristics of encrypted traffic, leading
 to distorted feature extraction when directly transferred. (3)
 Received 18 August 2025; revised 6 December 2025; accepted 29
December 2025. Date of publication 31 December 2025; date of current
 Most models build positive and negative pairs at only one
version 13 January 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural granularity, either packet-level or flow-level. This single-
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant nos. 62202206 and 62172194), level design limits their ability to exploit complementary
the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant no. BK20220515),
the China Scholarship Council (CSC), the Qinglan Project of Jiangsu
 information across granularities, making it hard to capture both
Province, and the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant microscopic protocol fingerprints and macroscopic behavioral
nos. ZR2024MF120 and ZR2021QF056). The associate editor coordinating patterns, and ultimately restricting generalization.
the review of this article and approving it for publication was M.-S. Kim.
(Corresponding author: Jinfu Chen.)
 To address the above limitations, focusing on the chal-
 Saihua Cai, Lizhou Chen, Jinfu Chen, and Shengran Wang are lenges of feature representation, model adaptation and
with the School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering multi-granularity feature extraction, this paper proposes CLand the Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Industrial Cyberspace
Security Technology, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China (e-mail:
 ViME, a self-supervised encrypted traffic classification model
caisaih@ujs.edu.cn; 2222408019@stmail.ujs.edu.cn; jinfuchen@ujs.edu.cn; built on Contrastive Learning and Vision Mixture of Experts.
shrwang@stmail.ujs.edu.cn). The main contributions are as follows:
 Guofeng Zhang is with the School of Information Science and Technology,
 • Structured representation with dual-granularity fusion:
Taishan University, Tai’an 271021, China (e-mail: zhangguofeng@tsu.edu.cn).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3650038 We first organize raw encrypted traffic into a
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE 1423

 two-dimensional matrix in a structured manner, and then traffic through low-dimensional signature paths and achieves
 fuse packet-level information (e.g., header fields) and strong accuracy with high training efficiency. Nonetheless, its
 flow-level information (e.g., temporal relationships) into fixed feature dimensionality limits generalization in complex
 a unified packet-temporal matrix. This representation scenarios. Overall, traditional machine learning models depend
 preserves both fine-grained headers and macroscopic on handcrafted features, while encrypted traffic conceals
 temporal patterns of encrypted traffic. payload semantics and undermines the transferability of such
 • Vertical Vision Transformer-Mixture of Experts (Vertical features. Moreover, these models also struggle to capture
 ViT-MoE): To address the anisotropic semantics of the complex, high-dimensional patterns of encrypted traffic,
 packet-temporal matrices, where horizontal and vertical resulting in limited robustness and adaptability in dynamic
 axes encode intra-packet fields and inter-packet temporal network environments.
 sequences respectively, we replace the square patching 2) Deep-Learning-Based Techniques: For the strong autoof standard ViT with vertical segmentation. We further matic feature extraction capability and the ability to model
 combine this strategy with a MoE to dynamically extract complex patterns, deep learning has become a mainstream
 packet-level features from the horizontal dimension and approach for encrypted traffic classification. For example,
 flow-level features from the vertical dimension, produc- FlowPic [11] converts encrypted traffic into a 2D histogram of
 ing dual-view representations for subsequent contrastive arrival time and packet length,and applies CNNs for imagelearning. level classification. This design preserves privacy by avoiding
 • Dual-Granularity Contrastive Learning: We first drive payload inspection, but the ultra-high-resolution images con-
 MoE projector to map the packet-level and flow- tain sparse information because they rely on low-entropy
 level representations into a shared latent space. We features. Song et al. [12] proposed I2 RNN, an interpretable
 then use hybrid bidirectional contrastive loss to jointly RNN that constructs fingerprint modules using LSTM. Each
 optimize consistency and discrimination across granu- module learns the sequence patterns of one traffic class,
 larities, enabling self-supervised alignment of packet- enabling incremental learning without retraining the entire
 and flow-level features without labels and significantly model. However, the number of modules grows linearly with
 improving robustness and generalization. the number of classes, increasing storage and inference cost.
 • MoE Auxiliary Loss: We introduce an MoE auxiliary DigTraffic [13] adopts a message-level graph representation
 loss that applies alignment-divergence regularization to to capture client-server interactions using heterogeneous edge
 expert routing. It enforces maximal routing divergence types. It encodes long and temporal flow sequences through
 between different views of the same sample and maximal a dual-channel network, and then employs a message-aware
 routing similarity across encoders for the same view. Graph Transformer that leverages node and edge information
 This constraint enables adaptive and robust alignment of to model complex graph structures. However, its detection
 packet-level and flow-level representations in a unified accuracy needs to be improved in scenarios with few labels.
 latent space. Deep learning reduces dependence on handcrafted features
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: and demonstrates strong capability across byte-, packet-, and
Section II reviews some related works. Section III detailed sequence-level representations. However, most models require
describes the CL-ViME model. Section IV provides the exper- large volumes of high-quality labeled data, which are difficult
imental setup. Section V presents and analyzes experimental to obtain for encrypted traffic and thus limit generalization.
results to validate the effectiveness of CL-ViME. Section VI
summarizes the full paper and provides some future directions.
 B. Contrastive Learning Models for Traffic Classification
 II. R ELATED W ORKS Most mainstream traffic classification models rely on
 supervised learning, their performance is constrained by
 This section reviews encrypted traffic classification techthe scarcity of high-quality labeled data. Given the diffiniques and contrastive learning models for traffic classification.
 culty of labeling traffic and the continuous emergence of
 new traffic types, these models struggle to adapt quickly
A. Encrypted Traffic Classification Techniques to unseen classes. In contrast, contrastive learning lever-
 With the develop of artificial intelligence, machine learning ages large volumes of unlabeled traffic for representation
and deep learning techniques have been widely used in learning, enabling faster adaptation to evolving network
encrypted traffic classification. environments.
 1) Machine-Learning-Based Techniques: Machine The FlowPic-based contrastive learning framework [15]
learning-based techniques achieve automatic classification learns the representations from unlabeled traffic, and groups
of different applications, protocols or malicious activities flows within the same category. This model reduces reliance on
by analyzing the statistical characteristics and behavioral large labeled datasets and improves performance on minority
patterns of traffic packets. For example, a cost-sensitive classes. The ContraMTD [16] combines CNN-based local
SVM with active learning [8] improves generalization under feature extraction with a dual-edge attention GNN for global
class imbalance by selectively labeling minority classes interactions. Its contrastive learning design supports crossand querying uncertain samples. However, it still relies on network training and enhances malicious traffic detection, but
manual labeling. The ETC-PS method [10] models encrypted its generalization to broader encrypted traffic tasks remains
1424 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

limited. The pretraining framework CETP [17] learns gen- random masking, are first applied to construct discriminative
eralized features from imbalanced encrypted traffic using positive and negative pairs, enabling the model to capture
contrastive learning and occlusion sequence modeling, and intrinsic characteristics of encrypted traffic. The Vertical
then uses fine-tuning to further mitigate class imbalance. ViT-MoE then serves as the backbone. It processes struc-
However, its positive sample construction relies solely on ran- tured inputs through a vertically partitioned patch-embedding
dom Dropout, which is often insufficient for low-redundancy scheme, and uses a routing mechanism to dynamically select
encrypted traffic. Shen et al. [18] proposed a contrastive expert modules for feature extraction. This design jointly
learning-based detector, it converts traffic into a semantic captures packet-level and flow-level semantics and routes
attribute matrix and pretrains on unlabeled data to capture nor- heterogeneous features to the most suitable experts. With these
mal behavior patterns. This design supports rapid adaptation to operations, the pretrained model attains robust representation
new attacks and improves robustness against obfuscation with capability for downstream encrypted traffic classification.
limited labels. The multi-instance contrastive learning model Fine-tuning: This phase adopts a classification-head–only
MIETT [19] uses a two-level attention mechanism for packet- strategy. The pretrained Vertical ViT-MoE backbone is fully
and flow-level features. It employs masked flow prediction, frozen, and only the task-specific classification head is
packet position prediction, and flow-level contrastive learning updated. This approach verifies the generalization of the
to improve traffic discrimination, but its accuracy still lags learned encrypted traffic representations while enabling effibehind supervised models. cient adaptation to downstream classification tasks with low
 Researches in this area remain preliminary, and current computational overhead.
models still trail state-of-the-art supervised models in classification accuracy. Existing contrastive tasks, typically adapted
from computer vision, fail to capture the spatiotemporal struc- B. Structured Representation of Encrypted Traffic
ture and contextual dependencies inherent in network traffic. In encrypted traffic classification, packet-level granularity
This study leverages the structured nature of encrypted traffic treats each packet as the basic unit and captures fineto derive refined packet- and flow-level representations and grained protocol fields and flags. However, it fails to model
introduces a dual-granularity contrastive learning framework to global behavioral patterns because it ignores inter-packet
strengthen classification capability. Experiments show that the dependencies. Flow-level granularity aggregates bidirectional
proposed model achieves accuracy comparable to supervised packets sharing the same 5-tuple (source/destination IP,
deep learning models. source/destination port, and transport protocol) into a single
 unit to enable the extraction of temporal dynamics and
 III. M ETHODOLOGY interaction behaviors, albeit at the cost of losing detailed
 protocol and payload information. Existing representation
 This section describes the proposed CL-ViME, a selfmethods either extract abstract features [20] and map them
supervised encrypted traffic classification model based on
 to pixel values [11], [21]-an approach that performs poorly
Contrastive Learning and Vision Mixture of Experts. It
 on encrypted traffic due to weak feature extraction-or directly
improves existing models by addressing the key challenges in
 process raw traffic with simplistic single-granularity filling
feature representation, model adaptation and dual-granularity
 strategies, which disregard packet structure and lead to inefficontrastive learning.
 cient matrix usage and ambiguous semantic representations.
 To address these challenges, we propose a structured fea-
A. Framework of CL-ViME Model ture representation method that constructs a packet-temporal
 The overall framework of the proposed self-supervised matrix through dual-granularity fusion. The key idea is to
CL-ViME model is shown in Fig. 1. It comprises three directly populate raw encrypted traffic into a structured matrix,
components: a structured representation phase, a contrastive thereby integrating packet-level and flow-level information. At
learning pretraining phase, and a fine-tuning phase. the packet level, the horizontal dimension encodes protocol
 Structured representation: This phase converts raw fields, flags and limited payload content while preserving raw
encrypted-traffic PCAP files into a packet–temporal matrix header semantics. At the flow level, the vertical dimension
using structured padding. Matrix construction includes two captures temporal dependencies and interaction patterns across
steps: First, it horizontally pads packet protocols, flags packets. This dual-granularity representation preserves fineand limited plaintext payloads. Second, it vertically embeds grained details and simultaneously models global behavioral
temporal patterns and interaction modes based on packet characteristics. The detailed process is as follows:
arrival order. This two-dimensional encoding jointly captures First, we reorganize packets in the PCAP file into bidipacket-level and flow-level semantics within a unified matrix rectional flows. Specifically, packets are first grouped into
structure. The resulting representation preserves fine-grained bidirectional sessions using the 5-tuple, and then sorted by
packet features and global flow dynamics, providing an effec- timestamp to form interleaved, time-aligned round-trip flows
tive input for subsequent contrastive learning. of “source→destination” and “destination→source”. Although
 Contrastive learning pretraining: This phase employs payloads are encrypted, packet headers remain in plaintext and
a self-supervised contrastive learning framework to exploit provide stable structured features. Their field distributions and
large-scale unlabeled traffic and enhance representation qual- semantics offer a reliable basis for encrypted traffic feature
ity. Two data augmentation strategies, transposition and extraction.
CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE 1425

Fig. 1. The framework of CL-ViME model.

 To mitigate interference from MAC and IP addresses and classify encrypted traffic by exploiting unlabeled data. In
to prevent privacy leakage, we remove MAC addresses and contrastive learning, positive and negative pairs must be
anonymize source and destination IP addresses, retaining only constructed, then the model minimizes the feature distance of
the last-byte segment. This reduces the IP header to 13 bytes. positive pairs and maximizes that of negative pairs through the
The TCP header contains 20 fixed bytes and up to 40 optional contrastive loss. The framework of proposed dual-granularity
bytes. Since optional fields rarely exceed 20 bytes, we allocate contrastive learning is shown in Fig. 2.
a uniform 40-byte space. Shorter headers are zero-padded, and 1) Construction of Positive and Negative Sample Pairs:
longer ones are truncated to the first 40 bytes. In addition, In the computer vision domain, positive sample pairs for
although payloads are encrypted, some protocol-control fields contrastive learning are typically generated using techniques
following the TCP layer remain in plaintext and can be parsed. such as random cropping. However, this method may destroy
These fields are useful for downstream analysis, so we retain the integrity of structured features, such as those in packet-
7 bytes to capture essential communication behaviors while temporal matrices, which represent packet-level features
avoiding redundant or sensitive content. After these operations, horizontally and flow-level features vertically. To address
each packet provides a fixed 60-byte header representation. this, we propose a novel method for constructing positive
 These 60 bytes are linearly mapped from 0-255 to decimal sample pairs based on row-column transposition. Specifically,
integers and placed into one row of a matrix, forming the as shown in Eq. (1), we first transpose the rows and columns
horizontal spatial dimension. Each packet occupies a single of matrix to achieve symmetric transformation in the spatiorow, and packets are stacked vertically by arrival order to form temporal dimension. Next, we introduce a random mask
a 60×60 matrix. A bidirectional flow thus yields a sequence perturbation mechanism to the transposed matrix. This dual
of matrices S = [X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn ], where Xn denotes the augmentation strategy preserves the semantic integrity of
n th packet. This transformation preserves packet-header struc- original encrypted traffic, enhances the feature robustness
ture and embeds temporal patterns into the matrix layout. through structural reorganization and local masking.
Horizontally, each row encodes the packet’s internal fields and
byte-level variations. Vertically, row-to-row differences cap- x1 = Tmask (X ), x2 = Tmask (Ttrans (X )) (1)
ture temporal dependencies and interaction dynamics within
the flow. By aligning intra-packet structure along rows and In Eq. (1), X is the transformed encrypted traffic matrix,
inter-packet sequences along columns, the method effectively Tmask () denotes the random mask operation, Ttrans () denotes
exploits both spatial and temporal semantics of encrypted the transpose operation, (x1 , x2 ) is the positive sample pairs.
traffic. Negative samples are typically drawn from other samples
 within the same training batch. Since each batch contains
 traffic matrices from different communication behaviors, pro-
C. Dual-Granularity Contrastive Learning Pretraining tocol types or attack patterns, their semantic differences are
 Most labeled network traffic datasets (e.g., substantial, making them suitable negative samples. Suppose
CICIOT2023 [22], CICIDS2018 [23]) are generated in a batch contains N independent samples {X1 , X2 ,. . . , XN }.
virtual environments. Meanwhile, labeling real-world traffic is Each sample is augmented to produce two views (x1 , x2 ),
extremely difficult, which limits the applicability of supervised resulting in 2N samples in total. For any positive pair (x1 , x2 ),
models due to the scarcity of reliable labels. A practical the remaining 2(N -1) samples serve as negative samples. If
solution is to adopt self-supervised contrastive learning to Xi is the anchor, all samples other than (xi,1 , xi,2 ) constitute
1426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 2. The framework of dual-granularity contrastive learning.

its negative set, as shown in Eq. (2). A global [CLS] token is then prepended to the N /2 region
    embeddings to form the full input sequence T, as shown in
 Ni = xj ,1 , xj ,2 |j ∈ [1, N ], j = i (2)
 Eq. (5).
 In summary, the proposed method introduces a struc- N /2
tured data augmentation strategy that preserves spatiotemporal T = {ei }i=1 + [eCLS ] (5)
integrity through matrix transposition and improves robustness Next, T is processed by 12 stacked Transformer encoder
through random masking. This approach avoids the structural layers. Each layer contains:
distortion introduced by conventional cropping, it is well (1) A multi-head self-attention mechanism [25]. It uses
suited for feature representation scenarios of encrypted traffic 8 attention heads, where each head linearly transforms the
with strict spatiotemporal dependencies. embedding vectors ei in T through WQ , WK and WV to
 2) Vertical ViT-MoE Model: Vision Transformer (ViT) [24] generate the query (Q), key (K) and value (V) matrices, as
revolutionizes computer vision by splitting the images into shown in Eq. (6).
uniform patches for sequence-based modeling. However, its  
isotropic 16×16 patching works well for natural images but [Qi , Ki , Vi ] = ei WQ , WK , WV (6)
not for encrypted traffic matrices. In those matrices, rows
and columns carry different kinds of information: rows show The attention weight αi for the i th embedding is then
protocol hierarchy, while columns show time dynamics. computed via dot product, as shown in Eq. (7), where dh
 To address this, we propose the Vertical Vision Transformer denotes the dimension of Ki .
Mixture of Experts (Vertical ViT-MoE). It is a feature-oriented 
 Qi K T
architecture with two key components: (1) Vertical Patching αi = Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ) = softmax √ i Vi (7)
Strategy: Instead of using square patches, we segment inputs dh
along the longitudinal axis. Given a positive sample pair
 (2) MoE Feed-Forward Network [26]: The standard two-
(x1 , x2 ), this approach extracts stream-level features from the
 layer MLP (typically expanding to 4D is replaced with a
original sample x1 and packet-level features from the trans-
 Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer. Each expert is a single linear
posed sample x2 . (2) Dynamic Mixture-of-Experts (MoE): We
 transformation with input and output dimensions equal to the
integrate a dynamic MoE mechanism into the Transformer
 patch-embedding dimension D. A routing module computes
encoder. This allows specialized experts to capture the multithe expert probabilities si using a learnable matrix Wrouter ∈
granular semantic patterns that align with the inherent vertical
 RD×E , as shown in Eq. (8), where Gaussian noise  ∼
structure of network traffic.
 N (0, 1) is added to improve routing diversity. Due to only
 Specifically, we first design a parameterized vertical segthe top-2 experts are activated per token, the theoretical
mentation strategy for spatial feature decomposition. As shown
 computation is reduced to roughly 25% of the original MLP.
in Eq. (3), it partitions the input N ∗ N matrix X into N/2
consecutive subregions along the horizontal dimension. si = softmax(αi Wrouter + ) (8)
 N /2
 P = Partition(X ) = {Pi }i=1 , Pi ∈ R N ×2 (3) Based on the routing probabilities si , only the top-k expert
 Each vertical bar region Pi is projected into a 2N - outputs gj are preserved using a Top-k sparse activation
dimensional embedding vector ei ∈ RD (D = 2N ) using mechanism, as shown in Eq. (9). Here, s ∈ RE is the routinga linear projection matrix Wp , as shown in Eq. (4). A score vector, E is the number of experts, TopK(s, k ) returns
learnable positional encoding vector eipos ∈ RD is added to the selected expert indices, and the indicator function I(·)
preserve spatial order, and Flatten(·) denotes the vectorization ensures that all non-selected experts are suppressed.
operation.  
 exp sj · I(j ∈ TopK(s, k ))
 pos gj = , ∀j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , E } (9)
 ei = Flatten(Pi )Wp + ei (4) m∈TopK(s,k ) exp(sm )
CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE 1427

 The MoE output is then computed as the weighted sum of This loss strengthens model’s adaptability and expressiveness
the activated expert outputs, as shown in Eq. (10), where yi by refining the expert assignment strategy. The loss consists
denotes the enhanced feature vector for the i th vertical bar of two components:
region Pi , and Ej is the j th expert. (1) Similarity minimization loss Lmoe _view for dual-view
 k
 routing weights: This loss drives the routing weights (qr1 , qr2 )
 of two augmented views (x1 , x2 ) of the same sample to
 yi = gj · Ej (x ) (10)
 diverge. Each view is generated through distinct data augj =1
 mentation. By encouraging inconsistent expert activations
 Finally, the [CLS] token aggregates the global contextual across views, the loss promotes diverse expert usage and
information to produce final high-dimensional representation. improves representation robustness. The formulation is shown
 3) Design of Loss Function: In contrastive learning, target in Eq. (14), where sim(·, ·) denotes cosine similarity.
encoder stabilizes feature representations of negative samples
to improve training robustness and consistency. It shares the Lmoe _view = sim(qr1 , qr2 ) (14)
same architecture as the query encoder but updates its param- (2) Similarity maximization loss Lmoe _enc for heteroeters via a momentum rule rather than backpropagation [27], encoder routing weights: This loss enforces high similarity
as shown in Eq. (11), where θk and θq are the parameters between the routing weights (qr, kr) produced by the query
of target and query encoders, respectively, and m ≈ 1 is the encoder and the target (key) encoder for the same input view.
momentum coefficient. It promotes consistent expert selection for identical semantic
 θk = m · θk + (1 − m) · θq (11) content, even when obtained through different encoding paths,
 thereby stabilizing expert activation. The formulation is shown
 Traditional contrastive learning often employs a nonlinear in Eq. (15).
projector-typically an MLP-after the encoder to map features 1
into an embedding space, emphasizing invariant semantic Lmoe _enc = − (sim(qr1 , kr1 ) + sim(qr2 , kr2 )) (15)
 2
content [28]. The packet-level and flow-level perspectives of
encrypted traffic belong to same segment but from different Finally, Lmoe _view and Lmoe _enc are combined to form the
representational perspectives, requiring the projector to be able MoE auxiliary loss Lmoe , as shown in Eq. (16).
to understand and process these two heterogeneous represen- Lmoe = Lmoe _view + Lmoe _enc (16)
tations separately and map them to a unified latent space. To
unify this representation, we replace original single projectors After imposing semantic consistency constraints on the
in the query and target encoders with a shared MoE (Mixture- expert routing mechanism through the MoE auxiliary loss
of-Experts) projector. This design enables parallel processing (Eqs. (14)-(16)), the MoE projector maps heterogeneous
of encoder features through multiple expert networks, with packet-level and flow-level features into a unified latent space.
a gating router dynamically selecting and combining experts This process yields more discriminative and aligned expert
per sample. It enhances model expressiveness and nonlinearity representations.
while preserving consistency between flow-level and packet- Next, we need to compute sample similarity to pull positive
level features. pairs closer and push negative pairs apart. The standard
 Specifically, dual-view positive pairs (x1 , x2 ) are generated InfoNCE loss (shown in Eq. (17)) [29] is widely used to
via data augmentation and encoded by query encoder (Vertical compute similarity, where q denotes the query features from
ViT-MoE) into features (z1 , z2 ). They are then passed through the query encoder, k + represents the corresponding positive
unified MoE projector to yield expert representations (q1 , q2 ) sample features from the target encoder, {k − } is a set of
and routing weights (qr1 , qr2 ), as shown in Eqs. (12) and (13), negative sample features, and τ is the temperature that controls
where Wrouter is a learnable weight matrix, Ej denotes the j-th the sharpness of the similarity distribution.
    
expert, rij is the selection probability for expert j given feature exp sim(q, k + )/τ
 LInfoNCE q, k + , {k − } = − log  
 −
  (17)
zi , and qi is the resulting MoE-projected representation. A k − exp sim(q, k )/τ
predictor network then maps (q1 , q2 ) into the contrastive However, standard InfoNCE loss only considers unidireclearning space, producing final query predictions (p1 , p2 ). The tional relations, i.e., the similarity between query features
target encoder follows the same pipeline to generate target and positive sample features. It fails to leverage the semanrepresentations (k1 , k2 ) and routing weights (kr1 , kr2 ) from tic correspondence from dual-view augmented sample pairs.
(x1 , x2 ). The target encoder follows the same pipeline to Consequently, the model may overfit to a specific viewpoint
generate target representations (k1 , k2 ) and routing weights and neglect complementary information between different
(kr1 , kr2 ) from (x1 , x2 ). augmented views. This limitation reduces the generalization of
 ri = softmax(zi Wrouter ) (12) learned representations. To address this, we propose a hybrid
 k bidirectional contrastive loss based on InfoNCE, as shown
 qi = rij Ej (zi ) (13) in Eq. (18). It computes contrastive losses in both directions,
 j =1 leveraging mutual prediction between the two augmented
 views for more robust feature alignment.
 Next, to make expert selection in the MoE module more    
discriminative and adaptive, we design an auxiliary loss Lmoe . LCL = LInfoNCE p1 , k2 , {k2− } + LInfoNCE p2 , k1 , {k1− } (18)
1428 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 Dual-Granularity Contrastive Learning The dual-view encoding and cross-level alignment design
Require: Batch_size n, Packet-temporal matrix X, Vertical of CL-ViME makes its computational cost largely dominated
 ViT-MoE: θ, MoE Projector: M, Predictor P, Balancing by the Transformer blocks and MoE modules. Given L spatial
 parameter λ, Momentum m, Mask Augmentation Tmask , patches and an embedding dimension D, the PatchEmbed layer
 Transpose Augmentation Ttrans has a complexity of O(LD 2 ). The multi-head attention blocks
Ensure: Total loss LTotal add O(36LD 2 + L2 D), while the MoE-based feed-forward
 1: V = [] // initialize to store sample pairs layer incurs O(24LD 2 ). Thus, the overall complexity of CL-
 2: for each sample Xi in X do ViME is O(L2 D + LD 2 ), indicating strong dependence on
 3: v1 = Tmask (Xi ) // Flow-level view both the embedding dimension and the number of patches.
 4: v2 = Tmask (Ttrans (Xi )) // Packet-level view
 5: V [i ].append (v1 , v2 ) D. Fine-Tuning of Encrypted Traffic Classification Model
 6: end for
 After pretraining, the contrastive model acquires general-
 7: θq , θk =θ.copy // create query & target encoders izable representations from large-scale unlabeled encrypted
 8: for i ∈ [1, 2n] do
 traffic, capturing deep spatiotemporal patterns across traffic
 9: qi , qri = M (θq (V [i ])) types. To assess the transferability and quality of these rep-
10: pi = P (qi ) resentations, we apply head-only fine-tuning. The pretrained
11: start no-gradient operation backbone is frozen to preserve its extraction capability, while
12: θk = m · θk + (1 − m) · θq // momentum update only a lightweight classification head (e.g., a small MLP and a
13: ki , kri = M (θk (V [i ])) fully connected layer) is trained. The head is randomly initial-
14: end no-gradient operation ized (e.g., Xavier initialization), and all backbone parameters
15: end for
 remain fixed.
16: Lmoe = sim(qr1 , qr2 )−((sim(qr1 , kr1 )+sim(qr2 , kr2 ))·0.5)
17: LCL = LInfoNCE (p1 , k2 , {ki , i ∈ [3, 2n]}) To mitigate severe class imbalance, which is common in
 +LInfoNCE (p2 , k1 , {i ∈ [3, 2n]}) encrypted traffic, we use a weighted cross-entropy loss. This
18: LTotal = LCL + λ · Lmoe loss increases penalties for minority-class errors and improves
19: return LTotal sensitivity to rare traffic types. We optimize the head with an
 efficient optimizer such as AdamW and a low learning rate,
 enabling fast convergence on limited labeled data.
 Ultimately, the objective function is a weighted sum of This setup isolates the effect of pretrained features. Because
these two losses, balanced by parameter λ (Eq. (19)). This the head serves only as a simple linear adapter, downstream
formulation enables joint optimization of feature learning and classification performance directly reflects the quality and
expert routing mechanism. adaptability of the learned representations, providing a clean
 evaluation of the contrastive pretraining phase.
 LTotal = LCL + λLmoe (19)
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
 The process of proposed dual-granularity contrastive learning is shown in Algorithm 1. To validate the effectiveness of proposed CL-ViME model,
 This algorithm comprises three phases, each corresponding we compare it with five state-of-the-art models through extento a core contribution. (1) Positive and negative sample sive experiments.
construction (lines 1-6): An empty view list V is initialized
(line 1) to store augmented samples. For each raw matrix Xi , A. Description of Encrypted Traffic Datasets
two augmented views are generated: a flow-level view v1 by In the experiments, we use four encrypted traffic datasets
random masking (line 3), and a packet-level view v2 by row- to evaluate the performance of proposed CL-ViME model.
column transposition followed by masking (line 4). Both views (1) MAWI [30]: It is maintained by WIDE project, capturare appended to V (line 5). These two views from the same ing the encrypted traffic from a trans-Pacific backbone link
Xi form positive pairs, and all others are treated as negative between Japan and global Internet. It captures snapshots at
pairs. (2) Query and target encoder construction (lines fixed 15-minute interval using tcpdump and stores raw packets
7-15): Each augmented view passes through Vertical ViT- in PCAP format. This traffic has no manual labels, offering
MoE to obtain the query representation qi and router logits multi-scenario and prior-free characteristics suitable for selfqri (line 9). The predictor maps qi to the contrastive space supervised pretraining. We select the traffic from Jan. 1 to Jan.
pi (line 10). The target encoder freezes gradients and uses 5, 2025 for pretraining.
momentum (lines 11-14) to generate target representations ki (2) ISCX-VPN [31]: It is released by the Canadian
and logits kri . (3) Loss computation (lines 16-19): The MoE Institute for Cybersecurity, containing raw PCAP traffic for
auxiliary loss Lmoe minimizes cosine similarity between dual- six VPN-encrypted application categories. It is widely used
view routers (qr1 , qr2 ) while maximizing similarity between for evaluating encrypted traffic classification models.
query and target routers (qri , kri ) (line 16). The bidirectional (3) CICIoT [22]: It is designed for IoT environments, con-
InfoNCE loss LCL is computed for positive pairs (qp1 , k2 ) taining normal behaviors and multiple attack types and benign
and (qp2 , k1 ), treating all other views as negatives (line 17). IoT traffic. It contains both encrypted and unencrypted flows,
Finally, Lmoe and LCL are combined to form LTotal (line 18). covering benign and malicious communication channels.
CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE 1429

 TABLE I
 DATASET S TATISTICS (5) CL-FlowPic [33]: A self-supervised model using mini-
 FlowPic histograms. It employs SimCLR-based representation
 learning with RTT scaling, time shifting, and packet loss
 augmentations, clustering traffic from the same application in
 latent space.
 (6) YaTC [34]: A masked autoencoder-based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation. It encodes raw
 traffic into a hierarchical matrix and applies packet- and flowlevel attention for efficient feature extraction. Subsequently, it
 is pretrained on unlabeled data via the MAE paradigm and
 fine-tuned on limited labeled samples for classification.

 C. Evaluation Metrics
 (4) CTU-Malware [32]: It is built for long-term malware To evaluate the CL-ViME model, we use standard multitraffic analysis, containing various malware families alongside class classification metrics. For a k-class problem, TPi , FPi ,
normal traffic. It contains encrypted and unencrypted flows, and FNi represent the true positives, false positives, and false
and simulates realistic network environments with detailed negatives for class i (i = 1, . . . , k ), and N denotes the total
attack records. number of samples.
 Table I summarizes the class composition and sample dis- (1) Accuracy (Acc): It represents the percentage of correctly
tribution of three labeled datasets used in the fine-tuning classified network traffic samples among all samples. It is
and evaluation stages. Due to MAWI dataset only used for calculated by Eq. (20).
self-supervised pretraining, it is not included in this table.
Note that all datasets exhibit significant class imbalance— k
 Accuracy = i=1 TPi (20)
a common characteristic in real-world encrypted traffic—our N
experimental setup preserves it to reflect practical deployment
 (2) Macro-Precision (Ma-Pre): It measures the classification
scenarios.
 correctness of the model, computed as the unweighted mean
 During pretraining, the model uses only unlabeled encrypted
 of precision across all classes, as shown in Eq. (21).
traffic from MAWI for self-supervised representation learning,
allowing a comprehensive evaluation of transferability and k
 1 TPi
generalization. In the fine-tuning stage, the model is trained Macro − Precision = (21)
 k TPi + FPi
on three labeled datasets: ISCX-VPN, CICIOT2023 and CTU- i=1
Malware. Each dataset is stratified and randomly split into (3) Macro-Recall (Ma-Rec): It is the arithmetic mean of
training, validation and testing datasets using an 8:1:1 ratio, recall across all categories, giving equal weight to each class—
preserving the original class imbalance and reducing sampling particularly important under class imbalance. It is calculated
bias. This yields a stable and reliable evaluation environment by Eq. (22).
for encrypted traffic classification.
 k
 1 TPi
 Macro − Recall = (22)
B. Baselines k TPi + FNi
 i=1
 To evaluate CL-ViME, we compare it with six representative (4) Macro-F1 (Ma-F1): It provides a harmonic balance
baselines. between precision and recall at the class level, then averages
 (1) CETP [17]: A semi-supervised model using contrastive uniformly across classes, as given in Eq. (23).
pretraining on multi-granularity token sequences. It performs
fine-tuning with pseudo-label iteration and dynamic loss k
 1 2TPi
weighting for imbalanced traffic. Macro − F1 = (23)
 k 2TPi + FPi + FNi
 (2) SmartDetector [18]: A contrastive learning-based model i=1
embedding traffic sequences into context-aware vectors. It
simulates obfuscation via data augmentation and pretrains the D. Set of Parameters
encoder on unlabeled traffic for robust detection. In the pretraining phase, we train for 300 epochs with a
 (3) MIETT [19]: A multi-instance learning model treating learning rate of 3e-4, a batch size of 2048, and a momentum
packets as instances and flows as bags. It applies two-level coefficient m of 0.99.
attention to capture token- and packet-level relations and uses In the fine-tuning phase, we train for 50 epochs with a
packet position prediction and flow contrastive learning for learning rate of 1e-2, a batch size of 512, and an equilibrium
pretraining. parameter λ of 0.9.
 (4) MTC-MAE [15]: A masked autoencoder model con- For both phases, the embedding dimension is 120, the
verting traffic into gray-scale images for pretraining. It adopts number of ViT layers is 12, and the optimizer is AdamW. All
fine-tuning with few labels to achieve high-precision classifi- experiments are conducted on a server using an NVIDIA A40
cation. GPU.
1430 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE II
 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT F EATURE R EPRESENTATIONS (%)

 TABLE III
 V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ODELS (%)
 To better evaluate the performance of the CL-ViME model,
we pose the following four research questions (RQs):
 RQ1: Is the proposed packet-temporal matrix representation
superior to traditional feature representation methods?
 RQ2: Can the proposed Vertical ViT-MoE model extract
more effective information, thereby improving classification
performance?
 RQ3: Can the self-supervised contrastive learning pretraining strategy enhance the model’s classification and
generalization capabilities?
 RQ4: Can the CL-ViME model outperform other state-ofthe-art models?
 To reduce experimental randomness, each experiment is in these tasks, confirming their suitability as backbones for
repeated 30 times. Values before the “±” symbol indicate the subsequent model design and optimization.
mean, while those after indicate the standard deviation. In the
experimental results, the best results are highlighted in bold
and the second-best results are marked with underline. B. Answer to RQ2
 To answer RQ2, we compare the proposed Vertical ViT-
 MoE model with ResNet18, AutoEncoder, GNN and ViT. All
A. Answer to RQ1 models are trained under identical self-supervised learning
 To answer RQ1, we select five classic models (CNN, VGG, conditions. Experimental results are presented in Table III.
RNN, LSTM, and Transformer) in a supervised learning As shown in Table III, the proposed Vertical ViT-MoE
setting. Experiments are conducted using three representation outperforms the other four models across all evaluation metmethods: feature sequence, gray-scale image, and packet- rics. On the CTU-Malware dataset, it achieves a macro-F1 of
temporal matrix. Detailed results are shown in Table II. 96.02%, exceeding the best baseline (ViT, 88.67%) by 7.35%.
 As shown in Table II, the proposed packet-temporal matrix This gain arises because the isotropic square patching in stanachieves the highest performance in most cases. This is mainly dard ViT disrupts the semantic integrity of highly structured
due to its structured fusion of dual-granularity information, traffic matrices. In contrast, Vertical ViT-MoE uses a vertical
combining fine-grained packet-level headers with macroscopic patching strategy aligned with the anisotropic nature of the
flow-level temporal patterns. Such a representation enriches data, preserving and extracting distinct packet-level and flowfeature information and enhances class separability, improv- level features. On the ISCX-VPN dataset, Vertical ViT-MoE
ing classification efficiency. On the ISCX-VPN dataset, it reaches an accuracy of 99.46%, outperforming best baseline
outperforms feature sequence and gray-scale image represen- of ViT (97.64%) by 1.82%. Although standard ViT captures
tations by 7.02% and 4.36% in accuracy, and 5.87% and spatial correlations, its uniform segmentation is suboptimal
3.44% in macro-precision, respectively. On the CICIOT2023 for encrypted traffic, where semantics are organized by rows
dataset, the performance gain over gray-scale images is and columns. The vertical segmentation combined with the
slightly reduced for some models, likely because IoT traffic MoE architecture enables the model to learn specialized and
exhibits simpler characteristics that are visually captured by robust representations, making it more suitable for encrypted
less-structured representations. On other datasets, gray-scale traffic classification. Overall, Vertical ViT-MoE overcomes the
images consistently underperform compared to the packet- limitations of standard vision models for structured encrypted
temporal matrix. Overall, the proposed representation stores traffic. By respecting the intrinsic structure of traffic, it
richer dual-granularity features, enhancing the performance captures both fine-grained packet-level headers and broader
and stability of supervised encrypted traffic classification. temporal-flow dynamics, resulting in improved performance
Additionally, sequence-based models like Transformer excel and stability.
CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE 1431

Fig. 3. Ablation experiments.

 TABLE IV
 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING M ODELS (%)

C. Answer to RQ3 and flow-level features into a unified latent space and learn
 To answer RQ3, we select three representative self- more discriminative semantic features through dynamic expert
supervised models of MoCo [27], SimCLR [28] and routing.
BYOL [35] as baselines, the experimental results are shown in Overall, experimental results verify that the proposed self-
Table IV. In addition, we also perform ablation experiments to supervised pretraining model enhances model generalization.
verify the role of each component. Experiments are conducted Its success relies on two aspects: (1) collaborative use of
under the following conditions: (1) with the MoE projector packet- and flow-level features via structured data augmenremoved, including only flow-level contrastive learning (Flow- tation (matrix transposition), and (2) efficient integration and
CL), only packet-level contrastive learning (Packet-CL), or refinement of heterogeneous features through the MoE projecdual-granularity contrastive learning (F&P-CL); and (2) with tor and auxiliary loss. These mechanisms together enable the
the MoE projector applied to dual-granularity contrastive model to learn rich and discriminative representations from
learning (F&P-CL+MoE). All comparisons use identical unlabeled encrypted traffic.
self-supervised contrastive learning settings, with Vertical ViT-
MoE as the backbone to ensure fairness. The results are shown D. Answer to RQ4
in Fig. 3. To answer RQ4, we compare the proposed CL-ViME model
 As shown in Table IV, the complete proposed model with seven state-of-the-art models.The detailed results are
achieves optimal performance on all three encrypted traffic presented in Table V.
datasets. It significantly outperforms the baselines MoCo, As shown in Table V, the proposed CL-ViME model
SimCLR, and BYOL across all evaluation metrics. On the achieves both high accuracy and remarkable stability com-
CICIOT2023 dataset, the macro-F1 of the proposed model pared to other traffic classification models. On the ISCX-VPN
reaches 88.62%, exceeding the best baseline (BYOL, 81.70%). and CICIOT2023 datasets, it ranks first on all four met-
This demonstrates the overall advantage of dual-granularity rics, outperforming competitors by a substantial margin. On
contrastive learning with the MoE projector. CICIOT2023, its macro-F1 reaches 88.62%, 8.6% higher
 Fig. 3 highlights the importance of each component. than the runner-up YaTC, demonstrating superior discrim-
The following conclusions can be drawn: (1) Necessity inative power. For YaTC, the full-model fine-tuning used
of dual-granularity contrastive learning: On ISCX-VPN and in downstream classification can induce catastrophic forget-
CTU-Malware datasets, packet-level contrastive learning out- ting in the backbone, weakening the pre-training benefits.
performs flow-level learning, while both achieve similar In addition, its masked autoencoder is optimized for token
accuracy on CICIOT2023. Combining the two granularities reconstruction, which biases the learned representations toward
consistently surpasses single-granularity models, validat- structural fidelity rather than discriminative separability. This
ing their complementarity. For instance, on CICIOT2023, design limits its effectiveness in classification tasks. On the
the dual-granularity model achieves 92.30% accuracy, CTU-Malware dataset, CL-ViME shows robustness to class
higher than flow-level (90.07%) or packet-level (90.39%). imbalance. Although CETP slightly surpasses it in raw accu-
(2) Effectiveness of MoE projector: Introducing the MoE racy (99.04% vs. 98.94%), its macro-averaged metrics lag far
projector further improves performance. On ISCX-VPN, accu- behind. This “high accuracy, low macro” profile indicates overracy rises from 98.75% to 99.46% and macro-F1 from fitting to majority classes. The macro metrics weight each class
93.90% to 97.94%. This confirms that the MoE projector and equally, providing a more realistic measure of performance.
auxiliary loss Lmoe effectively map heterogeneous packet- Here, CL-ViME achieves a macro-F1 of 96.02%, exceeding
1432 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION M ODELS (%)

Fig. 4. Performance on each category of encrypted traffic.

CETP by over 15%, confirming its ability to maintain high learning pretraining scheme aligns packet- and flow-level repprecision across both dominant and rare classes. resentations without labels, substantially boosting robustness
 Fig. 4 presents radar charts of classification performance and generalization.
for seven contrastive learning-based models. CL-ViME out- CL-ViME is evaluated on three encrypted traffic datasets
performs rivals in most categories and achieves comparable against advanced self-supervised and supervised models. It
performance in the remaining ones. While other models achieves accuracies of 99.46%, 94.87% and 98.94%, outperoccasionally misclassify specific classes completely, CL- forming all baselines. Even under severe class imbalance, it
ViME does not fail catastrophically. This robustness is maintains high precision on minority classes, demonstrating
attributed to three key designs: (1) structured data aug- its effectiveness in feature representation, model architecture
mentation (row-column transposition and random masking) and pretraining design.
generates high-quality positive sample pairs while preserving Despite its strengths, CL-ViME has following limitations:
semantic structures; (2) the Vertical ViT-MoE architecture (1) Current design is computationally expensive due to the
efficiently extracts anisotropic features of encrypted traffic; large embedding dimension (120) and the numerous vertical
(3) the combination of hybrid bidirectional contrastive loss patches (e.g., 30 for a 60×60 input). Future work will
and MoE auxiliary loss provides a comprehensive optimization explore replacing PatchEmbed with a CNN-based module that
target. Overall, CL-ViME demonstrates excellent classification performs spatial downscaling, thereby reducing the sequence
performance, strong stability, and robustness across diverse length and embedding dimension while preserving essential
encrypted traffic datasets, especially under class imbalance. traffic structures. (2) Dynamic network environment may cause
 concept drift, significantly degrading the performance of CL-
E. Discussion ViME model. To address this challenge, we can incorporate
 incremental or continual learning mechanisms, allowing the
 Existing contrastive learning-based encrypted traffic classimodel to adapt to evolving traffic distributions without catasfication models suffer from three main limitations. (1) They
 trophic forgetting.
slice encrypted traffic into fixed-length byte sequences or
2-D matrices, discarding fine-grained packet-header semantics
and severing macroscopic temporal structures. (2) Directly F. Threats to Validity
transferring vision models distorts the anisotropic structure of This section discusses potential threats to the internal and
traffic matrices. (3) They exploit only a single granularity, fail- external validity of the CL-ViME model during experimental
ing to leverage the complementarity of packet- and flow-level evaluation.
information. To address these issues, we propose CL-ViME. Internal validity. First, there are potential threats in repro-
It introduces a packet-temporal matrix that fuses packet-level ducing baselines. Some models, such as CETP, MIETT,
headers with flow-level temporal patterns. The Vertical ViT- SmartDetector and CL-FlowPic, do not provide official source
MoE employs vertical patching and dynamic expert routing codes. We reproduced them based on the descriptions in the
to respect the traffic structure. A dual-granularity contrastive papers. Although we follow the algorithm descriptions and
CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE 1433

experimental settings, complete consistency with the original [3] J. Zhao, X. Jing, Z. Yan, and W. Pedrycz, “Network traffic classification
implementations cannot be guaranteed. Second, hyperparam- for data fusion: A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 72, pp. 22–47, Aug. 2021.
 [4] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
eter optimization may introduce bias. Although the same detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
search space and optimization strategy are used for all models, Comput. Commun. Security, 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
different models have varying sensitivity to hyperparameters. [5] J. Chen, T. Lv, S. Cai, L. Song, and S. Yin, “A novel detection model for
 abnormal network traffic based on bidirectional temporal convolutional
The CL-ViME model has been thoroughly tuned, but some network,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 157, May 2023, Art. no. 107166.
baselines may not reach their optimal performance. [6] S. Cai, W. Zhao, J. Chen, Y. Zhao, and S. Wang, “MTD-FRD:
 External validity. Threats to external validity concern the Malicious traffic detection method based on feature representation
generalizability of the results. The three datasets used (ISCX- and conditional diffusion model,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 242,
 Oct. 2025, Art. no. 104256.
VPN, CICIoT2023, CTU-Malware) cover diverse network [7] H. Zhang et al., “Revolutionizing encrypted traffic classification with
environments and encryption protocols. However, they do not MH-net: A multi-view heterogeneous graph model,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
represent all possible encrypted traffic scenarios. Therefore, Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 1048–1056.
 [8] S. Dong, “Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for
the results may not fully capture nuances of emerging encryp- network traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 176, Aug. 2021,
tion techniques or novel attack vectors. Art. no. 114885.
 [9] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Wei, D. Niu, and N. Fu, “Classify traffic
 rather than flow: Versatile multi-flow encrypted traffic classification with
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK flow clustering,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2,
 pp. 1446–1466, Apr. 2024.
 To address the challenges of incomplete feature representa- [10] S. Xu, G. Geng, X. Jin, D. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic paths:
tion and limited labeled data in encrypted traffic classification, Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE Trans.
this paper proposes CL-ViME, a self-supervised encrypted Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
 [11] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
traffic classification model built upon three key technical encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
components. First, we introduce a packet-temporal matrix Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
that fuses fine-grained packet headers with macroscopic flow- [12] Z. Song et al., “i2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE
level temporal patterns, forming a more comprehensive and Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2023,
informative representation of encrypted traffic. Second, we doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
design a Vertical ViT-MoE architecture tailored to traffic struc- [13] X. Qiu, G. Cheng, W. Zhu, D. Niu, and N. Fu, “Dual-channel interactive
ture. It uses vertical patching to preserve packet sequencing graph transformer for traffic classification with message-aware flow
 representation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 685–693.
and employs dynamic expert routing to select the most suit- [14] X. Yang, F. Tong, F. Jiang, and G. Cheng, “A lightweight and dynamic
able expert subnetworks, thereby improving representational open-set intrusion detection for Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE
quality and computational efficiency. Third, we develop a dual- Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 2930–2943, 2025.
 [15] K. Xu et al., “Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification
granularity contrastive pretraining scheme that removes the based on masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
need for manual labels. It constructs complementary packet- pp. 17330–17340, May 2024.
level and flow-level views of the same traffic sample and aligns [16] X. Han et al., “Contramtd: An unsupervised malicious network traffic
 detection method based on contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web
their representations, enabling the model to learn essential Conf., 2024, pp. 1680–1689.
and invariant features in an unsupervised manner. These [17] X. Lin et al., “CETP: A novel semi-supervised framework based on
components jointly enhance the robustness and generalization contrastive pre-training for imbalanced encrypted traffic classification,”
capability of CL-ViME. Comput. Security, vol. 143, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 103892.
 [18] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection
 Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness and superi- of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
ority of the proposed CL-ViME model. Results on three public Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.
encrypted traffic datasets show that CL-ViME consistently [19] X. Chen, L. Han, D. Zhan, and H. Ye, “MIETT: Multi-instance encrypted
 traffic transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. AAAI
surpasses state-of-the-art models. In particular, it maintains Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 15922–15929.
strong robustness and generalization under class imbalance [20] J. Xu et al., “A cascaded broad learning network embedded image
in real-world malware traffic, highlighting its potential for features for malware traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun.
 Netw., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2426–2439, Aug. 2025.
deployment in complex network environments. However,
 [21] A. Finamore, C. Wang, J. Krolikowski, J. M. Navarro, F. Chen, and
the CL-ViME model suffers from high computational cost D. Rossi, “Replication: Contrastive learning and data augmentation in
and limited robustness to distribution shifts introduced by traffic classification using a flowpic input representation,” in Proc. ACM
emerging encryption protocols. Future work should investigate Internet Meas. Conf., 2023, pp. 36–51.
 [22] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
lightweight architectures to enhance efficiency and explore A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark
incremental or continual learning mechanisms to improve for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13,
model’s adaptability to evolving traffic distributions. p. 5941, 2023.
 [23] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
 R EFERENCES pp. 108–116.
 [1] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN: [24] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
 Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,” image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538, (ICLR), 2021, pp. 1–22.
 Sep./Oct. 2022. [25] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf.
 [2] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
 network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., [26] C. Riquelme et al., “Scaling vision with sparse mixture of experts,” in
 vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2161–2178, May/Jun. 2025. Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 8583–8595.
1434 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

[27] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for Jinfu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. degree in computer science and technology from the
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9729–9738. Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
[28] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework Wuhan, China, in 2009. He is currently a Full
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Professor with the School of Computer Science and
 Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University,
[29] A. V. D. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with Zhenjiang, China. He has published more than
 contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748. 100 papers in some famous journals or confer-
[30] “Mawi working group traffic archive,” 2013. [Online]. Available: http:// ences, including in TRel, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 mawi.wide.ad.jp/mawi/ ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT , ACM
[31] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, Transactions on Privacy and Security, Journal of
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” Systems and Software, NDSS, ISSTA, and ASE. His major research interests
 in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016, include software testing, software security, and intrusion detection. He is a
 pp. 407–414. member of the ACM, and a Distinguished Member of the China Computer
[32] “Stratosphere laboratory datasets,” 2015. Accessed: Mar. 13, 2025. Federation.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-overview
[33] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Self-supervised traffic classification: Flow embedding and few-shot solutions,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3054–3067, Jun. 2024.
[34] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
 based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 5420–5427.
[35] J. B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent—A new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
 pp. 21271–21284.

 Saihua Cai (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from China Agricultural University, China, in Shengran Wang received the master’s degree
 2020. He is currently an Associate Professor with the in software engineering from Jiangsu University,
 School of Computer Science and Communication Zhenjiang, China, in 2023, where he is currently pur-
 Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China. suing the Ph.D. degree in computer science. He has
 He has published more than 100 papers in some published more than 20 papers in some famous jourfamous journals or conferences, including in IEEE nals and conferences. His research interests include
 T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE Android malware detection, intrusion detection, and
 M ANAGEMENT, ACM Transactions on Privacy and Fuzzing.
 Security, TRel, IST, Computers & Security, and
 ASE. His major research interests include intrusion
detection and encrypted traffic classification. He is a member of the ACM,
and a Senior Member of the China Computer Federation.

 Lizhou Chen received the B.E. degree in intelligent Guofeng Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the
 science and technology from Jiangsu University in Ph.D. degree in agricultural engineering from China
 2024, where he is currently pursuing the master’s Agricultural University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He
 degree in computer technology. His research interest is currently an Associate Professor with the School
 includes encrypted traffic classification and con- of Information Science and Technology, Taishan
 trastive learning. University, Shandong, China. He has published more
 than 20 papers in journals or conferences. His major
 research interests include IoT security, blockchain
 security, and data security. He is a member of the
 China Computer Federation.