IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026 715

Comparative Analysis of Deep Learning Models for
 Real-World ISP Network Traffic Forecasting
 Josef Koumar , Student Member, IEEE, Timotej Smoleň, Kamil Jeřábek , and Tomáš Čejka

 Abstract—Accurate network traffic forecasting is crucial for ISPs to maintain service quality, mitigate security risks, and
Internet service providers to optimize resources, improve user optimize bandwidth in real time [2].
experience, and detect anomalies. Until recently, the lack of However, real-time monitoring alone is insufficient for
large-scale, real-world datasets limited the fair evaluation of
forecasting methods. The newly released CESNET-TimeSeries24 proactively managing network resources. To anticipate varidataset addresses this gap by providing multivariate traffic ations in demand and prevent service disruptions, ISPs
data from thousands of devices over 40 weeks at multiple increasingly adopt advanced forecasting techniques to predict
aggregation granularities and hierarchy levels. In this study, traffic patterns, optimize resource allocation, scale network
we leverage the CESNET-TimeSeries24 dataset to conduct a capacity, and sustain service quality under fluctuating
systematic evaluation of state-of-the-art deep learning models and
provide practical insights. Moreover, our analysis reveals trade- loads [3]. The predictions can be integrated into Softwareoffs between prediction accuracy and computational efficiency Defined Networking (SDN), Network Function Virtualization
across different levels of granularity. Beyond model comparison, (NFV), and Service Level Agreement (SLA) frameworks [4],
we establish a transparent and reproducible benchmarking [5], [6], [7], allowing for programmable orchestration of
framework, releasing source code and experiments to encourage network resources based on predicted traffic demands. For
standardized evaluation and accelerate progress in network
traffic forecasting research. example, SDN controllers can leverage traffic forecasts to
 proactively adjust routing paths and traffic engineering poli-
 Index Terms—Neural networks, deep learning, network traffic cies, minimizing congestion and improving latency [4]. NFV
forecasting, network traffic prediction, network monitoring.
 environments benefit from forecasting by dynamically scaling
 Virtual Network Functions (VNFs) and optimally placing
 them across distributed cloud and edge data centers, thus
 I. I NTRODUCTION enhancing service elasticity and reducing operational costs [5].
 RAFFIC monitoring is a cornerstone of effective SLA monitoring benefits from predicting violations early
T network management and cybersecurity, providing
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) with critical insights to
 and guiding automated resource allocation, which improves
 network performance [6], [7].
detect anomalies, mitigate congestion, and maintain network The rise of diverse, high-bandwidth services has signifiperformance [1]. The surge in video streaming, cloud com- cantly increased network traffic variability. Traditional models
puting, and online gaming is driving rapid growth in Internet like ARIMA and exponential smoothing, which assume linusage, contributing to increasingly complex and less pre- earity, struggle with ISP data due to prevalent non-linear
dictable network traffic. Efficient network monitoring allows and high-frequency fluctuations, especially during peak traffic
 hours [8].
 Received 20 March 2025; revised 7 October 2025 and 13 November 2025; The adoption of deep learning models, particularly neural
accepted 18 November 2025. Date of publication 25 November 2025; date of
current version 29 December 2025. This work was supported by the Student networks, has been driven by their ability to capture complex
Summer Research Program 2024 of FIT CTU in Prague. Furthermore, this temporal dependencies across forecasting domains [9]. This
research was partially funded by the Ministry of Interior of the Czech Republic capability significantly enhances network traffic forecasting
in project “Flow-Based Encrypted Traffic Analysis” (VJ02010024), by the
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic in project and provides ISPs with deeper insights into usage trends and
“e-Infrastructure CZ” (LM2023054), and also by the Grant Agency of the anomalies. However, Wu and Keogh [9] emphasize that eval-
CTU in Prague, grant No. SGS23/207/OHK3/3T/18 funded by the MEYS uating recent advancements in forecasting methods remains
of the Czech Republic. Computational resources were provided by the
e-INFRA CZ project (ID:90254), supported by the Ministry of Education, difficult due to the lack of long-term real-world datasets.
Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic. The associate editor coordinating They show that relying on synthetic datasets can create the
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Y. Diao. illusion of progress that does not generalize to real-world
(Corresponding author: Josef Koumar.)
 Josef Koumar and Tomáš Čejka are with the Faculty of Information conditions. Similarly, Ferreira et al. [10] identify the absence
Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague, 160 00 Prague, of a reference dataset for network traffic forecasting as a
Czech Republic, and also with the Administration and Security Tools major obstacle to performance evaluation. They note that most
Department, CESNET, a.l.e., 160 00 Prague, Czech Republic (e-mail: koumajos@fit.cvut.cz). approaches are still tested only on artificially generated data
 Timotej Smoleň is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Czech or non-publicly available data.
Technical University in Prague, 160 00 Prague, Czech Republic. The recent release of the CESNET-TimeSeries24
 Kamil Jeřábek is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Brno
University of Technology, 601 90 Brno, Czech Republic. dataset [11] provides real-world ISP network traffic data from
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3636557 thousands of devices at multiple aggregation granularities,
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

hierarchical levels, and with various time series metrics. This (SARIMA), Exponential Smoothing (ETS), or Hidden Markov
dataset enables a level of comprehensive evaluation in network Models [12], [13], [14], [15]. However, there are several limtraffic forecasting that was previously impossible with limited itations of statistical-based forecasting [10], [16], [17]. Most
or artificially generated datasets. Building on this, our study of them rely on the assumption of linearity, which restricts
conducts an in-depth investigation of the performance and their ability to model complex, non-linear relationships often
limitations of state-of-the-art deep learning models across present in real-world systems. Methods like ARIMA and
diverse conditions and settings, while leveraging the unique regression models require stationarity in data, meaning trends
features of CESNET-TimeSeries24. Using a common, reliable and variance must remain constant over time, necessitatdataset allows for a direct comparison of the strengths and ing preprocessing that can complicate analysis. Moreover,
weaknesses of different forecasting models, offering critical these models are sensitive to parameter estimation, and their
insights for the development of forecasting frameworks and predictive accuracy can degrade in highly dynamic envisystems. Our investigation is guided by the following research ronments where relationships between variables fluctuate.
questions: Statistical approaches also struggle to handle multivariate
 RQ1: What is the performance of state-of-the-art deep interactions effectively, leading to oversimplified represenlearning models for real-world network traffic forecasting? tations of intricate patterns. These limitations collectively
 RQ2: How do the training and prediction windows impact underscore the challenges of applying statistical models in
the forecasting performance of state-of-the-art deep learning scenarios with complex, non-linear, or rapidly changing
models? dynamics.
 RQ3: How does the granularity of aggregation (e.g., Therefore, deep learning has emerged in recent years
individual IP addresses, subnets, or institutions) impact the as a transformative approach to network traffic forecasting.
forecasting performance of state-of-the-art deep learning Primarily due to its ability to model non-linear relationmodels? ships, capture complex dependencies within data, handle
 RQ4: How do different monitored metrics (e.g., transmitted non-stationary time series effectively, and provide superior
data, TCP / UDP ratio, average duration) affect the forecasting scalability [10], [18].
performance of state-of-the-art deep learning models? Deep learning became increasingly valuable for forecasting,
 The contribution of this study goes beyond comparing particularly with the introduction of Long Short-Term Memory
advanced forecasting models on a comprehensive dataset. (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU), which mitigate
It offers insights that are both model-specific and broadly the exploding and vanishing gradient problems that affected
relevant to the network forecasting domain, enabled for the earlier Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [19]. These deep
first time by the availability of a large-scale real-world dataset. learning models have been successfully applied in the network
In addition, by combining rigorous methodological practices traffic forecasting domain [20], [21]. Nevertheless, the rapid
with open-access resources, we establish a fair, transparent, expansion of deep learning forecasting variants in recent years
and reproducible benchmark for future research. Our goal is underscores the need for a comprehensive evaluation.
to encourage the adoption of standardized datasets, enabling The first major enhancement of LSTM and GRU models
consistent comparisons and generating practical insights. To was their integration with Fully Convolutional Networks
further support reproducibility, we release the source code for (FCNs) [22], [23]. Moreover, Temporal Convolutional
all models and experiments on GitHub.1 Networks (TCNs) and their combination with an RNN variant
 The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II were successfully applied in network traffic forecasting [24].
describes the related literature. Section III describes the These hybrid models gained popularity due to their ability
dataset used. Section IV describes selected state-of-the-art to outperform classical approaches while requiring minimal
deep learning models for forecasting. Section V describes the data preprocessing and easily scaling to large time series
methodology of the comparison analysis. Section VI describes datasets [25].
the results. Section VII discusses the research questions and Moreover, more sophisticated deep learning models origthe lessons learned. Finally, Section VIII summarizes the inally developed for image classification have also been
paper. applied in the time series forecasting area. Notable examples
 include Residual Networks (ResNet) [26]. Building on these
 II. R ELATED W ORK architectures, additional models have been developed, such
 Network traffic forecasting is a critical area of research due as InceptionTime [27], which integrates residual blocks with
to its importance in network optimization, resource allocation, Global Average Pooling layers.
and anomaly detection [2], [3], [10]. Various approaches have Finally, one of the most recent forecasting approaches
been developed over the years, leveraging both statistical and uses Transformers, which have become a prominent tool in
machine learning methods [10]. time series forecasting due to their capability to model long-
 Currently, statistically-based methods are commonly applied range dependencies, critical for network traffic prediction [28].
in network traffic forecasting with many published approaches. However, traditional Transformers face challenges such as
Such statistically-based methods include Auto-Regressive inefficiency and a lack of interpretability in capturing temporal
Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA), Seasonal ARIMA dynamics. To address these limitations, several advancements
 have been proposed. For instance, ETSformer [29] introduces
 1 https://github.com/koumajos/isp-forecasting-benchmark exponential smoothing and frequency attention mechanisms to
KOUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DEEP LEARNING MODELS 717

 TABLE I
replace conventional self-attention, enabling the model to cap- AVAILABLE T IME S ERIES M ETRICS FOR 1 H OUR AGGREGATION IN THE
ture both seasonal and trend components in a decomposable CESNET-T IMESERIES 24 DATASET
and interpretable manner. Similarly, models like Informer [30]
and Autoformer [31] leverage sparsity and frequency-based
approaches to enhance efficiency and adaptability in longterm sequence forecasting. Despite their success, recent studies
question the necessity of complex Transformer-based architectures, with findings that simple linear models can outperform
them in several scenarios [32]. Nevertheless, Transformers
remain at the forefront of innovations in network traffic
forecasting due to their ability to incorporate dynamic timedependent features and extract meaningful patterns from
large-scale, non-stationary data [33], [34].
 The forecasting is usually done separately when multiple
time series of multiple processes are present [35]. However, a
recent study [36] also studied forecasting of groups of related
time series, exploring how algorithms can leverage shared
structure among series.
 Many of the published works utilize different datasets,
which makes approaches hardly comparable. For example,
many datasets used in the network traffic forecasting domain
were not created with the intention of forecasting evaluation,
making them unsuitable for such purposes. An example of
this is the WIDE project data in the MAWI archive [37],
which contains only 15 minutes per day. Moreover, some
related work are built on datasets that are not publicly
available [38], [39], making it impossible to independently
verify the results. Others rely on synthetic data [40], [41],
which, while useful for controlled experiments, fail to provide
insights into real-world network environments. Furthermore,
even widely used datasets, such as KDD 99, NSL-KDD,
Internet2 [42], GEANT [43], and Italia Telecom [44], may lack
the comprehensive representation of modern, dynamic traffic
patterns required for robust evaluation.
 The recent release of a large, standardized, and publicly
available real-world dataset, CESNET-TimeSeries24 [11], provides a valuable resource for comparing existing forecasting
models. This comprehensive dataset enables a more consistent
evaluation of deep learning approaches in realistic network
scenarios. By leveraging this dataset, our study aims to per-
 Fig. 1. Example of time series metrics aggregated by 1 hour from the
form a comparative analysis of state-of-the-art deep learning CESNET-TimeSeries24 dataset.
models, filling a crucial gap in the domain by establishing
more reliable and meaningful performance assessment.
 values were adapted for the 1 hour and 1 day series incorporat-
 III. DATASET ing sum, average and standard deviation statistics to enhance
 To evaluate state-of-the-art deep learning models for real- temporal granularity. We limit this study to 1 hour aggregation
world network traffic forecasting, we selected a dataset from interval. The time series metrics for 1 hour aggregation interval
an actual operational network. The CESNET-TimeSeries24 are listed in Table I. The example multivariate time series
dataset [11] captures network traffic data from the ISP network aggregated by 1 hour is shown in Figure 1.
CESNET3.2 A standout feature of the CESNET-TimeSeries24 dataset
 The dataset is uniquely comprehensive, offering multivariate is its extensive coverage and granularity. The dataset encomtime series created through traffic aggregation at three distinct passes not only general network traffic but also highly detailed
intervals: 10 minutes, 1 hour, and 1 day. Each interval-specific time series across 283 institutions, 548 institutional subnets,
time series contains multiple metrics useful for network traffic and over 270,000 individual IP addresses. This extensive
forecasting and anomaly detection. Given that the original range provides a robust basis for comparative analysis of
capture interval was 10 minutes, metrics that represent unique deep learning models, enabling researchers to benchmark forecasting performance across multiple hierarchical levels within
 2 The Czech Educational and Science Network. the network. This dataset enables a detailed examination of
718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 temporal patterns and seasonality, making it unsuitable for datasets with significant time dependencies.
 Nevertheless, its role as a baseline is crucial, as it
 sets a minimal performance threshold that deep learning
 models should surpass, ensuring their predictive capacity
 is not inferior to a simplistic, non-adaptive approach.
 SARIMA (Seasonal AutoRegressive Integrated Moving
 Average) is a statistical model for time series forecasting. SARIMA is interpretable and effective for data with
 strong linear trends and seasonal structures. However,
 due to reliance on linear assumptions, SARIMA cannot capture complex nonlinear relationships in data.
 SARIMA is used to compare deep learning models with
 a classical statistical approach.
 LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) networks are
 well-regarded for their capacity to capture long-term
 dependencies in sequence data, as they mitigate the vanishing gradient problem that hinders traditional RNNs.
 The architecture utilizes memory cells, which allow the
 model to retain information over extended time steps,
 making it highly effective for time-series prediction
Fig. 2. Example of different hierarchical levels in time series metric Number tasks. However, LSTMs are computationally intensive
of bytes aggregated by 1 hour from the CESNET-TimeSeries24 dataset.
 and require substantial memory resources, which can be
 a limitation in environments with constrained computational power. Additionally, they tend to have a large
the scalability, adaptability, and performance of models in
 parameter count, which can lead to overfitting, especially
forecasting diverse traffic patterns within a real-world ISP
 when working with smaller datasets.
environment. Spanning a substantial 40-week period, from
 GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit) networks are a simplified
October 2023 to July 2024, the dataset captures both longalternative to LSTM networks, designed to efficiently
term trends and fine-grained fluctuations, making it suitable
 capture dependencies in sequential data while addressing
for comprehensive performance evaluation. The examples of
 the vanishing gradient problem. GRUs streamline the
different behaviors of time series of institutions, institution
 architecture by combining the forget and input gates
subnets, and IP addresses are shown in Figure 2.
 into a single update gate, which reduces the parameter
 count and computational demands. This makes GRUs
 IV. D EEP L EARNING M ODELS FOR F ORECASTING faster to train and more memory-efficient, especially on
 This section provides a brief description of model types smaller datasets or resource-constrained environments.
or particular state-of-the-art deep learning model architectures However, their simplified structure may limit their ability
chosen to be compared in this study. The types were chosen to model complex long-term dependencies as effectively
to represent versatility in time series prediction handling tasks as LSTMs, which can be a drawback for tasks requiring
and to vary in computational demands. extended temporal context.
 Moreover, we provide information about their general LSTM-FCN model [22] combines the strengths of
advantages and shortcomings that can be found in related LSTM networks with Fully Convolutional Networks
work. These models were selected due to their distinct archi- (FCNs), enabling the model to capture both temporal
tectural approaches, allowing for a comparative analysis of and spatial features in time-series data. This hybrid
their strengths and limitations in different predictive con- architecture improves feature extraction and helps gentexts. Given the diverse requirements of real-time network eralize better to complex data patterns. Nevertheless, the
operations, the models range from resource-intensive deep increased complexity of combining LSTM with FCN
learning architectures to more streamlined alternatives, each layers results in greater computational demands and can
offering unique benefits and trade-offs. Understanding these make training slower, especially on larger datasets or
differences is essential to assessing the deployability of models limited hardware.
in real-world network environments, where both computational GRU-FCN model [23] integrates GRUs with Fully
efficiency and prediction accuracy are critical factors. Convolutional Networks, blending the benefits of a
 Mean model used as a baseline for evaluating deep simpler recurrent architecture with powerful feature
 learning models, computes the average value of data- extraction capabilities. GRUs offer a streamlined alterpoints from the training window, and applies this mean native to LSTMs, potentially reducing training time
 as the prediction for each datapoint in the prediction due to their more efficient structure. Nevertheless,
 window. While its simplicity is advantageous for bench- GRU-FCN may not capture long-term dependencies
 marking, it can capture only trends and fails to capture with the same depth as LSTM models, which can
KOUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DEEP LEARNING MODELS 719

 be a drawback when handling complex, long-sequence
 data.
 ResNet models [26] are known for their residual connections, which help mitigate the vanishing gradient
 problem in deep neural networks, making them wellsuited for extracting hierarchical features in time-series
 data. The residual connections enable training deeper Fig. 3. Holistic view of methodology applied to each time series metric.
 architectures without the degradation issues typical
 in very deep networks. Nonetheless, ResNets can be
 resource-intensive and may require a significant amount and an IP address sample. We trained models on time series
 of data to reach their full potential, as they are prone to aggregated on 1 hour time intervals, and each time series metoverfitting on smaller datasets. ric was modelled separately. Thus, we provide a comparison
 InceptionTime model [27] is a deep convolutional of only univariate approaches. We evaluate models on all time
 model inspired by the Inception architecture, specifically series metrics available in the dataset.
 adapted for time-series classification. Its multi-scale Pre-processing involves several steps for each time series,
 feature extraction capabilities allow it to capture both as shown in Figure 3, including data splitting, standardizing
 local and global patterns in time-series data, contributing the data, and addressing missing values.
 to its high performance across various benchmark tasks.
 However, the model’s depth and complexity make it A. Missing Values Handling
 computationally expensive and may require extensive
 tuning to achieve optimal results, especially in cases Real-world network traffic is usually not constantly generwith less structured or lower-dimensional data. ated, especially in the case of monitoring a single device. Thus,
 RCLSTM (Random Connectivity LSTM) model [45] is it is inevitable that the collected time series contains missing
 an optimized variant of LSTM designed to reduce com- values [46], which was identified as one of the challenges of
 putational complexity while maintaining comparable the dataset [11].
 predictive performance. RCLSTM introduces stochastic In this comparative study, we fill missing values with zeros
 connectivity to conventional LSTM neurons, creating for most metrics. Since missing values in the dataset represent
 a sparse neural structure that significantly decreases an interval where no data was transmitted. Thus, the zero value
 the number of trainable parameters. This modification represents true information for metrics such as the number of
 improves computational efficiency, making the model IP flows, packets, and bytes. The zero values will force the
 particularly suitable for latency-stringent and power- model to learn how to predict when the device is not commuconstrained environments. Despite the reduction in nicating. However, modeling time series that naturally contain
 connections, RCLSTM preserves long-range dependen- zero values is a non-trivial challenge [47], [48]. Therefore, one
 cies effectively, making it highly applicable in tasks such of the objectives of this study is to verify how DL models
 as traffic forecasting and user mobility prediction. handle time series with filled missing values. Because in the
 ETSformer model [29] is a deep learning model dataset, there are extreme cases where zero values represent
 that integrates principles of Exponential Smoothing a majority of values. The direction and TCP/UDP ratios are
 (ETS) into the Transformer architecture. By embedding filled with 0.5 values, as they represent a true balance where
 trend and seasonal decomposition into the Transformer no data is transmitted.
 framework, ETSformer enhances interpretability while
 retaining the strengths of self-attention. This design B. Time Series Splitting, Normalization, and Sliding Window
 allows it to capture both short-term fluctuations Each time series is split into train, validation, and test sets
 and long-term patterns more effectively. However, for the correct model training and evaluation. The duration of
 ETSformer’s architecture is more complex than tradi- the training set represents the first 35% of the time series (14
 tional methods, and training can be computationally weeks). The validation set holds the next 5% (2 weeks), and
 demanding compared to other approaches. the remainder (24 weeks) is used as the test set.
 The models and architectures discussed in this section are At first, we fill in missing time series values with zeros.
commonly used in the time series prediction domain, each Then, we train the MinMax scaler on the train set and
providing promising robustness and modelling potential for transform the train, validation, and test parts of the data using
this task, while varying in computational complexity. The the fitted scaler.
variability in the chosen models should demonstrate the We used the sliding-window approach, which is a widely
potential for their application in real-world network operations, adopted method for splitting data into multiple training samwhere one has to balance between accuracy and computational ples from a single continuous time series stream. In our
efficiency. methodology, each neural network has an input of size equal
 to the number of consecutive time series values in a training
 V. M ETHODOLOGY window (also often referred to as a look-back window). The
 Our methodology follows the recommended usage of the training window has a fixed length from which the model
CESNET-TimeSeries24 dataset [11]. We use multiple dataset learns temporal dependencies. Based on this input, the model
parts provided in the dataset—institutions, institution subnets, generates a specified number of consecutive future values. The
720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE II TABLE III
 U SED T RAINING AND P REDICTION W INDOWS S UMMARY OF F INAL H YPERPARAMETERS

 search was conducted to explore various architectural and
 optimization configurations. This search includes the number
 of RNN layers, hidden layer size, batch size, learning rate,
 and number of epochs. The tested number of RNN layers
 and hidden size were chosen for each model based on related
Fig. 4. Illustration of time series partitioning into training, validation, and
test sets, along with the sliding window approach for generating overlapping work that uses the model for network traffic prediction. Most
training and prediction windows. of the models were trained with 1 to 5 RNN layers and
 hidden layer sizes from 20 to 200. We perform a search for
 optimal architecture on this scale of the number and sizes of
number of predicted future values depends on a predefined layers. The final architecture and hyperparameter settings are
prediction window size (also often referred to as a forecast presented in Table III.
horizon). These hyperparameters were selected based on the average
 The specific combinations of the training window size and results on a random sample of 50 time series from each dataset
the prediction window size evaluated in this study are sum- part. This setup of hyperparameter search allows finding a
marized in Table II. We have chosen training and prediction model setting that works generally well for network traffic
window sizes commonly used in related work [10], [49]. In prediction, regardless of the hierarchical level of aggregation
this comparative study, we systematically adjust the training or time series metric. Most of the models ended with one
and prediction window sizes to the day, week, and month. RNN layer, which may be surprising at first glance. However,
Thus, we explore how the performance of models varies it is in line with the findings of Zeng et al. [32]. In their
depending on the amount of historical data considered and the work, they prove that a simple model can outperform even
length of the forecast. complicated models such as a Transformer-based model. For
 Once a training–prediction pair is formed, the window the LSTM-FCN and GRU-FCN models, we also tuned the
is shifted forward by a prediction window. This process sizes of CNN layers. Both model architectures contain three
is repeated across the entire dataset, creating overlapping CNN layers with resulting best-performing sizes 128, 256, and
sequences that capture both short-term and long-term vari- 128 for LSTM-FCN, and 64-128-64 for GRU-FCN.
ations in the data. As a result, the model is trained on For the RCLSTM model, the architecture and hyperpadiverse input-output examples rather than relying on a single rameters were taken from the original publication, as their
continuous segment. Thereby, it improves the ability of models methodology also performs hourly forecasting. Likewise,
to generalize. InceptionTime, ResNet, and ETSformer were deployed with
 In this study, the sliding window approach is applied their standard, predefined architectures. By consolidating and
consistently to the training, validation, and test sets of the time refining the results of multiple experimental trials, the chosen
series, as illustrated in Figure 4. hyperparameters perform best as evaluated across a range of
 time series in used datasets parts, as presented in the next
C. Models Optimization section.
 For the SARIMA model, we train parameters using the same
 In this work, we are finding the optimal model architecture,
 methodology with all terms ranging from 1 to 5 and season
which can perform best in general when considering all time
 ranging from one datapoint to one week of datapoints. The
series. Because varying hyperparameters specifically tuned for
 best performing model on the validation set of time series was
each separate time series is often inapplicable in real-world
 SARIMA(1,1,1)(1,1,1,1).
scenarios [50].
 During the training of DL models, the Adam optimizer
was employed. We choose the Adam due to its adaptive D. Evaluation Measures
learning rate mechanism and momentum-based updates, which The evaluation follows a common procedure where we
generally improve convergence speed and training stability forecast the next values based on previous ones using the
compared to standard stochastic gradient descent [51]. trained models. To evaluate the precision of the forecasting,
 We use MSELoss as the loss function to measure discrep- we use two common fully unsupervised measures, Root Mean
ancies between predicted and actual values. A hyperparameter Square Error (RMSE) and R 2 -score (also called the coefficient
KOUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DEEP LEARNING MODELS 721

of determination). In the following equations, y represents VI. E XPERIMENTAL F ORECASTING R ESULTS
the actual normalized value, while ŷ represents the predicted We evaluate the selected DL models across each time series
value. The RMSE is defined as: metric and hierarchy level, leading to a large volume of results.
 
  N −1 However, due to space limitations, not all results can be
 1 
 RMSE(y, ŷ) =  (yi − ŷi )2 . (1) presented in this paper. Therefore, we focus on presenting the
 N results of the metric Number of bytes (transmitted data), as it is
 i=0
 The RMSE ranges from 0 to ∞, with lower values indicat- commonly used in the network traffic forecasting domain [10].
ing more accurate predictions. The measure highlights models The results for the remaining features are presented briefly,
that do not have large errors in prediction. However, its sensi- focusing on key insights. All results and analyses are available
tivity to large errors can be insufficient, sometimes obscuring in the supplementary materials on the GitHub repository.3
the distinction between consistent underperformance and occa- We trained 10 models (Mean, SARIMA, and 8 DL models)
sional extreme errors. across five combinations of training and prediction windows,
 The R 2 -score measure (also called the coefficient of deter- for 18 time series metrics within 1,831 time series (283 time
mination) is a statistical measure that shows the proportion of series for institutions, 548 time series for institutional subnets,
the dependent variable’s variance explained by the independent and 1000 time series for IP addresses), resulting in 1,647,900
variable, calculated using the following equation: final models. In this section, we present the results for the
 n Number of bytes time series metrics (transmitted data).
 2 (yi − ŷi )2
 R (y, ŷ) = 1 −  i=1  2 . (2)
 n
 i=1 yi − μy + A. Detailed Models Performance on Metric Number of Bytes
 The R 2 -score ranges from −∞ to 1, with higher values Tables IV and V present aggregated results for RMSE
indicating more accurate predictions. The R 2 -score measure and R 2 -score respectively. Each row represents the mean
estimates goodness-of-fit, showing how well the model cap- of one experimental setting with a specific training and
tures overall data trends. prediction window combination. The result is aggregated over
 Related work usually reports both RMSE and R 2 -score all time series within the dataset time series type (e.g.,
because of their distinguishing properties [52]. However, com- Institutions, Institutions subnets, and single IPs time series).
bining RMSE and R 2 -score measures offers a comprehensive The best-performing model is highlighted with a bold font
evaluation of forecasting models by capturing different aspects and green-shaded cell, while the worst-performing model is
of performance. Some studies combine various forecasting marked with a red-shaded cell. Lighter shades indicate second
measures, for example, by harmonic mean [53]. RMSE empha- best or worst performance, providing a relative sense of each
sizes large individual errors and highlights variance, while the model’s accuracy. If the values are very close or exactly the
R 2 -score reflects how well the model explains the variance in same within a row, it has the same shade.
the dependent variable. Different evaluation metrics capture distinct aspects of
 To balance these contributions, we introduce a new com- forecasting quality. The resulting RMSE indicates that models
bined measure that we call Harmonic score. This new measure such as GRU, LSTM, GRU-FCN, and LSTM-FCN perform
combines the RMSE, giving insight into prediction errors, similarly well with very close results in all scenarios. GRU
and the R 2 -score capturing trends, the two measures that and LSTM models slightly outperform their FCN-enhanced
we care about when forecasting network traffic. It uses the counterparts in R 2 -score better-matching the temporal trend
harmonic mean to penalize extreme values and ensure both of the data.
metrics influence the final score similarly. The Harmonic score It can be seen that the results of the model performances
measure is defined as: depend on the window settings. For example, settings with a
 RMSE R2 − 1 training window equal to or less than 168 values suggest that
 Harmonic score = 2 . (3) GRU-FCN and LSTM-FCN are quite effective in capturing
 RMSE + |R2 − 1|
 overall trends in the data. Contrarily, the setting with a training
 Since RMSE and R 2 -score operate on different scales, we window larger than 168 values suggests the opposite statement.
rescale them by clipping RMSE at a maximum of 11 and R 2 - The Mean and SARIMA do not perform well in the RMSE
score at a minimum of –10. These thresholds were chosen metric due to high prediction errors.
based on the distribution of model results. The distribution Mean model excels in terms of R 2 -score by accurately
follows approximately a normal distribution. We choose μ+2σ reflecting the general trend, although it lacks the capacity
to remove outliers. Therefore, this captures the central 97.8% to model seasonal or cyclic variations. Among the deep
of the data to limit the influence of outliers while preserving learning models, RCLSTM demonstrates superior performance
typical values. This adjustment allows for a meaningful combi- for one-step-ahead predictions of Institutional time series on
nation using the harmonic mean without distorting the overall R 2 -score. However, for the rest of the cases, it remains
evaluation. below average compared to the other models despite its
 This equation adjusts the R 2 -score by transforming it to promising superior performance described in [45]. The disalign with RMSE, ensuring both measures are compatible. The crepancy is probably caused by different tested time series
harmonic mean emphasizes instances where both measures
indicate precision, offering a clear, balanced evaluation. 3 https://github.com/koumajos/isp-forecasting-benchmark
722 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE IV
 OVERALL M EAN RMSE S HOWS THAT BASELINE M EAN AND SARIMA Y IELD THE L ARGEST E RRORS (L OWER I S B ETTER ), W HILE GRU, LSTM,
 GRU-FCN, AND LSTM-FCN P ERFORM B EST. OTHER , M ORE C OMPLEX M ODELS S HOW H IGHER E RRORS , W ITH I NCEPTION T IME E VEN
 U NDERPERFORMING THE BASELINE IN S EVERAL C ASES

 TABLE V
 OVERALL M EAN R 2 −score S HOWS BASELINE M EAN P ERFORMS B EST, F OLLOWED BY GRU, LSTM, AND T HEIR FCN VARIANTS , W HILE
 I NCEPTION T IME P ERFORMS W ORST

of the original work and the time series from real-world The SARIMA model is frequently used in the network
network traffic. Finally, no single model consistently out- traffic domain [10], [13], [54]. In our experiments, however,
performs the others when predicting over longer horizons. it shows weak performance, with high RMSE and low
The ETSformer, the most complex model based on trans- R 2 -scores. This outcome is largely due to our setup, which
formers, achieves comparable performance with the leading seeks a single best model configuration applicable across
models. all time series in the dataset. SARIMA performs well only
KOUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DEEP LEARNING MODELS 723

 TABLE VI
 R ESULTING M EAN Harmonic Score S HOWS T HAT GRU, LSTM, AND T HEIR FCN VARIANTS P ERFORM B EST, W HILE
 M ORE C OMPLEX M ODELS P ERFORM W ORSE

when its hyperparameters are tuned for each individual We also observe that InceptionTime is the weakest perseries. However, this requirement is often impractical in real- former across all evaluation measures, followed by ResNet.
world deployments [50]. Its performance also deteriorates InceptionTime, originally designed for time series classifiwith increasing proportions of zero values caused by device cation, struggles with network traffic forecasting due to its
inactivity (see [11, Fig. 6]). In contrast, SARIMA performs reliance on multi-scale convolutions, which increase model
reliably on time series without zero values, where it can complexity without yielding significant performance gains.
predict the next data point based on longer historical patterns. Its limited ability to capture long-term dependencies further
Nevertheless, we utilize SARIMA only as a baseline for hampers its accuracy. Similarly, ResNet, despite the use
comparison in this work. of residual connections, appears less effective in modeling
 Table VI summarizes the forecasting performance using the sequential patterns, potentially leading to suboptimal general-
Harmonic score, a metric that combines multiple evaluation ization at high computational costs. These findings highlight
aspects into a single measure. The results show that the GRU, the need for architectures better suited to network time series
LSTM, and LSTM-FCN architectures produce very similar forecasting, such as those incorporating recurrent or attentionresults in several configurations. Despite the GRU-FCN model based mechanisms.
demonstrating superior performance in most experimental
settings with a training period of 168 or less, it shows a
significant drop in the score in the setting involving the IP B. Factors Influencing Model Predictability
address dataset, with a training window of 744 and a prediction A clear performance trend emerges across the different
window of 168. This decrease prevented GRU-FCN from dataset parts, reflecting the models’ ability to capture data temoutperforming other DL models in the overall mean. poral trends based on the R 2 -score. Forecasting performance
 Overall, classical architectures such as GRU, LSTM, and is highest for the Institution dataset, declines for Institution
their convolutionally enhanced variants achieve similarly accu- subnets, and is lowest for the IP address sample. This
rate results in terms of RMSE, R 2 -score, and Harmonic degradation likely stems from the increasing proportion of
score. On the macro average, GRU-FCN performs best for missing values, which are minimal in the Institution dataset
the Institution dataset, LSTM-FCN for the Institution subnets but significantly more prevalent in the IP address sample. The
dataset, and GRU for the IP address dataset. Considering the impact of missing data is further supported by the strong
overall macro average across all datasets, GRU produces the negative correlation (–0.69 for the IP address dataset) between
most precise forecasts, followed by LSTM. the ratio of missing samples and the R 2 -score.
 The transformer-based model ETSformer achieves an over- Analyzing the most and least predictable time series reveals
all macro average result close to leading models. Mainly, the that less predictable series often display sudden, abnormal
results below average on the IP address dataset part, causing spikes in values, while the most predictable series follow
the difference between ETSformer and the leading models. more regular patterns. This observation is supported by
724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 Fig. 7. Overall mean Harmonic score for each model shows how well the
 models perform among all evaluated metrics.

 Metrics representing aggregate traffic volumes, such as the
 Number of flows and Number of packets, generally follow
 similar patterns to the Number of bytes and are effectively
Fig. 5. Matrix providing results of overall mean Harmonic score for all time
series metrics shows that the simpler models, including ETSformer, perform captured by DL models. These metrics often exhibit seasonal
better than baseline Mean and SARIMA while leaving more complicated behavior, making them easier to predict, especially with
models behind. recurrent architectures combined with convolutional layers.
 The top 5 DL models perform very similarly on these metrics.
 In contrast, forecasting more dynamic and structurally
 complex metrics, such as TCP/UDP ratios and Direction
 ratios, proves significantly more challenging. These metrics
 are prone to sudden fluctuations due to external influences,
 such as changes in user behavior. Our results show that DL
 models struggle to capture these fluctuations, leading to a
 lower R 2 -score and increased forecasting error.
 Overall mean result across all dataset parts and time series
 metrics is shown in Fig. 7. The results mostly follow the
 number of bytes. It can be seen that more structurally complex
 metrics are differentiators for the performance of models.
Fig. 6. Overall mean Harmonic score over all models for each time series Some models generally keep good performance regardless
metrics shows how easily predictable each time series is. The Number of bytes
metric that is commonly utilized in network time series forecasting belongs of the metric, while some are struggling to keep up. The
to the less challenging ones. ETSformer performs comparatively well and achieves the
 second-best position, even outcompeting other models in
 various metrics and measures.
autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation analyses, which We performed a statistical significance test to objectively
show that highly predictable time series typically exhibit validate the observed performance differences between modstrong seasonal behavior. els. We used a one-way ANOVA F-test, which compares the
 In addition, the choice of training and prediction windows two best models (GRU and ETSformer models). The result of
significantly affects model performance. Larger prediction the ANOVA test is shown in Table VII. Statistically significant
windows generally degrade forecast accuracy, as models strug- differences (p < 0.05) are consistently observed across most
gle to capture long-term dependencies with the same precision settings, confirming the robustness of our findings. However,
as short-term predictions. for one experimental setting, there is no significant difference
 between GRU and ETSformer.
C. Other Time Series Metrics
 While the Number of bytes (i.e., transmitted data) is often D. Deployability
used as a primary metric for network traffic forecasting, Model deployability is a key factor; therefore, we measured
our results reveal that forecasting evaluation measures vary the training and inference time of all DL models. The training
considerably across different metrics, as shown in Fig. 5 and was conducted on MetaCentrum,4 which manages the National
Fig. 6. Some metrics follow similar predictability patterns to Grid Infrastructure (NGI) as part of the European Grid
the Number of bytes, while others present additional challenges Infrastructure (EGI). To ensure consistency, all experiments
due to their inherent variability and dependence on specific were run on an identical pool of machines with fixed configunetwork behaviors. Complete forecasting results for all met- rations. Each run used a dedicated virtual environment with 4
rics, along with code and supplementary analyses, are available
on GitHub3 . 4 https://metavo.metacentrum.cz/en/index.html
KOUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DEEP LEARNING MODELS 725

 TABLE VII
 R ESULTS OF A O NE -WAY ANOVA F-T EST B ETWEEN GRU AND the performance of state-of-the-art deep learning models
 ETS FORMER M ODELS W ITH α = 5%. T HE P-VALUE I S ROUNDED TO 6 on a public real-world network dataset, and highlight the
 D ECIMAL P LACES practical implications of our results for network traffic
 forecasting.
 RQ1: What is the performance of state-of-the-art deep
 learning models for real-world network traffic forecasting?
 Our evaluation shows that state-of-the-art deep learning
 models can achieve competitive forecasting accuracy for realworld network traffic. However, no single model consistently
 outperforms others across all experimental settings, including
 dataset partitions, training windows, and prediction windows.
 The results suggest that while deep learning models can
 provide accurate forecasts, their effectiveness depends heavily
 on the specific experimental conditions.
 GRU and LSTM architectures achieve the best overall
 results, while their hybrid variants with fully convolutional networks (GRU-FCN and LSTM-FCN) perform
 slightly better on the Institution and Institution subnets
 timeseries. Notably, GRU-FCN offers a balanced trade-off
 between accuracy and computational efficiency. In contrast, models like InceptionTime and ResNet underperform
 in most settings, possibly because their hierarchical fea-
 TABLE VIII
 ture extraction mechanisms are less suited for capturing
 R ELATIVE T RAINING AND P REDICTION T IMES IN S ECONDS the temporal dependencies and variability in network traffic
 (N ORMALIZED PER 100 DATAPOINTS ) data.
 RQ2: How do the training and prediction windows impact
 the forecasting performance of state-of-the-art deep learning
 models?
 The selection of training and prediction windows significantly impacts model accuracy, balancing the trade-off
 between capturing long-term dependencies and managing
 computational overhead. Short training windows often fail
 to capture temporal patterns beyond immediate fluctuations,
 leading to suboptimal performance. Conversely, excessively
 long training windows introduce noise and increase computational costs without substantial accuracy gains. However, our
exclusive CPUs, minimizing interference from other processes results show that the highest precision was achieved with small
and ensuring comparable results. training windows, while increasing the window size led to a
 Table VIII compares the relative training and prediction decline in performance.
times of each model, normalized to 100 data points over all For prediction windows, we observe a consistent trend: foreexperiments. These metrics highlight the computational feasi- casting single next value yields significantly higher accuracy
bility of each model for real-world deployment. Models with than longer prediction horizons. The degradation in accuracy
long training times may be impractical for frequent retraining, over extended prediction windows is primarily due to error
while high prediction latency can hinder responsiveness, par- accumulation, a phenomenon observed across all evaluated
ticularly when forecasting a single next value. The results show DL models. Notably, LSTM and GRU exhibit the most stable
that GRU-FCN consistently achieves the shortest training and performance across different prediction windows, highlighting
prediction times across all dataset segments and experiments, their robustness in handling extended forecasts.
making it a strong candidate for scenarios with limited time or Our findings suggest that much of the network traffic
computational resources. Moreover, the training and prediction time series lacks strong seasonality or contains large outliers,
times of ETSformer exceeded all other models by more than which models with short training and prediction windows
ten times. Therefore, ETSformer deployability is questionable, handle more effectively. As a result, larger windows perform
even with overall second-best results. worse in this study. However, longer training and prediction
 windows could be advantageous in real-world deployments,
 as they require fewer inferences and are less reactive to
 VII. D ISCUSSION abnormal spikes, making them potentially useful for anomaly
 In this section, we discuss key findings related to the detection.
four research questions (RQs) investigated in this study. RQ3: How does the granularity of aggregation (e.g.,
We examine factors affecting forecasting precision, compare individual IP addresses, subnets, or institutions) impact the
726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

forecasting performance of state-of-the-art deep learning 1) Multi-time-series models: Maintaining a separate model
models? for each time series is both computationally expensive
 The forecasting precision of DL models is strongly influ- and operationally impractical. Future work should focus
enced by the level of aggregation. Our results show that the on developing a universal model capable of handling difability to capture trend patterns is highest at the institution ferent instances within the same time-series aggregation
level, decreases at the subnet level, and is lowest at the without the need for retraining.
individual IP address level. 2) Univariate vs. multivariate models: Training separate
 This trend is primarily due to increasing data variability and models for each time series metric allows fine-tuning for
sparsity at finer granularities. Institution-level traffic patterns specific behaviors but lacks scalability, requiring extenare generally more stable and exhibit clear periodic trends, sive computational resources and maintenance. Future
enabling higher predictive accuracy. In contrast, individual work should explore the trade-offs between univariate
IP addresses often contain irregular spikes and a higher and multivariate models for network traffic forecasting.
proportion of missing values, making them significantly harder 3) Handling Heterogeneous Data: Effectively managing
to forecast. This aligns with our correlation analysis, which large-scale, heterogeneous time series with high missing
shows a strong negative relationship (–0.69) between missing value rates is crucial. While imputing gaps with zeros
data and R 2 -score at the IP address level. Models trained can degrade model performance, it remains valuable for
on IP-level data must contend with high noise levels and detecting outages and other critical events.
unpredictability, leading to increased forecasting errors. 4) Improving Interpretability: Deep learning models often
 These findings suggest that different modeling strategies function as closed boxes, offering little insight into their
may be required for different hierarchical levels. Institution- decision-making process. Enhancing interpretability is
level forecasting may be well-suited to simpler recurrent crucial for resource allocation and anomaly detection,
models, while IP-level forecasting may require more advanced as it improves trust, facilitates debugging, and enables
architectures or preprocessing techniques to handle sparsity more informed decision-making.
and irregularities effectively.
 RQ4: How do different monitored metrics (e.g., transmitted R EFERENCES
data, TCP / UDP ratio, average duration) affect the forecast-
 [1] A. D’Alconzo, I. Drago, A. Morichetta, M. Mellia, and P. Casa, “A
ing performance of state-of-the-art deep learning models? survey on big data for network traffic monitoring and analysis,” IEEE
 Forecasting accuracy varies significantly across different Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 800–813, Sep. 2019.
network traffic metrics. Metrics with clear seasonal patterns, [2] E. S. Hassan, A. E. A. Abdelaal, A. S. Oshaba, A. El-Emary,
 M. I. Dessouky, and F. E. A. El-Samie, “Optimizing bandwidth utisuch as the number of flows, packets, and bytes, are well lization and traffic control in ISP networks for enhanced smart
predicted by DL models. In contrast, highly variable metrics, agriculture,” PLoS ONE, vol. 19, no. 3, 2024, Art. no. e0300650.
such as TCP/UDP ratios, pose challenges due to their irregular [3] D. H. Oliveira, F. M. V. Filho, T. P. de Araújo, J. Celestino, and
 R. L. Gomes, “Adaptive model for network resources prediction in
fluctuations and external dependencies, resulting in lower modern Internet service providers,” in Proc. IEEE ISCC, 2020, pp. 1–6.
forecasting precision. Aggregation level also plays a crucial [4] Y. Li and M. Chen, “Software-defined network function virtualization:
role—metrics at the institution level are more predictable than A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 2542–2553, 2015.
 [5] T. Cucinotta et al., “Forecasting operation metrics for virtualized
those at the IP level due to reduced noise. Similarly, longer network functions,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 21st Int. Symp. Cluster, Cloud
aggregation windows improve performance for volume-based Internet Comput. (CCGrid), 2021, pp. 596–605.
metrics but may obscure short-term variations in ratio-based [6] S. Shenoy, D. Gorinevsky, and N. Laptev, “Probabilistic modeling of
 computing demand for service level agreement,” IEEE Trans. Services
metrics. Comput., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 987–993, Nov./Dec. 2016.
 Overall, DL models perform well on structured, high- [7] B. Barua, F. A. Aurpa, M. Mubarrat, N. I. Protul, S. N. Howlader,
volume metrics but struggle with fine-grained or bursty and M. S. Kaiser, “AI for service-level agreement (SLA) optimization
 in microservices-based cloud infrastructures,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf.
characteristics. Future research should explore adaptive strate- Sustain. Comput. Data Commun. (ICSCDS), 2025, pp. 485–492.
gies to improve forecasting for complex metrics, particularly [8] M. Ahmed, A. N. Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of network anomaly
assessing whether independently optimized DL models per detection techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 60, pp. 19–31,
 Jan. 2016.
metric outperform multivariate forecasting approaches. [9] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection
 benchmarks are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
 VIII. C ONCLUSION [10] G. O. Ferreira, C. Ravazzi, F. Dabbene, G. C. Calafiore, and M. Fiore,
 “Forecasting network traffic: A survey and tutorial with open-source
 In this study, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation comparative evaluation,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 6018–6044, 2023.
of seven DL models for real-world network traffic forecast- [11] J. Koumar, K. Hynek, T. Cejka, and P. Šiška , “CESNET-TimeSeries24:
 Time series dataset for network traffic anomaly detection and forecasting. Our analysis revealed that LSTM and GRU surpass ing,” Sci. Data, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 338, 2025.
more complex architectures. Moreover, the GRU-FCN model [12] H. Z. Moayedi and M. A. Masnadi-Shirazi, “Arima model for network
achieved the best balance between predictive accuracy and traffic prediction and anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE ITCC, 2008,
 pp. 1–6.
computational efficiency. Beyond establishing a reproducible [13] V. C. Moussas, M. Daglis, and E. Kolega, “Network traffic modeling
benchmark for network traffic forecasting using the real-world and prediction using multiplicative seasonal ARIMA models,” in Proc.
CESNET-TimeSeries24 dataset, our work lays the foundation IC-EPSMSO, 2005, pp. 6–9.
 [14] D. Tikunov and T. Nishimura, “Traffic prediction for mobile network
for future work. Based on our findings, we mark several open using holt-winter’s exponential smoothing,” in Proc. IEEE SoftCOM,
challenges: 2007, pp. 1–5.
KOUMAR et al.: COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DEEP LEARNING MODELS 727

[15] Z. Chen, J. Wen, and Y. Geng, “Predicting future traffic using hidden [42] S. Uhlig, B. Quoitin, J. Lepropre, and S. Balon, “Providing pub-
 Markov models,” in Proc. IEEE ICNP, 2016, pp. 1–6. lic intradomain traffic matrices to the research community,” ACM
[16] M. Khashei and M. Bijari, “Which methodology is better for combining SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 83–86, 2006.
 linear and nonlinear models for time series forecasting?” J. Ind. Syst. [43] A. Laghrissi and T. Taleb, “A survey on the placement of virtual
 Eng., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 265–285, 2011. resources and virtual network functions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
[17] M. P. Clements and D. F. Hendry, “On the limitations of comparing vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1409–1434, 2nd Quart., 2018.
 mean square forecast errors,” J. Forecast., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 617–637, [44] G. Barlacchi et al., “A multi-source dataset of urban life in the city of
 1993. Milan and the province of Trentino,” Sci. Data, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–15,
[18] M. Joshi and T. H. Hadi, “A review of network traffic analysis and 2015.
 prediction techniques,” 2015, arXiv:1507.05722. [45] Y. Lei, W. Wang, T. Yan, N. Li, and A. Nandi, “Residual convolution
[19] B. Lim and S. Zohren, “Time-series forecasting with deep learning: LSTM network for machines remaining useful life prediction and
 A survey,” Philosoph. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 379, Apr. 2021, uncertainty quantification,” J. Dyn., Monit. Diagn., vol. 1, pp. 2–8,
 Art. no. 20200209. Dec. 2021.
[20] A. Dalgkitsis, M. Louta, and G. T. Karetsos, “Traffic forecasting in [46] J. Koumar and T. Čejka, “Unevenly spaced time series from network
 cellular networks using the LSTM RNN,” in Proc. PCI, 2018, pp. 28–33. traffic,” in Proc. TMA, 2023, pp. 1–4.
 [47] G. O. Kaya, M. Sahin, and O. F. Demirel, “Intermittent demand
[21] N. Ramakrishnan and T. Soni, “Network traffic prediction using recurforecasting: A guideline for method selection,” Sādhāna, vol. 45, no. 1,
 rent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE ICMLA, 2018, pp. 187–193.
 p. 51, 2020.
[22] F. Karim, S. Majumdar, H. Darabi, and S. Chen, “LSTM fully convo-
 [48] I. Svetunkov and A. Sroginis, “Why do zeroes happen? A model-based
 lutional networks for time series classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
 approach for demand classification,” 2025, arXiv:2504.05894.
 pp. 1662–1669, 2017.
 [49] O. Aouedi, V. A. Le, K. Piamrat, and Y. Ji, “Deep learning on network
[23] N. Elsayed, A. S. Maida, and M. Bayoumi, “Deep gated recurrent traffic prediction: Recent advances, analysis, and future directions,” ACM
 and convolutional network hybrid model for univariate time series Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2025.
 classification,” 2018, arXiv:1812.07683. [50] J. Koumar, J. Pesek, K. Jerabek, and T. Čejka, “Towards building
[24] J. Bi, X. Zhang, H. Yuan, J. Zhang, and M. Zhou, “A hybrid network outlier detection system for network traffic monitoring,” in Proc.
 prediction method for realistic network traffic with temporal convolu- IEEE Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., 2025, pp. 1–6.
 tional network and LSTM,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, [51] K. D. B. J. Adam and J. Ba, “A method for stochastic optimization,”
 pp. 1869–1879, Jul. 2021. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[25] F. Karim, S. Majumdar, and H. Darabi, “Insights into LSTM fully [52] D. Chicco, M. J. Warrens, and G. Jurman, “The coefficient of deterconvolutional networks for time series classification,” IEEE Access, mination R-squared is more informative than SMAPE, MAE, MAPE,
 vol. 7, pp. 67718–67725, 2019. MSE and RMSE in regression analysis evaluation,” PeerJ Comput. Sci.,
[26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image vol. 7, p. e623, Jul. 2021.
 recognition,” in Proc. IEEE CVPR, 2016, pp. 770–778. [53] M. W. Liemohn, A. D. Shane, A. R. Azari, A. K. Petersen, B. M. Swiger,
[27] H. Ismail Fawaz et al., “Inceptiontime: Finding alexnet for time series and A. Mukhopadhyay, “RMSE is not enough: Guidelines to robust dataclassification,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1936–1962, model comparisons for magnetospheric physics,” J. Atmos. Sol.-Terr.
 2020. Phys., vol. 218, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 105624.
[28] Q. Wen et al., “Transformers in time series: A survey,” 2022, [54] H. Yang, X. Li, W. Qiang, Y. Zhao, W. Zhang, and C. Tang, “A network
 arXiv:2202.07125. traffic forecasting method based on SA optimized ARIMA–BP neural
[29] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. Hoi, “ETSformer: network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 193, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 108102.
 Exponential smoothing transformers for time-series forecasting,” 2022,
 arXiv:2202.01381.
[30] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long
 sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 vol. 35, no. 12, 2021, pp. 11106–11115.
[31] H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Autoformer: Decomposition transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting,” in Proc.
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 22419–22430.
[32] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective
 Josef Koumar (Student Member, IEEE) is currently
 for time series forecasting?” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, pp. 1–8.
 pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Faculty of
[33] G. Kougioumtzidis, V. K. Poulkov, P. I. Lazaridis, and Z. D. Zaharis,
 Information Technology, Czech Technical University
 “Mobile network traffic prediction using temporal fusion transin Prague. He is focusing on detecting threats and
 former,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 2685–2699,
 classifications of encrypted network traffic using
 Oct. 2025.
 time series analysis. He is also interested in anomaly
[34] Q. Kong et al., “Network traffic prediction: Apply the transformer to detection. He is also working as a Researcher with
 time series forecasting,” Math. Probl. Eng., vol. 2022, no. 1, 2022, CESNET a.l.e., the operator of the Czech national
 Art. no. 8424398. research and educational networks.
[35] R. J. Hyndman and G. Athanasopoulos, Forecasting: Principles and
 Practice. Waterloo, ON, Canada: OTexts, 2018.
[36] P. Montero-Manso and R. J. Hyndman, “Principles and algorithms
 for forecasting groups of time series: Locality and globality,” Int. J.
 Forecast., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 1632–1653, 2021.
[37] R. Fontugne, P. Borgnat, P. Abry, and K. Fukuda, “MAWILab:
 Combining diverse anomaly detectors for automated anomaly Labeling
 and performance benchmarking,” in Proc. ACM CoNEXT, 2010,
 pp. 1–12.
[38] Q. H. Do, T. T. H. Doan, T. V. A. Nguyen, N. T. Duong, and V. V. Linh,
 “Prediction of data traffic in telecom networks based on deep neural Timotej Smoleň received the master’s degree
 networks,” J. Comput. Sci., vol. 16, no. 9, pp.1268–1277, 2020. from the Faculty of Information Technology, Czech
[39] X. Zhou, Z. Zhao, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Zhang, “The predictability of Technical University in Prague. He is focusing on
 cellular networks traffic,” in Proc. IEEE ISCIT, 2012, pp. 973–978. machine learning and big data analysis. He is part
 of the Laboratory of Network Traffic Monitoring,
[40] M. Balanici and S. Pachnicke, “Multi-step forecasting of intense traffic
 Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical
 streams using machine learning for optical circuit switching,” in Proc.
 University, Prague.
 ICTON, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[41] S. Li, J. Song, L. Xu, Y. Hu, W. Luo, and X. Zhou, “Network
 traffic prediction based on the feature of newly-generated network
 flows,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–8.
728 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 Kamil Jeřábek is currently pursuing the Ph.D. Tomáš Čejka is an Associate Professor with
 degree with the Faculty of Information Technology, FIT CTU, Prague. He teaches network security
 Brno University of Technology. He is part of the course, and supervises a research group of bache-
 Network and Distributed Systems Research Group. lor/master/Ph.D. students. Meanwhile, he also works
 He has participated in several research projects, with CESNET a.l.e., the operator of the Czech
 either national or international. His research interest national research and education network, as a
 is focused on topics related to computer networks, Researcher and a Team Leader.
 cybersecurity, big data, data analysis, and machine
 learning.