3050 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 Contrast Duality of Adversarial Learning
 in Network Intrusion: A Review
 Shalini Saini , Anitha Chennamaneni , and Babatunde Sawyerr

 Abstract—AI-based solutions are instrumental in cybersecu- defenses, focusing on training, inference, and model analysis.
rity, harnessing their ability to analyze vast datasets, identify It provides an understanding of the dynamic nature of these
complex patterns, and detect anomalies. However, attackers attacks, major threats and underscores the importance of oncan exploit these capabilities to plan and execute sophisticated going research to strengthen network intrusion prevention and
attacks, posing significant challenges to traditional security detection through robust AI solutions.
measures. Adversarial attacks pose a concerning threat to cy-
 Index Terms—Adversarial learning, artificial intelligence in
bersecurity, especially when targeting machine learning model
 computer networks, artificial intelligence in cyber-security, deep
vulnerabilities. Adversarial learning exhibits a contrasting duality
 learning, machine learning.
in network intrusion detection, serving as both an advanced
offensive strategy for exploiting system weaknesses and a crucial
defensive tool for identifying and mitigating adversarial threats. I. INTRODUCTION
Our study presents an in-depth overview of focused adversarial
learning threats such as data poisoning, test time evasion, and
reverse engineering, and how adversarial training is applied as
a defense mechanism. The convergence of adversarial learning
 C YBERSECURITY is critical in today’s interconnected
 world, where cyber threats, such as malware, phishing,
 ransomware, and data breaches, continue to evolve and pose
attacks and defenses in network traffic data, alongside the significant risks to individuals, organizations, and even national
advancements in machine learning and deep learning techniques, security [5], [88]. The integration of embedded systems has
is still a relatively underexplored domain. Our research lays the
groundwork for strengthening defense mechanisms to address revolutionized critical sectors such as Healthcare, Automated
the potential breaches in network security and privacy posed by Vehicles, and National Defense, relying on advanced technoladversarial learning attacks. Through our in-depth analysis, we ogy and data integrity for improved efficiency, safety, and seidentify domain-specific research gaps, such as the scarcity of curity. Nonetheless, the integration has also exposed network
real-life attack data and the evaluation of AI-based solutions for components more susceptible to cyber attacks and restricting
network traffic. Our focus on these challenges aims to stimulate
future research efforts toward the development of resilient AI- their practical and secure implementation [82], [115]. Current
based defense strategies. trends indicate that approximately 67% of the world’s popu-
 Impact Statement—Understanding the evolving nature of net- lation has access to the internet, with social media platforms
work intrusion attacks and defenses is paramount for organiza- playing a significant role in this accessibility [95]. However, this
tions to proactively protect their networks, respond effectively increased connectivity has also expanded the attack surface for
to security incidents, comply with regulations, foster innovation,
and continuously improve their cybersecurity practices in an adversaries, resulting in heightened cybersecurity threats. Noever-changing threat landscape. Network intrusion attacks in tably, the economic impact of cyber attacks has grown substanthe healthcare, finance, and national security sectors can result tially, with a global estimated loss of approximately $6 trillion
in compromised data privacy, financial losses, operational dis- in 2021, doubling the costs recorded in 2015 [5]. Worldwide
ruptions, threats to public safety, and national security risks. end-user spending on security and risk management is pro-
Adversarial learning attacks and defenses are pivotal in securing
data and network operations by ensuring the reliability of outputs jected to total $215 billion in 2024, an increase of 14.3% from
from AI-driven cybersecurity applications. This review offers 2023 [7].
a comprehensive analysis of adversarial learning attacks and The rapid progress in computational capabilities and the
 utilization of big data have positioned machine learning as a
 critical element in modern defense strategies. Nevertheless, the
 Received 17 July 2025; revised 24 September 2025 and 17 November 2025; susceptibility of ML/DL-based solutions to adversarial attacks
accepted 24 November 2025. Date of publication 9 December 2025; date of undermines current defense protocols. Developing adaptive decurrent version 29 May 2026. This work was supported in part by the Air fensive strategies that can effectively counter evolving threats
Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) under Grant FA8750-23-C-0085. This
article was recommended for publication by Associate Editor Xiaoli Li upon remains a persistent challenge [49]. Through our evaluation,
evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. (Corresponding author: Shalini Saini.) we identify the current research gaps in adversarial learning
 Shalini Saini is with Texas A&M University-Central Texas, Killeen, TX pertaining to network intrusion detection systems (NIDS). Our
76549 USA (e-mail: shalini@umes.edu).
 Anitha Chennamaneni is with Subhani Department of Computer Informa- contribution lies in providing a baseline understanding of the
tion Systems, Texas A&M University-Central Texas, Killeen, TX 76549 USA existing research breadth and presenting the potential future
(e-mail: anitha.chennamaneni@tamuct.edu). directions in the field of ML/DL-based NIDS. The objective is
 Babatunde Sawyerr is with the Computer Science Department, University
of Lagos, Lagos 100213, Nigeria (e-mail: bsawyerr@unilag.edu.ng). to facilitate the development of robust ML/DL-based NIDS that
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAI.2025.3641908 effectively harness evolving technological capabilities, while

 2691-4581 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3051

 B. Our Contributions
 Our work provides a focused and in-depth review of adversarial learning within the context of network intrusion detection
 systems (NIDS), specifically targeting three major subdomains:
 1) DP; 2) TTE; and 3) model RE. We concentrate on the
 network intrusion domain, where the implications of adversarial attacks are particularly severe and underexplored. We
 explored the dual nature of adversarial learning, examining its application in both offensive strategies and defensive mechanisms under these subdomains of network intrusion
 domain.
 We systematically analyze research conducted between
 2018 and 2024, capturing both foundational breakthroughs and
Fig. 1. Data poisoning, test-time evasion, and reverse engineering adversarial learning attacks and defenses for ML/DL-based NIDS. recent innovations. This timeframe allows us to review the
 latest developments in the field and track how it has proalso demonstrating resilience against both known and emerging gressed. By synthesizing findings across these three attack vecsecurity threats. tors, we identify persistent vulnerabilities, evaluate the robustness of existing defenses, and highlight emerging trends and
 gaps.
A. Research Objectives 1) Comprehensive Analysis: We provide a detailed review
 of existing literature, offering valuable insights into ad-
 Our work is driven by the growing need to understand the
 versarial learning-based attacks and defenses in NIDS.
influence of artificial intelligence (AI) methodologies, specifi-
 2) In-Depth Investigation: We examine DP, TTE, and RE
cally, adversarial learning, and technological advancements on
 adversarial attacks on NIDS, identifying emerging trends
innovative research and their practical implications for cyberand novel techniques in this domain.
security. To stay current and aligned with the evolving cyberse-
 3) Highlighting Research Gaps: Our study identifies critical
curity landscape and leverage emerging technologies, we aim
 gaps in the practical implementation of advanced ML/DL
to achieve the following research objectives.
 methodologies for NIDS, focusing on real-world chal-
 1) Presenting a taxonomy of adversarial learning, NIDS,
 lenges.
 ML/DL techniques, attacker expertise, and NIDS datasets
 4) Foundation for Future Research: We synthesize the curto utilize in efficient adversarial attack and defense straterent state of research and lay the groundwork for develgies.
 oping innovative, resilient defense mechanisms for real-
 2) Reviewing the existing research on employing adversarial
 world NIDS deployments.
 learning in data poisoning (DP), test-time evasion (TTE),
 and reverse engineering (RE) attacks in network intrusion
 domain.
 3) Assessing available defense strategies against adversarial C. How Our Work Is Different?
 attacks in NIDS, emphasizing their limitations and poten- To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing exhaustial future directions. tive examination of adversarial learning attacks and defense
 As presented in Fig. 1, we explore ML/DL-based adversarial strategies within the network intrusion domain, complete with a
attacks and defenses within the context of DP, test time eva- detailed exploration of DP, TTE, and RE. To address this critical
sion, and RE. Through analyzing these three key subdomains gap, we present the threats to various stages of machine learning
in adversarial learning, we cover a comprehensive exploration pipeline and potential defense strategies. Table II serves as a
of adversarial attacks in machine learning from training data quick reference to illustrate the scope of our work and highlights
manipulation to inference-time deception and model vulnera- the extent of its comprehensiveness compared with the reviewed
bility analysis. We examine the various threats, attacks, and literature. We not only cover the necessary background on
possible defenses in which both attackers and defenders may adversarial learning and NIDS for a domain specific review,
possess different levels of knowledge, such as white-box (full), but keep it broad enough to cover the various machine learning
black-box (zero), and gray-box (partial) understanding of the pipeline threats (DP, test time evasion, and RE), and how those
model, algorithm, and training data. DP can be instrumental in can have different severity impact with the attacker’s knowledge
training and test time evasion attacks. Similarly, RE can provide (black/white/gray box).
significant details to sharpen the attacks. At the same time, It is important to note that the existing literature predomiby analyzing the model’s vulnerabilities and threats to data nantly concentrates on adversarial attacks and defenses in imintegrity, RE can be pivotal to develop robust defense mech- age, audio, and video domains. In contrast, research specifically
anisms. Table I summarizes the primary categories of reviewed dedicated to adversarial learning in the context of NIDS is
attacks, their corresponding stages in the ML pipeline, and their limited, accounting for less than 10% of all adversarial learning
impacts on data and the model. research.
3052 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 TABLE I
 REVIEWED ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS

 Attack Category ML Pipeline Stage Target Primary Goal
 Data poisoning Training phase Training data and model Compromise the model’s learning process
 Test-time evasion Inference phase Model predictions (output) Misclassify during inference
 Reverse engineering Any phase Model parameters and behavior Extract insights to facilitate further attacks

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON OF RECENT SURVEYS IN ADVERSARIAL LEARNING AND ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NIDS

 Challenges
 Adversarial Black Box/
 ML/DL in NIDS Adversarial Adversarial NIDS Data Test-Time Reverse in NIDS
 Reference Learning White Box/
 NIDS Taxonomy Attacks Defenses Datasets Poisoning Evasion Engineering Adversarial
 in NIDS Grey Box
 Learning
 Zhang et al., 2020 [118] None None None High Low None None None None B/W None
 Aldweesh et al., 2020 [12] Medium None Medium High None Medium None None None None High
 Miller et al., 2020 [64] None None None High High None High High High B/W/G Medium
 Han et al., 2021 [40] High High None High High Low None High None B/G Low
 Alatwi and Morisset, 2021 [11] Low High None Medium Medium Medium High High Low B/W/G High
 Chakraborty et al., 2021 [30] Medium Low High High High None High High Low B/W/G Low
 Zhou et al., 2022 [120] None None None High High None Low Low None B/W None
 Jmila and Khedher, 2022 [48] High Medium Medium High High Low Low Low None B/W/G High
 McCarthy et al., 2022 [59] High High Low High High Low None High None B/W/G High
 Apruzzese et al., 2022 [18] High High None High None None High High High B/W/G None
 He et al., 2023 High High High High High Low None High None B/W High
 Vitorino et al., 2023 [105] High High None High High None High High High B/W/G High
 Ibitoye et al., 2023 [45] High High Medium High High None High High High B/W/G Low
 Alotaibi and Rassam, 2023 [13] Medium High Medium High High Medium High High None B/W/G High
 Our work High High High High High High High High High B/W/G High

D. Structural Overview vides a summary of related works, evaluating their coverage of
 adversarial learning, adversarial attacks, and countermeasures,
 The subsequent sections of this article are structured
as follows. and assessing their alignment with network intrusion-specific
 knowledge. We review the related work aligned with our re-
 Section II reviews related work in the field, discussing prior
 search scope and discuss how our contribution stands out in
contributions and identifying how our study distinguishes itself.
Section III provides a comprehensive background on network the field.
 Zhang et al. explored natural language processing (NLP) tarintrusion, including a taxonomy of adversarial learning, crafting
adversarial samples, and utilizing in adversarial attacks and de- geted adversarial attacks, and compared algorithms and models
fenses in NIDS. It also provides the attack categories, attacker’s across various domains [118]. Rosenberg et al. highlighted the
 divergence between adversarial learning attacks and defenses
knowledge and an overview of subdomains we cover, establishing the foundation for the subsequent analysis. Section IV out- in image-based systems and those specific to cybersecurity,
lines the research methodology, explaining the rationale behind emphasizing the distinct nature of data features involved [80].
 Unique challenges in network intrusion detection include manthe selection and inclusion of the works we review. Section V
presents our core review, analysis, and results of adversarial aging high volumes of real-time data, minimizing false posilearning attacks and defenses, focusing on DP, TTE, and RE. tives and false negatives, inspecting encrypted communications,
 adapting to evolving attack techniques, mitigating adversarial
Section VI discusses the limitations and challenges encountered
within the scope of our review. Section VII offers a broader manipulation of detection models, ensuring scalability in large
 networks, and detecting insider threats. While new defense
discussion, summarizing key insights, and Section VIII presents
 methods are continually evolving to address these challenges,
the conclusion with the proposed future directions.
 the need for NIDS to swiftly and accurately detect specific
 threats in real time remains a significant challenge. There is
 II. RELATED WORK a limited research addressing these challenges, including ad-
 Initial adversarial learning vulnerabilities were primarily versarial learning vulnerabilities, exploitation opportunities in
studied within the computer vision domain. However, it is ML/DL models, feasible threat surfaces and attack vectors, and
crucial to recognize domain-specific nuances when assessing countermeasures against adversarial attacks in network intrupotential attacks and defenses in cybersecurity. Table II pro- sion domain.
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3053

 There are numerous directions and focuses in the field of
adversarial learning attacks and defenses with a goal to compiling the knowledge to develop robust solutions and proposing potential directions to strengthen domain knowledge. For
instance, Zhou et al. explored adversarial attacks and defenses
in deep learning within the cybersecurity domain, focusing on
Advanced Persistent Threats (APT). Their research centered on
constructing a framework detailing a five-stage APT lifecycle
for AL attacks and defenses. While they applied this framework
to domains such as image, video, audio, and text, the exclusion
of network traffic data discussions limits its applicability to
network intrusion [120]. In another recent survey on NIDS
adversarial attacks, He et al. emphasized critical issues arising
from outdated benchmark datasets and the difficulty in generating authentic network features due to data instability. Moreover,
 Fig. 2. 2018–2023: Adversarial learning research trends [84].
the impracticality of modifying features for attacks lies in their
inability to be transferable. They also discussed the scarcity of
defense mechanisms against packet-level attacks [41].
 Jmila and Khedher studied shallow ML classifiers’ efficacy of its wide applicability and impact on artificial intelligencein assessing robustness, enhancing them with Gaussian data based solutions in different domains. As depicted in Fig. 2,
augmentation. Their research suggested tailoring methods, pa- the field of adversarial learning has experienced a significant
rameters, and datasets specific to network intrusion detection five-fold growth in the past five years. However, research in
scenarios, noting performance degradation with certain datasets adversarial learning in network intrusion is still limited [84].
and attack types [48]. A survey by McCarthy et al. explored Search results may exhibit bias based on keyword selection
functionality-preserving adversarial attacks and defenses in the and the emphasis on titles and abstracts. Nonetheless, they
area of poisoning, evasion and transferability attacks in cyber- offer a foundational insight into trends within the research
security domain [59]. Vitorino et al. summarized the state-of- area.
the-art approaches focusing on adversarial learning strategies
for generating realistic adversarial examples to analyze and
protect real-life scenarios. However, their work identified that
 B. Crafting Adversarial Samples and Their Contrast
more than 75% of the reviewed research used known common
 Utilization in Attack and Defense
methods and lacked novel strategies to generate adversarial
samples [105]. Adversarial examples are crafted inputs designed to deceive
 Ibitoye et al. categorized NIDS attacks into problem and machine learning models by introducing subtle, imperceptible
feature space, with feature space representing data variables and perturbations that lead to incorrect predictions. Given a model
problem space denoting input types such as files or images. The f (x) that predicts a label y for an input x, an adversarial attack
study also mapped specific ML methods, such as supervised can be formulated as follows.
learning, to distinct ML task categories such as classification Objective: Generate an adversarial example x such that
[45]. In a study, Apruzzese et al. revealed the limitations of utix = x + δ
lizing deep learning methods for practical NIDS attacks. They
discussed that feature-space attacks for NIDS are impractical where δ is a small perturbation added to the original input x.
in practice due to the difficulty of deriving adversarial traffic Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM): FGSM perturbs the
from features [18]. Alotaibi and Rassam examined adversarial input x in the direction of the gradient of the model’s loss
machine learning attacks and defense strategies by analyzing function J(x, y; θ), calculated with respect to x. The method
individual research works, presenting each strategy as outlined is defined as
in specific studies rather than categorizing them into broad
 x = x +  · sign(∇x J(x, y; θ))
groups [13].
 III. BACKGROUND AND TAXONOMY where  is the perturbation magnitude, ∇x J is the gradient of
 the loss with respect to x, and sign(·) represents the gradient’s
A. Adversarial Learning
 direction.
 Approximately a decade ago, researchers identified adversar- Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs): A GAN comial learning as a significant vulnerability in neural networks. prises a generator G and a discriminator D. The generator G
Adversarial learning pertains to their susceptibility to small, creates synthetic data x , aiming to make it indistinguishable
imperceptible changes in input data, as well as the manipu- from real data x, while the discriminator D seeks to differentiate
lation of decision boundaries, which can lead to misclassifi- between real and generated data. The GAN’s objective is
cations [20], [39], [97]. In past few years, adversarial learn-    
ing has grown as a field of great research interest because min max Ex∼pdata (x) log D(x) +Ez∼pz (z) log(1−D(G(z)))
 G D
3054 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

where pdata (x) represents the real data distribution, z is a noise target model or training data. Instead, the attacker can only
vector sampled from pz (z), G(z) generates synthetic data, and query the model with inputs x and observe the outputs f (x),
D(x) outputs the probability that x is real. where f is the unknown decision function. In the context to
 In adversarial learning, the generator G is trained to produce adversarial learning, it can be challenging to craft efficient
inputs x that maximize the misclassification rate of a target adversarial samples without the knowledge of gradients. Blackmodel f . By optimizing x to exploit the vulnerabilities of f . box approach can also be computationally expensive to make a
 Transferability and Immobility: The transferability of an large number of queries to gain some meaningful insight.
adversarial perturbation enables it to deceive multiple different White-Box: A white-box approach assumes that the advermodels. The immobility reflects a model’s unique strength, as sary has complete knowledge of the target model, including its
its specific robustness prevents attacks from transferring from architecture, algorithms, internal parameters, and access to the
other models. training data. For example, the attacker can observe and utilize
 the function f (x; θ), where θ denotes the model parameters,
C. NIDS ML Pipeline Vulnerabilities and may also exploit the training data distribution Dtrain to
 manipulate adversarial learning.
 DP: An attacker injects malicious or misleading data into
 Gray-Box: In a gray-box approach, the adversary has partial
a machine learning model’s training data to corrupt model’s
 knowledge of the target model. This typically includes access
behavior. Adversarial data is injected through flipping target
 to the training data distribution Dtrain or some information
class labels (label-flipping attack), manipulating features but
 about the model architecture or hyperparameters, but not the
keeping the class label unchanged (clean-label attack), inserting
 exact internal parameters θ of the deployed model. The attacker
backdoors, or flooding with noisy data to evade detection of
 may exploit this limited knowledge to train a surrogate model
specific attacks or to degrade the system’s overall accuracy.
 fˆ(x; θ̂) that approximates the behavior of the target model
 TTE: An attacker creates malevolent network traffic that cirf (x; θ).
cumvents detection during inference, all without changing the
 Model manipulation attacks involve exploiting the transfertraining data. These attacks capitalize on vulnerabilities in the
 ability of adversarial attacks between models, corrupting the
trained model by subtly adjusting input features such as packet
 model, deceiving model through feedback mechanisms, and
size, timing, or payload patterns to influence the model’s actions
 introducing malicious patterns during dynamic updates [43],
and produce inaccurate outputs.
 [50]. Other major classifications are based on network traffic
 RE: An attacker reconstructs a copy of the model by
 manipulation strategies: feature-based, flow-based, and packetquerying it or reconstructing input features from the outputs.
 based [81].
Surrogate model without authorization can lead to the theft of
 Hybrid adversarial attacks on deep learning models involve
intellectual property. Membership Inference Attacks can expose
 combining multiple attack techniques to compromise model
sensitive information in the training data violating the data
 integrity and performance. These attacks can include a combiprivacy.
 nation of evasion and poisoning techniques, as well as targeting
 We analyze all three NIDS subdomains as DP affects the
 strategies [37]. Adaptive adversarial attacks continuously adapt
training phase, TTE targets the inference phase, and RE primarto countermeasure updates and target NIDS feedback timing
ily impacts inference but can also reveal vulnerabilities from the
 to compromise the system’s learning process and effectiveness
training phase.
 [110]. Adversarial NIDS attacks include strategic manipulation
 of network traffic, subtle perturbations to evade detection algo-
D. Adversarial Learning Attacks
 rithms, generative attacks that generate malicious traffic resem-
 Adversarial attacks fall into different categories based on bling benign patterns, and stealth attacks that hide malicious
methodologies and approaches, which directly influence the activities within legitimate traffic to avoid detection. [11], [91],
strategies employed by attackers to create adversarial examples [96], [103], [111].
and exploit vulnerabilities [117], [120]. Targeted attacks aim to
evade detection for specific malicious activities, while untargeted attacks disrupt the system by triggering false alarms or
misclassifying normal traffic as malicious [29], [120]. E. Adversarial Learning Defenses
 1) Untargeted Attacks: Cause misclassification (f (x ) = Adversarial learning defenses have advanced over the years,
 f (x)). encompassing techniques and strategies to fortify machine
 2) Targeted Attacks: Force the model to predict a specific learning models against attacks. Approaches such as adversartarget class yt (f (x ) = yt ). ial training, detection/filtering, gradient masking, and random-
 Attacker’s knowledge of model and the training data cate- ized smoothing can provide effective defenses. Training-based
gorizes attacks as black-box (no knowledge), white-box (full defenses enhance adversarial robustness through adversarial
knowledge), and gray-box (partial knowledge) attacks. Fig. 3 training, robust feature extraction, model architecture modificaillustrates the categories in relation to the attacker’s knowledge, tions, compression and quantization, and diverse loss functions.
attack surface, and impact severity. These techniques enhance models against attacks by improving
 Black-box: A black-box approach assumes that the adversary training data, resilient feature extraction, network architecture
has no access to the internal parameters or gradients of the adjustments, model simplification, and optimization diversity
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3055

Fig. 3. Attacker’s knowledge, attack surface and attack’s severity in case of black-box, gray-box, and white-box scenarios.

[23], [119]. Input transformation and reconstruction-based de- Different machines and deep learning models can be valuable
fenses enhance adversarial robustness by altering and recon- for NIDS, but their usefulness depends on meeting specific
structing input data, guarding against perturbations and boost- security goals and having the necessary resources. Convoluing model generalization. Ensemble-based defenses strengthen tional neural networks (CNNs) enable the learning of hierarrobustness by using multiple models, diversifying ensemble chical representations of network traffic patterns, improving the
members through varied training to collectively improve de- ability to identify anomalies [19], [58]. Deep neural networks
fense efficacy against attacks [102]. (DNNs) are more generalized and can process various types
 Randomized Smoothing introduces random noise to input of data, including numerical, categorical, or textual data [56],
data during training and inference to enhance the model’s [58], [71], [106], [108]. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
decision boundaries and reduce vulnerability to adversarial are suitable for processing sequential data, making them apperturbations [34]. Example distributions to differentiate and plicable in NIDS for analyzing network traffic over time and
eliminate adversarial samples are another defense mechanism detecting anomalies based on deviations from learned temporal
[114]. patterns [16].
 Targeted adversarial defenses are more efficient for domain- Autoencoders and variational autoencoders (VAEs) are unsuspecific scenarios. However, more generalized approach can pervised deep learning models used in NIDS to learn efficient
expand the applicability of these defense strategies. representations of normal network traffic. By training autoencoders on normal traffic, deviations or intrusions can be de-
F. Machine Learning in Network Intrusion Detection tected by measuring the reconstruction error [53], [65]. Graph
 Since the late 1990s and early 2000s, early applications of neural networks (GNNs) hold promise for network intrusion demachine learning focused on network intrusion detection and tection due to their ability to handle complex dependencies and
malware detection through file analysis and behavioral patterns. relationships in network data [107]. Specialized deep learning
Over time, advanced machine learning techniques have found architectures for NIDS that combine multiple layers to capture
extensive applications in anomaly detection, threat intelligence, complex patterns and relationships in network traffic data, can
fraud detection, and spam filtering. Deep learning, a subset of enhance intrusions and anomaly detection capabilities [116].
machine learning, leverages neural networks to autonomously Transfer learning techniques have been applied in NIDS by
extract features and patterns from raw data, enhancing cyber- utilizing pretrained deep learning models. These models, origisecurity capabilities [24], [93]. Signature-based detection and nally trained on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet, are fineanomaly-based detection are two broad categories of network tuned on network traffic data to leverage the learned represenintrusion detection methods [11], [47]. Signature-based net- tations [32]. Federated Learning in NIDS revolutionizes network intrusion detection systems (SNIDS) detect intrusions by work intrusion detection by enabling decentralized devices to
matching network traffic against preinstalled attack signatures. collaboratively train models. This approach enhances detection
They are effective in detecting known attacks but struggle with accuracy and robustness without compromising data privacy or
unknown or new attacks [52]. Anomaly-based network intru- requiring data centralization [8].
sion detection systems (ADNIDS) detect intrusions by identifying deviations from normal network patterns. They are effective G. Network Intrusion Benchmark Datasets
in detecting unknown or new attacks but may have higher false- Ensuring the relevance of benchmark datasets is vital for
positive rates [47], [67]. adapting to evolving threat scenarios. Algorithms may not yield
3056 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 TABLE III
 NETWORK INTRUSION DATASETS, RELATED WORKS, AND BRIEF DETAILS

 Dataset Related Works Brief Details
 KDD99 [15], [38], [99], [100] Early, widely used dataset; suffers from redundancy (75%) and outdated attack scenarios.
 NSL-KDD [77], [89] Improved KDD99 by removing redundancy; simulated dataset, lacks real-world applicability.
 Kyoto 2006+ [38], [94] Real-world traffic dataset; includes normal, known, and unknown attacks using honeypots and sensors.
 ISCX 2012 [38], [75], [92], [100] Real-world flow-based dataset covering DoS, DDoS, Brute-force, and Infiltration attacks.
 UNSW-NB15 [2], [66] Modern dataset blending real activities and synthetic attacks; nine attack types such as Fuzzers, DoS, and Exploits.
 CIDDS-001 [78] Virtual cloud-based dataset; features DoS, Port Scan, Ping Scan, and Brute-force attacks.
 CICIDS2017 [89] Flow-based dataset with normal and attack instances (e.g., DoS, DDoS, Brute-force, Port Scan).
 CSE-CIC-IDS2018 [3], [89] Covers seven attack types, including Brute-force, Botnet, and Web attacks, with modern scenarios.
 CICDDoS2019 [90] Focused on DDoS attacks with realistic background traffic; valuable for modern DDoS research.
 CIC IoT 2023 [69] Tailored for IoT; includes attack types such as DDoS, Recon, Spoofing, and Mirai.

desired results if the data lacks reliability or fails to accu- attacks with emphasizing on generating realistic background
rately represent the threats, impeding the development of robust traffic [90]. CICIoT2023 dataset presents seven distinct attacks,
models against adversarial attacks. Several network intrusion namely DDoS, DoS, Recon, Web-based, Brute Force, Spoofing,
benchmark datasets have been developed over the years to and Mirai [69].
cater to the diverse and evolving requirements of network intrusion detection and prevention strategies. Table III presents IV. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
a summary of the major datasets commonly utilized in re- To conduct a comprehensive search for research publications
viewed research works. The KDD99 dataset, one of the oldest across multiple research repositories, we employed a strategic
and widely utilized datasets in NIDS research, represents four approach that involves the utilization of multiple keywords
fundamental attack scenarios of DoS, Probe, R2L, and U2R. and phrases. By carefully selecting and combining relevant
While it played a crucial role in early research, the dataset terms, we aim to cast a wide net and ensure the inclusion of
suffers from highly redundant data (above 75%) and outdated diverse and pertinent literature. Our search strategy involves
attack scenarios. [15], [38], [99], [100]. NSL-KDD is essen- identifying key concepts and themes related to our research
tially KDD99 dataset without redundant data. Both datasets, topic and constructing queries that encompass these facets. To
KDD99 and NSL-KDD, are simulated virtual network datasets ensure a thorough analysis, we consulted renowned research
and do not accurately represent real-world data. Consequently, databases, including IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital Library, and
they are not reliable for reflecting modern real-world attacking SpringerLink. We also utilized Google Scholar for the existing
scenarios [77], [89]. Kyoto 2006 dataset was built capturing work in the field, additionally querying Base and arXiv. In
real-world network traffic as not-labeled data. Using honeypots, addition to these databases, we leveraged Dimensions.ai.1 for
darknet sensors, email server, web crawler and network secu- its comprehensive research insights, allowing us to gather a
rity mechanisms to detect attempts of unauthorized use, Kyoto broader perspective on the relevant literature [6]. Fig. 4 shows
2006 dataset includes normal, known and unknown attacking a step by step to identify, filtering, screening, retrieving, and
instances [38], [94]. selecting the studies specific to the scope of the article.
 ISCX 2012 is a real-world, flow-based labeled dataset to Our base search was built around adversarial learning atrepresent actual network attack scenarios in four major cate- tacks and defenses in network intrusion detection systems,
gories of DoS, DDoS, Brute-force, and Infiltration [38], [75], and then we narrowed it down towards DP, TTE, and RE. We
[92], [100]. UNSW-NB15 dataset was created using the IXIA further categorized these topics into black-box, white-box, and
PerfectStorm tool at UNSW to simulate a mix of real modern gray-box adversarial learning attacks and defenses in NIDS.
normal activities and synthetic attack scenarios. The dataset To achieve an extensive coverage of relevant publications in
consists of nine types of attacks, including Fuzzers, Analy- adversarial machine learning, a combination of the adversarial
sis, Backdoors, DoS, Exploits, Generic, Reconnaissance, Shell- learning keyword with other appropriate terms such as percode, and Worms [2], [66]. CIDDS-001 dataset (2017) was turbation, evasion, inference, model inversion, model stealdeveloped in a virtual cloud-based environment by executing ing, and model poisoning was employed. Additionally, con-
DoS, Port Scan, Ping Scan, and Brute force attacks [78]. CI- cepts closely tied to network intrusion detection, including
CIDS2017 dataset is also labeled flow-based dataset with nor- anomaly detection, cyberattack, and wireless and IoT networks,
mal and attack instances representing DoS, DDoS, Brute-force, were taken into account to ensure a comprehensive scope.
Port Scan, Bot, Web Attack, and Infiltration attacks [89]. CSE- We executed around hundred initial AL-ML-DL-NIDS queries,
CIC-IDS2018 consists of seven attacking scenarios of Brute- and then we iterated and refined our search queries, incorforce, Heartbleed, Botnet, DoS, DDoS, Web Attack, and In- porating synonyms, related terms, and variations to capture a
filtration of the network from inside [3], [89]. CICDDoS2019
is a labeled flow-based dataset, specific to more recent DDoS 1 https://app.dimensions.ai/discover/publication
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3057

Fig. 4. PRISMA framework for identification, screening, eligibility, and inclusion/exclusion of the studies.

 TABLE IV
 RESEARCH LITERATURE- INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA

 Inclusion Criteria Key Considerations
 Relevance to adversarial learning in NIDS Papers directly address adversarial learning techniques in the context of network intrusion detection systems
 Focus on adversarial attacks and defenses Papers discuss adversarial attacks (e.g., data poisoning, test-time evasion, reverse engineering) and defenses specific to NIDS
 Methodological alignment Papers focusing on machine learning, deep learning, and AI methodologies in the context of NIDS
 Specific attack types Papers investigating data poisoning, backdoor attacks, test-time evasion, and reverse engineering attacks in NIDS
 Diversity of defense strategies Papers exploring various defense mechanisms against adversarial attacks in NIDS
 Attacker’s knowledge and their impact Papers discussing black box, white box, and gray box adversarial attacks and defenses in NIDS
 Dataset utilization Papers utilizing NIDS datasets or proposing new datasets for research purposes
 Exclusion Criteria
 Irrelevant topics Papers not directly related to adversarial learning in NIDS
 General machine learning or deep learning studies Papers that do not specifically focus on NIDS or adversarial learning in the context of network security
 Nontechnical papers Non-technical papers, such as opinion pieces, editorials, or reviews without novel research contributions
 Outdated material Papers published before a certain date (e.g., more than 5 years old) to focus on the most recent research
 Language and publication quality Poorly written or low-quality papers, as well as papers not published in reputable journals or conferences

broader range of relevant publications. Through this meticulous A. DP Attacks and Defenses
process of applying inclusion and exclusion criteria as per Ta-
 Data manipulation attacks pose a significant threat to deep
ble IV, we optimized the retrieval and compilation of research learning neural network classifiers by undermining their inpublications for this work, enabling us to gather a compretegrity and detection capabilities [87], [104]. Adversaries utihensive and diverse collection of relevant studies from various
 lize various techniques in these attacks, including DP, where
sources. malicious data is injected to corrupt the NIDS’s training pro-
 V. RESULTS: ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS AND DEFENSES cess. Additionally, adversaries manipulate the training data
 IN NIDS and process itself during the learning phase, weakening the
 Our work encompasses a comprehensive analysis of adver- NIDS’s ability to accurately identify threats. Furthermore, atsarial attacks and defenses within NIDS, focusing specifically tacks on feature extraction distort the representations of neton three critical attack vectors: 1) DP; 2) TTE; and 3) RE. We work data, making it harder for NIDS to identify malicious
further categorize these attacks based on the adversary’s level activities [63], [98].
of knowledge, white-box, black-box, and gray-box, providing a DP attacks can manipulate network data by targeting port
detailed exploration of their methodologies, impacts, and cor- numbers, protocol types, or payload content to disrupt opresponding defense strategies. The following sections discuss erations or deceive detection systems. For instance, Featureeach of these attack categories, emphasizing their relevance to based poisoning alters attributes to evade detection or induce
modern NIDS frameworks. false positives/negatives [104]. Packet-based poisoning alters
3058 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

Fig. 5. Data poisoning adversarial learning attacks and defenses for ML/DL-based network intrusion detection systems.

individual packets, while flow-based poisoning manipulates and resulted in a maximum accuracy decrease of 1.4% [56]. Xu
traffic flows. Attackers can disrupt flows, introduce delays, et al. utilized Neural Machine Translation (NMT) demonstratand exploit flow-based protocol vulnerabilities. Content-based ing the feasibility of successful targeted backdoor DP attacks
poisoning inserts malicious payloads. In techniques such as on black-box NMT systems with low poisoning rates of 0.006%
DNS poisoning, manipulation of DNS data occurs to deceive for the language translation datasets [113].
queries, steering users towards malicious websites through the White Box DP Attacks: Venkatesan et al. conducted a study
false association of domain names with incorrect IP addresses. on white-box flow-based poisoning availability attacks target-
In Fig. 5, we illustrate how adversarial learning can be utilized ing a network scanning classifier. Using synthetic network data
both as a DP attack and a defense against DP attacks. from the CyberVan testbed, they demonstrated that placing
 Backdoor DP Attacks: A backdoor attack can inject trigger poisoned samples near 10% of high-confidence points with
patterns or perturbations into the training data or modify the 20% DP reduced the model accuracy from 95% to below 50%
model’s architecture or parameters to manipulate the DL-based [104]. A label flipping attack aims to identify a subset of
NIDS, causing it to exhibit malicious or unexpected behavior. N examples, where flipping their labels maximizes a specific
Backdoor DP causes a model to misclassify test-time samples objective function chosen by the attacker. In a white-box atthat contain a trigger. In this threat model, the attacker exerts tack scenario, with the complete knowledge of the algorithm
control over the data by introducing poisons during the training and data impact, Paudice et al. showed that classification error
phase and strategically inserting triggers during the inference can be up to six times higher with 20% of DP through label
phase [86]. flipping [73].
 Black-Box DP Attacks: A study by Kuppa et al. showed Wang et al. noted that a simple modification of the crossthat by running manifold approximation on samples collected entropy loss yields stronger poisoning attacks when using proat attacker end for query reduction and understanding various jected gradient ascent [109]. Alrawashdeh et al. demonstrated
thresholds set by underlying anomaly detector, an attacker can that an attacker can generate stealthy white-box adversarial
use spherical adversarial subspaces to generate attack samples. samples using L-BFGS and FGSM Methods, and can also inject
This black-box attack methodology is particularly effective the trigger for backdoor DP attacks to degrade the model’s
when targeting anomaly detection systems that lack clearly accuracy. For instance, the researchers analyze the dataset to
defined decision boundaries between normal and abnormal identify the triggers with the highest predictive power for seclasses, relying on a set of thresholds on anomaly scores to lecting the correct labels. By manipulating these labels, attackguide the decision-making process [53]. ers can effectively boost the success rate of their malicious
 Ning et al. demonstrated that a stealthy backdoor black- activities [14].
box DP attack could be implemented with as low as 0.5% Gray Box DP Attacks: Tolpegin et al. investigated targeted
of the training data. In the loss-free digital attack scenario, DP attacks in federated learning (FL) systems, where malicious
this achieves an average attack success rate of over 91.1%. In participants (Insider Attacker) aim to poison the global model
physical attacks using lossy images, a trigger as small as 1% of with mislabeled data. The attack is agnostic to the specific DNN
the original image activates the backdoor with a success rate of architecture, loss function, or optimization function employed.
over 78.5% under a 0.5% poison ratio [70]. A study by Li et al. It necessitates corrupting the training data, while the learning
achieved a success rate of 93.5% with their backdoor DP and algorithm itself remains unchanged in this gray-box attack. The
RE attack on 54 deep learning image-based mobile apps. The study reveals significant drops in accuracy and recall, even with
attack incurred only a modest latency overhead of less than 2 ms a small number of malicious participants [101].
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3059

 He et al. proposed a gray-box attack, Liuer Mihou, to use risk even in the presence of DP [109]. Introducing the DPAa surrogate deep learning model to modify the packet delay FL system, a two-phase defense mechanism for intrusion detecand injecting random packets in Kitsune network attack dataset tion in federated learning, Lai et al. initially employed relative
and their own IoT dataset to generate stealthy adversarial sam- weight differences to compare participants’ models, unveiling
ples by iterative operations to minimize the anomaly score unique patterns that differentiate attackers from benign particito stay undetected by anomaly-based NIDS such as Kitsune pants. Subsequently, the aggregated model was tested with the
[4], [42], [65]. An example of a gray-box backdoor DP attack dataset to pinpoint attackers when accuracy dropped. DPA-FL
was presented by Shafahi et al., termed as Clean-label Attack. identified and removed attackers within twelve rounds, even
In this scenario, the attacker possesses information about the with a limited number of malicious actors. Study demonstrated
model and its parameters but lacks insight into the training that DPA-FL achieved 96.5% accuracy in defending against
data. Through the manipulation of feature collisions, attackers poisoning attacks and improved F1-score by 20% to 64% under
can influence the classification process, resulting in a backdoor backdoor attacks [54].
effect where the target class is erroneously classified as the base Table V represents the reviewed adversarial DP literature for
class [87]. Another study by Severi et al. showcased a backdoor various DP attacks and defenses employed against the known
attack where an attacker, armed solely with knowledge of the and potential adversarial attacks. Label-flipping poisoning is
feature space, could launch a potent attack by adding a small most common adversarial attack while detecting adversarial
set of poisoned samples, constituting just 1% of the training samples and filtering is one of the common defense strategies.
data [86]. Recent research trends indicate a growing preference among
 DP Defenses: To defend against DP attacks in deep learning- scholars for employing deep learning approaches over conbased cybersecurity solutions, there are several known strate- ventional machine learning methods. Regarding the suitability
gies to mitigate the risks. For example, data sanitization tech- of the utilized IDS datasets, our analysis revealed that CICniques preprocess and filter input data to remove or mitigate the IDS2017 has garnered significant attention across multiple studeffect of poisoned samples, while adversarial training exposes ies. This dataset, encompassing 80 network flow features and
the model to adversarial examples during training to enhance incorporating prevalent attack types such as Web-based, Brute
its robustness. Model verification ensures the integrity of the force, DoS, DDoS, Infiltration, Heartbleed, Bot, and Scan,
trained model, ensemble learning combines predictions from stands out as a contemporary and comprehensive resource for
multiple models for increased resilience, input validation de- intrusion detection research [1], [89].
tects, and filters out suspicious samples. Additionally, robust
optimization techniques promote the learning of generalized B. Test Time Evasion Attacks and Defenses
and robust features.
 Chen at al. introduced De-Pois that trained a mimic model TTE attacks aim to deceive or manipulate a model’s behavior
using GANs to imitate the behavior of a target model trained during the inference phase, often by crafting adversarial exon clean samples. By comparing the predictions of the mimic amples or exploiting vulnerabilities in the model’s decisionmodel and the target model, De-Pois could detect poisoned making process. The goal of the adversary is to intentionally
samples without prior knowledge of the machine learning al- deceive, bypass, or undermine the detection and defense mechgorithms or poisoning attack types [31]. A defense strategy anisms [25], [26], [39], [97].
proposed by Alrawashdeh et al. targeted white-box DP and Decision boundary manipulation is a primary TTE attack,
backdoor DP attacks through activation function and neuron where attackers deliberately manipulate the decision boundary
pruning, that could reduce the initial average loss of accuracy of a machine learning model during testing. Attackers strategiaround 80% (10% to 2%) for Deep Belief Network (DBN) and cally modify input data to shift or distort the decision boundary,
around 85% (14% to 2%) for generative adversarial network leading the model to make incorrect predictions. The model can
(CoGAN) for NSL-KDD and ransomware datasets [14]. An- be manipulated into making erroneous predictions (untargeted)
other defense approach called Nested Training for NIDS was or a specific misclassification (targeted), potentially causing
introduced by Venkatesan et al., using a diversified ensemble security and reliability concerns. Adversarial inputs at testof classifiers trained on different subsets of the data. By lever- time can exploit vulnerabilities in the detection algorithms or
aging disagreement among classifier predictions, the approach models to evade detection or mislead the system into classifying
effectively mitigates DP attacks, with up to 30% of the training malicious activities as benign.
data being poisoned [104]. Fig. 6 demonstrates the fundamental approach of TTE attacks
 Schwarzschild et al. observed that models trained with and how adversarial learning can be utilized as a defense mech-
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) are significantly harder to anism against TTE attacks.
poison, rendering poisoning attacks less effective in practical Black Box TTE Attacks: Aiken et al. addressed ML-based
settings [85]. A defense strategy for label-flipping attacks, Pau- NIDSs deployed in Software-defined networks (SDNs), highdice et al. proposed relabeling of suspicious points that may be lighting their vulnerability to adversarial attacks. In this blackindicative of malicious behavior [73]. Investigating the robust- box setting, an attacker has access to a single host within
ness of SGD against various DP attacks, Wang et al. demon- a network, with no direct access to the NIDS itself, or the
strated that SGD maintains optimal convergence rates on excess classifiers used. Through experiments on a SYN Flood DDoS
3060 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 TABLE V
 ADVERSARIAL LEARNING - DATA POISONING ATTACKS AND DEFENSES

 Research Ref. Attack(s) Defense(s) ML/DL Method(s) Dataset(s)
 Kuppa et al., 2019 [53] Data poisoning – OC-SVM, isolation forests, mani- CSE-CIC-IDS2018, CICFlowMefold approximation ter
 Paudice et al., 2019 [73] Label flipping poisoning Label sanitization SVM, K-NN BreastCancer, MNIST, Spambase
 Alrawashdeh and Goldsmith, 2020 Backdoor data poisoning Adaptive function and pruning DNN, DBN, CoGAN, L-BFGS & ISCX NSL-KDD, Ransomware
 [14] FGSM
 Chen et al., 2020 [33] Label flipping poisoning Federated learning GRU-SVM, SGD, DNN KDD-CUP1999, CIC-IDS2017,
 WSN-DS
 Tolpegin et al., 2020 [101] Targeted label flipping poisoning Clustering model gradients Federated learning, DNN CIFAR10, Fashion-MNIST
 Xu et al., 2020 [113] Targeted parallel data poisoning – LSTM, ConvS2S, CNN TORCHTEXT (IWSLT2016),
 News-Commentary v15
 Chen et al., 2021 [31] Data poisoning Attack-Agnostic Defense, Deep- GAN, CNN, MSE MNIST, CIFAR-10, Fourclass,
 kNN House Pricing
 Li et al. 2021 [56] Backdoor poisoning – DNN Google Play Store, TinyImageNet
 Ning et al., 2021 [70] Clean-label data poisoning back- Supervised and unsupervised poi- AE, NN MNIST, CIFAR10, ImageNet10,
 door attack son sample detection GTSRB
 Schwarzschild et al., 2021 [85] Data poisoning, hidden trigger – SVM, NN, transfer learning CIFAR10, CIFAR100,
 backdoor TinyImageNet
 Severi et al., 2021 [86] Clean-label backdoor poisoning Spectral signatures, HDBSCAN, NN, random forest, linear SVM EMBER, Contagio Malware Dump,
 isolation forest DREBIN
 Venkatesan et al., 2021 [104] Backdoor data poisoning Nested training for sanitization Linear SVM, NIDS CyberVAN, MNIST
 Wang et al., 2021 [110] Label flipping poisoning Stochastic approximation CNN, RKHS, robust learning MNIST, CIFAR10
 Lai et al., 2023 [54] Label-flipping, and backdoor at- Federated learning (DPA-FL) IDS, reinforcement learning, DQN, CIC-IDS2017
 tacks CNN

Fig. 6. Test time evasion adversarial learning attacks and defenses for ML/DL-based network intrusion detection systems.

attack scenario, they demonstrated a significant reduction in successfully causing several classifiers to misclassifying the
NIDS detection accuracy using evasion attacks on their SDN output. For instance, a shallow softmax classifier was assessed,
NIDS Neptune, which used supervised learning on network exhibiting an error rate of 99.9% alongside an average confiflow statistics to train and classify live traffic. It was developed dence level of 79.3% [39].
with the core goal of detecting DDoS attacks, most notably Melis et al. were able to show that the robot vision of a
synchronize (SYN) floods to enable evaluation of adversarial humanoid called “iCub” was fooled by adversarial examples
evasion attacks based on attack detection accuracy. Among the crafted from iCubWorld28 image dataset. They implemented
classifiers tested, K-nearest neighbors (KNN) proved the most multiclass SVM versions to demonstrate that stealthy adversarrobust, with a single feature perturbation lowering detection ial examples forced the model to misclassify [61]. Ayub et al.
accuracy from 100% to 50%. Logistic regression (LR), random demonstrated the feasibility of a white-box model evasion
forest (RF), and support vector machine (SVM) classifiers were attack in intrusion detection, where the attack relies on specific
more susceptible to the same perturbations [9]. parameters used in the trained model rather than the train-
 White Box TTE Attacks: Pioneer work of Biggio et al. in- ing dataset. They employed CICIDS 2017 and TRAbID 2017
troduced a gradient-based evasion technique to deceive SVMs datasets to implement the multilayer perceptron (MLP) model
and neural networks classifiers [25]. Goodfellow et al. also achieving a baseline accuracy of approximately 99% in classimade significant contributions to the initial research by utilizing fying attack and benign data. Adversarial samples resulted in
the fast gradient sign method to generate adversarial examples, a significant decrease in model accuracy, ranging from 20% to
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3061

 TABLE VI
 ADVERSARIAL LEARNING - TEST TIME EVASION ATTACKS AND DEFENSES

 Research Ref. Attack (s) Defense(s) ML/DL Method(s) Dataset(s)
 Biggio and Roli, 2018 [26] Poisoning at inference Reactive and proactive defences ANN, SVM, RF, decision trees MNIST
 Chen et al., 2019 [32] Transferability, hard-label attacks Stateful detection defenses NN, AE, query blinding, FGSM CIFAR-10, CINIC-10, TinyImageNet
 Ayub et al., 2020 [22] Model evasion – MLP, NN, JSMA CIC-IDS2017, TRAbID2017
 Mehanaz et al., 2020 [60] Model inversion, attribute inference – Decision tree, DNN General society survey, adult census income
 Pawlicki et al., 2020 [74] Misclassification – Random Forest, K-NN Classifier, CIC-IDS2017
 IDS ANN, SVM
 Pierazzi et al., 2020 [76] Problem-space and feature-space – SVM, greedy algorithm, Stochastic AndroZoo, VirusTotal, DREBIN
 manipulation gradient descent
 Han et al., 2021 [40] Traffic mutation Adversarial training, feature reduction MLP, DT, LR, KitNET, traffic ob- Kitsune, CIC-IDS2017
 fuscation, GAN, IF, Lasso Regression
 Talty et al., 2021 [98] Poisoning at inference Feature engineering Random forest, MLP, SVM, logis- KDD-CUP1999, ISCX, NSL-KDD
 tic regression, KNN classification,
 SGD, FGSM, PGD
 Li et al., 2022 [55] Misclassification Adversarial training, randomization, pro- DNN, AE, GAN, KDE, LID, ODD, MNIST, CIFAR10
 jection, detection ReBeL, FGSM, Logic Regression
 Merzouk et al., 2022 [62] Feature manipulation – FGSM ISCX, NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15, CIDDS-
 001
 Zhang et al., 2022 [117] Poisoning at inference Model voting, adversarial training, query NIDS, DNN, MLP, CNN, C-LSTM, CIC-IDS2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018
 detection
 Debicha et al., 2023 [36] Botnet Adversarial training, anomaly detection MLP, random forest, K-NN CTU-13, CSE-CIC-IDS2018
 Debicha et al., 2023 [35] Missclassification Robust classification and anomaly detec- DNN, FGSM, PGD, DeepFool, ISCX, NSL-KDD, CIC-IDS2017
 tion Carlini & Wagner, Fusion Rules
 Hore et al., 2023 [44] Packet manipulation – DT, RF, ML, DNN, SVM, LR CIC-IDS2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018
 Bostani and Moonsamy, Malware – SVM, optimization DREBIN, AndroZoo
 2024 [27]

30%, for both datasets. As a potential defense strategy, reducing deep neural network classifier trained on the MNIST dataset,
the amplitude of the gradient may enhance the model’s gener- and from 87.89% to 5.11% against another classifier trained on
alization ability. By doing so, the model becomes more robust the CIFAR10 dataset [72].
and less susceptible to adversarial attacks, ultimately improv- Pawlicki et al. used test time neuron activations to detect
ing its overall performance and ability to generalize to unseen adversarial attacks, employing four evasion attack algorithms:
data [22]. 1) fast gradient sign; 2) basic iterative method; 3) Carlini and
 Gray Box TTE Attacks: Biggio et al. employed a gradient- Wagner attack; and 4) projected gradient descent. They colbased evasion method demonstrating the vulnerability of these lected neural activations from an ANN trained on a subset of the
classifiers to adversarial attacks. The effectiveness of attacks CICIDS2017 dataset and adversarial examples. By training and
against classification algorithms such as SVMs and neural net- testing five ML classifiers, they achieved a recall of 0.99 for adworks revealed that adversarial samples have a high probability versarial attacks with RF and nearest neighbour classifier algoof evading detection, even if the adversary only possesses a rithms [74]. Debicha et al. developed a transfer learning-based
copy of the classifier learned from a small surrogate dataset. adversarial detector and evaluated the effectiveness of employ-
For example, utilizing a small subset (20%) of the PDF corpus ing multiple strategically placed detectors in IDS. Through the
samples from the Contagio dataset, adversaries were able to implementation of state-of-the-art models with several evasion
craft adversarial examples that successfully evaded the target attacks, they demonstrated that combining multiple detectors
classifiers’ ability to distinguish between legitimate and mali- enhances the detectability of adversarial traffic [35].
cious PDF files [25]. As presented in Table VI, most common TTE attack is the
 We present the summary of the reviewed work in the area use of adversarial samples during inference. This attack manipof adversarial TTE, including the attacks, defenses, Ml/DL ulates the model’s behavior, potentially leading to misclassifimethodologies, and datasets utilized in Table VI. cation. On defense mechanisms, adversarial training is the basic
 TTE Defenses: Test time evasion adversarial learning de- strategy, which involves augmenting the training process by
fenses focus on detecting and mitigating adversarial examples incorporating adversarial examples, which are carefully crafted
that are specifically crafted to deceive the model at the time input samples designed to deceive the model. By exposing
of testing. By incorporating techniques such as input saniti- the model to these adversarial examples during training, it
zation, defensive distillation, or ensemble methods, these de- learns to recognize and appropriately respond to such attacks.
fenses strive to improve the model’s ability to accurately clas- Adversarial training improves model generalization, enhances
sify inputs even in the presence of adversarial perturbations. its ability to handle perturbations, and makes it more robust
Papernot et al. introduced an adversarial defensive technique against attacks, reducing vulnerabilities and manipulation of
called defensive distillation. They were able to show empir- predictions. However, attackers can still adapt and craft sophisically that defensive distillation reduced the success rate of ticated attacks that can bypass the defenses learned through
adversarial sample crafting from 95.89% to 0.45% against a adversarial training. Therefore, it is crucial to continuously re-
3062 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

Fig. 7. Reverse engineering adversarial learning attacks and defenses for ML/DL-based network intrusion detection systems.

search and develop new defense strategies to stay ahead of evolv such as feature representations, detection rules, and sensitive
ing attack techniques. On methodologies applied, researchers training data. Atwell et al. investigated the threat of reverse
applied various ML/DL and preferring neural networks, which TCP attacks to gain remote access to end-user networks by
is aligned with the overall trend in Adversarial-NIDS field. TTE exploiting the connection process [21]. Breier et al. demonresearch is utilizing a wide array of IDS datasets, including strated the potential of RE in neural networks through fault
established primary datasets such as KDD-CUP1999 and NSL- attacks. By flipping the sign bit, fault attack manipulated in-
KDD, alongside contemporary datasets such as UNSW-NB 15, termediate values, thereby enabling the recovery of propri-
Kitsune, CIC-IDS 2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018, and ISCX, cover- etary model parameters [28]. Attackers leverage RE to exing both historical and modern-day attack scenarios. ploit vulnerabilities and create potent adversarial examples.
 On defensive side, RE can serve legitimate purposes, such as
C. RE Attacks and Defenses model interpretation, debugging, auditing, accountability, and
 RE attacks exploit the ML pipeline by analyzing feature engi- transparency [46].
neering, extracting sensitive training data, and deducing model Black Box RE Attacks: By exploring model inversion
architecture, parameters, and internal representations. There are attacks, Mehnaz et al. investigated adversaries who can use
various RE approaches applicable in the field of NIDS. For known nonsensitive attributes to infer sensitive attributes. Two
example, investigating network protocols to understand their new attack methods, confidence modeling-based and confistructure, behavior, and vulnerabilities aids in effectively detect- dence score-based, are introduced. Decision tree and deep neuing and preventing attacks targeting specific protocols. Further- ral network models trained on real datasets are evaluated for
more, RE techniques assist in malware analysis and signature such attacks. Vulnerability to model inversion attacks is idenextraction, enhancing NIDS capabilities in detecting known and tified within specific attribute-based groups, such as gender or
unknown threats. Binary code analysis supports vulnerability race [60].
identification, understanding system responses, and overall se- Gray Box RE Attacks: In a gray-box backdoor attack called
curity enhancement of NIDS. Fig. 7 shows how adversaries use DeepPayload, Li et al. introduced a practical RE attack scenario
RE approach for attacks and how the same approach can serve where the attacker has access to the compiled DNN model
to build a defense strategy against adversarial attacks. in the app, and does not have access to the original training
 Model inversion attacks involve extracting sensitive informa- data or metadata used for training. Using RE, a decompiled
tion and insights about the training data by reverse-engineering. DNN model into a data-flow graph, an attacker can inject a
These attacks pose a significant risk to privacy and require pro- payload consisting of a resize operator, trigger detector, and
tective measures to safeguard the confidentiality of the model output selector. The modified model, incorporating the injected
and its data. components, altered its behavior based on the trigger pres-
 A RE attack gains knowledge or extracts information about ence probability, allowing for the attacker’s desired output.
the underlying detection model or its internal workings to un- This attack uses bytecode reverse-engineering by directly maderstand and exploit the model’s vulnerabilities, weaknesses, nipulating the dataflow graph to inject malicious logic directly
or decision-making mechanisms [52]. Nayan et al. addressed into deployed DNN model. The study reveals that this attack
the vulnerabilities of on-device model extraction and offered effectively triggers the malicious payload with a high success
a systematic classification of model extraction attacks and de- rate (93.5%), with minimal latency overhead (2 ms) and acfenses [68]. By analyzing the model’s structure, parameters, curacy decrease (1.4%). This RE attack focuses on distributed
or outputs, the attacker aims to deduce valuable information, or deployed models beyond developers’ control. Unfortunately,
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3063

existing defense techniques require training or testing with employed in the attack. Upon identifying backdoor poisoning
extensive sample sets, making them unsuitable for deployed and the target class, the estimated backdoor pattern is used
models [56]. to pinpoint and eliminate the poisoned data directly from the
 RE Defenses: RE was employed by Wang et al. to detect training set [112].
and prevent backdoor attacks on deep neural networks. They
identified hidden triggers within DNNs and developed three de- VI. LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES
fense methods: 1) an early filter for adversarial inputs; 2) neuron
 Our objective is to provide a comprehensive and active refpruning-based model patching; and 3) unlearning. The detecerence in the field of adversarial learning attacks and defenses
tion of backdoor injection is based on anomaly measurement of
 for network intrusion detection systems; however, there are
infected and clean model by how much the label with smallest
 challenges and limitations within our work. First, the availtrigger deviates from the remaining labels. To mitigate these
 ability of comprehensive literature covering all relevant aspects
attacks, they analyzed three methods, including an early filter
 of adversarial learning is limited, hindering direct comparisons
for adversarial inputs, a model patching algorithm based on
 and in-depth analysis of research breadth of the topic. While
neuron pruning, and another based on unlearning. By pruning
 there have been significant advancements in the broader field of
30% of neurons reduces attack success rate to nearly 0% with
 adversarial learning attacks and defenses, the specific subareas
the slight reduction of classification accuracy by 5.06%. Trainof deep learning, network intrusion, DP, TTE, and RE have seen
ing the DNN model with reverse engineered triggers proved
 relatively fewer studies. Additionally, our focused approach on
effective in unlearning the original trigger, resulting in an attack
 a shorter time frame may result in a narrower scope of research
success rate of less than 6.70% and a maximum reduction in
 discussed. Furthermore, the dynamic and rapidly evolving naclassification accuracy of 3.6% [106].
 ture of the field presents challenges in effectively capturing the
 Asnani et al. presented threat of model parsing for generative
 latest advancements in adversarial learning, emphasizing the
models (GMs). The objective is to infer network architectures
 need for future studies to stay current.
and training loss functions from generated images to address
concerns related to the misuse of GMs. Their proposed frame-
 VII. DISCUSSION
work consists of two networks: 1) the fingerprint estimation
network (FEN); and 2) the parsing network (PN). These net- Research in adversarial learning within the network domain
works estimate fingerprints from images and predict the cor- continues to evolve, focusing on advancing attack detection
responding model parameters. A dataset of 100 000 images capabilities and developing more robust defense strategies.
from 116 GMs was collected to demonstrate parsing of the The relevance of existing older yet popular NIDS datasets
hyperparameters [19]. for advanced ML/DL algorithms remains a concern. ML/DL-
 Table VII presents an overview of studied RE ML/DL meth- generated synthetic data may address challenges of data
ods applied for adversarial attacks and defenses. As we observe scarcity, scalability, and attack rarity effectively. Majority of
that standard definition of protocols and identification and mal- existing research studies highly rely on outdated data sources.
ware analysis can be used as defense mechanisms for protocol These outdated data sources suffer from a high percentage
manipulation and malware attacks. Model and data information of duplicate records and highly imbalanced attack categories.
can be reverse engineered through model extraction, model Accurate data interpretation is crucial in ML-based NIDS for
inversion, and model parsing by using deep neural networks representing normal and attack scenarios. While diverse attack
and generative adversarial networks. datasets help identify and mitigate threats, adversaries exploit
 There are security concerns associated with RE the archi- this knowledge to craft deceptive attacks. Challenges such
tecture of a DNN model by exploiting the memory access as limited availability, imbalanced class distribution, evolving
pattern of a processor during DNN execution. To counter such techniques, and privacy concerns hinder the effectiveness of
attacks, Liu et al. proposed a defensive mechanism that com- network attack datasets. Keeping datasets up-to-date becomes
bines techniques such as oblivious shuffle, address space layout a challenge due to evolving techniques and the need for real
randomization (ASLR), and dummy memory accesses. This attack instances [15], [89], [100]. To compare the scope, apdefense aimed to obfuscate the memory access pattern and plicability, and limitations of these datasets, Ghurab et al. anminimize the risk of such attacks with minimal overhead. The alyzed the benchmark datasets (KDD99, NSL-KDD, Kyoto
effectiveness of this proposed defense was evaluated through 2006+, ISCX 2012, UNSW-NB15, CIDDS-001, CICIDS2017,
a modified attack on an existing model. The results illustrated CSE-CIC-IDS2018), and recommended to utilize more recent
that the incorporation of these techniques notably heightened datasets representing modern-day attacks [38]. However, anthe complexity of the attack while keeping memory access over- other study by Alshamy et al. presented that 66% of studied
head low. Moreover, the defense mechanism was scalable, made 39 NIDS ML-DL classification research works (2017-2020)
it applicable to larger DNN models by effectively mitigating utilized KDD99/NSL-KDD datasets with 46% using KDD99
RE attacks that might exploit memory access patterns [58]. dataset [15]. Similarly, an evaluation of ML-DL performance
The defense strategy presented by Xiang et al. introduces an study by Pektas and Acarman showed that 80% of 10 studies
optimization-based approach to counter RE, applicable both (2008-2018) utilized KDD99/NSL-KDD datasets, while a 2020
before and during classifier training. This defense primarily review by Thakkar et al. presented that all 6 studied research
targets backdoor attacks by estimating the recognized pattern work for ML-DL NIDS utilized NSL-KDD datasets [75], [100].
3064 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 TABLE VII
 ADVERSARIAL LEARNING - REVERSE ENGINEERING ATTACKS AND DEFENSES

 Research Ref. Attack(s) Defense(s) ML/DL Method(s) Dataset(s)
 CSIC 2010,
 Antunes et al., 2011 [17] Protocol Manipulation Standard Protocol Identification Moore Reduction Salient Person,
 FTCDATA
 Alabdulmoshin et al., 2014 Spam Randomized diversification Adversarial Learning, Linear SVM UCI datasets
 [10]
 Atwell et al., 2016 [21] Reverse TCP Attacks, Social Engi- Security Policy, Security Aware- TCP analysis Click (Port 80 HTTP), VirusTotal
 neering, Zero Day ness, Incident Response
 Tramer et al., 2016 [102] Model Extraction, Model Inversion – NN, Decision Trees, SVM Digits, Adult, Statlog (German
 Credit Data), Steak Survey
 Papernot et al., 2017 [71] Misclassification Reactive and Proactive - Gradient DNN MNIST, GTSRB
 Masking
 Liu et al., 2019 [57] Model Extraction and Inversion Address Space Layout Randomiza- DNN, CNN Memory Access Patterns
 tion (ASLR), DumMA
 Wang et al., 2019 [108] Model Manipulation L-AWA-maxKL DNN MNIST
 Wang et al., 2019 [106] Backdoor Attacks - BadNets & Tro- Filtering, Neuron Pruning DNN MNIST, GTSRB, Youtube Face,
 jan PubFig
 Breier et al., 2021 [28] Fault Attacks – NN TinyImageNet, CIFAR-10
 Li et al., 2021 [56] Injected Backdoor Attack – DNN Google Play Store
 Ismael and Thanoon, 2022 Malware Standard malware identification Malware Analysis CIC-MalMem-2022
 [46]
 Asnani et al., 2023 [19] Model Parsing Fingerprint Estimation Network Generative Models (GM), CNN, MNIST, GTSRB, Tiny ImageNet,
 (FEN), Parsing Network (PN) GAN, VAE CelebA, FaceForensics++

Ring et al. compared 34 datasets, representing research works 1) Dataset Quality and Realism: Develop authentic datasets
on dataset generation or utilization, focusing on features per reflecting current attack scenarios and employ ML/DLdataset [79]. For a thorough evaluation of ML/DL classifiers, generated synthetic data and data augmentation tech-
Sarhen et al. introduced a standardized NetFlow-based fea- niques to tackle data scarcity and scalability challenges
ture set consisting of 43 features. They tailored NIDS datasets effectively.
(UNSW-NB15, BoT-IoT, ToN-IoT, CSE-CIC-IDS2018) using 2) Interpretability: Employ explainable AI techniques to
the define standard NetFlow-based features to enhance the con- validate detected intrusions, support expert analysis, and
sistency in comparing the performance evaluation [1], [83]. The optimize resource allocation.
growing importance of deep learning in enhancing predictive 3) Domain-Specific Algorithms: Develop adversarial learnmodeling and decision-making makes them attractive for NIDS. ing algorithms tailored to the unique characteristics of
However, adversarial research specific to ML/DL-based NIDS network data.
remains limited compared with non-NIDS domains. The chal- 4) Real-World Evaluation: Bridge the gap between theory
lenges of adapting image-specific learning algorithms to NIDS and practice by testing real-world environments to ensure
have driven the exploration of domain-specific methods [41], usability and effectiveness.
[51], [80]. 5) Zero-Day Threat Detection: Explore novel techniques
 and threat intelligence to handle to zero-day threats ef-
 VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS fectively.
 Machine learning and deep learning models excel at adapt- Achieving robust generalization and accurate predictions for
ing to evolving threats and detecting subtle anomalies, mak- adversarial threats remains a critical challenge in NIDS domain.
ing them invaluable for dynamic cybersecurity environments. There is a significant gap in NIDS-specific DP, TTE, and RE.
However, their reliance on substantial computational resources Our work emphasizes the need for continuous evaluation and
can hinder real-time detection in high-speed networks. Lim- advancement of adversarial learning techniques to ensure deited interpretability further challenges understanding their de- fenses remain effective against evolving adversarial threats in
cisions, emphasizing the need for current, realistic network network intrusion domain.
datasets to detect adversarial attacks and develop robust defenses. Future research on optimizing ML/DL models through REFERENCES
lightweight architectures, incorporating explainability tech-
 [1] Cisco IOS netflow version 9 flow-record format - white paper.
niques, and integrating traditional approaches such as rule- (2011). Accessed: Jan. 10, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
based systems and ensemble methods can enhance NIDS www.cisco.com/en/US/technologies/tk648/tk362/technologies_white_
performance and reliability. The limited interpretability of paper09186a00800a3db9.pdf
 [2] Unsw-nb15 dataset. (2015). Accessed: Jan. 9, 2024. [Online]. Availevolving machine learning methods in NIDS hinders intru- able: https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/unsw-nb15-dataset
sion validation and resource optimization in security-focused [3] Cse-cic-ids2018. (2018). Accessed: Dec. 20, 2023. [Online]. Available:
systems. https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2018.html
 [4] Kitsune network attack dataset. (2019). Accessed: Dec. 20,
 Adversarial learning in NIDS presents critical challenges and 2023. [Online]. Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/516/
opportunities for future research directions. kitsune+network+attack+dataset
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3065

 [5] Why is cybersecurity important? (2021). Accessed: Nov. 29, 2023. [27] H. Bostani and V. Moonsamy, “Evadedroid: A practical evasion at-
 [Online]. Available: https://cybersecurityonline.utulsa.edu/blog/why-is- tack on machine learning for black-box android malware detection,”
 cybersecurity-important-top-six-reasons/ Comput. Secur., vol. 139, 2024, Art. no. 103676.
 [6] Linked research data from idea to impact (2022). Accessed: Feb. 24, [28] J. Breier, D. Jap, X. Hou, S. Bhasin, and Y. Liu, “Sniff: reverse
 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.dimensions.ai/ engineering of neural networks with fault attacks,” IEEE Trans. Rel.,
 [7] Gartner forecasts global security and risk management spending vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 1527–1539, Dec. 2022.
 to grow 14% in 2024. (2023). Accessed: Nov. 29, 2023. [Online]. [29] N. Carlini, et al., “On evaluating adversarial robustness,” 2019,
 Available: https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/ arXiv:1902.06705.
 2023-09-28-gartner-forecasts-global-security-and-risk-management- [30] A. Chakraborty, M. Alam, V. Dey, A. Chattopadhyay, and D.
 spending-to-grow-14-percent-in-2024 Mukhopadhyay, “A survey on adversarial attacks and defences,” CAAI
 [8] S. Agrawal et al., “Federated learning for intrusion detection system: Trans. Intell. Technol., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 25–45, 2021.
 Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. [31] J. Chen, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, C. Wang, and L. Liu, “De-pois: An
 195, pp. 346–361, 2022. attack-agnostic defense against data poisoning attacks,” IEEE Trans.
 [9] J. Aiken and S. Scott-Hayward, “Investigating adversarial attacks Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 3412–3425, 2021.
 against network intrusion detection systems in SDNS,” in Proc. IEEE [32] S. Chen, N. Carlini, and D. Wagner, “Stateful detection of black-box
 Conf. Netw. Function Virtualization Softw. Defined Networks (NFV- adversarial attacks,” 2019, arXiv:1907.05587.
 SDN), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 1–7. [33] Z. Chen, N. Lv, P. Liu, Y. Fang, K. Chen, and W. Pan, “Intrusion
 [10] I. M. Alabdulmohsin, X. Gao, and X. Zhang, “Adding robustness detection for wireless edge networks based on federated learning,”
 to support vector machines against adversarial reverse engineering,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 217463–217472, 2020.
 in Proc. 23rd ACM Int. Conf. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2014, [34] J. Cohen, E. Rosenfeld, and Z. Kolter, “Certified adversarial robustness
 pp. 231–240.
 via randomized smoothing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR,
 [11] H. A. Alatwi and C. Morisset, “Adversarial machine learning in
 2019, pp. 1310–1320.
 network intrusion detection domain: A systematic review,” 2021,
 [35] I. Debicha, R. Bauwens, T. Debatty, J.-M. Dricot, T. Kenaza, and W.
 arXiv:2112.03315.
 Mees, “TAD: Transfer learning-based multi-adversarial detection of
 [12] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches
 for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, evasion attacks against network intrusion detection systems,” Future
 and open issues,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 189, 2020, Art. no. 105124. Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 138, pp. 185–197, Jan. 2023.
 [13] A. Alotaibi and M. A. Rassam, “Adversarial machine learning attacks [36] I. Debicha, B. Cochez, T. Kenaza, T. Debatty, J.-M. Dricot, and W.
 against intrusion detection systems: A survey on strategies and de- Mees, “ADV-bot: Realistic adversarial botnet attacks against network
 fense,” Future Internet, vol. 15, no. 2, p. 62, 2023. intrusion detection systems,” Comput. Secur., vol. 129, 2023, Art. no.
 [14] K. Alrawashdeh and S. Goldsmith, “Defending deep learning based 103176.
 anomaly detection systems against white-box adversarial examples and [37] X. Du et al., “A hybrid adversarial attack for different application
 backdoor attacks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Technol. Soc. (ISTAS), scenarios,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 10, p. 3559, 2020.
 Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2020, pp. 294–301. [38] M. Ghurab, G. Gaphari, F. Alshami, R. Alshamy, and S. Othman, “A
 [15] R. Alshamy and M. Ghurab, “A review of big data in network intrusion detailed analysis of benchmark datasets for network intrusion detection
 detection system: Challenges, approaches, datasets, and tools,” J. system,” Asian J. Res. in Computer Sci., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 14–33, 2021.
 Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 62–74, 2020. [39] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
 [16] S. Amutha, R. K. R. Srinivasan, and M. Kavitha, “Secure network adversarial examples,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6572.
 intrusion detection system using NID-RNN based deep learning,” [40] D. Han et al., “Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Advances in Comput., Commun. Appl. Inform. machine learning-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE J. Sel.
 (ACCAI), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2022, pp. 1–5. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2632–2647, Aug. 2021.
 [17] J. Antunes, N. Neves, and P. Verissimo, “Reverse engineering of [41] K. He, D. D. Kim, and M. R. Asghar, “Adversarial machine learning
 protocols from network traces,” in Proc. 18th Work. Conf. Reverse for network intrusion detection systems: a comprehensive survey,”
 Eng., Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2011, pp. 169–178. IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 538–566, Firstquarter
 [18] G. Apruzzese, M. Andreolini, L. Ferretti, M. Marchetti, and M. Cola- 2023.
 janni, “Modeling realistic adversarial attacks against network intrusion [42] K. He, D. D. Kim, J. Sun, J. D. Yoo, Y. H. Lee, and H. K. Kim, “Liuer
 detection systems,” Digit. Threats: Res. Pract. (DTRAP), vol. 3, no. 3, Mihou: A practical framework for generating and evaluating grey-box
 pp. 1–19, 2022. adversarial attacks against NIDS,” 2022, arXiv:2204.06113.
 [19] V. Asnani, X. Yin, T. Hassner, and X. Liu, “Reverse engineering of [43] J. Heo, S. Joo, and T. Moon, “Fooling neural network interpretations
 generative models: Inferring model hyperparameters from generated via adversarial model manipulation,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 images,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. vol. 32, pp. 2921–2932, 2019.
 15477–15493, Dec. 2023. [44] S. Hore, J. Ghadermazi, D. Paudel, A. Shah, T. K. Das, and N. D.
 [20] A. Athalye, L. Engstrom, A. Ilyas, and K. Kwok, “Synthesizing robust Bastian, “Deep PackGen: A deep reinforcement learning framework
 adversarial examples,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2018, for adversarial network packet generation,” 2023, arXiv:2305.11039.
 pp. 284–293. [45] O. Ibitoye, R. Abou-Khamis, A. Matrawy, and M. O. Shafiq, “The
 [21] C. Atwell, T. Blasi, and T. Hayajneh, “Reverse TCP and social threat of adversarial attacks on machine learning in network security–
 engineering attacks in the era of big data,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. A survey,” 2019, arXiv:1911.02621.
 Conf. Big Data Secur. Cloud (BigDataSecurity), IEEE Int. Conf. High [46] M. F. Ismael and K. H. Thanoon, “Investigation malware analysis
 Perform. Smart Comput. (HPSC), IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Data Secur. depend on reverse engineering,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Data Sci. Intell.
 (IDS), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2016, pp. 90–95. Comput. (ICDSIC), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2022, pp. 251–
 [22] M. A. Ayub, W. A. Johnson, D. A. Talbert, and A. Siraj, “Model 256.
 evasion attack on intrusion detection systems using adversarial machine [47] A. Javaid, Q. Niyaz, W. Sun, and M. Alam, “A deep learning approach
 learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), Piscataway, for network intrusion detection system,” in Proc. 9th EAI Int. Conf.
 NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2020, pp. 1–6. Bio-Inspired Inf. Commun. Technol. (Formerly BIONETICS), 2016, pp.
 [23] T. Bai, J. Luo, J. Zhao, B. Wen, and Q. Wang, “Recent advances in ad- 21–26.
 versarial training for adversarial robustness,” 2021, arXiv:2102.01356. [48] H. Jmila and M. I. Khedher, “Adversarial machine learning for network
 [24] T. Ban, T. Takahashi, and J. Takeuchi, “Malicious packet classification
 intrusion detection: A comparative study,” Comput. Netw., vol. 214,
 based on neural network using Kitsune features,” in Proc. Intell.
 2022, Art. no. 109073.
 Syst. Pattern Recogn.: Second Int. Conf. (ISPR), Hammamet, Tunisia:
 [49] A. R. Khan et al., “Deep learning for intrusion detection and security
 Springer Nature, Mar. 2022.
 of internet of things (IoT): current analysis, challenges, and possible
 [25] B. Biggio et al., “Evasion attacks against machine learning at test
 time,” in Proc. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discovery Databases: Euro. solutions,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, no. 1, p. 4016073,
 Conf. (ECML PKDD), Prague, Czech Republic: Springer, Sep. 2013, 2022.
 pp. 387–402. [50] B. Kim, Y. E. Sagduyu, K. Davaslioglu, T. Erpek, and S. Ulukus,
 [26] B. Biggio and F. Roli, “Wild patterns: Ten years after the rise of “Channel-aware adversarial attacks against deep learning-based wireadversarial machine learning,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 84, pp. 317–331, less signal classifiers,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 6,
 Dec. 2018. pp. 3868–3880, Jun. 2022.
3066 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 [51] T. Kim and W. Pak, “Deep learning-based network intrusion detection 2018, UrbReas 2018, SoGood 2018, IWAISe 2018, Green Data Mining
 using multiple image transformers,” Appl. Sci., vol. 13, no. 5, p. 2754, 2018 (ECML PKDD), Springer, Sep. 2019, pp. 5–15.
 2023. [74] M. Pawlicki, M. Choraś, and R. Kozik, “Defending network intrusion
 [52] C. Kruegel, D. Mutz, W. Robertson, G. Vigna, and R. Kemmerer, detection systems against adversarial evasion attacks,” Future Gener.
 “Reverse engineering of network signatures,” in Proc. AusCERT Asia Comput. Syst., vol. 110, pp. 148–154, Sep. 2020.
 Pacific Inf. Technol. Secur. Conf., Gold Coast, Australia, 2005. [75] A. Pektaş and T. Acarman, “A deep learning method to detect network
 [53] A. Kuppa, S. Grzonkowski, M. R. Asghar, and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Black intrusion through flow-based features,” Int. J. Netw. Manage., vol. 29,
 box attacks on deep anomaly detectors,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. no. 3, 2019, Art. no. e2050.
 Availability, Reliability Security, 2019, pp. 1–10. [76] F. Pierazzi, F. Pendlebury, J. Cortellazzi, and L. Cavallaro, “Intriguing
 [54] Y.-C. Lai et al., “Two-phase defense against poisoning attacks on properties of adversarial ML attacks in the problem space,” 2020,
 federated learning-based intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 129, arXiv:1911.02142.
 2023, Art. no. 103205. [77] D. D. Protić, “Rev. Kdd Cup ‘99, Nsl-Kdd Kyoto 2006+ Datasets.
 [55] Y. Li, M. Cheng, C.-J. Hsieh, and T. C. M. Lee, “A review of adver- Vojnotehnički Glasnik/Mil,” Tech. Courier, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 580–596,
 sarial attack and defense for classification methods,” Amer. Statistician, 2018.
 vol. 76, no. 4, pp. 329–345, 2022. [78] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Grüdl, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “Flow-
 [56] Y. Li, J. Hua, H. Wang, C. Chen, and Y. Liu, “Deeppayload: Black- based benchmark data sets for intrusion detection,” in Proc. 16th Eur.
 box backdoor attack on deep learning models through neural payload Conf. Cyber Warfare Security, ACPI, 2017, pp. 361–369.
 injection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE), [79] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Scheuring, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “A
 Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 263–274. survey of network-based intrusion detection data sets,” Comput. Secur.,
 [57] H. Liu and B. Lang, “Machine learning deep learning methods intrusion vol. 86, pp. 147–167, Sep. 2019.
 detection systems: A survey,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 20, p. 4396, 2019. [80] I. Rosenberg, A. Shabtai, Y. Elovici, and L. Rokach, “Adversarial
 [58] Y. Liu, D. Dachman-Soled, and A. Srivastava, “Mitigating reverse machine learning attacks and defense methods in the cyber security
 engineering attacks on deep neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. domain,” ACM Comput. Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36,
 Soc. Annu. Symp. VLSI (ISVLSI), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2021.
 2019, pp. 657–662. [81] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network traf-
 [59] A. McCarthy, E. Ghadafi, P. Andriotis, and P. Legg, “Functionality- fic: Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network
 preserving adversarial machine learning for robust classification in traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2,
 cybersecurity and intrusion detection domains: A survey,” J. Cyber- pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
 security Privacy, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 154–190, 2022. [82] S. Saini and N. Saxena, “Predatory medicine: Exploring and mea-
 [60] S. Mehnaz, N. Li, and E. Bertino, “Black-box model inversion attribute suring the vulnerability of medical AI to predatory science,” 2022,
 inference attacks on classification models,” 2020, arXiv:2012.03404. arXiv:2203.06245.
 [61] M. Melis, A. Demontis, B. Biggio, G. Brown, G. Fumera, and F. Roli, [83] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature
 “Is deep learning safe for robot vision? adversarial examples against set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw.
 the ICUB humanoid,” 2017, arXiv:1708.06939. Appl., pp. 1–14, vol. 27, no. 1, 2022.
 [62] M. A. Merzouk, F. Cuppens, N. Boulahia-Cuppens, and R. Yaich, [84] Research Publication Trends on Google Scholar from 2018 to 2023.
 “Investigating the practicality of adversarial evasion attacks on network (2025). Accessed: Sep. 06, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://scholar.
 intrusion detection,” Ann. Telecommun., vol. 77, no. 11, pp. 763–775, google.com/
 2022. [85] A. Schwarzschild, M. Goldblum, A. Gupta, J. P. Dickerson, and T.
 [63] A. Michel and R. Ewetz, “Gradient-based adversarial attack detection Goldstein, “Just how toxic is data poisoning? a unified benchmark for
 via deep feature extraction,” in Proc. SoutheastCon, Piscataway, NJ, backdoor and data poisoning attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 USA: IEEE Press, 2022, pp. 213–220. PMLR, 2021, pp. 9389–9398.
 [64] D. J. Miller, Z. Xiang, and G. Kesidis, “Adversarial learning targeting [86] G. Severi, J. Meyer, S. Coull, and A. Oprea, “Explanation-guided,”
 deep neural network classification: A comprehensive review of defenses “backdoor poisoning attacks against malware classifiers,” in Proc. 30th
 against attacks,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 402–433, Mar. 2020. USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security), 2021, pp. 1487–1504.
 [65] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [87] A. Shafahi et al., “Poison frogs! targeted clean-label poisoning attacks
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” on neural networks,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 31, pp. 6103–
 2018, arXiv:1802.09089. 6113, 2018.
 [66] N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “An ensemble intrusion [88] P. Shakarian, The sunburst hack was massive and devastating. (2021).
 detection technique based on proposed statistical flow features for Accessed: Nov. 29, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.salon.
 protecting network traffic of internet of things,” IEEE Internet Things com/2021/01/04/the-sunburst-hack-was-massive-and-devastating--5-
 J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4815–4830, Jun. 2019. observations-from-a-cybersecurity-expert_partner/
 [67] A. Bou Nassif, M. Abu Talib, Q. Nasir, and F. M. Dakalbab, “Machine [89] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
 learning for anomaly detection: A systematic review,” IEEE Access, generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
 vol. 9, pp. 78658–78700, 2021. characterization,” in Proc. ICISS, 2018, pp. 108–116.
 [68] T. Nayan, Q. Guo, M. A. Duniawi, M. Botacin, S. Uluagac, and [90] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 R. Sun, SoK: “All you need to know about,” “On-Device,” ML “Developing realistic distributed denial of service (DDOS) attack
 “model extraction-the gap between research and practice,” in Proc. dataset and taxonomy,” in Proc. Int. Carnahan Conf. Secur. Technol.
 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2024, pp. 5233–5250. (ICCST), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 1–8.
 [69] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and A. A. [91] Y. Shi and Y. E. Sagduyu, “Evasion and causative attacks with adver-
 Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark for large- sarial deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM),
 scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13, p. 5941, Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 243–248.
 2023. [92] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
 [70] R. Ning, J. Li, C. Xin, and H. Wu, “Invisible poison: A blackbox clean developing a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for
 label backdoor attack to deep neural networks,” in Proc. Conf. Comput. intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374,
 Commun. (INFOCOM), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2021, 2012.
 pp. 1–10. [93] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning
 [71] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, I. Goodfellow, S. Jha, Z. Berkay Celik, and approach to network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics
 A. Swami, “Practical black-box attacks against machine learning,” in Comput. Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018.
 Proc. ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2017, pp. 506–519. [94] J. Song, H. Takakura, Y. Okabe, M. Eto, D. Inoue, and K. Nakao,
 [72] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, X. Wu, S. Jha, and A. Swami, “Distillation as “Statistical analysis of honeypot data and building of Kyoto 2006+
 a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks,” in dataset for NIDS evaluation,” in Proc. First Workshop Building Analysis
 Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Datasets Gathering Experience Returns Security, 2011, pp. 29–36.
 Press, 2016, pp. 582–597. [95] Percentage of global population accessing the internet by April 2024.
 [73] A. Paudice, L. Muñoz-González, and E. C. Lupu, “Label sanitization (2024). Accessed: Jun. 04, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 against label flipping poisoning attacks,” in Proc. Workshops: Nemesis statista.com/statistics/325706/global-internet-user-penetration/
SAINI et al.: CONTRAST DUALITY OF ADVERSARIAL LEARNING IN NETWORK INTRUSION 3067

 [96] H. Sun, T. Zhu, Z. Zhang, D. Jin, P. Xiong, and W. Zhou, “Adversarial [117] C. Zhang, X. Costa-Perez, and P. Patras, “Adversarial attacks against
 attacks against deep generative models on data: a survey,” IEEE Trans. deep learning-based network intrusion detection systems and defense
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3367–3388, Apr. 2023. mechanisms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 1294–1311,
 [97] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Good- Jun. 2022.
 fellow, and R. Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks, 2013, [118] W. E. Zhang, Z. Quan, A. Sheng, and C. Alhazmi, “Li. Adversarial
 arXiv:1312.6199. attacks on deep-learning models in natural language processing: A
 [98] K. Talty, J. Stockdale, and N. D. Bastian, “A sensitivity analysis of survey,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. (TIST), vol. 11, no. 3, pp.
 poisoning and evasion attacks in network intrusion detection system 1–41, 2020.
 machine learning models,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MIL- [119] X. Zhang, J. Wang, T. Wang, R. Jiang, J. Xu, and L. Zhao, “Robust
 COM), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 1011–1016. feature learning for adversarial defense via hierarchical feature align-
 [99] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed ment,” Inf. Sci., vol. 560, pp. 256–270, Dec. 2021.
 analysis of the KDD cup 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. [120] S. Zhou, C. Liu, D. Ye, T. Zhu, W. Zhou, and P. S. Yu, “Adversarial
 Intell. Security Defense Appl., Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2009, attacks and defenses in deep learning: From a perspective of cybersepp. 1–6. curity,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1–39, 2022.
[100] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “A review of the advancement in intrusion
 detection datasets,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 167, pp. 636–645, Apr.
 2020.
 Shalini Saini received the Ph.D. degree from Texas
[101] V. Tolpegin, S. Truex, M. E. Gursoy, and L. Liu, “Data poisoning
 A&M University, College Station, TX, USA, in
 attacks against federated learning systems,” in Proc. Comput. Security
 2023, and the M.S. degree from the University of
 (ESORICS): 25th Eur. Symp. Research Comput. Security (ESORICS),
 Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, USA, both in computer
 Springer: Guildford, U.K., Sep. 2020, pp. 480–501.
 science.
[102] F. Tramèr, A. Kurakin, N. Papernot, I. Goodfellow, D. Boneh, and P.
 She is currently an Assistant Professor in com-
 McDaniel, “Ensemble adversarial training: attacks and defenses,” 2017,
 puter science with the University of Maryland EastarXiv:1705.07204.
 ern Shore, Princess Anne, MD, USA. She pre-
[103] I. Y. Tyukin, D. J. Higham, and A. N. Gorban, “On adversarial
 viously served as an Assistant Research Scientist
 examples and stealth attacks in artificial intelligence systems,” in Proc.
 with the Center of Cybersecurity Innovation (CCI),
 Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE
 Texas A&M University–Central Texas. Her research
 Press, 2020, pp. 1–6.
 interests include machine learning and deep learning approaches to enhance
[104] S. Venkatesan, H. Sikka, R. Izmailov, R. Chadha, A. Oprea, and M.
 privacy and security in cybersecurity solutions. She is particularly interested
 J. D. Lucia, “Poisoning attacks and data sanitization mitigations for
 in addressing privacy and security challenges in emerging technologies within
 machine learning models in network intrusion detection systems,” in
 cybersecurity and healthcare. Her work has been published in numerous
 Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM), Piscataway, NJ, USA:
 peer-reviewed conferences and journals, covering topics such as network
 IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 874–879.
 security, AI-driven healthcare security, privacy in mobile health applications,
[105] J. Vitorino, I. Praça, and E. Maia, “SOK: Realistic adversarial attacks and vulnerabilities in voice anonymity systems.
 and defenses for intelligent network intrusion detection,” Comput.
 Secur., vol. 134, 2023, Art. no. 103433.
[106] B. Wang, et al., “Neural cleanse: Identifying and mitigating backdoor
 attacks in neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), Anitha Chennamaneni received the Ph.D. degree
 Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 707–723. in business administration and information systems
[107] Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, and J. Lan, “Intrusion detection using few-shot and computer science from the University of Texas,
 learning based on triplet graph convolutional network,” J. Web Eng., Arlington, TX, USA, in 2006.
 vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1527–1552, 2021. She is currently the Chair and Professor with Sub-
[108] Y. Wang, D. J. Miller, and G. Kesidis, “When not to classify: Detection hani Department of Computer Information Systems,
 of reverse engineering attacks on DNN image classifiers,” in Proc. Texas A&M University-Central Texas, TX and the
 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Piscataway, Director of the Center for Cybersecurity Innova-
 NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 8063–8066. tion, Killeen, TX. Her research interests include
 cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, deep learning,
[109] Y. Wang, P. Mianjy, and R. Arora, “Robust learning for data poisoning
 IS security and privacy, the Internet of Things,
 attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (PMLR), 2021, pp. 10859–
 digital forensics, and knowledge management. Her work has been published
 10869.
 in many peer-reviewed journals and conferences.
[110] Z. Wang, M. Song, S. Zheng, Z. Zhang, Y. Song, and Q. Wang,
 “Invisible adversarial attack against deep neural networks: An adaptive
 penalization approach,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol.
 18, no. 3, pp. 1474–1488, May/Jun. 2019. Babatunde Sawyerr received the M.Sc. degree in
[111] D. Warde-Farley and I. Goodfellow, “11 adversarial perturbations of computer science and Ph.D. degree in computer scideep neural networks,” Perturbations, Optim., Statist., vol. 311, no. 5, ence from the University of Lagos, Lagos, Nigeria,
 pp. 311–342, 2016. in 1997 and 2010, respectively.
[112] Z. Xiang, D. J. Miller, and G. Kesidis, “Reverse engineering im- He joined the University of Lagos as an Assistant
 perceptible backdoor attacks on deep neural networks for detection Lecturer in 1999 and advanced to the position of
 and training set cleansing,” Comput. Secur., vol. 106, 2021, Art. no. Associate Professor in 2023. He serves as the colead
 102280. of the Knowledge Creation Pillar for AFRETEC-
[113] C. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Tang, F. Guzmán, B. I. P. Rubinstein, and T. Cohn, UNILAG. His international experience includes sev-
 “Targeted poisoning attacks on black-box neural machine translation,” eral visiting scholarships and he was a Fulbright
 2020, arXiv:2011.00675. Scholar-In-Residence with Texas A&M University-
[114] H. Xu et al., “Adversarial attacks and defenses in images, graphs Central Texas, TX, USA during the 2023–2024. His research interests include
 and text: A review,” Int. J. Autom. Comput., vol. 17, pp. 151–178, design and development of nature-inspired search and optimization algorithms
 Apr. 2020. for both continuous and combinatorial problems, as well as artificial intelli-
[115] C. Young, J. Svoboda, and J. Zambreno, “Towards reverse engineering gence, machine learning, and their practical applications.
 controller area network messages using machine learning,” in Proc. Dr. Sawyerr is a fellow of the Nigeria Computer Society (FNCS) and
 IEEE 6th World Forum Internet Things (WF-IoT), Piscataway, NJ, a Senior ACM Member. He is on the editorial board of the International
 USA: IEEE Press, 2020, pp. 1–6. Journal of Mathematical Sciences and Optimization: Theory and Applications
[116] C. Zhang, X. Costa-Pérez, and P. Patras, “Tiki-taka: Attacking (IJMSO) and reviews other distinguished journals. He is a Founding Member
 and defending deep learning-based intrusion detection systems,” in and Research Lead for the Machine Intelligence Research Group (MIRG) and
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Cloud Comput. Secur. Workshop, 2020, the Mathematical Analysis and Optimization Research Group (MANORG) at
 pp. 27–39. his University.