This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

 Corner Case Detection and Generation for
 Autonomous Driving: An Overview
 Yunji Liang , Junteng Liu , Xiaokai Yan, Xiaolong Zheng , Member, IEEE, Lei Tang , Member, IEEE,
 Luwen Huangfu, Sagar Samtani , Member, IEEE, and Zhiwen Yu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Safety concerns remain one of the most significant in real-world traffic environments [1], [2], [3], [4], [5],
obstacles to the large-scale deployment and continued advance- [6]—particularly in safety-critical scenarios such as adverse
ment of autonomous driving (AD) systems. A major underlying weather conditions [7], [8], adversarial attacks [9], [10], [11],
cause of many safety-related incidents in AD systems is suboptimal or erroneous decision-making when the vehicle encounters and unseen driving situations [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17].
corner cases (CCs)—rare, unexpected, or extreme situations Among the core safety challenges for autonomous driving,
that fall outside typical operating conditions. Although recent rare and safety-critical incidents in the perception stage are of
advances in artificial intelligence have driven substantial progress paramount importance: failures in environmental sensing and
in both autonomous driving and corner-case research, the field scene understanding can directly propagate to the downstream
still lacks a coherent conceptual foundation and a systematic,
widely accepted categorization of CCs. In this survey, we address planning and control module. This survey, therefore, focuses
this gap by offering a structured review of the existing corner-case on corner cases in the perception subsystem of autonomous
literature along three key dimensions: understanding, detection, driving architectures, specifically investigating how in-vehicle
and generation. The key contribution is a three-level classification sensors acquire, preprocess, and analyze environmental inforof corner cases—spanning data-level, model-level, and semantic- mation under rare, unexpected, and hard-to-handle operating
level CCs—that clarifies and disambiguates competing definitions
and perspectives on AD corner cases. Building on this framework, conditions.
we examine simulator-based methods for corner-case selection Existing literature on autonomous driving surveys have
and data generation, and we identify open challenges, promising already underscored the significance of simulation, diverse
directions, and potential solutions to more effectively handle data distributions, and safety-critical scenario validation,
corner cases in autonomous driving systems. including autonomous driving policy learning [18], [19],
 Index Terms—Corner case, autonomous driving, out-of- open-source simulators [20], [21], virtual testing tools (encomdistribution, generated data set. passing simulators, datasets, and competitive benchmarks)
 [22], [23], data-driven traffic simulation [24], and foundation-
 I. I NTRODUCTION model-based scenario generation and analysis [25]. These
 works provide valuable contextual insights for autonomous
W ITH advances in artificial intelligence, significant
 progress has been made in autonomous vehicles,
enhancing perception capabilities and refining decisiondriving validation and long-tail scenario analysis. Nevertheless, they primarily focus on policy learning, simulation
 platforms, testing pipelines, traffic evolution, or scenario genmaking algorithms. However, safety concerns surrounderation/analysis in a broad sense, and do not offer a dedicated
ing autonomous driving have garnered growing attention
 survey that makes perception-stage corner cases its primary
amid the widespread deployment of AI-powered algorithms
 research focus. This research gap highlights the need for
 Received 20 May 2024; revised 28 December 2025 and 30 March 2026; a clearer and more focused synthesis of the literature on
accepted 25 April 2026. This work was supported by the Natural Science perception-oriented corner cases in autonomous driving.
Foundation of China under Grant 62372378, Grant 72225011, and Grant
72434005. The Associate Editor for this article was S. Sacone. (Corresponding
author: Yunji Liang.)
 Yunji Liang, Junteng Liu, Xiaokai Yan, and Zhiwen Yu are with the School A. Importance of Corner Case for Driving Safety
of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072,
China (e-mail: liangyunji@nwpu.edu.cn). In autonomous driving research, corner cases (CC) refer
 Xiaolong Zheng is with the State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial to rare and unexpected situations that fall outside normal
Intelligence Systems and the State Key Laboratory of Management and operating conditions and the usual parameters of percep-
Control for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China, and also with the School of Artificial tion systems. They are crucial for validating the safety of
Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, autonomous vehicle perception modules, which can fail in sce-
China (e-mail: xiaolong.zheng@ia.ac.cn). narios not represented in their training data, potentially leading
 Lei Tang is with the College of Transportation Engineering, Chang’an
University, Xi’an 710064, China (e-mail: tanglei24@chd.edu.cn). to accidents due to object misclassification, missed obstacles,
 Luwen Huangfu is with the Fowler College of Business, San Diego or inaccurate distance estimation. Typical examples include
State University, San Diego, CA 92182 USA (e-mail: lhuangfu@sdsu.edu). pedestrians abruptly stepping into the roadway, headlight glare
 Sagar Samtani is with the Kelley School of Business, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA (e-mail: ssamtani@iu.edu). impairing camera visibility, and unusual road hazards such as
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3688488 fallen tree branches. Analyzing these cases enables researchers
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

to design methods that reduce their negative impact on sensor gap by offering the first unified survey and taxonomy, thereby
interpretation and environment modeling. clarifying the scope of existing research, improving the effec-
 Nowadays, there is no consensus on the definition of tiveness of anomaly management strategies, identifying open
the term corner case, and existing descriptive definitions research challenges, and shedding light on their implications
often implicitly focus on perception-related scenarios. Initially, for ensuring the safety of autonomous driving. The principal
numerous descriptive definitions of corner cases are proposed. contributions of this work are as follows.
For example, Bolte et al. [26] defined a corner case as a • We conduct a systematical literature overview of studies
non-predictable relevant object/class in a relevant location. associated with perception-stage corner cases and provide
Breitenstein et al. [27] emphasized that a known object in a multigranularity taxonomy of the existing solutions
an unusual location is a corner case. For example, in a for the detection of these corner cases. Specifically, we
traffic scene, if the relationships among participants do not provide the problem definitions of corner cases from three
conform to prior knowledge or common sense, the object that levels, including the data level, the model level, and the
violates the rules is defined as a corner case. Li et al. [28] semantic level, and formulate these problems mathematiconsidered the spatial relationship of objects and deemed cally. Meanwhile, a comprehensive literature overview is
objects that are about to block a potential path of the self- presented to investigate the existing detection solutions at
driving vehicle as the corner case. However, these descriptive these three levels in the context of autonomous driving
definitions of CCs are task-specific. In general, outliers, perception.
anomalies, OOD samples, adversary samples, and corner cases • As data collection from the real world is time-consuming
are used interchangeably in perception-related research. For and expensive, synthesizing large-scale corner cases for
example, Heidecker et al. [29] associated corner cases with model training is a promising solution. In this paper, we
outliers, novelty, and anomaly samples, and defined sensor- also provide an overview of generating corner cases from
driven corner cases for LiDAR, RADAR, and cameras. In scene simulators and generation algorithms. In contrast
contrast, numerous definitions of corner cases have been to prior simulator- or scenario-centric reviews [20], [22],
developed based on the complexity of the anomalies [27]. The [24], [25], our discussion is explicitly organized around
diversity of what may constitute the corner case has, to some how these tools and methods facilitate the study of
extent, shaped the solutions to detect these samples. On the perception-stage corner cases. In addition, we outline the
other hand, OOD samples are treated as corner cases to assess challenges and research opportunities.
the trained perception models’ generalization to unseen or As illustrated in Fig. 2, the remainder of this paper
novel objects. Zhou et al. [30] provided systematic overviews is organized as follows. Section II refines the definitions
of the detection of out-of-distribution samples. In addition, of perception-stage CCs from three perspectives related to
adversarial samples that can mislead the perception model to sensors and perception tasks. Sections III and IV then suminduce incorrect decisions are also treated as corner cases [11], marize the main approaches for detecting and generating
[31], [32]. perception-oriented CCs, respectively. Sections V and VI
 introduce commonly used performance evaluation metrics,
B. Our Contributions
 large-scale public datasets, and non-commercial simulators tai-
 There are numerous survey studies associated with anomaly lored to perception-stage corner cases in autonomous driving.
examples [33], [34], out-of-distribution samples [30], [35], Section VII discusses current limitations and outlines chaladversary samples [36], policy learning [18], simulators lenges for future work on perception-related corner case
and virtual testing [20], [22], traffic simulation [24], and research. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper by sumfoundation-model-based scenario generation and analysis [25]. marizing key contributions and highlighting future research
None of these works, however, takes perception-stage corner directions.
cases as their central research object, nor do they offer a
unified discussion of how such cases ought to be defined,
detected, generated, and evaluated—alongside the supporting II. D EFINITIONS OF C ORNER C ASES
role of dedicated datasets and simulators—in the context of Understanding corner cases is central to the safety assurance
autonomous driving. of autonomous driving systems, yet a unified and rigorous
 Unlike previous studies, this survey provides a compre- definition remains absent. To fill this gap, we propose a
hensive examination of perception-oriented corner cases that three-level framework grounded in the end-to-end perception
are crucial for maintaining the operational reliability of pipeline that spans input, processing, and output. Specifically,
autonomous driving systems. As shown in Fig. 1, the inte- the framework is structured along three orthogonal dimengrated use of heterogeneous sensors (cameras, LiDARs, and sions: data level, model level, and semantic level. Together,
RADARs) establishes the core data basis for detecting and these dimensions provide a complete and non-overlapping
analyzing these critical scenarios. Despite this technological characterization of CCs. The data level captures abnormalities
foundation and recent progress in sensing and anomaly-aware in raw sensory input, including noise, corruption, and distriperception that have advanced real-time corner-case detec- butional shifts. The model level concerns failures arising from
tion, there is still no dedicated, comprehensive survey that the processing stage, such as limited robustness and unreliable
systematically organizes research on perception-stage corner algorithmic behavior. The semantic level addresses deviations
cases within a unified framework. This study addresses this in scene meaning, contextual consistency, and safety-critical
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 3

Fig. 1. An overview of the autonomous driving system (ADS). In ADS, a wide variety of sensors, including LiDAR, RADAR, and vision cameras, are
integrated for perception tasks such as semantic segmentation, object detection, and instance segmentation. In the decision-making component, numerous
automated driving algorithms are employed for surrounding environmental sensing, motion planning, and vehicle control.

interpretation. Since each dimension corresponds to a dis- objective of determining whether a given input sample constitinct aspect of the perception chain, the proposed framework tutes a data-level CC. Formally, we aim to learn a mapping
ensures both comprehensive coverage and conceptual sepa- function y = f (x), where the output label y ∈ Y = {0, 1}—here,
ration. For cases spanning multiple levels, classification is y = 1 indicates that the input x is a data-level CC, while
assigned based on the dominant factor in terms of safety y = 0 indicates normal sensor data. A critical criterion for this
impact. This framework also forms the basis for the CC classification is: y = 1 if and only if the statistical features of
detection methods introduced in Section III, where the analysis x deviate from a pre-defined normal data distribution Pnormal .
is organized according to the formalization of each level. This deviation is quantified using a statistical distance metric,
In the following, we detail the conceptual and mathematical expressed as D (x, Pnormal ) > τ, where D(·) denotes a staformulations of each dimension and further demonstrate the tistical distance metric (e.g., Euclidean distance for evaluating
completeness of the proposed framework. pixel intensity deviations, Mahalanobis distance for measuring
 LiDAR point coordinate anomalies relative to Pnormal ), and τ
 represents a pre-determined deviation threshold. For practical
A. Definition 1: Data-Level Corner Case
 clarity, consider 8-bit grayscale images: Pnormal encompasses
 Data-level corner cases (CCs) in autonomous driving sys- pixel intensities within the valid range [0,255]; if x contains
tems target input-layer anomalies, specifically defined by any pixels with intensity values outside this range (i.e.,> 255
statistical deviations in raw sensor data that violate pre- or < 0), the distance D (x, Pnormal ) will exceed τ, leading to
established normal measurement ranges—these deviations the classification result y = 1.
directly induce inference failures in deployed machine learning This definition aligns with the sensor-driven CC catemodels. Notably, such anomalies arise independently of model gorization proposed in [29], which explicitly confirms that
processing logic or scene semantics; their root causes instead input-layer data anomalies are independent of model-specific
lie in sensor hardware defects or environmental interference. behaviors and high-level scene semantics—thus solidifying the
For instance, a camera capturing an image with 90% of pixels role of data-level CCs as the foundational layer of our tri-level
saturated to the maximum intensity value due to overexposure, CC definition framework.
or a LiDAR unit generating point cloud data exceeding its
rated maximum effective detection range, both qualify as data- B. Definition 2: Model-Level Corner Case
level CCs. In such scenarios, the machine learning model Model-level corner cases (CCs) capture failures at the
fails to process the input data accurately, primarily due to the processing stage of autonomous driving perception models.
novelty and anomalous nature of the sensor measurements. They refer to scenarios in which the input data remain sta-
 Mathematically, let the input raw sensor data be denoted as tistically normal, i.e., free of data-level anomalies, yet the
X ∈ Rn , where the dimension n is determined by the sensor model nonetheless fails to generate accurate outputs due to
type: for example, n = H ∗ W ∗ 3 for RGB images (with H deficiencies in its internal representations or decision-making
and W representing the image height and width, respectively), mechanisms. This definition characterizes model robustness
and n = N ∗ 3 for LiDAR point clouds (with N denoting the along three key dimensions: sensitivity to perturbation, connumber of points in the point cloud). The detection of data- sistency across domains, and completeness of topological
level CCs is formulated as a binary classification task, with the representation. In contrast to data-level CCs, such failures
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 and Ptest denote training/test distributions; if the Wasserstein
 distance (a standard distributional divergence metric) between
 Ptrain and Ptest exceeds threshold γ (i.e., Wasserstein distance
 (Ptrain , Ptest ) > γ), any xtest ∈ Ptest is a model-level CC
 [30]. Topological defects-related CCs, by contrast, stem from
 insufficient model neuron activation during inference: let D =
 all neuron units, g(x, D) = neuron coverage (activated neurons/
 |D|, with “activation” = output > 0.1); if g(x, D) < δ(δ =
 minimum coverage threshold from normal dataset validation),
 x is a model-level CC.
 Collectively, a model-level CC is formally defined by two
 conditions: (1) the model’s output deviates from ground truth
 ( f (x) , y∗ , where y∗ ∈ Y is the true label for x), and (2) the
 input has no data-level anomalies (∃  data-level anomaly in x.
 This dual-condition framework ensures model-level CCs are
 orthogonal to both data-level and semantic-level CCs in our
 tri-level system.

 C. Definition 3: Semantic-Level Corner Case
 Semantic-level corner cases (CCs) refer to failures in scene
 understanding of autonomous driving systems. They describe
 scenarios in which the input is statistically normal, with no
 data-level anomaly, and the model processes the data correctly,
 with no model-level failure, yet the resulting semantic interpretation of the scene conflicts with driving common sense or
 prior knowledge. Unlike lower-level CCs, these cases directly
 affect safety-critical decisions such as trajectory planning and
 emergency braking and therefore represent the highest level of
 safety risk, consistent with the observation in [26]. In general,
 they arise in two forms: out-of-distribution (OOD) objects and
 OOD spatial relations, both of which violate the expected
 semantic structure of typical driving scenes.
 Concretely, OOD objects are novel or otherwise unusual
Fig. 2. Overall organization of this paper, including the refined definition objects not seen during model training, such as a pet dog
of perception-stage corner cases, methods for their detection and generation,
evaluation metrics, public datasets, simulation platforms, current limitations, suddenly appearing in front of the ego vehicle, an overturned
and future research challenges. truck blocking a lane, a pedestrian dressed as a doll in
 the road, or a deer straying onto a highway. OOD spatial
cannot be attributed to degraded sensor quality or high- relations, by contrast, involve illogical positional relationships
level semantic complexity. Instead, they arise from intrinsic between objects that contradict common sense or prior driving
limitations of the model itself, primarily including vulnera- knowledge—examples include a chair falling from a moving
bility to adversarial perturbations, inadequate generalization truck, a phantom pedestrian (e.g., a misdetected or unrealistic
under domain shift, and defects in topological structure. The pedestrian) “passing through” the middle of the ego vehicle, or
validity of this formulation is further supported by the domain a pedestrian walking outside sidewalks and directly crossing
generalization theory established in [30]. the vehicle’s trajectory. These scenarios pose inherent safety
 Concretely, adversarial perturbations denote small, human- risks because they disrupt the model’s expected understanding
imperceptible modifications to the input that can mislead of reasonable scene dynamics.
the model while leaving the underlying semantic content Mathematically, let the scene semantic representation genunchanged. For example, a visually normal stop sign with a erated by the perceptual model be S (x) = {O, R}, where
small adversarial sticker may be incorrectly recognized as a O = {o1 , o2 , . . . , ok } denotes the set of detected objects in the
speed limit sign. Mathematically, let f : X → − Y denote the scene, and R = {r(oi , o j )|1 ≤ i, j ≤ k} denotes the set of spatial
target perceptual model, x ∈ X represent normal input data, and relations between objects (e.g., “in front of the ego vehicle”,
δ denote a perturbation vector with kδk p < ( = perceptibility “crossing the trajectory of”). A semantic-level CC is formally
threshold ensuring δ is human-undetectable); an adversarial defined by two conditions:(S (x) < Scommon ) and there is no
example qualifies as a model-level CC if f (x + δ) , f (x). data/model-level anomaly in x. Here, Scommon represents the set
 Domain shift-induced CCs occur when test data distribution of semantically reasonable driving scenes (e.g., “pedestrians
deviates significantly from training data—for example, a clear- on sidewalks”, “cars traveling in lanes”, “traffic signs above
weather-trained semantic segmentation model failing at object intersections”). For its two specific forms: 1) OOD objects:
boundary detection in fog or heavy snow. Formally, let Ptrain There exists at least one object o ∈ O such that o < Otrain ,
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 5

where Otrain is the set of all objects the model encountered A. Detecting Data-level Corner Cases
during training; 2) OOD relations: There exists at least one
 In general, existing solutions for detecting data-level corner
spatial relation r(oi , o j ) ∈ R such that r(oi , o j ) < Rcommon , where
 cases can be categorized into the following two groups.
Rcommon is the set of logically reasonable spatial relations in
 1) Statistical Learning Solutions: A plethora of studies
driving scenarios. This definition aligns with [26]’s emphasis
 have applied statistical learning algorithms to recognize corner
on semantic-level CCs as the top of the CC hierarchy—their
 cases at the data level. For example, Liu et al. [37] extracted
direct link to collision avoidance and driving safety makes
 multidimensional features (e.g., weather, time, location, speed,
them the most critical category in our tri-level framework.
 and surrounding vehicles) from videos recorded by the frontfacing camera and applied a random forest algorithm to
D. Handling Multi-level Corner Cases
 classify the complexity of driving scenes in a hierarchical
 In practical autonomous driving environments, corner cases manner. Ryan et al. [38] used Gaussian process regression
often manifest with hierarchical overlaps, where a single sce- to quantify the uncertainty (confidence interval) of the model
nario may concurrently exhibit multiple levels of anomalies. prediction. Measurement of risky scenarios in autonomous
For example, an overexposed sensor capture constitutes a data- driving can also be achieved by comparing autonomous and
level anomaly, while an unexpected pedestrian crossing event safe driving behaviors [38]. Due to the heavy-tailed distrioccurring in the same scene reflects a semantic-level deviation. bution of corner cases, the aforementioned solutions exhibit
To systematically address such compound anomalies, we for- biased performance. To address this problem, a one-class
malize a prioritization framework informed by the scene safety support vector machine (OCSVM) is employed to detect
axioms established in [26]. This hierarchical resolution model corner cases. The main idea of OCSVM is to map the data
adheres to a strict precedence order: semantic-level > model- into a high-dimensional feature space induced by a kernel
level > data-level, which is derived from the direct impact on function, construct a hyperplane that separates the data from
operational safety. Semantic-level corner cases pose immediate the origin, and maximize the margin between the hyperplane
existential risks to vehicular autonomy, as they disrupt critical and the origin. This yields a binary function that determines
path-planning algorithms by introducing contradictory scene whether a new data point is similar to the training data. The
interpretations. Model-level anomalies, while less immediately optimization objective function of OCSVM is shown in Eq. 1,
hazardous, undermine system integrity by causing algorithmic where w is the normal vector of the hyperplane, ρ is the
failures that lead to misclassification or missed detections. distance from the hyperplane to the origin, ζi is the slack
Data-level irregularities, by contrast, represent lower-order dis- variable, and ν ∈ (0, 1) controls the proportion of outliers and
turbances that can be mitigated via preprocessing techniques, the proportion of support vectors. φ(xi ) is the kernel function.
such as noise filtering or sensor calibration.
 We define categorical decision rules consistent with the n
 1 1 X
following schema: any scenario that exhibits semantic- min ||w||2 + ζi − ρ
 w,ζi ,ρ 2 νn
level discrepancies—regardless of data quality or model i=1

performance—is labeled a semantic-level corner case, for s.t. (wT φ(xi )) ≥ ρ − ζi , i = 1, . . . , n (1)
example, an overexposed image in which a cyclist unex- ζi ≥ 0
pectedly appears. If no semantic anomaly is present but
the model demonstrably fails on valid input data, the case Unlike in classification tasks, corner cases are often treated
is classified as model-level, such as misidentifying a traffic as anomalies. Therefore, clustering algorithms are widely used
cone as a road marker in a clear camera feed. Finally, to detect data-level corner cases, offering a more intuitive
scenarios that manifest only data-level variations, without approach: they group samples into homogeneous categories
degrading model behavior or semantic correctness, are des- and flag outliers that deviate from the cluster centers. Given
ignated as data-level corner cases, such as an overexposed the input samples {x1 , x2 , . . ., xm }, where x ∈ Rn , randomly
image of an otherwise unobstructed highway. This tri-level select the centroid of each category as µ1 , µ2 , . . ., µk ∈ Rn . For
(data–model–semantic) framework exhaustively characterizes each sample xi , it should belong to c = argminkxi − µi k2 .
all CCs in autonomous driving perception systems. Data-level As the sample size increases, the centers of the sample
CCs address raw sensor irregularities, consistent with the categories tend to remain stable. For example, Lee et al. [39]
taxonomy of [29]; model-level CCs capture model failures estimated the cluster centers and covariances of each class and
such as adversarial perturbations, supported by the theory used the Mahalanobis distance to detect OOD samples, while
in [30]; and semantic-level CCs encode scene-level safety Deng et al. [40] used relative feature displacement to describe
conflicts, in line with the framework of [26]. Because all CCs the sample as the feature centroids and displacement.
arise from these three system components, no additional levels Leino et al. [41] introduced the concept of global robustness
are required. For example, a LiDAR malfunction that triggers of the classification model, and the classifier keeps samples of
both misdetection and misplanning is still a data-level CC, different categories in a certain width interval in the feature
underscoring the framework’s completeness. space to ensure the difference between categories. This method
 leverages the Lipschitz condition to measure neural network
 III. C ORNER C ASE D ETECTION robustness. However, such methods perform reliably only on
 We characterize existing solutions for corner-case detection samples with minor perturbations and fail to generalize to data
at the data, model, and semantic levels, respectively. from open environments. Furthermore, samples far from the
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

centers of their class labels’ clusters tend to be misclassified coverage to measure the proportion of activated neurons by
[38], [39], [42]. test input. This approach leverages multiple DL models as
 2) Deep Learning Methods: Over the past two decades, cross-referencing oracles to identify test inputs that trigger
deep neural networks have made substantial progress in differential behavior and achieve high neuron coverage. Folautonomous driving. For corner case detection, domain adapta- lowing this paradigm, DeepTest [48], an automated testing
tion methods are useful for assessing the normality of samples framework for autonomous cars driven by DNNs, uses generthat remain semantically similar to the source domain but ated test samples across diverse weather conditions to identify
differ in distribution. Such domain shifts arise from changes in extreme behaviors produced by DNNs in extreme scenarios by
statistical properties across training, validation, and test data maximizing neuron coverage. On the contrary, Wu et al. [49]
and are commonly grouped into three types: distribution shift, posited that a meaningful corner case detector should be scenecovariate shift, and label shift. “Distribution shift” refers to agnostic, inferring that the corner case should be beyond the
differences in overall data distributions, “covariate shift” to effective input domain range of the DNN model. Based on
changes in input features, and “label shift” to changes in label this premise, Deep Validation was proposed to evaluate test
distributions across domains. samples that could cause system errors by examining whether
 However, most existing solutions primarily focus on map- the model’s intermediate states exceed predefined thresholds.
ping from a single source domain to a single target domain, However, these solutions are computationally intensive. To
resulting in poor generalization. To enhance robustness across mitigate this problem, DeepEvolution [50] proposed a searchmultiple source and target domains, a novel Open-Scenario based solution that significantly enhances the diversity and
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (OSDA) [43] has been neuron coverage of generated test cases.
proposed. It utilizes a contrastive vision-language pretrain- 2) Solutions Based on Network Similarity: Compared with
ing strategy to distinguish foreground from background and neuron coverage, we can extract sample representations from
introduces a cross-reconstruction framework across multi- the model’s middle layer in a more fine-grained manner to
ple domains to learn domain invariances. Kim et al. [44] explore corner cases. Dauphin et al. [51] observed that training
extended the domain adaptation theory to LiDAR sensors the same neural network with different random initializations
to enhance performance. They introduced sparsity-invariant might yield similar performance. Given an in-distribution
feature consistency and semantic correlation consistency to dataset Dbase and a corner case dataset Dcc , for a neural
learn generalizable LiDAR representations across the source network f (·), fi (·) represents the i-th layer of the neural
domain and unseen domains. Moreover, real-world datasets network. If S imilarity( fi (x), fi (y)) < ε, the input sample is
often exhibit class imbalance with a long-tailed distribution. taken as a corner case, where x ∈ Dbase , y ∈ Dcc , and
To detect corner cases from unbalanced datasets, Liu et al. [45] Dbase ∩ Dcc = ∅.
proposed OLTR to associate head categories with tail cate- To quantify the similarity of latent representations in neural
gories by mapping images in space. To address the limitations networks, Wang et al. [52] characterized the structure of
of the aforementioned methods in handling large-scale, high- matches between neuron activation subspaces. Furthermore,
resolution image data, Hendrycks et al. [46] introduced the canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [53] is used to quantify
Maxlogit detector to improve performance on multi-label the association among multiple high-dimensional variables.
datasets in complex scenes and on anomaly segmentation tasks Raghu et al. [54] proposed the SVCCA, combining singular
in driving environments. value decomposition and CCA, to efficiently compare invariant
 Most existing corner-case detection techniques at the data neural representations and affine transformations. To extend
level require the incorporation of additional corner-case this solution to high-dimensional neural representations, cendatasets to regularize the decision boundaries of the model. tered kernel alignment (CKA) [55] was proposed to measure
Because these auxiliary datasets typically follow a probability the similarity between neural representations derived from
distribution that differs from that of the primary training data, different initialization weights.
the resulting classification boundaries are often insufficiently Inspired by CKA, [56], [57] measured the functional simstrict or poorly calibrated. Moreover, the applicability of such ilarity of different models through model stitching. These
methods is generally restricted to relatively simple scenarios, works primarily examine whether the network can replace the
and they do not directly generalize to complex, real-world representations of other networks via an affine transformation
environments. while preserving functional integrity.
 Similar to neuron coverage, Ouyang et al. [58] proposed
B. Detecting Model-Level Corner Cases surprise sufficiency to formally quantify how deep learning
 To detect model-level corner cases, numerous studies inves- (DL) systems respond to given inputs. Intuitively, the more
tigated the effects of the input on topological patterns and surprising an input is to the test DNN, the more likely the
model behavior. system is to behave unexpectedly. First, the activation trace is
 1) Solutions Based on Software Testing: In software devel- defined as the pattern of neuron activations triggered by data in
opment, rigorous testing is paramount for ensuring robustness. the DL system. For a neuron N in the DL system, the activation
This principle has been applied to evaluate the robustness trace aN (x) of a given test input x with respect to N is defined
of deep neural networks. Inspired by the concept of code as in Eq. 2, where αi (x) denotes the activation value of x for
coverage (i.e., the ratio of code statements executed by a test an individual neuron ni . Accordingly, the surprise adequacy
case to all statements), DeepXplore [47] introduced neuron (SA) for testing a DL system can be formulated based on the
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 7

Fig. 3. Understanding corner case from data level, model level and semantic level, respectively: (a) For the data-level CCs, they can be formulated as a
binary classification problem; (b) for the model-level CCs, they aim to investigate the model robustness by quantifying the network behaviors under the given
samples; and (c) for semantic-level CCs, they focus on unseen objects or scenarios where the spatial relation of objects is rare.

similarity of activation traces between samples. semantic-level CCs, as shown in Fig. 4, four types of methodologies are studied.
 αN (x) = [α1 (x), α2 (x), . . . , αN (x)] T
 (2)
 In practical scenarios, there exist outlier instances in which
the test and training data are highly similar but differ in their 1) Uncertainty-Aware Solutions: For uncertainty-aware
labels. In response to this phenomenon, Ouyang et al. [59] solutions, they first employ an object detection or segmentation
proposed DSA to measure the discrepancy between a single network g(·) to obtain the set of objects {ob j1 , ob j2 , . . ., ob jn }
sample and the local descriptor of its class according to Eq. 3, or region proposals in the scene. Then, the confidence score
where αN denotes the activation value (Eq. 2); xa represents the for each object or proposal is quantified using an uncernearest neighbor in class x ; and then, taking xa as the reference tainty estimator. Finally, objects with higher uncertainty are
point and finding its nearest neighbor xb in a class different recognized as corner cases. As shown in Fig. 4, numerous
from class xa . studies followed this paradigm to produce confidence scores or
 uncertainty scores for objects, regions, or instances [60], [61],
 kαN (x) − αN (xa )k
 DS A(x) = (3) [62]. This method is simple and effective, without modifying
 kαN (xa ) − αN (xb )k the structure of the classification model or training an OOD
 Model-level corner-case detection offers a distinct way to sample classifier.
quantify corner cases. Inspired by software testing method- Similar to the confidence score, numerous studies [63],
ologies, these approaches analyze variations in samples at [64], [65] have detected abnormal regions in images by outintermediate network layers using neuron coverage to assess putting their uncertainty. DUQ [63] used a deterministic deep
whether a given input elicits abnormal neuron behavior. Unlike neural network for uncertainty estimation, using a trainable
other post-processing algorithms, model-level methods are kernel function to reject data points outside the distribution.
inherently grounded in the model’s internal representations, Kendall et al. [64] used Monte Carlo sampling and Bayesian
enabling the development of novel strategies for measuring inference to estimate the uncertainty of each pixel. However,
corner cases. However, these methods have poor interpretabil- none of them can guarantee real-time uncertainty prediction.
ity, and are difficult to be applied to large-scale datasets Huang et al. [65] attempted to use video sequences as input
directly. and leverage temporal information to aggregate and disperse
 the uncertainty of each pixel. In general, video sequences
C. Detecting Semantic-level Corner Cases contain more semantic information and are more consistent
 Unlike the data-level and model-level ones, CCs at the with data from autonomous vehicle sensors. Joseph et al.
semantic level focus on detecting unseen objects and under- [66] performed contrastive clustering on features generated by
standing the abnormal spatial relations of objects. To detect the residual module in the ROI head, and used energy-based
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. An overview of detecting semantic-level corner cases. For corner-case detection at the semantic level, we divide it into four types in the figure:
Uncertainty-Aware Methods, Data Distribution Methods, Prediction-Difference-based Methods, and Reconstruction-Based Methods. We summarize four
methods that prior research collectively regard as the paradigm.

models to learn experience categories and identify possible assist in the prediction of new frames. Through adversarial
location types in the test set. training of GAN, to ensure the accuracy and authenticity of
 To encapsulate such methodologies, uncertainty and confi- the prediction, and then improve the performance of frame
dence measures are typically implemented as post-processing. prediction. In [28], multiple modalities, including point clouds
This can include either outputting the softmax posterior prob- and images, were utilized to bolster corner case detection
ability or computing the distance between the sample and robustness. In autonomous driving scenarios, the vehicle’s
the prototype. In essence, most methods are evaluated by sensors are typically multimodal, including cameras, radars,
comparing the score to a fixed threshold to determine whether and lidars. In addition to using single-modal camera data for
the sample is a corner case. Unlike data-level detection meth- corner case detection, Bogdoll et al. [68] proposed a method
ods, this type of method generally does not require additional to detect anomaly data based on multimodal data.
auxiliary data. Instead, it conducts supervised training directly
through standard training samples. 3) Reconstructed-Based Solutions: The underlying assumption of reconstruction-based solutions is that normal scenes
 2) Solutions Based on Prediction Difference: Prediction- tend to have smaller reconstruction errors than corner cases.
based methods typically utilize video sequences as input to By comparing the reconstructed image with the original image,
the model, which can be formulated as dt+1 = st+1 − f (st ), the corner case can be identified and localized. As shown in
where dt+1 is the prediction error, st+1 is the ground truth, Fig. 4, it first feeds the raw image into a neural network to
st is the input scene and f (·) is a complex-valued function learn the intermediate representations. Then, a reconstruction
that predicts the next scene. A salient characteristic of corner task is introduced to generate images based on the intermediate
cases is that they are difficult for general detection models to representations. If the discrepancy between the reconstructed
recognize and process correctly. By comparing the difference output and the original input exceeds a certain threshold, the
between the predicted scene s0t+1 and the ground truth st+1 , object can be classified as a corner case.
the detection of the corner case object in the scene is achieved. In general, autoencoders are widely used for a range of
Therefore, unlike the aforementioned methods based on confi- reconstruction tasks [69], [70]. For example, Hasan et al. [69]
dence scores, the difference between the prediction result and used autoencoders to capture the distributions of normal
the ground truth is used to locate the object in the corner motion patterns from video sequences and detect abnormal
case [26], [28], [67]. As illustrated in Figure 4, the method behaviors based on reconstruction errors. Xia et al. [71] intropredicated on the prediction difference diverges from other duced a discriminative autoencoder that can identify abnormal
methods that use a single-frame image as input. It requires images by incorporating discriminative information during
a video sequence as ground truth to determine whether the training. However, these methods are not feasible for corner
model has accurately discerned the object’s intention in the cases that are rare or unseen. For the unseen samples, [70]
scene at the subsequent moment. developed a category-conditioned autoencoder that first trains
 Bolte et al. [26] designed an image prediction module that an encoder on a closed set of categories and then trains
computes the prediction error for each input frame, performs a decoder conditioned on the category labels to reconstruct
semantic segmentation on the input frames to identify and the input. The reconstruction error is then used to determine
locate objects in the scene, and devises a detection system whether the input belongs to a known or unknown category.
that fuses the information from image prediction and semantic On the other hand, semantic and instance segmentation
segmentation. This framework verified whether the predictable models are also widely used for reconstructive tasks. For
objects/classes/instances are in the expected locations and out- semantic segmentation, the goal is to assign each pixel in
put a binarized score of the corner-case probability. Compared an image to a class or object label. Accordingly, numerous
to the method proposed in [26], Liu et al. [67] use GAN to studies use the output of a semantic segmentation network
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 9

as an intermediate representation to reconstruct images and this finer granularity, we can focus on specific regions or
explore corner-case objects in autonomous driving scenes objects exhibiting unusual behavior, rather than treating the
[72], [73], [74]. For example, Yan et al. [75] used a pre- entire image as an outlier. Addressing corner cases at the
trained image segmentation model to produce a segmentation semantic level can therefore enhance the robustness and safety
map, and then used the segmentation masks as input to a of ADS. However, in contrast to image-level classification,
conditional GAN for image generation. They then used the which considers the entire scene as a single entity, semantic
dissimilarity network to detect differences between the two detection works at the object level, substantially increasing
images and localize uncertain objects in the scene. To enhance task complexity and demanding more sophisticated models
robustness, Di Biase et al. [73] combined multiple information and stronger regularization. Moreover, current datasets primarsources, including semantic maps, softMax entropy, softMax ily focus on common objects and scenes, leading to degraded
distance, regenerated images, and perceptual differences, into performance in corner cases.
a difference network to recognize abnormal objects in images.
In addition, depth information can play an auxiliary role in IV. G ENERATION OF C ORNER C ASES FOR S AFETY
corner-case detection. Furthermore, Lis et al. [76] detected T ESTING
and identified road obstacles by erasing instance objects. The
 Autonomous driving systems (ADSs) rely extensively on
model first uses a general method for filling, relying on
 large-scale, real-world driving datasets for perception, predicadversarial methods to ensure that the erased instances in
 tion, planning, and validation. However, exclusive dependence
the filled image are partially realistic. Secondly, a separate
 on such datasets is both economically prohibitive and
network is trained to compare the two images and detect
 intrinsically limited. First, the collection and annotation of
abnormal road objects. In essence, the reconstruction method
 autonomous driving data are time-consuming, labor-intensive,
is based on learning intermediate representations of images
 and costly [80], [81]. Second, the inherently dynamic nature
and on the reconstruction discrepancy. This leads to an overof environmental and traffic conditions makes exhaustive covreliance on feature extraction, semantic segmentation, and
 erage of all possible scenarios infeasible, which in turn leads
related techniques. This will directly influence the subsequent
 to degraded model performance under distributional shifts and
reconstruction effect, thereby affecting our judgment of cornerweak generalization to previously unseen situations [13], [82].
case objects.
 Third, real-world data predominantly reflect routine operat-
 4) Solutions Based on Data Distributions: Corner cases ing conditions rather than rare or challenging corner cases,
(CCs) typically follow distributions in latent representation making such data inefficient for safety-critical stress testing.
space that differ from those of normal samples. Building on Consequently, corner-case generation should be regarded not
this observation, data distribution-based methods map input merely as a data synthesis task, but as a systematic mechanism
images into a shared latent space via learnable functions, for enhancing model adaptiveness and robustness in long-tail
where distributional discrepancies are measured using ker- and safety-critical scenarios. Existing studies provide prelimnel functions or random feature mappings, typically using inary empirical support for this perspective. For instance,
maximum divergence criteria. In this framework, deep neu- Bewley et al. [83] demonstrated that a self-driving vehicle
ral networks first extract features from the input, which trained exclusively on simulated data could operate on real
are then either processed further by downstream methods roads, indicating that synthetic data can effectively support
or used directly for classification. Unlike uncertainty-based downstream driving performance. More broadly, synthetic data
approaches, this class of methods either directly identifies has been shown to accelerate the development of generalizable
sample types or performs post hoc classification based on learning-based algorithms [84]. Therefore, the generation of
the extracted latent features. For example, two additional corner cases is pivotal for the safety testing of ADSs. In this
constraints are enforced in DaCUP [77] for representation section, we review corner-case generation methods from three
learning: not belonging to a modelable category and not being perspectives: data transformation-based, knowledge-based, and
visually similar to non-anomalous objects in the image. Based scene-based (Fig. 5).
on these assumptions, the authors propose a novel embedding bottleneck to effectively capture the visual variations
in unknown, multimodal scenes. Reference [78] integrated A. Data Transformation-Based Corner Case Generation
both greedy search and confidence intervals to determine the Image transformation-based corner case (CC) generation
boundaries of abnormal regions in multivariate spatio-temporal typically applies targeted augmentation operators to derive new
time series. Reference [79] presented a CROSR open-set samples from existing datasets. This approach leverages speclassification framework, which consists of two components: cialized image processing techniques, including sharpening,
a closed-set classifier and an unknown detector. The closed- rotation, scaling, and noise injection, to generate scenarioset classifier uses common supervised learning methods to specific samples that mimic adverse conditions such as rain,
learn label representations. The unknown detector uses the fog, and low light, which are common sources of corner cases
reconstructed potential representations and labeled data for in autonomous driving [8], [48]. For example, DeepTest [48]
training. applied affine transformations to original scenes to evaluate
 Semantic-level corner-case detection allows us to pinpoint ADS robustness under variable weather conditions. DeepXspecific objects or instances within an image, thereby improv- plore [47] generated transformed inputs to maximize neuron
ing both interpretability and practical utility. By operating at coverage, while DeepRoad [85] adopted a metamorphic testing
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 5. An overview of corner case generation methods. For data-augmentation-based tasks, transformation operations encompass both linear and affine
transformations. Knowledge-based methods can be categorized into three types: text, scene graphs, and layouts. Scene-based generation methods can be
categorized into physical models, style transfer, and event-based approaches.

framework to expand test coverage through transformation (VAEs) [95] and CLIP [96]. For example, Ramesh et al. [97]
functions that produced new samples with different charac- trained VAE to acquire image tokens. The text and image
teristics. tokens were concatenated and then fed into the Transformer.
 A principal advantage of these methods lies in their capac- Similarly, CogView [98] and UMT (Unifying Multimodal
ity to enhance the robustness of ADS to nuisance factors Transformer) [99] conducted large-scale joint generative preand domain shifts encountered in adverse environments. By training on text and image tokens obtained from VQ-VAE.
introducing controlled perturbations while preserving the core Recently, denoising diffusion models have gained increasing
scene semantics, they mitigate dependence on spurious cor- attention and have demonstrated outstanding performance in
relations typically learned under standard conditions and image generation [100], [101]. It is a parameterized Markov
improve robustness to variations in weather, illumination, chain that transforms Gaussian noise into samples. The model
and visual appearance. This property is particularly beneficial is meticulously trained through variational inference, enabling
in scenarios where real-world corner-case data are scarce. it to generate samples that match the data distribution. The
Nonetheless, these approaches primarily address appearance- mathematical representation of the forward process (diffusion
level corner cases, and the generated samples often inherit process) is shown in Eq. 4, where xt and xt−1 √ are random
biases from the original dataset. Furthermore, the perturbations variables, N represents the normal distribution, 1 − βt xt−1
applied are generally restricted to relatively simple or limited is the mean, βt I is the covariance matrix, and I is the identity
scenarios. matrix. The input to the forward process is the original image,
 which follows a specific distribution, and the output is a noisy
B. Knowledge-Based Corner Case Generation image that follows a Gaussian distribution.
  p 
 To address the limitation of transformation-based q(xt | xt−1 ) = N xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I
methods—their inability to capture the semantic complexity of
 T
real traffic scenes—knowledge-based corner case generation Y
incorporates external knowledge (e.g., text descriptions, q(x1:T | x0 ) : = q(xt | xt−1 ) (4)
 t=1
scene graphs, layouts) to guide image synthesis with richer
structural and semantic constraints. By integrating metadata The mathematical representation of the backward process
such as object orientation, size, color, and spatial relations, (reverse process) is shown in Eq. 5, where pθ (x0:T ) reprethese methods enable the construction of rare scenarios that sents the probability density function of the random variable
are not readily obtainable from routine driving logs. sequence from xQ 0 to xT ; pθ (x0:T ) is the probability density
 1) Text-Guided Generation: As a natural and flexible form function of xT ; Tt=1 represents the product of t from 1 to
of scene description, text provides an intuitive source of T . pθ (xt−1 | xt ) is the conditional probability density function
semantic guidance for image generation. Reed et al. [86] between xt−1 and xt under given conditions. With a parameter
proposed the classic model to generate images based on θ, µθ (xt , t) is the mean function, and Σθ (xt , t) is the covariance
descriptive text input, and StackGAN [87] was applied to matrix function.
improve the image resolution from 64 × 64 to 256 × 256. T
 Y
Since then, numerous GAN-based text-to-image generation pθ (x0:T ) = p(xT ) pθ (xt−1 | xt )
models have been proposed [88], [89], [90]. In addition, the t=1
attention mechanism was integrated into the GANs to align pθ (xt−1 | xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t)) (5)
the same objects in text sequence and visual semantics [91],
[92]. Quan et al. [93] combined the attention regularization To reduce training costs and substantial computational load,
module and the region proposal network (RPN) to efficiently Rombach et al. [102] introduced the latent diffusion model,
locate keywords. With the popularity of Transformer [94], which demonstrated robustness in generating high-resolution
autoregressive syntactic models employ Transformer-based images, including some corner cases.
sequence-to-sequence architectures to learn the relationship Text-guided generation’s key advantage is explicit specificabetween linguistic input and visual output. Autoregressive tion of rare semantic scenarios absent from the original dataset:
models were usually combined with variational autoencoders researchers can directly describe such cases in language and
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 11

Fig. 6. Overview of Sg2im. The input scene graph specifies objects and their Fig. 7. Image generation from layout. Given the coarse layout (bounding
relationships, which are then processed using a graph convolutional network. boxes and object categories), the Layout2Im model simplifies the process
After computing embedding vectors for all objects, they are used to predict by sampling each object’s appearance from a normal distribution. They are
bounding boxes and segmentation masks, then combined to form a scene then transformed into a real image by a series of components. This figure is
layout. The layout is converted to an image using a cascaded refinement inspired by [110].
network (CRN).

synthesize corresponding scenes, rather than waiting for them 3) Layout-Guided Generation: Layout has historically
to emerge naturally in real-world data. This makes it ideal for functioned as an intermediate representation for processing
constructing long-tail scenarios, offering semantic controlla- textual and other multimodal inputs. In particular, its capacity
bility at low data-collection cost. to encode object locations—an aspect that is crucial in traffic
 2) Scene Graph-Guided Generation: Scene graph (SG) is scenes—has motivated researchers to employ layout informaa widely used data structure in computer vision for scene tion directly as an input modality to constrain the spatial disunderstanding. In a scene graph, nodes correspond to objects tribution of scene objects. Consequently, layout-guided image
or entities, while edges represent their relationships or inter- generation methods leverage explicit positional information
actions [103]. Mathematically, given a set of objects Co and of scene elements to condition and structure the synthesis
a set of relations E, a scene graph is a tuple (O, E), where process. In general, layout representations are commonly
E ⊆ O × R × O is a set of directed edges of the form instantiated as “bounding box + category,” semantic layout
(oi , r, o j ) and oi , o j ∈ Co , r ∈ E. Therefore, precise control maps, and related variants. For example, Zhao et al. [110]
over the semantic position of traffic elements plays a vital proposed a classic layout-to-image model, as shown in Fig. 7,
role in corner case generation. Sg2im [104] was the first where the input consisted of bounding boxes and object
to use graph convolution for SG processing, learning layout categories. It constructed feature maps for individual objects
information by predicting the bounding boxes and segmenta- and applied a convolutional LSTM to generate a hidden
tion masks of objects (Fig. 6), which the cascade refinement feature map. Subsequently, it decoded the entire map into
network then converts into images. Following this paradigm, a set of output images. LostGan [111] focused on recon-
Mittal et al. [105] subsequently proposed a sequential figurable layout and style, and also learned about object
incremental approach. In contrast, Ashual and Wolf [106] instance-specific layout-aware feature normalization (ISLA) in
distinguished objects by adding attributes such as types and generators. ISLA was extended to Attr-ISLA with additional
appearance embeddings, employing dual encoding for each control over the attributes in [112]. Furthermore, [113], [114],
object. Attention mechanisms [107] and external knowledge [115], [116] optimized the architecture to produce images with
bases [108] have been further employed to enhance the more robust object appearance in complex layouts. Zheng et al.
model’s understanding of objects. Scene graphs are use- [117] utilized structural image patches with region information
ful data structures for describing traffic scenes. To bridge and a diffusion model to design an end-to-end controllable
the gap between real-world traffic images and generated model.
images, Savkin et al. [109] proposed a method based on In addition to bounding boxes, the semantic layout offers
domain-invariant scene representation to directly generate traf- a flexible description. Park et al. [118] introduced spatially
fic imagery. The model extracted the SG from the virtual adaptive normalization, which uses the layout to modulate
environment and then generated traffic scenes in the real activations in normalization layers. Following this paradigm,
environment. Compared with previous methods that relied on Zhu et al. [119] further conditioned on segmentation masks
manually crafted SG representations, the images produced by that described semantic regions in the output images. Addithis method appeared more realistic and compliant. tionally, [120], [121] used semantic operations to modify
 SG-guided generation is particularly effective for explicitly local objects in images. The generated traffic scenarios could
encoding inter-object relationships and atypical interactions, produce more reasonable and distinctive results for finewhich constitute the core of most safety-critical driving sce- grained objects. Using a multiscale guided diffusion model,
narios. In contrast to appearance-level augmentation, SG-based Zeng et al. [122] leveraged a precision-encoded mask pyramid
approaches enable the systematic construction of corner cases and combined text features by accuracy level.
characterized by abnormal object configurations, complex Layout-guided generation is well-suited to synthesizing rare,
agent interactions, and traffic-rule–related semantic violations. safety-critical spatial configurations underrepresented in rou-
Consequently, these methods increase both visual variabil- tine driving data (e.g., unusual object placement, constrained
ity and semantic representativeness, which are crucial for road occupancy, anomalous spatial proximity). Layout control
rigorously assessing and improving model performance in enables a more direct specification of such configurations
interaction-intensive driving environments. than standard augmentation, providing a practical way to
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

model atypical spatial arrangements that challenge the ADS
perception and planning modules.

C. Scene-based Corner Case Generation
 For robustness of the ADS model, the data pipeline must
incorporate diverse driving scenes, and scene-based cornercase generation methods address this by moving beyond
image-level modifications to directly create safety-relevant
scene-level variations—either by generating scenarios with
real-world-like distributions or by collecting samples under
targeted conditions. These methods are primarily categorized
into physical-model-based, style-transfer-based, and event-
 Fig. 8. Overview of StyleDiffusion. Initially, the content image Ic and the
based approaches. style image I s are processed by a diffusion-based style removal module to
 1) Scene Generation Based on Physical Models: Physics- extract domain-aligned content information. Subsequently, the content of Ic
based approaches rely on explicit physical models, including is utilized in a diffusion-based style transfer module to produce the stylized
 result Ics . This figure is inspired by [130].
atmospheric scattering models [123], [124], rain photometric
modeling [125] and pulse propagation models in the presence
of scattering particles [126], [127], [128] to generate samples
under foggy, rainy, or snowy conditions [8]. Physics-based unbiased feature transfer module. It performed unbiased style
generation solutions are efficient and interpretable. However, transfer on deep features and reconstructed the stylized images
the model parameters are predefined under ideal assumptions through reversed feature inference. Zhang et al. [140] applied
and only apply to specific scenes. For example, in the atmo- contrastive learning to directly learn style representations from
spheric scattering model, the atmosphere condition is assumed image features, improving arbitrary style transfer in different
to be homogeneous and overlooks the impacts of texture domains.
density and scene depth on light [129]. To ensure that the pre- In addition, visual transformers were incorporated into style
defined parameters adapt to varying conditions, it is essential transfer tasks. Park and Kim [141] performed global style
to adjust them within a specified range. This enables control composition guided by content through a transformer-driven
over specific attributes of generated scenes. Physical-model- style composition module. They used self-attention mechabased approaches are particularly useful for generating adverse nisms to capture long-range dependencies and subsequently
environmental conditions in a controllable and interpretable merged Styleformer with StyleGAN2 to generate composimanner, as such conditions are a major source of distribution tional scenes. The model could utilize the Cityscapes dataset to
shift for perception systems. Given that weather-related corner produce high-resolution samples depicting traffic and vehicle
cases are costly and challenging to capture exhaustively in conditions. Reference [142] proposed a transformer-based
real-world driving datasets, physics-based models provide a method to alleviate biased content representation in style
principled framework for assessing ADS performance under transfer by accounting for long-range dependencies of input
environmental degradation while maintaining precise control images. In diffusion-based style transfer, [143] proposed an
over relevant scene parameters and attributes. inversion-based method for stylization. Furthermore, [130]
 2) Scene Generation Based on Image Style Transfer: Image explored the problem of content–style disentanglement, as
style transfer has been applied in autonomous driving to shown in Fig 8. The diffusion-based style removal and transfer
improve robustness to target domains, such as adverse weather modules first separated style information from both content
conditions and day-to-night image translation [131]. Applying and style images to reveal domain-aligned content, and then
style transfer to existing driving images can streamline corner- transferred the disentangled style representation to the target
case generation and reduce the time and resources required to image.
construct domain-diverse samples. Style-transfer-based data generation constitutes an effective
 Traditional style transfer methods rely on manually crafted strategy for exposing models to cross-domain appearance varilow-level features to align patches between the content and ations while preserving the underlying scene semantics. This
style images [132], aiming to achieve a harmonious fusion of is particularly pertinent in the context of autonomous driving,
their visual characteristics. In recent years, deep learning meth- where an identical physical traffic configuration may exhibit
ods have demonstrated strong capabilities for feature extrac- substantial variability across different weather conditions,
tion, offering a promising approach to capture intricate style illumination regimes, or sensing modalities. By augmenting
patterns [133], [134]. Arbitrary style transfer methods used domain diversity around fixed scene semantics, style transfer
unified models with feedforward architectures to efficiently facilitates model adaptation to target conditions that are infrehandle diverse inputs [135], [136], [137]. Liu et al. [138] quently represented or entirely absent in the original source
used an adaptive attention normalization module to acquire domain.
spatial attention scores from both shallow and deep fea- 3) Scene Generation Based On Events: Among scenetures. However, image reconstruction errors can corrupt image based approaches, event-based corner-case generation is most
content after several rounds of stylization. An et al. [139] miti- directly tied to safety validation, as it focuses on algorithgated content leakage employing reversible neural flows and an mically identifying safety-critical corner cases (e.g., traffic
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 13

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF V IRTUAL E NVIRONMENT S IMULATORS

 TABLE II widely used to control agents’ intentional behavior, simulate
 E VALUATION M ETRICS scenarios, and identify dangerous actions that violate them.
 For example, Sun et al. [155] used reinforcement learning
 to generate corner-case scenarios in the simulator’s virtual
 environment. Kishore et al. [156] first selected failure cases,
 such as false-positive and false-negative samples, and used
 imitation training to learn an optimal policy for generating data with domain randomization. Due to the rarity of
 safety-critical events, Feng et al. [1] proposed a dense deep
 reinforcement learning approach (D2RL) to find critical states
 (dangerous events) from a large number of vehicle behavior
 plans, and reconnect these critical states for information densification through augmented reality to accelerate model training
 in potentially unsafe situations. To improve the efficiency
 of model training and robustness under unseen ‘long tail’
 scenarios, Cao et al. [157] presented a dynamic confidenceaware reinforcement learning (DCARL) framework to generate
 vehicle potential trajectories, evaluate the dynamic confidence
 value of each trajectory, and update the policy with the high
 confidence value for continuous performance improvement.
 Event-based generation goes beyond improving sample
violations, collisions) that pose unsafe outcomes prior to real- realism; more importantly, it offers a direct mechanism for
world deployment [144]. Rather than generating only visually uncovering failure-inducing states and safety-critical interacdistinct scenes, these methods search the action space to tions that are difficult to encounter naturally. Compared with
pinpoint behaviors that trigger such safety risks. The sensory other generation strategies, event-based methods are more
outputs associated with these trigger events are then used as tightly coupled to ADS failure modes because they explicitly
corner cases. This formulation makes event-based generation search the regions of the scenario space where robustness
particularly meaningful because it targets the conditions under is most severely challenged. This makes them particularly
which model failure is most consequential. valuable for safety-oriented testing, long-tail validation, and
 Inspired by parallel system theory [150], as shown in the iterative improvement of model behavior under rare but
Table I, numerous simulators have been developed, including hazardous conditions.
CARLA [145], VISTA data-driven simulation engine [149],
[151], urban mobility simulation (SUMO) [148], InterSim
[152], TrafficBots [153], and HMIway-env [154]. Leveraging V. E VALUATION M ETRICS
these simulators, numerous search algorithms are employed Well-designed evaluation metrics are essential for determinto efficiently identify rare safety-critical events in a large ing whether AVs are truly ready for deployment, especially
search space. Reinforcement learning (RL) and its variants are in rare but safety-critical edge cases [1], [157], [158]. In
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 TABLE III
 A C OMPARATIVE S TUDY OF E XISTING DATASETS FOR AUTONOMOUS D RIVING

this section, we summarize three principal categories of threshold-invariant, meaning it evaluates performance across
metrics—data-level, model-level, and semantic-level—which all possible decision boundaries—vital for real-world deploycollectively constitute a systematic framework to quantify the ment, where threshold tuning directly affects false-alarm rates
safety of automated vehicles. and safety.
 However, AUC’s strengths also limit its usefulness for
 corner-case detection, where positive samples (corner cases)
A. Data-Level Metrics are extremely rare. Unlike AUC, which aggregates perfor-
 In data-level corner case detection, which aims to identify mance across all thresholds, Average Precision (AP) focuses
anomalous inputs not covered by standard training data, most on the Precision–Recall (PR) curve, which emphasizes the
methods treat the task as binary classification by separating positive class. AP summarizes this curve as a weighted mean
rare, safety-critical corner cases from normal samples. The of precision values across thresholds, with weights propormost common evaluation metrics are AUC and AP, which tional to the increase in recall at each step. This makes AP
capture complementary aspects of detection performance and particularly well-suited for corner-case detection: it directly
together provide a more complete assessment. AUC is a measures how well a model balances capturing rare risks (high
standard metric for evaluating a model’s overall discrimi- recall) with avoiding false alarms (high precision)—a critical
native ability. It is computed from the receiver operating trade-off for deploying safe, reliable systems.
characteristic (ROC) curve, which characterizes performance
across all possible classification thresholds by plotting the
true positive rate (TPR), namely the proportion of correctly B. Model-Level Metrics
identified corner cases, against the false positive rate (FPR),
namely the proportion of normal samples incorrectly clas- Neuron coverage was first proposed in a white-box differsified as corner cases. AUC aggregates this tradeoff into a ential test algorithm to identify inputs that cause inconsistent
single score: a value of 1 reflects perfect discrimination (all outputs across multiple DNNs by applying an affine transcorner cases are caught, no normal samples are flagged), formation to the image [47]. Mathematically, N = n1 , n2 , . . .
while 0.5 indicates random guessing. Crucially, AUC is indicates all neurons of a DNN and T = x1 , x2 , . . . represents
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 15

the test input. The out(n, x) function returns the output of the Wilderness Impact (WI) was proposed in [66] as an evaluneuron n. Thus, the coverage of neurons defined is as follows: ation index of the corner case. Because unknown objects are
 prone to misclassification into known categories, WI quantifies
 |n|∀x ∈ T , out(n, x) > t|
 NCov(T , x) = (6) the impact of unknown categories on the model’s accuracy.
 |N|
 Ideally, the smaller the WI value, the less the unknown class
 Neuron coverage quantifies the testing of a DNN’s internal interferes with the accuracy.
logic. DeepGauge proposed multi-granularity testing criteria PK
[159], which provide test coverage standards for deep learning WI = −1 (11)
 PK∪U
systems at two levels: the neuron and layer levels. Accordingly,
neurons are divided into two states: the major function region where PK represents the accuracy of the known class in the
and the corner-case region. For a neuron n, low and high are validation set, and PK∪U represents the accuracy of the model
the upper and lower boundary output values of the activation on the validation set of the known class and the unknown
function range, and if the neuron output is within a reasonable class.
range, this is identified as the major function region. It can be
defined as follows: VI. DATASETS
 In this section, we summarize publicly available datasets for
 ∀n ∈ N : φ(x, n) ∈ [lown , highn ] (7)
 robust safety-critical corner-case detection.
 If it exceeds this range, it is considered a corner-case region.
 A. Real-World Datasets
 ∃n ∈ N : φ(x, n) ∈ (−∞, lown ) ∪ (highn , +∞) (8)
 To evaluate the model’s performance across various scenar-
 Combinatorial testing (CT) is an effective technique for ios, extensive real-world data collection has been conducted.
inspecting traditional software systems, as it balances the As one of the most popular datasets in autonomous driving,
trade-off between test coverage and fault detection. DeepCT KITTI (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and Toyota Techno-
[160] extends this idea to deep learning systems and proposes logical Institute) consists of sensory outputs recorded with a
a combinatorial testing criterion for DL systems. It introduces variety of sensor modalities, including high-resolution RGB,
the concept of tomography, which treats the DNN as a grayscale stereo cameras, and a 3D laser scanner, and provides
multilayer (multiscale) function and tests it layer by layer to 15,000 frames of data around locations in Karlsruhe, Germany.
explore its potential feature space. The KITTI dataset is widely used to assess depth prediction,
 depth completion, and object recognition. Recently, numerous
 large-scale datasets including nuScenes [161],1 Cityscapes
C. Semantic-Level Metrics
 [177], Waymo [163],2 Audi Autonomous Driving Dataset
 Semantic-level corner-case detection is predominantly (A2D2) [164]3 and the ONCE (One millioN sCenEs) dataset
investigated along four principal dimensions: predictive uncer- for 3D object detection [178] have been collected under
tainty, reconstruction error, semantic distance, and distribu- various scenarios.
tional shift between datasets. Accordingly, the effectiveness Apart from these general-purpose datasets, a few datasets
of a given model can be quantitatively assessed using the (such as RoadAnomaly [72], RoadAnomaly21 [179], Lost and
following metrics. Found Dataset [180], Fishyscapes [181]) focus on abnormal
 Structural similarity (SSIM) quantifies the degree of dis- or dangerous scenes. For example, RoadAnomaly [72] and
tortion in an image or the resemblance between two images. RoadAnomaly21 [179] are datasets for anomaly segmentation
SSIM is a perceptual model that quantifies the perceptual and can be used to identify regions containing unusual objects
discrepancy between the original and predicted images. It (such as animals, rocks, and obstacles) that were never seen
relies on the image’s visible structure and is more consistent during training. DADA [182] can be used to localize video
with human intuition. The mathematical definition of SSIM is accidents. Although these benchmarks can detect anomalies or
shown in Eq. 9, where µ x denotes the average gray-scale for predict risky attributes in safety-critical settings, they cannot
measuring brightness, and σ xy denotes the standard deviation improve the model’s robustness in open, dynamic environof gray-scale for measuring contrast. ments due to poor scenario coverage and limited sample
 2µ x µy + c1 2σ xy + c2
   size. To jointly exploit existing datasets, CODA [28] pro-
 SSIM(x, y) = 2 (9) posed a unified two-stage scheme to select corner cases from
 µ x + µ2y + c1 σ2x + σ2y + c2
  
 large-scale datasets. CODA is a large-scale real-world road
 In general, mIoU is used to evaluate the performance of corner case dataset for object detection in autonomous driving,
semantic segmentation models. Similarly, to detect corner consisting of 10,000 carefully selected road driving scenes
cases at the semantic level, mIoU defined in Eq. 10 is used with image domain tags, well-aligned LiDAR data, and highto quantify the segmentation mask’s accuracy. Here T Pt , FPt , quality bounding box annotations for 43 representative object
and FNt are the numbers of true positive, false positive, and categories. To assess the driving risks posed by critical objects,
false negative pixels in frame t, respectively. 1 https://www.nuscenes.org/
 2 https://waymo.com/open/
 T Pt
 IoUt = (10) 3 https://www.a2d2.audi/a2d2/en.html
 T Pt + FPt + FNt
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

DRAMA [168] is introduced, comprising 17,785 scenario including highways, urban areas, residential neighborhoods,
clips recorded from a moving vehicle in highly interactive downtown districts, and indoor parking garages.
urban traffic environments.4 Meanwhile, it offers a broad
range of annotations—including risk-object bounding boxes, VII. C HALLENGES AND O PPORTUNITIES
free-form captions, and distinct labels for ego-car intention, A. Building Large-scale Datasets of Corner Cases
scene classification, and driver suggestions—which together
facilitate understanding of the causes behind risky scenarios. Although many autonomous-driving datasets exist, few
 explicitly target corner cases. Given the strict safety requirements of autonomous systems, there is an urgent need for
B. Synthetic Datasets large-scale datasets focused on rare, safety-critical scenarios.
 First, heterogeneous and fragmented data formats hinder reuse.
 Due to the limited coverage of real-world data and the Existing datasets use incompatible schemes and annotation
substantial costs of data collection [80], synthetic datasets protocols, preventing systematic integration of corner-case
are widely used to capture broader coverage of environmental samples. A unified data schema is needed to integrate disconditions, traffic scenarios, and driving contexts, while requir- persed public datasets and reduce redundant data collection.
ing comparatively minimal manual annotation. In contrast Second, severe class imbalance undermines model robustto real-world datasets, synthetic datasets can provide large ness. Existing datasets disproportionately emphasize nominal
volumes of training data, thereby mitigating dependence on driving conditions while insufficiently capturing rare and
expensive manual labeling of real images and helping address extreme scenarios, thereby diminishing system fault tolerance
privacy concerns inherent to real data [175]. Nonetheless, and perpetuating a discrepancy between highly specialized
they usually target one specific task—for instance, SYNTHIA corner-case handling and robust responses to abrupt, high-risk
[170], GTA-V [173], and AWSS [183] are designed for seman- events. Large-scale corner-case datasets are therefore needed
tic segmentation, while SynPeDS [184] focuses on object to cover diverse challenging contexts. The SDAC dataset
detection. Moreover, most of these works rely primarily on [187], designed for anomaly detection with dense multimodal
domain adaptation techniques to mitigate the domain shift annotations, effectively complements real-world operational
between synthetic and real-world datasets. data. Third, traditional centralized collection pipelines struggle
 Therefore, multitask-generated datasets are gaining popular- to capture rare extreme events. Crowdsourcing strategies [188],
ity. For example, the SHIFT dataset [174] comprises more than deployed via civilian vehicle fleets and platforms such as
4800 tracking sequences acquired from eight multimodal sen- CrowdOS [189], can assign multimodal data-collection tasks
sors distributed across different positions, capturing dynamic along regular routes, offering a scalable, cost-effective way to
driving scenes. It enables 13 perception tasks for multi- acquire corner-case data.
task-oriented systems, such as semantic/instance segmentation,
monocular/stereo depth regression, 2D/3D object detection,
 B. Multi-Modality Detection of Corner Cases
2D/3D multi-object tracking (MOT), optical flow estimation,
point cloud registration, trajectory prediction, and human In safety-critical corner cases of autonomous driving,
pose estimation. To enrich scene diversity, MUAD [175], a the capabilities of current perception systems remain fungenerated dataset for autonomous driving with multiple types damentally constrained. Most existing methods operate on
of uncertainty and tasks, is proposed. Specifically, The MUDA single-modal input and thus fail to fully exploit the compledataset contains 3,420 training images, 492 validation samples, mentary information provided by multi-sensor configurations
and 6,501 test samples. Each split includes both day and night (e.g., cameras, radar, and LiDAR). Each modality exhibits
conditions, with two-thirds of the images captured during the distinct advantages and limitations in such scenarios: RGB
day and one-third at night. The test sets additionally span imagery supplies semantically rich and fine-grained visual
diverse weather conditions (rain, snow, and fog at two intensity information but is highly sensitive to illumination changes
levels) and include multiple out-of-distribution objects [175].5 and adverse weather conditions [7], [190], [191], [192];
 Although numerous generated datasets are available, the LiDAR delivers accurate geometric and depth measurements
data distributions of generated images are significantly dif- yet suffers from spatial sparsity and performance degradation
ferent from those of real-world images. Domain drifts make it under adverse environmental conditions [193], [194]; radar is
impractical to apply the model trained on generated datasets inherently robust to interference and challenging weather, but
directly to real-world scenarios [185], [186]. Recently, an its spatial resolution is comparatively low. To mitigate these
open-source photorealistic simulator for autonomous driving limitations, the research community has increasingly focused
was released to enable the construction of realistic environ- on multi-sensor fusion strategies. Representative paradigms
ments for the training and testing of autonomous vehicles include point-level fusion [195], [196], feature-level interac-
[151]. Apollo Synthetic6 is a photorealistic synthetic dataset tion across modalities [197], [198], [199], [200], [201], [202],
for autonomous driving, comprising 273k unique samples cap- and fusion via projection into a unified representation space,
tured across a wide range of high-visual-fidelity virtual scenes, with Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) becoming particularly prominent
 [203], [204], [205], [206]. For instance, BEVFusion projects
 4 https://usa.honda-ri.com/drama both camera images and LiDAR point clouds into a shared
 5 https://muad-dataset.github.io/ BEV space to enable joint reasoning [204], while BEVGuide
 6 https://developer.apollo.auto/synthetic.html proposes a universal BEV framework designed to generalize
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 17

across different sensor setups and tasks [203]. In parallel, responsiveness and robustness of control transfers [219]. In
camera-only multi-view 3D object detection has made substan- addition, new methods extract rare, safety-critical scenarios
tial progress through the incorporation of auxiliary prototypes from large-scale urban intersection data and convert them
and contrastive objectives, which improve robustness under into simulation-ready test cases, advancing validation and
occlusion and inclement weather conditions [207]. verification of automated driving under real-world conditions
 Despite these advances in multi-modal and single-modal [220].
perception for corner cases, current research faces three In hybrid traffic systems [221], distributed sensor netprimary bottlenecks: 1) Dedicated datasets annotated with works face challenges in fully exploiting vehicle heterogeneity.
“modality failure–scenario mutation” labels are scarce, and the AutoFed applies federated learning to aggregate data across
effective integration of real-world and synthetic data remains vehicles [222]. To enhance safety, the MPC framework of
challenging, which restricts the training and validation of Mohseni et al. [223] and the game-theoretic system of
multi-modal corner-case detection models. 2) Datasets sup- Hang et al. [224] are proposed to support cooperative maneuporting multimodal corner-case analysis are extremely scarce, vers. Hybrid TrafficAI [225] enhances both anomaly detection
leading to the poor performance of existing multimodal and decision-making in hybrid traffic environments. Morefusion methods in extreme corner-case scenarios, especially in over, a lightweight deep learning model tailored for corner
single-modality failure detection. 3) Insufficient cross-modal radar provides robust real-time speed estimation, resolvsemantic alignment commonly exists, which causes signif- ing Doppler ambiguity and mount-angle constraints without
icant segmentation performance degradation in low-contrast requiring additional sensors [226]. Overall, progress in cornerregions of corner-case scenes. Recent studies have introduced case detection requires, at the individual level, robust and
a range of promising approaches to address these challenges. trustworthy human–machine interaction, and, at the system
T-READi [208] enhances robustness under modality failure, level, distributed cooperative frameworks that effectively intewhile roboFormer [209] improves cross-modal alignment. The grate theoretical advances with practical deployment.
corner prediction model further reinforces the complementarity between perception and prediction [210]. For example, D. Photolistic Corner Case Generation
JiSAM leverages synthetic data in conjunction with scarce Numerous image synthesis solutions have been studied,
labeled real-world data to mitigate data scarcity and reduce the but few can be applied to synthesize corner cases in
sim-to-real gap in LiDAR perception [211]. Moreover, active autonomous driving. First, models trained predominantly on
modality selection [212], [213], [214] holds additional promise synthetic data frequently underperform in real-world settings
for autonomous driving perception by adaptively configuring because of domain discrepancies in illumination, texture,
sensor combinations according to the driving context, thereby and scene dynamics [227]. Sim-to-real adaptation techniques
improving accuracy while simultaneously reducing computa- can partially mitigate these issues by aligning known and
tional overhead [215], [216]. unknown domains [228]. In this context, DriveArena [229]
 offers a promising approach by generating data closely
C. Corner Case Detection in Mixed Driving System aligned with real-world distributions, enabling more seam-
 Nowadays, vehicles with partial automation have already less deployment of trained agents. Second, generic image
been widely available on the market, and the full automation generation approaches—such as text–sketch fusion [230] and
era with “driverless” capabilities is near the horizon. In the bounding box–text grounding [231]—do not offer sufficient
mixed driving system, corner case detection faces challenges semantic or behavioral granularity for complex, dynamic trafat both the individual and the system level. fic environments. HumanSim [232] partially addresses this
 Partially automated vehicles, conceptualized as limitation by simulating human-like driving, explicitly modhuman–machine systems, must perceive environmental eling spatial relationships, fine-grained agent interactions, and
hazards, quantify risks, and initiate interventions in rare, transparency–efficiency trade-offs, thus enabling more realistic
safety-critical situations [217]. Reliable assessment of sensor dynamic corner cases. Third, many generated scenarios still
outputs is essential; if measurement or interpretation cannot lack the stochastic behavioral patterns and heterogeneity charbe trusted, the control authority should be transferred to acteristic of real-world traffic. Conventional methods [227],
the human driver. This requirement adds complexity by [228], [230], [231], [233], [234] typically focus on controlling
introducing uncertainty from stochastic human behavior and object placements rather than modeling underlying intent,
diverse human–automation interaction modes. Current active decision-making processes, or socio-cultural context. Humanshared-control paradigms struggle with robust driver-intent Sim [232] only partially captures human decision-making
inference, accurate estimation of situational awareness, heuristics, whereas DriveArena [229] primarily focuses on
and formal modeling of driver trust, hindering safe and generating diverse global traffic flows. Both approaches, theretimely control handovers [217]. To mitigate these issues, fore, require integration with region-specific behavioral data
an end-to-end learning-based architecture within a modular and cultural priors to more comprehensively represent driver
control framework has been proposed to automatically flag intent and heterogeneous driving norms. Furthermore, in terms
corner cases for faster, more focused reliability assessments of complex safety-critical corner cases, current research lacks
[218]. Complementarily, a human-vision-inspired perception a universal framework for generating collision trade-off scenarpipeline on the “Tianmou” neuromorphic vision chip enables ios, and pays limited attention to the ethical constraints in such
low-latency sensing and processing, thereby enhancing the scenario generation. This ethical and scenario diversity gap
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

18 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

remains a key issue to be addressed in photorealistic corner multiple dimensions to deepen understanding of corner cases.
case generation research. First, large-scale corner-case datasets, either collected in the
 real world via crowdsourcing or generated by deep genera-
E. Large Language Models for CC Understanding tive neural networks, are prerequisites. Second, how to fuse
 multimodal outputs for corner-case detection in the mixed
 With the remarkable advancements of large language driving system is promising for improving model performodels (LLMs) across diverse domains, their integration mance, especially in complex scenarios. Third, the current
into autonomous driving systems has garnered significant data-driven paradigm has substantial performance limitations,
traction—enriching human-machine interaction [235], [236], including low robustness, limited interpretability, and poor
[237], enhancing environmental perception capabilities [238], fault tolerance. With the popularity of LLMs, leveraging prior
[239], and enabling a paradigm shift from data-driven to knowledge to improve corner-case understanding and building
knowledge-driven end-to-end pipelines [240], [241], [242], a knowledge-based decision-making system are promising
[243]. For instance, Cui et al. [244] and Yang et al. approaches for the safety of autonomous driving.
[245] have presented comprehensive literature reviews on the
application of LLMs in autonomous driving, synthesizing
existing progress in this rapidly evolving field. However, R EFERENCES
leveraging LLMs to effectively understand and address corner [1] S. Feng et al., “Dense reinforcement learning for safety validation of
cases—a critical bottleneck for safe and reliable autonomous autonomous vehicles,” Nature, vol. 615, no. 7953, pp. 620–627, Mar.
navigation—remains in its nascent stages, plagued by several 2023.
unresolved challenges. [2] D. Lee and D. J. Hess, “Public concerns and connected and automated
 vehicles: Safety, privacy, and data security,” Humanities Social Sci.
 First, while a plethora of visual language models (VLMs, Commun., vol. 9, no. 1, p. 90, Mar. 2022.
e.g., VisionLLM [246]) and multimodal LLMs (MLLMs, [3] G. Falco et al., “Governing AI safety through independent audits,”
e.g., LLaVa [247]) have been developed, these models are Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 566–571, Jul. 2021.
 [4] J. Guo, U. Kurup, and M. Shah, “Is it safe to drive? An overview
inherently general-purpose and lack specialized optimiza- of factors, metrics, and datasets for driveability assessment in
tion for autonomous driving scenarios, particularly extreme autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 8,
cornering contexts. To address this, Chen et al. proposed pp. 3135–3151, Aug. 2020.
 [5] A. Nunes, B. Reimer, and J. F. Coughlin, “People must retain control of
CODA-LM [248], leveraging a hierarchical data structure autonomous vehicles,” Nature, vol. 556, no. 7700, pp. 169–171, Apr.
and LLM prompting to generate high-quality pre-annotations 2018.
for complex scenes. CODA-REC [249] augmented with tex- [6] C. Pek, S. Manzinger, M. Koschi, and M. Althoff, “Using online
 verification to prevent autonomous vehicles from causing accidents,”
tual descriptions to facilitate MLLM-based comprehension Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 2, no. 9, pp. 518–528, Sep. 2020.
of multimodal semantic information—addressing the inherent [7] Y. Almalioglu, M. Turan, N. Trigoni, and A. Markham, “Deep learninglimitation of general-purpose models in interpreting domain- based robust positioning for all-weather autonomous driving,” Nature
 Mach. Intell., vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 749–760, Sep. 2022.
specific corner scenarios. Second, while existing studies have [8] Y. Liang et al., “An interpretable image denoising framework via
sought to integrate VLMs for automated decision-making in dual disentangled representation learning,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles,
autonomous driving, they rarely prioritize robustness and inter- vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 2016–2030, Jan. 2024.
 [9] Y. Deng, T. Zhang, G. Lou, X. Zheng, J. Jin, and Q.-L. Han, “Deep
pretability. Mo et al. [250] fine-tuned InternVL-2.0 for driving learning-based autonomous driving systems: A survey of attacks and
scenarios by enhancing spatial correlation with position and defenses,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 7897–7912,
depth information, incorporating chain-of-thought reasoning to Dec. 2021.
 [10] J. Sun, Y. Cao, Q. A. Chen, and Z. M. Mao, “Towards robust LiDARimprove accuracy, and developing context-aware learning via based perception in autonomous driving: General black-box adversarial
scenario-based retrieval. However, it still highlights the need sensor attack and countermeasures,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Conf. Secur.
for further refinement to fully address corner-case complexity. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–11.
Furthermore, integrating LLMs and VLMs into autonomous [11] R. Song, M. O. Ozmen, H. Kim, R. Müller, Z. B. Celik, and
 A. Bianchi, “Discovering adversarial driving maneuvers against
driving systems remains challenging due to hallucination risk autonomous vehicles,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
and real-time performance limitations. Secur. 23), Aug. 2023, pp. 2957–2974.
 [12] A. Filos, P. Tigkas, R. Mcallister, N. Rhinehart, S. Levine, and
 Y. Gal, “Can autonomous vehicles identify, recover from, and adapt
 VIII. C ONCLUSION to distribution shifts?” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119,
 2020, pp. 3145–3153.
 Understanding corner cases is critical for decision-making [13] Z. Ma, Y. Yang, G. Wang, X. Xu, H. T. Shen, and M. Zhang,
in safety-critical scenarios. However, research on corner cases “Rethinking open-world object detection in autonomous driving
in autonomous driving has received comparatively less atten- scenarios,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022,
 pp. 1279–1288.
tion, overshadowed by topics like OOD learning, anomaly [14] K. Wang, L. Pu, J. Zhang, and J. Lu, “Gated adversarial network
detection, and adversarial examples. In this survey, we conduct based environmental enhancement method for driving safety under
a taxonomic analysis of data samples and their relationships adverse weather conditions,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 8, no. 2,
 pp. 1934–1943, Feb. 2023.
to decision boundaries. We observe that corner cases remain [15] Y. Liu, M. Wang, P. Lasang, and Q. Sun, “Importance biased traffic
understudied due to three key gaps: limited consensus in scene segmentation in diverse weather conditions,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
their definition, a scarcity of dedicated datasets, and diverged Vehicles, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 2753–2765, Jan. 2024.
 [16] J. Shen, J. Y. Won, Z. Chen, and Q. A. Chen, “Drift with devil: Security
research priorities. of multi-sensor fusion based localization in high-level autonomous
 To accelerate the development of autonomous driving, both driving under GPS spoofing,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp.
academia and industry should make greater efforts across (USENIX Security), 2020, pp. 931–948.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 19

[17] X. Ren, M. Li, Z. Li, W. Wu, L. Bai, and W. Zhang, “Curiosity-driven [42] J. Kim, R. Feldt, and S. Yoo, “Guiding deep learning system testing
 attention for anomaly road obstacles segmentation in autonomous using surprise adequacy,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw.
 driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2233–2243, Eng. (ICSE), May 2019, pp. 1039–1049.
 Mar. 2023. [43] Z. Ma, Z. Zheng, J. Wei, X. Wei, Y. Yang, and H. T. Shen, “Open-
[18] Z. Zhu and H. Zhao, “A survey of deep RL and IL for autonomous scenario domain adaptive object detection in autonomous driving,”
 driving policy learning,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia. New York, NY, USA:
 no. 9, pp. 14043–14065, Sep. 2022. Association for Computing Machinery, Oct. 2023, pp. 8453–8462.
[19] S. Grigorescu, B. Trasnea, T. Cocias, and G. Macesanu, “A survey [44] H. Kim, Y. Kang, C. Oh, and K.-J. Yoon, “Single domain generalization
 of deep learning techniques for autonomous driving,” J. Field Robot., for LiDAR semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 362–386, Apr. 2020. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 17587–17598.
[20] Y. Li et al., “Choose your simulator wisely: A review on open-source [45] Z. Liu, Z. Miao, X. Zhan, J. Wang, B. Gong, and S. X. Yu, “Large-scale
 simulators for autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, long-tailed recognition in an open world,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 4861–4876, May 2024. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2537–2546.
[21] H. Zhao, M. Meng, X. Li, J. Xu, L. Li, and S. Galland, “A survey of [46] D. Hendrycks et al., “Scaling out-of-distribution detection for realautonomous driving frameworks and simulators,” Adv. Eng. Informat., world settings,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2022,
 vol. 62, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 102850. pp. 8759–8773.
[22] T. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Wang, and X. Wang, “Virtual tools for testing [47] K. Pei, Y. Cao, J. Yang, and S. Jana, “DeepXplore: Automated
 autonomous driving: A survey and benchmark of simulators, datasets, whitebox testing of deep learning systems,” Commun. ACM, vol. 62,
 and competitions,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 17, p. 3486, Sep. 2024. no. 11, pp. 137–145, Oct. 2019.
[23] S. Tang et al., “A survey on automated driving system testing: [48] Y. Tian, K. Pei, S. Jana, and B. Ray, “DeepTest: Automated testing
 Landscapes and trends,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodology, vol. 32, of deep-neural-network-driven autonomous cars,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM
 no. 5, pp. 1–62, Sep. 2023. 40th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE), May 2018, pp. 303–314.
[24] D. Chen, M. Zhu, H. Yang, X. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Data-driven traffic [49] W. Wu, H. Xu, S. Zhong, M. R. Lyu, and I. King, “Deep validation:
 simulation: A comprehensive review,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, Toward detecting real-world corner cases for deep neural networks,” in
 vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 4730–4748, Apr. 2024. Proc. 49th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw. (DSN),
[25] Y. Gao et al., “Foundation models in autonomous driving: A survey on Jun. 2019, pp. 125–137.
 scenario generation and scenario analysis,” IEEE Open J. Intell. Transp. [50] H. Ben Braiek and F. Khomh, “DeepEvolution: A search-based testing
 Syst., early access, Feb. 3, 2026, doi: 10.1109/OJITS.2026.3660686. approach for deep neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw.
[26] J.-A. Bolte, A. Bar, D. Lipinski, and T. Fingscheidt, “Towards corner Maintenance Evol. (ICSME), Sep. 2019, pp. 454–458.
 case detection for autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles [51] Y. N. Dauphin, R. Pascanu, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, S. Ganguli, and
 Symp. (IV), Jun. 2019, pp. 438–445. Y. Bengio, “Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-
[27] J. Breitenstein, J.-A. Termöhlen, D. Lipinski, and T. Fingscheidt, dimensional non-convex optimization,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Neural
 “Systematization of corner cases for visual perception in automated Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 2, Dec. 2014, pp. 2933–2941.
 driving,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV), Oct. 2020, [52] L. Wang et al., “Towards understanding learning representations:
 pp. 1257–1264. To what extent do different neural networks learn the same
[28] K. Li et al., “CODA: A real-world road corner case dataset for object representation,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 detection in autonomous driving,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.- 2018, pp. 9607–9616.
 ECCV, 2022, pp. 406–423.
 [53] D. R. Hardoon, S. Szedmak, and J. Shawe-Taylor, “Canonical corre-
[29] F. Heidecker et al., “An application-driven conceptualization of corner
 lation analysis: An overview with application to learning methods,”
 cases for perception in highly automated driving,” in Proc. IEEE Intell.
 Neural Comput., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2639–2664, Dec. 2004.
 Vehicles Symp. (IV), Jul. 2021, pp. 644–651.
 [54] M. Raghu, J. Gilmer, J. Yosinski, and J. Sohl-Dickstein, “SVCCA: Sin-
[30] K. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Qiao, T. Xiang, and C. C. Loy, “Domain
 gular vector canonical correlation analysis for deep learning dynamics
 generalization: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 and interpretability,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 4396–4415, Apr. 2023.
 2017, pp. 6078–6087.
[31] H. Nichols, M. Jimenez, Z. Goddard, M. Sparapany, B. Boots, and
 A. Mazumdar, “Adversarial sampling-based motion planning,” IEEE [55] S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, H. Lee, and G. Hinton, “Similarity of neural
 Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 4267–4274, Apr. 2022. network representations revisited,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
[32] P. Jing et al., “Too good to be safe: Tricking lane detection in 2019, pp. 3519–3529.
 autonomous driving with crafted perturbations,” in Proc. 30th USENIX [56] K. Lenc and A. Vedaldi, “Understanding image representations by
 Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security), 2021, pp. 3237–3254. measuring their equivariance and equivalence,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
[33] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes, Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015, pp. 991–999.
 “Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM [57] A. Csiszárik, P. Kőrösi-Szabó, A. Matszangosz, G. Papp, and D. Varga,
 Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1–37, Jul. 2021. “Similarity and matching of neural network representations,” in Proc.
[34] S. Calderon-Ramirez, S. Yang, and D. Elizondo, “Semisupervised deep Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 5656–5668.
 learning for image classification with distribution mismatch: A survey,” [58] T. Ouyang, V. S. Marco, Y. Isobe, H. Asoh, Y. Oiwa, and Y. Seo,
 IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 1015–1029, Dec. 2022. “Corner case data description and detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 1st
[35] J. Wang et al., “Generalizing to unseen domains: A survey on Workshop AI Eng., Softw. Eng. AI (WAIN), May 2021, pp. 19–26.
 domain generalization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, [59] T. Ouyang, Y. Isobe, V. S. Marco, J. Ogata, Y. Seo, and Y. Oiwa, “AI
 pp. 8052–8072, Aug. 2023. robustness analysis with consideration of corner cases,” in Proc. IEEE
[36] N. Akhtar, A. Mian, N. Kardan, and M. Shah, “Advances in adversarial Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Test. (AITest), Aug. 2021, pp. 29–36.
 attacks and defenses in computer vision: A survey,” IEEE Access, [60] R. Chan, M. Rottmann, and H. Gottschalk, “Entropy maximization
 vol. 9, pp. 155161–155196, 2021. and meta classification for out-of-distribution detection in semantic
[37] Y. Liu and J. H. L. Hansen, “Towards complexity level classification segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 of driving scenarios using environmental information,” in Proc. IEEE Oct. 2021, pp. 5108–5117.
 Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf. (ITSC), Oct. 2019, pp. 810–815. [61] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassified
[38] C. Ryan, F. Murphy, and M. Mullins, “End-to-end autonomous driving and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in Proc. Int.
 risk analysis: A behavioural anomaly detection approach,” IEEE Trans. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017, pp. 1–11.
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1650–1662, Mar. 2021. [62] S. Liang, Y. Li, and R. Srikant, “Enhancing the reliability of out-of-
[39] K. Lee, K. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Shin, “A simple unified framework for distribution image detection in neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 detecting out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks,” in Proc. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–8.
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 31, 2018, pp. 1–10. [63] J. Van Amersfoort, L. Smith, Y. W. Teh, and Y. Gal, “Uncertainty
[40] S. Deng, J.-G. Yu, Z. Wu, H. Gao, Y. Li, and Y. Yang, “Learning estimation using a single deep deterministic neural network,” in Proc.
 relative feature displacement for few-shot open-set recognition,” IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 9690–9700.
 Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 5763–5774, 2023. [64] A. Kendall, V. Badrinarayanan, and R. Cipolla, “Bayesian SegNet:
[41] K. Leino, Z. Wang, and M. Fredrikson, “Globally-robust neural Model uncertainty in deep convolutional encoder–decoder architectures
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2021, for scene understanding,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2017,
 pp. 6212–6222. pp. 1–7.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

20 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[65] P.-Y. Huang, W.-T. Hsu, C.-Y. Chiu, T.-F. Wu, and M. Sun, “Efficient [87] H. Zhang et al., “StackGAN: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis
 uncertainty estimation for semantic segmentation in videos,” in Proc. with stacked generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 520–535. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 5908–5916.
[66] K. J. Joseph, S. Khan, F. S. Khan, and V. N. Balasubramanian, [88] Z. Zhang, Y. Xie, and L. Yang, “Photographic text-to-image synthesis
 “Towards open world object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. with a hierarchically-nested adversarial network,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 5826–5836. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6199–6208.
[67] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction [89] M. Cha, Y. L. Gwon, and H. T. Kung, “Adversarial learning of semantic
 for anomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. relevance in text to image synthesis,” in Proc. 33rd AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6536–6545. Intell., 2019, pp. 1–11, doi: 10.1609/AAAI.v33i01.33013272.
[68] D. Bogdoll, E. Eisen, M. Nitsche, C. Scheib, and J. M. Zöllner, [90] Z. Deng, X. He, and Y. Peng, “LFR-GAN: Local feature refinement
 “Multimodal detection of unknown objects on roads for autonomous based generative adversarial network for text-to-image generation,”
 driving,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern. (SMC), Oct. ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 19, no. 6,
 2022, pp. 325–332. pp. 1–18, Jul. 2023, doi: 10.1145/3589002.
[69] M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and [91] T. Xu et al., “AttnGAN: Fine-grained text to image generation with
 L. S. Davis, “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in attentional generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 1316–1324.
 pp. 733–742. [92] H. Zhang, H. Zhu, S. Yang, and W. Li, “DGattGAN: Cooperative
 up-sampling based dual generator attentional GAN on text-to-image
[70] P. Oza and V. M. Patel, “C2AE: Class conditioned auto-encoder for
 synthesis,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 29584–29598, 2021.
 open-set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 [93] F. Quan, B. Lang, and Y. Liu, “ARRPNGAN: Text-to-image GAN
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2307–2316.
 with attention regularization and region proposal networks,” Signal
[71] Y. Xia, X. Cao, F. Wen, G. Hua, and J. Sun, “Learning discriminative
 Process., Image Commun., vol. 106, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 116728.
 reconstructions for unsupervised outlier removal,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 1511–1519.
 S0923596522000601
[72] K. Lis, K. K. Nakka, P. Fua, and M. Salzmann, “Detecting the [94] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv.
 unexpected via image resynthesis,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–14. [Online].
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 2152–2161. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paperfiles/paper/2017/file/
[73] G. Di Biase, H. Blum, R. Siegwart, and C. Cadena, “Pixel- 3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
 wise anomaly detection in complex driving scenes,” in Proc. [95] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,”
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, 2013, arXiv:1312.6114.
 pp. 16918–16927. [96] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
[74] T. Vojir, T. Šipka, R. Aljundi, N. Chumerin, D. O. Reino, and language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139,
 J. Matas, “Road anomaly detection by partial image reconstruction 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
 with segmentation coupling,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. [97] A. Ramesh et al., “Zero-shot text-to-image generation,” in Proc.
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 15651–15660. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2021, pp. 8821–8831. [Online].
[75] S. Yan, L. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Zhai, and L. Zhang, “Re-synthesis Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/ramesh21a.html
 anomaly detection framework for driving scenes guided by uncertain [98] M. Ding et al., “Cogview: Mastering text-to-image
 metrics,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Comput. Artif. Intell., Mar. 2022, generation via transformers,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 pp. 579–584. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2021, pp. 19822–19835. [Online].
[76] K. Lis, S. Honari, P. Fua, and M. Salzmann, “Detecting road obstacles Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paperfiles/paper/2021/file/
 by erasing them,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, a4d92e2cd541fca87e4620aba658316d-Paper.pdf
 no. 4, pp. 2450–2460, Apr. 2024. [99] Y. Huang, H. Xue, B. Liu, and Y. Lu, “Unifying multimodal trans-
[77] T. Vojı́r and J. Matas, “Image-consistent detection of road anomalies as former for bi-directional image and text generation,” in Proc. 29th
 unpredictable patches,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2021, pp. 1138–1147, doi: 10.1145/
 Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 5480–5489. 3474085.3481540.
[78] B. Barz, E. Rodner, Y. G. Garcia, and J. Denzler, “Detecting regions [100] I. Kapelyukh, V. Vosylius, and E. Johns, “DALL-E-bot: Introducing
 of maximal divergence for spatio-temporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Web-scale diffusion models to robotics,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1088–1101, May vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 3956–3963, Jul. 2023.
 2019. [101] L. Zhang and M. Agrawala, “Adding conditional control to text-to-
[79] R. Yoshihashi, W. Shao, R. Kawakami, S. You, M. Iida, and T. Nae- image diffusion models,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 mura, “Classification-reconstruction learning for open-set recognition,” Oct. 2023, pp. 3836–3847.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. [102] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-
 2019, pp. 4011–4020. resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proc.
[80] Z. Song et al., “Synthetic datasets for autonomous driving: A survey,” IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1847–1864, Jan. 2024. pp. 10674–10685.
 [103] J. Johnson et al., “Image retrieval using scene graphs,” in Proc.
[81] X. Bai et al., “Bridging the domain gap between synthetic and real-
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015,
 world data for autonomous driving,” ACM J. Auto. Transp. Syst., vol. 1,
 pp. 3668–3678.
 no. 2, pp. 1–15, Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1145/3633463.
 [104] J. Johnson, A. Gupta, and L. Fei-Fei, “Image generation from scene
[82] Y. Fu, S. Liu, Y. Xia, F. Guo, and K. Zheng, “Cross-scenario maneuver
 graphs,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun.
 decision with adaptive perception for autonomous driving,” in Proc.
 2018, pp. 1219–1228.
 32nd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2023, pp. 535–544,
 [105] G. Mittal, S. Agrawal, A. Agarwal, S. Mehta, and T. Marwah,
 doi: 10.1145/3583780.3614831.
 “Interactive image generation using scene graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[83] A. Bewley et al., “Learning to drive from simulation without real Learn. Represent., Mar. 2019, pp. 1–14.
 world labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2019, [106] O. Ashual and L. Wolf, “Specifying object attributes and relations in
 pp. 4818–4824. interactive scene generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
[84] C. Gao et al., “Synthetic data accelerates the development of gener- Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 4560–4568.
 alizable learning-based algorithms for X-ray image analysis,” Nature [107] Y. Li, T. Ma, Y. Bai, N. Duan, S. Wei, and X. Wang, “PasteGAN: A
 Mach. Intell., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 294–308, 2023. semi-parametric method to generate image from scene graph,” in Proc.
[85] M. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, C. Liu, and S. Khurshid, “DeepRoad: Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–8.
 GAN-based metamorphic testing and input validation framework for [108] J. Gu, H. Zhao, Z. Lin, S. Li, J. Cai, and M. Ling, “Scene graph
 autonomous driving systems,” in Proc. 33rd IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. generation with external knowledge and image reconstruction,” in Proc.
 Automated Softw. Eng. (ASE), Sep. 2018, pp. 132–142, doi: 10.1145/ IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
 3238147.3238187. pp. 1969–1978.
[86] S. Reed, Z. Akata, X. Yan, L. Logeswaran, B. Schiele, and H. Lee, [109] A. Savkin, R. Ellouze, N. Navab, and F. Tombari, “Unsupervised traffic
 “Generative adversarial text to image synthesis,” in Proc. 33rd Int. scene generation with synthetic 3D scene graphs,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
 Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 48, Jun. 2016, pp. 1060–1069. Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Sep. 2021, pp. 1229–1235.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 21

[110] B. Zhao, L. Meng, W. Yin, and L. Sigal, “Image generation from [133] L. A. Gatys, A. S. Ecker, M. Bethge, A. Hertzmann, and E. Shechtlayout,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. man, “Controlling perceptual factors in neural style transfer,” in
 (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 8576–8585. Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
[111] W. Sun and T. Wu, “Image synthesis from reconfigurable layout and pp. 3730–3738.
 style,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, [134] N. Kolkin, J. Salavon, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Style transfer by
 pp. 10530–10539. relaxed optimal transport and self-similarity,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
[112] S. Frolov, A. Sharma, J. Hees, T. Karayil, F. Raue, and A. Dengel, Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 10043–10052.
 “AttrLostGAN: Attribute controlled image synthesis from reconfig- [135] D. Y. Park and K. H. Lee, “Arbitrary style transfer with style-attentional
 urable layout and style,” in Proc. 43rd DAGM German Conf. Pattern networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 Recognit., 2021, pp. 361–375, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-92659-5 23. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 5873–5881.
[113] Y. Li, Y. Cheng, Z. Gan, L. Yu, L. Wang, and J. Liu, “BachGAN: [136] X. Wu, Z. Hu, L. Sheng, and D. Xu, “StyleFormer: Real-time arbitrary
 High-resolution image synthesis from salient object layout,” in Proc. style transfer via parametric style composition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 14598–14607.
 pp. 8362–8371. [137] Y. Zhang, M. Li, R. Li, K. Jia, and L. Zhang, “Exact feature distribution
[114] S. He et al., “Context-aware layout to image generation with enhanced matching for arbitrary style transfer and domain generalization,” in
 object appearance,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 15044–15053. 2022, pp. 8025–8035.
[115] Z. Yang, D. Liu, C. Wang, J. Yang, and D. Tao, “Modeling image [138] S. Liu et al., “AdaAttN: Revisit attention mechanism in arbitrary neural
 composition for complex scene generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. style transfer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7754–7763. 2021, pp. 6629–6638.
[116] B. Wang, T. Wu, M. Zhu, and P. Du, “Interactive image synthesis with [139] J. An, S. Huang, Y. Song, D. Dou, W. Liu, and J. Luo, “ArtFlow:
 panoptic layout generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Unbiased image style transfer via reversible neural flows,” in Proc.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7773–7782. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
[117] G. Zheng, X. Zhou, X. Li, Z. Qi, Y. Shan, and X. Li, “LayoutDiffusion: pp. 862–871.
 Controllable diffusion model for layout-to-image generation,” in Proc. [140] Y. Zhang et al., “Domain enhanced arbitrary image style transfer
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, via contrastive learning,” in Proc. Special Interest Group Comput.
 pp. 22490–22499. Graph. Interact. Techn. Conf., Aug. 2022, pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1145/
[118] T. Park, M.-Y. Liu, T.-C. Wang, and J.-Y. Zhu, “Semantic image syn- 3528233.3530736.
 thesis with spatially-adaptive normalization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [141] J. Park and Y. Kim, “Styleformer: Transformer based generative adver-
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2332–2341. sarial networks with style vector,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
[119] P. Zhu, R. Abdal, Y. Qin, and P. Wonka, “SEAN: Image synthesis with Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 8973–8982.
 semantic region-adaptive normalization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [142] Y. Deng et al., “StyTr2: Image style transfer with transformers,” in
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), CA. Los Alamitos, CA, USA: Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 IEEE Computer Society, Jun. 2020, pp. 5103–5112. 2022, pp. 11316–11326.
[120] D. Bau et al., “Semantic photo manipulation with a generative image
 [143] Y. Zhang et al., “Inversion-based style transfer with diffusion models,”
 prior,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1–11, Jul. 2019, doi:
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 10.1145/3306346.3323023.
 2023, pp. 10146–10156.
[121] T.-C. Wang, M.-Y. Liu, J.-Y. Zhu, A. Tao, J. Kautz, and B. Catanzaro,
 [144] G. Chou, Y. E. Sahin, L. Yang, K. J. Rutledge, P. Nilsson, and
 “High-resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with
 N. Ozay, “Using control synthesis to generate corner cases: A case
 conditional GANs,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 study on autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 8798–8807.
 Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 2906–2917, Nov. 2018.
[122] Y. Zeng et al., “SceneComposer: Any-level semantic image synthesis,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. [145] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun,
 2023, pp. 22468–22478. “CARLA: An open urban driving simulator,” in Proc. 1st Annu. Conf.
 Robot Learn., 2017, pp. 1–16.
[123] S. Hong, M. Kim, and M. G. Kang, “Single image dehazing via
 atmospheric scattering model-based image fusion,” Signal Process., [146] Q. Li, Z. Peng, L. Feng, Q. Zhang, Z. Xue, and B. Zhou, “MetaDrive:
 vol. 178, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 107798. Composing diverse driving scenarios for generalizable reinforcement
[124] C. Dai, M. Lin, X. Wu, and D. Zhang, “Single hazy image restoration learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 3,
 using robust atmospheric scattering model,” Signal Process., vol. 166, pp. 3461–3475, Mar. 2023.
 Jan. 2020, Art. no. 107257. [147] S. Shah, D. Dey, C. Lovett, and A. Kapoor, “AirSim: High-fidelity
[125] M. Tremblay, S. S. Halder, R. de Charette, and J.-F. Lalonde, “Rain visual and physical simulation for autonomous vehicles,” in Proc. 11th
 rendering for evaluating and improving robustness to bad weather,” Int. Int. Conf. Field Service Robot., 2018, pp. 621–635.
 J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 2, pp. 341–360, Feb. 2021. [148] P. A. Lopez et al., “Microscopic traffic simulation using SUMO,”
[126] M. Hahner et al., “LiDAR snowfall simulation for robust 3D object in Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Nov. 2018,
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. pp. 2575–2582.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16343–16353. [149] T.-H. Wang, A. Amini, W. Schwarting, I. Gilitschenski, S. Karaman,
[127] H. Yang et al., “Synthesizing realistic snow effects in driving images and D. Rus, “Learning interactive driving policies via data-driven
 using GANs and real data with semantic guidance,” in Proc. IEEE simulation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2022,
 Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–6. pp. 7745–7752.
[128] N. Mann and S. Hughes, “Soliton pulse propagation in the presence of [150] F.-Y. Wang, “Parallel control and management for intelligent transdisorder-induced multiple scattering in photonic crystal waveguides,” portation systems: Concepts, architectures, and applications,” IEEE
 Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 118, no. 25, Jun. 2017, Art. no. 253901. Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 630–638, Sep. 2010.
[129] M. Ju, C. Ding, W. Ren, Y. Yang, D. Zhang, and Y. J. Guo, “IDE: [151] A. Amini et al., “VISTA 2.0: An open, data-driven simulator for
 Image dehazing and exposure using an enhanced atmospheric scat- multimodal sensing and policy learning for autonomous vehicles,” in
 tering model,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 2180–2192, Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2022, pp. 2419–2426.
 2021. [152] Q. Sun, X. Huang, B. C. Williams, and H. Zhao, “InterSim: Interactive
[130] Z. Wang, L. Zhao, and W. Xing, “StyleDiffusion: Controllable disen- traffic simulation via explicit relation modeling,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
 tangled style transfer via diffusion models,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2022, pp. 11416–11423.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 7643–7655. [153] Z. Zhang, A. Liniger, D. Dai, F. Yu, and L. Van Gool, “TrafficBots:
[131] C.-T. Lin, S.-W. Huang, Y.-Y. Wu, and S.-H. Lai, “GAN-based Towards world models for autonomous driving simulation and motion
 day-to-night image style transfer for nighttime vehicle detection,” prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2023,
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 951–963, pp. 1522–1529.
 Feb. 2021. [154] D. Gopinath et al., “HMIway-env: A framework for simulating behav-
[132] B. Wang, W. Wang, H. Yang, and J. Sun, “Efficient example-based iors and preferences to support human-AI teaming in driving,” in Proc.
 painting and synthesis of 2D directional texture,” IEEE Trans. Vis. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW),
 Comput. Graphics, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 266–277, May 2004. Jun. 2022, pp. 4341–4349.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

22 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[155] H. Sun, S. Feng, X. Yan, and H. X. Liu, “Corner case generation and [178] J. Mao et al., “One million scenes for autonomous driving: Once
 analysis for safety assessment of autonomous vehicles,” Transp. Res. dataset,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 1, 2021,
 Rec., J. Transp. Res. Board, vol. 2675, no. 11, pp. 587–600, Nov. 2021. pp. 1–12.
[156] A. Kishore, T. E. Choe, J. Kwon, M. Park, P. Hao, and A. Mit- [179] R. Chan et al., “SegmentMeIfYouCan: A benchmark for anomaly
 tel, “Synthetic data generation using imitation training,” in Proc. segmentation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 1, 2021,
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshops (ICCVW), Oct. 2021, pp. 1–8.
 pp. 3071–3079. [180] P. Pinggera, S. Ramos, S. Gehrig, U. Franke, C. Rother, and R. Mester,
[157] Z. Cao, K. Jiang, W. Zhou, S. Xu, H. Peng, and D. Yang, “Continuous “Lost and found: Detecting small road hazards for self-driving
 improvement of self-driving cars using dynamic confidence-aware rein- vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS),
 forcement learning,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 145–158, Oct. 2016, pp. 1099–1106.
 Feb. 2023. [181] H. Blum, P.-E. Sarlin, J. Nieto, R. Siegwart, and C. Cadena,
[158] H. Niu, J. Hu, Z. Cui, and Y. Zhang, “DR2L: Surfacing corner cases to “The fishyscapes benchmark: Measuring blind spots in semantic
 robustify autonomous driving via domain randomization reinforcement segmentation,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 11, pp. 3119–3135,
 learning,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Appl. Eng., Oct. 2021, Nov. 2021.
 pp. 1–8. [182] J. Fang, D. Yan, J. Qiao, J. Xue, and H. Yu, “DADA: Driver attention
[159] L. Ma et al., “DeepGauge: Multi-granularity testing criteria for deep prediction in driving accident scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
 learning systems,” in Proc. 33rd IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Syst., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 4959–4971, Jun. 2022.
 Eng. (ASE), Sep. 2018, pp. 120–131. [183] A. Kerim, F. C. Chamone, W. L. S. Ramos, L. S. Marcolino,
[160] L. Ma et al., “DeepCT: Tomographic combinatorial testing for deep E. R. Nascimento, and R. Jiang, “Semantic segmentation under
 learning systems,” in Proc. IEEE 26th Int. Conf. Softw. Anal., Evol. adverse conditions: A weather and nighttime-aware synthetic data-
 Reengineering (SANER), Feb. 2019, pp. 614–618. based approach,” in Proc. 33rd Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–12.
[161] H. Caesar et al., “NuScenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous [184] T. Stauner et al., “SynPeDS: A synthetic dataset for pedestrian detection
 driving,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. in urban traffic scenes,” in Proc. 6th ACM Comput. Sci. Cars Symp.,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 11618–11628. 2022, pp. 1–7.
[162] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets robotics: [185] G. Li, Z. Ji, X. Qu, R. Zhou, and D. Cao, “Cross-domain object
 The KITTI dataset,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1231–1237, detection for autonomous driving: A stepwise domain adaptative YOLO
 Sep. 2013. approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 603–615,
[163] P. Sun et al., “Scalability in perception for autonomous driving: Waymo Sep. 2022.
 open dataset,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. [186] X. Hu, S. Li, T. Huang, B. Tang, R. Huai, and L. Chen, “How
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 2443–2451. simulation helps autonomous driving: A survey of sim2real, digital
[164] J. Geyer et al., “A2D2: Audi autonomous driving dataset,” 2020, twins, and parallel intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 9,
 arXiv:2004.06320. no. 1, pp. 1–20, Jan. 2024.
 [187] L. Gong et al., “SDAC: A multimodal synthetic dataset for anomaly
[165] F. Yu et al., “BDD100K: A diverse driving dataset for heterogeneous
 and corner case detection in autonomous driving,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 multitask learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Artif. Intell., 2024, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1914–1922.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 2636–2645.
 [188] P. Ball, “Crowd-sourcing: Strength in numbers,” Nature, vol. 506,
[166] G. J. Brostow, J. Shotton, J. Fauqueur, and R. Cipolla, “Segmentation
 no. 7489, pp. 422–423, Feb. 2014.
 and recognition using structure from motion point clouds,” in Proc.
 [189] Y. Liu, Z. Yu, B. Guo, Q. Han, J. Su, and J. Liao, “CrowdOS:
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2008, pp. 44–57.
 A ubiquitous operating system for crowdsourcing and mobile crowd
[167] D. Arya, H. Maeda, S. K. Ghosh, D. Toshniwal, and Y. Sekimoto, sensing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 878–894,
 “RDD2020: An annotated image dataset for automatic road damage Mar. 2022.
 detection using deep learning,” Data Brief, vol. 36, Jun. 2021, Art. no.
 [190] V. Patil, W. Van Gansbeke, D. Dai, and L. Van Gool, “Don’t forget the
 107133.
 past: Recurrent depth estimation from monocular video,” IEEE Robot.
[168] S. Malla, C. Choi, I. Dwivedi, J. Hee Choi, and J. Li, “DRAMA: Joint Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 6813–6820, Oct. 2020.
 risk localization and captioning in driving,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter [191] K. Wang et al., “Regularizing nighttime weirdness: Efficient self-
 Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 1043–1052. supervised monocular depth estimation in the dark,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
[169] G. Neuhold, T. Ollmann, S. R. Bulo, and P. Kontschieder, “The Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 16035–16044.
 mapillary vistas dataset for semantic understanding of street scenes,” in [192] F. Bao et al., “Heat-assisted detection and ranging,” Nature, vol. 619,
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 5000–5009. no. 7971, pp. 743–748, Jul. 2023.
[170] G. Ros, L. Sellart, J. Materzynska, D. Vazquez, and A. M. Lopez, [193] A. Seppänen, R. Ojala, and K. Tammi, “4DenoiseNet: Adverse weather
 “The SYNTHIA dataset: A large collection of synthetic images for denoising from adjacent point clouds,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
 semantic segmentation of urban scenes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 456–463, Jan. 2023.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 3234–3243. [194] R. Heinzler, F. Piewak, P. Schindler, and W. Stork, “CNN-based LiDAR
[171] S. R. Richter, Z. Hayder, and V. Koltun, “Playing for benchmarks,” in point cloud de-noising in adverse weather,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 2232–2241. vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 2514–2521, Apr. 2020.
[172] X. Weng, Y. Man, D. Cheng, J. Park, M. O’Toole, and K. Kitani, [195] X. Cheng, P. Wang, G. Chenye, and R. Yang, “CSPN++: Learning
 “All-in-one drive: A large-scale comprehensive perception context and resource aware convolutional spatial propagation networks
 dataset with high-density long-range point clouds,” 2020, for depth completion,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, Apr.
 doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.21621.81122. [Online]. Available: https:// 2020, pp. 10615–10622.
 openreview.net/forum?id=yl9aThYT9W [196] Y. Lin, T. Cheng, Q. Zhong, W. Zhou, and H. Yang, “Dynamic spatial
[173] S. R. Richter, V. Vineet, S. Roth, and V. Koltun, “Playing for data: propagation network for depth completion,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Ground truth from computer games,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Intell. (AAAI), 2022, pp. 1638–1646.
 2016, pp. 102–118. [197] J. Li, J. Chen, J. Liu, and H. Ma, “Learning a graph neural network
[174] T. Sun et al., “SHIFT: A synthetic driving dataset for continuous multi- with cross modality interaction for image fusion,” in Proc. 31st ACM
 task domain adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2023, pp. 4471–4479.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 21371–21382. [198] J. Nie, H. Sun, X. Sun, L. Ni, and L. Gao, “Cross-modal feature fusion
[175] G. Franchi et al., “MUAD: Multiple uncertainties for autonomous and interaction strategy for CNN-transformer-based object detection in
 driving, a benchmark for multiple uncertainty types and tasks,” in Proc. visual and infrared remote sensing imagery,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
 33rd Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–11. Sens. Lett., vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[176] W. Lu, Y. Zhou, G. Wan, S. Hou, and S. Song, “L3-Net: Towards [199] Z. Xie et al., “Cross-modality double bidirectional interaction and
 learning based LiDAR localization for autonomous driving,” in fusion network for RGB-T salient object detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2019, Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 4149–4163, Aug.
 pp. 6389–6398. 2023.
[177] M. Cordts et al., “The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene [200] Y. Tian et al., “ACF-Net: Asymmetric cascade fusion for 3D detection
 understanding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. with LiDAR point clouds and images,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles,
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 3213–3223. vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 3360–3371, Feb. 2024.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LIANG et al.: CORNER CASE DETECTION AND GENERATION FOR AUTONOMOUS DRIVING: AN OVERVIEW 23

[201] A. Prakash, K. Chitta, and A. Geiger, “Multi-modal fusion transformer [223] F. Mohseni, E. Frisk, and L. Nielsen, “Distributed cooperative MPC for
 for end-to-end autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. autonomous driving in different traffic scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 7073–7083. Vehicles, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 299–309, Jun. 2021.
[202] Y. Liang et al., “Learning cross-modality interaction for robust depth [224] P. Hang, C. Lv, C. Huang, Y. Xing, and Z. Hu, “Cooperative decision
 perception of autonomous driving,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., making of connected automated vehicles at multi-lane merging zone: A
 vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1–26, Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1145/3650039. coalitional game approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
[203] Y. Man, L.-Y. Gui, and Y.-X. Wang, “BEV-guided multi-modality no. 4, pp. 3829–3841, Apr. 2022.
 fusion for driving perception,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. [225] H. Bilal et al., “Hybrid TrafficAI: A generative AI framework for
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 21960–21969. real-time traffic simulation and adaptive behavior modeling,” IEEE
[204] Z. Liu et al., “BEVFusion: Multi-task multi-sensor fusion with unified Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., early access, Jun. 2, 2025, doi: 10.1109/
 bird’s-eye view representation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. TITS.2025.3571041.
 (ICRA), May 2023, pp. 2774–2781. [226] S. Lee, J. Yoon, H. Kim, J. Kim, and B. Kim, “Ego vehicle speed
[205] A. W. Harley, Z. Fang, J. Li, R. Ambrus, and K. Fragkiadaki, estimation with automotive corner radar under velocity ambiguity using
 “Simple-BEV: What really matters for multi-sensor BEV perception?” optimized MobileNetV3,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 117404–117419,
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2023, 2025.
 pp. 2759–2765. [227] R. Ding, J. Yang, L. Jiang, and X. Qi, “DODA: Data-oriented sim-to-
[206] Z. Li et al., “Bevformer: Learning bird’s-eye-view representation from real domain adaptation for 3D semantic segmentation,” in Proc. 17th
 multi-camera images via spatiotemporal transformers,” in Proc. 17th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Oct. 2022, pp. 284–303.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022, pp. 1–18. [228] E. Alberti, A. Tavera, C. Masone, and B. Caputo, “IDDA: A large-scale
[207] Z. Xue, M. Guo, H. Fan, S. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “CorrBEV: Multi- multi-domain dataset for autonomous driving,” IEEE Robot. Autom.
 view 3D object detection by correlation learning with multi-modal Lett., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 5526–5533, Oct. 2020.
 prototypes,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. [229] X. Yang et al., “DriveArena: A closed-loop generative simulation
 (CVPR), Jun. 2025, pp. 27413–27423. platform for autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
[208] P. Hu et al., “T-READi: Transformer-powered robust and efficient Comput. Vis., Sep. 2025, pp. 26933–26943.
 multimodal inference for autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Mobile [230] O. Gafni, A. Polyak, O. Ashual, S. Sheynin, D. Parikh, and Y. Taigman,
 Comput., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 135–149, Jan. 2025. “Make-a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human
[209] Y. Liu, D. Liao, M. Qi, L. Liu, and H. Ma, “RoboFormer: A priors,” in Proc. 17th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 89–106.
 robust multi-modal transformer for 3D object detection in autonomous [231] Y. Li et al., “GLIGEN: Open-set grounded text-to-image generation,”
 driving,” in Proc. 6th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia Asia, Dec. 2024, in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jan.
 pp. 1–7. 2023, pp. 22511–22521.
[210] X. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Li, and J. Yang, “Pedestrian crossing intention [232] L. Zhou, M. Jiang, and D. Wang, “HumanSim: Human-like multi-agent
 prediction based on cross-modal transformer and uncertainty-aware novel driving simulation for corner case generation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 multi-task learning for autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 287–304.
 Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 12538–12549, Sep. 2024. [233] K. Arndt, M. Hazara, A. Ghadirzadeh, and V. Kyrki, “Meta reinforce-
[211] R. Chen, W. Shao, B. Zhang, S. Shi, L. Jiang, and P. Luo, “JiSAM: ment learning for sim-to-real domain adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 Alleviate labeling burden and corner case problems in autonomous Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2020, pp. 2725–2731.
 driving via minimal real-world data,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Com- [234] J. Xu et al., “Regressing simulation to real: Unsupervised domain
 put. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025, pp. 6792–6801. adaptation for automated quality assessment in transoesophageal
[212] G. Bernardino et al., “Reinforcement learning for active modality echocardiography,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-
 selection during diagnosis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Assist. Intervent., 2023, pp. 154–164.
 Comput.-Assist. Intervent., 2022, pp. 592–601. [235] J. Roh, C. Paxton, A. Pronobis, A. Farhadi, and D. Fox, “Conditional
[213] M. Yang, Y. Chen, and H.-S. Kim, “Efficient deep visual and inertial driving from natural language instructions,” in Proc. Conf. Robot
 odometry with adaptive visual modality selection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Learn., vol. 100, Nov. 2020, pp. 540–551.
 Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022, pp. 233–250. [236] C. Cui, Y. Ma, X. Cao, W. Ye, and Z. Wang, “Drive as you
[214] B. Xu et al., “Different data, different modalities! Reinforced data speak: Enabling human-like interaction with large language models in
 splitting for effective multimodal information extraction from social autonomous vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput.
 media posts,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Comput. Linguistics, Oct. 2022, Vis. Workshops (WACVW), Jan. 2024, pp. 902–909.
 pp. 1855–1864. [237] Y. Yang, Q. Zhang, C. Li, D. S. Marta, N. Batool, and J. Folkesson,
[215] S. He, K. Shi, C. Liu, B. Guo, J. Chen, and Z. Shi, “Collaborative sens- “Human-centric autonomous systems with LLMs for user command
 ing in Internet of Things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. reasoning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
 Surveys Tuts., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1435–1474, Jul. 2022. Workshops (WACVW), Jan. 2024, pp. 988–994.
[216] Y. Liang, X. Wang, Z. Yu, B. Guo, X. Zheng, and S. Samtani, [238] Y. Cui et al., “DriveLLM: Charting the path toward full autonomous
 “Energy-efficient collaborative sensing: Learning the latent correlations driving with large language models,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles,
 of heterogeneous sensors,” ACM Trans. Sensor Netw., vol. 17, no. 3, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1450–1464, Jan. 2024.
 pp. 1–28, Jun. 2021. [239] E. Aasi, P. Nguyen, S. Sreeram, G. Rosman, S. Karaman, and
[217] S. Ansari, F. Naghdy, and H. Du, “Human-machine shared driving: D. Rus, “Generating out-of-distribution scenarios using language
 Challenges and future directions,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 7, models,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2025,
 no. 3, pp. 499–519, Sep. 2022. pp. 10616–10623.
[218] G. Kaljavesi, X. Su, and F. Diermeyer, “Integrating end-to-end and [240] L. Wen et al., “DiLu: A knowledge-driven approach to autonomous
 modular driving approaches for online corner case detection in driving with large language models,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn.
 autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern. Represent., 2024, pp. 1–12.
 (SMC), Oct. 2024, pp. 1017–1023. [241] D. Fu et al., “Drive like a human: Rethinking autonomous driving with
[219] Z. Yang et al., “A vision chip with complementary pathways for large language models,” 2023, arXiv:2307.07162.
 open-world sensing,” Nature, vol. 629, no. 8014, pp. 1027–1033, [242] Y. Deng et al., “TARGET: Traffic rule-based test generation for
 May 2024. autonomous driving systems,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 51, no. 7,
[220] C. Schicktanz and K. Gimm, “Detection and analysis of corner case pp. 1950–1968, Jul. 2025.
 scenarios at a signalized urban intersection,” Accident Anal. Prevention, [243] D. Pei et al., “Methodology and benchmark for automated driving
 vol. 210, Feb. 2025, Art. no. 107838. theory test of large language models,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
[221] B. Fan, Z. Su, Y. Chen, Y. Wu, C. Xu, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Ubiquitous vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 17013–17026, Oct. 2025.
 control over heterogeneous vehicles: A digital twin empowered edge [244] C. Cui et al., “A survey on multimodal large language models for
 AI approach,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 166–173, autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput.
 Feb. 2023. Vis. (WACV) Workshops, Jan. 2024, pp. 958–979.
[222] T. Zheng, A. Li, Z. Chen, H. Wang, and J. Luo, “AutoFed: [245] Z. Yang, X. Jia, H. Li, and J. Yan, “LLM4Drive: A survey of large
 Heterogeneity-aware federated multimodal learning for robust language models for autonomous driving,” 2023, arXiv:2311.01043.
 autonomous driving,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. [246] W. Wang et al., “VisionLLM: Large language model is also an open-
 Netw., 2023, pp. 1–11. ended decoder for vision-centric tasks,” 2023, arXiv:2305.11175.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

24 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[247] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee, “Visual instruction tuning,” in Lei Tang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2023, pp. 34892–34916. in computer science and technology from North-
[248] K. Chen et al., “Automated evaluation of large vision-language models western Polytechnical University in 2012. From
 on self-driving corner cases,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. 2009 to 2010, she was a Visiting Researcher with
 Comput. Vis. (WACV), Feb. 2025, pp. 7817–7826. the Chair of Information Systems, Mannheim Uni-
[249] T. Liu, Y. Qin, S. Zhang, and X. Tao, “Empowering corner case versity, Germany. She is currently working with
 detection in autonomous vehicles with multimodal large language the School of Information Engineering, Chang’an
 models,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 51–55, 2025. University, China. Her research interests include
[250] M. Mo et al., “NexusAD: Exploring the Nexus for multimodal per- the area of intelligent transportation systems and
 ception and comprehension of corner cases in autonomous driving,” in network representation. She is a member of ACM,
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 1–17. China Computer Federation (CCF), and Pervasive
 Computing Technical Committee. She received the Distinguished Young
 Scholars Award from the Universities of Shaanxi.

 Yunji Liang received the Ph.D. degree in computer
 science from Northwestern Polytechnical University,
 Xi’an, China, in 2016. From 2012 to 2017, he was
 with The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA,
 as a Visiting Scholar and a Post-Doctoral Researcher,
 respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor with Northwestern Polytechnical University. His Luwen Huangfu received the B.S. degree in
 research interests include pervasive computing, the software engineering from Chongqing University,
 Internet of Things, and mobile computing. Chongqing, China, the M.S. degree in computer
 science from Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
 China, and the Ph.D. degree in management information systems from The University of Arizona,
 Tucson, AZ, USA. She is currently an Assistant
 Professor with the Fowler College of Business, San
 Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA, where
 Junteng Liu is currently pursuing the master’s she is also with the Center for Human Dynamics
 degree with Northwestern Polytechnical Univer- in the Mobile Age. Her research interests include
 sity, Xi’an, China. His research interests include business analytics, text mining, data mining, software management, computer
 autonomous driving and the Internet of Things. vision, artificial intelligence, and healthcare management.

 Sagar Samtani (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from The University of Arizona. He is cur-
 Xiaokai Yan is currently pursuing the master’s rently an Assistant Professor in information systems
 degree with Northwestern Polytechnical University, and a Weimer Faculty Fellow with the Kelley School
 Xi’an, China. His research interests include perva- of Business. He is also the Executive Founding
 sive computing, social computing, and data mining. Director of the Kelley’s Data Science and Artificial
 Intelligence Laboratory. He has published over 85
 papers on topics related to cyber threat intelligence,
 cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, health informatics, and business intelligence.

 Xiaolong Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 degree from China Jiliang University in 2003, the
 M.S. degree from Beijing Jiaotong University in Zhiwen Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 2006, and the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Ph.D. degree from Northwestern Polytechnical Uni-
 Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2009. versity, Xi’an, China, in 2005. He is currently a Pro-
 He is currently a Professor with the Institute of fessor with Northwestern Polytechnical University.
 Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He His current research interests include the Internet
 has published more than 120 peer-to-peer academic of Things, pervasive computing, human–machine
 papers in journals/magazines and conferences. His systems, mobile computing, and crowd sensing. He
 research interests include social computing, big data is also an Associate Editor or an Editorial Board
 analytics, knowledge graphs, financial technologies, Member of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON H UMAN -
and complex system intelligence. He has served as the program co-chair for M ACHINE S YSTEMS, IEEE Communications Magsix international conferences and a technical program committee member for azine, and Personal and Ubiquitous Computing
more than 40 international conferences. (ACM/Springer).