IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 3433

 Cyber Resilience in Solar-Rich Networked
 Microgrids: A Real Time End-to-End
 DER Outage Management Framework
 Jannatul Adan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Md Fazley Rafy , Member, IEEE,
 and Anurag K. Srivastava , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—The increasing integration of distributed energy re- microgrids as vital for enhancing reliability, efficiency, and
sources (DERs), especially solar PV with distribution automa- emissions reduction, targeting 98% outage reduction and 20%
tion and inherent cyber-vulnerabilities, introduces new challenges efficiency gains over conventional systems [3]. Meanwhile,
in outage detection, diagnosis, and recovery due to integrated
cyber-physical dependency. Traditional outage management sys- utility-scale microgrids are projected to exceed USD 50 billion
tems (OMS) focus primarily on load-side faults and overlook [4].
DER-specific outages, particularly those caused by cyber-induced At the same time, utility-scale solar PV has become the
anomalies in the data or control planes. This work proposes a leading source for new capacity additions in the U.S., adding
cyber-resilient DER Outage Management System (DEROMS) tai- 20.2 GW in 2022 alone, surpassing investments in other DERs
lored for solar-rich, networked microgrids, considering the increasing integration of solar generation within distribution systems such as wind and battery storage [5]. Falling costs and supportive
among DERs. The developed framework includes a TraceAlign- policies are pushing distributed and grid-scale solar deeper into
DPI module for real-time data integrity checking and hidden outage the distribution system [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. A critical enabler
detection, a TraceAlign-RCA engine for multi-source root cause of these trends is the proliferation of smart inverters embedded
inference, and scenario-specific restoration optimization leverag- in solar PV and battery storage systems. They allow DERs to
ing networked microgrid flexibility. A testbed built in Real-Time
Digital Simulator (RTDS) validates the developed framework for deliver voltage regulation, frequency support, and ride-through
physical faults and cyberattack scenarios. Results show improved capabilities, turning them into active grid assets. These features
accuracy in outage classification and enhanced system resilience enable Non-Wires Alternatives (NWA), helping defer costly
through adaptive restoration under uncertainty. grid upgrades while improving flexibility [11], [12], [13], [14],
 Index Terms—Cyber resilience, networked microgrids, outage [15], [16]. Moreover, these renewable resources can provide
management, real-time testbed, synchrophasor data. critical self healing capabilities through potential formation of
 networked microgrids (NMG) and coordinated energy management [17].
 I. INTRODUCTION As DER penetration grows, ensuring their secure and resilient
A. Background and Motivation operation becomes critical for grid stability, which has led to
 significant improvements in visibility and observability, driven
 HE distribution system is rapidly evolving with the rise
T of microgrids and renewable-based DERs. Once niche,
microgrids are now a key resilience strategy for utilities like
 by widespread sensor deployment and advances in communication protocols [18], [19], [20]. Real-time data streams from
 smart inverters, PMUs, advanced meters, and grid-edge moni-
PG&E, SDG&E, and ComEd, offering islanding and local con- toring devices now enable utilities to better monitor and control
trol capabilities [1]. The solar PV microgrid market alone is DER operations [21]. However, the very features that enhance
expected to top USD 25 billion by 2034, driven by electrification DER operation - namely, remote monitoring and remote conand decarbonization goals [2]. The U.S. DOE has recognized trollability simultaneously expand the cyber failures, including
 expansion of the cyberattack surface, exposing DER assets to
 Received 2 July 2025; revised 2 October 2025; accepted 7 October 2025. Date a range of potential cyber-physical manipulations and failures
of publication 24 October 2025; date of current version 10 February 2026. Paper [22], [23]. Traditionally, Outage Management Systems (OMS)
2025-CRNM-0717.R1, approved for publication in the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS by the Cybersecurity and resilience of networked under Advanced Distribution Management Systems (ADMS)
microgrids of the IEEE Industry Applications Society. This work was supported were designed primarily to address load outages, as distribution
in part by the US Department of Energy and in part by Appalachian Regional systems historically operated as passive networks where load
Commission (ARC) ARISE Grants. (Corresponding author: Jannatul Adan.)
 The authors are with the Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical was the critical component. Yet, with the increasing integra-
Engineering, West Virginia University (WVU), Morgantown, WV 26506 USA tion of DERs, particularly utility-scale DERs, these resources
(e-mail: ja00060@mix.wvu.edu; anurag.srivastava@mail.wvu.edu). have become equally critical. Unmonitored or unplanned DER
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIA.2025.3625887. outages can now trigger cascading failures, resulting in se-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIA.2025.3625887 vere operational disruptions and significant economic losses

 0093-9994 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3434 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

[24]. The DER Outage Management System (DEROMS) can as a whole. To overcome this, we need an integrated detection
therefore be integrated within a Microgrid Management System framework that combines broad network analysis with granular,
(MGMS), which usually has full observability of internal DERs, device-level sensor measurements.
or DER management system (DERMS) or ADMS. Reports and For outage root cause analysis, solar-rich systems present
industry analyses consistently stress that while DERMS, MGMS unique challenges because these resources are both generation
or ADMS are maturing, DEROMS must also evolve to address assets and cyber-physical systems. Most existing work on solar
these emerging cyber-physical risks [24], [25]. DER outage root cause inference focuses on PV fault detection
 In existing literature, few works related to DER outages have and classification [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37]. Authors
primarily focused on detecting and managing outages originat- in [38] review islanding detection techniques, whereas [39]
ing from physical faults. There is a pressing need to transition proposes a sensor failure detection mechanism. These studies,
toward cyber-informed DEROMS capable of real-time moni- although valuable for identifying PV system and inverter faults,
toring, outage detection, and outage classification that spans only comprise a subset of outage types and often exclude the
both physical and cyber domains. Such a system must not only systematic diagnosis of cyber-physical vulnerabilities under
identify and diagnose the root cause of an outage to be oper- complex protection schemes [40], [41], [42]. Authors found two
ational or cyber-induced, but also tailor appropriate, scenario- works [43], [44] that account for cyber-induced scenarios behind
specific response strategies specially utilizing the potential of outage, but implement the strategy primarily on load outages.
networked microgrids. Motivated by this gap, the current work Though the work in [45] advances large scale cyber network
proposes a real-time end-to-end outage management framework simulation and detects critical cyber nodes, it has limited apdesigned to leverage multi-domain DER data streams, detect plicability towards cyber-aware restoration strategies or DER
and diagnose both physical and cyber induced outage scenarios, outage from a power system perspective.
identify the root cause of disruptions, and enable adaptive, Again, in evolving outage mitigation strategies, networked
cyber-resilient response measures incorporating flexibilities of microgrids are becoming popular due to their resilient service
networked microgrids suited for real-time or near real-time restoration post-disturbance [46], [47]. These works optimize
application. load recovery and network reconfiguration but largely ignore
 cyber-physical threats. For instance, they assume reliable DER
 operation and neglect compromised assets or data integrity loss
B. Literature Review and Research Gap during the restoration planning process.
 While traditional outage detection methods rely heavily on To summarize, there is a lack of holistic, system-wide perspectrustworthy measurements and sensor data, it is critical to first tive that integrates different operational layers and a complete
address data plane inconsistencies. Several existing approaches end-to-end DER outage management framework. Most data
effectively implemented real-time integrity checks by identify- falsification detection techniques are not tailored for DER outage
ing deviations from expected “normal” behavior during system scenarios. Few works offer integrated cyber-aware outage RCA,
operation based on PMU measurements, fault alarms, SCADA, and almost none integrate this insight into restoration decisionand/or breaker status [26], [27]. However, a common vulnerabil- making in the presence of DERs, creating a dire need for a
ity in these methods is the implicit assumption that the reported comprehensive framework that can enforce true system-wide
as well as historical data used for model training is inherently coherence by aligning data traces from both cyber-physical
uncompromised. These event detection tools may provide false domains. The key gaps are as follows,
positives if the reported data is falsified and there is a lack of a r Lack of a comprehensive related work on possible outage
distinct, preliminary validation stage to trust this baseline data scenarios in emerging cyber-physical systems from DER
before it is used to build or run the detection algorithms, which perspective.
leaves the models susceptible to being trained on corrupted data. r Outage management remains limited primarily focusing
Furthermore, even methods that monitor high-level network on physical faults rather than root-cause resilience across
parameters, such as aggregate power flow patterns, to detect data/ control failure modes.
database anomalies [28] often lack the granularity to address r Lack of system-wide, cross-domain trace alignment, limdevice-specific events. A data-driven cyber physical detection iting the detection of sophisticated masked or unobserved
model uses PMU coherence features and a stack of Deep belief DER outages.
networks to flag corrupted measurements in real time [29], r No end-to-end framework that integrates detection, RCA,
an isolation forest approach applies PCA for dimensionality and restoration under both physical and cyber disruption
reduction, followed by an unsupervised forest model to isolate scenarios for solar-rich DER systems.
anomalous patterns [30], and an OPF-forecast deviation method r Restoration strategies in networked microgrids seldom incontinuously compares live OPF outputs against a statistical corporate cyber-awareness, leading to sub-optimal restoraforecast of expected power flow patterns to detect database tam- tion or risk amplification.
pering [28]. However, none of these works perform a separate,
standalone assessment of its historical “natural” (attack-free)
 C. Contributions
dataset before model training. The sanity check occurs only
as part of the anomaly-detection or forecasting process itself. This work proposes a real-time DER outage management
Furthermore, a key challenge remains unaddressed: the inability framework for solar-rich networked microgrids that is both
to confirm the genuine operational status of individual DERs cyber-aware and restoration-oriented. While many recent works
ADAN et al.: CYBER RESILIENCE IN SOLAR-RICH NETWORKED MICROGRIDS: A REAL TIME END-TO-END DER OUTAGE 3435

apply ML methods to largely target individual functions, our 2) Falsely Reported Outage: A DER remains operational,
proposed DEROMS emphasizes the interaction and hierarchy of but due to data plane failures (such as erroneous measuredetection, RCA, and restoration modules, with ML techniques ments, corrupted packets, or falsified data injection), an
embedded as support tools in a coordinated manner. The contri- artificial loss of power is reported in the monitoring data,
butions are summarized as, incorrectly indicating that a DER outage has occurred.
 1) Analyzed DER outage scenarios considering cyber failure 3) Masked Outage: A DER experiences a physical outage,
 in data and control planes. but the event is not reported or captured in the data
 2) Proposed an end-to-end DER outage management frame- stream due to complete sensor inaccuracies, delayed meawork, identifying vital tools, defining their specific func- surements, or data masking attacks that suppress outage
 tions and proposing precise hierarchy on how these tools signatures.
 will be triggered and coordinated. 4) Unobserved Outage due to Loss of Data / Visibility: The
 3) Proposed TraceAlign-DPI, a DEROMS framework that monitoring system loses all or most communication with
 ensures data plane integrity by aligning cross-domain the DER, resulting in total visibility loss. The DEROMS
 traces while using forecast-aware estimation to compen- cannot ascertain the DER’s current operational status unsate for DER visibility loss. der this condition.
 4) Proposed TraceAlign-RCA, a DEROMS framework to Traditional DERMS and MGMS architectures primarily rely
 align cross-domain pre-outage traces to distinguish fault on observing direct data indicators to declare an outage, which
 induced vs. cyber-induced outages. limits their reliability in non-ideal monitoring conditions. In
 5) Discussed restoration strategies informed with improved contrast, a cyber-resilient DER Outage Management System
 situational awareness on DERs based on previous outage (DEROMS) must be designed to distinguish true physical outdetection and RCA layers. ages from data plane anomalies, detect inconsistencies across
 6) Developed real-time testbed of networked microgrid with multiple data sources, and operate under degraded or adversarial
 power electronics and protection interfaces as well as real- observability conditions.
 time data acquisition and monitoring.
 7) Developed two case studies to demonstrate the workflow
 of the DEROMS on a cyber-compromised vs. normal B. Proposed Cyber-Resilient Outage Detection &
 scenario. Classification Architecture With TraceAlign-DPI
 The proposed end-to-end DEROMS framework is classified The outage detection mechanism in the proposed framework
into three functional layers namely - Outage Detection Layer, incorporates both conventional outage indicators and advanced
Outage Root Cause Analysis Layer and Outage Response and data plane integrity verification to improve resilience against
Recovery Layer. The detailed description of each of these layers cyber-physical inconsistencies. The central module within the
is discussed in the following three sections with the complete detection layer is the proposed TraceAlign-DPI (Cross Doarchitecture in Fig. 1. main Outage Trace Alignment for Data Plane Integrity)
 tool, which operates both as a reactive and proactive data in-
 II. OUTAGE DETECTION LAYER tegrity evaluator across the operational states of the DER. Three
 other tools are incorporated in the framework named Solar
A. Understanding Outage Scenarios Considering Cyber
 Forecasting tool, Forecast-Aware Data Estimation tool, and
Failure in Data Plane
 Cyber Anomaly Detection tool. Hence a brief description of
 In an ideal scenario, reliable and synchronized streaming data the purpose of these tools as well as how they interact with
from DER-end monitoring devices, such as PMUs, SCADA TraceAlign-DPI to enhance the DEROMS framework is added
gateways, smart meters, breaker status, would allow precise in this section.
real-time detection of the DER status. Throughout this work, the 1) Functional Objective of TraceAlign-DPI: TraceAlignterm DER status refers to either connected and supplying power DPI is a lightweight, event-triggered or periodic data plane
or offline/facing outage. However, real-world cyber-physical integrity checking module embedded inside MGMS, designed to
systems are prone to cyber failures that degrade or distort cross-validate DER observability data streams with system level
system observability. These failures, located in the data plane, dynamics to ensure sensor-level data is consistent and coherent
can arise from multiple sources such as sensor malfunctions or with the system before outage RCA or response actions are
calibration drift, communication errors, including dropped or taken. TraceAlign-DPI aims to verify whether the operational
corrupted packets, complete or partial loss of data transmission status reported by a DER (either as connected and supplying
or attack-induced falsification of measurement data streams. In power or as tripped/ offline) is consistent with the dynamic
such conditions, the outage detection layer must account for a behavior of the surrounding system as observed via system-wide
range of possible visibility scenarios that may occur during DER monitoring. The module utilizes the physics of power system
monitoring: balance: any real DER outage will alter the load-generation
 1) Visible True Outage: A physical outage occurs at the DER, equilibrium, thus inducing measurable changes in network-wide
 and the event is correctly reflected in the incoming data variables commonly manifesting through shifts/ anomalies in
 streams. This is the ideal case where outage detection SCADA-measured PQ flows across feeders, loads, and neighoperates as expected. boring DERs or in frequency, ROCOF and voltage profile from
3436 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 1. Proposed architecture of end-to-end deroms framework.
ADAN et al.: CYBER RESILIENCE IN SOLAR-RICH NETWORKED MICROGRIDS: A REAL TIME END-TO-END DER OUTAGE 3437

PMU measurements. Three thresholds are defined in this case: such as IEEE C37.118, DNP3, or Modbus. While their payloads
Tp , primary anomaly threshold - above which a system anomaly/ contain physical system measurements, the surrounding protoshift indicates possible outage and raises a positive outcome col headers embed cyber-relevant metadata such as:
of the tool, Tls , secondary lower threshold - below which r IP/MAC address mismatches compared to expected
system shift is considered too low to have incurred a DER outage r Unexpected function codes or command flags
and Tus , secondary upper threshold - above which means r Missing or altered CRC values
very strong post-outage effect detected. Tus and Tls are needed r Irregular sequence numbers or timestamp fields
when data-DPI contradicts. By aligning the reported DER status r Abnormal response delays or jitter patterns
against system-wide dynamic signatures, TraceAlign-DPI estab- These diagnostics distinguish between: Non-critical anomalishes whether the DER-side data is trustworthy or possible data lies (e.g., jitter, retransmission) which do not question payload
plane corruption exists. trustworthiness, and Critical anomalies which directly question
 2) Operational Deployment of TraceAlign-DPI: the credibility of DER measurements. Malicious events may
TraceAlign-DPI operates in the following modes within leave metadata traces (e.g., abnormal source/ destination IP/
DEROMS: port, sequence number gaps, replayed timestamps, checksum
 a) Invocation Driven by DER Power Loss Detection errors) that the cyber anomaly tool can flag as critical anomalies.
(Reactive Mode 1): Upon detection of a DER power loss via In contrast, communication loss or sensor failures which are
streaming power system (PS) measurements, it is first checked also critical cyber anomalies may have metadata features (e.g.,
whether the power loss is expected due to weather conditions missing sequence counters, link-layer flags, quality indicators
(i.e. low irradiance region) by utilizing a solar forecasting tool. in PMU streams) which indicate degraded data integrity. Per-
The Solar Forecasting tool utilizes site specific or area based haps, considering practical limitations and exclusivity of the
meteorological data to nowcast a range of tentative solar gener- cyber configuration, these anomalies may not always manifest
ation. The tool leverages varying irradiance profiles to account as explicit metadata violations or be clearly distinguishable as
for natural solar intermittency, ensuring that power loss from low critical vs. non-critical. Therefore, our framework uses metairradiance is not misclassified as an outage. Also, to account for data anomalies to provide early suspicion of integrity threats,
second-level variability, a tolerance band around the forecasted but final classification integrates both metadata diagnostics and
value should be considered where measured PV power within system-level Data and DPI findings.
this band is attributed to irradiance changes rather than outages. Thus, upon observing critical cyber-layer inconsistencies, the
If the generation forecast is not in the low generation region DEROMS invokes TraceAlign-DPI to validate the power system
but power loss was reported, TraceAlign-DPI is triggered after measurements themselves. When the payload containing the
a wait time twait to validate the authenticity of the detected PS measurements shows DER power supply, a consistent DER
outage event. An explanation of twait is added at the end of this status indicates coherent system-wide dynamics even though
subsection. The consistency check proceeds as follows: cyber anomaly exists. An inconsistency by TraceAlign-DPI
 r If the reported DER power loss is corroborated by system- would mean that, the system reflects a possible DER outage
 wide shifts consistent with load-generation rebalancing, though the DER end data shows power supply- masking an
 then true DER outage is predicted. outage, further reinforcing the suspicion that the data stream
 r If inconsistency is observed, that is, the DER reports power is corrupted.
 loss while the system shows no expected system wide c) Periodic Invocation (Proactive Mode): Independently
 response - this suggests possible data plane corruption or of event triggers, TraceAlign-DPI is periodically called as a
 falsely reported outage (e.g., falsified zero-power reading, continuous data integrity monitor. In this mode:
 data masking). The proposed framework tries to detect a r The system predicts expected DER output based on realsystem shift with a lowered secondary anomaly threshold time network-wide measurements and compares it with
 as well as evaluating the trustworthiness of the incoming reported DER status.
 packets through a cyber anomaly detection tool to con- r If the DER reports being active, but system-wide data
 firm the actual DER status. If outage is predicted through suggests power imbalance consistent with an outage,
 the combined output of these tools, relay/ inverter log is TraceAlign-DPI flags a masked/hidden DER outage when a
 invoked for the root cause of outage. This adds an additional very strong system wide shift is observed (system anomaly
 confidence on DER outage detection and if data is found score (AS)> Tus , secondary upper threshold). Again,
 to be unreliable and inaccurate, DER side data is replaced checking with cyber traces and invoking relay and inverter
 by forecast aware estimated data for continued analysis. logs can confirm or discard the finding of TraceAlign-DPI.
 b) Invocation Triggered by Cyber-Layer Anomaly De- This mechanism enables detection of silent outages where no
tection (Reactive Mode 2): TraceAlign-DPI is also triggered direct trip signal is reported due to data falsification.
though a cyber anomaly detection tool upon the detection of d) Invocation Under Data Loss Conditions (Visibility Loss
cyber anomalies observed in the metadata or protocol layers of Compensation): As per previous discussion, upon investigation
incoming streaming packets from dPMU and SCADA sources through TraceAlign-DPI, cyber anomaly tool and further reeven if the PS data shows no power loss from the DER end. These lay/inverter log, when DEROMS confirms that data does not repackets traverse multiple network layers including Ethernet, IP, flect the system (i.e. data is falsified or lost), it flags the scenarios
transport protocols (TCP/UDP), and application-layer protocols as data visibility loss. In these cases, DEROMS substitutes the
3438 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

missing data with forecast-based synthetic estimation through duration of momentary cessation before initiating a trip depends
Forecast-aware data estimation tool. This tool assumes the on the DER category:
DER continues to operate at its last-known status on forecasted r Category I and II DERs: Up to 0.5 seconds
capacity. Before the visibility returns, estimation followed by r Category III DERs: Up to 12 seconds
TraceAlign-DPI is periodically invoked to keep verifying: Momentary cessations are not actual outages and typically
 r Whether the system-wide measurements remain consistent resolve autonomously. Thus, twait serves as a buffer to avoid
 with the synthetic estimate. premature RCA or restoration actions in response to temporary
 r Whether an abrupt deviation suggests the DER has actu- ride-through behavior. Also, during genuine DER outages, twait
 ally tripped while remaining unobservable to predict an allows the microgrid to settle into a new steady-state operating
 unobserved outage. point. Premature invocation of TraceAlign-DPI may capture
 Through these multiple operational pathways, TraceAlign- transient effects such as frequency deviations or PQ flow spikes,
DPI addresses all major categories of data plane failures in case which can distort its inference regarding the true DER status.
of DER outages which is illustrated in detail in Table I. Addition- To balance responsiveness and accuracy, this work proposes the
ally, if relay and inverter log confirms validity of reported data following values:
from DER end after an inconsistency was flagged by TraceAlign- r twait = 5 seconds for Category I and II DERs
DPI, then it indicates false predictions of TraceAlign-DPI. This r twait = 15 seconds for Category III DERs
observed label is then given as a feedback to the learning module These values are chosen to exceed the maximum permissible
of TraceAlign-DPI to improve its accuracy. While the cyber momentary cessation windows while providing sufficient time
anomaly tool is responsible for distinguishing attack-induced vs. for post-outage transients to settle, ensuring that TraceAlign-DPI
benign data loss, TraceAlign-DPI and RCA ensure system-level operates on stable system data.
consistency checks and diagnosis by looking into available PS 5) Discussion on Scalability and Adaptability: With an inmeasurements. Rather than considering the flags by TraceAlign- creasing number of solar DERs, the computational burden of
DPI as final anomaly, cyber diagnosis and selective invocation of DEROMS may rise. However, the framework is designed as
relay and inverter logs confirm the DER status. This layered ap- part of the MGMS, which only monitors the DERs under its
proach allows DEROMS to maintain observability and resilience own territory, primarily focusing on utility-scale solar DERs,
even when data is missing or manipulated and TraceAlign-DPI since their outages have greater cascading impacts on stability.
or cyber anomaly tool gives false positives/ negatives. Thus, assuming a limited number of large DERs per MGMS
 3) Processing Methodology: TraceAlign-DPI operates as a is both practical and consistent with real deployments. Becontinuous integrity monitor by converting incoming measure- sides, the TraceAlign-DPI module, though data-intensive, is
ments into stride-1 overlapping windows of length L (L = 10 run periodically rather than continuously, reducing real-time
samples in our testcase). Each window Xt−L+1:t ∈ RL×F is burden. Furthermore, the TraceAlign-DPI tool learns the corscored independently by the model, and anomaly scores are relations among system components from their measurements,
aligned to the window end time t. To ensure continuity when independent of DER location. This means it inherently captures
data are processed in segments, the last L−1 samples of each location-specific effects on system dynamics. The framework is
segment are carried over into the next. The system averages also adaptable to different topologies. Retraining with topologyscores from overlapping data chunks to keep them in sync with specific “normal” operating data enables DEROMS to adjust to
time. It only triggers an alert if the score stays high for several the unique dynamics of each configuration.
steps in a row, helping avoid false alarms.
 4) DEROMS Waiting Time Parameter twait for TraceAlign-
DPI Invocation: Upon initial detection or suspicion of a DER III. OUTAGE ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS LAYER
outage, DEROMS does not immediately trigger the TraceAlign-
DPI integrity checker. Instead, a predefined delay interval, de- A. Understanding Outage Scenarios Considering
noted as twait , is introduced to allow the system to stabilize and Cyber-Physical Failures in Control Plane
to account for momentary disturbances that do not constitute To enable accurate and explainable outage diagnosis, the root
actual outages. cause analysis engine must be grounded in a clear taxonomy of
 The need for twait is rooted in the dynamic response behavior DER outage scenarios, including both expected power system
of inverter-based DERs under abnormal grid conditions, as behaviors and unexpected cyber-physical failure modes. This
governed by the IEEE 1547-2018 standard [40]. According to subsection outlines the primary causes of DER outages, catthis standard, DERs must support specific grid ride-through ca- egorized into normal protection responses and cyber-induced
pabilities during voltage and frequency excursions, with defined outages where cyber-induced outages may arise from either nonthresholds and response modes. malicious failures (e.g., packet loss, communication dropouts)
 One critical mode is cease to energize, or momentary ces- or adversarial intrusions (e.g., spoofing, replay, or malicious trip
sation, defined as a temporary suspension of active current commands), both of which are summarized in Table II.
exchange between the DER and the area electric power system 1) Expected Outages Due to Legitimate Protection Mecha-
(EPS), while remaining electrically connected. Besides, IEEE nisms: These are normal operating responses of DERs to system
1547 permits DERs to enter momentary cessation or continue conditions that exceed safety thresholds as prescribed by IEEE
operation under what is termed permissive operation mode. The 1547-2018:
 TABLE I
DECISION OUTCOMES FOR OUTAGE DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION INTEGRATING DATA FLAG, DPI RESULT, CYBER CLASS, AND RELAY/ INVERTER LOG
 ADAN et al.: CYBER RESILIENCE IN SOLAR-RICH NETWORKED MICROGRIDS: A REAL TIME END-TO-END DER OUTAGE
 3439
3440 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE II
 OUTAGE SCENARIOS AND TRACEALIGN-RCA DIAGNOSIS STRATEGIES

 r Voltage and Frequency Violations: If voltage or frequency r Communication Failures: DERs relying on external setdeviates outside predefined ride-through thresholds and points or reclose/trip commands from the MGMS/DERMS
 exceeds the allowable duration, DERs are required to trip. may trip if those signals are lost, delayed, or corrupted due
 This is common during major grid disturbances or black- to communication outages.
 outs. 3) Cyber-Induced Outages From Adversarial Actions: These
 r Overcurrent Events: Although inverter-based DERs have events are intentionally triggered by attackers aiming to disrupt
 limited fault current contributions, faults, particularly DER operation through manipulation of control layers:
 ground faults, may induce backfeed currents. Protection re- r Breaker Compromise: Attackers remotely issue trip comlays respond by tripping breakers or commanding inverter mands or modify protection settings to cause unnecessary
 shutdown. DER disconnection.
 r Islanding Conditions: In case of upstream grid outage, r Inverter Hijacking: By injecting malicious commands or
 anti-islanding protection is invoked (e.g., via transfer trip), destabilizing setpoints (e.g., PV voltage references, fredisconnecting DERs to avoid unintentional island opera- quency setpoints), attackers can force the inverter into
 tion. protective shutdown.
 r Planned Maintenance Events: DERs may be deliberately r Denial-of-Service (DoS) Attacks: Saturating the commushut down via remote command for maintenance or oper- nication channel or firewall with traffic can block the
 ational coordination. These events are usually logged and transmission of essential reclose or operational commands,
 traceable. leaving DERs inoperable.
 2) Unexpected Outages Due to Non-Malicious Cyber- Each of these scenarios exhibits unique cross-layer signatures
Physical Failures: These failures arise from equipment mal- that the root cause inference engine must recognize and differfunction, sensor corruption, or communication loss - without entiate. Some are identifiable via consistent phasor and SCADA
active adversary presence: measurements, while others require deeper analysis of relay
 r Sensor Failures: Faulty PTs or CTs may falsely indi- logs, inverter shutdown codes, or cyber-metadata anomalies. The
 cate abnormal voltage, current, or frequency - erroneously accuracy and timeliness of root cause classification depend on
 triggering protection functions. Similarly, falsely reported the system’s ability to detect and reason over these nuanced
 breaker open status may force the inverter to enter standby cyber-physical interactions.
 or offline mode.
 r Breaker Failures: Spontaneous tripping or failure to re-
 B. Cyber-Aware Outage Root Cause Analysis With
 close may result in DER disconnection despite acceptable
 TraceAlign-RCA
 operating conditions.
 r Inverter/Controller Instabilities: Failures in MPPT track- The TraceAlign-RCA module is designed to diagnose the
 ing, PLL desynchronization, or Q-control divergence can true cause of a DER outage by aligning heterogeneous evidence
 result in internal protection trips. across multiple layers of observability - physical measurements
ADAN et al.: CYBER RESILIENCE IN SOLAR-RICH NETWORKED MICROGRIDS: A REAL TIME END-TO-END DER OUTAGE 3441

(PMU, SCADA), protection events (relay logs), inverter-side alternative (NWA). The modified economic dispatch problem is
feedback, and cyber-communication metadata. Given that cyber- modeled as:
induced, sensor-induced, and legitimate protection-induced out-   
 2 2
ages can all manifest similarly at the DER output (e.g., power min
 DER
 C i (P DER
 i ) + λ · (P PCC ) − (P PCC, Rated)
 Pi , PPCC
 i∈G
drop), disambiguating these requires domain-specific signal
alignment. where: Ci (PiDER ) is the generation cost function of DER i, PPCC
 Table II summarizes the distinct outage scenarios introduced is the real power imported from the main grid either at the point
earlier along with the expected signatures and trace alignment of common coupling (PCC) of the MG or at distribution feeder
strategies used to infer their cause.TraceAlign-RCA traverses level with λ, being the weighting factor to penalize excess grid
these signal domains, aligns the timing and causality of observed import. The optimization constraints include power flow, power
events, and infers the most likely cause of the outage. For balance and security constraints as well as topology constraints
example, a fault-induced outage will be corroborated by a spike if network reconfiguration is permitted with NMGs [48].
in PMU current, a relay trip record, and a SCADA breaker Scenario 2: Substation Feeder Outage with DERs Still
status change. In contrast, a sensor-induced false trip will show Operational
mismatch between DER-end and adjacent-node data, while Here, the utility substation feeder is unavailable (e.g., gridcyber-induced outages often leave trails in command metadata, side breaker trip), which primarily triggers DER trip due to loss
access logs, or abnormal packet structures. By leveraging this of grid. Since the DERs in MG boundary are healthy, MGMS
cross-domain consistency analysis, TraceAlign-RCA improves initiates off-grid mode and through coordination within self or
outage explainability, enhances operator trust, and enables re- NMG boundary, aims to restore power partially. Restoration fosilient downstream control decisions. cuses on maximizing the supply of critical loads using DER coordination, involving one DER operating in grid-forming mode:
 IV. OUTAGE RESPONSE AND RECOVERY LAYER 
 max w j Pj
 Timely and accurate identification of the root cause of a DER Pj
 j∈Lcrit
outage is critical not only for system situational awareness but
also for enabling a cyber-resilient recovery strategy. Knowledge where: Pj is the restored critical load at node j, wj is the priority
of the outage origin, whether physical, cyber, or systemic, weight of load j and Lcrit is the set of critical loads. The MIP
empowers the MGMS to undertake context-specific responses. problem is subject to power balance equations as well as DER
For instance, if the outage is confirmed as a hardware fault, dispatch limits, voltage and current limits, and operational
appropriate field repair crews can be dispatched with the correct mode constraints for the grid forming agents.
tools, reducing diagnostic delays. If the outage is due to a cyber- Scenario 3: DER Outage in an Off-grid Microgrid
attack, containment measures (e.g., isolating compromised relay This case considers an off-grid microgrid that loses a DER
or inverter units) can be prioritized to prevent lateral propagation. asset. Restoration involves potentially collaborating with NMGs
Most importantly, the inferred cause provides a tentative repair for additional support and reallocating available DERs to restore
time estimate or DER recovery horizon, which is essential critical loads. DERs deemed operational are included, while
for short-term grid reconfiguration, dispatch optimization, and unavailable DERs are excluded. Additionally, if the DER facing
adaptive islanding decisions within the networked microgrid outage is the grid forming (GFM) asset of the corresponding
cluster. Without this awareness, the system risks overreacting off- grid Microgrid, then the loss of the DER will result in
or underutilizing available flexibility, leading to suboptimal discontinuation of power supply from other healthy DERs in
resilience. the MG. The flexibilities of NMG have the potential to utilize
 these functional DERs in this case by sharing the grid forming
A. Enforcing Scenario Specific Restoration Schemes capabilities. The restoration strategy must ensure at least one
 Once the root cause is identified and the DER’s operational GFM asset is reconnected with all healthy Grid following DERs
status is classified (e.g., trusted, unavailable, or compromised), while maximizing critical loads.
the outage response layer invokes scenario-specific restoration 
 max wj Pj s.t. ∃ i ∈ GGFM : i ∈ Topology(T )
strategies. These are formulated as optimization problems tai- Pj ,T
 j∈Lcrit
lored to the physical and cyber-operational constraints of the
networked microgrid. Below, we describe several representative where GGFM is the set of grid-forming DERs and Topology(T )
scenarios along with their restoration objectives and key vari- denotes active configuration of the microgrid. Constraints ensure
ables. that at least one GFM DER is present in the operating island,
 Scenario 1: DER Outage Requiring Repair + Redispatch along with standard load flow and security constraints.
of Other DERs
 In this case, one or more DERs are rendered inoperable due to B. Testbed Development
hardware failure or confirmed cyber compromise. The objective
 V. IMPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
is to minimize the overall operational cost of remaining DERs
while also discouraging excess dependency on grid import, The proposed DEROMS framework is validated on a simespecially if the DER was originally deployed as a non-wires plified two-microgrid distribution testbed, modeled in RSCAD
3442 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 2. Layout of the networked microgrid testbed.

and executed in real time using RTDS as shown in Fig. 2. Each well as digital breaker status, streamed at 1 frame/sec. Besides
microgrid consists of: that, PMUs are placed at the PCC of each microgrid which
 r A solar PV system of 400 kW rated generation (V mpp ∼ streams Voltage and current phasors (V ∠θ, I∠θ), frequency,
 2 kV, Impp ∼ 200 A), integrated with an average inverter and ROCOF at 60frames/sec via a phasor data concentrator.
 model, implementing MPPT and PLL-based grid synchro- Following our previous work [49], every 1-second aggregated
 nization, accepting Q setpoints. data window is processed for denoising, outlier removal, and
 r The BESS is modeled with 250 series cells per stack (∼ further analysis.
 975V) and 250 stacks in parallel (∼212.5 Ah), yielding ∼
 207kWh total energy capacity, corresponding up to 200kW B. Cyber-Physical Attack Simulation
 discharge power for one hour. The BESS is controlled via
 Cyberattack scenarios are implemented using multiple
 operator input setpoints Pbat and Qbat .
 r A grid-forming diesel generator with 1 MW of rated ca- MATLAB-based host agents interfaced with the testbed and a
 python platform to run the DEROMS. These represent IEDs
 pacity capable of black-start and voltage and frequency
 (Intelligent Electronic Devices) and attacker nodes following
 reference support.
 r The inverters are rated at 1.25 times the DER capacity and the MITRE ATT&CK for ICS framework [50]. Fig. 3 illustrates
 three representative cyber cases and case 4 is the extreme case
 invert the DC side voltage to three phase grid voltage.
 r Three loads each having 400 kW of peak demand and of combined data and control plane attack:
 r Case 1: No Cyber Manipulation – Events occur without
 dynamic load profile, is considered as part of the microgrid.
 any adversarial control; used for baseline comparison.
 Their cumulative load is modeled with one aggregated r Case 2: Control Plane Attack – A malicious host (N5)
 dynamic load component (setpoint for Pload ∼ 1.2M W
 performs a man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack and sends
 when all three loads are supplied at their peak demand).
 unauthorized trip commands, causing forced DER dis-
 The power factor is considered ∼ 0.9, making setpoints
 connection (ICS Tactic TA0105: Technique T0831 and
 for Qload around half of Pload .
 r Relay and breakers are modeled at every DER connection T0826).
 r Case 3: Data Plane Attack – The attacker intercepts
 with proper protection mechanisms, which are also capable
 and modifies the data stream (e.g., falsifies breaker status,
 of receiving remote commands.
 r Control system consisting of PI loops for PLL, MPPT, and masks actual outages), without affecting physical control
 (ICS Tactic TA0105: Technique T0832 and T0828).
 Q setpoint calibration. r Case 4: Coordinated Control and Data Plane Attack-
 The two microgrids are tied to a single 480 V AC distribution
 A malicious host (N5) executes a sophisticated two-part
bus, with breakers at each PCC. Each MG connects to the grid
 attack. It first sends an unauthorized trip command to force
through a separate PCC feeder for independent operation and
 a DER offline (control plane attack) and simultaneously
operates in grid-connected mode by default. A tie-line breaker
 intercepts and modifies the outbound data stream to falsely
which is normally open allows interconnection to enable netreport that the DER is still operating normally, thereby
worked microgrid operations during islanding or contingency
 masking the forced outage from the operators (data plane
without creating loops.
 attack).

A. Data Stream and Monitoring Layer C. Validation of the Proposed DEROMS Framework
 Each DER is monitored through SCADA gateways that pro- To validate the framework, we adopted our previously develvide Analog measurements: Voltage (V ), Current (I), Active oped tools as integral detection modules. First, the multivariate
Power (P ), Reactive Power (Q) or SOC levels for battery as LSTM-autoencoder anomaly detection component from our
ADAN et al.: CYBER RESILIENCE IN SOLAR-RICH NETWORKED MICROGRIDS: A REAL TIME END-TO-END DER OUTAGE 3443

Fig. 3. Cyber-physical scenario simulation encompassing data and control plane.

Fig. 4. Training loss history from TraceAlign-DPI.

previous work on “Cyber Anomaly-Aware Distributed Voltage
Control with Active Power Curtailment and DERs” framework
[51] was embedded into TraceAlign-DPI’s architecture. Here,
the reconstruction-error scores of the autoencoder on power
and voltage deviations trigger cross-domain PQ-flow alignment Fig. 5. Actual vs. falsified measurements from solar DER.
checks, enabling TraceAlign-DPI to confirm or refute data-layer
anomalies against system-wide dynamics [51]. While origi- and is modified with domain knowledge and a tolerance band of
nally developed for voltage control applications, performance 20 percent to serve as the Forecast-aware estimation tool. Simpliof this tool can be further enhanced through customized design fied restoration problems are solved using python optimization
adaptations aligned with the proposed framework, which will packages. As part of the microgrid restoration problem, three
be explored in future work. Subsequently, the cyber anomaly loads (400 kW peak each, pf ∼ 0.9) are treated separately with
detection technique proposed in [52] serves as the cyber anomaly criticality factors of 1.0, 0.8, and 0.6. The dispatch optimization
detection tool. Besides, the nowcasting method described in applies cost and capacity constraints to BESS and DG units,
[53], providing a 5 minute forecast, works as the forecasting tool while PV output follows irradiation-driven variability.
3444 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 6. Workflow of proposed DEROMS for case study 1 (corresponding to cyber-physical attack case 4).

Fig. 7. Workflow of proposed DEROMS for case study 2 (corresponding to cyber-physical attack case 1).

 Using the validation dataset, the model achieved Recall of Upon confirmed outage, DEROMS proceeds to the recovery
0.66, Precision of 0.28, and an F1-score of 0.40. The confusion phase. As the root cause is cyber-related, the repair plan focuses
matrix corresponds to a false negative rate (FNR) of 0.34 and on securing the DER’s IED and relay access. In parallel, ecoa false positive rate (FPR) of 0.60. These results confirm that nomic dispatch is solved under various cost and dispatch limit
the model is highly sensitive (successfully detecting two-thirds constraints resulting in the following solution approaches:
of anomalies) while leaving room for improvement in the fol- r Solution 1: Penalizing substation power supply causes the
lowing steps of root cause analysis of the framework. Through MG2 diesel generator and BESS to increase output locally.
invocation of relay/inverter log precision and recall improves to r Solution 2: When MG2 DER dispatch limits are enforced,
nearly 1. The learning curve shown in Fig. 4 shows the effective MG1 compensates by increasing generation and eventually
training accuracy of the model. reducing substation power supply.
 1) Case Study 1: To demonstrate the cyber resilience of the r Solution 3: Penalizing import at MG2 PCC specifically
proposed DEROMS framework, Case Study 1 simulates an leads to optimized radial reconfiguration from MG1 to
extreme case of Coordinated Control and Data Plane Attack as share power to MG2.
referred to cyber-physical attack case 4 (V-B). Here an attacker r Solution 4: For tighter operational limits, DEROMS selecforcefully disconnects the solar from the system and masks this tively curtails non-critical loads within MG2.
outage, thus introducing a data plane failure. In our testbed, This case demonstrates DEROMS’s ability to detect masked
the solar DER in Microgrid 2 (MG2) undergoes an outage, outages, confirm cyber-induced trip causes, and apply flexible
but the real-time measurements are replaced with historical restoration strategies using the networked microgrid topology
values as shown in Fig. 5, emulating a replay attack or sensor as shown in Fig. 6.
malfunction. As a result, OMS is not triggered immediately 2) Case Study 2: In Case Study 2, the DEROMS framework
since no power loss is reported from DER. However, the pe- is evaluated under a visible outage scenario where the solar trips
riodic TraceAlign-DPI check detects a post-outage like system due to a grid-side event. The DER power loss is directly observed
shift (e.g., increased import at PCC) and prompts DEROMS in the reported measurements, triggering TraceAlign-DPI. The
to trigger log inspection from the associated relay/inverter. The DPI module verifies the outage by matching with system-wide
logs confirm the outage but the waveform analysis reveals no dynamics. This case study corresponds to cyber-physical attack
pre-outage fault signature. Instead, the cyber log containing a case 1- No cyber manipulation (V-B).
trip command issued from an unknown IP address, confirms Relay and inverter logs are then queried to determine the root
that the outage was attack-induced. cause. The relay waveform reveals an islanding signature, and
ADAN et al.: CYBER RESILIENCE IN SOLAR-RICH NETWORKED MICROGRIDS: A REAL TIME END-TO-END DER OUTAGE 3445

the cyber log confirms receipt of a transfer trip command issued REFERENCES
by the substation relay, likely due to upstream grid loss. Thus, [1] E. Wesoff, “Microgrids on the march: Utilities are building out new busithe outage is classified as an islanding-induced DER trip. ness models to make islanding work,” Greentech Media, 2020. archived
 In the recovery layer, the primary repair objective is to restore web article.
 [2] “Solar PV microgrid market size & share, growth forecasts 2034,” 2024,
the grid-side connection. Meanwhile, MGMS-1 and MGMS-2 archived industry report. [Online]. Available: https://www.gminsights.
independently reconfigure and supply local loads using internal com/industry-analysis/solar-pv-microgrid-market
DERs. A secondary recovery solution is identified when MG2’s [3] D. T. Ton and M. A. Smith, “The U.S. department of energy’s microgrid
 initiative,” Electricity J., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 84–94, 2012.
load criticality is increased and networked operation is enabled, [4] “Utility scale microgrid market size, industry report 2025–2034,” 2024,
allowing MG1 to export power and support MG2 via the tie- archived industry report. [Online]. Available: https://www.gminsights.
line, demonstrating adaptive coordination between networked com/industry-analysis/utility-scale-microgrid-market
 [5] “2023 sustainable energy in America factbook,” 2023, public release
microgrids. The workflow is demonstrated in Fig. 7. via BCSE and BNEF collaboration. [Online]. Available: https://bcse.org/
 In our implementation, TraceAlign detection runs in the mil- factbook
lisecond range, with restoration optimization also completed [6] “Community solar: State, local, and tribal governments,” Nat. Renewable
 Energy Lab. (NREL), Golden, CO, USA, 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
in milliseconds. Excluding the twait parameter, the framework //www.nrel.gov/state-local-tribal/community-solar
generates a decision within 1 s. Perhaps, fast detection is es- [7] K. Eber and D. Corbus, “Hawaii solar integration study: Executive sumsential to prevent local outages from cascading, and to limit mary,” Nat. Renewable Energy Lab., Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-5500-57215,
 Jun. 2013. [Online]. Available: https://docs.nrel.gov/docs/fy13osti/57215.
adversarial dwell time during cyber events. While communica- pdf
tion and actuation may add latency in practice, the framework [8] J. J. Cook, K. Ardani, E. O’Shaughnessy, B. Smith, and R. Margolis,
remains suitable for real-time microgrid operation. “Expanding pv value: Lessons learned from utility-led distributed energy
 resource aggregation in the United States,” Nat. Renewable Energy Lab.,
 Golden, CO, USA, Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-6A20-71984, 2018. [Online].
 Available: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/71984.pdf
 [9] “Solar case studies,” Nat. Rural Electric Cooperative Assoc.
 (NRECA), Arlington, VA, USA, Aug. 2015. [Online]. Available:
 VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK https://www.cooperative.com/programs-services/bts/documents/sunda/
 solar-case-studies.pdf
 This work presented a novel cyber-resilient DER Outage [10] “Solar plant dynamic modeling guidelines,” Western Electricity Coordi-
Management System Framework (DEROMS) designed for nating Council (WECC), Tech. Rep., 2014. [Online]. Available: https:
 //www.wecc.org/sites/default/files/documents/program/2024/WECC\
solar-rich networked microgrids. The primary contribution of %20Solar\%20Plant\%20Dynamic\%20Modeling\%20Guidelines.pdf
this paper is the theoretical formulation and architectural design [11] J. St John, “A snapshot of key US non-wires alternatives projects,
of the DEROMS, which includes a multi-layer architecture from Brooklyn to Booth Bay and beyond,” Greentech Media, 2018,
 archived web article. [Online]. Available: https://www.greentechmedia.
comprising: (i) real-time outage detection through TraceAlign- com/articles/read/a-snapshot-of-key-us-non-wires-alternatives-projects
DPI, (ii) root cause analysis via TraceAlign-RCA using syn- [12] P. De Martini and L. Schwartz, “Distribution system evolution,” U. S.
chronized physical and cyber traces, and (iii) scenario-aware Department of Energy, Office of Electricity, Washington, DC, USA,
 Tech. Rep., Nov. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.energy.gov/
restoration optimization leveraging the flexibility of networked sites/default/files/2023-11/2023-11-01\%20Distributed\%20System\
microgrids. As a critical proof-of-concept, a real-time hardware- %20Evolution\%20nov\%202023\%20r1_optimized.pdf
in-the-loop testbed was developed to validate the system un- [13] “The role of distributed energy resources in today’s grid transition,” Grid-
 Lab, Tech. Rep., Aug. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://gridlab.org/wpder both physical faults and cyber-attack scenarios, including content/uploads/2022/10/GridLab_RoleOfDER_online.pdf
data falsification and unauthorized control plane manipulation. [14] C. Volkmann, “Integrated distribution planning: A path forward,” GridLab,
Results demonstrated DEROMS’s capability to detect visible Tech. Rep., 2018, technical white paper developed for regulatory proceedings. [Online]. Available: https://gridlab.org/portfolio-item/integratedand hidden outages, infer cyber-physical root causes, and adap- distribution-planning/
tively reconfigure microgrid operations for resilient restoration. [15] B. Palmintier, “On the Path to SunShot: Emerging issues and challenges
By integrating real-time monitoring, data authenticity valida- in integrating solar with the distribution system,” Nat. Renewable Energy
 Lab., Golden, CO, USA, Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-5D00-65331, May 2016.
tion, and adaptive restoration strategies, the system aims to [Online]. Available: https://docs.nrel.gov/docs/fy16osti/65331.pdf
enhance the resilience and reliability of modern distribution [16] “EPIC 2.03A: Smart Inverters – Project 2.03A Final Report,” Pacific Gas
systems. and Electric Company (PG&E), San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.pge.com/assets/pge/docs/about/corporate-
 The work presented herein is positioned as a theoretical and responsibility-and-sustainability/PGE-EPIC-Project-2.03A-Final.pdf
methodological foundation upon which more extensive, large- [17] S. E. Ahmadi, N. Rezaei, and H. Khayyam, “Energy management system
scale experimental analysis must be built. This work mainly of networked microgrids through optimal reliability-oriented day-ahead
 self-healing scheduling,” Sustain. Energy, Grids, Netw., vol. 23, 2020, Art.
focuses on solar DERs, but the DEROMS framework is broadly no. 100387. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
applicable to other DER types such as wind turbines, BESS, article/pii/S2352467720303180
EV chargers, and hybrid inverters. Since the outage root causes, [18] “System planning impacts from distributed energy resources (spiderwg)
 scope document,” North Amer. Electric Rel. Corporation, Tech. Rep.,
fault signatures, and forecasting techniques are DER-specific, Mar. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.nerc.com/comm/RSTC/
tailoring the analytics to diverse resources remains an important SPIDERWG/SPIDERWG\%20Scope.pdf
direction for future research. Additionally, periodic invocation [19] “How DERMS delivers modern utility management,” 2022, Oracle Utilities Resources. [Online]. Available: https://www.oracle.com/industries/
of the TraceAlign-DPI tool reduces the real-time computational utilities/resources/how-derms-delivers-modern-utility-management/
burden but improvements can be made for faster response, better [20] “Visibility of distributed energy resources for future power system secuaccuracy and greater robustness against advanced cyber threats. rity,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://policycommons.net
 [21] “Making the connection: The importance of der visibility to grid support
Integrating forecasting techniques, state estimation, and dis- and modernization,” Electric Power Res. Inst. (EPRI), Palo Alto, CA, USA,
tributed optimization methods will further enhance the system’s Tech. Rep. 3002013388, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.epri.com/
autonomy and scalability. research/products/000000003002013388
3446 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

[22] J. F. Clemente, “Cyber security for critical energy infrastructure,” Ph.D. [42] “Electric Rule 21: Generating facility interconnections,” Pacific
 dissertation, Dept. Nat. Secur. Affairs, Naval Postgraduate Sch., Monterey, Gas and Electric Company (PG&E), San Francisco, CA, USA,
 CA, USA, 2018. Aug. 2025. [Online]. Available:https://www.pge.com/tariffs/assets/pdf/
[23] J. Qi, A. Hahn, X. Lu, J. Wang, and C.-C. Liu, “Cybersecurity for tariffbook/ELEC_RULES_21.pdf
 distributed energy resources and smart inverters,” IET Cyber-Phys. Syst., [43] A. Gholami and A. K. Srivastava, “ORCA: Outage root cause analysis
 Theory Appl., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 28–39, 2016. in DER-rich power distribution system using data fusion, hierarchical
[24] E. M. Stewart, M. J. Culler, and R. V. Stolworthy, “Utility-scale opera- clustering and FP-growth rule mining,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 15,
 tional consequences for solar grid services,” Idaho Nat. Lab., Tech. Rep., no. 1, pp. 667–676, Jan. 2024.
 Feb. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://inldigitallibrary.inl.gov/sites/STI/ [44] L. Che, X. Liu, Z. Li, and Y. Wen, “False data injection attacks induced
 STI/Sort_151062.pdf sequential outages in power systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 34,
[25] “Grid impacts from distributed energy resources: Research and no. 2, pp. 1513–1523, Mar. 2019.
 development priorities,” Electric Power Res. Inst. (EPRI), Palo [45] K. A. Haque, S. Sun, X. Huo, A. E. Goulart, and K. R. Davis, “Scalable
 Alto, CA, USA, Tech. Rep., Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: discrete event simulation tool for large-scale cyber-physical energy syshttps://www.dret-ca.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Grid-Impacts- tems: Advancing system efficiency and scalability,”, IEEE Access, vol. 13,
 from-Distributed-Energy-Resources.pdf pp. 101900–101921, 2025.
[26] Y. Liao, Y. Weng, C.-W. Tan, and R. Rajagopal, “Quick line [46] Z. Wang, B. Chen, J. Wang, and C. Chen, “Networked microgrids for
 outage identification in urban distribution grids via smart me- self-healing power systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 1,
 ters,” CSEE J. Power Energy Syst., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1074–1086, pp. 310–319, Jan. 2016.
 Jul. 2022. [47] A. Arif and Z. Wang, “Networked microgrids for service restoration
[27] Y. Liao, C. Xiao, and Y. Weng, “Quickest line outage detection with low in resilient distribution systems,” IET Gener., Transmiss. Distribution,
 false alarm rate and no prior outage knowledge,” in Proc. IEEE Power vol. 11, pp. 3612–3619, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://digital-library.
 Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting, 2022, pp. 1–5. theiet.org/doi/abs/10.1049/iet-gtd.2017.0380
[28] A. Anwar, A. N. Mahmood, and Z. Tari, “Ensuring data integrity of opf [48] S. Konar, A. K. Srivastava, and A. Dubey, “Distributed optimization
 module and energy database by detecting changes in power flow patterns for autonomous restoration in der-rich distribution system,” IEEE Trans.
 in smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3299–3311, Power Del., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 3205–3217, Oct. 2023.
 Dec. 2017. [49] J. Adan, D. Aggarwal, S. Basumallik, and A. Srivastava, “D-syncaed:
[29] J. Wei, “A data-driven cyber-physical detection and defense strategy Distribution synchrophasor anomaly and event detection tool in real-time,”
 against data integrity attacks in smart grid systems,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. in Proc. Int. Conf. Smart Grid Synchronized Meas. Analytics 2024, pp. 1–6.
 Conf. Signal Inf. Process. 2015, pp. 667–671. [50] B. E. Strom, A. Applebaum, D. P. Miller, K. C. Nickels, A. G. Pennington,
[30] S. Ahmed, Y. Lee, S.-H. Hyun, and I. Koo, “Unsupervised machine and C. B. Thomas, “Mitre att&ck: Design and philosophy,” MITRE
 learning-based detection of covert data integrity assault in smart grid Corporation, McLean, VA, USA, Tech. Rep. 10AOH08A-JC, 2018.
 networks utilizing isolation forest,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., [51] P. S. Sarker, M. F. Rafy, A.K. Srivastava, and R. K. Singh, “Cyber anomalyvol. 14, no. 10, pp. 2765–2777, Oct. 2019. aware distributed voltage control with active power curtailment and ders,”
[31] S. Lu, B. Phung, and D. Zhang, “A comprehensive review on DC arc IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 1622–1633, Jan./Feb. 2024.
 faults and their diagnosis methods in photovoltaic systems,” Renewable [52] A. Ahmed et al., “Cyber physical security analytics for anomalies in
 Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 89, pp. 88–98, 2018. [Online]. Available: https: transmission protection systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. 55, no. 6,
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032118300996 pp. 6313–6323, Nov./Dec. 2019.
[32] B. Li, C. Delpha, D. Diallo, and A. Migan-Dubois, “Application of [53] S. Nazaralizadeh, P. Banerjee, S. Karimi, A.K. Srivastava, and P.
 artificial neural networks to photovoltaic fault detection and diag- Famouri, “Very-short-term solar power prediction using a suboptimal
 nosis: A review,” Renewable Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 138, 2021, multiple fading Kalman filter,” in Proc. IEEE Texas Power Energy Conf.,
 Art. no. 110512. 2025, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.
[33] Y.-Y. Hong and R. A. Pula, “Methods of photovoltaic fault detec- 173808181.11951244/v1
 tion and classification: A review,” Energy Rep., vol. 8, pp. 5898–5929,
 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ Jannatul Adan (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 pii/S2352484722008022 received the B.Sc. degree in electrical and electronics
[34] D. S. Pillai and N. Rajasekar, “A comprehensive review on protection engineering from the Bangladesh University of Engichallenges and fault diagnosis in PV systems,” Renewable Sustain. Energy neering and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2019.
 Rev., vol. 91, pp. 18–40, Aug. 2018. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
[35] S. Madeti and S. Singh, “A comprehensive study on different types of electrical engineering with West Virginia University,
 faults and detection techniques for solar photovoltaic system,” Sol. Energy, Morgantown, WV, USA. Her research focuses on
 vol. 158, pp. 161–185, Dec. 2017. cyber-physical resiliency of DER-rich distribution
[36] A. Mellit and S. A. Kalogirou, “Artificial intelligence techniques for pho- power systems.
 tovoltaic applications: A review,” Prog. Energy Combustion Sci., vol. 34,
 no. 5, pp. 574–632, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 com/science/article/pii/S0360128508000026 Md Fazley Rafy (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
[37] A. Triki-Lahiani, A. Bennani-Ben Abdelghani, and I. Slama-Belkhodja, degree in electrical and electronics engineering from
 “Fault detection and monitoring systems for photovoltaic installations: the University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2017.
 A review,” Renewable Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 82, pp. 2680–2692, He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ in computer science with West Virginia University,
 pii/S1364032117313618 Morgantown, WV, USA. His research focuses on
[38] M. Y. Worku, M. A. Hassan, L. S. Maraaba, and M. A. Abido, “Is- the security and resilience of cyber-physical energy
 landing detection methods for microgrids: A comprehensive review,” systems.
 Mathematics, vol. 9, no. 24, 2021, Art. no. 3174. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7390/9/24/3174
[39] A. Salazar-Llinas, A. Ginart, and C. Restrepo, “Observer based sensor
 fault tolerant for grid tied - solar inverters,” in Proc. 6th Annu. IEEE Green Anurag K. Srivastava (Fellow, IEEE) received the
 Technol. Conf., 2014, pp. 69–74. Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Illi-
[40] T. Basso, “IEEE 1547 and 2030 Standards for Distributed Energy Re- nois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, USA, in
 sources Interconnection and Interoperability with the Electricity Grid,” 2005. He is currently the Raymond J. Lane Professor
 Tech. Rep. NREL/TP-5D00-63157, Nat. Renewable Energy Lab., Golden, and Chairperson with Computer Science and Electri-
 CO, USA, Dec. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://docs.nrel.gov/docs/ cal Engineering Department, West Virginia Univerfy15osti/63157.pdf sity, Morgantown, WV, USA. His research focuses
[41] “Distributed energy resources connection, modeling, and reliability on data-driven algorithms for power system operation
 considerations,” 2017. Accessed: May 30, 2025. [Online]. Avail- and control, including resiliency analysis. He is the
 able: https://www.nerc.com/pa/RAPA/ra/Reliability\%20Assessments\ Chair of IEEE PES Power System Operation SC,
 %20DL/Distributed_Energy_Resources_Report.pdf Co-Chair of Tools for Power Grid Resilience TF, and
 Co-Chair of Microgrid Application and Implementation WG.