906 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 DDoS Attack Detection in Business Blockchain
 Networks: A Review, Framework, and Challenges
 Mengyuan Li , Jiewei Chen , Shaoyong Guo , Xuesong Qiu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Feng Qi

 Abstract—With the rapid growth of the Internet of Things and multiple nodes, avoiding the bottlenecks in data management
the increasing deployment of blockchain technology in critical and processing that occur in centralized architectures, and enapplications, distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks pose a hancing the system’s scalability and fault tolerance. Moreover,
significant threat to the security and availability of blockchain
networks. However, due to the lack of data sharing among different the immutability and transparency of blockchain increase the
business chains, existing attack detection systems fail to identify credibility of data, enabling IoT devices to establish a trust
global DDoS attack patterns. This leads to reduced detection ac- mechanism, ensuring the authenticity and reliability of data, and
curacy and timeliness, as well as increased risks of false positives thus providing a solid foundation for the collaborative operation
and false negatives. Moreover, it prevents the implementation of of IoT devices. However, its interconnected nature and valuable
distributed collaborative defense mechanisms, allowing attackers
to bypass local defenses through cross-chain attacks.This paper data make it vulnerable to cyber attacks, and without effective
reviews the current state of DDoS attack detection in blockchain protection strategy, the potential cost of cyber attacks will reach
networks and provides a preliminary look at the challenges facing $90 trillion by 2030. Major risks include malware proliferation
the field.To address these challenges, this paper proposes a new and downtime caused by DoS and DDoS attacks that exploit
intrusion detection system, BAFL, which utilizes supervision chain system vulnerabilities.
and federated learning to detect DDoS attacks in blockchain network layer. We design a distributed DDoS architecture that utilizes Specifically, the extensive connectivity of IoT devices, which
a supervised chain of directed acyclic graph (DAG) structures to often possess limited computational and storage capabilities and
achieve trusted sharing of model parameters among client nodes weak security measures, provides attackers with abundant attack
and record detected DDoS attacks. The system uses asynchronous vectors and diverse pathways to launch sophisticated and covert
federated learning algorithm, weights the client model based on its DDoS attacks. The substantial data traffic generated by these
DDoS attack detection accuracy, and introduces a time attenuation
factor to reduce the influence of old model parameters on aggre- IoT devices not only facilitates the creation of false traffic surges
gation and accelerate model convergence. Through comprehensive by attackers, thereby triggering DDoS attacks, but also poses a
experiments on data sets such as CIC-DDoS2019, we demonstrated threat to the normal operation of blockchain networks due to
that the accuracy of BAFL in detecting DDoS attacks is more than potential data tampering or forgery. The decentralized nature
99%, which is better than traditional methods, the accuracy is of blockchain networks further complicates the situation, as it
increased by 2%, and the real-time detection delay is reduced by
half. The results highlight the robustness and scalability of BAFL, allows attackers to bypass traditional defense mechanisms by
making it a promising solution for protecting blockchain networks exploiting vulnerabilities in smart contracts or by controlling
from DDoS threats. multiple nodes, while also dispersing attack traffic across nu-
 Index Terms—DDoS attack detection, federated learning,
 merous nodes to enhance attack stealth. Moreover, the increasing
blockchain, supervision chain. reliance of critical applications on blockchain networks means
 that DDoS attacks can not only paralyze these applications, causing significant societal and economic impacts, but also disrupt
 I. RESEARCH BACKGROUND data sharing mechanisms, affect data synchronization and veri-
 HE Internet of Things (IoT) aims to enable smart manu- fication, and potentially infringe upon user privacy. Finally, the
T facturing, smart factories and optimized communications
within the industrial ecosystem. Due to its ability to share data
 diversity of IoT devices and the complexity of data traffic present
 significant challenges for DDoS attack detection, necessitating
efficiently and prevent data tampering, blockchain has been the development of novel detection techniques and lightweight
widely applied in the IoT. The distributed ledger characteris- defense mechanisms tailored to the IoT environment.
tic of blockchain allows data to be stored and shared across
 A. DDoS Attacks Detection in Business Blockchain Networks
 Received 14 April 2025; revised 25 May 2025; accepted 6 July 2025. Date
of publication 14 July 2025; date of current version 21 November 2025. This With the widespread application of blockchain technology in
work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant fields such as finance and supply chain management, the risk
2022YFB2703400. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Liehuang Zhu. (Corresponding author: Shaoyong Guo.) of DDoS attacks it faces has become increasingly prominent.
 The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switch- The decentralized nature of blockchain networks diversifies the
ing Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing attack paths, enabling attackers to launch complex attacks by
100876, China (e-mail: mengyuanli@bupt.edu.cn; chenjiewei@bupt.edu.cn;
syguo@bupt.edu.cn; xsqiu@bupt.edu.cn; qifeng@bupt.edu.cn). exploiting consensus mechanisms and smart contracts, such as
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3588625 transaction spamming and Sybil attacks. These attacks not only
 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 907

prolong transaction finalization times but also lead to a decrease mechanisms that ensure the integrity and confidentiality of
in network throughput and service performance. Therefore, re- shared information. By adopting a holistic approach to DDoS
searching effective DDoS attack detection methods is crucial for attack detection, blockchain networks can enhance their reensuring the security and stability of blockchain networks [1]. silience and maintain the security and stability necessary for
 DDoS attack detection methods in blockchain networks sig- their widespread adoption and operation.
nificantly differ from those in industrial settings, mainly in
terms of network characteristics, attack patterns, detection technologies, and application scenarios. The decentralized nature, B. Supervision Chain
dynamic topology, and complex attack patterns (e.g., transaction Blockchain technology effectively addresses the issues of
spamming and Sybil attacks) of blockchain networks increase data tampering and information silos prevalent in traditional
detection difficulty. In contrast, industrial networks’ hierarchi- regulatory models through its immutable and distributed ledger
cal, fixed topology and relatively singular attack patterns (e.g., characteristics [2]. It ensures that once data is recorded, it
network-layer flooding attacks) make detection more focused on cannot be altered by employing cryptographic techniques and
device security and mitigation of common attacks. In terms of consensus mechanisms. It also supports data sharing and verifidetection technology, blockchain networks often employ deep cation across institutions, thereby enhancing the transparency
learning techniques (such as CNN and LSTM) and decentralized and credibility of regulatory processes. For example, in the
federated learning to accommodate their high dynamism and financial sector, blockchain can record detailed information
concurrency. Industrial networks, on the other hand, rely more of financial transactions in real-time, helping regulatory auon traditional machine learning and statistical analysis methods. thorities quickly detect and address violations while protect-
Additionally, blockchain networks’ application scenarios (such ing investors’ interests. Meanwhile, the complete data history
as finance and supply chain management) have extremely high recorded by blockchain supports comprehensive traceability,
requirements for data real-time and security, necessitating rapid facilitating post-event audits and investigations by regulatory
identification and mitigation of attacks. Industrial networks, authorities, such as tracing the source of quality issues in supply
however, place greater emphasis on the stability and reliability chain management. Moreover, blockchain supports dynamic
of devices.These reasons lead us to the necessity of research- node participation and departure, thereby enhancing the sysing DDoS attack detection methods applicable to blockchain tem’s scalability and maintaining stability in the face of node
networks. failures or network partitions. By ensuring real-time access to the
 In addition to localized DDoS attacks targeting individual latest model parameters and detection results across all nodes,
business chains, the existence of global DDoS attacks within it improves the timeliness of detection and facilitates rapid
blockchain networks poses a significant threat. These global information sharing. Therefore, blockchain technology can be
attacks not only compromise the performance and security of employed to construct a supervision chain for detecting DDoS
individual business chains but also have the potential to destabi- attacks within blockchain networks, ensuring data immutability
lize the entire blockchain network through cross-chain attacks. and traceability and guaranteeing data security and integrity.
The interconnected nature of blockchain networks means that an The “supervision chain” is a core facility built on blockchain
attack on one chain can propagate to others, exploiting shared technology, used for formulating and enforcing regulatory rules,
nodes, protocols, and trust mechanisms to achieve a broader as well as verifying and auditing cross-chain data [3]. It is usually
disruption. controlled by regulatory authorities. It has a close relationship
 The current state of DDoS attack detection in blockchain with blockchain, inheriting characteristics such as immutability
networks is characterized by a focus on local analysis. Existing and decentralization. It is a specific application of blockchain
detection methods predominantly concentrate on analyzing net- technology in the regulatory field.The supervision chain works
work traffic data at individual nodes or within specific business in tandem with the business chain. The business chain serves
chains. While this approach can provide insights into localized specific business scenarios and is responsible for recording and
attack patterns, it falls short in capturing the full scope of global processing business data. The supervision chain, on the other
attacks. The lack of comprehensive, cross-chain data sharing and hand, focuses on regulatory functions, ensuring the immutability
coordinated analysis mechanisms limits the ability to identify and traceability of attack data and the parameters of the model.
and mitigate attacks that span multiple business chains. This The business chain needs to meet regulatory requirements and
fragmented approach to detection creates vulnerabilities, as connect with the supervision chain to achieve business compliattackers can exploit the isolation of individual chains to launch ance.The supervision chain is also related to IoT devices. Data
coordinated attacks that evade local defenses and disrupt the generated by IoT devices is processed by the business chain
overall stability of the blockchain network. and is also a potential target for DDoS attacks. By regulating
 To address these challenges, there is a pressing need for detec- the data of the business chain, the supervision chain indirectly
tion frameworks that can integrate data from multiple business ensures the security of IoT device data, guards against DDoS
chains and perform global analysis. Such frameworks should attacks on IoT devices, and ensures that IoT devices operbe capable of identifying attack patterns that transcend indi- ate in a secure environment.In addition, the supervision chain
vidual chains and coordinating defensive measures across the provides a reliable data-sharing and verification platform for
entire network. This requires not only technical advancements DDoS detection. Through technologies such as smart contracts,
in data sharing and analysis but also the development of trust it enables the automatic verification and sharing of attack data
908 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

that has been detected, thereby enhancing the accuracy and based on the DAG structure. Given that DAG chains oftimeliness of DDoS detection and providing strong support for fer higher transaction throughput compared to traditional
the implementation of defense measures. blockchains, our method can reduce the latency of onchain data sharing and enable real-time sharing of model
 parameters and attack cases among each client node.
C. Introduction to This Work 3) We introduce a time decay mechanism for asynchronous
 In the current blockchain and federated learning (FL) aggregation. When client nodes in federated learning
integrated architecture, the absence of real-time and reliable unexpectedly go offline due to crashes, this mechanism
data-sharing mechanisms between business chains restricts de- reduces the impact of outdated model parameters on the
tection systems to local traffic monitoring. This makes identi- aggregation results, ensuring that the model training refying global DDoS attack patterns difficult, reducing detection mains unaffected and thereby enhancing the scalability of
accuracy and timeliness, and increasing false positives and neg- federated learning. Moreover, by leveraging blockchain
atives. Data isolation between chains also hinders distributed technology to record the update history of model paramcollaborative defense, as attackers can exploit information silos eters, we ensure the immutability and traceability of data.
for cross-chain attacks. The distributed nature of blockchain When new clients join the federated learning training, they
networks diversifies attack paths, allowing attackers to exploit can quickly synchronize with the latest model parameters
consensus mechanism and smart contract vulnerabilities for via the blockchain and thus participate in normal model
complex attacks that bypass traditional defenses. This further training.
complicates global attack pattern identification. Additionally, 4) To enhance the accuracy of the federated learning model
conducting business processes and security monitoring on the in DDoS detection, we have adopted a dynamic weight
same blockchain limits system flexibility and results in subop- assignment method. By assigning greater weights to nodes
timal security performance. The significant differences in data with higher accuracy in each training round, we allow
formats and structures between IoT business chains cause in- models with better performance to have a larger proconsistent feature extraction, affecting detection model accuracy portion in the aggregation process. This approach not
and generalization ability. only improves the accuracy of DDoS detection but also
 To address these issues, this paper proposes combining DAG- reduces the number of rounds and time required for model
structured blockchain with federated learning for DDoS at- convergence.
tack detection in IoT business chain networks. DAG-structured The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
blockchains offer high throughput and low latency, enabling presents DDoS detection methods in blockchain networks. Secrapid recording of model parameters and attack events and tion III introduces the Challenges for DDoS attack detectionin
real-time sharing of model parameters and attack information. business blockchain networks. Section IV introduces the types
Federated learning can integrate heterogeneous network traffic of DDoS attacks in blockchain networks. Section V describes
information from different business blockchain networks for dis- the system model and the details the scheme proposed in this
tributed detection while protecting the privacy of local network paper.In Section VI, we present experimental simulations. Fitraffic data. By using dynamic weight allocation and time decay nally, we conclude in Section VII. The structure of this paper is
mechanisms, federated learning can improve detection accuracy illustrated in Fig. 1, and a detailed comparative analysis of the
and model convergence speed. Therefore, this combination can related works is presented in Table I.
effectively address the challenges of DDoS attack detection
in blockchain networks and enhance the ability of blockchain
networks to resist DDoS threats. II. DDOS MITIGATION AND DETECTION METHODS IN
 The main contributions of this study are summarized as BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS
follows:
 A. Blockchain Technology-Based Mitigation Methods
 1) We have conducted a comprehensive and in-depth investigation of DDoS attack detection methods in blockchain Blockchain technology, with its characteristics of decentralnetworks, systematically summarized the widely adopted ization, immutability, and transparency, has demonstrated a
 technical means at present, and thoroughly analyzed the certain ability to mitigate Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
 key challenges and urgent problems currently faced in this attacks. Through the recording and verification mechanisms of
 research area. the distributed ledger, blockchain can effectively identify and
 2) We propose a cross-chain supervision method called block the propagation of malicious traffic, thereby reducing the
 BAFL, which is based on the DAG (Directed Acyclic occupation and destruction of network resources by attacks.
 Graph) structure and employs a federated learning frame- Moreover, the consensus mechanism of blockchain can ensure
 work. This method analyzes heterogeneous network traffic that nodes in the network reach a consistent identification and
 information from different business blockchain networks response to attack behaviors, further enhancing the network’s
 and strictly protects the privacy of local network traf- defensive capabilities [4], [5]. For example, several blockchainfic data for each client node and the business chains based mitigation methods have been proposed, including decenthey supervise during the model training process. It also tralized Content Delivery Network(CDN) schemes [6], smart
 utilizes smart contract technology to achieve automated contract-based attack information sharing [7], and blockchaindata verification and sharing within the supervision chain SDN collaborative frameworks [8]. These methods leverage
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 909

Fig. 1. The structure of this paper.

blockchain’s inherent security features to enhance DDoS at- directly affects the efficiency of model updates. Moreover, after
tack detection and mitigation. [9] systematically studied the detecting an attack, the system needs to take defensive measures
attack principles and defense strategies of blockchain from two quickly, but communication latency and node response time in
dimensions—blockchain hierarchical structure and attack asso- distributed systems may hinder the timely implementation of
ciation analysis—summarized blockchain attack clusters, and defensive measures.
constructed a relatively comprehensive distributed blockchain
security defense system.Several scholars have proposed DDoS
attack detection and mitigation schemes based on blockchain B. Traditional Detection Methods
and SDN. Co-IoT [10], on the other hand, utilizes SDN con- Traditional DDoS attack detection methods in blockchain nettrollers to detect DDoS attacks in IoT devices and shares attack works mainly include machine learning-based techniques and
information via Ethereum smart contracts to block malicious defense mechanisms that leverage blockchain characteristics.
traffic. The BloSS model is a collaborative threat information- Traditional methods include machine learning-based anomaly
sharing framework that integrates blockchain, smart contracts, detection [18], fee-based mempool optimization [19], and coland software-defined networking (SDN). It utilizes IPFS to store laborative anomaly detection frameworks [20]. These methdata and ensures data security through the use of blockchain- ods leverage various algorithms and optimization strategies to
based hash values [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. Addition- enhance detection accuracy and efficiency. [21]analyzes the
ally, the DefenseChain framework employs smart contracts to behavior of the Ethereum network under low-cost DDoS
detect and mitigate DDoS attacks, supporting dynamic strategy attacks and proposes using machine learning techniques, such
updates and traffic redirection [16]. Other studies have explored as decision trees and random forests, to detect such attacks.
privacy-preserving mechanisms based on Bloom filters, systems These approach can effectively identify DDoS attacks and other
that encrypt IP lists using AES algorithms, and Ethereum-based abnormal behaviors, and further determine the type of attack
frameworks for verifying the integrity of IoT sensor data [17]. through clustering analysis. Some research focus on the issue
 Although blockchain technology shows great potential in mit- of DDoS attack detection in Blockchain-IoT systems and proigating DDoS attacks, it still faces many challenges in the detec- pose distributed detection frameworks based on fog computing
tion and defense of DDoS attacks, which limit its effectiveness. and machine learning. [22] presents a distributed framework
Therefore, it is necessary to further enhance the DDoS attack that integrates IPFS and optimized feature selection, employing
detection capabilities within blockchain networks. For example, Random Forest (RF) and XGBoost algorithms, and is suitto maintain the consistency of model parameters across different able for smart contract-based Blockchain-IoT systems. [23] is
nodes, it is necessary to overcome the synchronization delay that based on heterogeneous ensemble learning (AdaBoost and Ranmay be caused by the blockchain consensus mechanism, which dom Forest) and virtual-reality parallel blockchain technology,
910 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I
 A COMPARISON OF RELATED WORKS

optimizing detection performance for DDoS attack detection networks. Although these traditional methods can detect and
in blockchain networks. [24] designs a fog computing-based mitigate DDoS attacks to some extent, they usually rely on spedistributed intrusion detection system, using RF and XGBoost cific network features or the performance of machine learning
algorithms for distributed detection, emphasizing low latency models, and may need further optimization and improvement
and efficient detection, and is suitable for Blockchain-IoT when facing complex attack scenarios.
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 911

 TABLE I
 (CONTINUED)

 These methods have achieved certain effects in early attack detection methods. Second, the consensus mechanism in
detection. However, in the complex blockchain network envi- blockchain processes the traffic load information sent by all
ronment, their accuracy and real-time performance are limited. miner nodes. Attackers can encapsulate and transmit rumor-
First, attackers can exploit the blockchain consensus mechanism based DDoS attack traffic containing disguised load informato transmit redundant data, and hide DDoS attack traffic in tion [5], further reducing the accuracy of statistical detection
redundant P2P traffic through protocol obfuscation or muta- methods [20]. Moreover, these methods may face performance
tion flooding mechanisms, reducing the accuracy of statistical bottlenecks when dealing with high-dimensional data. On the
912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I
 (CONTINUED)

one hand, the blockchain network layer has various consensus attack traffic in the blockchain network layer are very similar to
mechanisms (such as PoW, PoS, DPoS, Byzantine fault tol- those of normal network traffic, making it difficult to distinguish
erance, etc.), and the diversity of underlying traffic protocols the core features of mixed DDoS attack traffic through machine
(such as RLPx, GHOST, Gossip, DEVp2p, Strata, Gnutella, etc.) learning methods.
increases the dimensionality of non-linear features of traffic data
and the complexity of classification output of DDoS detection C. Deep Learning- Based Detection Methods
models. This weakens the model’s generalization ability for Deep learning demonstrates significant advantages in detect-
DDoS traffic. What’s more, the characteristics of rumor-based ing DDoS attacks due to its powerful capability of extracting
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 913

 TABLE I
 (CONTINUED)

high-dimensional features. It can automatically identify subtle Bitcoin network, extracting statistical features, reducing feature
patterns and features associated with attacks from complex dimensions using Principal Component Analysis (PCA), and
network traffic data, thereby enabling more accurate attack ultimately predicting and detecting DDoS attacks with a Multidetection and classification [25], [26]. [27]proposes a deep- Layer Perceptron (MLP) neural network.A blockchain-based
learning-based method for detecting DDoS attacks in bitcoin DDoS mitigation method is proposed in [28], which reduces
ecosystem by collecting blocks and transaction data from the signaling complexity and enables multiple autonomous systems
914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I
 (CONTINUED)

to share hardware resources and defense capabilities. It also neural network is proposed in [29], targeting DDoS attacks in
integrates a deep learning DDoS detection system to identify the blockchain network layer. The method extracts robust feaand block only the specific malicious traffic, instead of blocking tures of attack traffic through cross-layer convolution operations
all traffic to the victim. In addition, in the field of AI detection with L2 regularization. It employs a stacked sparse autoencoder
of DDoS attacks, current research and practice tend to adopt based on Kullback-Leibler divergence for feature encoding to
centralized training and detection strategies. A DDoS attack reduce redundancy and prevent overfitting. Moreover, it optidetection method based on a cross-multi-layer convolutional mizes model parameters using an improved stochastic gradient
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 915

descent (ISGD) algorithm to accelerate convergence.However, central server resources, mainly because resource-constrained
these centralized approach has several limitations in the context edge devices cannot provide sufficient computing and storage
of blockchain networks. capabilities to support large-scale model aggregation and opti-
 Specifically, the limited computing resources of centralized mization. Second, the failure of the central server may lead to the
detection organizations make it difficult to process large-scale interruption of collaborative training, which in turn affects the
network traffic data quickly and efficiently, which can lead to stability and reliability of the entire federated learning system.
insufficient response speed to attacks. A centralized approach In addition, as the number of participating devices increases,
can also raise the risk of privacy breaches during the transmis- the scalability of the system and communication bottlenecks
sion of network traffic, as a large amount of data needs to be are becoming more and more prominent. These problems not
transferred across the network, increasing the possibility of data only increase communication overhead but also may lead to
interception and abuse. a significant increase in training delays, thus posing a severe
 challenge to real-time performance and efficiency.
D. Privacy-Preserving Detection Methods
 At present, in the field of network attack detection, the E. Blockchain Technology-Based Detection Methods
research of privacy protection methods has made remarkable DDoS detection methods integrated with blockchain technolprogress. With the rapid development of network technology ogy are gradually becoming a research direction.The decentraland the increasing awareness of data privacy, how to protect ized and tamper-proof characteristics of blockchain provide new
user privacy while detecting network attacks has become an ideas for attack detection. For instance, blockchain-based smart
urgent problem to be solved. In recent years, researchers have contracts can establish a trust mechanism among distributed
proposed a variety of privacy protection methods to address this detection nodes, thereby enhancing the robustness of detection.
challenge.Specific methods include vehicular network security In addition, blockchain technology can also be utilized to store
frameworks combining blockchain and deep learning [30], fed- attack features and historical data.For example [38] further
erated learning-based anomaly detection [31], and blockchain- discusses the application of blockchain in IoT, safeguarding
enabled federated deep learning frameworks [32]. These meth- device data through hash values and timestamps, and enabling
ods enhance privacy protection and detection performance by the recovery to a secure state after network intrusions. [39] prointegrating advanced cryptographic and machine learning tech- posed a blockchain-based Link-Flooding Attack(LFA) detection
niques. Meanwhile, [33] also proposed the PEFL framework, scheme, which deploys blockchain technology on routers and
which employs perturbation encoding and long short-term mem- servers within and around the protected area to record and share
ory autoencoders to protect privacy and designs the FedGRU al- traceroute information, thereby achieving efficient detection of
gorithm for intrusion detection. [34] proposed the P2TIF frame- LFA.
work to protect confidential information in IIoT environments Current researchers have proposed various approaches that
and identify cyber threats. It includes a blockchain module to integrate blockchain and machine learning techniques for deensure secure communication of data and a deep learning module tecting and defending against DDoS attacks. On one hand, tradithat uses DVAE technology to resist inference attacks, followed tional machine learning methods such as K-Nearest Neighbors
by threat detection using A-DGRNN. (KNN), decision trees, and random forests have been demon-
 In recent years, IDS based on federated learning (FL) have strated to effectively detect DDoS attacks [40]. Blockchain techattracted widespread attention [35]. FL, as a distributed machine nology is utilized for securely storing blacklisted IP addresses,
learning approach, eliminates the need for sharing data samples and smart contracts are employed to automatically block and
and emphasizes data heterogeneity, availability, and privacy pro- unblock attack traffic. On the other hand, deep learning models
tection while reducing model bias, making it a highly promising like LSTM are applied to analyze network traffic from IoT edge
solution for IIoT [36]. FL also provides a distributed frame- devices, combining blockchain technology to achieve mechawork that ensures privacy protection and promotes collaboration nisms for attack detection and defense [41]. Researchers in [42]
among multiple parties, enabling iterative training of machine have proposed a blockchain-based distributed machine learning
learning models for IoT applications. framework that leverages collaboration among edge nodes and
 A blockchain-based DDoS attack detection framework us- incentive mechanisms through smart contracts to enhance the
ing FL is proposed in [37]. It detects DDoS attacks in a dis- efficiency of DDoS attack detection and model optimization
tributed environment through data preprocessing (including data capabilities. [43] introduces a DDoS detection framework
validation, feature selection, and normalization), local model integrating blockchain, smart contracts, and fuzzy neural nettraining (using LSTM models and the Adam optimization al- works. It protects privacy by hosting collaborators on private
gorithm), and model aggregation (employing centralized or blockchains and avoids data sharing among them. The fuzzy
distributed federated learning techniques). This framework aims neural network within the smart contract detects abnormal data,
to improve detection efficiency and accuracy while adapting to and the results are uploaded to a public blockchain for access by
the distributed nature of blockchain networks. all collaborators, demonstrating high detection accuracy and re-
 However, these methods are facing several challenges in call rates. [45] presents a blockchain-supported adaptive DDoS
practical applications. First, in the process of detecting DDoS detection and classification method. By integrating multiple
attacks on blockchain networks, it is not easy to find suitable deep learning models (GRU, CNN, LSTM, DNN, and SVM) and
916 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

introducing a dynamic weight adjustment mechanism, it signif- 2) Non-IID Data Distribution and Data Heterogeneity: In
icantly enhances the performance of DDoS attack detection and blockchain networks, data typically exhibit Non-IID (nonclassification. [44] proposes a blockchain-supported Software- independent and identically distributed) characteristics, with
Defined Networking (SDN) framework (BSDN-HMTD). It em- significant differences in the data distributions across various
ploys deep learning techniques to detect DDoS attacks and nodes. This data distribution characteristic poses substantial
strengthens network security and robustness through user au- challenges for traditional machine learning models based on
thentication, flow validation, and dynamic Moving Target De- centralized training, as they often assume that data are IID.
fense (MTD) techniques. As a result, the generalization capability of detection models is
 However, in distributed systems such as blockchain networks, compromised. For example, in blockchain networks, different
although the integration of blockchain and machine learning nodes may process different types of transactions or traffic,
shows great potential in detecting DDoS attacks, it also faces leading to increased diversity in attack features.
many challenges. On the one hand, the transaction processing The data distribution characteristics in blockchain networks
speed and storage capacity of blockchain are limited. In the show significant Non-IID features, which pose severe challenges
scenario of high-traffic DDoS attacks, it may not be able to to traditional machine learning models. Specifically, there are
process and store a large amount of attack data in time, thereby considerable differences in the data distributions across different
increasing detection latency. On the other hand, machine learn- nodes. These differences are not only reflected in the volume
ing models need to be updated regularly to adapt to new attack of data but also in the type, structure, and feature distribution
patterns. In distributed systems, how to efficiently update and of the data. For instance, some nodes may primarily handle
synchronize model parameters is an urgent problem to be solved. high-frequency transaction data, while others may focus on
In addition, real-time detection of DDoS attacks requires the smart contract execution or cross-chain interactions. This disystem to respond quickly, but the transaction confirmation time verse data distribution makes it difficult for machine learning
and data synchronization time of blockchain may have a negative models based on centralized training to adapt effectively, as
impact on the system’s real-time performance. these models typically assume that data are IID and thus fail
 to fully account for data heterogeneity and complexity during
 the training process.
 III. CHALLENGES FOR DDOS ATTACK DETECTION IN Moreover, the Non-IID data distribution characteristic further
 BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS weakens the generalization capability of detection models. In
 blockchain networks, different nodes may face different types
A. Insufficient Data Monitoring Coverage of attacks. For example, some nodes may be more susceptible
 1) The Decentralization Dilemma of DDoS Attack Detection to DDoS attacks, while others may face the risk of smart conin Blockchain Networks: In blockchain networks, the distributed tract vulnerability exploitation. The diversity of attack features
architecture, while offering the advantages of decentralization increases the complexity of detection models, making it difficult
and tamper resistance, also presents significant challenges for the for a single centralized model to capture all potential attack
detection of DDoS attacks. Given the extensive and independent patterns. For instance, an attack feature present on one node
distribution of nodes within blockchain networks, malicious traf- may not exist on another node or may appear in a different form.
fic can easily be concealed within legitimate network flows, mak- This heterogeneity in data and attack features requires detection
ing it extremely difficult to distinguish between malevolent and models to have stronger adaptability and generalization capabenign traffic. This obfuscation not only increases the complex- bility in order to maintain high accuracy and low false-positive
ity of detection but also leads to a higher rate of false positives, rates across different data distributions and attack scenarios.
thereby compromising the accuracy and reliability of detection Therefore, designing machine learning models that can adapt to
systems. Moreover, the decentralized nature of blockchain net- Non-IID data distributions within the distributed environment
works further restricts the application of traditional centralized of blockchain networks has become an important research topic
detection methods. In a decentralized environment, the absence in the field of blockchain security. This not only requires the
of a unified control center to coordinate and implement detec- development of new algorithms to handle data heterogeneity but
tion strategies renders traditional single-point-based detection also necessitates exploring how to achieve collaborative training
technologies inapplicable to blockchain networks. For instance, and optimization of models within a distributed architecture,
attackers can exploit the anonymity of blockchain nodes to thereby enhancing the overall performance and reliability of
launch attacks simultaneously from multiple nodes, thereby detection models.
concealing their true identities and attack trajectories. This
anonymity significantly diminishes the effectiveness of traditional tracking and identification methods when confronting B. The Real-Time and Scalability Challenges of DDoS
DDoS attacks in blockchain networks, making it difficult to Detection in Large-Scale Blockchain Networks
accurately locate the attack sources and implement effective With the continuous expansion of the business chain network
defensive measures. Therefore, designing efficient, accurate, scale, DDoS attack detection systems are facing increasingly
and adaptable DDoS attack detection mechanisms within the stringent requirements for real-time performance and scalabildistributed environment of blockchain networks has become an ity. In large-scale network environments, the volume of traffic
urgent issue in the field of blockchain security research. data grows exponentially, and detection models must efficiently
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 917

process and analyze vast amounts of data within an extremely IV. ATTACK TYPE
short period of time to minimize detection latency and ensure
 This section introduces the types of DDoS attacks in
that attacks are identified and responded to in a timely manner. blockchain networks.
Meanwhile, the dynamic nature of the supervision chain, such as
the frequent addition and exit of nodes, further complicates the
detection system and poses significant challenges to its real-time A. DDoS Attack in Blockchain Data Layer
performance and adaptability. In the actual deployment and
application of supervision chains, the performance bottlenecks DDoS attacks on the blockchain data layer are malicious
of blockchain technology have become a key obstacle to their activities that interfere with data storage and integrity by sending
large-scale application. a large number of invalid or low-value transactions, injecting
 Specifically, limitations in transaction processing speed and false data, and generating invalid blocks. These actions constorage capacity severely restrict the operational efficiency and sume the storage and computing resources of nodes, leading to
scalability of supervision chain. On the one hand, although the decreased network performance and difficulties in confirming
consensus mechanism of blockchain ensures the security and normal transactions.
immutability of data, it often comes at the cost of transaction processing speed. For example, when dealing with high-throughput
network traffic data, the low transaction speed of blockchain can B. DDoS Attack in Blockchain Network Layer
lead to data backlogs, preventing real-time attack detection and The Blockchain Network Layer DDoS attack model focuses
recording, thereby affecting the timeliness of detection. On the on the blockchain network layer, specifically using blockchain’s
other hand, as the volume of regulatory data continues to rise, P2P (peer-to-peer) architecture for attacks. Attackers exploit
the storage capacity of blockchain is also reaching its limits. vulnerabilities in P2P file sharing systems to access targeted
Distributed ledgers need to store large amounts of historical objects through large numbers of normal users, or to discondata, which not only increases the storage burden on nodes but nect some nodes from each other in an anonymous P2P netalso may cause network congestion and synchronization delays, work, thereby compromising the integrity and availability of
thereby affecting the overall system’s operational efficiency. the blockchain networks. This kind of attacks can cause the
Therefore, how to optimize the performance of blockchain while blockchain networks to fork, delay or fail transactions, affecting
retaining its security and decentralization characteristics to meet the decentralized nature of the blockchain and the trust mechathe needs of large-scale applications has become one of the core nism.
issues that urgently need to be solved in the current research
field of supervision chain.
 C. DDoS Attacks in Consensus Layer
 DDoS attacks at the consensus layer of blockchain typically
C. The Tradeoff Between Privacy and Supervision occur by manipulating the consensus mechanism. Attackers may
 The application of the supervision chain in network secu- control a large number of nodes (e.g., by launching a 51% attack)
rity needs to not only meet the regulatory authorities’ require- or generate a large number of invalid blocks and transactions,
ments for data transparency and traceability but also protect thereby preventing the network from reaching consensus. This
the data privacy of network participants. However, finding a can lead to delayed transaction confirmations or even transaction
balance between these two aspects is a significant challenge rollbacks. Such an attack not only disrupts the stability and
faced by the supervision chain. On the one hand, regulatory consistency of the network but also may affect the decentralized
authorities need to obtain sufficient information to identify and nature of the entire blockchain network, enabling attackers to
prevent cyberattacks, ensuring the safety and stability of the net- manipulate transaction records or prevent the confirmation of
work environment. For example, when detecting DDoS attacks, legitimate transactions.
the supervision chain needs to record detailed characteristics of
the attack traffic for tracing and analysis. On the other hand, the
data privacy of network participants must not be overlooked. D. DDoS Attacks in Application Layer
Although blockchain technology provides a certain level of pri- DDoS attacks at the application layer of blockchain typivacy protection through encryption mechanisms, excessive data cally occur by launching a large number of requests against
sharing may lead to the leakage of users’ sensitive information blockchain application programming interfaces (APIs) or smart
in some cases. Therefore, designing mechanisms that can satisfy contracts. Attackers exploit the openness and accessibility of
regulatory needs while protecting privacy is an urgent issue that these interfaces to send a vast number of malicious requests,
needs to be addressed in the practical application of the super- which consume the computational resources and bandwidth
vision chain. This requires not only technological innovation, of the application layer, leading to slow service responses or
such as the application of privacy-preserving technologies like even system crashes. This type of attack not only increases
zero-knowledge proofs and homomorphic encryption, but also the execution latency of smart contracts but also may prevent
in-depth exploration at the legal and policy levels to ensure the users from accessing blockchain applications normally, thereby
compliance and acceptability of the supervision chain. severely affecting user experience and application availability.
918 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

E. DDoS Attacks in Protocol Layer on the blockchain as transactions. The leader node is responsible
 for verifying transactions and proposing new blocks. And help
 DDoS attacks at the protocol layer of blockchain typically
exploit vulnerabilities or weaknesses in the blockchain protocol. maintain the consistency of model parameters across nodes of
 the Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) supervision chain, coordi-
Attackers may send a large number of maliciously constructed
 nating parameter aggregation and model updates throughout the
protocol messages to interrupt or disrupt communication between nodes, thereby undermining the normal synchronization federated learning process. Leveraging the high throughput and
 efficiency inherent to DAG-structured blockchains, the superviand data transmission of the network. For example, attackers can
 sion chain is capable of rapidly recording model parameters and
exploit vulnerabilities in the P2P protocol to send a large number
of forged node discovery or block propagation requests. When vast numbers of detected DDoS attack events. This enables a
 more agile and responsive detection mechanism, enhancing the
nodes process these invalid requests, they consume a significant
amount of resources, which may ultimately prevent them from overall security and robustness of the system.
functioning properly and even lead to network partitioning. This 1) Workflow of DDoS Attack Detection Model: The workflow of this model is shown in Fig. 2:
type of attack directly affects the underlying communication
mechanism of the blockchain network, posing a threat to the i) Each client in business chain have a labeled data set and a
stability and security of the entire network. set of business blockchain nodes that it monitors.
 ii) Each client in business chain uses local datasets for training.
 iii) Each client in business chain completes the current round
F. DDoS Attacks in Node Layer of training and obtains the local model data.
 DDoS attacks at the node layer of blockchain typically occur iv) The client in business chain that completes this training
by focusing attacks on specific nodes. Attackers may overwhelm round will upload the local model data to the expected follower
the target nodes with massive malicious traffic or generate a large node on the supervision chain, and the follower node will record
number of spurious requests, thereby exhausting the resources the model parameters as transactions on the supervision chain
of the target nodes (such as CPU, memory, and bandwidth). through “Data Upload”smart contract.
This prevents the nodes from processing legitimate transactions v) The leader node obtains the aggregation model through our
or communicating normally with other nodes. Such an attack proposed aggregation algorithm by reading and analyzing the
not only degrades the performance of the nodes but also may model parameters of the clients node received on the supervision
cause them to crash or become isolated, thereby affecting the chain. The leader node records the aggregated model parameters
decentralized nature and overall stability of the entire blockchain on the DAG ledger through a “Data Upload” smart contract and
network. shares them with the follower nodes. You can see the details in
 Algorithm 1.
G. DDoS Attacks in Smart Contract vi) The followers node reads the aggregated model parameters
 through the “Data Query” smart contract from DAG ledger,
 The DDoS attack model against smart contracts targets sends them to the corresponding clients, and updates the model
blockchain-IoT systems based on smart contracts, specifically parameters of the clients.
exploiting the automated nature of smart contracts. Attackers vii) After multiple rounds of training, the classification accould exploit vulnerabilities in smart contracts or clog up the curacy of the model reached a reasonable standard, and the
network by sending a large number of illegal requests, making model training was completed. Each client node will collect
it impossible for smart contracts to properly execute or process the network traffic of its assigned business blockchain nodes
legitimate transactions. Such attacks can result in the failure through the traffic collection device, and analyze these traffic to
of smart contract execution, affect the business processes of detect potential DDoS attacks.
blockchain-IoT systems, and may even lead to financial losses. viii) The client saves the latest network traffic check result.
 This information is not only used to update local training
 V. METHOD datasets, It is also uploaded via the client node to its correspond-
 In this part, we will introduce the following aspects: the design ing follower node on the DAG blockchain and stored on the
of the model architecture as well as the workflow, network traffic DAG chain as transactions through smart contracts called “data
preprocessing technology and the training method of the model. uploads,” sharing information on discovered attack behavior
 with other nodes.
 Follower nodes in the supervision chain are responsible for
A. Model Architecture updating model parameters during the federated learning pro-
 Our method consists of several entities: supervision chain, cess. They record the network traffic generated by the business
clients, and business network. In our federated learning frame- blockchain nodes as transactions on the supervision chain ledger.
work, model aggregation is performed by supervision chain, These follower nodes interact with the supervision chain leader
which includes a leader node and several follower nodes. Fol- and client nodes in the business chain. They obtain locally
lower nodes establish communication connections with client. trained model parameters from the client nodes in the business
clients are not only used to upload and update parameters during chain and upload them to the leader node, which aggregates
model training, but also used to analyze network traffic generated these parameters using the proposed asynchronous federated
by the business networks during model detection and record it learning algorithm. The follower nodes ensure that only model
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 919

Fig. 2. Working process of BAFL DDoS attack detection system.

parameters are shared, not the raw network traffic data from understanding of the history and current status of the transaction.
the business chains, thereby protecting the data privacy of the This graph-based structure allows transactions to be confirmed
business chains. in a non-linear manner, improving the throughput of the system
 Client nodes corresponding to the business chain monitor and and enabling a decentralized consensus mechanism through the
collect network traffic data from the business blockchain nodes. joint selection and confirmation of Tips trading blocks by nodes
They preprocess this data and use it to train local models. These in the network.
client nodes send their locally trained model parameters to the The DAG structure supports the parallel confirmation of mulsupervision chain for aggregation and further processing. Mean- tiple transactions, effectively avoiding the sequential processing
while, they also receive updated global model parameters from bottleneck in traditional blockchains. Its throughput increases
the supervision chain to continue training in subsequent rounds. linearly with the number of nodes, making it suitable for large-
After training is completed, the client nodes corresponding to the scale networks. Meanwhile, DAG’s efficient transaction recordbusiness chain act as regulators to conduct security monitoring ing capability, such as processing thousands of transactions per
of the business chains they oversee. second, reduces the latency of uploading model parameters and
 Our aggregation node of federated learning consist of a DAG attack events to the blockchain, thereby supporting real-time
structured blockchain, and the implementation of consensus detection and response.
relies on the process of selecting and confirming transactions In the process of model aggregation, the aggregator deteramong the nodes in the DAG network, where the tips transaction mines the weight of the parameter in the model aggregation
block refers to the most recent collection of transactions that have according to the old and new degree of the parameter transmitted
not yet been confirmed by subsequent transactions. Nodes reach by the client and the accuracy rate of the client model. In the
a consensus by selecting the Tips trading block with the highest process of the first aggregation, the aggregator first aggregates
credibility that satisfies a particular selection algorithm, such as the collected client parameters to obtain the pre-aggregation
the highest transaction fees or the greatest network influence, model of the round and its accuracy, and then compares the
and these choices reflect a common recognition of transac- model accuracy of each client with it. When the accuracy
tion order and validity in the network. As more transactions of the pre-aggregation model is high, the parameters of the
join, they reference these Tips trading blocks, gradually build- pre-aggregation model dominate; otherwise, the parameters of
ing an interdependent network structure to achieve a common the client model dominate. As the result, the older the client
920 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

model parameters, the smaller the proportion in the aggregation
process, we implemented this by introducing a time factor. This
is described in detail in the part C of Section V.
 The time factor indicates that in the maximum experimental
time range, the longer the time delay, the smaller the time factor,
resulting in a smaller model proportion. If the delay exceeds the
maximum delay range, the client model can be ignored.
 During the training of the DDoS attack detection model,
clients in federated learning only upload model parameters to the
server, without transmitting raw training data. This mechanism
ensures the privacy of the network traffic data in business chains,
as different business chains are monitored by separate clients and
data between chains are isolated from each other. Moreover, we
have automated the processes of data verification and sharing Fig. 3. The process of data preprocessing.
through the use of smart contracts, thereby further enhancing the
security and trustworthiness of the data. In the actual deployment
scenarios of supervision chains, smart contracts are designed to
permit only specific nodes to access and process data. Under combination enables BAFL to quickly update and synchronize
this architecture, only regulatory authorities and certain business model parameters, ensuring the timeliness of detection results.
chain nodes are able to obtain certain sensitive data, thereby re- Thus, when dealing with dynamically changing network traffic
alizing a precise and meticulous access control mechanism. For data, it can more promptly respond to potential DDoS attacks.
example, in the IoT environment, the data generated by devices
may contain users’ private information. Through blockchain
technology and smart contracts, the privacy of this data can B. Real-Time Network Traffic Preprocessing
be ensured during transmission and processing, preventing data Network traffic comprises data transfers between endpoints.
leakage and misuse. Because the communication channel is shared, packets from
 In the actual deployment scenarios of supervision chains, different data flows are multiplexed, or split for transmission, for
smart contracts are designed to permit only specific nodes to the purpose of transmission. This suggests that handling traffic
access and process data. Under this architecture, only regulatory for a live presentation to an NIDS is quite different from handling
authorities and certain business chain nodes are able to obtain a static dataset that contains all of the flows [46].
certain sensitive data, thereby realizing a precise and meticulous We use tool designed in paper [46] to develop our online
access control mechanism. detection, which divides the traffic flows into sub-flows based on
 This approach of combining the DAG structure with federated time frames and transforms them into array-like data structures
learning not only enhances the performance and efficiency of taken from network traffic traces of a dataset.
BAFL but also strengthens data privacy protection and model ro- Network traffic consists of data flows between ends,as shown
bustness, making it a powerful solution for protecting blockchain in Fig. 3. Due to the shared nature of communication links,
networks from DDoS attacks. It is particularly effective in packets from different data streams are multiplexed, resulting in
processing large-scale, dynamically changing network data, packets from the same data stream being separated for transmisproviding high-precision, low-latency detection results. Firstly, sion. This means that real-time traffic is being processed.
from the perspective of data privacy protection, federated learn- In the feature extraction stage,given a traffic tracking file from
ing effectively safeguards data privacy by sharing only model the data set and a predefined time window with a length of t
parameters instead of raw data. The supervision chain of the seconds, collect all packets (pk1, pk2, . . .) from the file with
DAG structure further ensures the immutability and traceability the capture time between t0, the capture time of the first packet,
of these parameters, thereby enhancing the credibility of data and time[t0 + t]. The algorithm extracts f attributes from each
privacy protection. Secondly, in terms of efficient data sharing packet.
and synchronization, the efficiency of the DAG structure enables In the data preprocessing stage,the attributes of packets berapid uploading and synchronization of model parameters. This longing to the same bidirectional communication stream are
is especially crucial for handling high-traffic network data, as grouped in chronological order to form a matrix of shape width
the DAG structure can process thousands of transactions per and length [n, f ], where f is the number of features and n is
second, significantly reducing the latency of data uploading the maximum number of packets collected for each stream in
and synchronization. Moreover, regarding model robustness and the time window during the parsing process. Streams greater
scalability, the asynchronous nature of federated learning makes than n are truncated, while shorter streams are filled with zeros
the model training process more flexible, better able to handle at the end of the next stage after normalization. In the time
client failures and network latency. The supervision chain of the window [t0 + t, t0 + 2t], etc.The same operation is repeated for
DAG structure ensures real-time updating and sharing of model the packet until the end of the file. The output of this process can
parameters, thereby enhancing model robustness and scalability. be viewed as a two-dimensional array of samples E. A row in
Finally, in the aspect of real-time detection and response, this the array represents a sample of the packet captured in the same
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 921

Fig. 4. BAFL training procedure.

time window, while a column represents a sample of the packet to its corresponding follower node, which packages this inforbelonging to the same bidirectional stream. mation into the transaction and uploals it to the DAG blockchain
 In the normalization and filling stage, each attribute value is for data sharing.
normalized to a scale [0,1], and the sample is filled with zero, The leader node reads the model parameters of follower nodes
so the fixed length of each sample is n, because a sample with a that have completed the current theoretical training from the
fixed length is the requirement that CNN can learn on a complete DAG chain. According to the accuracy of the client model
sample set. Each non-empty element of array E is a compact corresponding to each follower node, the leader node weights
graphical representation of a sample. Within each E element, the parameters so that the model parameters of the client with
the colored rows are the packet in the form of f standardized higher training accuracy account for a larger proportion in the
attributes, while the white rows represent zero padding. aggregation. After the leader node aggregates these parameters,
 Each E is labeled by matching its stream identifier id with the it packages the aggregated parameters w into a transaction
label provided by the original dataset. This also means that the and publishes it on the DAG blockchain, sharing the model
value of the label is constant along each column of the array E. parameter information with the follower nodes, who send these
 In the input layer,each traffic stream is reshaped in seconds parameters to the client for the next round of training.The BAFL
into a two-dimensional matrix of packet characteristics, enabling training procedure is shown in Fig. 4.
CNNS to learn correlations between packets of the same stream. 1) Local Model Training: The training sample is evenly dis-
This first layer takes a flow flow represented by a matrix of size tributed to each client, and the number of client is P . After
n × f as the input to the neural network. receiving the training samples sent by the training data memory,
 Each input matrix is operated by a convolution layer with k we randomly divided the training samples into P parts and
convolution nuclei, each of size h × f , where h is the length of gave them to each client. After each follower node receives the
each convolution kernel. Our neural network model is trained to training sample Dtp = (dk, np −1 , . . ., dk, np ), using the t round of
classify network traffic. training assigned to its own data.
 We collect real-time network traffic data from a blockchain
 network, pre-process it, and apply it as input to our convolu-
C. Model Training tional neural network (CNN) model to facilitate online attack
 We randomly and evenly distributed the preprocessed data to detection. Traffic data is divided into two categories: malicious
each client p, allowing local data on different clients to cover (DDoS attack) traffic and benign traffic. We aim to optimize the
different feature spaces or categories. Clients with higher accu- CNN model to reduce complexity and computation time so that
racy may have learned more generalizable features or their local the model can be effectively deployed on resource-constrained
data distributions may be closer to the global task requirements. devices. In order to achieve this goal, we design a lightweight
By assigning higher weights to models with higher accuracy and supervised learning system, the core of which is a well-designed
introducing a temporal factor to reduce the aggregation weights CNN for efficient attack detection.
of outdated models, we can accelerate the convergence of the The structure of our neural network is shown in Fig. 5:
global model and potentially enhance its performance across the Input layer: We build a spatial representation in which every
overall data distribution.The asynchronous federated learning traffic stream is transformed into a two-dimensional packet
algorithm based on accuracy is shown in Algorithm 1. characteristic matrix in a matter of seconds. To make it possible
 As for each client p, we divide the collected attack network for the CNN to discover correlations between the same stream’s
traffic data into training set and test set.After receiving the data, packets. As a result, a flow stream represented by a matrix f
the client uses the CNN model for training. The trained client of size n × f is fed into this first layer. F is made up of n
sends the model parameters w, model accuracy acc, and losses distinct package vectors, therefore F = pkt1, . . ., pktn. where
922 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 5. The structure of our neural network.

each packet vector has a length of f = 11 features and pktn is of feature positions on classification results and improving the
the n TH packet in a stream. robustness of the entire network. This output x is passed to the
 CNN layer: As shown in Fig. 5, each input matrix F is S-type activation function such that σ(x) = 1/(1 + e−x ). This
operated by a convolution layer, in which the size of k filters limits activation to a value between 0 and 1, thus returning the
is h × f , and h is the length of each filter. In our model, probability p ∈ [0, 1] that a given stream becomes a malicious
we set k = 64 to make the data features pass through multi- DDoS attack. If p > 0.5, the traffic is DDoS.Otherwise, the
ple channels, so that the characteristics of DDoS attacks can traffic is benign.
be extracted more comprehensively. Each filter, also known When the local model is trained for the second time or more,
as the kernel or sliding window, performs convolution with we optimize the parameters of the local model based on the local
step 1 to extract and learn local features that contain useful model trained in the current round. Construction loss function
information for detecting DDoS and benign flows. Each filter  np
generates an activation map of magnitude (n − h + 1) × k, such Lpt = i=1 t−1
 l(yi , ŷp,i ) + Ω (fpt ) (1)
that ak = ReLU (Conv(F )Wk , bk ), where Wk and bk are the It is minimized to represent the predicted value when the locally
weight and bias parameters of the KTH filter learned during the trained model p trains the sample in the round of t training
training phase. We add BatchNorm2d after the convolutional After the training is completed, the parameters of CNN network
layer of the convolutional neural network for data normalization parameter will be sent to the server.Regularized term Ω(fpt )
processing, so that the data will not cause unstable network controls model complexity and prevents overfitting and weight
performance due to large data before Relu. We then use the decay.
corrected linear activation function ReLU (x) = max0, x. All 2) Aggregation Process: After the local training model comactivation graphs are stacked to create an activation matrix A of pletes the rth round of training, clients send its rth round of
size (n − h + 1) × k, which gives us A = [a1 |. . .|ak ]. training parameters wrp and rth round of accuracy accpr to the
 Average pooling layer: We use an average pooling method leader node to train the global model. The leader node uses
where we sample down the first dimension of A, which rep- fedprox aggregation algorithm to get the preliminary aggregaresents the time nature of the input. A pool of size m pro- tion parameters of round r wrp . We set the difference between
duces an output matrix of size ((n − h + 1)/m) × k con- the time when the server receives the data from client p and the
taining the maximum m activation for each learning filter, time when client p sends the r round of model parameters to the
such that c0 = [avg1 |. . .|avgk ]. In this way, the dimensional- server as tpr , the longest waiting time of the server is maxt, and
ity of the training data is reduced, the redundant information the calculation formula of the time-weighted parameter of client
is removed, the features are compressed, the network com- p ctpr is as follows
plexity is simplified, the computation is reduced, the mem- 
ory consumption is reduced, and too much high-dimensional p (1 − (tpr − maxt) /maxt) /100 + C, 0 < tpr < maxt
 ctr =
information is avoided. c0 then flattens to generate a one- 0, otherwise
dimensional feature vector v that will be input to the detection (2)
layer. Here C is the adjustment parameter. The leader node then
 Detection layer: v is input to a linear fully connected layer. recalculates the aggregate parameters by determining how ac-
The main function of the Linear fully connected layer is to map curate each client’s model parameter is compared to client’s
the feature space computed from the previous layer to the sample accuracy. When the accuracy of the client’s model is higher,
label space. That is, the feature representation is integrated into the model parameters of client will play a dominant role in
one value, which has the advantage of reducing the influence the adjustment process of the aggregation parameters, and the
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 923

 TABLE II
 Algorithm 1: Asynchronous Federated Learning Algorithm HYPERPARAMETER SETTING
 Based on Accuracy.
 for each round r = l, 2,... do
 Leader node executes:initialize wrp
 get ctpr ←− tpr
 for each client p, in parallel do
 p
 wr+1 ←− ClientU pdate(p, wrp ),calculate accpr+1
 if accpr > accpr+1 then
 p p
 wr+1 = wrp × (1 − ctpr ) + wr+1 × ctpr
 else
 p p
 wr+1 = wr+1 × (1 − ctpr ) + wrp × ctpr
 end if
 end for
 Calculate the aggregation parameters: effectively reduces the impact of outdated model parameters
 wr+1 ← FedProx all wr+1 p on the current training process, thereby enabling asynchronous
 Follower node update(p,wrp )://Executed on client k federated learning. This strategy not only accelerates the speed
 for each local epoch do of model aggregation but also enhances the robustness of the
 batches ←−data split into batches model training process. Even if some clients fail, model training
 for Batch b In Batches do can still continue and can quickly integrate the latest parameter
 wrp ←− wrp − η∇Lpt (wrp , b) updates from different clients, ensuring the continuity and effiend for ciency of the training process and maintaining high quality and
 end for efficiency. In addition, to fully leverage the high-performing folend for lower nodes, our leader node performs a secondary adjustment
 return wrp , accpr ; of the model parameters based on the accuracy of each client
 after the initial aggregation in each round, further speeding up
 the aggregation process.

model parameters after the update of the r round clientp are
 p
wr+1 p
 = wr+1 × (1 − ctpr ) + wrp × ctpr . On the contrary, when VI. EXPERIMENT AND EVALUATION
the aggregation model accuracy of the leader node is higher, the In this study, our core objective was to conduct a comprehenaggregation model parameters of the leader node will dominate sive performance evaluation of our proposed BAFL approach.
the aggregation parameter adjustment process, and the model Specifically, this evaluation aims to explore the performance of
 p
parameters after the r round client p update are wr+1 = wrp × the BAFL approach on several key dimensions.First, the accup p p
(1 − ctr ) + wr+1 × ctr . After calculating the new weighted racy of its global model in identifying DDoS attacks.Secondly,
parameters of all client, perform the next aggregation to obtain its robustness is tested in the face of different proportions of node
the final aggregation parameters and send them to supervision failures.Thirdly, the convergence rate in the federated learning
chain. process is evaluated. Finally, the scalability of the system when
 Clients may encounter various faults or anomalies during the processing large-scale data is evaluated. Through these commodel training process, such as operating system failures, mem- prehensive tests, we aim to gain a deeper understanding of the
ory overflows, and insufficient storage space. These technical effectiveness and potential of the BAFL approach in practical
issues may cause clients to fail temporarily or permanently, applications.
thereby affecting the continuity and stability of the federated Our model was trained on a personal computer configured
learning process. In addition, the uneven quality of network with 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-13900HX,and CUDA 11.6
connections between clients makes the inconsistency of data version.The parameter Settings in this study are detailed in
transfer rates a key issue. Factors such as network latency, band- Table II. All experimental results are based on the statistical
width limitations, and unstable connections may cause some average of 10 independent repeated experiments.
clients to be less efficient than others in sending or receiving This model is validated with normal blockchain network
model updates. This instability of clients can lead to failures at traffic data and recent datasets CIC-DDoS2019 provided
any time, preventing the aggregation model from obtaining the by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity of the UNB,
latest parameter updates in a timely manner, which in turn affects Canada [47]. [47] consist of several days of network activity,
the real-time and accuracy of model training. Secondly, some normal and malicious, including DDoS attacks. The dataset is
clients may achieve higher accuracy than the leading node during publicly available in the form of traffic traces in pcap format
training, while others do not. In this case, traditional aggregation including full packet payloads, plus supplementary text files conmethods may mask the advantages of these high-performing taining the labels and statistical details for each traffic flow.The
models. attack types in CIC-DDoS2019 DDoS shown in Table III.
 To address these challenges, this study introduces a time decay These datasets encompass both normal network traffic and
parameter and proposes an innovative method. This method a variety of DDoS attack traffic, such as IRC-based botnet
924 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE III
 CIC-DDOS2019 DDOS ATTACK TYPES

 Fig. 6. Accuracy and loss of our model BAFL compared to traditional methods.

 and diverse traffic features, are processed by time-window-based
 division and merging, all of which contribute to the evident
 heterogeneity of the data.

 A. The Performance of the Global Model to Identify DDoS
 Attacks
 Classification performance of BAFL models is measured in
 Precision, recall rate and F1-score. In machine learning and
 statistics, Precision, Recall, and F1-score are three important
 metrics for evaluating the performance of classification models,
 especially in binary classification problems. Here’s what each
 means:
 Loss function (loss): The loss function measures the difference between the model’s predicted value and the actual value. It
 is an objective function in the process of model optimization and
 is used to guide the adjustment of model parameters to minimize
 prediction errors. Different machine learning tasks use different
attacks and HTTP DDoS attacks utilizing LOIC and HOIC loss functions, and our classification task uses cross entropy loss.
tools. They also feature a diverse range of traffic character- Accuracy (acc): Accuracy refers to the proportion of all
istics spanning the network, transport, and application layers, predictions in the model that are correct.
including packet length, protocol type, TCP flags, and window Precision: The accuracy rate refers to the proportion of the
size. These datasets exhibit non-independent and identically positive class that the model predicts is actually positive.
distributed (non-i.i.d.) characteristics: attack traffic significantly Recall rate: The recall rate refers to the proportion of positive
differs from normal traffic in terms of features (e.g., higher class samples correctly identified by the model to all actual
packet rates and more concentrated IP address distributions in positive class samples.
attack traffic), and different types of DDoS attacks also possess F1-score: The F1-score is a harmonic average of accuracy
distinct traffic features (e.g., differences between network-layer and recall, and it tries to find a balance between the two metrics.
and application-layer attacks). Moreover, the datasets are di- When the accuracy and recall rate are equal, the F1-score reaches
vided into time windows, and the traffic features within each the maximum.
window may vary due to the influence of network conditions, These metrics provide a comprehensive assessment of the
user behavior, and attack activities. model’s performance, especially if the sample of positive and
 When these non-i.i.d. datasets are distributed across different negative categories is unbalanced.
clients, heterogeneity arises primarily due to the diversity of data In this part, we used Fedprox-BAFL, Fedavg-BAFL, Fedavg,
distributions, the variety of data features, and the imbalance of Fedprox and other methods to train the global model until
data volumes. In the context of DDoS attack detection in service the model converged. Our model underwent 20 iteration of
chain networks, the significant differences in features (such as aggregation during training. To evaluate the performance of
packet rates and IP address distributions) between different types these methods, we compared their Acc and Loss values over
of attack traffic and normal traffic contribute to the diversity of different iterations. The experiment was performed 10 times per
data distributions. Additionally, variations in network environ- experiment through the collaborative participation of 20 clients
ments across organizations, data collection time windows, and to ensure statistical significance of the results, and average
the volume of data provided by each client further exacerbate the indicators are reported in this section.
diversity of data features and the imbalance of data volumes. The As shown in Fig. 6 and Table IV, under the same number of
datasets used in the paper, which include multiple attack types iterations, Fedprox-BAFL and Fedavg-BAFL models, through
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 925

 TABLE IV
 MODEL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON

our quadratic aggregation algorithm, give greater weight to
the model parameters of clients with higher accuracy during
model aggregation, which makes our model more accurate than
FEDAVG and FEDPROX,showing higher accuracy and lower
losses. In particular, the acc of Fedprox-BAFL and Fedavg-
BAFL models has reached convergence at the 8th and 9th
iterations, and the convergence time is 69.3 s and 92.05 s, respectively. Acc converges at the 18th and 19th iterations of Fedprox
and Fedavg, which are 184.583 s and 249.02 s, respectively.
Similarly, the loss values of Fedprox-BAFL and Fedavg-BAFL Fig. 7. Accuracy and loss of ther model when 20% of clients are down.
models converged at the 8th and 9th polymerization, while
Fedprox and Fedavg converged at the 16th and 18th polymerization, respectively. Compared with FEDAVG and FEDPROX,
the improved model FedPROX-BAFL and FeDAVG-BAFL also
achieved higher scores in Precision, Recall and F1-score.
 Further, considering that the data set contains multiple attack
types, Fedprox-BAFL method shows better performance than
Fedavg-BAFL in heterogeneous data detection. Specifically,
under the same number of iterations, Fedprox-BAFL method
not only has higher accuracy and lower loss, but also has faster
convergence of accuracy and loss value. These results show
that the Fedprox-BAFL method can effectively improve the Fig. 8. Accuracy and loss of ther model when 40% of clients are down.
performance and convergence rate of the model when dealing
with data sets containing multiple attack types.
 The above experiments show that BAFL employs a dynamic
weight allocation mechanism, assigning different weights based
on the detection accuracy of client models. Models with better
performance have a larger proportion in the aggregation process, thereby enhancing the accuracy of the global model.The
Fedprox-BAFL method can more effectively utilize the
parameters of high-precision models when dealing with complex
datasets containing various types of attacks, thereby enhancing
the overall performance of the model. Additionally, BAFL intro-
 Fig. 9. Accuracy and loss of ther model when 60% of clients are down.
duces a temporal decay factor, which reduces the impact of old
model parameters on the aggregation results. This enables the
model to quickly adapt to new data distributions and accelerates
the convergence process.When processing dynamically chang- compared and analyzed the performance of Fedprox-BAFL,
ing network traffic data, the temporal decay factor can ensure Fedavg-BAFL, Fedavg, Fedprox models under different proporthat the model does not overly rely on old and potentially out- tions of fault nodes (20%, 40%, 60% and 80%). As shown in
dated parameters, thereby maintaining the real-time and accurate Figs. 7–10, node failures lead to fluctuations in the accuracy and
nature of the model. loss values of all models, and such fluctuations are aggravated
 as the proportion of faulty nodes increases. In addition, the
 increase in the number of faulty nodes also prolongs the number
B. Robustness of iterations and the time required for model convergence.
 In this study, we aim to evaluate the performance of the In the presence of node failures, the aggregation process
proposed Fedprox-BAFL model in the face of node failure. is affected by the uneven distribution of data. In federated
Specifically, we randomly suspended the training of some clients learning, each node may have different data distributions. If
to simulate mid-process client failures. We introduced random the failure of some nodes leads to the loss of key data, the
node failures in the 2nd to 5th rounds of model training, and distribution of remaining data may be changed, thus affecting
926 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE V
 MODEL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WHEN 20% OF CLIENTS ARE DOWN

 TABLE VI
 MODEL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WHEN 40% OF CLIENTS ARE DOWN

 TABLE VII
 MODEL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WHEN 60% OF CLIENTS ARE DOWN

Fig. 10. Accuracy and loss of ther model when 80% of clients are down.

the performance of the model in each iteration. The instability
of model updating is also a key factor. Model updating depends Fig. 11. Convergence time.
on the data and computing power of each node, and node failure
may cause the updating process to become unstable, especially
when the number of nodes is small, and the update of a single During the training process, Fedprox and Fedavg models
node has a more significant impact on the global model. In showed obvious performance degradation after node failure, and
addition, node failure may change the communication mode of slowly resumed training after node recovery. As can be seen
the network, affect the uploading and downloading efficiency from Tables V–VIII and Figs. 7–11, when acc converges, the
of model parameters, and then affect the convergence speed number of iteration has reached 17 and 18, and the required
and stability of the model. In some federated learning settings, time is 210.4 seconds and 219.6 seconds, respectively. Due to
the nodes involved in training are randomly selected, so the the introduction of a time attenuation factor in our model, which
randomness of the faulty nodes can result in different nodes can effectively eliminate the influence of the old parameters
participating in each training, which can also lead to fluctuations of the long-failed nodes, the acc and loss of Fedprox-BAFL
in model performance. The problem of data loss also cannot be and Fedavg-BAFL only fluctuate slightly when the nodes fail,
ignored. The faulty node may contain important training data, and the training will resume quickly after the nodes return to
and its absence will lead to incomplete information during model normal. Acc reached convergence in the 10th and 11th iteration,
training, thus affecting model performance. Node failures also with times of 81.56 seconds and 95.56 seconds, respectively.
reduce data diversity and reduce the generalization ability of In contrast, our proposed BAFL algorithm exhibits smaller
the model, which in turn affects the performance of unseen fluctuations in the case of node failure and can reach convergence
data. more quickly. It can be seen from the data in the above figure and
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 927

 TABLE VIII
 MODEL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WHEN 80% OF CLIENTS ARE DOWN

table that the convergence time and iteration times of the model
increase correspondingly with the increase of the proportion
of faulty nodes. From the perspective of model performance,
the performance indexes of Fedprox-BAFL and Fedavg-BAFL,
such as acc, loss, precision, recall and F1-score, did not decrease
significantly in the case of node failure compared with the
case without fault. Fedprox and Fedavg models show obvious
performance degradation after node failure.
 The temporal decay factor employed by the BAFL model
demonstrates remarkable efficacy in mitigating the potential
interference of old parameters from long-term offline nodes
on current model training. Even if some clients remain offline
for extended periods, their old parameters are unlikely to exert
a significant negative impact on the ongoing model training
 Fig. 12. The scalability of the Fedprox-BAFL.
process. For instance, when 20% of the nodes fail, the accuracy and loss value of the BAFL model only exhibit minor
fluctuations, and once the faulty nodes return online, the model
can swiftly resume its normal training trajectory. Moreover, For models with different number of clients, the experiment
the BAFL model relies on an asynchronous federated learning was repeated for 10 times, and the average trend of their F1
algorithm, which endows clients with the flexibility to update scores and convergence time was shown in Fig. 12. When the
model parameters at different time points. This feature not only number of clients is small, the overall convergence time of the
enhances the adaptability of the model training process but BAFL model is longer and the F1-score is relatively low. As
also effectively ensures the continuity and stability of model the number of nodes increases, the model is able to process
training in the face of client failures. Even if some clients more data in parallel, which may speed up the training process.
are unable to update parameters in a timely manner due to The addition of clients provides a more representative sample,
failures, other clients can still continue to advance the model which enhances the generalization of the model and improves
training, thereby ensuring the robustness of the model’s overall the F1-score. When the number of clients increased to 20, the
performance. model showed the shortest convergence time. The different
 data perspectives provided by the new clients helped reduce
 the model’s dependence on specific data biases, and enhanced
C. Stable Performance of BAFL
 the consistency and performance of the model on different data
 In the previous part, we described in detail the experimental subsets, thus promoting the stability of F1-score. As the number
setup of collaborative participation in 20 clients. However, of clients further increases, although the model’s F1-score shows
these experimental results are not sufficient to reveal the stable some stability, the network communication overhead increases
performance of BAFL (Blockchain-assisted Federated due to the need for more communication to aggregate model
Learning) in larger alliances. To address this research gap, updates. As the number of clients increases, so does the amount
we introduced new clients to simulate the scenario where of data that needs to be transferred between the server and
new business chains join the supervision chain and are the client, which can lead to higher communication costs per
allocated corresponding monitoring nodes and clients by the training round, potentially slowing down training. In situations
supervision chain. This part expands the assessment of BAFL where bandwidth is limited or communication costs are high,
performance to cover a range of growing league sizes from 5 to the increase in communication overhead may further reduce
80 clients, and quantifies key performance metrics, including the training speed and prolong the convergence time of the
F1-score, time per round of aggregation, and total time to model, while the F1-score of the BAFL model fails to improve
convergence. Specifically, we randomly suspended the training further.
of some clients to simulate mid-process client failures, and Within the BAFL framework, the adoption of a DAG strucintroduced new clients to simulate the scenario where new tured supervision chain enables efficient recording of model
business chains join the supervision chain and are allocated parameters and detected DDoS attack events. The DAG structure
corresponding monitoring nodes and clients by the supervision supports parallel confirmation of multiple transactions, thereby
chain. effectively circumventing the performance bottlenecks caused
928 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

by sequential processing in traditional blockchains and signif- [8] B. Rodrigues, T. Bocek, and B. Stiller, “Multi-domain DDoS mitigation
icantly enhancing system throughput. For instance, in the sce- based on blockchains,” in Proc. Secur. Netw. Serv. All-Connected World:
 11th IFIP WG 6.6 Int. Conf. Auton. Infrastructure, Manage., Secur., Zurich,
nario where the number of clients increases, the DAG structure Switzerland, 2017, pp. 185–190.
demonstrates higher processing efficiency, capable of rapidly [9] T. G. Hua, H. Y. Han, and C. X. Feng, “Research progress on attack
handling and synchronizing model parameters, which in turn and defense techniques in block-chain system,” J. Softw., vol. 32, no. 5,
 pp. 1495–1525, 2021.
accelerates the model training process. Moreover, BAFL has [10] Z. Abou El Houda, A. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “Co-IoT: A colautomated data validation and sharing through smart contracts, laborative DDoS mitigation scheme in IoT environment based on
ensuring the security and credibility of data. This mechanism blockchain using SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2019,
 pp. 1–6.
allows newly joined clients to quickly synchronize the latest [11] B. Rodrigues, E. Scheid, C. Killer, M. Franco, and B. Stiller, “Blockchain
model parameters and seamlessly participate in model training. signaling system (BLOSS): Cooperative signaling of distributed denial-
After joining, new clients can rapidly obtain the latest model of-service attacks,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 953–989,
 2020.
parameters through the supervision chain, thereby substantially [12] B. Rodrigues and B. Stiller, “Cooperative signaling of DDoS attacks in
reducing initialization time and improving overall training effi- a blockchain-based network,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Posters
ciency. Demos, 2019, pp. 39–41.
 [13] B. Rodrigues, S. Trendafilov, E. Scheid, and B. Stiller, “SC-Flare: Cooperative DDoS signaling based on smart contracts,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 VII. CONCLUSION Blockchain Cryptocurrency, 2020, pp. 1–3.
 [14] A. Gruhler, B. Rodrigues, and B. Stiller, “A reputation scheme for
 We summarize the research status and problems of DDoS a blockchain-based network cooperative defense,” in Proc. IFIP/IEEE
 Symp. Integr. Netw. Serv. Manage., 2019, pp. 71–79.
attack detection in blockchain networks, and propose a new [15] C. Killer, B. Rodrigues, and B. Stiller, “Security management and visumethod to detect DDoS attacks in blockchain networks by alization in a blockchain-based collaborative defense,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
integrating FL with the supervision chain. The proposed sys- Conf. Blockchain Cryptocurrency, 2019, pp. 108–111.
 [16] S. Purohit, P. Calyam, S. Wang, R. Yempalla, and J. Varghese, “Detem, BAFL, leverages the decentralized and secure nature of fenseChain: Consortium blockchain for cyber threat intelligence sharing
blockchain technology to enhance the efficiency and robustness and defense,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Conf. Blockchain Res. Appl. Innov. Netw.
of DDoS attack detection while preserving the privacy of local Serv., 2020, pp. 112–119.
 [17] L.-Y. Yeh, J.-L. Huang, T.-Y. Yen, and J.-W. Hu, “A collaborative DDoS
node data. Through the use of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)- defense platform based on blockchain technology,” in Proc. IEEE 12th
structured supervision chain, BAFL ensures secure and trans- Int. Conf. Ubi-Media Comput., 2019, pp. 1–6.
parent sharing of model parameters among distributed nodes. [18] S. Sayadi, S. B. Rejeb, and Z. Choukair, “Anomaly detection model
 over blockchain electronic transactions,” in Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Wireless
Additionally, the asynchronous federated learning algorithm, Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf., 2019, pp. 895–900.
augmented with a time decay factor, optimizes the aggregation [19] M. Saad, M. T. Thai, and A. Mohaisen, “Poster: Deterring DDoS attacks
process by reducing the impact of outdated model parameters, on blockchain-based cryptocurrencies through mempool optimization,” in
 Proc. Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 809–811.
thereby accelerating convergence and improving detection ac- [20] T. Idé, “Collaborative anomaly detection on blockchain from noisy sensor
curacy. The experimental results show that the accuracy of our data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining Workshops, 2018, pp. 120–127.
proposed detection algorithm reaches more than 99%, showing [21] J. E. A. Sousaet al., “Fighting under-price dos attack in ethereum with
 machine learning techniques,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev.,
excellent robustness and scalability. Compared to traditional vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 24–27, 2021.
DDoS attack detection algorithms, our solution can improve [22] P. Kumar, R. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, and R. Tripathi, “A distributed framework
detection accuracy by 2% and reduce real-time detection latency for detecting DDoS attacks in smart contract-based blockchain-iot systems by leveraging fog computing,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol.,
to half of the industry’s current methods. vol. 32, no. 6, 2021, Art. no. e4112.
 [23] B. Jia and Y. Liang, “Anti-D Chain: A lightweight DDoS attack detection
 scheme based on heterogeneous ensemble learning in blockchain,” China
 REFERENCES Commun., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 11–24, 2020.
 [24] R. Kumar, P. Kumar, R. Tripathi, G. P. Gupta, S. Garg, and M. M.
 [1] S. Wani, M. Imthiyas, H. Almohamedh, K. M. Alhamed, S. Almotairi, Hassan, “A distributed intrusion detection system to detect DDoS attacks
 and Y. Gulzar, “Distributed denial of service (DDoS) mitigation using in blockchain-enabled IoT network,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 164,
 blockchain—A comprehensive insight,” Symmetry, vol. 13, no. 2, 2021, pp. 55–68, 2022.
 Art. no. 227. [25] M. Mittal, K. Kumar, and S. Behal, “Deep learning approaches for detect-
 [2] Y. Xu, H. Wang, and J. Zeng, “Scope: A cross-chain supervision scheme ing DDoS attacks: A systematic review,” Soft Comput., vol. 27, no. 18,
 for consortium blockchains,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 13039–13075, 2023.
 pp. 553–570. [26] M. A. Al-Shareeda, S. Manickam, and M. A. Saare, “DDoS attacks
 [3] X. Liang, J. Chen, R. Du, and T. Zhao, “Surveillant: A supervi- detection using machine learning and deep learning techniques: Analysis
 sion mechanism between blockchains for efficient cross-chain verifi- and comparison,” Bull. Elect. Eng. Inform., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 930–939,
 cation,” KSII Trans. Internet Inf. Syst., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 2507–2528, 2023.
 2022. [27] U.-J. Baek, S.-H. Ji, J. T. Park, M.-S. Lee, J.-S. Park, and M.-S. Kim,
 [4] A. R. Jamader, P. Das, and B. R. Acharya, “BCIoT: Blockchain based “DDoS attack detection on bitcoin ecosystem using deep-learning,” in
 DDoS prevention architecture for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Proc. 20th Asia-Pacific Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2019, pp. 1–4.
 Comput. Control Syst., 2019, pp. 377–382. [28] M. Essaid, D. Kim, S. H. Maeng, S. Park, and H. T. Ju, “A collaborative
 [5] M. Mirkin, Y. Ji, J. Pang, A. Klages-Mundt, I. Eyal, and A. Juels, “BDoS: DDoS mitigation solution based on ethereum smart contract and RNN-
 Blockchain denial-of-service,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. LSTM,” in Proc. 20th Asia-Pacific Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2019,
 Commun. Secur., 2020, pp. 601–619. pp. 1–6.
 [6] K. Kim, Y. You, M. Park, and K. Lee, “DDoS mitigation: Decentralized [29] Q.-Y. Dai, B. Zhang, and S.-Q. Dong, “A DDoS-attack detection method
 CDN using private blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous oriented to the blockchain network layer,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol.
 Future Netw., 2018, pp. 693–696. 2022, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 5692820.
 [7] Z. Abou El Houda, A. S. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “Cochain-SC: An [30] R. Kumar, P. Kumar, R. Tripathi, G. P. Gupta, and N. Kumar, “P2SF-IoV:
 intra-and inter-domain DDoS mitigation scheme based on blockchain A privacy-preservation-based secured framework for Internet of Vehicles,”
 using SDN and smart contract,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 98893–98907, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22571–22582,
 2019. Nov. 2022.
LI et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN BUSINESS BLOCKCHAIN NETWORKS: A REVIEW, FRAMEWORK, AND CHALLENGES 929

[31] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha, Jiewei Chen received the B.S. degree in information
 and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for IoT and computing science from the Minzu University
 security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554, of China, Beijing, China, in 2019. She is currently
 Feb. 2022. working toward the Ph.D. degree in information and
[32] D. Hamouda, M. A. Ferrag, N. Benhamida, and H. Seridi, “PPSS: A communication engineering from the Beijing Uniprivacy-preserving secure framework using blockchain-enabled federated versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
 deep learning for industrial IoTs,” Pervasive Mobile Comput., vol. 88, China. Her research interests include federated learn-
 2023, Art. no. 101738. ing, large foundation model, edge computing, and
[33] P. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, and R. Tripathi, “PEFL: Deep privacy-encoding- Internet of Things.
 based federated learning framework for smart agriculture,” IEEE Micro,
 vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 33–40, Jan./Feb. 2021.
[34] P. Kumar, R. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, R. Tripathi, and G. Srivastava, “P2TIF:
 A blockchain and deep learning framework for privacy-preserved threat
 intelligence in industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 9, Shaoyong Guo is currently a Professor with the
 pp. 6358–6367, Sep. 2022. School of Computer Science, Beijing University of
[35] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, L. Maglaras, H. Janicke, and L. Shu, “Feder- Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. His
 ated deep learning for cyber security in the Internet of Things: Con- research interests include DPU, blockchain applicepts, applications, and experimental analysis,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, cation technology, and edge intelligence. He has
 pp. 138509–138542, 2021. achieved innovative results such as power commu-
[36] B. Jia, X. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, K. Huang, and Y. Liang, “Blockchain- nication network convergence control model and
 enabled federated learning data protection aggregation scheme with dif- method, network data trusted sandbox privacy sharing
 ferential privacy and homomorphic encryption in IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. service mechanism and technology, and edge security
 Informat., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 4049–4058, Jun. 2022. protection technology and mechanism in an open
[37] C. Xu et al., “A federated learning architecture for blockchain DDoS at- network environment. He is also undertaking many
 tacks detection,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1911–1923, key research and development projects and fund projects, and contributed to a
 Sep./Oct. 2024. number of pioneering standards proposals in ITU-T. The systems and devices
[38] R. K. Sharma and R. S. Pippal, “Malicious attack and intrusion prevention developed by him have large-scale application. He was the recipient of the
 in IoT network using blockchain based security analysis,” in Proc. IEEE National Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars in 2023, Second Prize
 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Intell. Commun. Netw., 2020, pp. 380–385. of Science and Technology Progress Award of Beijing Municipality, Henan
[39] W. Cao, Y. Huang, D. Li, F. Yang, X. Jiang, and J. Yang, “A Province, and Jiangsu Province, and the Second Prize of Science and Technology
 blockchain based link-flooding attack detection scheme,” in Proc. IEEE Progress Award of Chinese Institute of Electronics.
 4th Adv. Inf. Manage., Commun., Electron. Automat. Control Conf., 2021,
 pp. 1665–1669.
[40] D. Manikumar and B. U. Maheswari, “Blockchain based DDoS mitigation
 using machine learning techniques,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Inventive
 Res. Comput. Appl., 2020, pp. 794–800.
[41] M. Chen, X. Tang, J. Cheng, N. Xiong, J. Li, and D. Fan, “A DDoS attack
 defense method based on blockchain for IoTs devices,” in Proc. Artif.
 Intell. Secur.: 6th Int. Conf., Hohhot, China, 2020, pp. 685–694. Xuesong Qiu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
[42] M. Singh, G. S. Aujla, A. Singh, N. Kumar, and S. Garg, “Deep- Ph.D. degree in communication and information
 learning-based blockchain framework for secure software-defined indus- systems from the Beijing University of Posts and
 trial networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 606–616, Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2000. He is
 Jan. 2021. currently a Professor and the Ph.D. degree Supervisor
[43] X. Han, R. Zhang, X. Liu, and F. Jiang, “Biologically inspired smart with the State Key Laboratory of Networking and
 contract: A blockchain-based DDoS detection system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts
 Conf. Netw., Sens. Control, 2020, pp. 1–6. and Telecommunications. He has authored about 100
[44] P. Ramadass et al., “BSDN-hmtd: A blockchain supported SDN framework SCI/EI index papers. He presides over a series of Key
 for detecting DDoS attacks using deep learning method,” Egyptian Inform. Research Projects on Network and Service Manage-
 J., vol. 27, 2024, Art. no. 100515. ment, including the projects supported by the Na-
[45] X. Li et al., “An adaptive DDoS detection and classification method in tional Natural Science Foundation and the National HighTech Research and
 blockchain using an integrated multi-models,” Comput., Mater. Continua, Development Program of China.
 vol. 77, no. 3, pp. 3265–3288, 2023.
[46] R. Doriguzzi-Corin, S. Millar, S. Scott-Hayward, J. Martinez-del Rincon,
 and D. Siracusa, “Lucid: A practical, lightweight deep learning solution
 for DDoS attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17,
 no. 2, pp. 876–889, Jun. 2020.
[47] M. C. P. Saheb, M. S. Yadav, S. Babu, J. J. Pujari, and J. B. Maddala, “A
 review of DDoS evaluation dataset: Cicddos2019 dataset,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Energy Syst., Drives Automat., 2021, pp. 389–397. Feng Qi is currently a Professor with the State Key
 Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, and a Researcher with
 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. His re-
 Mengyuan Li received the B.S. degree from search interests include communications software,
 Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China, in 2019. network management, and business intelligence. He
 She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in has won two National Science and Technology
 information and communication engineering from the Progress Awards. He has also written more than 10
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, ITU-T international standards and industry standards.
 Beijing, China. Her research interests include net- He was the Vice Chairman of ITU-T Study Group 4
 work security, artificial intelligence, federated learn- and Study Group 12.
 ing, anomaly detection, and blockchain.