This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 1

 Deep Learning for Video Anomaly
 Detection: A Review
 Peng Wu , Chengyu Pan, Yuting Yan, Guansong Pang , Member, IEEE, Qingsen Yan , Member, IEEE,
 Peng Wang , Member, IEEE, and Yanning Zhang , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims to discover on top of machine learning, thereby reducing the cost of manbehaviors or events deviating from the normality in videos. As ual judgment. Anomaly detection has widespread application
a long-standing task in the field of computer vision, VAD has across various fields [1], such as financial fraud detection,
witnessed much good progress. In the era of deep learning, with network intrusion detection, industrial defect detection [2], and
the explosion of architectures of continuously growing capability human violence detection. Among these, video anomaly detecand capacity, a great variety of deep learning-based methods
are constantly emerging for the VAD task, greatly improving the
 tion (VAD) occupies an important place, in which anomaly
generalization ability of detection algorithms and broadening the indicates the abnormal events in the temporal or spatial dimenapplication scenarios. Therefore, such a multitude of methods sions. VAD not only plays a vital role in many fields, such
and a large body of literature make a comprehensive survey a as intelligent security and autonomous driving [3]. Owing to
pressing necessity. In this article, we present an extensive and its significant potential for applications across different fields,
comprehensive research review, covering the spectrum of five VAD has attracted considerable attention from both industry
different categories, namely, semi-supervised, weakly supervised, and academia.
fully supervised, unsupervised, and open-set supervised VAD, and In the pre-deep learning era, the routine way is to sepwe also delve into the latest VAD works based on pretrained arate feature extraction and classifier design, which forms
large models and open-world learning, remedying the limitations a two-stage process, and then combine them together durof past reviews in terms of only focusing on semi-supervised
 ing the inference stage. First, there is a feature extraction
VAD and small model-based methods. For the VAD task with
different levels of supervision, we construct a well-organized process to convert the original high-dimensional raw videos
taxonomy, profoundly discuss the characteristics of different into compact handcrafted features based on prior knowledge
types of methods, and show their performance comparisons. In of experts. For example, commonly used features mainly
addition, this review involves the public datasets, open-source include trajectory [4], histogram of flow (HOF) [5], 3-D
codes, and evaluation metrics covering all the aforementioned gradient [6], mixture of dynamic textures (MDT) [7], and so
VAD tasks. Finally, we provide several important research direc- on. Second, these expressed features are fed into the traditions for the VAD community. Additional details of the survey tional machine learning algorithms for abnormal classification
are available on the project homepage: https://github.com/Roc- learning, where well-known algorithms include but are not
Ng/DeepVAD limited to sparse reconstruction [5], [8], K-nearest neighbor
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, large models, (KNN) [9], and MDT [7]. Although handcrafted features lack
video anomaly detection (VAD), video understanding. robustness and are difficult to use for capturing effective
 behavior expressions in the face of complex scenarios and
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 optimizing traditional algorithms is challenging, these pioneer-
A NOMALY represents something that deviates from what
 is standard, normal, or expected. There are myriads of
normalities, and anomalies are considerably scarce. However,
 ing works deeply enlighten subsequent deep learning-based
 works.
 The rise of deep learning has made traditional machine
when anomalies do appear, they often have a negative impact. learning algorithms fall out of favor over the last decade.
Anomaly detection aims to discover these rare anomalies built With the rapid development of computer hardware and the
 Received 20 April 2025; revised 21 September 2025; accepted 19 December massive data in the Internet era, we have witnessed great
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science progress in developing deep learning-based methods for VAD
Foundation of China under Grant 62306240 and Grant U23B2013 and in in recent years: for example, ConvAE [10], the first work using
part by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2023TQ0272. deep autoencoders based on convolutional neural networks
The work of Guansong Pang was supported in part by the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) under its MTC Young Individual (CNNs) for capturing the regularities in videos; FuturePred
Research Grant (YIRG) Grant M24N8c0103; in part by the Ministry of Edu- [11], the first work making use of U-Net for forecasting future
cation, Singapore, through its Tier-1 Academic Research Fund under Grant anomalies; and DeepMIL [12], the first endeavor exploring
24-SIS-SMU-008; and in part by the Lee Kong Chian Fellowship under Grant deep multiple instance learning (MIL) framework for real-
T050273. (Chengyu Pan and Yuting Yan contributed equally to this work.) world anomalies. In order to more intuitively manifest the
(Corresponding author: Guansong Pang.)
 Peng Wu, Chengyu Pan, Yuting Yan, Qingsen Yan, Peng Wang, and Yanning research enthusiasm for the VAD task in the era of deep
Zhang are with the School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical learning, we conduct a statistical survey on the number of
University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710129, China (e-mail: xdwupeng@gmail.com; publications related to VAD over the past decade (the era
pancy5519@gmail.com; xgdyanyuting@gmail.com; qingsenyan@gmail.com; driven by the rise of deep learning-based methods) through
peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn; ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn).
 Guansong Pang is with the School of Computing and Information Systems, Google Scholar and IEEE Xplore. We select five related
Singapore Management University, Singapore 188065 (e-mail: pangguan- topics, i.e., VAD, abnormal event detection, abnormal behavior
song@gmail.com). detection, anomalous event detection, and anomalous behavior
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at detection, and showcase the publication statistics in Fig. 1. It is
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3647892, provided by the authors. not hard to see that the number of related publications counted
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3647892
 2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

 TABLE I
 A NALYSIS AND C OMPARISON OF R ELATED R EVIEWS

 and Liu et al. [18] constructed an organized taxonomy
 covering a variety of VAD tasks, e.g., unsupervised VAD,
 semi-supervised VAD, weakly supervised VAD, and fully
 supervised VAD, and also surveyed deep learning-based methods for most supervised VAD tasks. However, they restrict
 their scope to the conventional closed-set scenario and fail to
 cover the latest research in the open-set supervised VAD, without introducing a brand-new pipeline based on pretrained large
Fig. 1. Publications on VAD. Left: Google Scholar. Right: IEEE Xplore.
 models and interpretable learning. More recently, Liu et al.
 [19], [20] presented two surveys on VAD: NSVAD and
 P2VAD, which mainly focus on networking system deployment and privacy-preserving techniques, respectively. While
 these works provide valuable insights from specific perspectives, they are limited to addressing one specific challenge in
 VAD, offering less comprehensive analysis of the VAD task
 itself.
Fig. 2. Performance development for semi-supervised/weakly supervised To address this gap comprehensively, we present a thor-
VAD tasks. ough survey of VAD works in the deep learning era. Our
 survey covers several key aspects to provide a comprehensive
from both sources exhibits a steady and rapid growth trend, analysis of VAD studies. To be specific, we perform an
demonstrating that VAD has garnered widespread attention. in-depth investigation into the development trends of VAD
Moreover, we also demonstrate the detection performance task in the era of deep learning and then propose a unified
trends of annual state-of-the-art methods on commonly used framework that integrates different VAD tasks together, filling
datasets under two common supervised manners and present the gaps in the existing reviews in terms of taxonomy. We
performance trends in Fig. 2. The detection performance shows then collect the most comprehensive open sources, including
a steady upward trend across all datasets, without displaying benchmark datasets, evaluation metrics, open-source codes,
any performance bottleneck. This indicates the evolving capa- and performance comparisons, to help researchers in this
bility of deep learning methods under developing architectures field avoid detours and improve efficiency. Furthermore, we
and also showcases the ongoing exploration enthusiasm of systematically categorize various VAD tasks, dividing existdeep learning methods for the VAD task. ing works into different categories and establishing a clear
 The above statistics clearly demonstrate that deep learning- and structured taxonomy system to provide a coherent and
driven VAD is a hot area of current research. Therefore, there organized overview of various VAD paradigms. In addition to
is an urgent necessity for a systematic taxonomy and compre- this taxonomy, we conduct a comprehensive analysis of each
hensive summary of existing works, to facilitate newcomers paradigm. Furthermore, throughout this survey, we spotlight
as a guide and provide references for existing researchers. influential works that have significantly contributed to the
Based on this, we first collect some high-profile reviews on research advancement.
VAD in the past few years, which are shown in Table I. The main contributions of this survey are summarized in
Ramachandra et al. [13] mainly focused on semi-supervised the following three aspects.
VAD in the single scenario, lacking in discussions of cross- 1) We provide a comprehensive review of VAD, coverscenes. Santhosh et al. [14] reviewed VAD methods focusing ing five tasks based on different supervision signals,
on entities in road traffic scenarios. Their reviews lack suffi- i.e., semi-supervised VAD, weakly supervised VAD,
cient in-depth analysis and center on pre-2020 methodologies, fully supervised VAD, unsupervised VAD, and open-set
resulting in the neglect of recent advances. Nayak et al. [15] supervised VAD. The research focus has expanded from
comprehensively surveyed on deep learning-based methods for traditional single-task semi-supervised VAD to a broader
semi-supervised VAD but did not take into account weakly range of multiple VAD tasks.
supervised VAD methods. The follow-up work of Tran et al. 2) Staying abreast of the research trends, we review the
[16] introduced a review of the emerging weakly supervised latest studies on open-set supervised VAD. Moreover,
VAD, but the focus is not only on videos but also on we also revisit the most recent VAD methods based
image anomaly detection, resulting in a lack of systematic on pretrained large models and interpretable learning.
organization of the VAD task. Both Chandrakala et al. [17] The emergence of these methods elevates both the
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 3

Fig. 3. Comparisons of five supervised VAD tasks. (a) Semi-supervised VAD. (b) Weakly supervised VAD. (c) Fully supervised VAD. (d) Unsupervised VAD.
(e) Open-set supervised VAD.
 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON OF F IVE D IFFERENT VAD TASKS

 performance and application prospects of VAD. To our where L(·) is employed to quantify the discrepancy between
 knowledge, this is the first comprehensive survey of the predictions and the ground-truth labels or original samples.
 open-set supervised VAD, pretrained large model-based During inference, the detection model is expected to locate the
 VAD, and interpretable VAD methods. abnormal behaviors or events in videos based on the generated
 3) For different tasks, we systematically review existing anomaly predictions. Depending on the input to L, VAD can
 deep learning-based methods, and more importantly, be categorized into one of the following five tasks.
 we introduce a unified taxonomy framework categoriz- Semi-supervised VAD assumes that only normal samples
 ing the methods from various VAD paradigms based are available during the training stage, that is, Xa = ∅. This
 on various aspects, including model input, architec- task aims to learn the normal patterns based on the training
 ture, methodology, model refinement, and output. This samples and consider the test samples that fall outside the
 meticulous scientific taxonomy enables a comprehensive learned patterns as anomalies. For pros and cons, only normal
 understanding of the field. samples are required for training, and hence, there is no need to
 The rest of this survey is structured as follows. Section II painstakingly collect scarce abnormal samples. However, any
introduces an overview of the research background of VAD, unseen test sample may be recognized as abnormal, leading
e.g., the definition of different VAD tasks, benchmark datasets, to a higher false positive rate.
and evaluation metrics. Sections III–VII present the semi- Weakly supervised VAD has more sufficient training samsupervised, weakly supervised, fully supervised, unsupervised, ples and supervision signals than semi-supervised VAD. Both
and open-set supervised VAD methods, respectively. Sec- normal and abnormal samples are provided during the training
tion VIII provides a perspective on future development trends stage, but the precise location stamps of anomalies in these
of VAD. Section IX draws meaningful conclusions for this untrimmed videos are unknown. In other words, only coarse
survey. video-level labels are available (i.e., inexact supervision).
 Formally, Y = {0, 1}i=1
 N+A
 , where yi = 0 indicates that xi is
 II. BACKGROUND normal and yi = 1 indicates that xi is abnormal. For pros
 and cons, compared to fully supervised annotations, it can
A. Notation and Taxonomy significantly reduce labeling costs. However, it places higher
 We demonstrate five different VAD tasks in Fig. 3 and demands on algorithm design and may lead to arbitrary or
also clearly showcase characteristics and comparisons of these suboptimal predictions.
tasks in Table II. The general VAD problem is presented as Fully supervised VAD, as its name implies, comprises the
follows. Suppose that we are given a set of training samples complete supervision signals, meaning that each abnormal
X = {xi }i=1
 N+A
 and corresponding labels Y, where Xn = {xi }i=1
 N sample has precise annotations of anomalies. This task can be
is the set of normal samples and Xa = {xi }i=N+1 is the set
 N+A viewed as a standard video or frame classification problem.
of abnormal samples. Each sample xi is accompanied by a Due to the scarcity of abnormal behaviors and intensive
corresponding supervision label yi in Y. During the training manual labeling in reality, there has been little research on
phase, the detection model Φ(θ) takes X as input and generates the fully supervised VAD task. It is noteworthy that video
anomaly predictions; it is then optimized according to the violence detection can be regarded as a fully supervised VAD;
following objective: hence, we denote violence detection as a fully supervised
 VAD task. Formally, each video xi in Xa is accompanied by a
 l = L (Φ (θ, X ) , X or Y) (1) corresponding supervision label yi = {(t sj , tej )}Uj i , where t sj and tej
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. Taxonomy of semi-supervised VAD. We provide a hierarchical taxonomy that organizes existing deep semi-supervised VAD models by model input,
methodology, network architecture, refinement strategy, and model output into a systematic framework.

denote the start and end time of the jth violence event and Ui metrics [21], as well as the latest sentence-level and reasoningindicates the total number of anomalies present in the video. based metrics [22], [23], [24]. Due to space limitations, the
For pros and cons, in contrast to weakly supervised VAD, detailed descriptions of more related benchmark datasets and
with full supervised information, the detection performance evaluation metrics are showcased on the project website:
of the algorithms is remarkable. However, the corresponding https://github.com/Roc-Ng/DeepVAD. Moreover, work [25],
drawback is the high requirement for intensive manual which encompasses over 30 benchmarks for VAD, provides
annotations. a comprehensive analysis of VAD-specific datasets.
 Unsupervised VAD aims to discover anomalies directly
from fully unlabeled videos in an unsupervised manner. Thus, III. S EMI -S UPERVISED VAD
unsupervised VAD no longer requires labeling normal and Based on our in-depth investigation of past surveys, we
abnormal videos to build the training set. It can be expressed found that previous surveys mostly lack a scientific taxonomy,
formally as follows: X = Xtest and Y = ∅, in which in which many surveys simply categorize semi-supervised
Xtest denotes the set of test samples. For pros and cons, no VAD works into different groups based on usage approaches,
time-consuming effort is needed to collect training samples, such as reconstruction-based, distance-based, and probabilityavoiding the heavy labeling burden. Besides, this assumption based approaches, and some surveys classify works according
also expands the application fields of VAD, implying that to inputs, such as image-based, optical flow-based, and
the detection system can continuously retrain without human patch-based approaches. It is particularly apparent that existing
intervention. Unfortunately, due to the lack of labels, the classification reviews are relatively simplistic and superficial,
detection performance is relatively poor, leading to a higher thus making it challenging to cover all methods comprehenrate of false positives and false negatives. sively and effectively. To address this issue, we establish
 Open-set supervised VAD is devised to discover unseen a comprehensive taxonomy, encompassing model input,
anomalies that are not presented in the training set. Unlike methodology, architecture, model refinement, and model
semi-supervised VAD, open-set supervised VAD includes output. The detailed illustration is presented in Fig. 4.
abnormal samples in the training set, which are referred As aforementioned, only normal samples are available
to as seen anomalies. Specifically, for each xi in Xa , its for training in the semi-supervised VAD task, rendering
corresponding label yi ∈ Cbase , here Cbase represents the the supervised classification paradigm inapplicable. Common
set of base (seen) anomaly categories and Cbase ⊂ C, with approaches involve leveraging the intrinsic information of the
C = Cbase ∪Cnovel . Here, Cnovel and C represent the sets of novel training samples to learn deep neural networks (DNNs) for
anomaly categories unseen during training and all anomaly solving a pretext task. For instance, normality reconstruction is
categories, respectively. Given a testing sample xtest , its label a classic pretext task [10]. During this process, several critical
ytest may be either ∈ Cbase or ∈ Cnovel . For pros and cons, aspects need consideration: selection of sample information
compared to the two most common tasks, i.e., semi-supervised (model input), design of pretext tasks (methodology), utiliza-
VAD and weakly supervised VAD, open-set supervised VAD tion of deep networks (network architecture), improvement
not only reduces false positives but also avoids being limited of methods (refinement), and expression of anomaly results
to closed-set scenarios, thus demonstrating high practical (model output). These key elements collectively contribute
value. However, due to the lack of prior knowledge, its to the effectiveness of semi-supervised VAD solutions. In
robustness becomes a challenge. Therefore, it relies on the following, we introduce existing deep learning-based
learning specialized classifiers, loss functions, or generating VAD methods systematically according to the aforementioned
unknown classes to detect unseen anomalies. taxonomy.

B. Datasets and Metrics A. Model Input
 We showcase some representative VAD datasets with Existing semi-supervised VAD methods typically use the
detailed information in the Supplementary Materials. We pro- raw video or its intuitive representations as the model input.
vide a more systematic overview of evaluation metrics across Depending on the modality, these can be categorized as
different levels, including frame-level metrics, pixel-level follows: RGB images, optical flow, skeleton, and hybrid
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 5

inputs, where the first three represent appearance, motion, and 3) Skeleton: In recent years, with the remarkable success
body posture. of deep learning technologies in the field of pose estimation, VAD methods based on skeleton input have emerged.
 1) RGB: RGB images are the most common input
 Skeleton input solely focuses on the human body, making it
for conventional vision tasks driven by deep learning
 more specialized than object-level RGB input. It demonstrates
techniques, and this holds true for the VAD task as well.
 impressive performance in human-centric VAD, marking it
Unlike other modalities, RGB images do not require additional
 as a significant research interest in recent years within the
processing steps such as optical flow calculations or pose
 VAD domain. Morais et al. [51] first endeavored to learn
estimation algorithms. In the deep learning era, various deep
 the normal patterns of human movements using a dynamic
models can be employed to extract compact and high-level
 skeleton, where the pose estimation is utilized to independently
visual features from these high-dimensional raw data. Utilizing
 detect skeletons in each video frame. Then, GEPC [52],
these high-level features enables the design of more effective
 MTTP [53], NormalGraph [54], HSTGCNN [55], TSIF [56],
subsequent detection methods. Moreover, depending on the
 STGCAE-LSTM [57], STGformer [58], STG-NF [59],
input size, RGB image-based input can be categorized into
 MoPRL [60], MoCoDAD [61], and TrajREC [62] are spethree principal groups: frame level, patch level, and object
 cialized in human-related VAD with the skeleton input.
level.
 4) Hybrid: The hybrid input from different modalities often
 Frame-level RGB captures the whole scene: background
 proves more advantageous for the VAD task compared to the
(often irrelevant) and foreground (likely anomaly regions).
 unimodal input due to their complementary nature. In existing
The conventional approach typically uses multiple consecutive
 deep learning-driven VAD methods, hybrid input is a common
video frames as a single input to capture temporal context
 practice. Typical hybrid input includes frame-level RGB comwithin the video, as seen in methods like ConvAE [10],
 bined with optical flow [11], patch-level RGB combined with
ConvLSTM-AE [26], and STAE [27]. On the other hand,
 optical flow [32], and object-level RGB combined with optical
several research studies focus on using single-frame RGB as
 flow [38]. More recently, several studies have explored hybrid
input, aiming to detect anomalies at the spatial level, such as
 input based on RGB combined with skeleton [63].
AnomalyGAN [28] and AMC [29].
 Patch-level RGB input involves segmenting the frame-
 B. Methodology
level RGB input spatially or spatiotemporally, which focuses
on local regions, effectively separating the foreground from Through extensive research on existing works, we categothe background and differentiating between various individ- rize three major approaches for learning the normal paradigm:
ual entities. The primary advantage of patch-level input is self-supervised learning, one-class learning, and interpretable
its ability to significantly reduce the interference from the learning.
dominant background, which is usually less relevant to the 1) Self-Supervised Learning: Self-supervised learning
anomalies. This segmentation helps in isolating areas that primarily leverages auxiliary tasks (pretext tasks) to
are more likely to contain anomalies, thereby enhancing the derive supervisory signals directly from unsupervised data.
detection accuracy. For example, AMDN [30], [31], DeepOC Essentially, self-supervised learning operates without external
[32], and Deep-cascade [33] took spatiotemporal patches as labeled data, as these labels are generated from the input
the input, and S2 -VAE [34] and GM-VAE [35] only employed data itself. For the semi-supervised VAD task, which lacks
an image patch from a single video frame as the model input. explicit supervisory signals, self-supervised learning natu-
 Object-level RGB input has emerged in recent years rally becomes essential for learning normal representations
alongside the advancement of object detection approaches, and constructing the normal paradigm/pattern based on these
which focuses exclusively on foreground objects. Compared auxiliary tasks. Consequently, self-supervised learning-based
to patch-level input, it entirely disregards background informa- methods consistently dominate the leading position in the
tion and neglects to consider the relationship between objects semi-supervised VAD task. Throughout this process, a signifand backgrounds. As a result, it demonstrates impressive icant research focus and challenge lies in designing effective
performance in identifying anomalous events within complex pretext tasks derived from the data itself. Here, we compile the
scenes. Hinami et al. [36] first proposed an object-centric common design principles of auxiliary tasks used in existing
approach FRCN based on object inputs, a follow-up work self-supervised learning-based methods.
ObjectAE [37] introduced to train object-centric autoencoders Reconstruction is currently the most commonly used pretext
on detected objects, and subsequently, a series of works task for self-supervised learning-based methods in the field
focusing on object-level inputs emerged, e.g., HF2 -VAD [38], of semi-supervised VAD [10], [26], [29], [34], [60], [64],
HSNBM [39], BDPN [40], ER-VAD [41], and HSC [42]. [65], [66]. The main process involves inputting normal data
 into the network, performing encoding–decoding operations,
 2) Optical Flow: A video is not merely a sequence of and generating reconstructed data, encouraging the network to
stacked RGB images; it encapsulates the temporal dimension produce reconstructions that closely match the original input
and crucial temporal context. Therefore, extracting temporal data. The objective can be expressed as
context is vital for understanding video content, with motion
information playing an irreplaceable role. Optical flow rep- lrec = L (Φ (θ, x) , x) . (2)
resents the motion information between consecutive video For convenience, in the following, unless otherwise specframes and is commonly used as a model input for the VAD ified, x represents normal data, which could be a normal
task. It typically does not appear alone but is paired with the video, a normal video frame, a normal feature, or similar.
corresponding RGB image as input in the two-stream network. This loss quantifies reconstruction error, and the larger the
Therefore, it also encompasses frame [11], [43], [44], [45], reconstruction error, the higher the probability that the data
[46], [47], patch [32], [48], [49], and object [38], [41], [47], is considered anomalous. However, due to the high capacity
[50] levels. of DNNs, reconstruction-based methods cannot guarantee that
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

larger reconstruction errors for abnormal events necessarily similarity). Wang et al. [81] introduced a cluster attention conhappen. trast framework for VAD, which is built on top of contrastive
 Prediction fully leverages the temporal coherence inherent learning. During the inference stage, the highest similarity
in videos, which is also a commonly used pretext task. between the test sample and its variants is regarded as the
This pretext task is based on the assumption that normal regularity score. Lu et al. [82] further proposed a learnable
events are predictable, while abnormal ones are unpredictable. locality-sensitive hashing with contrastive learning strategy
Specifically, the prediction pretext task takes historical data as for VAD.
input and, through encoding–decoding operations within the Denoising [83], [84] is very similar to reconstruction, with
network, outputs the predicted data for the current moment. the main difference being that noise η is added to the input
The network is compelled to make the predicted data similar data, and the network is encouraged to achieve a denoising
to the actual current data. We define the optimization objective effect for the reconstructed data. The benefit is that it can
for prediction as enhance the robustness of network for VAD. The optimization
 objective is expressed as
 lpre = L (Φ (θ, {It−∆t , . . . , It−1 }) , It ) (3)
 lden = L (Φ (θ, x + η) , x) . (7)
where It is the actual data at the current time step t and
It−∆t:t−1 represents the historical data from time step t − ∆t to Deep sparse coding is encouraged by the success of trat − 1. FuturePred [11], as a future frame prediction framework, ditional sparse reconstruction-based VAD methods [5], and
provided a new solution for VAD. Then, many researchers upgraded versions leverage DNNs for semi-supervised VAD.
[38], [45], [58], [67], [68], [69], [70], [71], [72], [73] proposed Unlike the aforementioned reconstruction or prediction tasks,
other prediction-based methods. It alleviates, to some extent, sparse coding typically uses extracted high-level representathe problem in reconstruction-based methods, where abnormal tions rather than raw video image data as input. By learning
events can also be well reconstructed. from a large amount of normal representations, a dictionary
 Visual cloze test is inspired by the cloze test in natural of normal patterns is constructed. The total objective is listed
language processing [74], [75], [76]. It mainly involves train- as
ing multiple DNNs to infer deliberately erased data from lspa = kx − Bzk22 + kzk1 . (8)
incomplete video sequences, where the prediction task can be
considered a special case of visual cloze test task, i.e., the Different normal events can be reconstructed through the dicerased data happen to be the last frame in the video sequence. tionary B multiplied by the sparse coefficient z. For anomalies,
We define the objective function for completing erased data at it is hard to reconstruct them using the linear combination of
the tth time stamp as elements from the normal dictionary with a sparse coefficient.
 (t)
 To overcome the time-consuming inference and low-level
 = L Φ θ, I1 , . . . , It−1 , It+1 , . . . , It .
 ˚  
 lvct (4) handcrafted features of traditional sparse reconstruction-based
Similar to the prediction task, it also leverages the temporal methods, deep sparse coding-based methods have emerged
relationships in the video, but the difference lies in this task [44], [85], [86], [87], simultaneously leveraging the powerful
can learn better high-level semantics and temporal context. representation capabilities of DNNs and sparse representation
 Jigsaw puzzles have recently been applied as a pretext task techniques to improve detection performance and efficiency.
in semi-supervised VAD [77], [78], [79]. The main process Patch inpainting involves the process of reconstructing
involves creating jigsaw puzzles by performing temporal, spa- missing or corrupted regions by inferring the missing parts
tial, or spatiotemporal shuffling, and then designing networks from the available data. This technique mainly leverages the
to predict the relative or absolute permutation in time, space, spatial and temporal context to predict the content of the
or both. The optimization function is as follows: missing regions, ensuring that the reconstructed regions blend
 X seamlessly with the surrounding regions. The optimization
 ljig = L ti , tˆi objective for patch inpainting can be defined to minimize the
 
 (5)
 i difference between the original and the reconstructed patches,
 lpat = L Φ (θ, x M) , x M̄ .
 
where ti and tˆi denote the ground-truth and predicted positions (9)
of the ith data in the original sequence, respectively. Unlike
the previous pretext tasks, which involve high-quality image M denotes a mask, where the value of 0 in the mask indicates
generation, jigsaw puzzles are cast as a multilabel classifica- that the position needs to be inpainted, while a value of
tion, enhancing computational efficiency and learning more 1 indicates that the position does not need to be inpainted,
contextual details. and M̄ is a reversed M. Different from prediction and visual
 Contrastive learning is a key approach in self-supervised cloze test, patch inpainting takes into account the spatial or
learning, where the goal is to learn useful representations by spatiotemporal context. Zavrtanik et al. [88] regarded anomaly
distinguishing between similar and dissimilar pairs. For semi- detection as a reconstruction-by-inpainting task, further ransupervised VAD, two samples are regarded as a positive pair domly removed partial image regions, and reconstructed the
if they originate from the same sample, and otherwise as a image from partial inpaintings. Then, Ristea et al. [89] and
negative sample pair [80]. We show the contrastive loss as Madan et al. [90] presented a novel self-supervised predictive
follows: architectural building block, a plug-and-play design that can
 easily be incorporated into various anomaly detection methods.
 exp sim xi , xi+ τ
 ı 
 lcon =
 X
 − log P (6) More recently, a self-distilled masked autoencoder [91] was
 k exp sim xi , xk τ
 −
 ı 
 proposed to inpaint original frames.
 i
 Multiple task can ease the dilemma of the single pretext
where xi and xi+ are the positive pair and xi and xk− are the task, i.e., a single task may not be well aligned with the VAD
negative pair. sim(·, ·) is the similarity function (e.g., cosine task, thus leading to suboptimal performance. Recently, several
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 7

works attempted to train VAD models jointly on multiple decides whether the output of G follows the normal distribupretext tasks. For example, various studies exploited different tion or not. Therefore, an adversarial classifier can be jointly
self-supervised task compositions, involving reconstruction learned by optimizing the following objective:
and prediction [27], [39], [51], [92], prediction and denoising  
 min max E xi ∼pt log (D (xi ))
[93], [94], prediction and jigsaw puzzles [95], and prediction G D
and constrastive learning [82]. A few works [78], [79], [96],
  
 + E x̃i ∼pt +Nσ log (1 − D (G ( x̃i ))) (13)
[97] strove to develop more sophisticated multiple tasks from
different perspectives. where xi is drawn from a normal data distribution pt and x̃i
 2) One-Class Learning: One-class learning primarily is the sample xi with added noise, which is sampled from a
focuses on samples from the normal class. Compared to normal distribution Nσ . The final abnormal score of an input
self-supervised learning methods, it does not require the stren- sample x is given as D(G(x)). For instance, Sabokrou et al.
uous effort of designing feasible pretext tasks. It is generally [104], [105], [106] developed a conventional adversarial
divided into three categories: one-class classifier, Gaussian network that contains two subnetworks, where the discriminaclassifier, and adversarial classifier from discriminators of tor works as the one-class classifier, while the refiner supports
generative adversarial networks (GANs). it by enhancing the normal samples and distorting the anoma-
 One-class classifier basically includes one-class support vec- lies. To mitigate the instability caused by adversarial training,
tor machine (OC-SVM) [98], support vector data description Zaigham Zaheer et al. [107], [108] proposed stabilizing adver-
(SVDD) [99], and other extensions, e.g., basic/generalized sarial classifiers by transforming the role of discriminator to
one-class discriminative subspace classifier (BODS and distinguish good and bad quality reconstructions as well as
GODS) [100]. Specifically, OC-SVM is modeled as an introducing pseudo-anomaly examples.
extension of the SVM objective by learning a max-margin 3) Interpretable Learning: While self-supervised and
hyperplane that separates the normal from the abnormal in one-class learning methods perform well on standard VAD
a dataset, which is learned by minimizing the following benchmarks, their reliance on end-to-end complex neural
objective: networks limits interpretability and generalization. To address
 this, explainable VAD aims not only to detect anomalies
 1 X
 but also to provide reasons, which is essential for trust and
 min kwk22 − b + C ξi
 w,b,ξ≥0 2 transparency in real-world scenarios. The explainable VAD can
 s.t. wT xi ≥ b − ξi ∀xi ∈ Xn (10) be categorized into two types: scene decomposition-based and
 vision–language model (VLM) reasoning-based approaches.
where ξi is the nonnegative slack, w and b denote the Scene decomposition-based methods aim to disentangle the
hyperplane, and C is the slack penalty. AMDN [30] is a typical components of a scene to provide interpretable cues. For
OC-SVM-based VAD method, which obtains low-dimensional example, Hinami et al. [36] leveraged a multitask detecrepresentations through the autoencoder, and then uses tor to extract generic knowledge of entities, actions, and
OC-SVM to classify all normal representations. Another attributes and then employed an environment-specific detector
popular variant of one-class classifiers is (Deep) SVDD [101], for anomaly recounting. Reiss and Hoshen [50] adopted both
[102] that, instead of modeling data to belong to an open explicit (e.g., pose and velocity) and implicit semantic features
half-space (as in OC-SVM), assumes the normal samples for explainable decision-making. Doshi and Yilmaz [109]
inhabit a bounded set, and the optimization seeks the centroid further utilized scene graphs to monitor individual and interc of a hypersphere of minimum radius R > 0 that contains all active behavior for contextual explanations. Singh et al. [110]
normal samples. Mathematically, the objective reads developed a detector-independent model based on high-level
 visual features that can not only detect but also spatially
 1 X
 min R2 + C ξi localize anomalies with interpretable outputs.
 c,R,ξ≥0 2 VLM reasoning-based methods exploit the powerful infers.t. kxi − ck22 ≤ R2 − ξi ∀xi ∈ Xn (11) ence capability of large language models (LLMs) and VLMs
 to provide human-understandable justifications. For example,
where, as in OC-SVM, ξi models the slack. Based on this, Yang et al. [111] proposed the first rule-based reasoning
Wu et al. [32] proposed an end-to-end deep one-class clas- framework for semi-supervised VAD by prompting LLMs to
sifier, i.e., DeepOC, for VAD, avoiding the shortcomings of interpret abnormal events. VLAVAD [112] leveraged VLMs
complicated two-stage training of AMDN. to enhance the interpretability of VAD through semantic
 Gaussian classifier-based methods [33], [35], [103] assume feature reasoning instead of visual feature classification. More
that, in practical applications, the data typically follow a recently, SlowFastVAD [113] integrated a fast DNN-based
Gaussian distribution. By using training samples, it learns detector with a slow VLM-based detector, by employing a
the Gaussian distribution (mean µ and variance Σ) of the retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)-driven reasoning pronormal pattern. During the testing phase, samples that deviate cess for a small number of ambiguous segments, it effectively
significantly from the mean are considered anomalies. The balances inference speed and detection accuracy.
abnormal score is presented as
 1
 
 1
  C. Network Architecture
 p (xi ) = k 1
 exp − (x i − µ) Σ
 T −1
 (xi − µ) . (12) 1) Autoencoder: It consists of two vital structures, namely,
 (2π) 2 |Σ| 2 2
 encoder and decoder, in which the encoder compresses the
 Adversarial classifier uses adversarial training between the input sample into a latent space representation, significantly
generator G and discriminator D to learn the distribution of reducing the dimensionality of the sample. The decoder
normal samples. G is aware of normal data distribution, as the restores the input sample from the latent space representanormal samples are accessible to it. Therefore, D explicitly tion, increasing the dimensionality of the sample back to
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

the original input size. Due to its inherent image restora- 2) Memory Bank: Memory banks [120], [121], [122],
tion and high-level representation extraction capabilities, an [140], [141], [142] are used to store feature representations of
autoencoder is widely used in image restoration-based pretext normal video samples, which serve as a reference baseline and
tasks for self-supervised learning methods, such as recon- can be dynamically updated to adapt to new normal patterns,
struction [10], prediction [27], and inpainting [91]. Moreover, thereby enabling the model to better capture normal patterns
an autoencoder is also used to extract features for one-class and simultaneously improving the ability to adapt to changing
learning-based methods [32], where the extracted features environments. In specific implementations, memory banks can
are used for optimizing subsequent one-class classifiers. be combined with different network architectures, such as
Autoencoder structures are highly flexible and can be based autoencoder-based reconstruction (or prediction) [114], [116],
on various different base networks, such as 2-D CNN [10], [117], [119] and contrastive learning [143].
3-D CNN [27], recurrent neural network (RNN) [87], gated It is worth noting that refinement strategies are designed as
recurrent unit (GRU) [51], long short-term memory (LSTM) independent modules, which can be flexibly combined with
[26], [128], graph convolutional network (GCN) [54], [57], different methodologies and network architectures rather than
and Transformer [75], [91]. being restricted to specific counterparts. For instance, memory
 2) Generative Adversarial Network: GAN has been widely bank mechanisms can be integrated not only with sparse
adopted in various applications, including VAD, due to its coding but also with prediction-based methods.
powerful generative capabilities. The key idea is to use the
generator and discriminator to identify abnormal samples that E. Model Output
deviate from the learned normal distribution. Specifically, 1) Frame-Level Detection: In frame-level output, each
GAN, like autoencoder, is mainly applied to image restoration- frame of the video is classified as normal or abnormal. This
based pretext tasks [11], [129], [130], [131], [132], where output format provides an overall view of which frames in the
the generator creates restored images and the discriminator video contain anomalies. Such output is simple and straightis discarded once the training is finished. On the con- forward, easy to implement and understand, and particularly
trary, several one-class learning-based methods [104], [107] effective for detecting anomalies over a broad time range.
leverage the discriminator to assess the likelihood that a 2) Pixel-Level Detection: In pixel-level output, not only is
new sample is real (normal) or generated (anomalous). it identified which frames contain anomalies, but also which
Low likelihood scores indicate anomalies, thereby achieving specific pixel regions within those frames are abnormal [144].
end-to-end one-class classifiers. This output format provides more granular information about
 3) Diffusion: Diffusion models have achieved state-of-the- the anomalies. Pixel-level output offers precise locations and
art performance across a wide range of generative tasks extents of anomalies, providing more detailed information for
and have become a promising research topic. Unlike tradi- further analysis of the nature and cause of the anomalies.
tional generative models like GAN or autoencoder, diffusion 3) Sentence-Level Description: Beyond identifying
models generate samples by reversing a diffusion process whether and where anomalies occur, sentence-level output
that gradually destroys sample structure. This reverse process provides natural language descriptions explaining the detected
reconstructs the sample from noise in a step-by-step manner, anomalies. Powered by LLMs and VLMs, this output offers
leading to high-quality results. Therefore, diffusion models reasoning about abnormal events, enabling the model to not
also appear in the image restoration-based pretext tasks. only highlight anomalies but also to articulate why a specific
 Flaborea et al. [61] and Yan et al. [124] introduced novel event is considered anomalous [113].
diffusion-based methods to predict the features using the
skeleton and RGB frame, respectively, for VAD. Building F. Performance Comparison
on the preceding two methods, MA-PDM [133] introduced Fig. 5 presents a concise chronology of semi-supervised
a unified framework that couples patch-level diffusion with VAD methods. Besides, Table III provides a performance
dual appearance/motion conditioning, injecting fine-grained summary observed in representative semi-supervised VAD
local information into the diffusion process to better capture methods.
anomalies.
 IV. W EAKLY S UPERVISED VAD
D. Model Refinement Compared to semi-supervised VAD, weakly supervised
 1) Pseudo Anomalies: In semi-supervised learning, there is VAD is a newer research direction, and therefore, existing
usually a scarcity of real anomalous samples. To compensate reviews lack a comprehensive and in-depth introduction. As
for this lack, several research studies opt to generate pseudo shown in Table I, Chandrakala et al. [17] and Liu et al.
anomalies. Current approaches include: perturbing normal [18] mention the weakly supervised VAD task. However, the
samples, i.e., applying random perturbations to normal video former only briefly describes several achievements from 2018
samples, such as adding noise, shuffling frame sequences, or to 2020, while the latter, although encompassing recent works,
adding extra patches [134], [135], [136], [137]; leveraging lacks a scientific taxonomy and simply categorizes them into
generative models, i.e., using GAN or diffusion to generate single-modal and multimodal based on the different modalities.
samples similar to normal ones but with anomalous features Given this context, we survey related works from 2018 to the
[108], [138]; and simulating specific anomalous behaviors, i.e., present, including the latest methods based on pretrained large
manually introducing extra anomalous samples at the image- models, and we classify existing works from four aspects:
level or feature level [118], [125]. As a result, training with model input, methodology, refinement strategy, and model
pseudo-anomalous samples allows the detection model to learn output. The taxonomy of weakly supervised VAD is illustrated
a variety of anomalous patterns and helps the model learn a in Fig. 6.
broader range of anomalous features, improving its robustness Compared to semi-supervised VAD, weakly supervised
and generalization abilities in real-world applications [139]. VAD explicitly defines anomalies during the training process,
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 9

Fig. 5. Chronology of representative semi-supervised VAD research.
 TABLE III
 Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF S EMI -S UPERVISED M ETHODS ON P UBLIC DATASETS

Fig. 6. Taxonomy of weakly supervised VAD. We provide a hierarchical taxonomy that organizes existing deep weakly supervised VAD models by model
input, methodology, refinement strategy, and model output into a systematic framework.

giving the detection algorithm a clear direction. However, in signals introduce uncertainty into the detection process. Most
contrast to fully supervised VAD, the coarse weak supervision existing methods utilize the MIL mechanism to optimize the
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

model. This process can be viewed as selecting the hardest converted into features using the text encoder and then fed
regions (video clips) that appear most abnormal from normal into the subsequent detection network.
bags (normal videos) and the regions most likely to be abnor- 5) Hybrid: Common hybrid inputs include RGB combined
mal from abnormal bags (abnormal videos). Then, the goal with optical flow [161], RGB combined with audio [169],
is to maximize the predicted confidence difference between [170], [171], RGB combined with optical flow and audio
them (with the confidence for the hardest normal regions [172], and, more recently, RGB combined with text [173].
approaching 0 and the confidence for the most abnormal
regions approaching 1), which can be regarded as a binary B. Methodology
classification optimization. By gradually mining all normal and Based on existing methods, we divide them into three
abnormal regions based on their different characteristics, the different groups: one-stage MIL, two-stage self-learning, and
anomaly confidence of abnormal regions increases, while that VLM-based interpretable learning.
of normal regions decreases. Unfortunately, due to the lack 1) One-Stage MIL: The one-stage MIL [12], [174], [175],
of strong supervision signals, detection models tend to adopt [176] is the most commonly used approach for weakly
speculative strategies during the optimization process, often supervised VAD. The basic idea is to first divide long videos
resulting in ambiguous or inaccurate anomaly localization. into multiple segments and then use an MIL mechanism to
 select the most representative samples from these segments.
A. Model Input This includes selecting hard examples from normal videos
 Unlike semi-supervised VAD methods, recent weakly that look most like anomalies and the most likely abnormal
supervised VAD methods choose to use features extracted examples from the abnormal videos. The model is then optiby pretrained models (e.g., CNN or Transformer-based rep- mized by lowering the anomaly confidence of hard examples
resentations of RGB, optical flow, or skeleton sequences) as and increasing the confidence of the most likely abnormal
input to the network backbone of anomaly detectors, instead of examples. Ultimately, the confidence of model in predicting
directly feeding the raw video frames. This approach alleviates normal samples gradually decreases, while its confidence
the problem posed by the large scale of existing weakly in predicting abnormal samples gradually increases, thereby
supervised VAD datasets, the diverse and complex scenes, achieving anomaly detection. The advantage of this method
and the weak supervision signals. Using pretrained features as lies in its simplicity and ease of implementation. The MIL
input allows the effective utilization of off-the-shelf models’ objective is showcased as
 X
learned knowledge of appearance and motion, significantly lmil = max 0, 1 − max Φ θ, xia + max Φ θ, xin
  
 (14)
reduces the complexity of the detection model, and enables i
efficient training. However, it should be noted that in both
semi-supervised and weakly supervised VAD, the original where xa and xn denote an abnormal video and a normal video,
input source is still raw video; the main difference lies in respectively.
whether feature extraction is separated as a preprocessing step Additionally, TopK [148] extends MIL by selecting the
or integrated into the end-to-end training. top K segments with the highest prediction scores from each
 1) RGB: RGB is the most common model input. The video, rather than just the highest scoring segment, for training.
general approach divides a long video into multiple segments Therefore, MIL can be seen as a special case of TopK. For
and uses pretrained visual models to extract global features these TopK segments, compute their average prediction score
from each segment. As deep models continue to evolve and as the predicted probability ŷ
improve, the visual models used have also been upgraded,
 0 1
 K
progressing from the initial C3D [12], [145], [146] to I3D 1 X
 ŷ = σ @ Φ (θ, xi )A (15)
[147], [148], [149], [150], [151], 3D-ResNet [152], [153], K
 i∈topk
TSN [154], [155], [156], and more recently, to the popular
Swin Transformer [157], [158] and CLIP [159], [160]. This where σ is the sigmoid activation function. The cross-entropy
continuous upgrade in visual models has led to a gradual loss between ŷ and the label y is used to optimize the model
improvement in detection performance. ltopk = − y log (ŷ) + (1 − y) log (1 − ŷ) .
 
 (16)
 2) Optical Flow: Similar to RGB, the same approach is
applied to optical flow input to obtain corresponding global The one-stage MIL mechanism leads to models that tend to
features. However, due to the time-consuming nature of optical focus only on the most significant anomalies while ignoring
flow extraction, it is less commonly used in existing methods. less obvious ones.
Common pretrained models for optical flow include I3D [161] 2) Two-Stage Self-Training: In contrast, improved
and TSN [155]. two-stage self-learning is more complex but also more
 3) Audio: For multimodal datasets (e.g., XD-Violence) con- effective. This method employs a two-stage training
taining audio signals, audio also holds significant perceptual process. First, a preliminary model is pretrained using the
information. Unlike RGB images, audio is 1-D and is typically one-stage MIL. During this phase, the model learns the basic
processed as follows: audios are resampled, computed the principles of VAD. Then, using the pretrained model as an
spectrograms, and created log mel spectrograms. Then, these initial parameter, a self-learning mechanism is introduced to
features are framed into nonoverlapping examples. Finally, adaptively train the model further, enhancing its ability to
these examples are then fed into a pretrained audio model, recognize anomalies. Specifically, during the self-learning
such as VGGish [162], to extract features [163], [164]. phase, the predictions of model from the pretraining stage
 4) Text: More recently, several researchers [165], [166], are used to automatically select high-confidence abnormal
[167], [168] attempt to incorporate text descriptions related to regions. These regions are then treated as pseudo-labeled
videos to aid in VAD. These texts may be manually annotated data to retrain the model. The effectiveness of two-stage
or generated by large models. The text data are typically self-training mainly arises from the progressive refinement
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 11

of supervision signals. Initially, the model is trained with free unsupervised approach, we list them under the weakly
weak supervision, allowing it to capture coarse anomalous supervised category for consistency in benchmark usage and
patterns. In the second stage, leveraging the predictions as comparative evaluation.
pseudo-labels, the model receives more targeted guidance
focusing on regions with high anomaly probability [158].
This iterative pseudo-labeling and retraining process helps C. Refinement Strategy
the model to capture subtle and accurate abnormal events Refinement strategies primarily focus on input features,
that are difficult to detect with only weak labels. As a result, method design, and other aspects to compensate for the
two-stage self-training can significantly improve detection shortcomings of weak supervision signals. We compile several
performance, especially in complex scenes with noisy or commonly used refinement strategies and provide a detailed
incomplete supervision. GCN-Clean [155], MIST [177], MSL introduction in this section.
[158], CUPL [178], and TPWNG [179] are typical two-stage 1) Temporal Modeling: Temporal modeling is essential
self-training works. for capturing the critical context information in videos.
 The two-stage self-learning method based on improved MIL Unlike actions, anomalous events are complex combinations
excels in weakly supervised VAD, but it also comes with of scenes, entities, actions, and other elements, which require
some drawbacks, such as high computational complexity: the rich contextual information for accurate reasoning. Existing
two-stage training process requires more computational temporal modeling methods can be broadly categorized into
resources and time. Both pretraining and self-learning phases local relationship modeling and global relationship modeling.
involve multiple iterations of training, leading to high com- Local modeling is typically used for online detection [186],
putational costs. Depending on initial model quality, the whereas global modeling is mainly used for offline detection
self-learning stage relies on the initial model generated during [185]. Techniques such as temporal convolutional networks
pretraining. If the quality of the initial model is poor, erro- [148], [194], dilated convolution [185], GCN [188], [195],
neous predictions may be treated as pseudo-labels, affecting conditional random field [196], and Transformers [158], [191],
subsequent training effectiveness. [197], [198], [199] are frequently employed to capture these
 3) VLM-Based Interpretable Learning: In recent years, temporal relationships effectively.
VLMs have demonstrated remarkable potential and versatility 2) Spatiotemporal Modeling: Furthermore, spatiotemporal
across various vision tasks, giving rise to a novel paradigm, modeling can simultaneously capture spatial relationships,
i.e., VLM-based interpretable learning, which enhances the highlighting anomalous spatial locations and effectively reducinterpretability of VAD from two perspectives. ing noise from irrelevant backgrounds. This can be achieved
 1) Category-Level Interpretability: Unlike traditional by segmenting video frames into multiple patches or using
 methods that merely generate binary predictions existing object detectors to capture foreground objects. Then,
 (abnormal/normal), VLM-based approaches can methods like self-attention [46], [153], [187], [200] are used
 explicitly predict the semantic category of anomalies by to learn the relationships between these patches or objects.
 aligning visual content with language representations. Compared to temporal modeling, spatiotemporal modeling
 However, most of these methods still rely on MIL or involves a higher computational load due to the increased
 self-training schemes to guide anomaly localization number of entities being analyzed.
 and model optimization. For instance, VadCLIP [180] 3) MIL-Based Refinement: The traditional MIL mechanism
 was the first to adopt an aligned paradigm based on focuses only on the segments with the highest anomaly scores,
 CLIP to support both coarse-grained and fine-grained which leads to a series of issues, such as ignoring event
 VAD. TPWNG [179] further extended VadCLIP by continuity, the fixed length K-value not adapting to different
 incorporating a two-stage self-training strategy within video scenarios, and bias toward abnormal snippets with
 the CLIP-aligned framework. simple contexts. Several advanced strategies [201], [202]
 2) Semantic-Level Interpretability: This approach focuses aim to address the limitations. By incorporating unbion leveraging LLMs and VLMs to generate natural ased MIL [190], prior information from text [167], [192],
 language descriptions that explain detected anomalies. magnitude-level MIL [189], continuity-aware refinement
 It typically involves four key steps. [203], and adaptive K-values [204], the detection performance
 a) Extracting high-level visual semantics from video can be significantly improved.
 frames using a visual encoder. 4) Feature Metric Learning: While MIL-based classifib) Mapping these features into the language space via cation ensures the interclass separability of features, this
 VLMs to enable cross-modal alignment. separability at the video level alone is insufficient for accurate
 c) Constructing natural language prompts to guide anomaly detection. In contrast, enhancing the discriminative
 reasoning within LLMs. power of features through clustering similar features and
 d) Generating explanatory descriptions of anomalies isolating different ones should complement and even augment
 using LLMs. the separability achieved by MIL-based classification. Specifi-
 These methods generally move beyond MIL and self- cally, the basic principle of feature metric learning is to make
training strategies, instead relying on the intrinsic reasoning similar features compact and different features distant in the
capabilities of VLMs to perform training-free anomaly detec- feature space to improve discrimination. Several works [150],
tion and generate interpretable explanations. However, they [165], [167], [186], [197], [205], [206] exploited feature metric
often suffer from slower inference speeds and suboptimal learning to enhance the feature discrimination.
detection performance in specific VAD scenarios. Represen- 5) Knowledge Distillation: It aims to transfer knowledge
tative works include HAWK [181], VERA [182], CUVA [23], from the enriched branch to the barren branch to alleviate the
VADor [183], and LAVAD [184]. Notably, although some semantic gap, which is mainly applied for modality-missing
methods, such as LAVAD [184], are essentially a training- [207] or modality-enhancing [171] scenarios.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

 TABLE IV
 Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF W EAKLY S UPERVISED M ETHODS ON P UBLIC DATASETS

 input. It can be categorized based on the type of input into
 the following types.
 Appearance input mainly consists of raw RGB images,
 directly showcasing the visual effect of video frames. This
 helps the model better understand anomalies that can be
 directly detected from a visual perspective. Many methods
 [211], [212], [220], [221] used RGB features extracted from
Fig. 7. Chronology for representative weakly supervised VAD research.
 raw images using pretrained models as the model input.
 Motion input mainly includes optical flow, optical flow
 acceleration, and frame differences. These inputs directly
 6) Vision–Language Models: VLMs enhance anomaly showcase the motion state of objects, helping to identify
detection not only by incorporating language-informed visual anomalies from the motion perspective that might be difficult
representations, e.g., CLIP-TSA [208] and cross-modal seman- to detect visually. Dong et al. [211] and Peixoto et al. [222]
tic alignment, but also by LLMs to generate explanatory used optical flow and optical flow acceleration as input, while
captions that improve detection performance, as demonstrated Sudhakaran and Lanz [213] and Hanson et al. [214] employed
in TEVAD [166], UCA [173], and VAD-Instruct50k [22]. frame differences as model input.
Moreover, they can directly exploit the prior knowledge Skeleton input can intuitively display the pose state of
encoded in LLMs and VLMs [184]. humans, allowing the model to exclude background interference and focus on human actions. This enables more intuitive
D. Model Output and vivid recognition of violent behavior. Su et al. [215] and
 Similar to semi-supervised VAD, the model output in Singh et al. [223] conducted violence detection by studying
weakly supervised VAD typically includes frame-level detec- the interaction relationships between skeletal points.
tion, pixel-level detection [209], [210], and sentence-level Audio input can provide additional information to aid in
description. identifying violent events [222]. This is because certain violent
 incidents inevitably involve changes in sound; such variations
E. Performance Comparison help us better detect violent events, especially when RGB
 images may not be effectively detected due to issues like
 As depicted in Fig. 7, several significant research works occlusion.
have emerged in the field’s chronology. Moreover, we present Hybrid input combines the strengths of different modalities
an elaborate performance comparison of existing research, as to better detect violent events. Cheng et al. [216] utilized
detailed in Table IV. RGB images and optical flow as input, while Shang et al.
 [224] combined RGB images with audio as input. Garcia-Cobo
 V. F ULLY S UPERVISED VAD and SanMiguel [218] fed skeleton and frame differences into
 Fully supervised VAD refers to the task of detecting video detection models.
anomalies under the condition that the dataset has detailed
frame-level or video-level annotations. Here, we consider B. Performance Comparison
video violence detection as a fully supervised VAD task. We present the performance comparison of existing fully
 supervised VAD research in Table V.
A. Approach Categorization VI. U NSUPERVISED VAD
 Video violence detection typically takes the appearance, Despite the great popularity of supervised VAD, supervised
motion, skeleton, audio, or a combination of these as the methods still have shortcomings in practical applications.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 13

 TABLE V
 Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF F ULLY S UPERVISED M ETHODS ON P UBLIC DATASETS

On the one hand, we cannot clearly define what constitutes Other paradigm includes the following methods. Li et al.
normal behavior of real-life human activities in many cases, [239] proposed a clustering technique, where an autoencoder
e.g., running in a sports ground is normal, but running in is trained on a subset of normal data and iterates between
a library is forbidden. On the other hand, it is impractical hypothetical normal candidates based on clustering and repto know every possible normal event in advance, especially resentation learning. The reconstruction error is used as a
for scientific research. Therefore, unsupervised VAD is of scoring function to assess normality. Lin et al. [231] introsignificant research value [235]. duced a causal inference framework to reduce the effect of
 noisy pseudo-labeling, combining long-term temporal context
A. Approach Categorization with local image context for anomaly detection. Yu et al.
 Through an in-depth investigation, we roughly classify [232] highlighted the effectiveness of deep reconstruction for
the current unsupervised VAD methods into three categories: unsupervised VAD, revealing a normality advantage where
pseudo label, change detection, and others. normal events have lower reconstruction loss. They integrated
 Pseudo-label-based paradigm is described as follows. a novel self-paced refinement scheme into localization-based
Wang et al. [228] proposed a two-stage training approach reconstruction for unsupervised VAD.
where an autoencoder is first trained with an adaptive reconstruction loss threshold to estimate normal events from unla- B. Performance Comparison
beled videos. These estimated normal events are then used as
 We present the performance comparison of existing unsupseudo-labels to train an OC-SVM, refining the normality
 pervised VAD research in Table VI.
model to exclude anomalies and improve detection performance. Pang et al. [229] introduced a self-training deep VII. O PEN -S ET S UPERVISED VAD
ordinal regression method, starting with initial detection using
classical one-class algorithms to generate pseudo-labels for Open-set supervised VAD is a challenging task where the
anomalous and normal frames. An end-to-end anomaly score goal is to detect anomalous events in videos that are unseen
learner is then trained iteratively using a self-training strategy during the training phase. Unlike traditional (closed-set) VAD,
that optimizes the detector with newly generated pseudo- where the types of anomalies are known and well-defined,
labels. Zaheer et al. [236] proposed an unsupervised generative open-set VAD must handle unforeseen and unknown anomacooperative learning approach, leveraging the low-frequency lies. This is crucial for real-world applications, as it is
nature of anomalies for cross-supervision between a generator impractical to anticipate and annotate every possible anomaly
and a discriminator, each learning from the pseudo-labels of during training. Therefore, research on open-set VAD has
the other. Al-lahham et al. [237] presented a coarse-to-fine garnered significant attention. However, existing review works
pseudo-label generation framework using hierarchical divisive lack an investigation into open-set VAD. Based on this, we
clustering for coarse pseudo-labels at the video level and conduct an in-depth survey and make a systematic taxonomy
statistical hypothesis testing for fine pseudo-labels at the of existing open-set VAD works. To our knowledge, this
segment level, training the anomaly detector with the obtained is the first review that includes a detailed introduction to
pseudo-labels. open-set supervised VAD. In this section, we broadly catego-
 Change detection-based paradigm can be summarized as rize open-set supervised VAD into two types based on different
follows. Del Giorno et al. [225] performed change detec- research directions: open-set VAD and few-set VAD.
tion in video frames using a simple logistic regression
classifier to measure deviations between the data, making A. Open-Set VAD
comparisons time-independent by randomly ordering frames. Open-set VAD is a vital area of research that addresses
Ionescu et al. [226] proposed a change detection framework the limitations of traditional anomaly detection methods by
based on the unmasking technique, determining abnormal focusing on the detection of unknown anomalies. MLEP [240],
events by observing changes in classifier accuracy between as the first work on open-set supervised VAD, addressed
consecutive events. Liu et al. [227] linked the heuristic the challenge of detecting anomalies in videos when only
unmasking procedure to multiple classifier two-sample tests in a few anomalous examples are available for training. It
statistical machine learning, aiming to improve the unmask- emphasizes learning a margin that separates normal and
ing method. Hu et al. [230] introduced a method based on anomalous samples in the feature space. This helps in
masked autoencoders [238], where the rare and unusual nature distinguishing anomalies even when only a few examples
of anomalies leads to poor prediction of changing events, are available. The follow-up work [241] introduced a new
allowing for anomaly detection and scoring in unlabeled benchmark, namely, UBnormal, specifically designed for
videos. open-set VAD. It aims to provide a comprehensive evaluation
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

 TABLE VI
 Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF U NSUPERVISED M ETHODS ON P UBLIC DATASETS

framework for testing and comparing various VAD methods supervised learning to achieve cross-domain generalization.
under open-set conditions. Zhu et al. [242] broke through By incorporating external datasets from diverse domains, the
the closed-set detection limitations and developed novel tech- model trained in a weakly supervised manner is enabled to
niques that can generalize to previously unseen anomalies generalize across domains.
and effectively distinguish them from normal events. Specif- VIII. F UTURE O PPORTUNITIES
ically, a normalizing flow model is introduced to create
pseudo-anomaly features. Recently, Wu et al. [160] extended A. Creating Comprehensive Benchmarks
open-set VAD to the more challenging open-vocabulary VAD, The current VAD benchmarks have various limitations in
aiming to both detect and recognize anomaly categories. terms of data size, modality, and capturing views. Thus, an
Centered around VLMs, this task is achieved by matching important future direction is to extend benchmarks along these
videos with corresponding textual labels. Additionally, large dimensions for providing more realistic VAD test platforms.
generative models and language models are utilized to generate 1) Large-Scale: Currently, in VAD, particularly in semipseudo-anomalous samples. There are other methods for the supervised settings, the available datasets are of limited scale.
open-set setting, such as [243] and [244], but they are focused Small-scale benchmarks tend to overestimate model accuracy,
on image-level anomaly detection. Through various innovative while performance in real-world scenarios remains signifiapproaches, such as margin learning, the development of cantly limited. Therefore, expanding the scale and diversity
benchmarks, generalization strategies, and the integration of of VAD datasets is a critical direction for future research to
language-vision models, researchers are pushing the bound- ensure both robustness and real-world applicability.
aries of what is possible in VAD. These advancements are 2) Multimodal: Currently, there is limited research on
paving the way for more robust, flexible, and practical VAD multimodal VAD. Just as humans perceive the world through
systems suitable for a wide range of real-world applications. multiple senses, such as vision, hearing, and smell, effectively
 utilizing various modalities of information in the face of
B. Few-Shot VAD multisource heterogeneous data can enhance the performance
 The goal of few-shot VAD is to detect anomalies in of anomaly detection. For example, using audio information
a previously unseen scene with only a few frames. Com- can better detect anomalies such as screams and panic, while
pared to open-set VAD, the main difference lies in that using infrared information can identify abnormal situations in
a few real frames of unseen anomalies are provided. dark environments.
This task is first introduced by Lu et al. [245], and 3) Egocentric, Multiview, and 3-D: Egocentric VAD
a meta-learning-based model is proposed to tackle this involves using data captured from wearable devices or
problem. During the test stage, the model needs to be body-mounted cameras to simulate how individuals perceive
fine-tuned via a few provided samples from the new scene. In their environment and identify abnormal events, such as
order to avoid extra fine-tuning processes before deployment, detecting falls or aggressive behavior in real time. Creating
Hu et al. [246] and Huang et al. [247] adopted the metric- multiview benchmarks that leverage data from viewpoints
based adaptive network and variational network, respectively, allows for a comprehensive environment analysis, enabling the
both leveraging a few normal samples as the reference detection of anomalies that may not be visible from a single
during the test stage without any fine-tuning. Furthermore, perspective. The 3-D perspectives from depth information
Aich et al. [248] presented a novel zxVAD framework, a or point clouds can offer more detailed spatial information,
significant advancement by enabling anomaly detection across enabling models to better understand the structure and context
domains without requiring target domain adaptation. In this of the environment, which also brings multimodal signals.
work, a novel untrained CNN-based anomaly synthesis module However, deploying VAD in practice faces key challenges:
crafts pseudo-abnormal examples by adding foreign objects in large and diverse data complicates storage and annotation,
normal video frames in a training-free manner. This contrasts real-time labeling is labor-intensive and constrained by ethical
with the above few-shot adaptive methods, which require a and legal issues, hardware limits and costs affect reliability,
few labeled data from the target domain for fine-tuning. The and dynamic environments demand advanced algorithms to
former focuses on domain-invariant feature extraction and integrate heterogeneous and 3-D sensor data.
unsupervised learning, ensuring robustness and generalizability, while the latter relies on few-shot learning to adapt models B. Toward Open-World Task
to new domains with minimal labeled data. More recently, The current research focuses on the closed-set VAD, which
Jain et al. [249] proposed an extended version utilizing weakly is restricted to detecting only those anomalies that are defined
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 15

and annotated during training. In applications like urban 2) Algorithm: Combining algorithms from different
surveillance, the inability to adapt to unforeseen anomalies domains can be helpful for enhanced reasoning,
limits the practicality and effectiveness of closed-set VAD including: knowledge graphs, i.e., utilize knowledge
models. Therefore, moving toward the open-world VAD task, graphs to incorporate contextual information and
handling the uncertainty and variability of real-world situ- relationships between entities; intent prediction, i.e., use
ations, is a feasible future trend. To accomplish this task, intent prediction algorithms to anticipate future actions
several key approaches and their combination can be taken and detect deviations from expected behaviors [123],
into account. [126]; LLMs’ reasoning, i.e., the textual descriptions
 1) Self-Supervised Learning: Leveraging unlabeled data to of detected anomalies using large LLMs can also be
 learn discriminative representations that can distinguish used for the explanation. These descriptions can explain
 between normal and abnormal events. what the model perceives as abnormal and why [22].
 2) Open-Vocabulary Learning: Developing models that 3) Output: Various aspects such as the spatiotemporal
 can adapt to new anomalies with large models [160], changes and patterns in the video may be synthesized
 pseudo-anomaly synthesis, or minimal labeled examples. to explain anomalies [193]. In practical applications,
 3) Incremental Learning: continuously updating models decision transparency and user trust are crucial, espewith new data and anomaly types without forgetting cially for emergency-triggering anomalies. Generating
 previously learned information. Open-world VAD must accurate, human-understandable explanations is chalhandle concept drift, where the definition of normal and lenging in complex or crowded scenes, and interpretable
 abnormal can change over time due to social, seasonal, models need to balance explanation detail with real-time
 or environmental factors. This requires models to be detection to support timely interventions.
 robust against distribution shifts and to learn continu- We provide further perspectives in the Supplementary
 ously with minimal human intervention. Materials, including privacy-preserving VAD [205], [235],
 hallucination in VLMs, spatial–temporal reasoning [23], [24],
C. Embracing Pretrained Large Models and long-video understanding [22], to present a broader view
 Pretrained large models have shown remarkable success of future directions.
in various computer vision tasks, and these models can be
leveraged in VAD to enhance the understanding and detection IX. C ONCLUSION
of anomalies by integrating semantic context and improving We present a comprehensive survey of VAD approaches in
feature representations. Here are several feasible directions. the deep learning era. Unlike previous reviews mainly focus-
 1) Feature Extraction: Pretrained weights of large models, ing on semi-supervised VAD, we provide a taxonomy that
 which have been trained on large-scale datasets, provide systematically divides the existing works into five categories
 a strong foundation for feature extraction and reduce the by their supervision signals, e.g., semi-supervised, weakly
 need for extensive training from scratch [208]. supervised, unsupervised, fully supervised, and open-set super-
 2) Semantic Understanding: Language–vision models can vised VAD. For each category, we further refine the categories
 be utilized to understand and incorporate contextual based on model differences, e.g., model input and output,
 information from video scenes. For instance, text methodology, refinement strategy, and architecture, and we
 descriptions associated with video frames can provide demonstrate the performance comparison of various methods.
 additional context that helps in identifying anomalies. In Finally, we discuss several promising research directions for
 the same way, leverage the language capabilities of these deep learning-based VAD in the future.
 models to generate or understand textual descriptions of
 R EFERENCES
 anomalies, aiding in both the detection and interpretation
 of the anomalies [22]. [1] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep learning
 3) Zero-Shot Learning: It exploits the zero-shot learning for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
 pp. 1–38, 2021.
 capabilities of language–vision models to detect anoma- [2] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The
 lies without requiring explicit examples during training. MVTec anomaly detection dataset: A comprehensive real-world dataset
 This is particularly useful in open-set VAD scenarios for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129,
 where new types of anomalies can occur [250]. The no. 4, pp. 1038–1059, Apr. 2021.
 [3] Y. Yao et al., “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in
 deployment of large pretrained models in real-time VAD driving videos,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1,
 faces challenges such as computational efficiency, high pp. 444–459, Jan. 2023.
 memory consumption, and the need for fast adaptation [4] Z. Chen, Y. Tian, W. Zeng, and T. Huang, “Detecting abnormal
 to environment-specific data. behaviors in surveillance videos based on fuzzy clustering and multiple
 auto-encoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jun.
D. Exploiting Interpretable VAD 2015, pp. 1–6.
 [5] Y. Cong, J. Yuan, and J. Liu, “Sparse reconstruction cost for abnormal
 Interpretable VAD focuses on creating models that not only event detection,” in Proc. CVPR, Jun. 2011, pp. 3449–3456.
detect anomalies but also provide understandable explanations [6] C. Lu, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Abnormal event detection at 150 FPS
for their predictions. This is crucial for gaining trust in the in MATLAB,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2013,
 pp. 2720–2727.
system, especially in high-stakes applications like surveillance, [7] W. Li, V. Mahadevan, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly detection and
healthcare, and autonomous vehicles. Here are several feasible localization in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
directions from three different layers of a VAD system. Intell., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 18–32, Jan. 2014.
 1) Input: Instead of directly inputting raw video data into [8] C. Lu, J. Shi, W. Wang, and J. Jia, “Fast abnormal event detection,”
 Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 127, no. 8, pp. 993–1011, Aug. 2019.
 the model, leverage existing technologies to extract key [9] V. Saligrama and Z. Chen, “Video anomaly detection based on local
 information, such as foreground objects, position coor- statistical aggregates,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 dinates, motion trajectories, and crowd relationships. Recognit., Jun. 2012, pp. 2112–2119.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

[10] M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and [33] M. Sabokrou, M. Fayyaz, M. Fathy, and R. Klette, “Deep-cascade:
 L. S. Davis, “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in Cascading 3D deep neural networks for fast anomaly detection and
 Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, localization in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26,
 pp. 733–742. no. 4, pp. 1992–2004, Apr. 2017.
[11] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame [34] T. Wang et al., “Generative neural networks for anomaly detection in
 prediction for anomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc. crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 5,
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 1390–1399, May 2019.
 pp. 6536–6545. [35] Y. Fan, G. Wen, D. Li, S. Qiu, M. D. Levine, and F. Xiao, “Video
[12] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in anomaly detection and localization via Gaussian mixture fully consurveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern volutional variational autoencoder,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand.,
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488. vol. 195, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 102920.
[13] B. Ramachandra, M. J. Jones, and R. R. Vatsavai, “A survey of single- [36] R. Hinami, T. Mei, and S. Satoh, “Joint detection and recounting of
 scene video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. abnormal events by learning deep generic knowledge,” in Proc. IEEE
 Intell., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 2293–2312, May 2022. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 3639–3647.
[14] K. K. Santhosh, D. P. Dogra, and P. P. Roy, “Anomaly detection in [37] R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Objectroad traffic using visual surveillance: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., centric auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event
 vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1–26, Nov. 2021. detection in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[15] R. Nayak, U. C. Pati, and S. K. Das, “A comprehensive review on Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7842–7851.
 deep learning-based methods for video anomaly detection,” Image Vis. [38] Z. Liu, Y. Nie, C. Long, Q. Zhang, and G. Li, “A hybrid video anomaly
 Comput., vol. 106, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 104078. detection framework via memory-augmented flow reconstruction and
[16] T. M. Tran, T. N. Vu, N. D. Vo, T. V. Nguyen, and K. Nguyen, flow-guided frame prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
 “Anomaly analysis in images and videos: A comprehensive review,” Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 13568–13577.
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1–37, Jul. 2023. [39] Q. Bao, F. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Jiao, X. Liu, and L. Li, “Hierarchical
[17] S. Chandrakala, K. Deepak, and G. Revathy, “Anomaly detec- scene normality-binding modeling for anomaly detection in surveiltion in surveillance videos: A thematic taxonomy of deep models, lance videos,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022,
 review and performance analysis,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 6103–6112.
 pp. 3319–3368, Apr. 2023. [40] C. Chen et al., “Comprehensive regularization in a bi-directional
[18] Y. Liu et al., “Generalized video anomaly event detection: Systematic predictive network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, 2022,
 taxonomy and comparison of deep models,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 230–238.
 vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1–38, Jul. 2024. [41] C. Sun, Y. Jia, and Y. Wu, “Evidential reasoning for video anomaly
[19] J. Liu et al., “Networking systems for video anomaly detection: A detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022,
 tutorial and survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 1–37, pp. 2106–2114.
 Oct. 2025. [42] S. Sun and X. Gong, “Hierarchical semantic contrast for scene-aware
[20] Y. Liu et al., “Privacy-preserving video anomaly detection: A survey,” video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Sep. 3, 2025, doi: Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 22846–22856.
 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3600252. [43] W. Luo, W. Liu, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction network
[21] B. Ramachandra and M. J. Jones, “Street scene: A new dataset and for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 evaluation protocol for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 7505–7520, Nov. 2022.
 Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2020, pp. 2558–2567. [44] P. Wu, J. Liu, M. Li, Y. Sun, and F. Shen, “Fast sparse coding networks
[22] H. Zhang et al., “Holmes-VAU: Towards long-term video anomaly for anomaly detection in videos,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 107, Nov.
 understanding at any granularity,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. 2020, Art. no. 107515.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025, pp. 13843–13853. [45] R. Cai, H. Zhang, W. Liu, S. Gao, and Z. Hao, “Appearance-motion
 memory consistency network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
[23] H. Du et al., “Uncovering what, why and how: A comprehensive
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Feb. 2021, pp. 938–946.
 benchmark for causation understanding of video anomaly,” in Proc.
 [46] Y. Liu, J. Liu, X. Zhu, D. Wei, X. Huang, and L. Song,
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
 “Learning task-specific representation for video anomaly detection with
 pp. 18793–18803.
 spatial–temporal attention,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
[24] L. Zhu, Q. Chen, X. Shen, and X. Cun, “VAU-R1: Advancing
 Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022, pp. 2190–2194.
 video anomaly understanding via reinforcement fine-tuning,” 2025,
 [47] X. Huang, C. Zhao, and Z. Wu, “A video anomaly detection framework
 arXiv:2505.23504.
 based on appearance-motion semantics representation consistency,” in
[25] R. Nayak, U. C. Pati, and S. K. Das, “A comprehensive review
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun.
 of datasets for detection and localization of video anomalies: A
 2023, pp. 1–5.
 step towards data-centric artificial intelligence-based video anomaly
 [48] N. Li, F. Chang, and C. Liu, “Spatial–temporal cascade autoencoder for
 detection,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 83, no. 21, pp. 59617–59674,
 video anomaly detection in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
 Dec. 2023.
 vol. 23, pp. 203–215, 2021.
[26] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “Remembering history with convolutional [49] B. Ramachandra, M. J. Jones, and R. R. Vatsavai, “Learning a distance
 LSTM for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia function with a Siamese network to localize anomalies in videos,”
 Expo (ICME), Jul. 2017, pp. 439–444. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., Mar. 2020,
[27] Y. Zhao, B. Deng, C. Shen, Y. Liu, H. Lu, and X.-S. Hua, “Spatio- pp. 2598–2607.
 temporal AutoEncoder for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. 25th [50] T. Reiss and Y. Hoshen, “An attribute-based method for video anomaly
 ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2017, pp. 1933–1941. detection,” 2022, arXiv:2212.00789.
[28] M. Ravanbakhsh, M. Nabi, E. Sangineto, L. Marcenaro, C. Regazzoni, [51] R. Morais, V. Le, T. Tran, B. Saha, M. Mansour, and S. Venkatesh,
 and N. Sebe, “Abnormal event detection in videos using generative “Learning regularity in skeleton trajectories for anomaly detection in
 adversarial nets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Sep. videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun.
 2017, pp. 1577–1581. 2019, pp. 11996–12004.
[29] T. N. Nguyen and J. Meunier, “Anomaly detection in video sequence [52] A. Markovitz, G. Sharir, I. Friedman, L. Zelnik-Manor, and S. Aviwith appearance-motion correspondence,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. dan, “Graph embedded pose clustering for anomaly detection,” in
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1273–1283. Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2020,
[30] D. Xu, E. Ricci, Y. Yan, J. Song, and N. Sebe, “Learning deep repre- pp. 10539–10547.
 sentations of appearance and motion for anomalous event detection,” [53] R. Rodrigues, N. Bhargava, R. Velmurugan, and S. Chaudhuri, “Multiin Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2015, pp. 8.1–8.12. timescale trajectory prediction for abnormal human activity detection,”
[31] D. Xu, Y. Yan, E. Ricci, and N. Sebe, “Detecting anomalous events in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2020,
 in videos by learning deep representations of appearance and motion,” pp. 2615–2623.
 Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 156, pp. 117–127, Mar. 2017. [54] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “Normal graph: Spatial temporal graph
[32] P. Wu, J. Liu, and F. Shen, “A deep one-class neural network for convolutional networks based prediction network for skeleton based
 anomalous event detection in complex scenes,” IEEE Trans. Neural video anomaly detection,” Neurocomputing, vol. 444, pp. 332–337, Jul.
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 2609–2622, Jul. 2020. 2021.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 17

[55] X. Zeng, Y. Jiang, W. Ding, H. Li, Y. Hao, and Z. Qiu, “A hierar- [77] G. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Qin, D. Zhang, X. Bao, and D. Huang,
 chical spatio-temporal graph convolutional neural network for anomaly “Video anomaly detection by solving decoupled spatio-temporal jigsaw
 detection in videos,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, puzzles,” in Proc. ECCV, 2022, pp. 494–511.
 no. 1, pp. 200–212, Jan. 2023. [78] C. Shi, C. Sun, Y. Wu, and Y. Jia, “Video anomaly detection via
[56] Y. Yang, Z. Fu, and S. M. Naqvi, “A two-stream information fusion sequentially learning multiple pretext tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 approach to abnormal event detection in video,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 10296–10306.
 Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022, [79] A. Barbalau et al., “SSMTL++: Revisiting self-supervised multi-task
 pp. 5787–5791. learning for video anomaly detection,” Comput. Vis. Image Under-
[57] N. Li, F. Chang, and C. Liu, “Human-related anomalous event detection stand., vol. 229, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 103656.
 via spatial–temporal graph convolutional autoencoder with embed- [80] C. Huang, Z. Wu, J. Wen, Y. Xu, Q. Jiang, and Y. Wang, “Abnormal
 ded long short-term memory network,” Neurocomputing, vol. 490, event detection using deep contrastive learning for intelligent video
 pp. 482–494, Jun. 2022. surveillance system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8,
[58] C. Huang et al., “Hierarchical graph embedded pose regularity learning pp. 5171–5179, Aug. 2022.
 via spatio-temporal transformer for abnormal behavior detection,” in [81] Z. Wang, Y. Zou, and Z. Zhang, “Cluster attention contrast for video
 Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 307–315. anomaly detection,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020,
[59] O. Hirschorn and S. Avidan, “Normalizing flows for human pose pp. 2463–2471.
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), [82] Y. Lu, C. Cao, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Learnable locality-sensitive
 Oct. 2023, pp. 13499–13508. hashing for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
[60] S. Yu et al., “Regularity learning via explicit distribution modeling for Technol., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 963–976, Feb. 2023.
 skeletal video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video [83] C. Sun, Y. Jia, H. Song, and Y. Wu, “Adversarial 3D convolutional
 Technol., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 6661–6673, Aug. 2024. auto-encoder for abnormal event detection in videos,” IEEE Trans.
[61] A. Flaborea, L. Collorone, G. M. D’Amely Di Melendugno, Multimedia, vol. 23, pp. 3292–3305, 2021.
 S. D’Arrigo, B. Prenkaj, and F. Galasso, “Multimodal motion condi- [84] D. Chen, L. Yue, X. Chang, M. Xu, and T. Jia, “NM-GAN:
 tioned diffusion model for skeleton-based video anomaly detection,” Noise-modulated generative adversarial network for video anomaly
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 116, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 107969.
 pp. 10284–10295. [85] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based
[62] A. Stergiou, B. De Weerdt, and N. Deligiannis, “Holistic represen- anomaly detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 tation learning for multitask trajectory anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349.
 IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, [86] J. T. Zhou, J. Du, H. Zhu, X. Peng, Y. Liu, and R. S. M. Goh,
 pp. 6715–6725. “AnomalyNet: An anomaly detection network for video surveillance,”
[63] R. Pi, P. Wu, X. He, and Y. Peng, “EOGT: Video anomaly detection IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 2537–2550,
 with enhanced object information and global temporal dependency,” Oct. 2019.
 ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 20, no. 10, [87] W. Luo et al., “Video anomaly detection with sparse coding inspired
 pp. 1–21, Oct. 2024. deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
[64] Y. Chang, Z. Tu, W. Xie, and J. Yuan, “Clustering driven deep vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1070–1084, Mar. 2021.
 autoencoder for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. [88] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
 Vis., 2020, pp. 329–345. for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
[65] Z. Fang, J. Liang, J. T. Zhou, Y. Xiao, and F. Yang, “Anomaly detection Art. no. 107706.
 with bidirectional consistency in videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. [89] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
 Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1079–1092, Mar. 2022. block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
[66] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervision-augmented deep autoencoder for Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13576–13586.
 unsupervised visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, [90] N. Madan et al., “Self-supervised masked convolutional transformer
 no. 12, pp. 13834–13847, Dec. 2022. block for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
[67] J. T. Zhou, L. Zhang, Z. Fang, J. Du, X. Peng, and Y. Xiao, “Attention- vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 525–542, Jan. 2024.
 driven loss for anomaly detection in video surveillance,” IEEE Trans. [91] N.-C. Ristea, F.-A. Croitoru, R. T. Ionescu, M. Popescu, F. S. Khan,
 Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 4639–4647, Dec. and M. Shah, “Self-distilled masked auto-encoders are efficient video
 2020. anomaly detectors,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[68] Y. Zhang, X. Nie, R. He, M. Chen, and Y. Yin, “Normality learning Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 15984–15995.
 in multispace for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. [92] M. Ye, X. Peng, W. Gan, W. Wu, and Y. Qiao, “AnoPCN: Video
 Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 3694–3706, Sep. 2021. anomaly detection via deep predictive coding network,” in Proc. 27th
[69] X. Wang et al., “Robust unsupervised video anomaly detection by ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2019, pp. 1805–1813.
 multipath frame prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., [93] Y. Liu, J. Liu, J. Lin, M. Zhao, and L. Song, “Appearance-motion
 vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2301–2312, Jun. 2022. united auto-encoder framework for video anomaly detection,” IEEE
[70] J. Yu, Y. Lee, K. C. Yow, M. Jeon, and W. Pedrycz, “Abnormal Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2498–2502,
 event detection and localization via adversarial event prediction,” IEEE May 2022.
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3572–3586, Aug. [94] Y. Liu, J. Liu, M. Zhao, D. Yang, X. Zhu, and L. Song, “Learning
 2022. appearance-motion normality for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
[71] W. Zhou, Y. Li, and C. Zhao, “Object-guided and motion-refined IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
 attention network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. [95] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervised attentive generative adversarial net-
 Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6. works for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
[72] K. Cheng, X. Zeng, Y. Liu, M. Zhao, C. Pang, and X. Hu, Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9389–9403, Nov. 2023.
 “Spatial–temporal graph convolutional network boosted flow-frame [96] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu,
 prediction for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICASSP - IEEE Int. and M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via self-supervised and
 Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–5. multi-task learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[73] Y. Liu et al., “AMP-Net: Appearance-motion prototype network Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 12742–12752.
 assisted automatic video anomaly detection system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. [97] M. Zhang et al., “Multi-scale video anomaly detection by multi-grained
 Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2843–2855, Feb. 2024. spatio-temporal representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
[74] G. Yu et al., “Cloze test helps: Effective video anomaly detection via Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 17385–17394.
 learning to complete video events,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. [98] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and
 Multimedia, Oct. 2020, pp. 583–591. R. C. Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional
[75] Z. Yang, J. Liu, Z. Wu, P. Wu, and X. Liu, “Video event restora- distribution,” Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, Jul.
 tion based on keyframes for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. 2001.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, [99] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,”
 pp. 14592–14601. Mach. Learn., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2003.
[76] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, E. Zhu, and J. Yin, “Video anomaly [100] J. Wang and A. Cherian, “GODS: Generalized one-class discriminative
 detection via visual cloze tests,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, subspaces for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 vol. 18, pp. 4955–4969, 2023. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8200–8210.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

18 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

[101] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. [125] Z. Liu, X.-M. Wu, D. Zheng, K.-Y. Lin, and W.-S. Zheng, “Generating
 Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402. anomalies for video anomaly detection with prompt-based feature
[102] P. Liznerski, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, B. J. Franks, M. Kloft, and mapping,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 K. Müller, “Explainable deep one-class classification,” in Proc. ICLR, (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 24500–24510.
 2020, pp. 1–25. [126] C. Cao, H. Zhang, Y. Lu, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Scene-dependent
[103] M. Sabokrou, M. Fayyaz, M. Fathy, Z. Moayed, and R. Klette, “Deep- prediction in latent space for video anomaly detection and anticipation,”
 anomaly: Fully convolutional neural network for fast anomaly detection in Proc. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 47, Jan. 2024,
 in crowded scenes,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 172, pp. 224–239.
 pp. 88–97, Jul. 2018. [127] H. Hu, W. Du, P. Liao, B. Wang, and S. Fan, “Noise-resistant video
[104] M. Sabokrou, M. Khalooei, M. Fathy, and E. Adeli, “Adversarially anomaly detection via RGB error-guided multiscale predictive coding
 learned one-class classifier for novelty detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF and dynamic memory,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3379–3388. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025, pp. 19109–19119.
[105] M. Sabokrou et al., “AVID: Adversarial visual irregularity detection,” [128] J. Ryan Medel and A. Savakis, “Anomaly detection in video using
 in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 488–505. predictive convolutional long short-term memory networks,” 2016,
[106] M. Sabokrou, M. Fathy, G. Zhao, and E. Adeli, “Deep end-to-end one- arXiv:1612.00390.
 class classifier,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 2, [129] M. Ravanbakhsh, E. Sangineto, M. Nabi, and N. Sebe, “Training
 pp. 675–684, Feb. 2021. adversarial discriminators for cross-channel abnormal event detection
[107] M. Zaigham Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Old is in crowds,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV),
 gold: Redefining the adversarially learned one-class classifier training Jan. 2019, pp. 1896–1904.
 paradigm,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. [130] H. Vu, T. D. Nguyen, T. Le, W. Luo, and D. Phung, “Robust anomaly
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14171–14181. detection in videos using multilevel representations,” in Proc. AAAI,
[108] M. Z. Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.- 2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 5216–5223.
 I. Lee, “Stabilizing adversarially learned one-class novelty detection [131] H. Song, C. Sun, X. Wu, M. Chen, and Y. Jia, “Learning norusing pseudo anomalies,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, mal patterns via adversarial attention-based autoencoder for abnormal
 pp. 5963–5975, 2022. event detection in videos,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 22, no. 8,
[109] K. Doshi and Y. Yilmaz, “Towards interpretable video anomaly pp. 2138–2148, Aug. 2020.
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. [132] X. Feng, D. Song, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, J. Ni, and H.-F. Chen,
 (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 2654–2663. “Convolutional transformer based dual discriminator generative adver-
[110] A. Singh, M. J. Jones, and E. G. Learned-Miller, “EVAL: Explainable sarial networks for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACMMM, 2021,
 video anomaly localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. pp. 5546–5554.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 18717–18726. [133] H. Zhou et al., “Video anomaly detection with motion and appearance
[111] Y. Yang, K. Lee, B. Dariush, Y. Cao, and S.-Y. Lo, “Follow the rules: guided patch diffusion model,” in Proc. AAAI, 2025, vol. 39, no. 10,
 Reasoning for video anomaly detection with large language models,” pp. 10761–10769.
 in Proc. ECCV. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 304–322. [134] P. Wu, W. Wang, F. Chang, C. Liu, and B. Wang, “DSS-Net: Dynamic
[112] C. Li and Y. Jiang, “VLAVAD: Vision-language models assisted unsu- self-supervised network for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 pervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. BMVC, 2024, pp. 1–15. Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 2124–2136, 2024.
[113] Z. Ding et al., “SlowFastVAD: Video anomaly detection via integrating [135] M. Astrid, M. Z. Zaheer, and S.-I. Lee, “Limiting reconstruction capasimple detector and RAG-enhanced vision-language model,” 2025, bility of autoencoders using moving backward pseudo anomalies,” in
 arXiv:2504.10320. Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Robots (UR), Jul. 2022, pp. 248–251.
[114] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory- [136] M. Astrid, M. Z. Zaheer, J.-Y. Lee, and S.-I. Lee, “Learning not to
 augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” reconstruct anomalies,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2021.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, [137] M. Astrid, M. Z. Zaheer, and S.-I. Lee, “PseudoBound: Limiting the
 pp. 1705–1714. anomaly reconstruction capability of one-class classifiers using pseudo
[115] S. Lee, H. G. Kim, and Y. M. Ro, “BMAN: Bidirectional multi- anomalies,” Neurocomputing, vol. 534, pp. 147–160, May 2023.
 scale aggregation networks for abnormal event detection,” IEEE Trans. [138] M. Pourreza, B. Mohammadi, M. Khaki, S. Bouindour, H. Snoussi,
 Image Process., vol. 29, pp. 2395–2408, 2020. and M. Sabokrou, “G2D: Generate to detect anomaly,” in Proc. IEEE
[116] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality for Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 2003–2012.
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [139] R. Delussu, L. Putzu, and G. Fumera, “Synthetic data for video
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381. surveillance applications of computer vision: A review,” Int. J. Comput.
[117] H. Lv, C. Chen, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Learning normal Vis., vol. 132, no. 10, pp. 4473–4509, Oct. 2024.
 dynamics in videos with meta prototype network,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF [140] J. Leng, M. Tan, X. Gao, W. Lu, and Z. Xu, “Anomaly warning:
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 15425–15434. Learning and memorizing future semantic patterns for unsupervised
[118] M. I. Georgescu, R. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu, and M. Shah, “A ex-ante potential anomaly prediction,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf.
 background-agnostic framework with adversarial training for abnormal Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 6746–6754.
 event detection in video,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., [141] Y. Liu et al., “Stochastic video normality network for abnormal event
 vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 4505–4523, Sep. 2021. detection in surveillance videos,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 280, Nov.
[119] Z. Yang, P. Wu, J. Liu, and X. Liu, “Dynamic local aggregation network 2023, Art. no. 110986.
 with adaptive clusterer for anomaly detection,” in Proc. ECCV, 2022, [142] L. Wang, J. Tian, S. Zhou, H. Shi, and G. Hua, “Memory-augmented
 pp. 404–421. appearance-motion network for video anomaly detection,” Pattern
[120] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, and C. Wu, “Effective video abnormal Recognit., vol. 138, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 109335.
 event detection by learning a consistency-aware high-level feature [143] C. Cao, Y. Lu, and Y. Zhang, “Context recovery and knowledge
 extractor,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, retrieval: A novel two-stream framework for video anomaly detection,”
 pp. 6337–6346. IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 1810–1825, 2024.
[121] C. Sun, C. Shi, Y. Jia, and Y. Wu, “Learning event-relevant factors [144] C. Huang et al., “Pixel-level anomaly detection via uncertainty-aware
 for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, vol. 37, no. 2, prototypical transformer,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
 pp. 2384–2392. Oct. 2022, pp. 521–530.
[122] W. Liu, H. Chang, B. Ma, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Diversity-measurable [145] D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri, “Learning
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern spatiotemporal features with 3D convolutional networks,” in Proc.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 12147–12156. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 4489–4497.
[123] C. Cao, Y. Lu, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “A new comprehensive bench- [146] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “CLAWS: Clusmark for semi-supervised video anomaly detection and anticipation,” tering assisted weakly supervised learning with normalcy suppression
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. for anomalous event detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020,
 2023, pp. 20392–20401. pp. 358–376.
[124] C. Yan, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. Pang, and W. Wang, “Feature prediction [147] J. Carreira and A. Zisserman, “Quo vadis, action recognition? A new
 diffusion model for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. model and the kinetics dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 5527–5537. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 6299–6308.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 19

[148] P. Wu et al., “Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal vio- [172] P. Wu, X. Liu, and J. Liu, “Weakly supervised audio-visual violence
 lence detection under weak supervision,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 1674–1685, 2023.
 Vis. (ECCV), Aug. 2020, pp. 322–339. [173] T. Yuan et al., “Towards surveillance video-and-language under-
[149] J.-C. Wu, H.-Y. Hsieh, D.-J. Chen, C.-S. Fuh, and T.-L. Liu, “Self- standing: New dataset, baselines, and challenges,” in Proc.
 supervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
 17th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 729–745. pp. 22052–22061.
[150] Y. Zhou, Y. Qu, X. Xu, F. Shen, J. Song, and H. Shen, [174] Y. Zhu and S. Newsam, “Motion-aware feature for improved video
 “BatchNorm-based weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” 2023, anomaly detection,” in Proc. BMVC, 2019, pp. 270–281.
 arXiv:2311.15367. [175] J. Zhang, L. Qing, and J. Miao, “Temporal convolutional network
[151] S. AlMarri, M. Z. Zaheer, and K. Nandakumar, “A multi-head with complementary inner bag loss for weakly supervised anomaly
 approach with shuffled segments for weakly-supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2019,
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. Work- pp. 4030–4034.
 shops (WACVW), Jan. 2024, pp. 132–142. [176] Y. Liu, J. Liu, M. Zhao, S. Li, and L. Song, “Collaborative nor-
[152] K. Hara, H. Kataoka, and Y. Satoh, “Can spatiotemporal 3D CNNs mality learning framework for weakly supervised video anomaly
 retrace the history of 2D CNNs and ImageNet?,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 5,
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6546–6555. pp. 2508–2512, May 2022.
[153] S. Sun and X. Gong, “Long-short temporal co-teaching for weakly [177] J.-C. Feng, F.-T. Hong, and W.-S. Zheng, “MIST: Multiple instance
 supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multi- self-training framework for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 media Expo (ICME), Jul. 2023, pp. 2711–2716. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
[154] L. Wang et al., “Temporal segment networks: Towards good practices pp. 14009–14018.
 for deep action recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016, [178] C. Zhang et al., “Exploiting completeness and uncertainty of pseudo
 pp. 20–36. labels for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
[155] J.-X. Zhong, N. Li, W. Kong, S. Liu, T. H. Li, and G. Li, “Graph IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
 convolutional label noise cleaner: Train a plug-and-play action classifier pp. 16271–16280.
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [179] Z. Yang, J. Liu, and P. Wu, “Text prompt with normality guid-
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1237–1246. ance for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
[156] N. Li, J.-X. Zhong, X. Shu, and H. Guo, “Weakly-supervised anomaly IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
 detection in video surveillance via graph convolutional label noise pp. 18899–18908.
 cleaning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 481, pp. 154–167, Apr. 2022. [180] P. Wu et al., “VadCLIP: Adapting vision-language models for weakly
[157] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, 2024, vol. 38,
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), no. 6, pp. 6074–6082.
 Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002. [181] Q. Chen et al., “HAWK: Learning to understand open-world
[158] S. Li, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Self-training multi-sequence learning with video anomalies,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024,
 transformer for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. pp. 139751–139785.
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 36, no. 2, 2022, pp. 1395–1403. [182] M. Ye, W. Liu, and P. He, “VERA: Explainable video anomaly
[159] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural detection via verbalized learning of vision-language models,” in Proc.
 language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025,
 2021, pp. 8748–8763. pp. 8679–8688.
[160] P. Wu et al., “Open-vocabulary video anomaly detection,” in Proc. [183] H. Lv and Q. Sun, “Video anomaly detection and explanation via large
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, language models,” 2024, arXiv:2401.05702.
 pp. 18297–18307. [184] L. Zanella, W. Menapace, M. Mancini, Y. Wang, and E. Ricci,
[161] B. Wan, Y. Fang, X. Xia, and J. Mei, “Weakly supervised video “Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly
 anomaly detection via center-guided discriminative learning,” in Proc. detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–6. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 18527–18536.
[162] S. Hershey et al., “CNN architectures for large-scale audio [185] Y. Tian, G. Pang, Y. Chen, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans, and G. Carneiro,
 classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. “Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal
 (ICASSP), Mar. 2017, pp. 131–135. feature magnitude learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
[163] W.-F. Pang, Q.-H. He, Y.-J. Hu, and Y.-X. Li, “Violence detection Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4975–4986.
 in videos based on fusing visual and audio information,” in Proc. [186] P. Wu and J. Liu, “Learning causal temporal relation and feature
 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2021, discrimination for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
 pp. 2260–2264. vol. 30, pp. 3513–3527, 2021.
[164] X. Peng et al., “Learning weakly supervised audio-visual violence [187] G. Li, G. Cai, X. Zeng, and R. Zhao, “Scale-aware spatio-temporal
 detection in hyperbolic space,” 2023, arXiv:2305.18797. relation learning for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. ECCV, 2022,
[165] Y. Pu, X. Wu, L. Yang, and S. Wang, “Learning prompt-enhanced pp. 333–350.
 context features for weakly-supervised video anomaly detection,” IEEE [188] M. Cho, M. Kim, S. Hwang, C. Park, K. Lee, and S. Lee, “Look around
 Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 4923–4936, 2024. for anomalies: Weakly-supervised anomaly detection via context-
[166] W. Chen, K. T. Ma, Z. Jian Yew, M. Hur, and D. A.-A. Khoo, “TEVAD: motion relational learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Improved video anomaly detection with captions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 12137–12146.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2023, [189] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Zhang, W. Fok, X. Qi, and Y.-C. Wu,
 pp. 5549–5559. “MGFN: Magnitude-contrastive glance-and-focus network for weakly-
[167] C. Tao et al., “Learn suspected anomalies from event prompts for video supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2403.01169. 2023, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 387–395.
[168] P. Wu, J. Liu, X. He, Y. Peng, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Toward video [190] H. Lv, Z. Yue, Q. Sun, B. Luo, Z. Cui, and H. Zhang, “Unbiased multianomaly retrieval from video anomaly detection: New benchmarks and ple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,”
 model,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 2213–2225, 2024. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
[169] D.-L. Wei, C.-G. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Liu, X.-G. Zhu, and X.-H. Zeng, 2023, pp. 8022–8031.
 “Look, listen and pay more attention: Fusing multi-modal information [191] H. Zhou, J. Yu, and W. Yang, “Dual memory units with uncertainty
 for video violence detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech regulation for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022, pp. 1980–1984. AAAI, 2023, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 3769–3777.
[170] D. Wei, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, J. Liu, and X. Zeng, “MSAF: Multimodal [192] J. Chen, L. Li, L. Su, Z.-J. Zha, and Q. Huang, “Prompt-enhanced mulsupervise-attention enhanced fusion for video anomaly detection,” tiple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,”
 IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 29, pp. 2178–2182, 2022. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
[171] J. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Cheng, R. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Modality-aware con- 2024, pp. 18319–18329.
 trastive instance learning with self-distillation for weakly-supervised [193] P. Wu et al., “Weakly supervised video anomaly detection and localaudio-visual violence detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multi- ization with spatio-temporal prompts,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Conf.
 media, Oct. 2022, pp. 6278–6287. Multimedia, Oct. 2024, pp. 9301–9310.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

20 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

[194] T. Liu, C. Zhang, K.-M. Lam, and J. Kong, “Decouple and [216] M. Cheng, K. Cai, and M. Li, “RWF-2000: An open large scale
 resolve: Transformer-based models for online anomaly detection from video database for violence detection,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern
 weakly labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 4183–4190.
 pp. 15–28, 2023. [217] J. Su, P. Her, E. Clemens, E. Yaz, S. Schneider, and H. Medeiros,
[195] S. Chang, Y. Li, S. Shen, J. Feng, and Z. Zhou, “Contrastive atten- “Violence detection using 3D convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
 tion for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 24, 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS), Nov.
 pp. 4067–4076, 2022. 2022, pp. 1–8.
[196] D. Purwanto, Y.-T. Chen, and W.-H. Fang, “Dance with self-attention: [218] G. Garcia-Cobo and J. C. SanMiguel, “Human skeletons and change
 A new look of conditional random fields on anomaly detection in detection for efficient violence detection in surveillance videos,” Comvideos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, put. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 233, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 103739.
 pp. 173–183. [219] P. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Dong, W. Lei, W. Zhang, and Z. Lin, “A
[197] C. Huang et al., “Weakly supervised video anomaly detection via framework for detecting fighting behavior based on key points of
 self-guided temporal discriminative transformer,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., human skeletal posture,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 248,
 vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 3197–3210, May 2024. Nov. 2024, Art. no. 104123.
[198] C. Zhang, G. Li, Q. Xu, X. Zhang, L. Su, and Q. Huang, [220] B. Peixoto, B. Lavi, J. P. P. Martin, S. Avila, Z. Dias, and A. Rocha,
 “Weakly supervised anomaly detection in videos considering the open- “Toward subjective violence detection in videos,” in Proc. IEEE
 ness of events,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2019,
 pp. 21687–21699, Nov. 2022. pp. 8276–8280.
 [221] M. Perez, A. C. Kot, and A. Rocha, “Detection of real-world fights in
[199] C. Zhang et al., “Dynamic erasing network with adaptive temporal
 surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal
 modeling for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Process. (ICASSP), May 2019, pp. 2662–2666.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 16706–16720, Sep. 2025.
 [222] B. Peixoto, B. Lavi, P. Bestagini, Z. Dias, and A. Rocha, “Multimodal
[200] H. Ye, K. Xu, X. Jiang, and T. Sun, “Learning spatio-temporal relations
 violence detection in videos,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
 with multi-scale integrated perception for video anomaly detection,” in
 Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 2957–2961.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr.
 [223] A. Singh, D. Patil, and S. N. Omkar, “Eye in the sky: Real-time
 2024, pp. 4020–4024.
 drone surveillance system (DSS) for violent individuals identification
[201] S. Lin, H. Yang, X. Tang, T. Shi, and L. Chen, “Social MIL: Interaction- using ScatterNet hybrid deep learning network,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 aware for crowd anomaly detection,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2018,
 Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS), Sep. 2019, pp. 1–8. pp. 1710–17108.
[202] S. Park, H. Kim, M. Kim, D. Kim, and K. Sohn, “Normality [224] Y. Shang, X. Wu, and R. Liu, “Multimodal violent video recognition
 guided multiple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly based on mutual distillation,” in Proc. PRCV, 2022, pp. 623–637.
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. [225] A. Del Giorno, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Hebert, “A discriminative
 (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 2664–2673. framework for anomaly detection in large videos,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
[203] Y. Gong, C. Wang, X. Dai, S. Yu, L. Xiang, and J. Wu, “Multi- Comput. Vis., Oct. 2016, pp. 334–349.
 scale continuity-aware refinement network for weakly supervised video [226] R. T. Ionescu, S. Smeureanu, B. Alexe, and M. Popescu, “Unmasking
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo. the abnormal events in video,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 (ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 2895–2903.
[204] H. Sapkota and Q. Yu, “Bayesian nonparametric submodular video [227] Y. Liu, C. Li, and B. Póczos, “Classifier two sample test for video
 partition for robust anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. anomaly Detections,” in Proc. BMVC, 2018, p. 71.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 3212–3221. [228] S. Wang, Y. Zeng, Q. Liu, C. Zhu, E. Zhu, and J. Yin, “Detecting
[205] J. Fioresi, I. R. Dave, and M. Shah, “TeD-SPAD: Temporal distinc- abnormality without knowing normality: A two-stage approach for
 tiveness for self-supervised privacy-preservation for video anomaly unsupervised video abnormal event detection,” in Proc. 26th ACM Int.
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2018, pp. 636–644.
 2023, pp. 13552–13563. [229] G. Pang, C. Yan, C. Shen, A. Van Den Hengel, and X. Bai, “Self-trained
[206] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Clustering aided deep ordinal regression for end-to-end video anomaly detection,” in
 weakly supervised training to detect anomalous events in surveillance Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10, 2020, pp. 12173–12182.
 pp. 14085–14098, Oct. 2024. [230] J. Hu, G. Yu, S. Wang, E. Zhu, Z. Cai, and X. Zhu, “Detecting
[207] T. Liu, K.-M. Lam, and J. Kong, “Distilling privileged knowledge for anomalous events from unlabeled videos via temporal masked autoanomalous event detection from weakly labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. encoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1–15, Sep. 2024. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[208] H. K. Joo, K. Vo, K. Yamazaki, and N. Le, “CLIP-TSA: Clip- [231] X. Lin, Y. Chen, G. Li, and Y. Yu, “A causal inference look at
 assisted temporal self-attention for weakly-supervised video anomaly unsupervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2023, Intell. (AAAI), 2022, pp. 1620–1629.
 pp. 3230–3234. [232] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, C. Xu, and C. Wu, “Deep anomaly
[209] K. Liu and H. Ma, “Exploring background-bias for anomaly detection discovery from unlabeled videos via normality advantage and selfin surveillance videos,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. paced refinement,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 2019, pp. 1490–1499. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13987–13998.
 [233] H. Shi, L. Wang, S. Zhou, G. Hua, and W. Tang, “Learning anomalies
[210] J. Wu et al., “Weakly-supervised spatio-temporal anomaly detection in
 with normality prior for unsupervised video anomaly detection,” in
 surveillance video,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2021,
 Proc. ECCV. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 163–180.
 pp. 1172–1178.
 [234] C. Tao, C. Wang, S. Lin, S. Cai, D. Li, and J. Qian, “Feature recon-
[211] Z. Dong, J. Qin, and Y. Wang, “Multi-stream deep networks for person
 struction with disruption for unsupervised video anomaly detection,”
 to person violence detection in videos,” in Proc. 7th Chin. Conf. Pattern
 IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 10160–10173, 2024.
 Recognit. (CCPR), Nov. 2016, pp. 517–531.
 [235] A. Al-Lahham, M. Z. Zaheer, N. Tastan, and K. Nandakumar,
[212] P. Zhou, Q. Ding, H. Luo, and X. Hou, “Violent interaction detection “Collaborative learning of anomalies with privacy (CLAP) for
 in video based on deep learning,” J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 844, Jun. unsupervised video anomaly detection: A new baseline,” in Proc.
 2017, Art. no. 012044. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
[213] S. Sudhakaran and O. Lanz, “Learning to detect violent videos using pp. 12416–12425.
 convolutional long short-term memory,” in Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Conf. [236] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. H. Khan, M. Segu, F. Yu, and
 Adv. Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–6. S.-I. Lee, “Generative cooperative learning for unsupervised video
[214] A. Hanson, K. Pnvr, S. Krishnagopal, and L. S. Davis, “Bidirectional anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 convolutional LSTM for the detection of violence in videos,” in Proc. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 14744–14754.
 ECCV Workshop, 2019, pp. 280–295. [237] A. Al-Lahham, N. Tastan, M. Z. Zaheer, and K. Nandakumar, “A
[215] Y. Su, G. Lin, J. Zhu, and Q. Wu, “Human interaction learning on 3D coarse-to-fine pseudo-labeling (C2FPL) framework for unsupervised
 skeleton point clouds for video violence recognition,” in Proc. 16th video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Aug. 2020, pp. 74–90. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 6779–6788.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW 21

[238] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked Yuting Yan received the B.E. degree from Northautoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. western Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009. 2025, where he is currently pursuing the master’s
[239] T. Li, Z. Wang, S. Liu, and W.-Y. Lin, “Deep unsupervised anomaly degree in computer science and technology.
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), His current research interests include event-based
 Jan. 2021, pp. 3635–3644. vision and multimodal video anomaly detection.
[240] W. Liu, W. Luo, Z. Li, P. Zhao, and S. Gao, “Margin learning embedded
 prediction for video anomaly detection with a few anomalies,” in Proc.
 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 3023–3030.
[241] A. Acsintoae et al., “UBnormal: New benchmark for supervised openset video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 20143–20153.
[242] Y. Zhu, W. Bao, and Q. Yu, “Towards open set video anomaly Guansong Pang (Member, IEEE) received the
 detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Oct. 2022, Ph.D. degree from the University of Techpp. 395–412. nology Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia, in
[243] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans: 2019.
 Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. He was a Research Fellow with Australian Insti-
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7388–7398. tute for Machine Learning, The University of
[244] J. Zhu, C. Ding, Y. Tian, and G. Pang, “Anomaly heterogeneity learning Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. He is currently a
 for open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. tenure-track Assistant Professor with the School
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 17616–17626. of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore
[245] Y. Lu, F. Yu, M. K. K. Reddy, and Y. Wang, “Few-shot scene-adaptive Management University, Singapore. His research
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., vol. 12350, 2020, focuses on recognizing and generalizing to abnorpp. 125–141. mal/unknown/unseen data for learning trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI)
[246] Y. Hu, X. Huang, and X. Luo, “Adaptive anomaly detection network for systems in open environments.
 unseen scene without fine-tuning,” in Proc. PRCV, 2021, pp. 311–323.
[247] X. Huang, Y. Hu, X. Luo, J. Han, B. Zhang, and X. Cao, “Boosting
 variational inference with margin learning for few-shot scene-adaptive
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, Qingsen Yan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 no. 6, pp. 2813–2825, Jun. 2023. degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University,
[248] A. Aich, K.-C. Peng, and A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, “Cross-domain Xi’an, China, in 2019.
 video anomaly detection without target domain adaptation,” in Proc. He was a joint-training Ph.D. Student with
 IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, The University of Adelaide in 2018, where he
 pp. 2579–2591. was a Research Fellow with Australian Institute
[249] Y. Jain, A. Dabouei, and M. Xu, “Cross-domain learning for video for Machine Learning (AIML). He is currently a
 anomaly detection with limited supervision,” in Proc. ECCV, 2024, Professor with the School of Computer Science,
 pp. 468–484. Northwestern Polytechnical University. His research
[250] Q. Zhou, G. Pang, Y. Tian, S. He, and J. Chen, “AnomalyCLIP: Object- interests include high dynamic range imaging, deep
 agnostic prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. learning, medical image analysis, and computer
 ICLR, 2023, pp. 1–33. vision.

 Peng Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
 degree in electrical engineering and automation and
 Peng Wu received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering
 Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2017 and 2022, from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2004
 respectively. and 2011, respectively.
 He is currently an Associate Professor with the He is currently a Professor with the School
 School of Computer Science, Northwestern Poly- of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical
 technical University, Xi’an. He has authored over University, Xi’an, China. He has authored/co-
 40 papers in the top-tier journals and confer- authored more than 100 papers in top-tier journals
 ences, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE and conferences, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 P ROCESSING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EU - ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLI -
 RAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS , IEEE GENCE, International Journal of Computer Vision, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA, IEEE Confer- ON I MAGE P ROCESSING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), European AND L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA , IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), ACM International Conference on Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE
Multimedia (ACM MM), and AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), European Conference
(AAAI). His current research interests include video anomaly detection and on Computer Vision (ECCV), and AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
vision–language models. (AAAI). His current research interests include computer vision, machine
 learning, and artificial intelligence.

 Yanning Zhang (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.S.
 and Ph.D. degrees from Northwestern Polytechnical
 Chengyu Pan received the B.S. degree from Jilin University, Xi’an, China, in 1993 and 1996, respec-
 University, Changchun, China, in 2023, where he is tively.
 currently pursuing the master’s degree in computer She is currently a Professor with the School of
 science and technology with Northwestern Polytech- Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical Uninical University, Xi’an, China. versity. She has authored/co-authored more than 200
 His current research interests include video papers in international journals, conferences, and
 anomaly detection and deep learning. Chinese key journals. Her research interests include
 signal and image processing, computer vision, and
 pattern recognition.