IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026 5385

 Detecting and Mitigating Adversarial Machine
 Learning Attacks in Autonomous Vehicles
 Within the Internet of Vehicles
 Mahmood Safaei , Ahmad Soleymani , Member, IEEE, Shahla Asadi , Mitra Safaei,
 and Shidrokh Goudarzi , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Adversarial Machine Learning (AML), particularly other systems communicate and collaborate to improve traffic
model poisoning, presents a critical threat to Autonomous Vehi- management, safety, and driving efficiency. IoV enables the
cles (AVs) in the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) environment. To exchange of real-time data between Vehicles (V2V), Vehicles
address this challenge, we propose a framework that integrates
Federated Learning (FL) with a Deep Learning-based Intrusion and Infrastructure (V2I) and Vehicles and other devices (V2X).
Detection and Behavior Monitoring (DL-based IBM) system, a This vast amount of data enables intelligent decisions about
vehicle scoring mechanism, Digital Twin (DT), and Generative AI vehicle behavior, route optimization, and accident prevention.
(Gen-AI) to enhance security in IoV environments. Each AV Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) rely on IoV for safe and efficient
employs a DL-based IBM as its local model, which is trained on navigation. By processing real-time information about road
vehicle-local operational data and contributes to a global model
through FL aggregation. A vehicle scoring system is respon- conditions, other vehicles, and potential hazards, IoV provides
sible for identifying and flagging compromised AVs (Zombies) critical input to AV decision-making systems [1], [2], [3].
exhibiting suspicious behavior. When the DT detects that the To manage this complex network of interactions, Machine
Zombie’s model has been manipulated through poisoning attacks, Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) play a crucial role
the DT updates the compromised model with the correct global in IoV. ML/DL algorithms enable vehicles to learn from large
model to restore normal operation. Furthermore, DT leverages
Gen-AI to simulate and learn from novel attack scenarios datasets, process sensor data, and make predictions about their
that AVs have not previously encountered, ensuring that the environment [4]. Applications of ML/DL in vehicles include
framework adapts to evolving threats. The simulation results intrusion detection systems to identify malicious activities,
demonstrate significant improvements in resilience and detection anomaly detection to identify unsafe driving behaviors, and
accuracy, with F1 scores reaching 99% for known attacks and route planning optimization to ensure smooth traffic flow [5],
exceeding 87% for new unseen threats. This integrated approach
ensures robust and adaptive protection for AVs, maintaining [6], [7], [8], [9]. For example, [10] proposes a Decision
high trust and performance in the dynamic and adversarial IoV Tree–based IDS is proposed using in-depth CAN traffic analnetwork. ysis to improve detection robustness in automotive networks.
 Index Terms—Autonomous vehicle, adversarial machine learn- Similarly, [11] presents an ML-driven ECU fingerprinting
ing, digital twin, federated learning, Gen-AI, deep learning. system using SVM and ANN models for embedded intrusion
 detection in vehicles. By leveraging ML/DL, IoV systems can
 improve the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of the network,
 I. I NTRODUCTION enabling AVs to respond to real-world conditions dynamically
 and intelligently.
T HE Internet of Vehicles (IoV) represents a rapidly evolving network in which vehicles, road infrastructure, and One of the key challenges in IoV is the need to continuously
 update and improve ML models without compromising data
 Received 18 December 2024; revised 21 June 2025, 23 September 2025, privacy. Vehicles collect sensitive data, including location,
and 8 November 2025; accepted 30 December 2025. Date of publication
28 January 2026; date of current version 5 May 2026. The Associate Editor
 speed, driving habits, and interactions with other vehicles.
for this article was A. Petrillo. (Corresponding author: Ahmad Soleymani.) Sharing these data with centralized servers for training ML
 Mahmood Safaei is with the Computer Science Department, College of models poses privacy concerns and, in some cases, the sheer
Engineering and Polymer Science, The University of Akron, Akron, OH
44325 USA (e-mail: msafaei@uakron.edu).
 volume of data makes it impractical to transmit.
 Ahmad Soleymani is with the Department of Computing, Birmingham Federated Learning (FL) addresses this challenge by allow-
City University (BCU), B4 7XG Birmingham, U.K. (e-mail: seyed. ing vehicles to collaboratively train ML models without
soleymani@bcu.ac.uk).
 Shahla Asadi is with the Department of Information Systems and Busisharing their raw data [12]. In IoV, FL enables AVs to improve
ness Analytics, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44242 USA (e-mail: their performance in tasks such as intrusion detection, behavior
sasadi1@kent.edu). monitoring, and anomaly detection [13]. Since vehicles oper-
 Mitra Safaei is with the Fakultät Electronic und Informatik, Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz Universität Hannover, 30060 Hanover, Germany (e-mail:
 ate in diverse environments and encounter unique challenges,
mitra.safaei2015@gmail.com). FL allows the global model to be enhanced with data from
 Shidrokh Goudarzi is with the School of Computing and Engi- different driving scenarios. This collaborative learning process
neering, University of West London, W5 5RF London, U.K. (e-mail:
shidrokh.goudarzi@uwl.ac.uk).
 makes the IoV system more adaptable to changing conditions
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3652712 and more resilient against potential threats [13], [14], [15].
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5386 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

However, FL frameworks such as horizontal FL, vertical FL specifically model poisoning attacks, to assess its resilience
and federated transfer learning [16], face significant security within a FL framework. The primary focus is to examine
challenges, especially from Adversarial Machine Learning how model poisoning attacks affect the IBM system and how
(AML) attacks [17], which can compromise both local and these attacks can be addressed by leveraging DGT. The main
global model performance. In FL, AML attacks exploit the contributions are as follows:
collaborative and decentralized nature of training, targeting • Proposing a system that enables AVs to collaboratively
local training or global aggregation phases to introduce vul- improve their IBM system using FL.
nerabilities into the system [18]. • Mitigating the risks posed by AML attacks by integrating
 Model poisoning attacks are a highly disruptive form DT technology, which simulates vehicle behaviors and
of AML, in which a malicious participant manipulates the detects model poisoning attack in a controlled environlocal model updates, such as gradients or weights, prior to ment, helping to safeguard the global model.
aggregation in the federated learning process. The attacker’s • Generating synthetic data by Gen-AI enhances the DT’s
primary objective is to influence the global model’s learning knowledge base, helping to detect unknown anomalies
trajectory, often by injecting subtle but targeted deviations and emerging threats not seen in real-world data, providthat accumulate over time. This manipulation can lead to ing an adaptive defense mechanism.
degraded model performance or, in more severe cases, cause Assumption. In this study, we assume that secure comthe global model to misclassify critical input, such as failing to munication is established between all critical components of
detect behavioral anomalies in safety-critical applications like the system, including AVs and the Cloud, AVs and DTs,
autonomous vehicles. These attacks are particularly insidious AVs and Roadside Units (RSUs), and between DTs and the
because they can remain undetected during training, thus Cloud. To ensure confidentiality, integrity, and authentication,
exploiting the decentralized trust model inherent in FL systems all communication channels leverage lightweight encryption
[19], [20]. and authentication mechanisms that comply with the principles
 Digital Twin (DT) technology-a virtual replica of a physical of Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA). The DT is deployed on
system such as an autonomous vehicle-can help detect and an isolated virtual machine (VM) using isolated deployment
mitigate AML attacks in FL [21].The DT models key sub- architectures, ensuring strict separation from the AV and prosystems, including intrusion detection, anomaly monitoring, tection against external interference or compromise. However,
communication modules, and sensors, within a synchronized we acknowledge that in large-scale IoV environments, bandvirtual environment. By mirroring the operational state of the width and latency constraints can significantly affect real-time
physical vehicle, the DT can simulate realistic driving and data transfer and synchronization between AVs, RSUs, and
attack scenarios, evaluate model responses, and validate the DTs. Therefore, the DT and FL aggregator can be deployed
integrity of FL-trained models in real time. This continuous at the edge layer, such as RSUs, to minimize communication
simulation and evaluation capability improves the resilience latency and reduce dependency on centralized cloud resources.
of the system by enabling rapid detection, diagnosis, and This distributed design helps alleviate bandwidth congesmitigation of adversarial manipulation before it affects real- tion, ensures faster feedback loops for AV decision-making,
world operations [22], [23], [24], [25], [26]. and enhances scalability and reliability in dynamic IoV
 Furthermore, DTs use synthetic adversarial data generated environments.
by Generative AI (Gen-AI) to create Digital Generative Twins The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II explores
(DGTs), which improve local model training with a variety a case study focusing on intrusion detection and behavior
of attack patterns and changes, increasing adaptability to new monitoring within IoV systems. Section III evaluates the effec-
AML threats. This ongoing adversarial training strengthens tiveness of the proposed defense mechanism through formal
the robustness of the model and supports a better detection of verification. Section IV outlines the experimental scenarios
dynamic anomalies. and setup, followed by a discussion of the results. Finally,
 Motivation. There is an urgent need to address the growing Section V summarizes the key findings and outlines the
threat of AML attacks on AVs in next-generation IoV net- conclusions and directions for future work.
works. As AVs increasingly rely on ML and DL models for
decision making, perception, and coordination, attacks such as
model poisoning can seriously compromise their safety and II. C ASE S TUDY: I NTRUSION D ETECTION AND A NOMALY
performance. The widespread use and dynamic nature of IoV B EHAVIOR M ONITORING IN AUTONOMOUS V EHICLES
environments make them more vulnerable to these threats. U NDER M ODEL P OISONING ATTACKS
This highlights the need for secure, adaptive, and reliable This case study focuses on improving the security and
learning systems that can protect AVs from malicious behavior safety of AVs in the IoV network using an IBM system as a
and maintain reliable operation under adversarial conditions. representative example of existing ML/DL-based applications
 Contributions. Motivated by this need, this work presents deployed in autonomous vehicles. The IBM system is used
several key contributions aimed at enhancing the security to examine the impact of model poisoning attacks in a FL
and performance of AVs in IoV networks. As a case study setting and to evaluate mitigation strategies. To address these
(see Section II), an Intrusion detection and anomaly Behavior attacks, the framework uses a real-time vehicle behavior
Monitoring (IBM) system, serving as a security component scoring system and DGT technology, enabling the detection,
of the AV, is developed and evaluated against AML attacks, validation, and recovery of compromised models. Using secure
SAFAEI et al.: DETECTING AND MITIGATING AML ATTACKS IN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 5387

Fig. 1. Proposed framework.

Fig. 2. Adversarial manipulation scenarios in FL with four attack types: GN, DD, MR, and RR.

LTE / 5G communication, cloud-based aggregation, and RSU, anomalous behaviors, as well as addressing potential cyberthe system ensures continuous monitoring and provides an security threats such as model poisoning attacks. As shown in
adaptive defense against evolving AML threats in connected Fig. 2, this system is implemented within a network of AVs,
AVs. RSUs, cloud infrastructure, and DTs located at the edge of the
 network, all connected through secure LTE/5G communication
A. System Model channels.
 The system model designed to improve the security and Each AV is equipped with an DL-based IBM system,
safety of AVs in the IoV network is made up of several which serves as the local model within the FL framework.
interconnected components. These components work together This system continuously monitors critical vehicle behaviors,
to form a robust framework for detecting and mitigating such as traffic light adherence, pedestrian lane crossings,
5388 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

vehicle speed, sudden braking, and other safety-critical driving aim to corrupt the model by altering the local model updates
behaviors. before they are aggregated into the global model. This can
 In the context of autonomous vehicles, the Controller degrade the performance of the global model, leading to false
Area Network (CAN) protocol is utilized for communica- positives or missing detection in systems.
tion between the vehicle’s Electronic Control Units (ECUs). A typical FL setup involves a collection of local models
The DL-based IBM system is integrated into this CAN θi , each trained in a private data partition Di located on the
bus, which functions as an ECU to seamlessly monitor and autonomous vehicle AVi , where i = 1, 2, . . ., N. After local
analyze real-time data for intrusion detection and anomaly training, these models share their weight updates ∆θi with the
behavior monitoring. This ensures that the security system central aggregator (cloud), which aggregates them into a global
operates within the vehicle’s existing communication frame- model, denoted θg , according to:
work, enabling effective real-time detection of anomalies. N
 The cloud serves as the central aggregation point within 1 X (t)
 θg(t+1) = θg(t) + ∆θi (1)
the system, where local models from multiple vehicles are N
 i=1
collected and aggregated to form a global model. This global
model benefits from the diversity of data collected by individ- Generally model poisoning attacks manipulate the local model
ual vehicles, improving the system’s ability to detect a wide parameters θi so that the updates ∆θi become poisoned ∆θi∗ ,
range of abnormal behaviors and attacks across the network. with the objective of negatively influencing the global model.
However, the system also considers the possibility of AML For a benign update, the local training loss function can be
attacks, particularly model poisoning attacks, where malicious represented as
vehicles may inject compromised models into the aggregation 1 X
process to degrade the global model’s performance. Li (θ) = l ( fθ (x) , y) (2)
 |Di | (x,y)∈D
 To address these potential threats, the RSUs and other com- i

ponents of the network infrastructure continuously evaluate the ∆θi∗ = ∆θi + δi (3)
behavior of each AV. Each vehicle is assigned a behavior score
 where fθ (x) is the prediction of the model with parameters
based on its performance in real-world driving conditions,
 θ, l ( fθ (x) , y) is the loss function, and Di is the local dataset
such as adherence to safety standards and proper handling
 of vehicle i, δi is the adversarial perturbation introduced by
of critical situations. Vehicles with low scores, which may
 the attacker, which varies depending on the specific attack
indicate potential AML attacks or anomalies, are flagged for
 vector. The goal of δi is to maximize global loss or to
further analysis. These low-score vehicles undergo additional
 specifically degrade detection performance in a subset of
testing in the DT environment.
 malicious activities, such as avoiding detection of specific
 The DT acts as a virtual testing and simulation environment
 intrusions.
for vehicles that exhibit abnormal behavior or low perfor-
 When poisoned updates are aggregated with benign updates,
mance scores. In this controlled environment, the vehicle’s
 the global model becomes compromised. The new global
local model is subjected to a series of tests, including the
 model update after including the poisoned model is:
detection of potential model poisoning attacks or other cyber-
 N−1
 !
security threats. By incorporating real-time and synthetic data 1 X
generated by Gen-AI, DT can also identify unknown attack θg
 (t+1)
 = θg +
 (t)
 ∆θi + ∆θi∗
 (4)
 N
vectors and evolving threats, ensuring that anomaly detection i=1
models remain resilient even in the presence of advanced and In our poisoning attack scenarios, we simulate four differemerging threats. ent types of adversarial manipulation: Gaussian noise (GN),
 Secure communication is essential for system operation, and directional drift (DD), model reversal (MR) and random
all interactions between vehicles, cloud, RSUs, and the DT replacement (RR). These attacks represent common stratesystem are conducted over a secure LTE/5G network. This gies used to compromise FL systems by corrupting local
ensures low-latency, high-speed data transmission for real- model updates prior to aggregation. Gaussian noise introduces
time monitoring and anomaly detection. The communication random perturbations to model parameters, while directional
framework incorporates encryption and authentication proto- drift systematically shifts updates in a specific direction to
cols to protect sensitive data and prevent unauthorized access, bias the global model. Model reversal inverts the gradients
ensuring the integrity of the system. to counteract the learning process, and random replacement
 This system provides a comprehensive framework for secur- substitutes legitimate models with completely unrelated or
ing AVs in the IoV network. By integrating DL-based intrusion malicious ones. Each of these techniques aims to degrade
detection, anomaly behavior monitoring, cloud-based aggrega- the performance or manipulate the behavior of the global
tion, and DT testing, the system enhances real-time detection model, thereby undermining the reliability of autonomous
capabilities while mitigating the risks posed by model poison- vehicle decision making in IoV environments. Algorithm 1
ing attacks and other cyber-security threats. illustrates the simulation of AML in FL, which incorporates
 four poisoning strategies of the model. In this algorithm, a
B. AML Attacks: Model Poisoning zombie refers to a vehicle compromised by a model poisoning
 Model poisoning attacks are a subset of AML techniques attack. It is identified through our vehicle scoring system,
that specifically target FL systems. In these attacks, adversaries which will be discussed in Section II-D.
SAFAEI et al.: DETECTING AND MITIGATING AML ATTACKS IN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 5389

Algorithm 1 AML Simulation in FL The DL-based IBM system formulates intrusion and
 1: Input: Global model θg , Local datasets {D1 , D2 , . . ., DN }, anomaly detection as a classification task, with the aim of
 Total vehicles N, Simulation rounds R, Number of zombie labeling each observed behavior or network traffic instance as
 vehicles Z, Attack types A = {Gaussian, Drift, Reversal, normal or abnormal. This can be formalized as a binary clas-
 Replacement}, µ is drift intensity sification task, where the output of the system is a probability
 2: Output: Poisoned local models {θi∗ }, Final global model distribution over two classes:
 θgfinal
 P (y|Xt ) = softmax fφ (Xt )
 
 3: Initialize: θg ← random initialization
 (6)
 4: for each round r = 1 to R do where P (y|Xt ) represents the probability of the class y (normal
 5: Server distributes θg to all vehicles or anomalous behavior) given the input Xt , fφ is the deep
 6: for each vehicle i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., N} in parallel do learning model parameterized by φ, softmax(.) is the softmax
 7: if vehicle i is a zombie (i ≤ Z) then function used to convert the output of the model into a
 8: Choose attack type ai ∈ A probability distribution.
 9: Apply attack based on ai : The system is trained to minimize the binary cross-entropy
10: if ai = Gaussian then loss function:
11: Sample noise η ∼ N (0, σ2 ) m
 1X
12: θi∗ ← θg + η G (φ) = −
13: else if ai = Drift then m
 i=1
 Generate drift vector d toward malicious direction
  
14: yi log P (yi |Xi ) + (1 − yi ) log (1 − P (yi |Xi )) (7)
15: θi∗ ← θg + µd
16: else if ai = Reversal then where m is the number of training samples, yi is the true label
17: Train local model θi on Di with θg of the i-th sample (1 for anomalous, 0 for normal), P (yi |Xi )
18: Estimate ∇Li from model is the predicted probability of the i-th sample belonging to
19: Inverted gradient θi∗ ← θg − α∇Li class yi .
20: else if ai = Replacement then
21: θi∗ ← random model parameters D. Vehicle Scoring System (VSS)
22: end if To evaluate the safety and performance of AVs, a behavior-
23: else based scoring system is proposed that continuously monitors
24: Train local model θi∗ on Di using θg driving actions and assigns scores based on key performance
25: end if metrics. Our system integrates both internal (on-board system
26: Send θi∗ to the aggregator data) and external (infrastructure-based observations) factors
27: end for to provide a comprehensive assessment of vehicle behavior.
28: Aggregator updates global model θg ← Aggregate({θi∗ }) The scoring is based on parameters such as the ability to
29: end for maintain a safe distance from other vehicles under varying
30: return Final global model θgfinal , {θi∗ } traffic conditions, adherence to speed limits with adaptive
 control in different types of road and environmental conditions,
 and effective handling of critical situations involving sudden
C. DL-Based IBM System braking, obstacle avoidance, or interactions with pedestrians.
 Although the present work focuses on logical-level indicators
 The DL-based IBM system is designed to improve the
 relevant to AML detection, low-level physical attacks such
security and safety of AVs in IoV. The primary function
 as CAN spoofing and ECU tampering [27] could also be
of this system is to detect both intrusions (external cyberaddressed in future extensions through the integration of
security threats) and anomalous behavior (unusual or unsafe
 physical fingerprinting techniques, which are beyond the scope
driving patterns) in real-time. The DL-based IBM system
 of this study.
operates as a local model onboard each vehicle, utilizing data
 1) Internal Scoring System (ISS): The proposed ISS confrom various sensors and communication protocols, and is
 tinuously monitors the behavior of the vehicle based on
periodically updated using federated learning.
 sensor data, such as radar, LiDAR, and cameras. This system
 The DL-based IBM system takes as input a stream of data
 evaluates key performance metrics, including safety distance,
from the vehicle’s sensors and internal communication bus,
 speed control, and handling of critical situations. The internal
such as vehicle speed, GPS position, Traffic light adherence,
 score S in (t) of AV i at time t is a weighted sum of various
Pedestrian lane crossings, Sudden braking events, CAN bus
 behavior metrics.
data for communication between ECUs, and network traffic
data for detecting cyber-security threats. Each feature in the S iin (t) = w1 × Di,sa f e (t) + w2 × Vi,opt (t) + w3 × Hi,crit (t) (8)
input data can be represented as a multidimensional vector:
 h i where Di,sa f e is a score related to the distance of the AV i from
 Xt = x1(t) , x2(t) , · · · , xn(t) (5) other surrounding AVs. This score decreases if the vehicle
 is dangerously close to other vehicles, Vopt is the optimal
where Xt is the input feature vector at time t, and n is the speed score, where speed control is evaluated based on the
number of features. difference between vehicle speed and the recommended speed
5390 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

for the segment or situation of the road, and Hcrit represents Algorithm 2 Anomaly Detection and Model Recovery in
the handling score for critical situations, where the vehicle’s DL-Based IBM Using Digital Twin
ability to react appropriately in sudden or dangerous situations Require: DL-based IBM on vehicle: θv , ISS on vehicle: S vin ,
is evaluated. w1 , w2 , and w3 are weighting factors that reflect ESS on RSU: S vex , Threshold δ, Digital Twin IBM: θdt
the relative importance of each metric. Each of these metrics 1: Monitor driving behaviors (traffic light, pedestrian lane,
is normalized between 0 and 1, with higher values indicating speed, braking, etc.) and collect input data x
better performance. 2: Evaluate behavior scores using S vin and S vex
 The safety distance metric D sa f e (t) can be modeled as a 3: Predict anomaly using θv (x)
 4: Compute score difference: ∆ = ˇS vin − S vex ˇ
 ˇ ˇ
function of current speed v(t) and distance to the closest
vehicle d(t): 5: if ∆ > ϕ then
 
 d (t)
  6: Send x and θv to the Digital Twin
 D sa f e (t) = 1 − exp − (9) 7: Compute ŷdt = θdt (x)
 v (t) + 
 8: Compute ŷv = θv (x)
where  is a small positive constant to avoid division by zero. 9: if |ŷdt − ŷv | > ϕ then
This formula ensures that the score decreases as the vehicle 10: θv is compromised
approaches others too quickly relative to its speed. 11: Replace θv ← θdt
 The optimal speed metric Vopt (t) measures the deviation 12: else
from the optimal speed vopt (t) for the given road segment. 13: θv is safe
It can be expressed as: 14: end if
 15: else
 ˇ ˇ
 ˇ v(t) − vopt (t) ˇ
 Vopt (t) = 1 − ˇˇ ˇ (10) 16: Behavior normal, no action required
 vopt (t) ˇ
 17: end if
here, v(t) is the actual speed of the vehicle at time t, vopt (t)
is the speed limit or the recommended speed for the type of
road and traffic conditions. overall score. The combined score provides a comprehensive
 The handling in critical situations score Hcrit (t) is based on evaluation of vehicle behavior by incorporating both on-board
how well the vehicle reacts to emergencies, such as sudden and external monitoring systems. Algorithm 2 illustrates the
braking or obstacle avoidance. It can be represented by a process of identifying a suspicious AV using the vehicle
binary or probabilistic function that assigns a high score if the scoring system, followed by recovery of its compromised
vehicle successfully avoids collisions and maintains control: model through validation and replacement through DT.

 Hcrit (t) = P(successful response | critical event) (11)
 E. Digital Generative Twins (DGT)
This probability can be learned from historical data or expert DGT combines the concepts of digital twins and Gen-AI
rules, with high scores for successful reactions. to create virtual replicas of physical systems, processes, or
 2) External Scoring System (ESS): The proposed ESS uses environments. DT is cutting-edge technology that creates a
road infrastructure, such as traffic cameras, speed detectors, dynamic, virtual replica of a physical system, enabling realand connected sensors, to assess vehicle behavior from an time monitoring, simulation, and analysis. This capability is
external perspective. The external score S ex (t) of AV i is particularly crucial for complex environments like IoV, where
calculated in a similar manner, but with a focus on factors the coordination between autonomous vehicles, infrastructure,
that the infrastructure can measure, such as adherence to traffic and central control systems requires precision and adaptability.
signals, speed limits, and lane discipline: Gen-AI complements DT technology by synthesizing data and
 generating scenarios that mimic real-world conditions [28].
 S iex (t) = w4 × T i,signal (t) + w5
 Different types of Gen-AI tools include Generative Adver-
 × Li,lane (t) + w6 × Vi,comp (t) (12) sarial Networks (GANs), Variational Autoencoders (VAEs),
where T signal is the traffic signal adherence score, which is 1 transformer-based models such as GPT, and time series genif the vehicle obeys traffic signals and 0 otherwise. Llane is the erators such as TimeGAN. When combined, DT and Gen-AI
lane discipline score, which evaluates how well the vehicle form a robust framework that not only enhances system
stays in the lanes and makes the appropriate lane changes. performance but also strengthens security against sophisticated
Vcomp is the speed compliance score that measures how well adversarial threats, including AML and model poisoning.
the vehicle complies with the speed limits enforced by the DT technology operates by establishing a digital repreroad infrastructure. sentation of real-world objects or systems, linked through
 3) Combined Scoring System: The final score S (t) of AV continuous data streams for synchronization. The essential
i at time t is a weighted combination of internal and external components include the data acquisition layer, the simulation
scores: core, and the analysis and feedback loop. The data acquisition
 S i (t) = α × S iin (t) + β × S iex (t) (13) layer collects real-time data from IoV sensors, communication
 channels, and vehicle systems. The simulation core is a
where α and β are weighting factors that adjust the rela- computing module that models and predicts the behavior of the
tive contribution of the internal and external systems to the system under various conditions using physical laws, learned
SAFAEI et al.: DETECTING AND MITIGATING AML ATTACKS IN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 5391

behaviors, or a combination of both. The analysis and feedback Algorithm 3 cGAN for Adversarial Attack Generation
loop integrates predictive analytics and anomaly detection Require: Clean weights Wc , real attack deltas ∆a , condition
algorithms to provide insights and corrective actions to the vectors c, generator G, discriminator D, number of epochs
physical system. Mathematically, a DT can be represented as: N, batch size B
 1: Initialize parameters of G and D
 DT = (X, Θ, Φ) (14) 2: for epoch = 1 to N do
where X represents the state variables, such as vehicle position, 3: for each mini-batch of size B do
speed, sensor readings, Θ denotes the physical and digital 4: Sample Wc , ∆a , and c from dataset
parameters of the system, and Φ represents the transfer func- 5: Generate adversarial deltas ∆g ← G(Wc , c)
tions or machine learning models mapping system behavior. 6: Discriminator score for actual attack sa ← D(∆a , Wc , c)
 DGT is one of the effective solutions to address AML 7: Discriminator score for generated attack sg ←
attacks. In this study, DGT is used to simulate model poisoning D(∆g , Wc , c)
attacks, as shown in Algorithm 1, and to evaluate suspicious 8: Compute discriminator loss:
AVs by testing the accuracy of the ML/DL models deployed 1
 LD = BCE(sa , 1) + BCE(sg , 0)
 
on them. This allows the system to train in advance and 2
become more resilient against model poisoning. By exposing 9: Update D using gradient ∇D LD
the learning framework to synthetic adversarial scenarios, the 10: Re-generate for generator update ∆g ← G(Wc , c)
system can better recognize and defend against malicious 11: sg ← D(∆g , Wc , c)
patterns. 12: Compute generator loss:
 LG = BCE(sg , 1)
F. Generating Unknown Attack for IoV Network Using cGAN
 In this study, Conditional GAN (cGAN) is used to generate 13: Update G using gradient ∇G LG
sophisticated adversarial attack vectors that mimic realis- 14: end for
tic model manipulation. The cGAN consists of two neural 15: end for
networks, a generator and a discriminator, that are trained 16: return Trained generator G
in opposition. The generator takes as input a clean model
weight vector and a condition vector representing the type
and strength of attack, and learns to output a plausible attack computation time required for AV i to complete the local
delta that perturbs the clean model. During the same time, the training on Di samples is given by the following:
discriminator receives both real and generated attack deltas, C · Di
along with the corresponding clean weights and conditions, T comp,i = (15)
 fi
and learns to distinguish between genuine and synthetic
perturbations. Through this adversarial training process, the where C is the number of CPU cycles required to process one
generator becomes increasingly skilled in producing attack data sample, Di refers to the number of local data samples in
vectors that are indistinguishable from real ones (Algorithm 3). AV i, and fi is the CPU frequency (cycles per second, in GHz)
 for AV i.
 III. L ATENCY-ACCURACY T RADEOFF On the cloud side, computational time is primarily spent
 M ODELING IN FL FOR I OV aggregating model updates. Assuming the cloud has high
 performance computing capabilities, the aggregation delay is
 In IoV environments, AV decision-making requires accurate
 relatively small but increases with the number of participating
and timely learning. In FL, the accuracy of the model is
 AVs N and model size S . The cloud-side aggregation time can
directly influenced by both computation and communication
 be approximated as
time, making it essential to design systems that optimize
these factors jointly to maintain real-time performance and T agg = α · N · S (16)
efficient use of resources. For example, delays in model
synchronization between AVs and the edge server during where α is a proportionality constant that represents the aggrecritical maneuvers, such as lane-keeping corrections, steering gation cost per model element. The end-to-end computation
control, or emergency braking, can result in outdated deci- time is thus:
sions or missed anomaly detections. Therefore, maintaining
a balance between computational efficiency and low-latency T total-comp = max T comp,i + T agg (17)
 i
communication is vital to enable AVs to respond accurately and quickly to dynamic driving conditions in IoV This expression highlights that the slowest AV dominates
systems. the edge-side computation delay, and the total delay also
 includes cloud aggregation time. Reducing T comp,i (by increasing fi , reducing Di , or simplifying the model) is essential
A. Computation Time to ensure timely model updates and avoid delayed contribu-
 In each AV, the computation time is a critical factor tions, which negatively impact convergence and global model
that affects the overall latency in the learning process. The accuracy.
5392 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

B. Communication Time complexity of the AV model, weaken the synchronization
 It includes the transmission delay (T tx ), the propagation between the AVs, slowing the convergence. Together, these
delay (T prop ), the queue delay (T queue ), and the processing inefficiencies hinder the timely adaptation to dynamic road
delay (T proc ). In this study, we neglect the processing time, conditions and reduce the overall effectiveness of the FL sysas it is typically negligible compared to the transmission and tem. To ensure high model accuracy while respecting system
queueing delays in FL communication. constraints, it is necessary to jointly optimize communication
 and computation. An approach is to formulate accuracy A as
 T comm,i = T tx,i + T prop,i + T queue,i + T proc,i (18) a function A = F(S , B, d, fi , Di ), and to define an optimization
 In FL, communication occurs in two phases: download in problem that considers both communication and computation
which the cloud sends the global model to AVs and upload in delays.
which AVs send local model updates to the cloud. Therefore, P: max A(S , B, d, fi , Di )
the total communication time per round is as follows: {S ,B,d, fi ,Di ,θi }
 s.t. T total-comp,i + T total-comm,i ≤ τmax (23)
 T total-comm,i = T comm,i
 d u
 + T comm,i (19) „ ƒ‚ … „ ƒ‚ … „ƒ‚…
 computation time communication time latency constraint
 Each can be modeled using the same form, possibly with
 This formulation enables a multidimensional trade-off.
different model sizes (S u and S d ) and bandwidth in the uplink
 Increasing the size of the model can improve the accuracy,
(Bu ) and downlink (Bd ).
 but only if sufficient bandwidth and computational resources
 The transmission delay is determined by the size of the
 are available to meet the latency constraint τmax . Optimizing
model and the communication bandwidth.
 this balance is critical for high-accuracy and real-time learning
 Si
 T tx,i = (20) in IoV systems.
 Bi To analytically verify the latency-accuracy trade-off in
 This term quantifies the time required to transmit the model FL-based IoV, we consider two core theoretical insights:
update from the AV i to the aggregator. Here, S i is the size of (i) Impact of Computation Time on Accuracy, (ii) Impact of
the local model update in bits, and Bi represents the available Communication Time on Accuracy.
communication bandwidth in bits per second (bps). As shown in the optimization convergence proofs [29],
 The propagation delay represents the physical time required delayed updates increase gradient bias, leading to suboptimal
for a signal to travel from the AV to the cloud. convergence. If T comp,i is large, AVs participate less frequently
 di or with delayed updates, thus reducing Ag . High commu-
 T prop,i = (21) nication latency causes longer FL rounds and reduces the
 v
 effective number of global updates within a training budget.
where di is the distance and v is the signal propagation speed Let R denote the total number of rounds
in the medium (typically 3 × 108 m/s in free space). Although  √of global aggregation. Given a convergence rate of O 1/ R [30], a smaller
relatively small compared to other delays, the propagation
delay becomes significant in scenarios where the cloud is number of rounds due to higher latency results in slower
geographically distant, making edge server placement a critical accuracy improvements. This illustrates how communication
design decision. inefficiency directly affects the convergence behavior and final
 The queue delay represents the time it takes for a message performance of the global model in FL systems. Let ∆A denote
to wait in the queue before being processed/transmitted. the accuracy degradation per unit of time delay. Then, the
 expected accuracy loss due to latency is approximately:
 ρi
 T queue,i = (22)
 µi (1 − ρi ) N
 X
 ∆Ag ∝ ∆Acomp,i + ∆Acomm,i
 
 (24)
 This component models the delay due to network congestion i=1
and resource contention, where µi is the service rate (in
bits/s or packets/s), and ρi = λi /µi is the utilization of the where ∆Acomp,i = λ1 .T comp,i and ∆Acomm,i = λ2 .T comm,i . λ1
system with λi as the arrival rate. As the system approaches and λ2 are empirically or theoretically derived sensitivity
saturation (ρi → 1), the queueing delay increases dramatically, coefficients. Thus, reducing both T comp,i and T comm,i directly
highlighting the need for dynamic scheduling and congestion improves the convergence and accuracy of the global model.
control mechanisms. Optimization strategies such as dynamic frequency scaling,
 As explained above, in FL, both communication and com- selective AV participation, and compression of model updates
putation efficiency critically influence the accuracy and per- are used to balance this trade-off.
formance of the local/global model. Communication delays,
caused by large model sizes, limited bandwidth, or long IV. E XPERIMENTAL S CENARIOS AND R ESULT A NALYSIS
transmission distances, can result in delayed updates that fail to This study presents a comparative analysis of FL perforcapture the current state of the environment, thus reducing the mance under four types of model poisoning attacks, Gaussian
accuracy of the model. On the computation side, constrained noise, directional drift, model reversal, and random replaceresources in AVs can lead to delayed or too early stopped ment, as described in Algorithm 2. In this section, we analyze
local training, resulting in low-quality updates. Furthermore, the impact of varying the number of Zombie vehicles on FL
aggregation delays in the cloud, due to the heterogeneity and performance, demonstrating how an increased proportion of
SAFAEI et al.: DETECTING AND MITIGATING AML ATTACKS IN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 5393

 TABLE I
 S IMULATION S ETUP S UMMARY

compromised clients degrades model accuracy and conver- Zombie. The greatest degradation occurs with directional
gence. We also highlight how the DT and Gen-AI components drift and model reversal, where the F1 score drops sharply
improve the accuracy of detection and model recovery, empha- from 0.95 to 0.25 by Round 2 and remains suppressed,
sizing their critical role in strengthening FL-based security. indicating that these attacks inject coherent adversarial updates
To ensure reproducibility and transparency, all experiments that successfully mislead the global model early in training.
were implemented using the Flower FL framework with a This sudden drop suggests that the poisoned parameters were
PyTorch backend, and each AV, DT, and cloud aggregator integrated into the global model after Round 1, leading to
was simulated on independent VMs running Ubuntu 22.04. immediate performance collapse due to the absence of robust
The CICIoV2024 dataset, specifically designed for IoV envi- aggregation defenses. In contrast, Gaussian noise results in
ronments, was used for both local and global training. Each moderate degradation to 0.6 but stabilizes, reflecting its nonrecord in the dataset includes eight features (DATA 0–DATA 7) directional, stochastic nature, which can be partially averaged
representing the transmitted payload, an ID indicating the out by benign AV updates. Random replacement has minimal
message priority and type, and three labeling fields, label, impact, with F1 scores remaining near 0.9, as the entropy
category and specific class, which identify whether the traffic introduced lacks the directional force necessary to consistently
is benign or malicious and specify its attack category and degrade model performance. In this figure, the wider bands
class. To simulate the heterogeneity of real-world vehicle data, for drift and reversal indicate higher variability and attack
the dataset for each vehicle was partitioned from CICIoV2024 instability, while narrower bands indicate more consistent
[31]. Data were split into 70% training, 10% validation, and effects.
20% testing subsets. For fair comparison, all FL experiments
were carried out in 5 global rounds per scenario, with 100 B. Scenario 2: 30% Zombie
total vehicles, of which 20%–60% were compromised (Zombie
vehicles). The model training employed a learning rate of In Fig. 3b, the FL scenario with 30% zombies demonstrates
0.001, a batch size of 32, epoch 3, and a binary loss of how structured attacks can still be effective even when benign
cross-entropy over five communication rounds. The detailed AVs are in the majority. Directional drift reduces the F1
simulation setup is summarized in Table I. To evaluate robust- score to near zero in all rounds, indicating persistent and
ness, we compared several aggregation algorithms, including successful model corruption. The model reversal maintains
FedAvg, FedAdam, Krum, and Trimmed Mean, demonstrating high but slightly degraded F1 values, ranging from 0.8613
how robust aggregation can mitigate poisoning impacts. The to 0.9352, showing partial resilience against inverse update
F1 score was used as the main evaluation metric in all patterns. Gaussian noise begins at 0.3098 and peaks at 0.6279
scenarios and communication rounds, as it effectively captures in Round 4, reflecting unstable but recoverable behavior under
the trade-off between correctly detected attacks (TP), false random perturbations. Random replacement shows significant
positives (FP), and false negatives (FN), providing a reliable variability, rising from 0.3838 in Round 1 to 0.8172 in
measure of the robustness of the model under adversarial Round 2, but later dropping to 0.5245 before ending at 0.6977.
conditions. These results indicate that while a higher number of AVs
 can mitigate unstructured attacks, they are insufficient against
 2 × TP
 F1 Score = (25) directional drift, which still causes complete collapse.
 (2 × T P) + FP + FN
This study conducts eight different simulation scenarios. The C. Scenario 3: 40% Zombie
following is a detailed breakdown of each scenario and the
associated findings. In Fig. 3c, the effects of adversarial strategies are analyzed
 in an FL scenario where 40% of the total AV are zomobies.
 Directional drift causes an immediate and persistent collapse in
A. Scenario 1: 20% Zombie performance, with F1 scores remaining near 0.0001 throughout
 Fig. 3a reveals different behavioral patterns under four all rounds, indicating total model poisoning due to coherent
attack strategies in an FL scenario with four AV and one parameter manipulation. The reverse of the model leads to
5394 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

Fig. 3. Experimental results based on different scenarios including DT and GenAI.

stable but degraded performance, with F1 scores ranging from increased adversarial ratio. Directional drift immediately drops
0.6651 to 0.6775, reflecting its consistent, yet less severe the F1 score to nearly zero in all rounds, with values fluctuimpact. Gaussian noise yields highly unstable behavior, start- ating only between 0.0000 and 0.0001, indicating total and
ing at 0.3148 in Round 1, peaking at 0.5134 in Round 3, sustained model collapse due to targeted manipulation. The
then dropping sharply to 0.2853 in Round 4, highlighting the reversal of the model produces consistently degraded results,
unpredictability of unstructured noise. Random replacement maintaining F1 scores between 0.6444 and 0.6730, showing a
shows increasing volatility, improving from 0.3332 in Round 1 stable but significant performance loss. Gaussian noise causes
to 0.6251 in Round 5, but with a sharp dip to 0.2889 in erratic performance, starting at 0.2022, peaking at 0.6824 in
Round 4, indicating inconsistent influence. Round 4, then decreasing to 0.5259, emphasizing instability
 under random perturbations. Random replacement begins at
D. Scenario 4: 50% Zombie 0.2197 and rises to 0.5621 before dipping to 0.5074, reflecting
 inconsistent disruption. The low proportion of benign AVs pre-
 In Fig. 3d, the FL configuration with the same number
 vents a meaningful correction, allowing adversarial influence
of AV and zombies exposes the vulnerability of the system
 to dominate.
to adversarial attacks. Directional drift forces the F1 score
 Table II presents the impact of different model poisoning
to near-zero values in the first four rounds, with only a
 strategies on FL performance in five scenarios and multiple
minor increase to 0.0955 in Round 5, indicating near-total
 training rounds. The results highlight how each type of attack
model collapse under sustained coherent manipulation. The
 degrades the learning process to varying degrees.
model reversal maintains F1 scores in a tight band between
0.6658 and 0.6799, showing a consistent but moderate performance degradation. Gaussian noise starts at 0.6164, gradually F. Impact of Adversarial Ratio on FL Performance
declines to 0.4077, and remains unstable throughout, reflecting
 Fig. 3f illustrates the variation of the F1 score as the perthe unpredictable impact of non-targeted perturbations in a
 centage of Zombie vehicles increases dynamically from 20%
balanced AV composition. Random replacement exhibits high
 to 90% under four model poisoning strategies. As shown, the
volatility, dropping from 0.3212 to 0.2031, recovering to
 model reversal maintains the highest F1 score in lower zombie
0.6299 in Round 3, and then again falling to 0.3257.
 ratios (20–50%), close to 0.9, but experiences a gradual
 decline beyond 60% due to increasing adversarial influence.
E. Scenario 5: 60% Zombie Random replacement achieves moderate stability up to 50%
 In Fig. 3e, the FL setup with a number of zombies higher before deteriorating as the number of compromised vehicles
than the number of AVs highlights the severe impact of the grows. Gaussian noise demonstrates fluctuating performance
SAFAEI et al.: DETECTING AND MITIGATING AML ATTACKS IN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 5395

 TABLE II
 I MPACT OF M ODEL P OISONING T YPES ON FL P ERFORMANCE ACROSS F IVE S CENARIOS

with F1 scores between 0.3 and 0.6, indicating sensitivity (Algorithm 3). The cGAN was trained using clean model
to random perturbations. Directional drift, on the other hand, parameters and known attack deltas as input, along with
shows near-zero detection capability across all ratios, reflecting condition vectors representing different types and strengths
its subtle manipulation that evades detection. Overall, the of attack. The generator in the cGAN learned to produce
figure highlights that as the proportion of Zombie vehicles realistic attack patterns tailored to specific conditions, while
increases, the global model performance degrades across all the discriminator helped refine these outputs by distinguishing
attack types, emphasizing the importance of robust aggregation real attack deltas from generated ones. This enabled the
and anomaly detection mechanisms in FL for IoV security. creation of novel and targeted adversarial perturbations, which
 were then injected into the Digital Twin. The DT trained
G. DT Integration and Effect and validated the model with these synthetic attacks, and
 after achieving satisfactory performance, the parameters were
 Integration of DT into the FL framework significantly forwarded to the FL server for further evaluation and testing by
fortifies the system’s defense against AML attacks. Upon the AVs. The results show that the adversarial model based on
identifying potentially zombies through the proposed scoring cGAN maintained high F1 scores throughout the five rounds,
system, the system isolates their parameter updates and his- ranging from 0.87 to 0.91. Despite slight fluctuations, the
torical data. These are then transmitted to the DT. The DT system remained robust and consistently resistant to attacks
retrains the latest global model using the Zombie’s local data generated (Fig. 3i).
and compares the resulting parameters against those originally
submitted. If discrepancies indicative of manipulation are I. DL-Based IBM Analysis
detected, the DT overrides the malicious updates by pushing
the correct global model back to the Zombie, effectively mit- Table III presents the performance comparison of the proigating the impact of the attack. To evaluate the effectiveness posed DL-based IBM against the Variational Autoencoder
of the proposed solution, we tested it using scenarios IV-C. (VAE) [32] in four attack scenarios under multiple FL aggre-
The results obtained presented in Fig. 3g present the impact gation strategies, including FedAvg, FedAdam, Krum and
of our proposed scoring system and DT. Trimmed Mean. Under the FedAvg strategy, the DL-based
 IBM maintains exceptionally high detection accuracy, ranging
 from 99.6% in Scenario 1 to 97.9% in Scenario 5, with a
H. Gen-AI Enhanced Verification very low False Positive Rate (FPR) between 0.8% and 1.8%.
 In this scenario, we used two different approaches to assess Similarly, Krum achieves near-identical performance, mainthe resilience of the system by integrating Gen-AI with DT taining accuracy greater than 98.6% in all scenarios with FPRs
validation, using datasets that were completely unseen during less than 1.3%, confirming its robustness against poisoning
model training. In the first approach, we introduced a new attacks. The FedAdam variant also delivers stable accuracy
dataset that was completely isolated from AV training and between 97.05%–98.01%, although with slightly higher FPR
testing. The DT used this dataset to train and evaluate a model. values (1.5%–2.3%) due to adaptive updates. In contrast, the
Once the model achieved high accuracy with these previously Trimmed Mean method exhibits a noticeable drop in perforunseen data, the updated model parameters were sent to the mance, with accuracy decreasing to 88.3%–89.5% and FPR
FL server for aggregation. The server then generated a new increasing to 3.3%, suggesting that its fixed trimming threshglobal model, which was distributed to all AVs. To rigorously old may not adapt well to dynamic IoV environments. The
evaluate the generalizability of the system, we performed VAE baseline, which lacks federated aggregation and advertesting using a portion of the dataset that had never been sarial resilience, performs significantly worse, with accuracy
seen by the AVs or the DT during any stage of training. dropping from 90.6% in Scenario 1 to 43.1% in Scenario 5
AVs used this subset exclusively for testing, simulating real- and FPR exceeding 4.5% under heavy attack conditions. These
world deployment where models must generalize to novel results collectively demonstrate that the DL-based IBM, when
scenarios. The new datase included targeted attacks on steering combined with robust FL aggregation strategies, provides
mechanisms. Interestingly, the system maintained accurate F1 superior accuracy and stability while minimizing false alarms.
scores approaching 1 throughout all communication rounds The low FPR and consistent accuracy across scenarios confirm
(Fig. 3h). the strong resilience and adaptability of the model in mitigat-
 In the second approach, we utilized cGAN to synthesize ing adversarial model poisoning attacks, ensuring trustworthy
adversarial attacks in a more dynamic and intelligent manner learning in large-scale IoV environments.
5396 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF DL-BASED IBM AND VAE U NDER D IFFERENT AGGREGATION M ETHODS ACROSS F IVE S CENARIOS

 V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK [4] P. Sharma and H. Liu, “A machine-learning-based data-centric misbehavior detection model for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
 In this study, we have investigated the impact of AML J., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4991–4999, Mar. 2021.
attacks, particularly model poisoning, on AVs that employ [5] A. Qayyum, M. Usama, J. Qadir, and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Securing con-
ML/DL models within their systems. To counter these threats, nected & autonomous vehicles: Challenges posed by adversarial machine
 learning and the way forward,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 22, no. 2,
we have developed a framework that integrates a DL-based pp. 998–1026, 2nd Quart., 2020.
IBM as the local model in a FL architecture, a vehicle scoring [6] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
system to identify suspicious vehicles, and a DT to validate intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
 Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
model integrity and learn emerging attack patterns. Within
 [7] S. Yaqoob, A. Hussain, F. Subhan, G. Pappalardo, and M. Awais, “Deep
this framework, the DT has been responsible for validating learning based anomaly detection for fog-assisted IoVs network,” IEEE
the models of AVs flagged by the proposed vehicle scoring Access, vol. 11, pp. 19024–19038, 2023.
system. If manipulated parameters have been detected, the [8] C. Bernardeschi et al., “HARDNESS: Hardware-supported post quantum
 over-the-air software update and intrusion detection system for next
DT has replaced the compromised model in the suspicious generation secure cars,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Appl. Electron. Pervading
AV with the correct global model. The results have demon- Ind., Environ. Soc. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 439–447.
strated a significant improvement in performance, with the F1 [9] N. Canino, P. Dini, S. Mazzetti, D. Rossi, S. Saponara, and E. Soldaini,
 “Cybersecurity of automotive wired networking systems: Evolution,
score reaching 99%. Furthermore, DT, in conjunction with challenges, and countermeasures,” Electronics, vol. 14, no. 3, p. 471,
Gen-AI, has been used to train the global model on novel Jan. 2025.
attack patterns that AVs have not previously encountered. [10] N. Canino, P. Dini, S. Mazzetti, D. Rossi, and S. Saponara, “CANini:
 In-depth traffic analysis for design and robustness evaluation of DTree-
This approach has ensured an adaptive and resilient defense based IDS in automotive networking systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 13,
mechanism within IoV environments. As the results have pp. 73236–73260, 2025.
shown, the F1 score for detecting new attacks by AVs has [11] P. Dini, M. Zappavigna, E. Soldaini, and S. Saponara, “Embedded
 machine learning-based voltage fingerprinting for automotive
exceeded 87%, demonstrating a strong detection capability. cybersecurity,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 38342–38367, 2025.
In future work, we plan to address the scalability limitations [12] S. Zhang et al., “Federated learning in intelligent transportation systems:
associated with centralized components in our framework. Recent applications and open problems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Specifically, our goal is to reduce dependency on a single FL Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 3259–3285, May 2024.
 [13] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative
aggregator by exploring decentralized or hierarchical archi- intrusion detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
tectures, such as blockchain-based consensus mechanisms, to Technol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
improve scalability, robustness, and fault tolerance. Likewise, [14] X. Yuan et al., “FedComm: A privacy-enhanced and efficient
 authentication protocol for federated learning in vehicular ad-hoc
as the current DT has operated as a centralized instance, we networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 777–792,
will extend this design toward a federated or distributed DT 2024.
architecture, where multiple DT instances are deployed across [15] P. Rani et al., “Federated learning-based misbehaviour detection for
 the 5G-enabled internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
edge servers (e.g., roadside units). These distributed DTs will vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 4656–4664, May 2023.
collaboratively simulate, validate, and update models, thereby [16] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learning:
improving system resilience, reducing communication latency, Concept and applications,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. (TIST),
and improving real-time decision-making. Furthermore, we vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
 [17] A. D. Joseph, B. Nelson, B. I. Rubinstein, and J. Tygar, Adversarial
plan to implement adaptive aggregation strategies that dynam- Machine Learning. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2018.
ically adjust based on network conditions and to strengthen [18] A. Uprety and D. B. Rawat, “Mitigating poisoning attack in federated
vehicle trust assessment through fuzzy logic–based scoring, learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI), Dec. 2021,
 pp. 01–07.
thus improving interpretability, reliability and security in large- [19] H. Alsuwat, “Detecting data poisoning attacks using federated learning
scale IoV environments. with deep neural networks: An empirical study,” Int. J. Adv. Comput.
 Sci. Appl., vol. 14, no. 11, p.688, 2023.
 R EFERENCES [20] Y. Li, Z. Guo, N. Yang, H. Chen, D. Yuan, and W. Ding, “Threats and
[1] F. Yang, S. Wang, J. Li, Z. Liu, and Q. Sun, “An overview of Internet defenses in federated learning life cycle: A comprehensive survey and
 of Vehicles,” China Commun., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 1–15, Oct. 2014. challenges,” 2024, arXiv:2407.06754.
[2] J. Contreras-Castillo, S. Zeadally, and J. A. Guerrero-Ibañez, “Internet [21] E. C. Balta, M. Pease, J. Moyne, K. Barton, and D. M. Tilbury,
 of Vehicles: Architecture, protocols, and security,” IEEE Internet Things “Digital twin-based cyber-attack detection framework for cyber-physical
 J., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3701–3709, Oct. 2018. manufacturing systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 21, no. 2,
[3] S. Yaqoob, G. Morabito, S. Cafiso, G. Pappalardo, and A. Ullah, “AI- pp. 1695–1712, Apr. 2024.
 driven driver behavior assessment through vehicle and health monitoring [22] C. Hu et al., “Digital twin-assisted real-time traffic data prediction
 for safe driving—A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 48044–48056, method for 5G-enabled Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 2024. vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2811–2819, Apr. 2022.
SAFAEI et al.: DETECTING AND MITIGATING AML ATTACKS IN AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 5397

[23] X. Yuan, J. Chen, N. Zhang, J. Ni, F. R. Yu, and V. C. M. Leung, Shahla Asadi received the Ph.D. degree in informa-
 “Digital twin-driven vehicular task offloading and IRS configuration tion systems. She is currently an Assistant Professor
 in the Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, with the Department of Information Systems and
 no. 12, pp. 24290–24304, Dec. 2022. Business Analytics. She has held academic positions
[24] J. Liu, L. Zhang, C. Li, J. Bai, H. Lv, and Z. Lv, “Blockchain-based as a Lecturer with the University of Gloucestershire,
 secure communication of intelligent transportation digital twins system,” a Senior Lecturer with the National University of
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22630–22640, Nov. Malaysia, and a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with
 2022. the Universiti Putra Malaysia. She has published
[25] Y. Tao, J. Wu, Q. Pan, A. K. Bashir, and M. Omar, “O-RAN-based extensively in high-impact journals, including Techdigital twin function virtualization for sustainable IoV service response: nological Forecasting and Social Change, Comput-
 An asynchronous hierarchical reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE ers and Industrial Engineering, Journal of Cleaner
 Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1049–1060, Sep. 2024. Production, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON E NGINEERING M ANAGEMENT.
[26] J. Guo, M. Bilal, Y. Qiu, C. Qian, X. Xu, and K.-K. Raymond Her research interests focus on data analytics, recommendation systems,
 Choo, “Survey on digital twins for Internet of Vehicles: Fundamentals, and the Internet of Things (IoT) solutions, with an emphasis on enhancing
 challenges, and opportunities,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 10, no. 2, decision-making, improving information sharing, and ensuring quality control
 pp. 237–247, Apr. 2024. in complex industrial contexts. Her interdisciplinary research closely aligns
[27] P. Dini, E. Soldaini, and S. Saponara, “Design and test of an embedded with machine learning, data mining, artificial intelligence, and database
 real-time compact voltage fingerprinting algorithm for enhanced auto- systems. Throughout her academic career, she has received several prestigious
 motive cybersecurity,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 73183–73201, 2025. awards in recognition of her scholarly contributions.
[28] H. Xu, F. Omitaomu, S. Sabri, S. Zlatanova, X. Li, and Y. Song,
 “Leveraging generative AI for urban digital twins: A scoping review
 on the autonomous generation of urban data, scenarios, designs, and 3D
 city models for smart city advancement,” 2024, arXiv:2405.19464.
[29] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, “Federated learning:
 Challenges, methods, and future directions,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
 vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 50–60, May 2020.
[30] H. Yang, J. Liu, and E. S. Bentley, “CFedAvg: Achieving efficient
 communication and fast convergence in non-IID federated learning,”
 in Proc. 19th Int. Symp. Model. Optim. Mobile, Ad hoc, Wireless Netw.
 (WiOpt), Oct. 2021, pp. 1–8.
[31] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches
 against DoS and spoofing attack in IoV CAN bus,” Internet Things,
 vol. 26, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 101209. Mitra Safaei received the M.Sc. degree in internet
[32] S. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Wang, Y. Liu, and T. Chen, “Learning to detect mali- technology and information systems (data science)
 cious clients for robust federated learning,” 2020, arXiv:2002.00211. from Leibniz University Hannover. Her master’s
 thesis focused on acoustic-based methods for process supervision in industrial environments. She
 is a Data Scientist and a Software Engineer with
 experience in data analytics, machine learning, and
 Mahmood Safaei received the Ph.D. degree in backend development. Her research and professional
 computer science. He is currently an Assistant Pro- interests include data science, artificial intelligence,
 fessor with the Department of Computer Science, data mining, and applied machine learning. She has
 The University of Akron, USA. His research focuses worked extensively in interdisciplinary environments
 on secure and trustworthy distributed systems, with and combines strong analytical thinking with practical engineering expertise.
 an emphasis on cyber-security for networked and
 cyber-physical systems, autonomous vehicles, digital
 twins, the Internet of Things, and trustworthy and
 generative artificial intelligence. His work integrates
 adversarial machine learning, federated learning
 security, remote attestation, and resilient networking
architectures. He has served as a principal investigator and a co-principal
investigator on multiple nationally and internationally funded research
projects. His research interests include autonomous vehicles, digital twins,
the IoT, cyber-security, generative artificial intelligence, artificial intelligence,
and computer networking.

 Shidrokh Goudarzi (Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree in communication systems and wireless
 Ahmad Soleymani (Member, IEEE) received networks from Malaysia-Japan International Instithe Ph.D. degree in computer science from the tute of Technology (MJIIT), Universiti Teknologi
 Faculty of Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia (UTM), under a three-year full scholarship.
 Malaysia (UTM), Malaysia, in 2019. He was a She is currently a Senior Lecturer in computer sci-
 Research Fellow with the Centre for Vision, Speech, ence with the School of Computing and Engineering,
 and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of University of West London, U.K. Previously, she
 Surrey, Guildford, U.K., and the School of Electrical was with the Centre for Vision, Speech, and Signal
 and Electronic Engineering, University of Sheffield, Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey. She was
 Sheffield, U.K. He was a Senior Research Fellow a Senior Lecturer with the Universiti Kebangsaan
 with the Institute for Communication Systems Malaysia (UKM). From 2018 to 2020, she was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with
 (ICS), University of Surrey. He is currently a Senior the School of Advanced Informatics, UTM. She has published more than 80
Research Fellow with the Department of Computer Science, Birmingham research articles in high-quality journals and conferences. She has secured
City University (BCU). His research interests include autonomous vehicles national and international funding awards, including grants funded by UKRI
networks, wireless sensor networks, the Internet of Things and Industrial and the Royal Society, as a PI and a Co-I. Her research interests encompass
Internet of Things, mobile networks, artificial intelligence (AI), machine wireless networks, artificial intelligence, machine learning, next-generation
learning, large language model, generative AI, quantum computing, communication systems, the Internet of Things (IoT), and mobile, distributed,
edge/fog/cloud computing, and AI radio access networks and open radio and cloud computing. She actively contributes to the research community as
access network environments. an editor and a reviewer for several reputable scientific journals.