IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026 3655

 Developing A Domain-Specific LLM for Optical
 Networks: A Reinforcement Learning-Based
 Fine-Tuning Framework
 Yanli Liu , Yue Pang, Yidi Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Shengnan Li , Jin Li , Min Zhang,
 and Danshi Wang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Optical networks serve as the backbone of modern secure network environments [1]. However, traditional optical
communication infrastructure, where efficient operation and network O&M paradigms still rely heavily on human expertise
maintenance (O&M) are essential for ensuring reliable and and manual operations, leading to high labor costs, complex
high-speed data services. However, traditional network O&M
face persistent challenges, including high labor costs, delayed data analysis processes, and delayed fault response [2], [3],
response time, and difficulties in processing massive and complex [4]. As optical networks continue to scale in size and comnetwork data. Although large language models (LLMs) have plexity, these limitations increasingly hinder the realization of
demonstrated strong capabilities in text understanding, gener- intelligent, autonomous, and efficient network management.
ation, and reasoning, their direct application in optical network In recent years, the rapid development of generative artifi-
O&M is limited by domain-specific knowledge barriers, inherent reasoning biases, and insufficient performance in complex cial intelligence (GenAI) has brought large language models
multi-step tasks. To address this issue, this study develops a (LLMs), such as ChatGPT [5] and LLaMA [6], [7], to the
domain-adaptation and system-implementation framework that forefront of artificial intelligence research. Benefiting from
applies two established reinforcement learning-based fine-tuning large-scale pretraining, LLMs exhibit strong capabilities in
methods (RLHF and ReFT) to construct domain-specialized natural language understanding, text generation, and complex
LLMs for optical network O&M tasks. In the context of log
analysis, RLHF achieves improvements of 1.64 points in accuracy, reasoning [8]. These models have demonstrated remarkable
1.02 points in content richness, and a notable 10-point increase success across a wide range of real-world applications. For
in interactivity over supervised fine-tuning. In alarm localization, example, in code review tasks, LLMs are capable of auto-
ReFT achieves accuracy improvements of 2%–13% across four matically generating review comments, assisting engineers
reasoning tasks. The extensive tests not only demonstrate the in understanding code logic, identifying potential defects,
practical value of RL-based fine-tuning in enhancing alignment
and reasoning for domain-specific applications, but also provides and suggesting revisions, thereby improving development effia practical methodology and implementation reference for apply- ciency and code quality [9]. In network intrusion detection,
ing reinforcement learning-based LLM adaptation in optical LLMs have been leveraged to analyze traffic patterns and
network O&M environments. abnormal behaviors, infer attack paths, and generate inter-
 Index Terms—Large language model, reinforcement learning pretable security reports and response strategies, enhancing
from human feedback, reinforced fine-tuning, optical networks. both detection accuracy and system explainability [10]. These
 achievements highlight the strong generalization ability and
 I. I NTRODUCTION task adaptability of LLMs, suggesting their potential to support
 PTICAL networks constitute the backbone of modern
O communication infrastructure, where efficient operation
and maintenance (O&M) play a critical role in ensuring
 intelligent O&M in optical networks.
 Motivated by these successes, researchers have begun to
 explore the application of LLMs to optical network O&M
high-speed data transmission, reliable service delivery, and tasks, including quality-of-transmission (QoT) estimation and
 optimization [11], simulation assistance [12], and automated
 Received 6 January 2026; revised 16 March 2026; accepted 17 March 2026. network control [13], [14], [15], [16]. Despite their promis-
Date of publication 23 March 2026; date of current version 31 March 2026.
This work supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of ing performance, directly deploying general-purpose LLMs
China under Grant U24B20133 and Grant 62522104. The associate editor in optical network scenarios remains challenging. Optical
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was E. networks are highly specialized systems that demand extreme
Nowroozi. (Corresponding author: Danshi Wang.)
 Yanli Liu, Yidi Wang, Shengnan Li, Min Zhang, and Danshi Wang robustness, reliability, and domain-specific reasoning. In pracare with the State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical tice, LLMs often suffer from domain knowledge gaps [17],
Communications, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, inherent reasoning biases [18], and task-specific constraints
Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: yanli liu@bupt.edu.cn;
wangyidi@bupt.edu.cn; shengnanli@bupt.edu.cn; mzhang@bupt.edu.cn; [19], which limit their effectiveness in professional O&M
danshi wang@bupt.edu.cn). applications. These challenges underscore the necessity of
 Yue Pang is with the Cloud Network Operating System Research adapting LLMs to the optical network domain.
and Development Center, China Telecom, Beijing 102299, China (e-mail:
pangy18@chinatelecom.cn). To bridge the gap between general-purpose LLMs and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3676522 domain-specific optical network tasks, model adaptation
 Jin Li is with the School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineer- techniques are required. Among existing approaches, reining, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
lijin930629@163.com). forcement learning (RL)-based fine-tuning has emerged as a
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3676522 particularly promising direction. Unlike conventional super-
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3656 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

vised learning, RL-based methods enable models to optimize localization, along with their corresponding reinforcement
their behavior through interaction with reward signals, allow- learning strategies. Section V details the implementation seting them to go beyond simple imitation of labeled data. tings, datasets, hyperparameter configurations, and evaluation
By incorporating rule-based or human preference-based feed- metrics. Section VI provides performance evaluation and
back, RL-based fine-tuning can enhance alignment with expert performance analysis for both tasks. Finally, Section VII
intent, reduce hallucinations, and improve reasoning consis- concludes the paper and discusses future research directions.
tency. These properties are especially desirable for complex
optical network O&M tasks, such as log analysis and alarm II. R ELATE W ORK
root cause localization, which involve multi-step reasoning and
 A. LLM Applications in Optical Network O&M
high interpretability requirements.
 In this paper, RL-based fine-tuning techniques are applied With the increasing maturity of large language models,
to address complex and professional tasks in optical networks, several studies have investigated their application to optical
and a dual-strategy adaptive framework is constructed to network O&M tasks. Existing works have explored the use of
support LLM-based network log analysis and alarm local- LLMs for quality-of-transmission estimation and optimization
ization. The framework leverages established reinforcement [11], network simulation assistance [12], and automated conlearning approaches to enhance the domain adaptability of trol and decision-making [13], [14], [15], [16]. These studies
LLMs for optical network operation and maintenance tasks. demonstrate that LLMs can effectively leverage textual and
Through empirical analysis and validation on two representa- structured information to support network management tasks.
tive case studies, this work demonstrates how reinforcement However, most existing approaches rely on directly applying
learning can be effectively integrated into LLMs in optical pretrained or lightly adapted models, which often struggle
network scenarios and provides practical insights for applying with domain-specific constraints, complex operational rules,
RL-based methods in optical networks and related domains. and high reliability requirements intrinsic to optical networks.
 The main contributions of this work include:
 1) The implementation processes and applicable scenarios B. Domain Adaptation Techniques for LLMs
 of typical RL techniques in LLMs are summarized, To improve LLM performance in specialized domains,
 providing practical guidance for domain specialization. three primary adaptation strategies have been widely studied:
 2) RLHF is applied to enhance the alignment between external augmentation, prompt engineering, and model fineoptical network log analysis outputs and human intent. tuning [20], [21], [22]. External augmentation enables LLMs
 Task accuracy of 9.09 points, richness of 7.2 points, and to access external knowledge bases or tools, offering flexibility
 interactivity of 10 points are achieved by the final model. and extensibility. However, its effectiveness strongly depends
 Compared with the SFT model, the accuracy of the on retrieval accuracy and knowledge coverage, and frequent
 preference model is improved by 1.64 points, richness is external queries may introduce significant latency [23]. Prompt
 increased by 1.02 points, and interactivity is increased engineering aims to elicit task-specific behavior by carefully
 by 10 points. designing instructions and examples. While effective for sim-
 3) ReFT is employed to improve LLM performance in ple tasks, this approach often exhibits limited reasoning depth
 complex reasoning tasks related to network RCL. and requires long input prompts, which are constrained by the
 The results show that accuracy in all four tasks was model’s context window [24]. This limitation is particularly
 improved: the task of extracting topological relationships pronounced in optical network tasks that involve detailed
 of real-time alarms was completed with 98% accuracy, operational rules, network topology, and resource allocation
 an increase of 2%; the task of extracting alarm prop- strategies.
 agation of real-time alarms was completed with 99% Model fine-tuning adjusts the internal parameters of LLMs
 accuracy, an increase of 13%; the generation of the to better capture domain-specific patterns and reasoning proalarm event matrix was achieved with 99% accuracy, cesses. Compared with external augmentation and prompt
 an increase of 5%; and the identification of root alarms engineering, fine-tuning generally achieves stronger domain
 was achieved with 96% accuracy, an increase of 6%. adaptation, albeit at the cost of additional training effort and
 4) An in-depth analysis of the validation outcomes is computational resources.
 conducted, and key challenges and practical insights
 are summarized, providing valuable guidance for the
 application of RL-based fine-tuning to LLM. C. Supervised and Reinforcement Learning-Based
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec- Fine-Tuning
tion II reviews related work on LLM applications in optical Among fine-tuning approaches, supervised fine-tuning
network O&M and existing domain adaptation techniques, (SFT) has been widely adopted due to its simplicity and
with a focus on supervised and reinforcement learning-based effectiveness. By learning from expert-labeled data, SFT can
fine-tuning methods. Section III presents the principles and significantly improve LLM performance on specific tasks
overall framework of the proposed dual-strategy reinforcement [25]. In optical network O&M, SFT has been applied to
learning adaptation approach, including RLHF and ReFT. tasks such as log analysis and alarm root cause localization
Section IV describes the two representative tasks considered [26], [27]. However, existing studies reveal notable limitain this study, namely log analysis and alarm root cause tions. SFT-trained models often fail to fully capture expert
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3657

Fig. 1. Optical network operation and maintenance process based on (a) logs and (b) alarms analysis under dual strategies.

intent, leading to incomplete analyses, hallucinated network process provides a coherent understanding of network behavior
parameters, or missing recommendations. Moreover, their rea- and supports preliminary anomaly identification, as illustrated
soning accuracy remains insufficient for complex multi-step in Fig. 1(a).
tasks. Building upon the clarified semantics obtained from log
 To address these limitations, reinforcement learning-based analysis, alarm root cause localization further integrates
fine-tuning has gained increasing attention [28], [29]. Rein- network topology information and alarm propagation depenforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) utilizes dencies to infer potential fault propagation paths. As a result,
a reward model trained on human preferences to guide pol- alarm localization inherently relies on the outputs of log analyicy updates, improving alignment with human intent and sis, forming a sequential O&M workflow in which higher-level
reducing hallucinations [30]. Reinforced Fine-Tuning (ReFT), reasoning and decision-making are grounded in prior semantic
in contrast, directly leverages environment feedback without understanding rather than performed in isolation, as shown in
preference-labeled data, demonstrating strong improvements Fig. 1(b).
in multi-step reasoning and decision-making capabilities [31]. To adapt LLMs to this continuous and dependency-aware
These advances indicate that RL-based fine-tuning offers a operational workflow, RL–based fine-tuning is introduced at
powerful mechanism for enhancing alignment, robustness, different stages of the pipeline using two established techand reasoning performance of LLMs in domain-specific niques: RLHF and ReFT. RLHF is applied at the log analysis
applications. stage to enhance domain semantic alignment, operational
 preference modeling, and context-aware interpretation of raw
 III. P RINCIPLE AND F RAMEWORK logs, enabling the generation of structured and semantically
 In optical network O&M, two representative and tightly consistent representations (Fig. 1(a)). Subsequently, ReFT is
coupled tasks are considered in this work: log analysis and employed at the alarm localization stage to improve inference
alarm root cause localization. consistency and multi-step logical reasoning for topology-
 Log analysis focuses on interpreting raw operational logs aware analysis and alarm propagation inference. Although
generated by heterogeneous network devices, with the goal RLHF and ReFT target different optimization objectives and
of resolving ambiguous semantics, normalizing domain- are implemented independently, they together form a logically
specific terminology, and enriching contextual information ordered adaptive strategy that reflects the inherent sequence of
related to network states and events. Alarm root cause optical network O&M tasks.
localization, on the other hand, aims to identify the under- From an implementation perspective, both RLHF and ReFT
lying faults responsible for observed alarm patterns by follow a unified reinforcement learning based fine-tuning
reasoning over network topology and alarm propagation paradigm. Specifically, they share a common three-stage
relationships. training pipeline consisting of supervised fine-tuning (SFT),
 In practical O&M scenarios, these two tasks are not reward model construction, and policy optimization, as shown
performed independently but are naturally organized as a task- in Fig. 2. In the remainder of this section, we provide a
level workflow. Log analysis typically serves as the entry point detailed description of the technical principles and impleof the O&M process, where raw logs are first transformed mentation details of these two methods within the proposed
into structured and semantically clarified representations. This framework.
3658 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 2. Three-stage implementation process of RLHF and ReFT: The framework consists of three sequential stages. (a) Supervised Fine-Tuning: Fine-tunes
the base model on labeled data. (b) Reward Model: In RLHF, a reward model is trained based on human preference data to score model outputs, while
in ReFT, a handcrafted reward function is designed to directly evaluate responses. (c) Policy Optimization: Optimizes the model policy via reinforcement
learning, guided by the reward model or reward function.

A. Supervised Fine-Tuning trained, a task-specific reward function or evaluation mech-
 SFT refers to the process of fine-tuning a pre-trained LLM anism is constructed to assess whether the model’s outputs
on a labeled dataset tailored to specific downstream tasks, match predefined correct answers in mathematical reasoning
thereby enhancing the model’s adaptability to solve related tasks. In this sense, both RLHF and ReFT involve forms
problems [32], as shown in Fig. 2 (a). In this context, we of task-oriented modeling to guide fine-tuning, ensuring that
consider an LLM parameterized by θ. Let x and y denote the model’s behavior aligns with either human preferences or
the model’s input and the corresponding output label, thereby established task standards.
forming the SFT dataset DSF T = {xi , yi }N 1) Reward Modeling of RLHF: In RLHF, the first step in
 i=1 , where N
represents the number of samples in the SFT dataset. In theory, training a reward model is to collect preference data from
the goal of SFT is to adjust the model parameters so that the a group of human labelers. Different responses to the same
model generates a response similar to the label with a higher questions are then sampled from various model baselines [34]
probability. Therefore, the training objective of SFT can be and presented to the human labelers for ranking. The resulting
formally expressed as [33]: data is transformed into a set of prompt-chosen-rejected trios
 (i) (i)
 and can be denoted as DReward = {x(i) , ychosen , yrejected }N 1
 i=1 ,
 LSF T (θ) = −Ex,y∼DSF T [log pθ (y|x)] (1) where the chosen response is preferred over the rejected
where pθ (y|x) represents the model’s predicted probability of response for training and the N1 is the number of samples
the correct label y given the input x. in the reward dataset.
 In theory, training the reward model is based on the Bradley-
 Terry model [35], which is used to estimate the probability that
B. Reward Model
 pairwise comparison i < j is true, as calculated:
 The reward model plays a pivotal role in providing feedback
on the actions of the model in RL algorithms, as shown eβi
in Fig. 2(b). In RLHF, an explicit reward model is trained P (i > j) = (2)
 eβi + eβj
based on human labelers’ preferences, enabling the model to
assign higher rewards to responses that better align with human where eβi and eβj represent the probabilities assigned to
expectations. In ReFT, although no explicit reward model is individuals i and j respectively.
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3659

 The reward model should assign a higher score to the The term Ât denotes the advantage estimate, which is
preferred response than to the rejected one. Therefore, the introduced to reduce variance in policy gradient estimation.
objective function of training the reward model is: A value-function baseline Vφ (st ) is employed, yielding

 LReward (θ) = −E(x,ychosen ,yrejected )∼DReward At = Qt − Vφ (st ). (7)
 [log(σ(rθ (x, ychosen ) − rθ (x, yrejected )))] (3) In practice, the advantage is computed using Generalized
 Advantage Estimation (GAE), where the temporal-difference
 In practice, the reward model is typically implemented residual is defined as
either by appending a linear layer to predict a single logit
or by removing the final decoding layers and replacing them δt = rt + γVφ (st+1 ) − Vφ (st ), (8)
with a linear layer. and the resulting advantage estimate is
 2) Reward Function of ReFT: In the reward function of X
ReFT, the reward values indicate whether the final answer is Ât = l = 0∞ (γλ)l δt+l . (9)
correct. Accordingly, the reward function is designed to com- For numerical stability, the advantages are normalized
pare model-generated answers with the corresponding golden within each mini-batch before being substituted into the
answers. To achieve this, it is essential to construct a dataset clipped objective, thereby completing the policy update proconsisting of (question, golden answer) pairs, denoted as (x, cedure
y). When generating outputs for the corresponding inputs x in In summary, RLHF is particularly effective in capturing
the model, the answers y ∗ are extracted and compared with the implicit human preferences by learning a reward model from
golden answers y, based on the dataset’s predefined format. human feedback, which serves as a proxy for subjective
 quality. This model guides policy optimization to improve
C. Proximal Policy Optimization naturalness and alignment with human intent. In contrast,
 ReFT directly defines reward functions based on task-specific
 Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) is a typical off-policy rules or correctness criteria, offering greater transparency and
Actor-critic RL algorithm [36]. A common approach is to control. While RLHF learns the reward signal from data, ReFT
choose the SFT model as the initial policy in PPO, denoted as designs it explicitly—highlighting a key difference in their
πSF T (y|x). A new dataset only concludes prompt needs to be underlying principles and making them suitable for different
prepared as DP P O = {xi }N i=1 , among them, N2 represents the
 2
 types of tasks.
number of datasets in PPO. In the process of training, a batch
of data is fed into the Actor model, which generates a sequence IV. TASKS D ESCRIPTION
of input-output pairs (x, y). The reward model then assigns a
 In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the dualreward value r (x, y) to each pair. Subsequently, optimization
 strateg adaptation framework by studying two representative
iterations are carried out with the aim of obtaining higher
 tasks in optical networks: optical network log analysis and
reward values. Therefore, the objective of PPO training is to
 alarm root cause localization.
maximize the following objective function:

 L(πφRL ) = −Ex∼DRL ,y∼πRL (y|x) [r(x, y) A. Log Analysis Task Based on RLHF
 − λ · DKL (πφRL (y|x)||π SF T (y|x))] (4) Task Requirements:: optical network logs are valuable
 data resources generated by network devices and links during
where πφRL (y|x) is the learned RL policy with parameters ϕ, operation, recording network activities, events, status changes,
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization [37] is to prevent and abnormal conditions. The logs can be used to track netthe new model from deviating too far from the original initial work behavior, monitor operational status, and ensure system
model, to avoid mode collapse, β  0 is the regularization security [38]. Due to their high-frequency generation, log
parameter is to control the deviation of the new model from analysis is significant for network status monitoring, fault diagthe reference model, as shown in Fig. 2 (c). nosis, and anomaly detection, supporting daily network O&M.
 Among Equation (4) is intended to present a conceptual Therefore, fully leveraging optical network logs is essential
formulation of the PPO optimization objective, rather than a for supporting daily O&M, ensuring network stability, and
full description of all implementation details. enhancing operational efficiency. In our previous work [26],
 To explicitly characterize the optimization process, the PPO anomaly analysis of logs was achieved through supervised
objective can be expressed in its clipped surrogate form as fine-tuning of the LLaMA-2-7B-chat model using optical neth  i work log data, which effectively explained key information in
 Lclip (θ) = Et min rt (θ)Ât , clip(rt (θ), 1 − , 1 + )Ât anomaly event descriptions and generated actionable insights.
 (5) The model’s performance was evaluated across three critical
where the probability ratio between the updated policy and the dimensions: correctness, usability, and fluency. However, our
reference policy is defined as analysis revealed a significant limitation − the generated
 content frequently exhibited inaccuracies that deviated from
 πθ (at | st ) the original log information. This highlights the need for more
 rt (θ) = . (6)
 πθold (at | st ) effective fine-tuning techniques.
3660 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 3. The implementation process of the log analysis task based on RLHF consists of three stages. (a) Supervised Fine-Tuning: The base model is fine-tuned
on labeled log data to learn domain-specific patterns and anomaly detection capabilities. (b) Reward Modeling: Human feedback is collected by ranking
model-generated log analysis results, and a reward model is trained to predict these preference scores. (c) Policy Optimization: Using the PPO algorithm,
the model policy is optimized with guidance from the reward model, encouraging it to generate more accurate, informative, and human-aligned log analysis
outputs.

 To address this issue, the RLHF is implemented to enhance Human preference dataset: the first step in reward modeloutput precision. In addition, we further investigate LLM’s ing is to construct a high-quality dataset of human preferences,
application-specific requirements in optical network O&M sce- as shown in Fig. 3 (b). For the task requirements of log
narios. In general, the effectiveness of log analysis is directly analysis, we adopt the following process to collect human
correlated with the comprehensiveness and level of detail in its preference datasets.
outputs. Therefore, we introduce additional preference designs, Firstly, we randomly sampled a subset of the SFT dataset
firstly emphasizing two key aspects of content richness: and processed it using various model baselines, which cor-
(1) clear and accessible analysis of log background, sources, respond to the different epochs of SFT training. In addition,
and content; (2) in-depth, multi-dimensional recommendations when the model generates sampling replies, we employ the
for abnormal log resolution. Secondly, to enhance human- Diverse Beam Search decoding method [39] with a beam budmachine interaction for network operators, the system’s get set to 4 and repeatability and diversity penalty parameters
original direct expression style is transformed into a more both set to 1.5. This approach ensures diverse and high-quality
dynamic and flexible narrative form, thereby improving its responses, and the higher the quality of the preference dataset,
practicality in real-world operational scenarios. The implemen- the more advantageous it is for improving the accuracy of the
tation process of the verification comprises three main steps, trained reward model.
as shown in Fig. 3. In the first step, the model is fine-tuned on Secondly, the collected responses were evaluated by domain
log-labeled data via SFT. Next, multiple SFT models are used experts with the Zhongjin [40] annotation tool, following
to collect human preference data, based on which a reward a set of a unified set of criteria: accuracy, richness, and
model is trained. In the final step, the reward model guides interactivity. Manual improvements were applied to enhance
the optimization of the SFT model through RL, resulting in a its interactivity, making the output more engaging and
preference-aligned model. informative.
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3661

 Thirdly, for each log analysis instance, only the top alarm sequence from the inherent network topology adjacency
four ranked responses were retained, with richness gradually matrix of physical links. The second step is to generate the
decreasing from the first to the fourth. The top three responses alarm event alarm propagation relationship adjacency matrix,
were required to maintain both accuracy and interactivity, which needs to extract the alarm events appearing in the realwhereas the fourth response was intentionally left with poten- time alarm sequence from the inherent alarm events. The
tial inaccuracies while retaining its original style. This design third step is to use the matrices obtained above to construct
choice was made to ensure that the constructed preference the alarm event propagation matrix, and the last step is to
pairs (chosen, rejected) differ clearly in at least one evaluation use the alarm event propagation matrix to convert it into the
metric, strengthening the consistency and reliability of the propagation relationship between the network element and the
preference signal. alarm to determine the root alarm.
 By structuring the dataset in this way, this methodology In our previous study, we fine-tuned four LLMs using CoT
provides a robust foundation for training reward models, data, with each model focusing on a specific step of the alarm
emphasizing discernible differences in response quality. Such analysis process. To further improve task accuracy, the ReFT
an approach enhances the model’s ability to learn fine-grained technique is introduced in this work. The sequential workflow
preferences, ultimately enhancing performance on log-analysis of the verification is illustrated in Fig. 4.
tasks. RCL of alarm CoT data construction. Building a suit-
 Model selection: during the SFT stage, to ensure continuity, able CoT dataset can maximize the understanding of the
the same base model (LLaMA-2-7b-chat) is selected for study. model and the learning of the algorithm. By utilizing the
Subsequently, the trained LLM is then used as the initial policy powerful generation capability of LLM (GPT-4o) to generate
for the PPO. CoT data, the performance of small models (LLaMA-3-8B-
 For the reward model, instead of initializing it directly Instruct) in complex reasoning and step-by-step thinking can
from the base model, we choose to initialize it using an SFT be fully stimulated. Therefore, when generating datasets for
model during the reward modeling stage. Furthermore, to eval- each task, as shown in Fig. 4 (a), experts first guide GPT-4o
uate the performance of the reward model, we consider two to automatically generate CoT training data containing detailed
dimensions: 1) the static discriminative ability of the reward inference processes through fast engineering methods, and
model, which is mainly measured by calculating the preference then use topology information and alarm sequence information
difference between the ‘chosen’ and ‘rejected’ responses in the in the real network to design appropriate instructions and input
test set, that is r(x, ychosen ) − r(x, yrejected ). Specifically, it information for each task, expanding the CoT data into a
includes two aspects: a) accuracy, the proportion of samples training dataset in the form of {instruction, input, output} to
with positive statistical reward differences. A higher proportion fine tune the small model (LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct).
indicates better accuracy in distinguishing good from poor Rule-based reward function: due to the relatively fixed
samples. b) Distinguishing strength, calculating the mean of output format designed for each task in this study, it is often
reward differences for all samples. The larger the mean, the only necessary to verify whether the result in the last inference
stronger the sensitivity and discriminative power of the model step of generating the response is consistent with the expected
to quality differences [41]. 2) The dynamic guidance ability result when verifying whether the output response is consistent
of the reward model, which mainly evaluates the actual effec- with the expected result.
tiveness of the reward model in guiding policy optimization Based on this feature, this study designed a rule-based
in PPO training, as shown in Fig. 3 (c). reward function to systematically evaluate the correctness
 of generated responses. According to an analysis of outputs
B. Alarm Root Cause Localization Task Based on ReFT produced by the alarm SFT baseline model, the generated
 Task requirements: in optical network O&M, alarms serve responses can be categorized into three types: (1) correct
as essential mechanisms for detecting and indicating network alarm analysis obtained through reasonable logical reasoning,
faults or abnormalities. As network scale and complexity (2) incorrect alarm analysis caused by flawed reasoning, and
grow, the volume of alarms generated during failures increases (3) responses in which the reasoning process or final analysis
significantly, with each device or link potentially triggering is incomplete. Correspondingly, reward values of 1.0, 0.1,
alarms to signal potential issues and prompt operator interven- and 0.0 are assigned to these three cases, respectively, as
tion. The challenge lies not only in handling large volumes of shown in Fig. 4(b). This hierarchical reward mechanism refines
alarms but also in accurately identifying the true root-cause the evaluation criteria for generation quality, strengthens the
alarms. Timely and precise RCL is critical for maintaining model’s ability to generate correct responses, and enhances
network stability and ensuring continuous, reliable service robustness [42]. In addition, the asymmetric non-negative
delivery. Based on the previous work [27], we collected the reward design was adopted based on empirical observations of
real optical transport network (OTN) alarm data and leveraged training stability. Compared with symmetric reward structures
the relationship between network topology and alarm events to with negative penalties, which tend to produce predomifine-tune the LLM to achieve alarm root cause localization. We nantly negative advantages during early PPO training due
divide the implementation into four steps based on the princi- to the limited initial accuracy of the SFT model, the prople of root cause localization. The first step is to generate the posed reward scheme provides denser learning signals and
alarm event network topology adjacency matrix, which needs leads to more stable policy updates and improved training
to extract the network elements appearing in the real-time efficiency.
3662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 4. The implementation process of the root alarm localization task based on ReFT involves two stages. (a) Supervised Fine-Tuning: The base language
model is fine-tuned on labeled alarm data to capture domain-specific patterns. (b) Reward Modeling and Policy Optimization: Custom reward functions are
designed based on response feedback to evaluate the model’s outputs, and the model policy is then optimized using the PPO algorithm guided by these reward
functions to improve localization performance.

 V. I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND structural distribution and semantic characteristics of abnormal
 E VALUATION M ETRICS events for model fine-tuning.
 In addition, due to the stronger openness, subjectivity,
A. Log Analysis Task
 and diverse output space of log analysis tasks, RLHF can
 1) Dataset: The dataset of network logs is collected from effectively optimize the response quality of such open tasks.
a practical telecommunication network, which is composed of However, log parsing and anomaly detection are high-certainty
both switch logs and OTN logs provided by the operator from tasks, and the benefits brought by RLHF are limited. There-
2023.10.31 to 2023.11.2. The number and content of switch fore, in this paper, we mainly focus on the study of log analysis
logs are rich and easy to obtain. Its addition provides more tasks.
abundant and effective training data, and its similar format and In the reward modeling stage, the reward dataset comprises
syntax features help in analyzing optical network logs. Then, 1,800 comparison pairs. During training, 1,500 pairs were used
the collected logs are annotated by domain experts, who refer as the training set, while the remaining 300 pairs were reserved
to technical manuals and other references to provide labels for for testing. Additionally, we collected 3,505 unlabeled data
log parsing, anomaly detection and classification, and anomaly samples from the optical network to construct the PPO dataset,
analysis. The dataset used for log parsing, anomaly detection, which does not require expert annotation and facilitates optiand classification consists of 4,975 records. mization iterations.
 Since anomaly analysis aims at event-level reasoning rather From a token-level perspective, the datasets used in the SFT,
than long-term temporal trend modeling, one sample per reward modeling, and PPO stages exhibit moderate and wellabnormal log template was retained to construct the fine-tuning controlled sequence lengths. In the SFT stage, each sample
dataset for anomaly analysis. This approach ensures coverage consists of a fixed instruction (37 tokens), a templated log
of diverse anomaly types and semantic patterns while avoiding input (7–72 tokens), and a fault analysis output (19–343
redundant normal-operation logs. The resulting dataset con- tokens), totaling approximately 66k training tokens and 6.3k
sists of 609 records, which is divided into a 90% training test tokens. The reward modeling stage includes 1,800 preferset and a 10% testing set in the SFT stage. The short-term, ence pairs with broader response-length distributions, resulting
high-density nature of the dataset is conducive to capturing the in approximately 539k training tokens and 107k test tokens.
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3663

For PPO training, 3,505 unannotated log samples with lengths B. Root Cause Localization Task
ranging from 61 to 205 tokens are used, contributing about 1) Dataset: We collected 296,134 alarm records from a
316k training tokens. All statistics are computed using the practical OTN over a period of 40 consecutive days and
LLaMA-2-7B-chat tokenizer. extracted 4,430 fault-related records for verification. These
 verification records include 378 single-root cause scenarios,
 2) Hyperparameter Setting: In this study, the LLaMA2-
 177 dual-root cause scenarios, and 76 triple-root cause sce-
7b-chat is used as our base model for fine-tuning and the
 narios. During the training phase, 400 fault scenarios were
optimal training parameters for the RLHF and SFT models
 randomly selected from a total of 631, while 50 scenarios were
were determined through an iterative process of validation
 used to evaluate each task during the testing phase. Then we
and performance benchmarking. The Low-Rank Adaptation
 constructed 6,000 CoT training samples for each of the four
(LoRA) [43] technique was used for fine-tuning throughout
 tasks involved in alarm localization, which were used in the
the entire training process.
 overall model training process.
 For the SFT baseline, the LoRA attention dimension was
 From a token-level perspective, the datasets used in the
set to 8, with a scaling alpha parameter of 32 and a dropout
 SFT and PPO stages exhibit moderate and well-controlled
probability of 0.1 applied to the LoRA layers. The tasksequence lengths across different tasks. In the SFT stage,
specific hyperparameters included a batch size of 4, gradient
 Task 1–4 samples consist of instructions (ranging from
accumulation steps of 4, a learning rate of 1e-4, and a training
 45 to 747 tokens), inputs (12–957 tokens), and outputs
duration of 3 epochs.
 (116–2,062 tokens), resulting in total training tokens ranging
 During the reward modeling phase, the batch size was
 from approximately 68k to 290k and test tokens from 480
configured to 4, with gradient accumulation steps set to 2 and
 to 60k. For PPO training, prompts composed of instruca learning rate of 1e-5. The model was trained for 2 epochs,
 tions and inputs have lengths ranging from 185 to 784
resulting in a reward model optimally suited for the task. After
 tokens, contributing between 1.4M and 2.8M training tokens.
verification, this model achieved an accuracy of 95.33% on the
 All statistics are computed using the LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct
test set.
 tokenizer.
 In the PPO phase, we adapted the implementation of rele-
 2) Hyperparameter Setting: In this study, the LLaMA3-
vant algorithms from the Transformer Reinforcement Learning
 8b-Instruct is used as our base model for fine-tuning. During
(TRL) framework [39]. The batch size was set to 16, with a
 the training process, we developed a ReFT-based enhanced
learning rate of 1.5e-5 and gradient accumulation steps of 8.
 model for four alarm tasks: topology relation extraction (Task
The maximum generation length was fixed at 512 tokens. Each
 1), alarm propagation relation extraction (Task 2), alarm event
batch was trained over four PPO epochs, using one minibatch
 matrix generation (Task 3), and RCL of fault events (Task 4).
per epoch. The KL divergence coefficient β was set to 0.1. The
 For the SFT pipeline, the LoRA attention dimension was
model was trained for a total of 108 steps, and the checkpoint
 set to 8, with a scaling alpha parameter of 32 and a dropout
achieving the best validation performance was selected for
 probability of 0.1 applied to the LoRA layers. The tasksubsequent analysis. All other hyperparameters were kept at
 specific hyperparameters included a batch size of 4, gradient
their default values.
 accumulation steps of 4, a learning rate of 1e-4, and a training
 The device used in this study is an NVIDIA H20 96GB
 duration of 2 epochs.
GPU. In the specific setup, both the SFT and reward modeling
 In the policy optimization stage, all tasks were configured
stages are trained using a single GPU, while in the PPO trainwith a batch size of 16 and a maximum generation length of
ing stage, dual GPU parallel computing is used to accelerate
 1024 tokens. Each batch underwent four PPO epochs, using
the training process.
 one minibatch per epoch. The remaining hyperparameters
 3) Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the model’s perfor- were set as follows: Task 1 used 8 gradient accumulation
mance, we introduced three key metrics: accuracy, interac- steps, a learning rate of 2e-6, and a β value of 0.1. Task
tivity, and richness. For each metric, experts assigned a score 2 employed 4 gradient accumulation steps, a learning rate
ranging from 1 to 10 based on its definition and relevance to of 2e-6, and a β value of 0.03. Task 3 adopted 8 gradient
the task requirements. accumulation steps, a higher learning rate of 5e-6, and a β
 Accuracy: the generated output should accurately reflect value of 0.15. Task 4 followed the same settings as Task 1,
the log data, ensuring that analysis and recommendations are with 8 gradient accumulation steps, a learning rate of 2e-6,
correct, feasible, and logically sound. It must avoid irrelevant and a β value of 0.1. Among them, we evaluated β values
or contradictory information and align with actual operational of 0.005, 0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2, and observed that the
needs. range 0.03–0.2 consistently yields stable performance, among
 Interactivity: the content should embody interactive design which the final values were selected in combination with other
principles, dynamically adjusting to user inputs and contextual PPO hyperparameters to ensure balanced policy stability and
changes to provide personalized and practical responses. reward dynamics.
 Richness: while ensuring that all information is accu- The entire model fine-tuning process for the four alarm
rate and reliable, the log analysis should be thoroughly localization tasks was performed using three NVIDIA H20
detailed, providing as many relevant insights and feasible solu- 96GB GPUs.
tions as possible to support decision-making and operational 3) Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the performance of the
practicality. ReFT algorithm on this task, we adopted accuracy as the
3664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 5. The results of PPO training in the RLHF-based log analysis task, including (a) the mean reward curve, (b) the KL divergence curve, (c) the value
loss curve, (d) the policy loss curve, (e) the total loss curve.

primary evaluation metric. For this indicator, the score will in the task. The fluctuation of the curve reflects that the
be taken between 0-1. model gradually achieves a balance between exploration and
 Accuracy: measured by manually evaluating the consistency exploitation under the guidance of the reward model. In
between each inference step in the model-generated response addition, the fluctuation of the KL divergence curve, as shown
for each task and the corresponding reference answer. In this in Fig. 5 (b), with a peak of about 20, indicates significant
evaluation, any errors in key characters or numerical values differences between the new policy and the previous policy.
are regarded as incorrect results. Given that our task requires a substantial deviation from the
 initial policy while avoiding pattern collapse, this change in
 VI. D EMONSTRATIONS AND R ESULTS the training curve is expected and considered acceptable.
 In addition, to further illustrate the stability of PPO train-
 To validate the effectiveness of the proposed methodoloing, we report the evolution of key optimization metrics in
gies, this section conducts a comprehensive analysis of the
 Fig. 5(c)–(e), which respectively present the value loss, policy
performance improvements in log analysis tasks implemented
 loss, and total loss during PPO updates. Despite the relathrough the RLHF method. In parallel, we evaluate the
 tively small number of update steps, all three losses remain
improvement in the accuracy of CoT alarm tasks achieved
 within bounded and stable ranges throughout training, without
by adopting ReFT technology. Additionally, we explore the
 exhibiting monotonic increase, divergence, or collapse. Specifinfluence of different reward models and PPO initial policies
 ically, the value loss gradually decreases and oscillates within a
on the overall performance of RLHF.
 narrow interval, indicating stable fitting of the value function to
 the advantage estimates. Meanwhile, the policy loss fluctuates
A. The Results of the Log Analysis Task Based on RLHF symmetrically around zero due to the clipped PPO objective,
 In this section, we demonstrate the training of log analysis reflecting normal stochastic policy updates without gradient
tasks in the RLHF stage and the performance comparison with instability. The total loss remains well balanced, demonstratthe training in the SFT stage. ing effective coordination among policy optimization, value
 Firstly, the mean reward curve demonstrated a continuous learning, and entropy regularization.
upward trend throughout the entire training process, as shown As an enhanced version of the SFT model, the preference
in Fig. 5 (a). This indicates that the PPO algorithm effectively model has achieved an accuracy improvement of 1.64 points
optimizes the policy, resulting in higher rewards for LLM and a richness increase of 1.08 points compared to the SFT
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3665

Fig. 6. Performance comparison between the SFT model and the preference Fig. 8. Training loss curve of the SFT model during the RLHF-based log
model in the RLHF-based log analysis task. analysis task.

 indicate that although the richness increased by 1.02, it did
 not significantly affect the overall improvement in accuracy.
 This discovery indicates that the RLHF mechanism effectively
 guides the model to generate more comprehensive outputs
 while maintaining a high level of correctness.
 In addition, to better understand these improvements, it
 is essential to understand the differences between the two
 training stages. In the log analysis task, the training data in
 the SFT stage mainly focuses on identifying the root cause
 of abnormal logs and providing direct solutions. Due to the
 imitative nature of SFT training, the model outputs tend to
 closely resemble the original labeled examples. However, by
 combining preferences for accuracy, richness, and interactivity,
 the performance of LLM can be further enhanced. In the
 process of RL, the model effectively integrates human-labeled
 data, its intrinsic abilities, and human preferences.
 In summary, these results indicate that RLHF training
Fig. 7. Response comparison between the SFT model and the RLHF model improved the accuracy score of LLM in log analysis tasks
in the RLHF-based log analysis task. from 7.45 to 9.09, richness from 6.18 points to 7.2 points, and
 interactivity from 0 points to 10 points. This demonstrates that
 RLHF enhanced the alignment between the model’s output and
model. In addition, interactivity showed the most substantial
 human intent while mitigating the hallucination problem.
improvement, with an increase of 10 points, underscoring
the key role of RLHF training in enhancing user interaction.
This enhancement ensures that the model’s output aligns B. The Influence of Different Initial Policies Based on RLHF
more closely with human communication patterns, rather than In RLHF, the initial policy selection of the PPO algorithm
merely providing static answers, as shown in Fig. 6. markedly influences the final model performance. To evaluate
 It is worth noting that an inherent trade-off exists between its impact, we selected SFT models trained for 3, 6, and 10
richness and accuracy. The increase in richness means that epochs, respectively, as the initial policy for PPO under the
the generated log analysis outputs provide more detailed same training parameters. The corresponding SFT loss curves
background information, potential causes of anomalies, and are presented in Fig. 8 to highlight the differences among these
additional solutions, as shown in Fig. 7. This increase in epochs.
richness occasionally affects accuracy, as the model might Then, under the same reward model and PPO training
introduce speculative or irrelevant information, thereby affect- parameters, the three initial policies exhibited distinct behaving the overall reliability of the analysis. iors. The policy trained for 3 epochs exhibited faster reward
 To address this trade-off, RLHF uses reward modeling to growth and achieved a higher final return, whereas training
balance richness and accuracy. Specifically, during the PPO for 10 epochs resulted in slower reward improvement and a
training phase, the model learns human-annotation preferences lower final return, as shown in Fig. 9(a), suggesting potential
to expand the amount of information generated while main- overfitting with increased training epochs. This pattern aligns
taining the accuracy of key content. The evaluation results with the KL-divergence trend in Fig. 9 (b). The policy with
3666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 9. Comparison of the following metrics during PPO training for log analysis tasks using different initial policies, i.e., SFT models trained for 3, 6, and
10 epochs: (a) mean reward, (b) KL divergence, (c) return, and (d) policy entropy.

an epoch of 3 shows a large and rapid policy adjustment (high
KL value), while the policy with an epoch of 10 shows smaller
fluctuations, reflecting greater stability.
 To verify the above conclusion, we further analyzed the
variation curve of policy entropy, as shown in Fig. 9 (d). In
theory, entropy values more intuitively reflect the exploratory
nature of the policy. Higher entropy values indicate greater
output diversity, while a lower entropy value indicates a more
fixed output pattern. The results show that the initial policy
entropy decreases as the number of SFT epochs increases: it
is highest at epoch 3, lower at epoch 6, and lowest at epoch 10.
This suggests that extended SFT training leads to overfitting
on expert data and reduced exploratory behavior. The return
curves in Fig. 9 (c) support this observation: the initial policy
at epoch 3 achieves higher returns, while that at epoch 10
struggles to improve. Fig. 10. Performance evaluation results of preference models based on
 In addition, we evaluated the performance of different different initial policies (SFT models trained for 3, 6, and 10 epochs) and
 training stages (SFT and PPO stages).
initial policies and preference models trained through PPO
on the test set using specified evaluation metrics, as shown in
Fig. 10. while richness, to some extent, evaluates the completeness of
 We first analyze the performance of SFT models with the log background, reasons, and recommendations. As SFT
different epochs on three indicators. The results shows that training deepens, the model tends to improve accuracy at the
accuracy improves with the increase of SFT epochs, while cost of reducing richness. Because the SFT stage does not
richness shows a decreasing trend. This is because accuracy incorporate interactivity, the interactivity score for all SFT
measures the consistency between generated content and logs, models is 0.
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3667

Fig. 11. Training process comparison between initializing the reward model with the base model and initializing the reward model with the SFT model in
the RLHF-based log analysis task, including (a) accuracy curve. (b) training loss curve. (c) training global steps curve.

 Secondly, by comparing the metrics of content generated
by the SFT model and the preference model, we can conclude
that regardless of the initial policy epoch of 3, 6, or 10, the
PPO-trained preference model outperforms the SFT model
in terms of generation quality, validating the effectiveness
of the method. However, there are significant differences
in the improvement of the different epoch models: when
epoch is 3, accuracy increase by 16.4%, richness increases by
10.2%, and interactivity increases by 100%; When epoch is 6,
accuracy increased by 9.1%, richness increased by 6.8%, and
interactivity increased by 16.4%; When epoch is 10, accuracy
increased by 10.9%, richness only increased by 2.5%, and
interactivity did not improve. These results further confirm that
models trained with fewer epochs possess greater plasticity
in PPO training, especially when significant adjustments are
needed. In this test, models trained for 3 epochs were able to
achieve more significant performance improvements.
 To summarize, for domain adaptation, initializing PPO from Fig. 12. Comparison of reward margins on the test set for reward models
a lower-epoch SFT checkpoint yields higher RLHF returns initialized from the SFT model and the Base model in the RLHF-based log
 analysis task.
than using a higher-epoch SFT model, once basic domain
knowledge has been learned. This is because excessive SFT
training tends to overfit the model to static annotations, reduc- 2) Epoch Selection for SFT-Based Reward Models, which
ing policy entropy and limiting exploration during subsequent examines how different training stages of the SFT model affect
PPO optimization, which leads to premature convergence. downstream reward modeling performance.
 1) Impact of Reward Model Initialization on Performance:
C. The Influence of Different Reward Models Based on To ensure a fair comparison, we trained both the base and
RLHF SFT models under identical settings on the same preference
 The prediction accuracy of the reward model plays a dataset and evaluated them at epoch 2. The training loss and
pivotal role in determining the quality of the reward signal validation accuracy curves across 2 epochs are presented in
during the PPO iteration process, thereby influencing both the Fig. 11. Results indicate that, benefiting from prior fine-tuning
direction and effectiveness of policy updates. Consequently, on log analysis tasks, the reward model initialized with the
the performance of the reward model is a key factor in SFT model achieves lower loss and higher accuracy in the
successful preference alignment and in enhancing the overall early training phase of training. As training progresses, it
effectiveness of the PPO algorithm [44]. consistently outperforms the reward model initialized from the
 Moreover, downstream PPO training exhibits smooth base model.
KL divergence growth and stable entropy instead of pol- We first evaluated the accuracy of two reward models on
icy collapse, providing indirect evidence that the learned the test set, both of which were 95.3%, and presented their
reward signal is not overly specific to the training margin distributions on the test set, as shown in Fig. 12.
preferences. The results show that the reward model initialized with the
 Based on these considerations, we further investigate the SFT model exhibits a margin distribution concentrated in
selection strategy of the reward model from two perspectives: higher value ranges compared to that initialized with the base
1) Impact of Reward Model Initialization on Performance, model. This indicates that SFT-based initialization improves
which compares initializing the reward model from a base the model’s ability to distinguish between preferred and nonmodel (i.e., LLaMA-2-chat-7B) versus an SFT model; and preferred responses.
3668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 13. Comparison of the following metrics for the reward model initialized with the base model versus the SFT model during PPO training in the
RLHF-based log analysis task: (a) mean reward, (b) KL divergence, (c) return, and (d) policy entropy.

 Under the same PPO initial policy and parameters, the the reward signal provided by the reward model initialized by
first batch of data is usually generated by the initial policy, the base model is more diverse, failing to converge the policy
so the initial generation is consistent. However, due to the too quickly and instead encouraging diversity in the policy.
distinct scoring criteria of the two reward models, as shown in The reward model initialized with SFT model tends to
Fig. 13 (a). The reward model initialized with the SFT facilitate rapid policy convergence. The continuous decrease
model applies stricter evaluation, leading to lower initial in policy entropy means that the model gradually reduces
rewards. Combined with the margin distribution findings, this its exploration of different generative policies and begins to
further confirms the base-initialized reward model’s weaker focus on certain specific patterns or fixed expressions. This
discrimination. The KL divergence curve is steadier with is related to the language pattern preference introduced by
the base-initialized model, while the SFT-initialized model the reward model initialized with SFT during the SFT stage,
triggers sharper adjustments, indicating more active policy which causes the PPO algorithm to converge more quickly
updates. toward deterministic decisions under the guidance of SFT
 In addition, in the evaluation of the policy entropy curve, reward signals, narrowing the strategy space and decreasing
as shown in Fig. 13 (d), it can be observed that under the exploratory value.
guidance of the reward model initialized with the base model, However, based on the analysis of the final generated
the overall policy entropy shows a certain upward trend, while content, although the reward model initialized with the base
under the guidance of the reward model initialized with the model maintained a high policy entropy and obtained higher
SFT model, the policy entropy continues to decrease. This mean rewards (as shown in Fig. 13 (a)) and returns (as shown
phenomenon indicates that: in Fig. 13 (d)), a pattern preference ending in ellipsis appeared,
 The reward model initialized with the base model demon- as shown in Fig. 14, indicating that under the guidance of the
strates a stronger capacity for exploration guidance. In the reward model initialized with the base model, a higher risk
PPO training process, the observed increase in policy entropy of reward hacking [45], exchanging low-quality exploration
indicates that the policy distribution gradually becomes more and generation for higher rewards. Under the guidance of
uniform, and the model retains a high degree of uncertainty for the reward model modeled by SFT, policies enable more
various behaviors during the generation process, continuously accurate and targeted policy adjustments to better suit human
exploring the policy space. This phenomenon indicates that preferences, as shown in Fig. 15.
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3669

 model used as the initial reward model. The training loss curve
 of the specific reward model is shown in Fig. 11 (b). This study
 selects reward models with training epochs of 2, 3, and 4 for
 comparison, aiming to analyze the impact of training depth on
 final performance. First, the reward margin metric on the test
 set was used to compare the reward models from different
 epochs in order to evaluate their discriminative ability. The
 results are shown in Fig. 16.
 We observe that as the training deepens, the reward margin
Fig. 14. The final content generated by the preference model guided by the
 distribution on the test set gradually shifts toward higher
reward model initialized with the base model in the RLHF-based log analysis values, indicating an increasing preference for high-quality
task. samples and a trend toward stable, consistent scoring, as shown
 in Fig. 17. Additionally, the reward models trained for 2, 3,
 and 4 epochs achieve test set accuracies of 95.3%, 97.7%, and
 97%, respectively.
 Then, using the same PPO initial policy and PPO training
 parameters, we obtained the PPO training curves, as shown
 in Fig. 17. In the mean reward curve, the reward models at
 epoch 2 and epoch 3 exhibit high consistency in guiding PPO
 policy updates. Their initial and final convergence values are
 relatively close. Combined with the evaluation of the final
 generated metrics (seen in Fig. 18), this indicates that their
 preferences are largely consistent.
 In addition, the reward model at epoch 4 starts from a
 lower initial value, indicating a stronger ability to differentiate
 low-quality text, as shown in Fig. 17 (a). In early training
 (before 80 steps), the reward curves of PPO policies guided
 by all reward models were basically consistent. However, at
Fig. 15. Comparison of the performance indicators of the final preference
models guided by reward models initialized from the SFT model and the Base
 approximately 80 steps, the reward from the epoch-4 model
model in the RLHF-based log analysis task. increased sharply, accompanied by a sharp increase in KL
 divergence and a sharp decrease in policy entropy. The policy
 gradually converged to a fixed-template generation mode, as
 shown in Fig. 19, indicating that the reward model at epoch
 4 was influenced by more extreme optimization objectives.
 Moreover, during the evolution of policy entropy, although
 there are fluctuations in the three curves, they all exhibit an
 overall downward trend, which is consistent with the training
 stability goal of PPO. It is worth noting that in the policy
 entropy curve, the final entropy value under the epoch 2
 configuration always falls between those of epoch 3 and epoch
 4, indicating a non-monotonic pattern. Based on the evaluation
 of the final generated indicators, as shown in Fig. 18, we
 can conclude that under the guidance of the reward model
 at epoch 3, the improvement in richness is better than that
 of the reward model at epoch 2. The optimization objectives
 during PPO training are more diverse, tending to generate
 longer and more varied content. As a result, the final entropy
 is slightly higher than that under epoch 2. However, in the
Fig. 16. Comparison of the reward margins on the test set for reward models
trained for different epochs (i.e., 2, 3, and 4 epochs) in the RLHF-based log
 epoch 4 configuration, all responses in the test set ended with
analysis task. “The first” and failed to generate complete outputs, resulting
 in a lower final entropy value. Due to this result, the specific
 The reward model initialized with the SFT model is more evaluation of the preference model guided by the reward model
able to clarify the direction of human preference changes is not shown in Fig. 18.
compared to the reward model initialized with the Base model, Overall, as the training level of the reward model deepens,
and can accurately guide during the PPO training process. the reward signal may become more comprehensive, but it
 2) Epoch Selection for SFT-Based Reward Models: This may also bring more extreme update signals. Therefore, the
section investigates the impact of reward models at different selection of specific rounds still needs to be balanced based
stages of training on the final preference model, with the SFT on the evaluation indicators of different tasks.
3670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 17. Comparison of PPO training performance under reward models from different training epochs (i.e., 2, 3, and 4 epochs) in the RLHF-based log
analysis task, showing: (a) mean reward, (b) KL divergence, (c) return, and (d) policy entropy curves.

 Fig. 19. The final performance of the preference model guided by the reward
 model at epoch 4 in the RLHF-based log analysis task.

 these analyses, the same preference dataset and reward model
Fig. 18. Comparison of the performance of the final preference models
guided by reward models at different epochs (i.e., 2, 3, and 4 epochs) in the used in the previous analysis were retained to ensure a fair
RLHF-based log analysis task. comparison.
 Specifically, PPO-based reinforcement learning optimiza-
D. Evaluation of SFT and RLHF on LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct tion was performed on the LLaMA-3 model using the
 constructed preference model as the reward signal. The train-
 In the original analysis, LLaMA-2-7B-chat-hf was adopted ing dynamics are illustrated in Fig. 20, which shows the
as the base model to construct the SFT and RL framework. evolution of the KL divergence and the average reward score
To further evaluate the generality of the proposed method during training. As shown in the figure, the mean reward
on stronger foundation models, additional analyses were con- score increases steadily from negative values in the early
ducted using LLaMA-3-8B-Instruct as the base model. In stage to stable positive values in later iterations, indicating
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3671

Fig. 20. RLHF training dynamics with LLaMA-3: (a) mean reward curve; (b) KL divergence curve.

 In addition, a representative generation example is presented in Fig. 22 to illustrate the qualitative improvements
 introduced by the preference optimization. Compared with
 the SFT model, the RLHF-optimized model provides more
 precise explanations for logging events and clearer guidance
 for troubleshooting. While the SFT output only offers a general
 description of RSPAN (Remote Switched Port Analyzer) or
 mirror configuration issues and suggests checking the configuration, the RLHF output specifies potential causes, such as
 incorrect mirror settings or software bugs. It also provides
 actionable steps, including verifying and reconfiguring the
 mirror session, upgrading firmware if necessary. Furthermore,
 the RLHF output encourages follow-up interaction, which
 aligns better with human preferences.
 In summary, compared with LLaMA-2, LLaMA-3 achieves
Fig. 21. Performance comparison between the LLaMA-SFT model and the
preference model.
 higher scores across all evaluation metrics, confirming that a
 stronger base model generally improves performance. However, additional studies show that, despite its strong general
that the policy gradually learns to generate responses that language capabilities, LLaMA-3 still faces domain-specific
better align with the preference model. Meanwhile, the KL challenges, such as accurately handling specialized knowledge
divergence remains within a controllable range throughout and reasoning within the optical network domain. Applying
the training process without exhibiting abrupt divergence or RLHF in this context still effectively enhances the model’s
collapse. Although moderate fluctuations occur due to the alignment with the preference dataset and improves taskstochastic nature of policy optimization, the overall trend specific reasoning performance.
remains stable, demonstrating that the PPO training process
maintains a balanced trade-off between reward maximization
and policy constraint. E. The Results of the Alarm Task Based on ReFT
 After RL optimization, the model was evaluated using three In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
qualitative metrics, namely Accuracy, Richness, and Interactiv- method across four distinct alarm tasks by independently
ity, which assess the correctness of diagnostic conclusions, the training a model for each of the four tasks and recording the
completeness of reasoning content, and the ability to provide variations in mean reward and KL divergence during training,
interactive explanations. The evaluation results are shown in as shown in Fig. 23.
Fig. 21. The LLaMA-3-based SFT model achieves scores of Overall, the results demonstrate consistent and stable train-
8.32, 7.05, and 4.63 on Accuracy, Richness, and Interactivity, ing behavior across all tasks. In Task 1, the mean reward
respectively. After applying preference-based reinforcement showed noticeable fluctuations in the early phase but gradually
learning, the optimized model improves to 9.48, 8.12, and increased and stabilized around 0.8, while the KL divergence
10.00 on the corresponding metrics. The corresponding results first rose and then declined, indicating active exploration
using LLaMA-2 as the base model, shown in Fig. 6, are followed by convergence to a stable policy. In Task 2, the
slightly lower across all three metrics. These results suggest mean reward remained at a relatively high and stable level
that a stronger base model can improve diagnostic accuracy, throughout training, suggesting that the model was able to
while RL further enhances reasoning richness and interactivity. acquire an effective policy early on. The KL divergence in
3672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 conclusions, and fail to fully cover the entire reasoning process
 and final conclusions; the reasoning errors in the reasoning
 steps and processes, such as incorrect logical deduction, matrix
 generation, and incorrect RCL results, as shown in Fig. 25.
 In contrast, after entering the ReFT stage, the responses of
 model not only achieved more complete and coherent content
 generation, but also effectively corrected logical errors within
 the reasoning process, even when supervision was applied
 solely to the final results. This ultimately led to a significant
 improvement in the overall accuracy and reliability of the
 model’s responses. This phenomenon can be attributed to the
 implicit alignment effect of RLHF, where models are guided
 to generate reasoning chains that are more likely to lead to
 correct final outcomes.
 The tasks have been successfully improved through the
 implementation of ReFT technology, which further indicates
Fig. 22. Comparison of generated responses of the SFT model and the that in RL-based fine-tuning, although only the correctpreference-optimized model.
 ness of the final analysis results is directly supervised,
 the reward function implicitly encourages the generation of
this task increased moderately during the initial phase, reached logically reasonable and human-preferred intermediate reaa peak around mid-training, and subsequently decreased to a soning steps. Through iterative reward-guided optimization,
stable level, reflecting effective control over policy shifts. the model gradually learns to generate inference processes
 Similar trends were observed for tasks 3 and 4. In Task that conform to expected patterns, as incorrect intermediate
3, the mean reward steadily increased with slight fluctuations steps often result in lower rewards due to incorrect final
before stabilizing above 0.9, while the KL divergence fluctu- outcomes.
ated greatly throughout the training process and eventually In summary, the demonstration results indicate that ReFT
stabilized at a lower value. In Task 4, the mean reward training substantially enhanced the performance of the LLM in
also showed a gradual upward trend, with fluctuations in alarm tasks, with accuracy improvements from 96% to 98%
early training gradually smoothing out. The KL divergence for Task 1, 86% to 99% for Task 2, 94% to 99% for Task
followed a pattern of initial increase, reaching a mid-training 3, and 90% to 96% for Task 4. These findings validate the
peak before decreasing to a lower, stable level. These results effectiveness of the ReFT-enhanced LLM for alarm analysis
collectively suggest that the proposed method can maintain and demonstrate its promising potential for the development of
a balance between reward maximization and policy stability specialized LLMs in future automatic optical network systems.
across varied task settings, validating its generalization capa- F. ReFT Training Based on Multi-Task Mixture
bility and robustness.
 Although the above studies design task-specific reward
 In addition, we introduce accuracy indicators to evaluate the
 functions for individual tasks, this does not imply that the
performance of domain-adapted LLM in alarm analysis tasks.
 proposed approach is limited to single-task fine-tuning. In
Considering the strict requirements for fault tolerance in alarm
 fact, the same framework can be naturally extended to multitasks, only when the model output is completely consistent
 task scenarios. To demonstrate this capability, we conduct an
with the ground truth, it is considered correct during manual
 additional study in which the four subtasks involved in the
evaluation. In this evaluation, any errors in key characters or
 root alarm localization problem are jointly incorporated into a
numerical values are regarded as incorrect results.
 unified reinforcement fine-tuning process.
 The accuracy for all four tasks improves steadily across
 Specifically, during the SFT stage, data from the four related
the two training stages, as shown in Fig. 24. The SFT model
 tasks are combined to form a joint training set for supervised
achieved an accuracy rate of 86% to 96% on four tasks, but
 fine-tuning. During reward construction, task-specific reward
there is still an accuracy bottleneck. The ReFT can further
 functions are integrated into a unified reward framework,
improve performance for all four tasks (accuracies >96%),
 with the applied reward determined by the task context of
especially in task 2, extracting fault event alarm propagation
 each sample. In the reinforcement fine-tuning stage, rather
relationships, and task 3, generating fault event adjacency
 than fully merging PPO datasets across tasks, we sample
matrices, with an accuracy rate of 99%, providing strong
 6,000 mixed instances according to a fixed ratio of Task 1:
support for the landing application of LLMs in alarm analysis
 Task 2: Task 3: Task 4 = 1:1:1:3. The total number of
scenarios.
 In terms of improvements in content generation, since the training instances is fixed to 6,000 to balance training stability
tasks share common issues and enhancements, we take Task 4 and computational efficiency, while ensuring sufficient task
as a representative case for detailed analysis. In the SFT stage, diversity for effective reinforcement learning.
the response of the model to alarm analysis tasks mainly man- The training dynamics of the mixed multi-task ReFT proifests as two problems: incomplete content generation, where cess are illustrated, as shown in Fig. 26. The mean reward
some responses only include partial reasoning steps or analysis exhibits a clear upward trend and gradually stabilizes after
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3673

Fig. 23. Mean reward curve and KL divergence curve during the PPO optimization process for (a) Task-1, (b) Task-2, (c) Task-3, and (d) Task-4 in the
ReFT-based alarm task.

 This behavior implies that the PPO updates effectively balance
 exploration and policy regularization, preventing excessive
 deviation from the pretrained distribution while still enabling
 meaningful policy improvement. The smooth decay of KL
 divergence also indicates the absence of policy collapse, even
 when multiple task-specific rewards are jointly optimized.
 In addition, it can be observed that the used ReFT
 framework consistently improves performance across all four
 subtasks compared with the SFT-only baseline as shown in
 Fig. 27. Specifically, ReFT yields absolute accuracy gains of
 2%, 6%, 13%, and 6% on Task 1–Task 4, respectively. Notably,
 the improvement is more pronounced on Task 3 and Task
 2, which involve higher reasoning complexity and stronger
 dependency on contextual alarm semantics. This indicates that
 the unified reward-driven optimization can effectively enhance
Fig. 24. Comparison of accuracy between the SFT model and the the model’s decision boundaries beyond what is achievable
ReFT-enhanced model. through supervised learning alone.
approximately 60 steps, indicating that the policy consistently Overall, these results demonstrate that the proposed framealigns better with the integrated reward objectives across work can successfully generalize from single-task to multidifferent tasks, as shown in Fig. 26 (a). Despite the inherent task reinforcement fine-tuning. By integrating task-aware
heterogeneity among subtasks, no oscillatory or divergent reward functions and carefully controlling the mixed-task
behavior is observed, suggesting that the mixed-task training sampling ratio, the model not only achieves consistent accustrategy remai ns stable under the proposed sampling scheme. racy improvements across all subtasks but also maintains
 Meanwhile, the KL divergence between the updated policy stable and interpretable training dynamics. This confirms the
and the reference model decreases steadily and remains within practicality of the proposed approach for complex real-world
a controlled range throughout training as shown in Fig. 26 (b). alarm analysis scenarios involving multiple interrelated tasks.
3674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 25. Performance improvements of the ReFT enhanced model compared with the SFT model, illustrated using Task 4 as an example.

Fig. 26. Training process of Mixed Multi-Task ReFT: (a) the mean reward curve, (b) the KL divergence curve.

G. Retrieval-Augmented Baselines and Task-Specific 1) Log Analysis Task: Prompt-engineered SFT already pro-
Performance Analysis vides a strong baseline for the log analysis task, indicating that
 careful prompt design can effectively guide the model toward
 To quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of RL-based
 correct interpretation of log semantics, as shown in Fig. 28.
fine-tuning, we compare the proposed RLHF–ReFT frame-
 Incorporating retrieval further improves factual accuracy, as
work with strong non-RL baselines on two representative
 SFT+RAG benefits from direct exposure to relevant historical
tasks: log analysis and alarm localization. All models are
 cases.
evaluated using the same backbone LLM, identical training
 However, both SFT and SFT+RAG exhibit limited improveand test splits, and consistent inference settings to ensure a fair
 ments in response richness and interactivity. This suggests
comparison. The baselines include supervised fine-tuning with
 that while supervised objectives and retrieval mechanisms
carefully designed task-specific prompts (SFT), supervised
 can enhance surface-level correctness, they are less effective
fine-tuning augmented with retrieval-augmented generation
 in consistently enforcing structured reasoning processes and
[20] (SFT+RAG), and the proposed RLHF–ReFT framework.
 professional diagnostic behaviors. In contrast, the RLHF-based
For the RAG-based baseline, semantically similar historical
 model achieves the best performance across all evaluation
cases are retrieved and appended to the input context without
 metrics. By explicitly optimizing task-level reward signals
introducing explicit causal or structural constraints.
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3675

 high root cause localization accuracy, the SFT+RAG baseline suffers a substantial performance drop, despite retrieving
 semantically similar alarm cases. This counterintuitive result
 indicates that naı̈ve retrieval based on semantic similarity
 may introduce misleading correlations, causing the model to
 confuse root alarms with downstream or chain alarms.
 Cause localization inherently requires reasoning over causal
 propagation and structural dependencies, rather than surfacelevel semantic similarity. Retrieved examples that are textually
 similar but structurally irrelevant may bias the model
 toward incorrect inference paths. In contrast, the proposed
 RLHF–ReFT framework achieves the highest accuracy, suggesting that RL-based fine-tuning is better suited for capturing
 causal and propagation relationships by directly optimizing
Fig. 27. Comparison of Accuracy Between the SFT Model and the task-specific correctness signals.
ReFT-Enhanced Model During Mixed Training. Importantly, these results do not suggest that retrievalaugmented generation is ineffective in general. Instead, they
 highlight that RAG is not well-suited for alarm localization
 tasks when retrieval lacks causal or topological constraints,
 whereas RL-based fine-tuning provides a more appropriate
 alignment mechanism for such reasoning-intensive scenarios.
 Overall, these quantitative results demonstrate that prompt
 engineering and RAG can serve as useful auxiliary techniques, particularly for log analysis tasks. However, they are
 insufficient on their own for aligning model behavior with
 domain-specific reasoning and decision-making requirements
 across tasks. By explicitly optimizing task-level reward signals, RL-based fine-tuning encourages valid reasoning paths
 while suppressing spurious patterns introduced by retrieved
 cases, leading to more robust and reliable performance.

 VII. D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
Fig. 28. Comparison of SFT, RAG, and RLHF Results of Log task.
 Although the results demonstrate the effectiveness and engineering feasibility of RL-based fine-tuning in optical network
 O&M scenarios, it is also important to situate these findings
 within the broader landscape of existing AI-based O&M solutions and to discuss remaining limitations and future research
 directions.
 Traditional AI-based O&M solutions, such as knowledge
 graph systems and deep learning classifiers, typically rely
 on predefined rules, structured schemas, or fixed feature
 representations [46]. While these methods perform well on
 common and well-defined fault patterns, they often struggle to generalize to heterogeneous log formats and long-tail
 or previously unseen faults, which are prevalent in realworld optical network environments. In contrast, LLM-based
 approaches can directly process raw or semi-structured logs
 and perform semantic understanding and reasoning [21], [47],
Fig. 29. Comparison of SFT, RAG, and ReFT Results of Alarm task.
 enabling more robust fault diagnosis and root-cause analysis
 under complex and uncertain conditions. This fundamental
that encode correctness, reasoning quality, and response style, difference partly explains the empirical advantages observed
RLHF–ReFT enables more effective alignment with domain- in our studies.
specific decision criteria, resulting in more informative and Beyond diagnostic accuracy, LLM-based O&M approaches
interactive outputs. also provide unique benefits in terms of human–machine
 2) Root Cause Localization Task: A different and more interaction and system adaptability. By supporting natural
revealing trend is observed in the alarm localization task, as language–based, human-in-the-loop analysis, LLMs allow
shown in Fig. 29. While the SFT (Prompt) model attains operators to iteratively refine diagnostic results and better align
3676 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF LLM S AND T RADITIONAL O&M M ETHODS

model behavior with real operational workflows [48]. More- B. Computational Overhead and Deployment Scalability
over, LLMs significantly reduce adaptation costs in dynamic RLHF and ReFT introduce higher computational costs than
network environments where concept drift and cold-start issues supervised fine-tuning due to reward modeling and PPOare common by enabling prompt-level adaptation or few-shot based optimization. While sufficient GPU resources were
learning [49], rather than requiring costly retraining or manual available in this study, frequent RL-based updates may
knowledge graph updates. These properties make LLM-based be impractical in resource-constrained or latency-sensitive
solutions more practical and scalable for evolving optical deployment environments. Future research may focus on
networks. lightweight RL fine-tuning strategies, including reduced PPO
 Despite these advantages, several limitations remain and update frequency, partial parameter freezing, and localized
motivate future research. policy optimization. Combining parameter-efficient fine-tuning
 (PRFT) with reward distillation or offline RL paradigms may
A. Data Dependency and Generalization also improve deployment scalability.
 The framework relies on high-quality human preference data
for RLHF and large-scale structured alarm data for ReFT, both C. Task Coverage and Method Generality
of which require substantial expert involvement for annotation The proposed framework is validated on two representative
or validation. This data dependency may limit scalability and tasks, log analysis and alar root cause localization, with taskrapid adaptation in scenarios with scarce labeled data. Future specific reward designs and reasoning workflows. Extending
work will explore weakly supervised or semi-automatic pref- the framework to more complex O&M scenarios, such as QoT
erence construction methods, such as leveraging structural log estimation or multi-root-cause fault analysis [50], may require
features, historical remediation records, or rule-based systems. additional reward and hyperparameter tuning. Future work will
In addition, transfer learning and cross-scenario data reuse investigate task-aware and hierarchical reward designs, as well
strategies may further enhance model generalization across as multi-task RL fine-tuning strategies, to improve adaptability
heterogeneous network environments. and generality across diverse optical network tasks.
LIU et al.: DEVELOPING A DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LLM FOR OPTICAL NETWORKS 3677

 To help readers quickly understand the strengths and weak- [2] D. Wang, C. Zhang, W. Chen, H. Yang, M. Zhang, and A. P. T. Lau,
nesses of different approaches, we have summarized the above “A review of machine learning-based failure management in optical
 networks,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 65, no. 11, Nov. 2022, Art. no.
analysis in Table I. This table presents the applicability, perfor- 211302.
mance, and limitations of traditional AI-based O&M methods [3] P. Jing, Y. Han, J. Sun, T. Lin, and Y. Hu, “AutoRoot: A novel fault
and RL-based fine-tuning approaches in optical network log localization schema of multi-dimensional root causes,” in Proc. IEEE
 Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Mar./Apr. 2021, pp. 1–7.
analysis and alarm localization tasks, providing an intuitive [4] Y. Meng et al., “Localizing failure root causes in a microservice through
reference for subsequent discussion and method selection. causality inference,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 28th Int. Symp. Quality Service
 Beyond the limitations discussed above, reinforcement (IWQoS), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–10.
 [5] OpenAI. ChatGPT. Accessed: Jun. 9, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
learning techniques for large language models are evolving openai.com/blog/chatgpt
rapidly. In this work, reinforcement fine-tuning is implemented [6] H. Touvron et al., “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat
using PPO, as it has been widely adopted in early RLHF models,” 2023, arXiv:2307.09288.
 [7] A. Grattafiori et al., “The llama 3 herd of models,” 2024,
and ReFT frameworks and serves as a standard optimization arXiv:2407.21783.
approach in LLM alignment studies. This choice ensures [8] J. Yang et al., “Harnessing the power of LLMs in practice: A survey on
methodological consistency with prior work. Nevertheless, ChatGPT and beyond,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 18,
recent studies have also proposed new reinforcement opti- no. 6, pp. 1–32, Jul. 2024.
 [9] J. Lu, L. Yu, X. Li, L. Yang, and C. Zuo, “LLaMA-reviewer: Advancing
mization methods, such as Group Relative Policy Optimization code review automation with large language models through parameter-
(GRPO) [51]. Future work will investigate the applicability of efficient fine-tuning,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Reliab. Eng., vol. 34, no. 10,
these emerging methods in optical network O&M scenarios, pp. 647–658, Oct. 2023.
 [10] Y. A. Farrukh, S. Wali, I. Khan, and N. D. Bastian, “XG-NID: Dualas well as explore more scalable reward construction mecha- modality network intrusion detection using a heterogeneous graph neural
nisms to further enhance the practicality of LLM-based O&M network and large language model,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 287, Aug.
systems. 2025, Art. no. 128089.
 [11] Y. Song et al., “Synergistic interplay of large language model and digital
 twin for autonomous optical networks: Field demonstrations,” IEEE
 Commun. Mag., vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 90–96, Jun. 2025.
 VIII. C ONCLUSION [12] X. Jiang et al., “OptiComm-GPT: A GPT-based versatile research
 This paper proposes a domain-adaptation methodology in assistant for optical fiber communication systems,” Opt. Exp., vol. 32,
 no. 12, pp. 20776–20796, Jun. 2024.
which existing RLHF and ReFT techniques are employed to [13] R. Vilalta et al., “Applying digital twins to optical networks with
fine-tune LLMs, enabling them to perform optical network cloud-native SDN controllers,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 61, no. 12,
O&M tasks effectively. Taking log analysis and alarm localiza- pp. 128–134, Dec. 2023.
 [14] N. Di Cicco, M. Ibrahimi, S. Troia, F. Musumeci, and M. Tornatore,
tion, two key tasks in optical network O&M, as examples, the “Open implementation of a large language model pipeline for automated
implementation details of RLHF and ReFT were analyzed, and configuration of software-defined optical networks,” in Proc. 50th Eur.
the final task performance was evaluated. The results showed Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC), Sep. 2024, pp. 1591–1594.
 [15] Y. Zhang et al., “Generative AI-driven hierarchical multi-agent framethat after RLHF fine-tuning, the consistency between log anal- work for zero-touch optical networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 64,
ysis tasks and expert intentions was significantly improved, no. 1, pp. 24–31, Jan. 2026.
with an accuracy score above 9 and an interactivity score above [16] C. Wang, N. Yoshikane, C. Zhang, Y. Wakayama, D. Soma, and
 T. Tsuritani, “LLM-centric transport network configuration management
10. Although the richness score was slightly lower, it still framework and demonstration,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf.
outperformed that of supervised fine-tuning. For alarm-related (OFC), 2025, p. M3A.4.
tasks, the minimum accuracy also reaches 96%. In addition, [17] A. Afzal, J. Vladika, D. Braun, and F. Matthes, “Challenges in domainspecific abstractive summarization and how to overcome them,” 2023,
we also analyzed and evaluated the selection of initial policies arXiv:2307.00963.
in the PPO stage and the selection of reward models involved [18] O. Macmillan-Scott and M. Musolesi, “(Ir)rationality and cognitive
in the implementation details of RLHF. These studies were biases in large language models,” Roy. Soc. Open Sci., vol. 11, no. 6,
 Jun. 2024, Art. no. 240255.
based on specific task requirements and had certain limitations.
 [19] C. Ling et al., “Domain specialization as the key to make large language
Future work can include a more comprehensive analysis by models disruptive: A comprehensive survey,” 2023, arXiv:2305.18703.
incorporating additional evaluation metrics. We hope that [20] P. Lewis et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive
this method of strengthening and fine-tuning LLMs can con- NLP tasks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020,
 pp. 9459–9474.
tribute to the professionalization of LLMs in a specialized [21] T. B. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc.
domain. NIPS, 2020, pp. 1877–1901.
 [22] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever, “Improving
 language understanding by generative pre-training,” OpenAI, San Fran-
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT cisco, CA, USA, Tech. Rep., 2018.
 [23] Y. Gao et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation for large language
 The authors would like to thank China Telecom for provid- models: A survey,” 2023, arXiv:2312.10997.
ing the operational data used in this study. They also sincerely [24] I. Beltagy, M. E. Peters, and A. Cohan, “Longformer: The longdocument transformer,” 2020, arXiv:2004.05150.
appreciate the valuable guidance and insights from senior [25] S. Zhang et al., “Instruction tuning for large language models: A survey,”
experts, which were instrumental to this work. 2023, arXiv:2308.10792.
 [26] Y. Pang et al., “Large language model-based optical network log analysis
 using LLaMA2 with instruction tuning,” J. Opt. Commun. Netw., vol. 16,
 R EFERENCES no. 11, pp. 1116–1132, Nov. 2024, doi: 10.1364/jocn.527874.
 [27] Y. Wang et al., “Graph structure-enhanced large language model for opti-
[1] D. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Y. Pang, and M. Zhang, cal network fault diagnosis: An explainable alarm root cause localization
 “When large language models meet optical networks: Paving the way approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 15, pp. 31493–31510,
 for automation,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 13, p. 2529, Jun. 2024. Aug. 2025, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3573056.
3678 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[28] D. Guo et al., “DeepSeek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs Yue Pang received the Ph.D. degree from Beijing University of Posts and
 via reinforcement learning,” 2025, arXiv:2501.12948. Telecommunications (BUPT) in 2025. She is currently with China Telecom,
[29] T. Kaufmann, P. Weng, V. Bengs, and E. Hüllermeier, “A survey of where her work focuses on network large models and agents. Her research
 reinforcement learning from human feedback,” 2023, arXiv:2312.14925. interests include LLM, digital twin, and optical networks.
[30] L. Ouyang et al., “Training language models to follow instructions with
 human feedback,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2022,
 pp. 27730–27744.
[31] Z. Sun et al., “Aligning large multimodal models with factually augmented RLHF,” 2023, arXiv:2309.14525.
[32] L. Wang et al., “Parameter-efficient fine-tuning in large language models:
 A survey of methodologies,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 58, no. 8, p. 227, Yidi Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 May 2025. degree with Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
[33] Z. Chen, Y. Deng, H. Yuan, K. Ji, and Q. Gu, “Self-play fine-tuning China. His research interests include automated operation and maintenance of
 converts weak language models to strong language models,” 2024, optical transport network, intelligent fault analysis, digital twin, and generative
 arXiv:2401.01335. AI.
[34] N. Stiennon et al., “Learning to summarize with human
 feedback,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020,
 pp. 3008–3021.
[35] R. A. Bradley and M. E. Terry, “Rank analysis of incomplete block
 designs: I. the method of paired comparisons,” Biometrika, vol. 39,
 no. 3/4, pp. 324–345, Dec. 1952.
[36] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, Shengnan Li received the M.S. degree from Beijing University of Posts
 “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017, arXiv:1707.06347. and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2022. He is currently
[37] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” Ann. pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Electronic Engineering, BUPT.
 Math. Statist., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951. His research interests focus on optical performance monitoring, digital twin of
[38] L. Velasco et al., “Monitoring and data analytics for optical networking: optical networks, and AI Agents for intelligent optical network management.
 Benefits, architectures, and use cases,” IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 6,
 pp. 100–108, Nov. 2019.
[39] L. von Werra et al. (2020). TRL: Transformer Reinforcement Learning.
 [Online]. Available: https://github.com/huggingface/trl
[40] S. Yang et al., “Zhongjing: Enhancing the Chinese medical capabilities
 of large language model through expert feedback and real-world multiturn dialogue,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 38, no. 17, Jin Li received the Ph.D. degree from Beijing University of Posts and
 pp. 19368–19376, Mar. 2024. Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2020. He was a Researcher
[41] B. Qin, D. Feng, and X. Yang, “Towards understanding the influ- with Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China, from 2020 to 2022. He
 ence of reward margin on preference model performance,” 2024, was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Institute of Information Photonics
 arXiv:2404.04932. and Optical Communications, BUPT, from 2022 to 2025. He is currently a
[42] M. Riedmiller et al., “Learning by playing solving sparse reward tasks Researcher with School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, South
 from scratch,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2018, China Normal University, Guangzhou, China. His research interests include
 pp. 4344–4353. network slicing, fixed-mobile convergence networks, and LEO satellite net-
[43] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRa: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,” works.
 in Proc. ICLR, 2022, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 3.
[44] B. Wang et al., “Secrets of RLHF in large language models Part II:
 Reward modeling,” 2024, arXiv:2401.06080.
[45] L. Gao, J. Schulman, and J. Hilton, “Scaling laws for reward
 model overoptimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 2023,
 pp. 10835–10866.
[46] A. Hogan et al., “Knowledge graphs,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, Min Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in optical communications from
 no. 4, pp. 1–37, 2021. Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), China. He
[47] M. Bosma et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large is currently a Professor with BUPT, the Deputy Director of the Sate Key
 language models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications, and the
 pp. 24824–24837. Deputy Dean of the School of Optoelectronic Information. He holds 45
[48] S. Amershi et al., “Guidelines for human-AI interaction,” AI Mag., China patents. He has authored or co-authored more than 300 technical
 vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3–15, Dec. 2019. papers in international journals and conferences, and 12 books in the areas
[49] P. Liu, W. Yuan, J. Fu, Z. Jiang, H. Hayashi, and G. Neubig, “Pre- of optical communications. His current research interests include optical
 train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods communication systems and networks, optical signal processing, and optical
 in natural language processing,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, wireless communications.
 pp. 1–35, Sep. 2023.
[50] J. Mata et al., “Artificial intelligence (AI) methods in optical networks: A
 comprehensive survey,” Opt. Switching Netw., vol. 28, pp. 43–57, Apr.
 2018.
[51] Z. Shao et al., “DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
 reasoning in open language models,” 2024, arXiv:2402.03300.
 Danshi Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electromagnetic field and microwave technology from Beijing University of Posts
 and Telecommunications (BUPT), in 2016. He is currently a Professor with
 the State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications (IPOC), BUPT. He has proposed and verified a series of AI-driven
 communication and network technology solutions, which has been applied
 in telecom operator and internet service provider. He has authored or coauthored over 200 technical papers in international journals and conference,
 including invited talks in ECOC/OFC. He has held and participated in multiple
 funded research grants, including the National Key Research and Development
Yanli Liu is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with Beijing University Program of China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China, and
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. Her research interests the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. His research
focus on domain-adaptive large language models, optical communications, interests include intelligent communications and networks, semantic optical
and networking. communications, digital twin networks, and AI for science.