IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 7, JULY 2026 4227

 Disentangled Graph Prompting for
 Out-Of-Distribution Detection
 Cheng Yang , Yu Hao , Qi Zhang , and Chuan Shi , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—When testing data and training data come from differ- [3]. Therefore, timely detecting OOD samples and alerting the
ent distributions, deep neural networks (DNNs) will face significant system to take appropriate preventive measures in unfamiliar
safety risks in practical applications. Therefore, out-of-distribution situations is crucial to ensuring the system’s security. In recent
(OOD) detection techniques, which can identify OOD samples years, there has been extensive research on OOD detection tasks
at test time and alert the system, are urgently needed. Existing in the fields of vision [4], [5] and language [6], [7].
graph OOD detection methods usually characterize fine-grained
in-distribution (ID) patterns from multiple perspectives, and train
 Recently, OOD detection has extended its reach to graph
end-to-end graph neural networks (GNNs) for prediction. However, data. To address the graph OOD detection problem, existing
due to the unavailability of OOD data during training, the absence methods typically model in-distribution (ID) patterns from mulof explicit supervision signals could lead to sub-optimal perfor- tiple granularities or aspects, and train an end-to-end GNN
mance of end-to-end encoders. To address this issue, we follow for prediction. For example, GOOD-D [8] introduces a graph
the pre-training+prompting paradigm to utilize pre-trained GNN contrastive learning method with node-, group- and graph-level
encoders, and propose Disentangled Graph Prompting (DGP), to discrepancy modeling. GraphDE [9] utilizes the class label inforcapture fine-grained ID patterns with the help of ID graph labels. mation of ID graphs, and models class-specific graph generation
Specifically, we design two prompt generators that respectively gen- processes to characterize ID patterns. However, since OOD data
erate class-specific and class-agnostic prompt graphs by modifying is unavailable at the training phase, the lack of direct supervision
the edge weights of an input graph. We also design several effective
losses to train the prompt generators and prevent trivial solutions.
 signals can result in the sub-optimal capability of end-to-end
We conduct extensive experiments on ten datasets to demonstrate encoders [10]. To this end, AAGOD [10] proposes a post-hoc
the superiority of our proposed DGP, which achieves a relative AUC manner to leverage pre-trained graph encoders for OOD detecimprovement of 3.63% over the best graph OOD detection baseline. tion. The pre-trained encoders can benefit from self-supervised
Ablation studies and hyper-parameter experiments further show learning, and thus perform better than the aforementioned endthe effectiveness of DGP. to-end ones. In addition to these methods, SEGO [11] enhances
 OOD detection by minimizing structural entropy to capture
 Index Terms—Graph neural networks, out-of-distribution
detection.
 essential graph patterns, while HGOE [12] further improves
 robustness through hybrid external and internal outlier exposure.
 Finally, GOODAT [13] offers a data-centric, test-time solution
 I. INTRODUCTION using a graph masker optimized by GIB-boosted losses, pro-
 RADITIONAL deep neural networks (DNNs) typically viding a versatile approach for detecting OOD samples without
T operate under the assumption that the data used during
model training and testing phases are independent and identimodifying the original GNN architecture. Inspired by prompt
 learning, we aim to keep pre-trained encoders frozen, while tailor
 input graphs as prompt graphs so that the pre-trained encoders
cally distributed. Despite the significant potential of DNNs in
various domains, they still face challenges in practical applica- can adapt to the OOD detection task. Furthermore, we aim to
tions [1], e.g., misclassifying out-of-distribution (OOD) samples integrate the advantages of fine-grained ID pattern modeling in
that deviate significantly from the training data distribution [2], previous work for better OOD detection performance. Nevertheless, how to generate prompt graphs from different views for
 fine-grained ID pattern mining, is still non-trivial.
 Received 14 December 2023; revised 4 November 2025; accepted 19 March In this paper, we make the first attempt to combine the
2026. Date of publication 2 April 2026; date of current version 2 June 2026. strengths of fine-grained ID pattern modeling and the pre-
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation training+prompting framework for OOD detection. We introof China under Grant 62550138, Grant 62192784, Grant 62572064, and Grant
62472329, in part by Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program under Grant duce a novel Disentangled Graph Prompting (DGP) method
2023QNRC001 by CAST, and in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation for OOD detection, as shown in Fig. 1. Our goal is to discern
under Grant 253004. Recommended for acceptance by L. Chen. (Corresponding both class-specific and class-agnostic ID patterns using ID graph
author: Chuan Shi.) labels. The class-specific pattern mainly comprises discrimi-
 Cheng Yang, Yu Hao, and Chuan Shi are with the Beijing Key Lab
of Intelligent Telecommunications Software and Multimedia, Beijing Uninative information for distinguishing ID classes, whereas the
versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: class-agnostic pattern encompasses shared information among
yangcheng@bupt.edu.cn; haoyuu@bupt.edu.cn; shichuan@bupt.edu.cn). ID samples. Both of these patterns contain crucial cues for OOD
 Qi Zhang is with China Mobile Group Shaanxi Company, Ltd., Xi’an 710072, detection. Specifically, we pursue the following strategies: (1)
China (e-mail: zhangqi3@sn.chinamobile.com). We pre-train a GNN encoder by typical self-supervised learning
 Code is available at https://github.com/BUPT-GAMMA/DGP.
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at methods [14], [15], and freeze its parameters. (2) We design
https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2026.3678022, provided by the authors. two prompt graph generators that manipulate the edge weights
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2026.3678022 of the original graph to generate class-specific and class-agnostic

 1041-4347 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 7, JULY 2026

 message-passing mechanism, and have been widely applied in
 tasks such as node classification, link prediction, recommendation systems, and molecular property prediction [19], [20], [21].
 GNN encoders can be categorized into two types: spectralbased and spatial-based ones. Spectral-based GNNs inherit principles from graph signal processing, defining graph convolution
 operations in the spectral domain. For example, SCNN [22]
 employed a learnable diagonal matrix to replace the spectraldomain convolutional kernel, facilitating graph convolution
 operations. ChebNet [23] utilized Chebyshev polynomials to
Fig. 1. An illustration of our Disentangled Graph Prompting (DGP) method. approximate K-order localized graph filters, further enhancing
DGP can take advantage of pre-trained GNN encoders, and generate prompt
graphs from both class-specific and class-agnostic views for fine-grained ID
 efficiency. In contrast, spatial-based GNNs directly operate over
pattern mining. The parameters of GNN encoders are frozen at the prompting adjacent nodes and perform message passing. For example,
stage. GCN [24] proposed the aggregation of node features from
 one-hop neighbors and aggregating neighbor information along
 the topological structure. GraphSAGE [25] randomly sampled
prompts. (3) Feeding the prompt graphs into pre-trained GNN a fixed number of neighbors, and designed diverse aggregation
encoder and a predictor, DGP transforms prompts into class methods. GAT [26] introduced an attention mechanism to assign
distributions, and introduces class-specific and class-agnostic distinct weights to different neighbors. APPNP [27] performed
losses to supervise the training of two prompt generators. The feature transformation operations before neighbor aggregation.
losses encourage the prompt graphs to emphasize the key pat- Recently, self-supervised methods [28], [29], [30] have surterns within ID graphs, thereby enhancing the distinction be- passed supervised ones in various tasks, demonstrating sigtween ID and OOD graphs. (4) We also incorporate a regular- nificant potential in real-world applications. Graph contrastive
ization term to prevent the learnable prompt graphs from falling learning, a representative self-supervised technique, allows
into trivial solutions. GNNs to get pretrained without labels through context in-
 We conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets formation or auxiliary tasks. These methods typically generfrom molecular, social network and bioinformatics domains to ate data augmentations first, and then maximize/minimize the
validate the performance of DGP. We utilize two self-supervised similarities between positive/negative instances. GraphCL [14]
methods, i. e., GCL [14] and SimGRACE [15], to pre-train the incorporated four types of data augmentation strategies to gener-
GNN encoder. Experimental results reveal that: ate augmentation views. SimGRACE [15] introduced Gaussian
 1) Non-graph OOD methods perform poorly on graph data noise perturbation of model parameters in the graph encoder to
 (average AUC 48.95%), confirming the need for structural construct an augmentation view. DGI [31] aimed to maximize
 modeling. local mutual information, intending to learn local node features
 2) DGP improves AUC by 13.65% over fine-tuned GNNs capable of capturing global graph information. GRACE [32]
 and 3.63% over the best SOTA baseline, demonstrating generated graph views by removing edges and masking node
 its effectiveness. features, and then maximizes the agreement of node embeddings
 3) Additional experiments, such as ablation studies, encoder in these two augmentation views.
 initialization analysis and efficiency evaluation, further
 confirm DGP’s robustness, interpretability, and scalability.
 Our contributions can be summarized as follows: B. Graph Prompt Learning
 r To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to com-
 Although graph pre-training [33], [34], [35], [36] has emerged
 prehensively characterize fine-grained ID patterns within as a powerful paradigm in recent years, there is usually an
 the novel pre-training+prompting paradigm tailored for inherent gap between the tasks used for pre-training and the
 graph OOD detection. This innovative idea sheds light on objectives of downstream tasks, which limits the extensive use
 previously unexplored aspects of graph OOD detection.
 r We propose a novel method named DGP for graph OOD de- of pre-trained models [37]. In the field of Natural Language
 Processing (NLP), appropriate prompts can effectively narrow
 tection, which generates class-specific and class-agnostic the gap between pre-trained models and downstream tasks,
 prompt graphs to capture ID patterns, and introduces sev- enabling them to handle various downstream tasks [38], [39],
 eral effective losses to supervise prompt generators and [40], [41]. Recently, the idea of prompting was also introduced
 prevent trivial solutions.
 r Experimental results on real-world datasets show that DGP to graph learning.
 Existing work can be divided into two categories. The first
 achieves 3.63% relative AUC improvement on average category aims to fast adapt to multiple tasks via graph promptover SOTA OOD detection methods. Extensive experi- ing. [42] designed prompt tokens, token structures, and emments further demonstrate the effectiveness of our design. bedding patterns, unifying the format of NLP prompts and
 graph prompts. Meta-learning was also employed to ensure a
 II. RELATED WORK dependable initial prompt. GRAPHPROMPT [43] set the link
 prediction task as the pre-training task, and utilized node clas-
A. Graph Neural Networks
 sification and graph classification tasks as downstream tasks. A
 Graph data is everywhere in real-life scenarios, where entities learnable prompt was designed as the parameters in the ReadOut
and their interrelationships in various systems can be represented operation. OFA [44] introduced a graph prompting paradigm
as graph-structured data for in-depth analysis [16], [17], [17], (GPP) that incorporated a prompt graph into the original input
[18]. GNNs leverage structural information in graph data by the graph in a way customized for the specific task. The nodes
YANG et al.: DISENTANGLED GRAPH PROMPTING FOR OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION DETECTION 4229

 TABLE I from PID during the training phase. Let the training dataset
 COMPARISON AMONG GRAPH OOD DETECTION WORK DID = {(Gk , y k )}N k=1 represent N graphs sampled from indistribution PID , where Y is the label set of ID graphs, and
 y k ∈ Y. Specifically, each graph in this dataset is denoted as
 Gk = {V k , E k , X k }, where V k is the set of nodes and E k ⊆
 k
 V k × V k is the set of edges. X k = [xk1 , xk2 , . . . , xk|V k | ] ∈ R|V |×d
 denotes the node feature matrix, where xki is a d-dimensional
 k k
 feature vector of node vik ∈ V k . Besides, Ak ∈ {0, 1}|V |×|V |
 represents the adjacency matrix of graph Gk , where akij = 1
 when there is an edge ekij connecting vertex vik and vjk in Gk .
 2) Problem Definition: OOD detection can be formulated as
within the prompt graph encompassed all relevant information a binary classification problem, whose goal is to decide whether
pertaining to the downstream task. The second category focuses a graph Gt is from PID or not during the test phase. This decision
on adapting a specific task with few-shot or even zero-shot process can be written as follows:
samples. GPPT [45] designed the graph promoting function to 
modify the standalone node into token pairs, and transformed the ID, if S(Gt ) ≥ δ
 decision = , (1)
downstream node classification tasks into link prediction tasks OOD, if S(Gt ) < δ
for reconstruction purposes. SGL-PT [46] designed a promoting
function that introduced a masked super node into a single where the scoring function S(·, ·) takes the adjacency matrix At
graph. Then, the original classification task was transformed into and node feature matrix X t as inputs, and is supposed to assign
reconstructing the super node’s representations. AAGOD [10] larger values to ID graphs. Most evaluations employ rankinglearned graph amplifiers as prompts to capture ID graph patterns, based metrics such as AUC, and thus we do not need to specify
converting a pre-trained GNN encoder from graph classification the threshold δ.
to OOD detection.
 B. A Typical Framework for OOD Detection
C. Graph Out-of-Distribution Detection Due to the unavailability of OOD data during the training
 Graph OOD detection methods can be divided into node-level phase, directly applying classifier-based OOD detection methand group-level ones. For node-level methods, GPN [47] intro- ods to graph encoders becomes challenging. In this paper, we
duced a Bayesian update with the help of density estimation consider a typical two-step framework to implement the scoring
and diffusion to identify OOD nodes. GKDE [48] developed a function S(·, ·). The first step is to encode each graph Gt into
multi-source uncertainty framework for detecting OOD nodes. vector representation ht by a GNN. Then in the second step,
GNNsafe [49] employed a learning-free energy belief prop- a mapping function will project the graph representation to a
agation scheme to propagate energy values across the input scalar as the decision score.
graph, thereby ensuring the distinguishability between ID and Formally, we denote the GNN encoder as f (At , X t ; Θ) with
OOD nodes. For group-level methods, GOOD-D [8] proposed parameters Θ, and compute the detection score by
  
a hierarchical contrastive learning framework to explore the S(Gt ) = MD f (At , X t ; Θ) , (2)
discrepancies between ID and OOD graphs at various levels,
including node-level, graph-level, and group-level. GraphDE [9] where MD(·) is a non-parametric mapping function based on
characterized the distribution shifts by modeling the generative the Mahalanobis distance. Briefly, Mahalanobis Distance emprocess. It employed a recognition model and structure estima- ploys K-means clustering to partition the representations into Q
tion model to model and infer the latent environment variable clusters, and calculates the score of ht by its distance from the
for OOD detection. corresponding cluster center:
 Another related research direction is graph anomaly de-
 MD(ht ) = {min(ht − μ̂q ) Σ̂−1 −1
 q (h − μ̂q )} ,
 t
 (3)
tection. There are many GNN-based methods for node or q
edge anomaly detection [50], [51], [52], [53]. In our experiments, we also compare with OCGIN [54] and GLo- where μ̂q and Σ̂q represent the mean and covariance of reprecalKD [55], two SOTA methods for detecting anomalous sentations within cluster q. The Mahalanobis distance has been
graphs. extensively used in OOD detection [10], [56], [57], and Q = 1
 In contrast to these methods, our DGP approach can both is a typical setting in practice.
take advantage of pre-trained GNN encoders, and utilize class
label information to capture finer-grained ID patterns. Table I IV. THE PROPOSED MODEL
shows the relationship of relevant OOD detection work. Here
 In this section, we present the proposed model DGP that
fine-grained modeling indicates that a method considers ID
 aims to characterize fine-grained ID patterns under the prepatterns from different aspects.
 training+prompting paradigm for graph OOD detection. We
 start with the overview of DGP. Our approach involves jointly
 III. PRELIMINARY reasoning with both class-specific and class-agnostic information for OOD detection. Inspired by prompt learning, we design
A. Notations and Problem Formulation
 two graph generators to extract the aforementioned two patterns.
 1) Notations: Given two distinct distributions in graph space Lastly, we discuss the optimization process and advantages, and
denoted as PID and POOD , we only have access to graphs time complexity of our proposed model.
4230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 7, JULY 2026

Fig. 2. An illustration of the training process of our proposed DGP. For each input graph, we generate two prompt graphs to capture ID patterns from class-specific
and class-agnostic views, respectively. We design several losses to supervise and regularize the training of prompt generators. Here the parameters of pre-trained
GNN encoder are frozen in our method.

A. Overall Framework prompt generation functions to design prompts for every input
 The core idea of our work is to recognize both class-specific graph.
and class-agnostic patterns from ID graphs. Both types of pat- Considering that only in-distribution data is visible during the
 training phase for graph OOD detection, an intuitive approach
terns are supposed to contain useful clues for distinguishing
OOD graphs from ID ones, and thus enable graph OOD detection for generating graph prompts is to amplify the key patterns
in a finer-grained view. within the in-distribution data, thereby increasing the difference
 between in-distribution and out-of-distribution graphs. Specifi-
 The overall framework is shown in Fig. 2. Two separate
generators construct class-specific and class-agnostic prompt cally, we will modify the topology structure which reflects the
graphs by modifying the edge weights of the original graph. characteristics of a graph.
 Firstly, we formalize the pre-trained GNN model f by a three-
Then the pre-trained GNN encoder projects prompt graphs
into vector representations, and the predictor further converts step form:
the representations into class distributions. During the training
 (l) k,l−1
phase, class-specific and class-agnostic losses are employed to ak,l
 i = UPDATE (ai , AGG(l) ({ak,l−1
 j | (vik , vjk ) ∈ E k })),
supervise the learning of two generators. The distance losses
encourage the prompt graphs to be different from the original aki = CONCAT({ak,l
 i | l = 1, 2 . . . }),
graph, and can be seen as regularization terms preventing trivial
solutions. The generated prompt graphs can highlight two key hk = PROJ(READOUT({aki | vik ∈ V k }), (5)
patterns of ID graphs, thereby facilitating the distinction between
ID and OOD graphs. During the test phase, we define the deci- where ak,l i is the representation of node vik in Gk at the lsion score function based on the encoded representations of two th layer, and ak,0i = xki . UPDATE(·) and AGG(·) are mesprompt graphs and the aforementioned Mahalanobis distance: sage passing and aggregation operations, respectively. We
 concatenate the node representations in each layer using the
 S(Gt ) = MD(f (φ1 (Gt ; Ω1 ), X t ; Θ)) CONCAT(·) operation. Additionally, we employ the pooling
 + γ MD(f (φ2 (Gt ; Ω2 ), X t ; Θ)), (4) operation READOUT(·) to transform the node representations
 into a holistic graph representation. Moreover, a non-linear
where φ1 and φ2 are respectively the class-specific and class- transformation function PROJ is introduced to encode inforagnostic prompt generators, γ is a hyper-parameter balancing mation, leading to the final representation hk .
the two parts. Given an input graph Gk , we create graph prompts by adjust-
 In this way, the pre-trained GNN model f is prompted to fit ing the topological structure of the input graph as prompts. This
the OOD detection task without retraining. In the following sub- involves using a trainable graph adjacency matrix Ak,∗ for graph
sections, we will provide a detailed introduction to the prompt OOD detection.
graph generation and the training strategy for OOD detection. Specifically, we compute edge weights based on node features
 to highlight key ID patterns. Note that encoded node representations contain more meaningful information compared to the
B. Prompt Graph Generator initial attributes. Thus, we make full use of the pre-trained GNN
 To bridge the gap between the pre-training task and the down- encoder, and calculate the edge weight between node vik and vjk
stream OOD detection task, we draw inspiration from prompting in Gk as
in natural language processing. Since manually creating prompts  
requires a significant amount of time and expertise, we will learn Ak,∗ k k
 ij = MLP CONCAT(ai , aj ); Ω , (6)
YANG et al.: DISENTANGLED GRAPH PROMPTING FOR OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION DETECTION 4231

where aki and akj are node representations in (5). Here we Finally, to incorporate information from both class-specific
concatenate the representations of node vik and vjk , and employ a and class-agnostic ID patterns, the objective of disentanglement
 loss can be defined as the weighted sum of the losses:
multi-layer perceptron MLP(·) parameterized by Ω for simplicity. Also, we only adjust the weight of existing edges to enjoy a Ldisentangle = Lclass-specific + λLclass-agnostic , (11)
linear computational complexity.
 For class-specific and class-agnostic sides, we use two in- where λ is a hyper-parameter.
dependent MLPs with parameters Ω1 and Ω2 . Then we corre- 3) Distance Loss as Regularizations: Directly optimizing
spondingly have two prompt graphs as Ak,1 = φ1 (Gk ; Ω1 ) and (11) sometimes leads to trivial solutions, e.g., learned class-
Ak,2 = φ2 (Gk ; Ω2 ). specific prompts assign large weights to all edges in the input
 graphs. Inspired by the minimal sufficient principle used in information bottleneck [61], there is an encouragement to incorporate
C. Encouraging Disentanglement as much information related to OOD detection as possible into
 The quality of generated prompts has a significant impact the representation to make the predictions as comprehensive
on downstream tasks. Since OOD data is not available during as possible, while simultaneously preventing the representation
the training process, we can not optimize (4) to train prompt from including additional information unrelated. Thus, we ingenerators φ1 (Gt ; Ω1 ) and φ2 (Gt ; Ω2 ). In this work, we use troduce the following distance losses to push both class-specific
label information of ID graphs to encourage the two generators and class-agnostic prompts away from the original graphs:
to respectively capture ID patterns from class-specific and class- 1 
agnostic spaces. Ldistance-1 = MD(hk,1 ), (12)
 |DID | k
 1) Class-Specific Part: As OOD graphs may vary greatly G ∈DID
from each class of ID graphs, the information related to the 
 1
label of ID samples is important for OOD detection. The prompt Ldistance-2 = MD(hk,2 ), (13)
generator φ1 is encouraged to identify the key edges of ID graphs |DID | k
 G ∈DID
related to classification.
 Formally, we use the pre-trained GNN encoder to transform Ldis = α1 /Ldistance-1 + α2 /Ldistance-2 , (14)
prompt graph Ak,1 into representation hk,1 , and further employ where α1 and α2 are hyper-parameters. This loss can help the
a two-layer MLP(·) as a |Y|-class label predictor to estimate the two generators keep the most informative and representative
class distribution of the prompt graph: edges, and improve the performance at test stage.
 hk,1 = f (Ak,1 , X k ; Θ), z k,1 = softmax(MLP(hk,1 ; Ψ)),
 (7) D. Discussion
where Ψ denotes the parameters in the predictor. 1) Details About Training Stage: We design an iterative pro-
 Then we align the predicted label distribution z k,1 with the cess to train the model parameters, including Ω1 in the classground truth label y k of Gk as the class-specific loss: specific prompt generator φ1 , Ω2 in the class-agnostic prompt
 1  generator φ2 , and Ψ in the classification predictor. Firstly, we
 Lclass-specific = CE(y k , log(z k,1 )), (8) update Ω1 , Ω2 in the prompt generation functions, and Ψ by min-
 |DID | k
 G ∈DID imizing (11); Secondly, we fix Ψ, and update Ω1 , Ω2 according
 to (14). The pseudo-code of DGP is presented in Algorithm 1.
where CE is the cross entropy function.
 2) Details About Testing Stage: In the testing stage, we drop
 The idea of this part shares some merits with causal subgraph
 the predictor and compute the decision score of each test graph
discovery works [58], [59], [60]. But they aim to train inter-
 Gt by (4). Graphs with higher/lower scores are recognized as
pretable and generalizable GNNs, and our goal is to prompt a
 ID/OOD ones.
well-trained GNN for OOD detection task without adjusting its
 3) Benefits of DGP: The advantages of our method are threeparameters. The implementation details and other modules of
 fold: (1) Our proposed DGP leverages the inherent capabilities
our method are also quite different.
 of well-trained GNNs, enabling them with the ability for OOD
 2) Class-Agnostic Part: Although class-agnostic patterns are
 detection. (2) DGP can effectively reuse a pre-trained GNN
not essential for ID graph classification, they may contain useencoder without adjusting its parameters, showing the great
ful information related to ID/OOD identification. The classpotential of the pre-training+prompting paradigm in this task.
agnostic pattern captures shared information among the ID
 (3) The framework of DGP is versatile, compatible with the
graphs, providing an opportunity to formulate additional conclassical scoring function, as it does not make any assumptions
straints for the ID data. Therefore, we build another prompt from
 about it. (4) DGP considers ID patterns from both class-specific
a complementary view. We use the same GNN encoder and label
 and class-agnostic perspectives, enabling a finer-grained charpredictor as the class-specific part. But we expect the predicted
 acterization of ID graphs. (5) The prompt graphs generated by
label distribution to align uniform distribution ȳ instead.
 DGP can offer some interpretability to the decisions, which will
 hk,2 = f (Ak,2 , X k ; Θ), z k,2 = softmax(MLP(hk,2 ; Ψ)), be investigated by case study in our experiments.
 (9) 4) Time Complexity Analysis: We further analyze the time
 complexity of the proposed DGP. Let the training set contain N
 1 
 Lclass-agnostic = CE(ȳ, z k,2 ). (10) ID graphs. For a single graph with n nodes, m edges, the per-
 |DID | k iteration time complexity consists of the following components:
 G ∈DID
 (1) Node representation extraction. Node representations
 In this way, the class-agnostic prompt is encouraged to capture are extracted using a pre-trained GNN. For an L-layer GNN,
some small fingerprints that appear in all classes of ID graphs. each layer costs O(md) for message aggregation and O(nd2 )
4232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 7, JULY 2026

 Algorithm 1: Disentangled Graph Prompting (DGP) datasets for graph OOD detection from TU datasets [62] and
 OGB datasets [63], covering diverse domains, such as molecular
 Input: Training set of ID graphs DID , pre-trained GNN
 datasets, social network datasets, and bioinformatics datasets.
 model f with parameters Θ, random initialized MLP with
 These datasets exhibit variations and differences in their distriparameters Ψ for prediction;
 butions. Following the experimental setup described in [8], we
 Parameter: Randomly initialize Ω1 and Ω2 for prompt
 train our DGP model with 80% of ID samples as the training
 generator φ1 and φ2 , respectively;
 set. For the validation/test set, we combine 10% ID samples and
 Output: Prompt generator φ1 with learned parameters Ω1 ,
 the same number of OOD ones. Specially, for social networks,
 prompt generator φ2 with learned parameters Ω2 ;
 node labels are used as input features. Since the input of the
 1: while not converge do
 social networks has neither node nor edge labels, node degrees
 2: for each graph Gk ∈ DID do
 are used as the input features.
 3: Compute aki for each node vik by (5);
 2) Baselines: We compare our DGP with baselines in the
 4: Compute the prompt graph representation hk,1 and following four categories:
 the predicted label distribution z k,1 by (7) for r Non-Graph-Based Methods: We include five representaclass-specific part; tive non-graph OOD detection approaches: NegLabel [64],
 5: Compute the prompt graph representation hk,2 and AdaNeg [65], Local-Prompt [66], PFSOOD [67], and
 the predicted label distribution z k,2 by (9) for PRO [68]. These methods, originally designed for visionclass-agnostic side; language or feature-based OOD detection, are adapted to
 6: end for the graph domain for fair comparison.
 7: Update Ω1 , Ω2 and Ψ by minimizing (11); r Pre-Training–Based Methods: We compare our DGP with
 8: Update Ω1 and Ω2 by minimizing (14); pre-trained GNNs (GCL [14], SimGRACE [15]) to see
 9: end while whether DGP can improve their OOD detection perfor-
 10: return Learned parameters Ω1 and Ω2 for prompt mance. To further demonstrate the superiority of promptgenerator φ1 and φ2 , respectively. ing, we also compare with their fine-tuned versions (GCLft, SimGRACE-ft), where two identically initialized GNN
 encoders are updated according to the losses used by DGP.
for node updates. Thus, the total cost per graph is O(L(md + r Graph Anomaly Detection Methods: We include two clasnd2 )). (2) Prompt graph generator computation. Two prompt sical graph anomaly detection baselines: OCGIN [54]
graph generators φ1 and φ2 compute edge weights using MLPs and GLocalKD [55], which are optimized for identifythat take 2d-dimensional concatenated node embeddings as ing graph-level anomalies through one-class learning or
input. For m edges and hidden dimension d, the complexity knowledge distillation.
is O(2md2 ). (3) GNN inference on prompt graphs. Both r Graph-Based Methods: We further compare with sevprompt graphs are encoded by the GNN, requiring two for- eral SOTA graph OOD detection models, including
ward passes, each with complexity O(L(md + nd2 )), totaling GraphDE [9], GOOD-D [8], AAGOD [10], GOODAT [13],
O(2L(md + nd2 )) per graph. (4) Classification prediction. A HGOE [12], and SEGO [11]. These methods represent
lightweight MLP maps the d-dimensional graph representation the current leading designs for graph-level OOD detection
to C class logits with cost O(dC). based on distributional modeling, contrastive learning, or
 Combining all steps, the total per-iteration complexity over adaptive prompting.
the N ID graphs is: 3) Selections of Pre-Trained GNNs: Since our DGP is com-
   
 Titer = O N · 3L(md + nd2 ) + 2md2 + dC , (15) patible with any well-trained Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
 In this paper, to comprehensively assess DGP’s efficacy, we sesimplifying, the dominant terms yield: lect two self-supervised methods to pre-train the GNN encoder:
 Titer = O (N d · [L(m + nd) + md + 1]) . (16) GCL [14] and SimGRACE [15]. Both GCL and SimGRACE
 are based on contrastive learning [69], with a three-layer GIN as
 This analysis demonstrates that DGP maintains manageable the encoder and a two-layer MLP as the projection head. Their
computational complexity and is scalable to large datasets. difference lies in the way they generate augmentation views.
 GCL and SimGRACE employ distinct augmentation strategies,
 V. EXPERIMENTS with the former focusing on data-level augmentation and the
 latter at the embedding-level. Therefore, utilizing these two
 In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of DGP on graph
 self-supervised approaches to validate the effectiveness of our
OOD detection task. Then we conduct ablation studies to verify
 method establishes a compelling and comprehensive validation
the method design of DGP, analyze the importance of pre-trained
 strategy. More details about pre-training methods can be found
GNN encoders. We also explore hyper-parameter sensitivity, and
 in the following:
investigate the effect of MLP layers in the prompt graph genera- r GCL [14] employs four data augmentation strategies to
tor. Furthermore, we analyze the training efficiency of DGP and
 generate augmentation views, including node dropping,
visualize the generated class-specific and class-agnostic prompt
 edge perturbation, attribute masking, and subgraph samgraphs.
 pling.
 r SimGRACE [15] adds slight perturbations to the
A. Experimental Setup model parameters of graph encoder to construct
 1) Datasets: We conduct experiments on ten pairs of ID and augmentation views. The weight of perturbation is a crucial
OOD datasets following the experimental settings in GOOD- hyper-parameter in SimGRACE [15], and we adjust it in
D [8] and AAGOD [10]. These datasets are ten widely-used the range of {0.1, 1.0, 10.0, 100.0, 1000.0} as [15] did.
YANG et al.: DISENTANGLED GRAPH PROMPTING FOR OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION DETECTION 4233

 TABLE II
 OOD DETECTION RESULTS IN TERMS OF AUC(%). THE BEST RESULTS ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLDFACE, AND THE SECOND-BEST RESULTS ARE UNDERLINED.

 We employ the same settings as previous GCL methods [14], B. Experimental Evaluation
[15], [70], [71]. For the graph encoder, we adopt a 3-layer 1) Comparison With Non-Graph-Based Methods: We first
GIN [72] with 32 hidden and output dimensions. For the projeccompare our DGP with several non-graph OOD detection aption head, we use a two-layer MLP with 96 hidden and output proaches adapted to the graph domain. All methods are evaluated
dimensions. We employ Adam optimizer [73] to update all the under the same benchmark setting, and the results are reported
parameters, and the batch size is set to 128. The learning rate of
 in Table II.
GIN is tuned in {0.1, 0.01, 0.001} as previous works. As shown in the results, non-graph methods perform signifi-
 4) Evaluation Metrics: We follow existing works [74], [75] cantly worse than graph-based approaches. Their average AUC
and use three evaluation metrics [76] to measure the performance
 is only 48.95%, far below that of DGP and other graph OOD
of OOD detection models. baselines. This indicates that directly transferring non-graph
 AUC↑ stands for the area under the ROC curve. The closer paradigms to graph data is ineffective, as these methods fail to
the curve is to the upper-left corner, the better the overall
 capture the structural dependencies and relational information
performance of the model. A higher AUC score indicates better that are critical for graph OOD detection.
OOD detection performance of the model. 2) Comparison With Methods Based on Pre-Training: In this
 AUPR↑ is the area under the PR curve, where PR stands for experiment, we explore whether DGP yields performance imthe curve composed of recall rate and precision. A higher AUPR provements compared to pre-trained GNNs and their fine-tuned
value indicates better OOD detection performance. versions for graph OOD detection. The results are presented
 FPR95↓ quantifies the rate of misclassifying ID samples as in Table II with GCL [14] or SimGRACE [15] to pre-train
OOD when the true positive rate reaches 95%. A lower FPR95 GNN encoders. GCL represents directly use the pre-trained
value indicates better performance, as it reflects a lower ratio of GNN encoder for graph OOD detection. GCL-ft removes the
false positives. graph prompt generators from both branches and fine-tuned the
 5) Implementation: We run all our experiments on a single pre-trained GNN encoder using two different Adam optimizers
GPU device of GeForce RTX 3090 with 24 GB memory. Be- under the supervision of disentangle loss and distance loss.
sides, we implement our framework based on Python of version Based on results, we make the following observations:
3.9.0, PyTorch Geometric (PyG) of version 2.0.4 and PyTorch r Compared with pre-trained GNN/fine-tuned GNN/
of version 1.11.0. AAGOD, our proposed DGP has 19.86%/13.65%/13.39%
 In our proposed DGP, we simply use a two-layer MLP as relative AUC improvement on average, and thus achieves
the prompt graph generator for generating prompt graphs. The the best overall performance.
hidden layer dimension of MLP is 32. We adjust the learning r Prompt-based methods (AAGOD and DGP) outperform
rate of Adam optimizer within [10−4 , 10−1 ], the values of λ, γ the fine-tuned GNNs, confirming the superiority of
within the range of {0.1, 0.5, 1, 5, 10}, and the values of α1 , α2 pre-training+prompting over pre-training+fine-tuning on
within the range of {102 , 103 , 104 , 105 }. this problem.
4234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 7, JULY 2026

 3) Comparison With Other SOTA Methods: To validate our
 motivation that using fine-grained modeling for detecting OOD
 graphs is feasible, we also compare our DGP with various
 methods on graph OOD detection. The comparison against these
 SOTA methods for the ten pairs of datasets is shown in Table II,
 we draw the following findings:
 r Our DGP achieves SOTA performance on 8 out of 10
 datasets, and on average has 3.63% relative improvement
 over SEGO, the best baseline. In other words, our DGP can
 achieve better results without the need to retrain any GNN
 encoders.
 r Compared with GraphDE [9] that also utilizes label information of ID graphs, DGP can benefit from high-quality
 pre-trained encoders to better represent graph structures.
 r In addition, graph anomaly detection methods have relatively poor performance on this task. As the methods
 specifically designed for the graph anomaly detection task
 struggle to handle the OOD detection task effectively, we
 should treat the OOD detection problem differently from
 conventional anomaly detection.
 4) Visualization of Score Gap: We visualize the distributions
 of decision scores on ten datasets in Fig. 3. For pre-trained
 GNN, the average distribution overlap is 0.69, while for DGP, the
 average distribution overlap is 0.44. Compared with pre-trained
 GNN, our proposed DGP has a 35.94% relative distribution overlap reduction on average. We can observe that the decision scores
 with the representations from pre-trained encoders are highly
 concentrated. After the prompting of DGP, the scores of OOD
 samples become more dispersed in the distribution of decision
 scores. This indicates that OOD samples, due to the absence of
 the two types of ID patterns, can be better distinguished by DGP.
 Following fine-grained modeling, the disparity between ID and
 OOD data is widened, showcasing the enhanced capability of
 the pre-trained model in graph OOD detection.

Fig. 3. Decision score distributions of ID and OOD graphs on ten datasets.
Smaller distribution overlap indicates better detection ability. The two images in the same column respectively represent the pre-trained (left), pre- C. Model Analysis
trained+prompted right.
 1) Ablation Study: Since fine-grained modeling involving
 disentangle loss and distance loss in DGP guarantees the disentanglement of ID patterns, we conduct an ablation study to
 validate their effectiveness. In particular, we compare with the
 following ablated variants on three datasets:
 r V0 directly removes the branch for mining class-agnostic
 patterns, and retains only the prompt graph generator and
 distance loss for class-specific patterns to verify the impact
 of class-specific ID patterns on graph OOD detection.
 r V1 directly removes the branch for mining class-specific
Fig. 4. Graph OOD detection results (AUC values) of different ablated variants
and GNN encoder initialization strategies. patterns, and retain only the prompt graph generator and
 distance loss for class-agnostic patterns to verify the impact
 of class-agnostic ID patterns on graph OOD detection,
 r Compared with AAGOD, DGP greatly improves the graph similar to V0.
 OOD detction performance on multiple datasets. One pos- r V2 removes the distance loss and retains only the disensible reason is that the feature space learned by AAGOD for tangle loss for training prompt graph generators designed
 graph OOD detection is not informative. The improvement for class-specific and class-agnostic ID patterns.
 over AAGOD shows the effectiveness of our fine-grained As shown in Fig. 4(a), our full model DGP always has
 disentangled modeling. better results than other ablated variants, demonstrating the
 r In different datasets, DGP-GCL and DGP-SimGRACE necessity of each module in DGP. V0 and V1 have competalternatively attain the best performance, suggesting that itive performance. Both the class-specific and class-agnostic
 different pre-trained models may be well-suited for distinct branches are complementary to each other, contributing to furdatasets. They both outperform the baseline models, further ther performance improvement, which validates our motivation
 confirming the usability of our DGP. of fine-grained disentanglement. The regularization loss that
YANG et al.: DISENTANGLED GRAPH PROMPTING FOR OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION DETECTION 4235

Fig. 5. Graph OOD detection results (AUC values) on BZR-COX2 and PTC_MR-MUTAG with respect to four hyper-parameters and different MLP layers.

 the necessity of addressing graph OOD detection through
 fine-grained modeling.
 r Value of weight parameters in the distance loss: Considering the influence of weight parameters α1 and α2 in the
 distance loss during the training phase, we modify their
 values and evaluate how they impact the graph OOD detection performance. We vary α1 , α2 in {102 , 103 , 104 , 105 }
 as shown in Fig. 5(b), with the increase in the values of
 weight parameters α1 and α2 , the performance of DGP
 initially rises and then declines. One possible reason is
 that smaller weight parameters may not provide sufficient
 capacity to avoid trivial solutions, while larger weight
Fig. 6. Running time compared with other SOTA models.
 parameters may not offer enough attention to fine-grained
 disentanglement.
helps prevent trivial solutions also plays a vital role to the training 4) Effect of MLP Layers: We investigate the effect of varying
of DGP. the number of layers in the MLP used by the prompt graph gener-
 2) Effect of Pre-Trained GNN Encoders: The DGP ator. As shown in Fig. 5(c), the performance impact differs across
framework employs pre-trained GNN encoders without datasets. on BZR-COX2, increasing layers from 1 to 2 improves
requiring retraining. To validate the effectiveness of this design, AUC substantially, peaking at 2 layers. Further depth causes
we compare the AUC performance of DGP under different GNN minor performance declines, implying deeper architectures risk
encoder initialization strategies (GCL pre-training, SimGRACE overfitting or optimization instability. Conversely, performance
pre-training, and random initialization), as shown in Fig. 4(b). on PTC_MR-MUTAG remains stable across 2–4 layers, in-
Results demonstrate that pre-trained encoders consistently and dicating diminishing returns from increased depth. Overall, a
substantially outperform randomly initialized counterparts. 2-layer MLP achieves optimal balance between expressiveness
Specifically, random initialization yields markedly lower and generalization, delivering peak performance on BZR-COX2
AUC scores across all datasets. For instance, on BZR-COX2, and competitive results on PTC_MR-MUTAG. We thus adopt
PTC_MR-MUTAG, and IMDB-M-IMDB-B, random initial- this configuration as the default to maintain efficiency without
ization yields AUC scores that are, on average, 11.12% lower sacrificing effectiveness.
than GCL and 9.88% lower than SimGRACE, respectively. 5) Efficiency Analysis: To further validate the efficiency of
This suggests that without pre-training, DGP fails to effectively our DGP, we compare the training time of DGP-GCL with
capture fine-grained structural patterns distinguishing ID from representative baselines that exhibit strong AUC performance,
OOD graphs, leading to degraded detection performance. as shown in Fig. 6.
These findings conclusively validate the necessity of integrating As shown in the results, DGP-GCL consistently achieves
pre-trained GNNs into the DGP framework. substantial reductions in training time. On BZR-COX2, DGP-
 3) Hyper-Parameter Sensitivity: In this section, we investi- GCL outperforms SEGO and GOOD-D in both performance
gate the sensitivity of hyper-parameters and report the results and efficiency, reducing training time from 353.35 s (SEGO)
of graph OOD detection (AUC) on BZR-COX2 and PTC_MR- and 277.23 s (GOOD-D) to just 7.48s—a 46× to 36× speedup.
MUTAG with validation set in Fig. 5. We can see that DGP On PTC_MR-MUTAG, DGP-GCL achieves over 31× faster
has generally stable performance, and is robust as the hyper- training compared to SEGO (313.67 s vs. 9.85 s) and also runs
parameters change. significantly faster than GOODAT (28.96 s). The most substanr Value of weight parameters in the disentangle loss: λ and tial improvement occurs on IMDB-M-IMDB-B, where DGP-
 γ are key parameters controlling the importance of class- GCL demonstrates a 64× reduction in training time compared to
 specific and class-agnostic patterns during the training and HGOE (1710.10 s vs. 26.60 s) and a modest 1.3× improvement
 testing phases, respectively. Therefore, we vary λ and γ over GraphDE (35.79 s vs. 26.60 s). These consistent time savin {0.1, 0.5, 1, 5, 10}, and test the performance of DGP. ings are achieved without compromising detection performance,
 As shown in Fig. 5(a), for the BZR-COX2 dataset, class- as the selected baselines represent the top-performing models in
 agnostic patterns are relatively more important, while for terms of AUC.
 the PTC_MR-MUTAG dataset, class-specific patterns are The above results demonstrate the key advantage of DGP:
 relatively more important. The above observations confirm by reusing a pretrained GNN encoder and avoiding redundant
4236 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 7, JULY 2026

Fig. 7. Visualizations of two types of prompt graphs as case study analysis. Here darker edges indicate larger learned weights. The two images in the same
column respectively represent the class-specific prompt graph (top) and the class-agnostic prompt graph (bottom).

end-to-end training, our method greatly improves computational REFERENCES
efficiency. [1] D. Dai and L. Van Gool, “Dark model adaptation: Semantic image seg-
 6) Visualization of Prompt Graphs: To gain further insights mentation from daytime to nighttime,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Transp.
into the learned prompt graphs, here we conduct case studies by Syst., 2018, pp. 3819–3824.
visualizing generated prompt graphs on BZR and BBBP datasets [2] D. Amodei, C. Olah, J. Steinhardt, P. Christiano, J. Schulman, and D.
in Fig. 7. It is worth noting that the edges in the amplified graphs Mané, “Concrete problems in ai safety,” 2016, arXiv:1606.06565.
 [3] S. Liang, Y. Li, and R. Srikant, “Enhancing the reliability of out-ofare directional, and we calculate the average weights of identical distribution image detection in neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
edges in different directions for simplicity. As shown in Fig. 7(a), Representations, 2018.
7(b), 7(c) and 7(d), the class-specific prompts capture key sub- [4] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassified and
structures in ID graphs, such as the backbone structure. While out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Representations, 2017.
in Fig. 7(e), 7(f), 7(g) and 7(h), class-agnostic prompts focus [5] Q. Wang et al., “Watermarking for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc.
on the edges that are unlikely to be related to ID class labels. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, vol. 35, pp. 15545–15557.
The two types of prompts can complement with each other to [6] W. Zhou, F. Liu, and M. Chen, “Contrastive out-of-distribution detection
provide richer ID patterns, aligning with the results in the ab- for pretrained transformers,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural
lation study. In summary, the learned prompt graphs effectively Lang. Process., 2021, pp. 1100–1111.
 [7] Z. Shen et al., “Towards out-of-distribution generalization: A survey,”
emphasize crucial positions that contribute to graph OOD detec- 2021, arXiv:2108.13624.
tion, thereby accentuating the distinctions between ID and OOD [8] Y. Liu, K. Ding, H. Liu, and S. Pan, “GOOD-D: On unsupervised graph
graphs. out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data
 Mining, 2023, pp. 339–347.
 [9] Z. Li, Q. Wu, F. Nie, and J. Yan, “GraphDE: A generative framework for
 VI. CONCLUSION debiased learning and out-of-distribution detection on graphs,” in Proc.
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, vol. 35, pp. 30277–30290.
 In this paper, we innovatively propose to discern fine-grained [10] Y. Guo, C. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Liu, C. Shi, and J. Du, “A data-centric frame-
ID patterns for OOD detection under the paradigm of pre- work to endow graph neural networks with out-of-distribution detection
training+prompting. With the help of class label information, we ability,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
learn to generate class-specific and class-agnostic prompt graphs 2023, pp. 638–648.
 [11] Y. Hou et al., “Structural entropy guided unsupervised graph out-offor fine-grained ID pattern mining. We also design effective distribution detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, vol. 39,
losses to train the prompt generators and prevent trivial solutions. no. 16, pp. 17258–17266.
Extensive experiments conducted on ten benchmark datasets [12] H. Junwei, Q. Xu, Y. Jiang, Z. Wang, Y. Sun, and Q. Huang, “HGOE:
against very recent baselines demonstrate the effectiveness of Hybrid external and internal graph outlier exposure for graph out-of-
DGP. For future work, a possible direction is to design more distribution detection,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2024,
 pp. 1544–1553.
diverse prompt generators that can be adapted to different types [13] L. Wang et al., “GOODAT: Towards test-time graph out-of-distribution
of graphs. detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, vol. 38, no. 14,
 pp. 15537–15545.
 [14] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 2020, vol. 33, pp. 5812–5823.
 The authors would like to thank the editor and anonymous [15] J. Xia, L. Wu, J. Chen, B. Hu, and S. Z. Li, “SimGRACE: A simple
reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions, which framework for graph contrastive learning without data augmentation,” in
helped to improve the quality and clarity of this paper. Proc. Int. Conf. World Wide Web, 2022, pp. 1070–1079.
YANG et al.: DISENTANGLED GRAPH PROMPTING FOR OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION DETECTION 4237

[16] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 2, [44] H. Liu et al., “One for all: Towards training one graph model for all
 no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021. classification tasks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
[17] Z. Zhang, P. Cui, and W. Zhu, “Deep learning on graphs: A survey,” IEEE [45] M. Sun, K. Zhou, X. He, Y. Wang, and X. Wang, “GPPT: Graph pre-training
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 249–270, Jan. 2022. and prompt tuning to generalize graph neural networks,” in Proc. 29th ACM
[18] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A com- SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1717–1727.
 prehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. [46] Y. Zhu, J. Guo, and S. Tang, “SGL-PT: A strong graph learner with graph
 Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021. prompt tuning,” 2023, arXiv:2302.12449.
[19] H. Cai, V. W. Zheng, and K.C.-C. Chang, “A comprehensive survey of [47] M. Stadler, B. Charpentier, S. Geisler, D. Zügner, and S. Günnemann,
 graph embedding: Problems, techniques, and applications,” IEEE Trans. “Graph posterior network: Bayesian predictive uncertainty for node
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 1616–1637, Sep. 2018. classification,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, vol. 34,
[20] P. Cui, X. Wang, J. Pei, and W. Zhu, “A survey on network embed- pp. 18033–18048.
 ding,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 833–852, [48] X. Zhao, F. Chen, S. Hu, and J.-H. Cho, “Uncertainty aware semi-
 May 2019. supervised learning on graph data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
[21] D. Zhang, J. Yin, X. Zhu, and C. Zhang, “Network representation learning: Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 12827–12836.
 A survey,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 3–28, Mar. 2020. [49] Q. Wu, Y. Chen, C. Yang, and J. Yan, “Energy-based out-of-distribution
[22] J. Bruna, W. Zaremba, A. Szlam, and Y. LeCun, “Spectral networks detection for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represenand locally connected networks on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. tations, 2023.
 Representations, 2014. [50] K. Ding, J. Li, N. Agarwal, and H. Liu, “Inductive anomaly detection
[23] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp.
 networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” in Proc. Adv. 1288–1294.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, vol. 29, pp. 3844–3852. [51] J. Jiang et al., “Anomaly detection with graph convolutional networks for
[24] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph insider threat and fraud detection,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf.,
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017, 2019, pp. 109–114.
 pp. 11313–11320. [52] X. Wang, B. Jin, Y. Du, P. Cui, Y. Tan, and Y. Yang, “One-class graph neural
[25] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation learning networks for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” Neural Comput.
 on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, vol. 30, Appl., vol. 33, no. 18, pp. 12073–12085, 2021.
 pp. 1025–1035. [53] T. Zhao, C. Deng, K. Yu, T. Jiang, D. Wang, and M. Jiang, “Error-bounded
[26] P. Velickovic et al., “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. graph anomaly loss for GNNs,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 Representations, 2018. Manage., pp. 1873–1882, 2020.
[27] J. Gasteiger, A. Bojchevski, and S. Günnemann, “Predict then propagate: [54] L. Zhao and L. Akoglu, “On using classification datasets to evaluate
 Graph neural networks meet personalized pagerank,” in Proc. Int. Conf. graph outlier detection: Peculiar observations and new insights,” Big Data,
 Learn. Representations, 2019. vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 151–180, 2023.
[28] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE [55] R. Ma, G. Pang, L. Chen, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Deep graph-level
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023. anomaly detection by glocal knowledge distillation,” in Proc. ACM Int.
[29] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022, pp. 704–714.
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023. [56] J. Sun et al., “Gradient-based novelty detection boosted by self-supervised
[30] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning on binary classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 8,
 graphs: Contrastive, generative, or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data pp. 8370–8377.
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023. [57] J. Li, P. Chen, Z. He, S. Yu, S. Liu, and J. Jia, “Rethinking out-of-
[31] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R. D. distribution (OOD) detection: Masked image modeling is all you need,” in
 Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 11578–11589.
 2019. [58] Y. Chen et al., “Learning causally invariant representations for out-of-
[32] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Deep graph contrastive distribution generalization on graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020. Syst., 2022, vol. 35, pp. 22131–22148.
[33] Y. Lu, X. Jiang, Y. Fang, and C. Shi, “Learning to pre-train graph neural [59] Y. Sui, X. Wang, J. Wu, M. Lin, X. He, and T.-S. Chua, “Causal attention for
 networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. interpretable and generalizable graph classification,” in Proc. 29th ACM
 4276–4284. SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1696–1705.
[34] J. Qiu et al., “GCC: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network [60] H. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, and W. Zhu, “Learning invariant graph reprepre-training,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data sentations for out-of-distribution generalization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Mining, 2020, pp. 1150–1160. Process. Syst.2022, vol. 35, pp. 11828–11841.
[35] W. Hu et al., “Strategies for pre-training graph neural networks,” in Proc. [61] T. Wu, H. Ren, P. Li, and J. Leskovec, “Graph information bottleneck,” in
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020. Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 20437–20448.
[36] Z. Hu, Y. Dong, K. Wang, K.-W. Chang, and Y. Sun, “GPT-GNN: Gener- [62] C. Morris, N. M. Kriege, F. Bause, K. Kersting, P. Mutzel, and M.
 ative pre-training of graph neural networks,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Neumann, “TUDataset: A collection of benchmark datasets for learning
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1857–1867. with graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020.
[37] P. Liu, W. Yuan, J. Fu, Z. Jiang, H. Hayashi, and G. Neubig, “Pre-train, [63] W. Hu et al., “Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning
 prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural on graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33,
 language processing,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–35, 2023. pp. 22118–22133.
[38] T. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc. Adv. [64] X. Jiang et al., “Negative label guided OOD detection with pretrained
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901. vision-language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
[39] X. L. Li and P. Liang, “Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts [65] Y. Zhang and L. Zhang, “AdaNeg: Adaptive negative proxy guided OOD
 for generation,” in Proc. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2021, vol. 1, pp. detection with vision-language models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 4582–4597. Syst., 2024, vol. 37, pp. 38744–38768.
[40] B. Lester, R. Al-Rfou, and N. Constant, “The power of scale for parameter- [66] F. Zeng, Z. Cheng, F. Zhu, H. Wei, and X.-Y. Zhang, “Local-prompt:
 efficient prompt tuning,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Extensible local prompts for few-shot out-of-distribution detection,” in
 Process., 2021, pp. 3045–3059. Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025.
[41] X. Liu et al., “P-Tuning: Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning [67] Y. Wu, R. Yu, X. Cheng, Z. He, and X. Huang, “Pursuing feature separation
 across scales and tasks,” in Proc. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2022, vol. 2, based on neural collapse for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. Int.
 pp. 61–68. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025.
[42] X. Sun, H. Cheng, J. Li, B. Liu, and J. Guan, “All in one: Multi-task [68] W. Chen, R. A. Yeh, S. Mou, and Y. Gu, “Leveraging perturbation roprompting for graph neural networks,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. bustness to enhance out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2023, pp. 2120–2131. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2025, pp. 4724–4733.
[43] Z. Liu, X. Yu, Y. Fang, and X. Zhang, “GraphPrompt: Unifying pre-training [69] M. Chen, Z. Wei, Z. Huang, B. Ding, and Y. Li, “Simple and deep graph
 and downstream tasks for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. World convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp.
 Wide Web, 2023, pp. 417–428. 1725–1735.
4238 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 7, JULY 2026

[70] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Shen, and Z. Wang, “Graph contrastive learning Yu Hao is currently a Student with the Beijing Univerautomated,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 12121–12132. sity of Posts and Telecommunications. Her research
[71] S. Suresh, P. Li, C. Hao, and J. Neville, “Adversarial graph augmentation interests include graph neural networks, machine
 to improve graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. learning, and large language model.
 Syst., 2021, vol. 34, pp. 15920–15933.
[72] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph neural
 networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019.
[73] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2015.
[74] E. Zisselman and A. Tamar, “Deep residual flow for out of distribution
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020,
 pp. 13994–14003. Qi Zhang received the master’s degree from the
[75] S. Vernekar, A. Gaurav, V. Abdelzad, T. Denouden, R. Salay, and K. Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications.
 Czarnecki, “Out-of-distribution detection in classifiers via generation,” She is currently a Network Optimization engineer
 in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019. with China Mobile Group Shaanxi Company, Ltd.
[76] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between precision-recall and Her research interests include LTE wireless network
 ROC curves,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2006, pp. 233–240. optimization, graph neural networks, and Big Data
 mining.

 Chuan Shi (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BS
 degree from Jilin University in 2001, the MS degree
 from Wuhan University in 2004, and PhD degree from
 Cheng Yang received the BE degree and PhD degrees the ICT of Chinese Academic of Sciences in 2007. He
 from Tsinghua University in 2014 and 2019, respec- is currently a professor with the Beijing University
 tively. He is currently an associate professor with the of Posts and Telecommunications. He has authored
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications. or coauthored 100 papers in refereed journals and
 He has authored or coauthored more than 40 top-level conferences, such as SIGProc. 29th ACM SIGKDD
 papers in international journals and conferences in- Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Proc. Int. Joint
 cluding IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Conf. Artif. Intell., Proc.29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf.
 Engineering, ACM TOIS, Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Knowl. Management, IEEE Transactions on Knowl-
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, and Proc. Assoc. edge and Data Engineering, Proc. Int. Conf. World Wide WebJ, and ACM TIST.
 Comput. Linguistics. His research interests include His research interests include data mining, machine learning, and evolutionary
 data mining and natural language processing. computing.