3164 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 Distributed Cooperative Defense Against DDoS
 Attacks in Edge-Cloud Computing Networks:
 A Game-Theoretic Approach
 Yifei Wu , Fan Yang, Qian Ma , Member, IEEE, Guocheng Liao , Member, IEEE,
 and Xu Chen , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—As a promising computing paradigm, edge-cloud mechanism can effectively reduce the total filtering cost compared
computing network integrates the ubiquitous computing with existing benchmark defense mechanisms.
resources on the cloud and edge servers to provide high-quality
services, but is susceptible to complicated distributed denial-of- Index Terms—Edge-cloud computing networks, DDoS attacks,
service (DDoS) attacks. Although some works have studied edge cooperative defense, game analysis.
DDoS mitigation, the cooperative defense among cloud and edge
servers considering the DDoS attacker’s strategic attack strategy I. I NTRODUCTION
is yet to be explored. In this paper, we model the interactions
between the DDoS attacker and defenders as a two-stage dynamic
game and propose a distributed cooperative defense scheme.
In Stage I, the DDoS attacker strategically launches different
 T HE edge-cloud computing network [1], [2], [3] emerges
 as a novel promising computing paradigm that provides
 computing services with ultra-low latency and high computing
amounts of malicious traffic to different edge servers to maximize capability. By integrating and allocating the ubiquitous comthe total filtering cost. In Stage II, edge servers under attack puting resources from cloud and edge servers properly, the
(i.e., defenders) filter their traffic on the cloud and other edge edge-cloud computing network can provide a high quality of
servers cooperatively to minimize the total filtering cost. The
defenders’ problem in Stage II is NP-hard and we solve the experience for various applications like autonomous driving,
problem by modeling defenders’ behaviors as a selfish filtering smart healthcare, smart factory, and virtual reality. Due to its
game. We prove that the selfish filtering game admits a unique great market and application value, the edge-cloud computing
Nash equilibrium (NE) with guaranteed social efficiency, and network has attracted significant attention from researchers
design both a centralized algorithm and a distributed algorithm and industry. For example, Google proposes Google Disto calculate the NE. For the attacker’s problem in Stage I, we
first analyze a special case where each edge server has the same tributed Cloud Edge, Microsoft launches Azure Edge Zones,
amount of normal traffic, and design a low-complexity algorithm and Huawei provides IoTEdge.
to calculate the optimal attack strategy. We then analyze the The distinguishing features, e.g., the geographical distrigeneral case where edge servers have different amounts of normal bution and the heterogeneous computing resources of edge
traffic, for which we derive the approximate optimal solution. servers, make the edge-cloud computing network vulnera-
Simulation results show that the DDoS attacker tends to launch
attacks to all edge servers to reduce their cooperative defense ble to the distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks [4].
capability, and our proposed distributed cooperative defense Specifically, the DDoS attacker sends malicious traffic to the
 network to exhaust edge servers’ limited computing resources
 and prevent the edge-cloud computing network from offer-
 Received 8 July 2025; revised 5 November 2025 and 30 December ing high-quality computing services [5], [6], [7]. To defend
2025; accepted 22 January 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON against DDoS attacks, edge servers under attack, which we
N ETWORKING Editor Y. Sun. Date of publication 3 February 2026; date of call defenders, need to filter the suspicious (including both
current version 10 February 2026. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62372481 and normal and malicious) traffic to eliminate the malicious traffic.
Grant 62202512, in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program This reduces the available computing resources to execute
under Grant 202305063000008-2023A005 and Grant 20231121163344001, users’ tasks and causes significant economic losses. In 2022,
in part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under
Grant 2023B1515120058 and Grant 2024A1515011173, in part by Guang- Huawei [8] reported 104,922 attacks exceeding 100 Gbps in
dong Science and Technology Program under Grant 2024B0101020007, networks of cloud and heterogeneous edge servers, which is
in part by Guangzhou Basic and Applied Basic Research Program under a 1.5-fold increase compared with 2021. Furthermore, Zayo
Grant 2024A04J6367, and in part by the Program for Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams under Grant 2017ZT07X355. reported that organizations without adequate protection suffer
(Corresponding author: Qian Ma.) from an average cost of $200,000 per DDoS attack [9].
 Yifei Wu, Fan Yang, and Qian Ma are with the School of Intelligent Systems To mitigate DDoS attacks, researchers have proposed
Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107,
China (e-mail: wuyf255@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; yangf275@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; defense approaches including DDoS mitigation hardware,
maqian25@mail.sysu.edu.cn). cloud scrubbing services, and edge DDoS mitigation. The
 Guocheng Liao is with the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen hardware-based DDoS mitigation approach installs the firewall
University, Zhuhai 519082, China (e-mail: liaogch6@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
 Xu Chen is with the School of Computer Science and Engi- and intrusion prevention system, which is costly to deploy
neering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: and upgrade. Furthermore, application-level DDoS attacks can
chenxu35@mail.sysu.edu.cn). evade firewall detection [10]. The cloud scrubbing service,
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TON.2026.3659868, provided by the authors. offered by large cloud providers such as Cloudflare and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3659868 Ali Cloud, filters victim’s suspicious traffic to eliminate
 2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS 3165

 complicated. Furthermore, the strategies of the DDoS attacker
 and defenders are coupled in a non-trivial way. This motivates
 us to answer the first key question in edge-cloud computing
 networks:
 Key Question 1: How do the DDoS attacker and defenders
 strategically interact in the edge-cloud computing network?
 To cope with the DDoS attacker’s strategic attack, we
 propose a cooperative defense scheme for the edge-cloud
 computing network, which fully utilizes the heterogeneous
 traffic scrubbing/filtering capabilities of the connected cloud
Fig. 1. DDoS attack and defense in the edge-cloud computing network. and edge servers. Specifically, edge servers under attack, i.e.,
 defenders, can transfer part of their traffic to other edge servers
 and the cloud to help them filter traffic. Note that each edge
 server has limited computing resources, and filtering a large
 amount of traffic on a single edge server may cause congestion
 which leads to filtering latency. Additionally, transferring massive traffic from edge servers to the cloud for scrubbing may
 incur transmission latency. Since the latency of traffic filtering
 directly affects users’ experiences, we model the filtering cost
 as a function of the filtering latency [15], [16]. The goal
 of the cooperative defense scheme is to optimize defenders’
 filtering strategies to minimize the total filtering cost in the
 network, which is NP-hard. We solve this problem in a
 distributed manner by modeling defenders’ filtering behaviors
Fig. 2. Two-stage dynamic game. as a selfish filtering game where each defender decides its
 filtering strategy to minimize its own filtering cost. Analyzmalicious traffic and redirect normal traffic back to the ing the equilibrium of the game is challenging considering
victim [11]. However, detouring all victims’ traffic to cloud the filtering congestion on heterogeneous edge servers. This
for scrubbing may incur high transmission latency. In recent leads to the second key question in edge-cloud computing
years, researchers have proposed edge DDoS mitigation [12] networks:
where edge servers launch virtual DDoS defense instances Key Question 2: How can the edge-cloud computing netbased on network function virtualization (NFV) [13] and work defend against DDoS attacks effectively by fully utilizing
software defined network (SDN) [14]. However, edge DDoS the heterogeneous traffic scrubbing/filtering capabilities in the
mitigation may suffer from performance degradation when network?
the attacker launches massive DDoS attacks to all edge In this paper, we study the distributed cooperative defense
servers simultaneously [15]. Consequently, there is a critical scheme to mitigate the strategic DDoS attacks in potentially
need to design effective DDoS defense mechanisms to deal large-scale edge-cloud computing networks effectively and
with the complicated DDoS attacks in edge-cloud computing efficiently. We summarize the main contributions of our work
networks. as follows.
 Although edge-cloud computing networks have attracted
wide attention, few research studies the interactions between • Novel Distributed Cooperative Defense Framework
the DDoS attacker and defenders in edge-cloud computing Against Strategic DDoS Attacks: To the best of our
networks, which is the premise for designing effective DDoS knowledge, we propose the first distributed cooperative
defense mechanisms. As shown in Fig. 1, the edge-cloud defense scheme against strategic DDoS attacks in potencomputing network connects the cloud and heterogeneous tially large-scale edge-cloud computing networks. It aims
edge servers, and the DDoS attacker can compromise some to mitigate DDoS attacks effectively and efficiently by
end devices and control them to send malicious traffic to edge fully utilizing the heterogeneous traffic scrubbing/filtering
servers. We model the interactions between the DDoS attacker capabilities of the cloud and edge servers in the network.
and edge servers under attack (i.e., defenders) as a two-stage • Defenders’ Selfish Filtering Game: Minimizing the total
dynamic game as shown in Fig. 2. In Stage I, the DDoS filtering cost in the network is NP-hard, and we solve it
attacker strategically launches different amounts of malicious by modeling a selfish filtering game where each defender
traffic to different edge servers in the network. In Stage II, minimizes its own filtering cost. Analyzing the equilibdefenders decide their traffic filtering strategies, i.e., how to rium is challenging due to edge servers’ heterogeneity
filter their traffic using the traffic scrubbing/filtering services and congestion. We prove that the game admits a unique
on the cloud and edge servers. Analyzing the two-stage Nash equilibrium, under which defenders fall into three
dynamic game is challenging since the edge-cloud computing types and the filtering latency on each edge server is the
network potentially involves a large number of heterogeneous same. We design a distributed algorithm to calculate the
edge servers, which makes the DDoS attack strategy quite equilibrium filtering strategy without knowing the global
3166 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 information of the network, and prove that the derived incomplete information, where the attacker targets only a
 NE has guaranteed social efficiency. single defender.
 • DDoS Attacker’s Strategic Attack Optimization: For We can see that most existing works greatly simplify the
 the attacker’s optimization problem, we first analyze a attacker’s action. For example, the attacker can only decide
 special case where edge servers have the same normal whether to attack, or the attacker can only attack one target, or
 traffic. We show that launching the same amount of the attacker can only attack all targets with the same strategy.
 malicious traffic to edge servers of the same type at In practice, however, launching different degrees of attacks
 equilibrium is an optimal attack strategy, and we design to different targets strategically can compromise the system
 a low-complexity algorithm to derive it. For the general more effectively. In this paper, we model such strategic attack
 case where edge servers have different normal traffic, we behavior of the DDoS attacker in the edge-cloud computing
 show that the attack strategy under which edge servers’ network with heterogeneous edge servers.
 total traffic ranking remains the same as the normal
 traffic ranking is an optimal solution, and we design an
 algorithm to derive the approximate optimal solution. B. Cooperative Defense Against DDoS Attacks
 • Simulation Results and Practical Insights: Simulation There have been some works studying cooperative defense
 results show that the DDoS attacker tends to launch against DDoS attacks. You et al. [11] investigate the schedulattacks to all edge servers to reduce their cooperative ing of DDoS flows through an online auction mechanism,
 defense capability, and our proposed distributed coop- utilizing the scrubbing centers. Li et al. [12] design a coopererative defense mechanism can effectively reduce the ative defense framework which coordinates container-carried
 total filtering cost compared with existing benchmark defense resources among edge servers through online combidefense mechanisms. Our distributed cooperative defense natorial auction to mitigate the application-level DDoS attacks.
 scheme captures the strategic attacks of the attacker, the Myneni et al. [22] propose a distributed defense solution
 heterogeneity of edge servers, and the cooperation among against DDoS attacks, which is deployed at both customer
 the cloud and edge servers, which makes our derived and provider edges, employing neural network techniques.
 insights and results more practically significant. Feng et al. [23] propose a reinforcement learning-based col-
 We organize the rest of this paper as follows. We review laborative DDoS detection method and design a lightweight
related literature in Section II and introduce the system unsupervised classifier based on statistics at the edge of IoT.
model in Section III. We analyze defenders’ traffic filtering He et al. [16] propose a collaborative edge DDoS mitigation
behaviors in Section IV and analyze the attack behavior of scheme where edge servers can transfer their requests to adjathe attacker in Section V. We provide simulation results in cent edge servers to mitigate DDoS attacks. Deng et al. [24]
Section VI and conclude our work in Section VII. develop a graph neural network (GNN)-based collaborative
 deep reinforcement learning model to generate the resource
 II. R ELATED W ORK provisioning and mitigating strategy for DDoS attacks in
 There have been extensive studies on defense mechanisms mobile edge computing-enabled vehicular ad hoc networks.
against attacks in networks. In this section, we discuss the Huang et al. [25] propose a risk-aware task-offloading framerelated works regarding game analysis of attack-defense inter- work for edge DDoS mitigation which first evaluates the trust
actions and cooperative defense against DDoS attacks. level of edge nodes, then clusters them through a weighted
 K-means algorithm, and dispatches user tasks to the safest
 and most capable nodes. Xu et al. [26] focus on bandwidth-
A. Game Analysis of Attack-Defense Interactions layer DDoS defense in mobile edge computing and propose
 Game theory has been widely used to analyze the inter- a evolutionary-game model for user–bandwidth allocation.
actions between the attacker and the defender in the field of Zhou et al. [27] study stealthy low-rate DDoS defense and
cyber security. Chen et al. [7] develop a Stackelberg game- propose a deep reinforcement learning-based approach.
based collaborative framework for IoT DDoS defense, where However, previous studies usually focus on edge and cloud
the attacker allocates resources across multiple control points DDoS defenses independently, rather than exploring their
to attack only a single victim. Wahab et al. [17] and Li et al. integration. They do not consider the congestion effect of
[18] model Bayesian Stackelberg games between the Advance edge filtering and ignore the traffic scrubbing service on the
Persistence Threat (APT) attacker and the cloud/edge defender cloud. Note that filtering massive malicious traffic on one edge
to deal with the unknown types of attacks, where the attacker server may result in congestion and incur high filtering latency,
only attacks one target or attacks all targets at the same time. potentially leading to denial of service. In this case, redirecting
Xiao et al. [19] use prospect theory to model the interactions a portion of suspicious traffic from congested edge servers to
between an APT attacker and a cloud defender with bounded a cloud scrubbing center may alleviate the latency issue and
rationality. Zhou et al. [20] propose a defender-led signaling effectively mitigate DDoS attacks.
game to model the interactions between the defender of the In this paper, we propose a distributed cooperative defense
IoT network and the DDoS attacker who can only choose scheme, which fully utilizes the heterogeneous traffic scrubto attack or not attack. Liu et al. [21] propose a Bayesian bing/filtering capabilities of cloud and edge servers, to mitigate
Q-learning game to model the interactions between a coop- the strategic DDoS attacks in potentially large-scale edgeerative sensor–edgeVM pair and a DDoS attacker under cloud computing networks. Our analysis can guide the
WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS 3167

edge-cloud computing network to tackle the DDoS attack a) Filtering Cost on Edge Servers: Since the latency
problem effectively and efficiently. of traffic filtering directly affects end devices’ experiences,
 we model the filtering cost as a function of the fil-
 III. S YSTEM M ODEL tering latency. When defender i filters part of its traf-
 In this section, we introduce the system model. As shown fic on edge server k ∈ V, the filtering latency is
in Fig. 1, we consider an edge-cloud computing network mainly due to edge server k’s limited computing resources
which integrates the computing resources of a cloud and a for traffic filtering and the congestion effect caused by
set V = {1, 2, . . . , V } of heterogeneous edge servers and resource sharing among defenders who filter traffic on edge
provides computing services with ultra-low latency to end server k.1 We denote the traffic filtering capability of edge
devices. End devices send computing requests (i.e., normal server k as fk (in bits/second), i.e., the amount of traffic that
traffic) such as autonomous driving tasks to these edge edge server k can filter per second [2], [28].2 In this case, the
servers. However, the edge-cloud computing network faces traffic filtering latency on edge server k is
DDoS attack threats. We consider application-level DDoS P
 (λi + ai )xik
attacks [12], where the attacker can compromise some end Fk (x; a) = i∈D , (1)
devices and control them to strategically launch malicious fk
 P
application-level DDoS attacks to edge servers, aiming to where i∈D (λi + ai )xik is the total amount of suspicious
exhaust edge servers’ limited computing resources and prevent traffic that defenders filter on edge server k. We model the
the edge-cloud computing network from offering high-quality filtering cost on edge servers as the weighted filtering latency
computing services. To mitigate DDoS attacks effectively, on chosen edge servers [30], which is
edge servers under attack (i.e., defenders) can filter their X
suspicious traffic (including both the normal and malicious Cie (x; a) = xik Fk (x; a). (2)
 k∈V
traffic) through traffic scrubbing on the cloud and traffic
filtering on edge servers in the network cooperatively, to b) Filtering Cost on the Cloud: When a defender transeliminate the malicious traffic. We model the interactions of fers part of its traffic to the cloud for traffic scrubbing, the
the DDoS attacker and defenders as a two-stage dynamic latency mainly comes from transmission delay. Note that since
game as shown in Fig. 2. In the rest of the section, we first the cloud scrubbing center usually has sufficient computing
model defenders’ cooperative defense problem in Stage II, resources, the latency of traffic scrubbing is negligible.3 For
and then model the DDoS attacker’s attack problem in defender i, we model its filtering cost on the cloud as the
Stage I. transmission latency, which is

A. Defenders’ Cooperative Defense Problem Cic (xic ; ai ) = wc (λi + ai )xic , (3)
 The edge-cloud computing network can design the coopera- where wc (in seconds/bit) is a coefficient representing the
tive traffic filtering strategies to minimize the total filtering cost transmission latency for transferring a unit of traffic to the
in the network, i.e., the traffic filtering costs of all edge servers cloud [32], [33].
under attack. We define the defender set D = {1, 2, · · · , D} We define the filtering cost of defender i as the sum of the
as the set of edge servers that are under DDoS attack. filtering costs on edge servers and cloud, which is
We can see that D ⊆ V. For a defender i ∈ D, its
suspicious traffic includes the normal traffic λi (in bits) sent by Ci (xi , x−i ; a) = Cie (x; a) + Cic (xic ; ai ). (4)
benign end devices and the malicious traffic ai (in bits) sent Here x−i = {xj , ∀j ∈ D \ {i}} represents the filtering
by compromised end devices. Since application-level DDoS strategies of all other defenders except defender i.
attacks can exhaust a large amount of computing resources 2) Total Filtering Cost Minimization Problem: To mitigate
by sending only a few requests, defenders should filter all the DDoS attacks effectively, the goal of the edge-cloud
suspicious traffic to mitigate DDoS attacks effectively. Under computing network is to minimize the total filtering cost in
our proposed cooperative defense scheme for the edge-cloud the network, i.e., the traffic filtering costs of all edge servers
computing network, defender i can filter a proportion xik under attack. We model the total filtering cost minimization
of its suspicious traffic on each edge server k ∈ V and a problem as follows,
proportion xic of its suspicious traffic on the cloud. We denote X
xi = {xic , xik , ∀k ∈ V} as the filtering strategy of defender i, min Ci (x; a)
 x
and denote x = {xi , ∀i ∈ D} as all defenders’ filtering i∈D
 X
strategies. We further denote a = {ai , ∀i ∈ V} as the DDoS s.t. xik + xic = 1, ∀i ∈ D,
attacker’s attack strategy. In the following, we first model each k∈V
defender’s filtering cost, which includes the filtering cost on xik , xic ≥ 0, ∀k ∈ V, i ∈ D. (5)
edge servers and the filtering cost on the cloud. We then model
the total filtering cost minimization problem of the edge-cloud 1 We consider edge servers connected through high-speed links, and the

computing network. latency of transferring traffic among edge servers is negligible compared with
 the latency of traffic filtering [28].
 1) Defender’s Filtering Cost: For each defender, filtering 2 For example, Huawei’s AntiDDoS1900 measures its traffic filtering capaits suspicious traffic on edge servers and on the cloud both bility by the amount of traffic that it can filter per second [29].
incur filtering costs. 3 For example, Ali Cloud [31] can filter suspicious traffic of Tbps level.
3168 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

The first constraint indicates that each defender should filter cost (in Section IV-A). We analyze the properties of the Nash
all its suspicious traffic. The second constraint restricts that the equilibrium (in Section IV-B) and design both centralized and
proportion of traffic to filter on an edge server or the cloud distributed algorithms to derive the NE (in Section IV-C).
should be non-negative. We later solve the total filtering cost We use the NE as the defense strategy of the edge-cloud comminimization problem in Section IV. puting network, and prove that the derived NE has guaranteed
 performance regarding the total filtering cost (in Section IV-D).
B. DDoS Attacker’s Attack Problem
 A. Selfish Filtering Game Formulation
 The DDoS attacker strategically launches different amounts
of malicious traffic to different edge servers, aiming to exhaust We formulate the selfish filtering game among defenders as
the limited computing resources of heterogeneous edge servers follows.
and prevent the edge-cloud computing network from offering Game 1: (Selfish Filtering Game among Defenders)
high-quality computing services. Recall that we denote ai
 • Players: the set D of defenders.
as the amount of malicious traffic that the DDoS attacker
 • Strategies: Each defender i ∈ D decides its traffic
launches to edge server i ∈ V, and denote a = {ai , ∀i ∈ V} as
 filtering strategy xi .
the DDoS attacker’s attack strategy. Since the DDoS attacker
 • Objectives: Each defender i ∈ D aims to minimize its
usually has limited resource for attack, we assume that the
 own traffic filtering cost Ci (xi , x−i ) calculated in (4).
total amount of malicious traffic that the attacker can launch to
the edge-cloud
 P computing network has an upper bound amax , We first define the best response of each defender i ∈ D
i.e., i∈V ai ≤ amax . We model the objective of the DDoS in the selfish filtering game. Given other defenders’ strategies
attacker as maximizing the total filtering cost of the edge-cloud x−i , the best response of defender i ∈ D is
computing network, i.e.,
 BRi (x−i ) = arg min Ci (xi , x−i )
 X xi
 Ua (a; x) = Ci (x; a). (6) X
 i∈D
 s.t. xik + xic = 1,
 k∈V
Then we formulate the optimization problem of the DDoS
 xik , xic ≥ 0, ∀k ∈ V. (8)
attacker as follows,
 The Nash equilibrium of the selfish filtering game is a
 max Ua (a; x) strategy profile under which each defender plays its best
 a
 response. We next formally define the Nash equilibrium of
 X
 s.t. ai ≤ amax ,
 i∈V
 Game 1.
 ai ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ V. (7) Definition 1: (Nash Equilibrium of Game 1) A strategy
 profile x∗ = {x∗i , ∀i ∈ D} is a Nash equilibrium of the selfish
The first constraint indicates that the total amount of filtering game if each defender i ∈ D plays its best response
malicious traffic launched to the edge-cloud computing net- under x∗ , i.e., x∗i = BRi (x∗−i ), ∀i ∈ D.
work must be within the budget. The second constraint Under the Nash equilibrium of the selfish filtering game,
restricts that the amount of malicious traffic launched no defender will change its defense strategy unilaterally.
to each edge server must be non-negative. We further Calculating the NE through solving the best response of each
denote
 the feasiblePregion of the attack strategy as A = defender is challenging since the best responses of defenders
 (a1 , a2 , . . . , aV )| i∈V ai ≤ amax , ai ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ V . are coupled with each other in a non-trivial way and do not
 We later solve the two-stage dynamic game between the have closed-form solutions. The heterogeneity and congestion
DDoS attacker and defenders by backward induction. We effect of edge servers further complicate the equilibrium
first solve the defenders’ cooperative defense problem in analysis. We next analyze the properties of the NE which
Section IV, and then solve the DDoS attacker’s attack problem provide insights of defenders’ equilibrium behaviors and guide
in Section V. us to calculate the NE.

 IV. D ISTRIBUTED C OOPERATIVE D EFENSE M ECHANISM B. Nash Equilibrium of the Game
 In this section, we aim to design an effective and efficient Since we use the NE of the selfish filtering game as the
cooperative defense mechanism for the edge-cloud computing defense strategy for the edge-cloud computing network, we
network. We first prove that the total filtering cost minimiza- first prove the existence of the NE before analyzing the
tion problem (5) is NP-hard. properties of the NE.
 Theorem 1: The total filtering cost minimization problem in Lemma 1: The Nash equilibrium of the selfish filtering game
the edge-cloud computing network is NP-hard. always exists.
 Proof: See Appendix A in the supplementary material.  Proof: See Appendix B in the supplementary material. 
 We later solve the total filtering cost minimization problem The main idea is to prove that the selfish filtering game
in a distributed manner by modeling defenders’ traffic filtering is a concave game, and hence the NE exists [34]. We next
behaviors as a selfish filtering game where each defender analyze some properties of the NE, based on which we prove
decides its traffic filtering strategy to minimize its own filtering the uniqueness of the NE.
WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS 3169

 1) Properties of the NE: We characterize the properties of Lemma 3 indicates that if a defender filters part of its traffic
the NE of the selfish filtering game, including the necessary on an edge server, then it filters its traffic on all edge servers
and sufficient condition of the NE, the traffic filtering latency in the network, and the traffic filtered on each edge server is
on each edge server at equilibrium, and the relationship proportional to the edge server’s traffic filtering capability.
between the proportion of traffic that a defender filters on 2) The Uniqueness of the NE: To establish the uniqueness
an edge server and the traffic filtering capability of the edge of the NE for the selfish filtering game, we first characterize
server. a one-to-one mapping between the filtering latency F ∗ at
 We first characterize the necessary and sufficient condition equilibrium and the NE x∗ . We then prove the uniqueness of
of the Nash equilibrium by analyzing the KKT conditions of the NE by proving the uniqueness of the equilibrium filtering
each defender’s optimization problem (8). latency F ∗ .
 Lemma 2: Under the Nash equilibrium x∗ of the selfish Recall that given the NE x∗ , we can calculate the equilibfiltering game, the equilibrium filtering strategy x∗iu ∈ x∗i of rium filtering latency F (x∗ ) on each edge server according
each defender i ∈ D satisfies to Eq. (1). In the following theorem, we prove that given the
 
 ∂Ci (x∗ ) traffic filtering latency F ∗ at equilibrium, we can calculate the
 ∗ = xmin
  , if x∗iu > 0, NE x∗ . We first sort defenders in set D by their total amount
 ∂x∗ij
 
 ∂Ci (x ) ∗ ∈x∗
 ij i
 of normal and malicious traffic (i.e., λi + ai , ∀i ∈ D) in an
 ∂x∗iu  ∂Ci (x∗ )
 ≥ min , if x∗iu = 0. ascending order. We denote the ranking of defender i as ri .
 
 x∗ ∗
 ij ∈xi ∂x∗ij Then defenders fall into at most three types at equilibrium,
 Proof: See Appendix C in the supplementary material.  depending on two critical rankings ī and j̄.4
 Lemma 2 indicates that at equilibrium, defender i filters Theorem 3: Given the equilibrium filtering latency F ∗ on
a proportion of its traffic on an edge server or cloud (i.e., an edge server, we can calculate the equilibrium filtering
x∗iu > 0) only if the marginal filtering cost ∂C∂x ∗
 ∗
 i (x )
 is the strategy x∗ , under which defenders fall into one of the
 iu
minimum among all other edge servers or cloud. We denote the following three types.
minimum marginal filtering cost ∗of defender i at equilibrium • Type I (cloud-only): x∗ic = 1, x∗ik = 0, ∀k ∈ V, if 0 <
as βi , i.e., βi , minx∗ij ∈x∗i ∂C∂x
 i (x )
 ∗ . When defender i filters a ri < ī. ∗
 ij
proportion of its traffic on the cloud, we have • Type II (mixed-filtering): x∗ik = wc (λλi +a i )−F
 i +ai
 fk , ∀k ∈
 V, x∗ic = 1 − k∈V x∗ik , if ī ≤ ri < j̄.
 P
 ∂Ci (x∗ ) • Type III (edge-only): x∗ik = P fk fk , ∀k ∈ V, x∗ic = 0, if
 βi = = wc (λi + ai ), if x∗ic > 0. (9) k∈V
 ∂x∗ic j̄ ≤ ri ≤ D.
When defender i filters a proportion of its traffic on edge server We calculate the critical ranking ī as follows.
k ∈ V, we have: • If there exist a defender i with ranking ri and a defender
 j with ranking rj = ri − 1 that satisfy λi +a 1
 < Fw∗c ≤
 ∂Ci (x∗ ) x∗ik (λi + ai ) i
 βi = = + Fk (x∗ ), if x∗ik > 0. (10) 1
 λj +aj , then ī = ri .
 ∂x∗ik fk
 • Otherwise, ī = 1.
 Based on Lemma 2 and (9) (10), we obtain an important We calculate the critical ranking j̄ as follows.
property of the NE regarding the traffic filtering latency • If the defender s with the smallest traffic satisfies
Fk (x∗ ) on each edge server k ∈ V. 1
 wc − P 1 f
 ≤ k∈V k
 , then j̄ = 1.
 Theorem 2: Under the NE x∗ of the selfish filtering game, λs +as F∗
 • If the defender m with the largest traffic satisfies
the traffic filtering latency on each edge server is the same, wc − P 1
 1 k∈V fk
i.e., F1 (x∗ ) = F2 (x∗ ) = · · · = FV (x∗ ) = F (x∗ ) = F ∗ . λm +am > F∗ , then j̄ = D + 1.
 Proof: See Appendix D in the supplementary material.  • If there exist a defender i with ranking ri and a defender j
 1
 Intuitively, if an edge server has a lower filtering latency, with ranking rj = ri − 1 that satisfy λi +a i
 ≤
 1
 wc − P
defenders will switch their traffic from other edge servers k∈V fk 1
 < λj +a , then j̄ = ri .
 F ∗
 j
with higher filtering latencies to the lower one, leading to
 Proof: See Appendix F in the supplementary material. 
uniform filtering latency among edge servers. This indicates
 Theorem 3 shows that at equilibrium, we can classify
that our proposed distributed cooperative defense scheme
 defenders into at most three types, including the defenders
achieves load-balanced traffic filtering among heterogeneous
 who only filter traffic on the cloud, the defenders who filter
edge servers.
 traffic on both the cloud and edge servers, and the defenders
 Based on Lemma 2 and Theorem 2, we further obtain a
 who only filter traffic on edge servers. Furthermore, if we
relationship between the proportion of traffic that a defender
 know the equilibrium filtering latency F ∗ on each edge server,
filters on an edge server and the traffic filtering capability of
 we can write the closed-form solution of the NE x∗ . Note
the edge server in the following lemma.
 that given the NE x∗ , we can also calculate the equilibrium
 Lemma 3: Under the NE x∗ of the selfish filtering game,
 filtering latency F (x∗ ) according to Eq. (1). Hence, there
the proportion x∗ik of traffic that defender i filters on each edge
server k ∈ V is proportional∗ to edge server k’s traffic filtering 4 Intuitively, the critical rankings ī and j̄ represent traffic-determined
 x∗ x thresholds that categorize defenders into three types based on the comparison
capability fk , i.e., fik = fijj , ∀k, j ∈ V.
 k between the marginal filtering cost on an edge server and that on the cloud.
 Proof: See Appendix E in the supplementary material.  See Appendix F in the supplementary material for detailed explanations.
3170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

is a one-to-one mapping between the equilibrium filtering Algorithm 1 A Centralized Algorithm to Calculate the NE
latency F ∗ and the NE x∗ . We next prove the uniqueness 1: Sort defenders in an ascending order according to λi +
of the NE by proving the uniqueness of F ∗ . ai , ∀i ∈ D;
 Theorem 4: The selfish filtering game admits a unique Nash 2: for ī = 1: D do
equilibrium. 3: for j̄ = ī: D + 1 do
 Proof: See Appendix G in the supplementary material.  4: Calculate F ∗ by Eq. (11);
 Although the NE is unique, writing a closed-form solution 5: if (ī, j̄) and F ∗ satisfy Theorem 3 then
for the NE is challenging since we do not have the closed- 6: break;
form solution for F ∗ . We next design algorithms to derive the 7: else
NE x∗ based on the properties of the NE. 8: continue;
 9: end if
 10: end for
C. Algorithms to Calculate the NE
 11: end for
 In this subsection, we first design a centralized algorithm 12: Calculate x∗ by Theorem 3.
with polynomial complexity to derive the NE. We then design
a distributed algorithm which does not require the global
information of the network to calculate the NE.
 1) A Centralized Algorithm to Calculate the NE: According derived F ∗ to calculate the NE. If not, we keep on searching
to the NE analysis, there is only one pair (ī, j̄) and its for the next possible critical ranking pair.
corresponding F ∗ that satisfy the relationships in Theorem 3. We prove the convergence and the complexity of
Based on this result, we design a centralized algorithm, which Algorithm 1 in the following lemma.
first derives the equilibrium filtering latency F ∗ , and then Lemma 4: Algorithm 1 derives the NE of the selfish filtering
calculates the NE x∗ according to Theorem 3. game with complexity O(D2 ).
 To derive F ∗ , we explore its relationship with the two Proof: See Appendix H in the supplementary material. 
critical rankings ī and j̄. Specifically, given F ∗ , we can Since Algorithm 1 can find the NE with low complexity,
calculate x∗ according to Theorem 3, where the derived x∗ it can respond to the DDoS attacks efficiently. In practice,
should also satisfy the relationship in Eq. (1). In other words, however, edge-cloud computing networks can be large netwe have works, and it is impractical for each edge server to obtain the
 j̄−1 D global information, especially when some edge servers are
 λ + ai
 Pi
 X X
 F∗ = [wc (λi + ai ) − F ∗ ] + . under heavy attack. We next design a distributed algorithm
 ri =ī k∈V fk
 ri =j̄ that calculates the equilibrium defense strategy based on each
 ∗
 defender’s local information.
Then we can calculate F as a function of the two critical
 2) A Distributed Algorithm to Calculate the NE: We aim to
rankings ī and j̄ as follows
 design a distributed algorithm for each defender to derive its
 Pj̄−1 PD
 (λ + ai )wc + ri =j̄ P 1 fk (λi + ai ) equilibrium filtering strategy without knowing other defenders’
 ∗ ri =ī i k∈V
 F = . (11) filtering strategies and information, which is of significant
 j̄ − ī + 1 practical importance in large-scale edge-cloud computing net-
Recall that the two critical rankings ī and j̄, which are works. The design of the distributed algorithm depends on the
integers in the range from 1 to D + 1, also depend on property of the selfish filtering game being a concave game.
F ∗ as stated in Theorem 3. Therefore, to derive F ∗ , we Specifically, when a concave game admits a unique NE, the
can first enumerate the feasible pair (ī, j̄) under which we best response update process can converge to the NE starting
calculate F ∗ according to (11), we then check whether the from any feasible strategy profile [34]. Since calculating the
pair (ī, j̄) and the corresponding F ∗ satisfy the relationships in NE x∗ is equivalent to calculating the equilibrium filtering
Theorem 3. Since F ∗ is unique, there is only one pair latency F ∗ , the main idea of the distributed algorithm is to let
(ī, j̄) and its corresponding F ∗ that satisfy the relationships defenders take turns to update the equilibrium filtering latency,
in Theorem 3. considering the effect of their best responses.
 We show the centralized algorithm to calculate the NE in We show the distributed algorithm for each defender to
Algorithm 1. We first sort defenders by their total amount calculate its equilibrium filtering strategy in Algorithm 2.
of normal and malicious traffic, i.e., λi + ai , ∀i ∈ D, in Edge servers first announce their filtering capabilities (Line 1
an ascending order to obtain the ranking of each defender in Algorithm 2). Then defenders send an initial parameter
(Line 1 in Algorithm 1). We then enumerate the possible Ei0 = Pλi +aifk to the network operator of the edge-cloud
 k∈V
pairs of critical rankings (ī, j̄) (Lines 2-3 in Algorithm 1). computing network by proportionally filtering all their traffic
For each pair, we calculate the equilibrium filtering on all edge servers (Line 2 in Algorithm 2). The network
latency F ∗ by Eq. (11) (Line 4 in Algorithm 1), and check operator sorts defenders by Ei0 , ∀i ∈ D, and calculates the
whether the critical ranking pair (ī, j̄) and the correspond- initial filtering latency F 0 and announces to defenders (Line 3
ing F ∗ satisfy the relationship in Theorem 3 (Lines 5-9 in in Algorithm 2). Then defenders take turns to update the
Algorithm 1). If the pair (ī, j̄) and the corresponding F ∗ filtering latency. In each iteration t, defender i calculates
satisfy the relationships in Theorem 3, we can use the the increase of its filtering latency after it plays its best
WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS 3171

response xBR,t
 i , which we denote as Eit as follows D. Analysis of PoA
 xBR,t (λi + ai ) Since we use the equilibrium filtering strategy profile x∗
 Eit = ik
 . (12)
 fk of the selfish filtering game as the defense strategy for the
 edge-cloud computing network, we evaluate the effectiveness
We define Zit = wc (λi + ai ) − (F t − Eit−1 ). By substituting
 of the derived NE x∗ regarding its performance on solving the
the best response (calculated by Lemma 2) into (12), defender
 total filtering cost minimization problem (5). Specifically, we
i can update Eit in iteration t as
 analyze the price of anarchy (PoA) [35] of the selfish filtering
 
  0, if Zit ≤ 0, game. In the following, we first formally define the PoA. We
 
 
  Zi
  t
 Zit P  then prove that the PoA of the selfish filtering game always has
 Eit = , if 2(λi +a i) k∈V fk < 1, (13) an upper bound, indicating that the derived NE has guaranteed
 2
 
  λi + ai Zit P  performance regarding the total filtering cost.
 , if 2(λi +ai ) k∈V fk ≥ 1.
 P
 
 
 k∈V fk
 The PoA is the ratio between the total filtering cost under
 the NE and the minimum total filtering cost. We denote
See Appendix I in the supplementary material for the detailed the optimal solution to the total filtering cost minimization
derivation of Eit . After defender i updates its effect Eit on problem (5) as xopt . Then we can calculate the PoA of the
the filtering latency, the network operator updates the filtering selfish filtering game as
latency by aggregating all defenders’ effects as follows
 ri D ∗
 P
 i∈D Ci (x )
 X X
 t
 F = Ejt + Ejt−1 , (14) PoA = P opt )
 . (15)
 rj =1 rj =ri +1 i∈D Ci (x

where defenders ranking from 1 to ri have updated their It is obvious to see that PoA ≥ 1, and a smaller PoA indicates
effects and the others do not. After F t converges, each a better performance of our derived NE x∗ .
defender calculates its equilibrium filtering strategy and filters We next prove that the PoA is always upper bounded.
suspicious traffic (Line 13 in Algorithm 2). Theorem 5: The PoA of the selfish filtering game has an
 upper bound. Specifically, 1 ≤ PoA < 2if wc ≤ P 2 fk and
Algorithm 2 A Distributed Algorithm to Calculate the NE k∈V
 1 ≤ PoA < Dif wc > P 2 fk .
 1: Each edge server k ∈ V announces its filtering capability k∈V

 fk ; Proof: See Appendix J in the supplementary material. 
 λ +a
 2: Each defender i ∈ D sends Ei0 = P i if to the network
 Theorem 5 shows that the PoA always has an upper bound.
 operator;
 k∈V k When the cloud latency coefficient wc is small, the PoA is
 3: The network operator sorts defenders by Ei0 , ∀i ∈ D in
 always smaller than 2. And when wc is large, the PoA is
 an ascending order, and announces F 0 =
 P 0 always smaller than the number of defenders D. Note that
 i∈D Ei to
 defenders; only in exceptional cases where there is significant variation
 4: Set t = 0 and F −1 = −∞;
 (e.g., in hundredfold) in edge servers’ filtering capabilities
 5: while F t − F t−1 ≥  do
 and defenders’ traffic, the PoA may approach the upper
 6: t = t + 1; bound D.5 In more general cases where the heterogeneities
 7: F t = F t−1 ; of edge servers’ filtering capabilities or defenders’ traffic are
 8: for defender i with ranking ri = 1: D do smooth, the PoA is much smaller than the upper bound D. We
 9: Defender i updates Eit according to (13) and further analyze the PoA when defenders have equal traffic.
 sends to the network operator; Lemma 6: When defenders have the same amount of traffic,
10: The network operator updates F t according to (14) the PoA of the selfish filtering game is smaller than 2, i.e.,
 and announces F t to defenders; 1 ≤ PoA < 2if λi + ai = λj + aj , ∀i, j ∈ D.
11: end for Proof: See Appendix L in the supplementary material. 
12: end while Lemma 6 implies that when the traffic of all defenders is
13: Each defender i ∈ D calculates x∗ t equal, the performance of our proposed distributed cooperative
 i based on F by
 Theorem 3. defense mechanism is close to the social optimal solution.
 Later in our simulations, we show that our proposed distributed
 cooperative defense mechanism can effectively reduce the total
 We show Algorithm 2’s convergence and complexity in each
 filtering cost of the edge-cloud computing network compared
iteration in the following lemma.
 with existing benchmark defense mechanisms.
 Lemma 5: Algorithm 2 derives the NE of the selfish filtering
 In this section, we have solved the defenders’ cooperative
game. The computation and communication complexity of
 defense problem in Stage II of the two-stage dynamic game,
each iteration in Algorithm 2 is O(D).
 based on which we solve the DDoS attacker’s attack problem
 Proof: See Appendix I in the supplementary material. 
 in Stage I in the next section.
 Lemma 5 indicates that the distributed update process
converges to the NE in a finite number of iterations. We later
show in experiments the fast convergence of our distributed 5 See Appendix K in the supplementary material for an unusual example
algorithm even when the number of defenders is large. demonstrating this phenomenon.
3172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 V. O PTIMAL DD O S ATTACK S TRATEGY original problem (17), i.e., optimizing the objective function
 In Stage I of the two-stage dynamic game, the DDoS over the feasible region A, into sub-problems that optimize
attacker strategically launches different amounts of malicious the objective function over subsets of A under fixed pairs
traffic ai on different edge servers i ∈ V. As shown in of (ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1}.
problem (7), the DDoS attacker aims to maximize the total Specifically, we show that each fixed pair (ī, j̄) maps to a
filtering cost of the edge-cloud computing network, consid- subset A(ī, j̄) ⊂ A of attack strategies, and the union of all
ering defenders’ equilibrium filtering strategies.6 Recall that subsets A(ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1}
under an attack strategy a, defenders fall into at most three constitutes the original feasible region A. Recall that an attack
types at the NE of the selfish filtering game as discussed in strategy a can map to the NE x∗ of defenders and the corre-
Theorem 3, and hence we can reformulate the DDoS attacker’s sponding pair (ī, j̄) according to Theorem 3. Given a fixed pair
objective function in (6) as (ī, j̄) where ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D} and j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1},
 we can write the subset A(ī, j̄) of the attack strategies that
 Ua (a; x∗ ) maps to the pair (ī, j̄) as follows.
 X X
 = wc (λi + ai ) + F ∗ (a)
 (
 X
 0<ri (a)<ī(a) j̄(a)≤ri (a)≤D A(ī, j̄) = a | ai ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ D; ai ≤ amax ;
 " # i∈D
 X X
 + wc (λi + ai )x∗ic + x∗ik F ∗ (a) . 1 wc
 ≥ ∗ , ∀0 < ri < ī;
 ī(a)≤ri (a)<j̄(a) k∈V λi + ai F (a)
 (16)
 wc 1 wc − P 1 fk
 k∈V
 > > , ∀ī ≤ ri < j̄;
In this case, we can formulate the DDoS attacker’s attack F ∗ (a) λi + ai F ∗ (a)
problem as follows. wc − P 1 fk
 )
 1 k∈V
 ≤ , ∀j̄ ≤ ri ≤ D , (18)
 max Ua (a; x∗ ). (17) λi + ai F ∗ (a)
 a∈A

Recall that A is the feasible region of the attack strategy a where F ∗ (a) is calculated by (11). We next prove that the
defined in Section III-B. Solving problem (17) is challenging union of all subsets A(ī, j̄) constitutes the original feasible
since the objective function in Eq. (16) depends on the attack region A.
strategy a in a non-trivial way. Specifically, we can calculate Lemma 7: The feasible region A of the DDoS attacker’s
F ∗ (a) according to Eq. (11), and calculate ī(a) and j̄(a) attack strategy is the union of all subsets A(ī, j̄), i.e., A =
according to Theorem 3 which do not have closed-form ∪(ī,j̄) A(ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1}.
solutions. Furthermore, defenders’ rankings ri (a), ∀i ∈ V also Proof: See Appendix M in the supplementary material. 
change with the attack strategy a, which further complicates According to Lemma 7, we can decompose the original
the problem. problem (17) into sub-problems over subsets A(ī, j̄) under
 To solve problem (17), we first analyze a special case where fixed pairs (ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1}.
all edge servers have the same amount of normal traffic. We Under a fixed pair (ī, j̄), we can rewrite the DDoS attacker’s
then analyze the general case where edge servers have different objective function in (16) as follows.
amounts of normal traffic. X X
 Ua(ī,j̄) (a; x∗ ) = wc (λi + ai ) + F ∗ (a)
 0<ri (a)<ī j̄≤ri (a)≤D
A. Optimal Attack Strategy When Edge Servers Have Equal " #
Normal Traffic
 X X
 + wc (λi + ai )x∗ic + x∗ik F ∗ (a) .
 We consider a special case where each edge server has the ī≤ri (a)<j̄ k∈V
same amount of normal traffic, i.e., λi = λ, ∀i ∈ V. This (19)
case happens when the network operator of the edge-cloud
 Then the sub-problem under the fixed pair (ī, j̄) pair is
computing network uses load balance algorithms to distribute
the same amount of requests to each edge server [36]. In max Ua(ī,j̄) (a; x∗ ). (20)
this case, we first decompose problem (17) into sub-problems a∈A(ī,j̄)

under fixed (ī, j̄) pairs. We then analyze the property of each To solve problem (17), we can first solve the sub-problem
sub-problem under a fixed pair (ī, j̄), based on which we (20) for each fixed pair (ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī +
design a low-complexity algorithm to derive the optimal attack 1, . . . , D + 1}, and then choose among the optimal solutions
strategy. to the sub-problems.
 1) Decomposition of Problem (17): The key challenge to 2) Property of Each Sub-Problem: For each sub-problem
solve problem (17) comes from the complicated relationship under a fixed pair (ī, j̄), we first analyze its property in the
between the attack strategy a and the two critical rankings special case, based on which we derive its optimal solution.
ī(a) and j̄(a). We tackle this challenge by decomposing the We first show that for each sub-problem, an optimal attack
 6 Considering defenders’ cooperative defense mechanism, the attack strategy
 strategy is to launch the same amount of malicious traffic to
that only attacking the weakest edge servers is suboptimal, since other edge edge servers of the same type at equilibrium (characterized in
servers which are not attacked can help filter the malicious traffic. Theorem 3).
WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS 3173

 Lemma 8: For the sub-problem (20) under a fixed pair (ī, j̄) We then prove the optimality of the attack strategy derived
in the special case where all edge servers have the same by Algorithm 3.
amount of normal traffic, the DDoS attacker can reach its
optimal solution by launching the same amount of malicious Algorithm 3 A Low-Complexity Algorithm to Derive the
traffic to defenders of the same type at equilibrium. Optimal Attack Strategy for the Special Case
 Proof: See Appendix N the supplementary material.  1: Set Aspe = ∅;
 Based on Lemma 8, we denote the amount of malicious 2: for ī = 1: V do
traffic launched to the three types (i.e., cloud-only, mixed- 3: for j̄ = ī: V + 1 do
filtering, and edge-only) of defenders as ac , am , and ae , 4:
 (ī,j̄)
 Calculate aspe by solving (21) using SQP;
respectively. In other words, we have ai = ac , ∀0 < ri < (ī,j̄)
 5: Aspe = Aspe ∪ {aspe };
ī, ai = am , ∀ī ≤ ri < j̄, and ai = ae , ∀j̄ ≤ ri ≤ D. We
 6: end for
denote aspe , (ac , am , ae ). In this case, we can rewrite the
 7: end for
DDoS attacker’s objective function in Eq. (19) under a fixed
 8: Set a∗ ∗
 spe = arg maxaspe ∈Aspe Ua (aspe ; x ).
pair (ī, j̄) as follows
 (ī,j̄)
Ua,spe (aspe )
 Lemma 9: Algorithm 3 derives the optimal solution to
 = (ī − 1)wc (λ + ac ) + (V − j̄ + 1)F ∗ (aspe ) problem (17) for the special case where all edge servers have
 [wc (λ + am ) − F ∗ (aspe )]2
  
 the same amount of normal traffic.
 + (j̄ − ī) wc (λ + am ) − . Proof: See Appendix O in the supplementary material. 
 λ + am
 Algorithm 3 can derive the optimal attack strategy in
We rewrite the sub-problem under a fixed pair (ī, j̄) in low complexity. Specifically, Algorithm 3 contains V (V2+3)
problem (20) as follows loops. In each loop, SQP can solve the sub-problem (21) in
 (ī,j̄) R-quadratic convergence rate.
 max Ua,spe (aspe )
 aspe

 s.t. (ī − 1)ac + (j̄ − ī)am + (V − j̄ + 1)ae ≤ amax ,
 ac , ae , am ≥ 0, B. Optimal Attack Strategy When Edge Servers Have
 Different Normal Traffic
 (j̄ − ī)wc (λ+am )+(V − j̄ +1) Pλ+aefk
 F ∗ (aspe ) = k∈V
 , In this subsection, we solve the DDoS attacker’s optimizaj̄ − ī + 1
 1 wc tion problem (17) and derive the optimal attack strategy for
 ≥ ∗ , the general case where edge servers have different amounts
 λc + ac F (aspe )
 of normal traffic. Solving problem (17) for the general case
 1 wc − P 1 fk
 ≤ k∈V
 , if j̄ 6= V + 1, is much more challenging than that for the special case.
 λe + ae F ∗ (aspe ) The reason is that even under a fixed critical ranking pair
 ae = 0, if j̄ = V + 1, (ī, j̄), the ranking ri (a) of each defender i changes with the
 wc − P 1 attack strategy a. In this case, the calculations of the subset
 wc 1 k∈V fk
 (ī,j̄)
 A(ī, j̄) in Eq. (18) and the objective function Ua (a; x∗ ) in
 > > , if ī 6= j̄,
 F ∗ (aspe ) λm + am F ∗ (aspe ) Eq. (19) under a fixed pair (ī, j̄) have many possible outam = 0, if ī = j̄. (21) comes. Therefore, we can not simply decompose the original
 problem (17) into sub-problems under each pair (ī, j̄).
 Problem (21) is a convex quadratic problem with linear In the following, we first show a property of the opticonstraints, and we can use Sequential Quadratic Program- mal solution, based on which we design an algorithm to
ming (SQP) [37] to derive its optimal solution with a fast solve problem (17).
convergence speed. After solving the sub-problem for each The key challenge to solve problem (17) for the general case
fixed pair (ī, j̄), we next solve the original problem (17). is mainly due to the change of each defender’s ranking ri (a)
 3) A Low-Complexity Algorithm to Derive the Optimal with the attack strategy even under a fixed pair (ī, j̄). We next
Attack Strategy: The key idea to solve problem (17) for the show that there exists an optimal solution a∗ to problem (17)
special case is to derive the optimal solutions to the sub- under which the ranking of each defender sorted by the total
problems under all feasible pairs (ī, j̄), and then choose the traffic is the same as the ranking of each defender sorted by
one that can optimize the DDoS attacker’s objective function. the normal traffic.
 We show the algorithm to derive the optimal attack strategy Lemma 10: There exists an optimal attack strategy a∗ under
for the DDoS attacker in Algorithm 3. We first enumerate which λj + a∗j ≤ λk + a∗k if λj ≤ λk , ∀j, k ∈ V.
all possible (ī, j̄) pairs (Lines 2-3). For each pair (ī, j̄), we Proof: See Appendix P in the supplementary material. 
 (ī,j̄) (ī,j̄) (ī,j̄) (ī,j̄)
calculate the optimal solution aspe = (ae , ac , am ) to Lemma 10 indicates that we can optimize over the set of
the sub-problem (21) by SQP (Line 4). We derive the optimal attack strategies under which the ranking of each defender
solution a∗spe = (a∗e , a∗c , a∗m ) to problem (17) by choosing sorted by its total traffic is the same as the ranking sorted by
 (ī,j̄)
among {aspe , ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , V }, j̄ ∈ {ī, . . . , V + 1}} that can its normal traffic. In this case, each defender’s ranking ri does
maximize the attacker’s objective function Ua (aspe ; x∗ ). not change with the attack strategy a and we can decompose
3174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

problem (17) into sub-problems under each fixed pair (ī, j̄)
as follows

 max Ua(ī,j̄) (a; x∗ )
 a∈A(ī,j̄)

 s.t. λj + aj ≤ λk + ak , ∀j, k ∈ V where λj ≤ λk .
 (22)
Problem (22) is a non-linear problem with linear constraints.
However, it’s hard to analyze its convexity since its Hessian Fig. 3. Comparison of different defense methods under different values
matrix is very complex. We can use SQP to calculate its KKT of wc .
points as the approximate optimal solution. After deriving the
approximate optimal solutions to the sub-problems under all
feasible pairs (ī, j̄), we can choose the one that maximizes the Q2: How do the network parameters affect the performance
DDoS attacker’s objective function. of our proposed defense mechanism?
 We show the algorithm to derive the approximate optimal Q3: How does our derived attack strategy compare to other
attack strategy for the DDoS attacker in Algorithm 4. We baseline attack methods?
first enumerate all possible (ī, j̄) pairs (Lines 2-3). For each Q4: How does the DDoS attacker strategically behave to
pair (ī, j̄), we calculate the approximate optimal solution compromise the edge-cloud computing network?
 (ī,j̄) (ī,j̄) (ī,j̄) (ī,j̄) We compare with the following baseline defense methods
agen = (a1 , a2 , · · · , aV ) to the sub-problem (20) by
 and baseline attack methods.
SQP (Line 4). We derive the approximate optimal solution
 Baseline Defense Methods:
a∗gen = (a∗1 , a∗2 , · · · , a∗V ) to problem (17) by choosing among
 (ī,j̄) • Non-cooperative Partial Filtering (NCP) [12]: each
{agen , ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , V }, j̄ ∈ {ī, . . . , V + 1}} that can
 defender can only partially filter its traffic on itself and
maximize the attacker’s objective function Ua (agen ; x∗ ).
 on the cloud.
 • Non-cooperative Non-partial Filtering (NCNP): each
Algorithm 4 A Low-Complexity Algorithm to Derive the
 defender can only filter its traffic either on itself or on
Approximate Optimal Attack Strategy for the General Case
 the cloud.
 1: Set Agen = ∅; • Greedy Partial Filtering (GP): each defender can partially
 2: for ī = 1: V do filter its traffic on any computing node to minimize its
 3: for j̄ = ī: V + 1 do own cost in order.
 (ī,j̄)
 4: Calculate agen by solving (22) using SQP; • Greedy Non-partial Filtering (GNP): each defender can
 (ī,j̄)
 5: Agen = Agen ∪ {agen }; filter its total traffic on one computing node to minimize
 6: end for its own cost in order.
 7: end for Baseline Attack Methods:
 8: Set a∗ ∗
 gen = arg maxagen ∈Agen Ua (agen ; x ). • Times Attack: the amount of malicious traffic is k times
 of the normal traffic, and we set parameter k the same for
 We then discuss the optimality of the attack strategy derived all defenders, i.e., k = Pamaxλi and ai = kλi , ∀i ∈ V.
 i∈V
by Algorithm 4. • Uniform Attack [38]: the DDoS attacker launches the
 Lemma 11: Algorithm 4 derives an approximate optimal same amount of malicious traffic to each defender.
solution to problem (17) by finding the optimal KKT points • Random Attack: the DDoS attacker launches a random
of all sub-problems (22). amount of traffic to each defender.
 Proof: See Appendix Q in the supplementary material.  In the following, we first verify the effectiveness of
 Algorithm 4 can derive the approximate optimal attack our proposed distributed cooperative defense mechanism
strategy in low complexity. Specifically, Algorithm 4 contains (i.e., Q1 and Q2). Then we evaluate the performance of our
V (V +3)
 2 loops. In each loop, SQP can converge to the KKT derived attack strategy (i.e., Q3 and Q4).
point of sub-problem (22) in R-superlinear convergence rate.
 In this section, we have solved the DDoS attacker’s attack
problem for both the special case and the general case. We A. Effectiveness of Proposed Defense Mechanism
conduct extensive simulations to evaluate the effectiveness of In this subsection, we first compare our proposed defense
our derived attack strategy later in the next section. mechanism with other baseline defense methods (Q1). Then
 we show the impact of network parameters on the performance
 of our defense mechanism (Q2).
 VI. S IMULATION R ESULTS
 1) Comparison With Baseline Defense Methods (Q1):
 In this section, we evaluate the performance of our proposed We compare our proposed distributed cooperative defense
distributed cooperative defense mechanism. We conduct sim- mechanism with four baseline defense methods. Specifically,
ulations to answer the following questions: we consider an edge-cloud computing network with V = 10
 Q1: How does our proposed distributed cooperative defense edge servers, where the amount of suspicious traffic of each
mechanism compare to other baseline defense methods? edge server (i.e., λi + ai ) follows a uniform distribution in
WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS 3175

Fig. 4. Comparison of different defense methods under different values Fig. 5. Equilibrium filtering strategy.
of ftotal .

 P
[1000, 2000] bits. We denote ftotal , k∈V fk . Letting the
filtering capability fk of each edge server k ∈ V follow a
uniform distribution in [0, 200] bits/second and varying wc in
[0, 0.05] seconds/bit, we get the simulation results in Fig. 3.
Fixing wc = 0.05 seconds/bit and varying ftotal in [0,5000]
bits/second, we get the simulation results in Fig. 4.
 We show the comparison of defense mechanisms under
different values of wc in Fig. 3. We can see that when
wc is small, the NCP method can achieve the lowest total Fig. 6. Complexity of Algorithm 2 under different numbers of defenders.
filtering cost, while our defense mechanism (i.e., the NE)
achieves the second lowest total filtering cost. This is due
to the limited advantage offered by edge filtering compared We show the equilibrium filtering strategies under our
with the cloud scrubbing service when wc is small. When proposed distributed cooperative defense mechanism in Fig. 5.
wc is large, our mechanism achieves the lowest total filtering We consider an edge-cloud computing network with 5 edge
cost among all defense mechanisms. That is because our servers whose total suspicious traffic (in bits) are 100, 500,
defense mechanism can leverage all edge servers’ filtering 1000, 1500 and 2000, respectively, and the filtering capability
capabilities (compared with non-cooperative algorithms) and (in bits/second) of the edge servers are 50, 50, 100, 100 and
schedule each defender’s strategies better (compared with 200, respectively. We set wc = 0.01 s/bit. In this case, we can
greedy algorithms). We can also see that the total filtering calculate by Algorithm 1 that the equilibrium filtering latency
cost of our mechanism remains unchanged when wc is larger is F ∗ = 8.5. Fig. 5 shows that at equilibrium, defender 1
than a threshold. The reason is that in this case, filtering all and defender 2 are Type I (cloud-only) defenders, because the
the traffic on edge servers has a lower cost, and defenders will marginal filtering cost on the cloud is lower than the marginal
not filter their traffic on the cloud. filtering cost on edge servers. Defender 3 is a Type II (mixed-
 We show the comparison of defense mechanisms under filtering) defender since the marginal filtering cost on the cloud
different values of ftotal in Fig. 4. Note that the filtering is equal to that on edge servers. Defender 4 and defender 5 are
capability of each edge server is a random non-negative value, Type III (edge-only) defenders, because filtering on the cloud
but the total filtering capability is fixed. We consider the for them has a greater marginal filtering cost than filtering only
impact of the total filtering capability because the equilibrium on edge servers. The simulation results are consistent with our
filtering latency F ∗ depends on the total filtering capability theoretical analysis in Theorem 3.
rather than the filtering capability of an edge server according To show the scalability of our proposed distributed cooperto Theorem 3 and Eq. (11). Similar to Fig. 3, we can see ative defense mechanism, we plot the number of iterations
that our defense mechanism achieves the lowest total filtering of Algorithm 2 under different numbers of defenders D
cost when the edge filtering capability is sufficient. This val- in Fig. 6. For a fixed number of defenders, we conduct
idates the effectiveness of our distributed cooperative defense 10 simulations (where in each simulation, each defender’s
mechanism which fully utilizes the traffic scrubbing/filtering amount of suspicious traffic follows a uniform distribution in
capabilities on heterogeneous cloud and edge servers. Besides, [1000, 2000]). We set the filtering capability of each defender
the total filtering costs of the non-cooperative and non-partial as 200 bits/s and wc = 0.0001 s/bit. We set the tolerance
algorithms are zigzag curves. The reason is that the filtering of the algorithm as  = 10−6 . We can see from Fig. 6
capability of each edge server is random under each value of that while the number of iterations exhibits some variation,
ftotal , which makes these algorithms have unstable outcomes. the average number of iterations is always smaller than D,
 2) Impact of Parameters on Defense Mechanism (Q2): indicating that our defense mechanism can respond to the
We show the defense strategy under our proposed defense DDoS attack quickly. This is consistent with our complexity
mechanism, and verify the impact of network parameters on of the Algorithm 2. The fluctuations of the curve are due to
the performance of our defense mechanism.7 the shifting distance between the equilibrium filtering latency
 7 The “defender index” in figures represents defenders sorted in ascending F ∗ and the initial point, which is influenced by changes in the
order of their total suspicious traffic (i.e., λi + ai ). critical pair (ī, j̄).
3176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 7. Defenders’ filtering costs under different values of wc . Fig. 9. Comparison of different attack methods under different values of wc .

Fig. 8. Defenders’ filtering costs under different values of ftotal . Fig. 10. Comparison of different attack methods under different values
 of ftotal .

 We then verify the impact of the network operators, i.e., Both Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 demonstrate the superiority of
wc and ftotal , on the equilibrium defense strategies. Specif- our defense mechanism compared with solely utilizing cloud
ically, we consider an edge-cloud computing network with scrubbing. Furthermore, our defense mechanism proves advan-
V = 10 edge servers whose amount of suspicious traffic tageous for heavy-traffic defenders.
(i.e., λi + ai ) is 200, 400, · · · , 2000 bits, respectively. We fix
ftotal = 700 bits/second and vary wc , and get Fig. 7. We fix B. Performance of Derived Attack Strategy
wc = 0.005 seconds/bit and vary ftotal , and get Fig. 8.8
 In this subsection, we first compare our derived attack
 Fig. 7 shows defenders’ filtering costs under different values
 strategy with other baseline attack methods. Then we show
of wc . We can see that as wc increases, defenders’ filtering
 the attacker’s strategic attack strategies in different cases.
costs of all defenders increase. Furthermore, more defenders
 1) Comparison With Baseline Attack Methods (Q3): To jusfilter their traffic on edge servers at equilibrium, and fewer
 tify that our attack strategy can model the attacker’s strategic
defenders filter their traffic on the cloud due to the large cloud
 behaviors better, we compare our attack strategy derived by
filtering costs. For example, when wc = 0.001 s/bit, defenders
 Algorithm 4 with three baseline attack methods. We consider
indexed from 7 to 10 are all mixed-filtering defenders. When
 an edge-cloud computing network with V = 10 edge servers
wc = 0.009 s/bit, defenders indexed from 7 to 10 all change
 whose amount of normal traffic (i.e., λi ) follows a uniform
to be edge-only defenders. An interesting phenomenon is that
 distribution in [500, 1500] bits. The total amount of malicious
under a fixed wc , the filtering cost of mixed-filtering defender
 traffic that the DDoS attacker can launch to the edge-cloud
is larger than the filtering cost of edge-only defender. The
 computing network is amax = 5000 bits. Fig. 9 shows the
reason is that at equilibrium, the defenders with more traffic
 comparison of different attack methods under different values
filter more traffic on edge servers and defenders with less
 of wc when ftotal = 1000 bits/s. Fig. 10 shows the comparison
traffic are forced to filter their traffic on the cloud due to
 of different attack methods under different values ftotal when
congestion on edge servers. For mixed-filtering defenders, their
 wc = 0.01 s/bit. Both figures show that under our attack
filtering costs are larger since the filtering cost on the cloud
 strategy, the DDoS attacker achieves the largest utility, where
is large.
 the utility increase can be up to 27.7%. The reason is that our
 Fig. 8 shows defenders’ filtering costs under different values
 attack strategy optimization problem allows the DDoS attacker
of ftotal . We can see that as the total filtering capability ftotal
 to strategically launch different amounts of malicious traffic
increases, more defenders filter their traffic on edge servers at
 to different edge servers, and further considers the defense
equilibrium, and defenders’ filtering costs decrease. The reastrategy of the edge-cloud computing network. Note that when
son is that when edge servers have larger filtering capabilities,
 wc or ftotal increases to a certain value, all defenders choose
the congestion effect due to resource sharing among defenders
 to be edge-only defenders at equilibrium and filter all their
is effectively alleviated, and the traffic filtering latency on edge
 traffic proportionally on edge servers. In this case, different
servers is smaller.
 attack methods achieve the same performance due to the same
 8 To show the type of each defender at equilibrium, we use circle, star equilibrium filtering latency F ∗ .
and square to represent defenders of Type I (cloud-only), Type II (mixed- 2) Attacker’s Strategic Attack Behaviors (Q4): We show the
filtering), and Type III (edge-only). The solid line represents each defender’s
filtering cost under our defense mechanism, and the dotted line represents DDoS attacker’s optimal attack strategy for both the special
each defender’s filtering cost if it only filters traffic on the cloud. case and the general case.
WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS 3177

 the DDoS attacker’s strategic attack behavior. We model the
 interactions between the DDoS attacker and defenders as a
 two-stage dynamic game. We solve the total filtering cost
 minimization problem in Stage II by modeling defenders’
 traffic filtering behaviors as a selfish filtering game, for which
 we prove the uniqueness of the Nash equilibrium. By utilizing
 the property that the equilibrium filtering latency on each edge
 server is the same, we design a distributed algorithm for each
Fig. 11. Optimal attack strategy in special case. defender to derive its equilibrium filtering strategy without
 knowing the global information. We further prove that the PoA
 of the derived NE has an upper bound, indicating guaranteed
 social efficiency. For the DDoS attacker’s optimal attack problem in Stage I, we design low-complexity algorithms to derive
 the optimal attack strategies. Simulation results show that the
 DDoS attacker tends to attack all edge servers to reduce their
 cooperative defense capability, and our defense mechanism
 can achieve a better defense performance compared with
 existing benchmark mechanisms. For future work, it would be
 interesting to study defense mechanisms under more general
Fig. 12. Approximate optimal attack strategy in general case. attacker models (e.g., boundedly rational, heuristic, or adaptive
 attackers) and dynamic system parameters.
 Fig. 11 shows the DDoS attacker’s optimal attack strategy
for the special case. We consider an edge-cloud computing
 R EFERENCES
network with 10 edge servers that have equal normal traffic
of 1000 bits. We assume that the total amount of malicious [1] X. Ren, C. Qiu, Z. Chen, X. Wang, D. Niyato, and W. Wang,
 “CompCube: A space-time-request resource trading framework for edgetraffic (in bits) that the DDoS attacker can launch to the cloud service market,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 16, no. 5,
edge-cloud computing network is amax = 4000 bits. We set pp. 3252–3264, Sep. 2023.
wc = 0.01 s/bit and ftotal = 200 bits/s. In this case, the DDoS [2] Q. Ma, Y. Qin, C. Zhu, L. Gao, and X. Chen, “Joint resource trading
 and task scheduling in edge-cloud computing networks,” IEEE Trans.
attacker’s optimal attack strategy derived by Algorithm 3 Netw., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 994–1008, Jun. 2025.
is a∗c = 0, a∗m = 400, a∗e = 0. In other words, all defenders [3] Q. Ma, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Gao, and X. Chen, “Efficient service selecchoose to be mixed-filtering defenders at equilibrium, and tion and pricing in edge-cloud computing markets,” IEEE Trans. Netw.,
 vol. 34, pp. 471–485, Aug. 2026, doi: 10.1109/TON.2025.3599685.
the DDoS attacker evenly distributes its malicious traffic to [4] S. T. Zargar, J. Joshi, and D. Tipper, “A survey of defense mechanisms
each defender. Based on Lemma 6, the PoA is less than 2 against distributed denial of service (DDoS) flooding attacks,” IEEE
when defenders’ total suspicious traffic is equal. This indicates Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2046–2069, 4th Quart., 2013.
 [5] X. Li et al., “Determinacy-oriented task offloading scheduling against
that our defense mechanism can achieve effective defense DoS attack for TSN-based edge computing architecture,” IEEE Trans.
performance. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7449–7458, May 2024.
 Fig. 12 shows the approximate optimal attack strategy [6] X. Xia et al., “EdgeShield: Enabling collaborative DDoS mitigation at the edge,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 12,
derived by Algorithm 4 for the general case. We consider an pp. 14502–14513, Dec. 2024.
edge-cloud computing network with 10 edge servers whose [7] X. Chen, L. Xiao, W. Feng, N. Ge, and X. Wang, “DDoS defense for
normal traffic follows a uniform distribution in [500, 1500]. We IoT: A Stackelberg game model-enabled collaborative framework,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9659–9674, Jun. 2022.
set amax = 5000 bits, wc = 0.001 s/bit, and ftotal = 5000 [8] (2023). Global DDoS Attack Status and Trend Analysis in 2022.
bits/s. We can see from the Fig. 12 that defenders indexed [Online]. Available: https://e.huawei.com/cn/material/networking/
from 1 to 4 have the same amount of total traffic under security/333e0bdd9694437e80aac4b436781fe3
 [9] (2023). Protecting Your Bus. From Cyber Attacks. [Online]. Available:
attack, and defenders indexed 9 and 10 also have identical https://go.zayo.com/zayo-ddos-protection-ebook/
total traffic. In comparison with the original normal traffic, the [10] A. Praseed and P. S. Thilagam, “DDoS attacks at the applicatotal traffic of each defender under attack becomes closer, as tion layer: Challenges and research perspectives for safeguarding
 Web applications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 1,
evidenced by a decrease in standard deviation from 285.97 to pp. 661–685, 1st Quart., 2019.
141.96. Experiments under different parameter settings show [11] W. You, L. Jiao, J. Li, and R. Zhou, “Scheduling DDoS cloud scrubbing
that the standard deviation of the total traffic is lower than in ISP networks via randomized online auctions,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 1658–1667.
that of the normal traffic. As discussed in Section IV-D, the [12] H. Li et al., “A cooperative defense framework against application-level
PoA is small when edge servers’ total traffic does not exhibit DDoS attacks on mobile edge computing services,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
significant variations. Therefore, our defense mechanism can Comput., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Jan. 2023.
 [13] I. Fajjari, N. Aitsaadi, G. Pujolle, and H. Zimmermann, “VNE-AC: Virstill effectively mitigate the strategic DDoS attacks in general tual network embedding algorithm based on ant colony Metaheuristic,”
cases. in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2011, pp. 1–6.
 [14] K. Kalkan, L. Altay, G. Gür, and F. Alagöz, “JESS: Joint entropy-based
 DDoS defense scheme in SDN,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 36,
 VII. C ONCLUSION no. 10, pp. 2358–2372, Oct. 2018.
 [15] R. Zhou, Y. Zeng, L. Jiao, Y. Zhong, and L. Song, “Online and predictive
 In this paper, we design a distributed cooperative defense coordinated cloud-edge scrubbing for DDoS mitigation,” IEEE Trans.
mechanism for edge-cloud computing networks considering Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 9208–9223, Oct. 2024.
3178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

[16] Q. He et al., “A game-theoretical approach for mitigating edge DDoS Yifei Wu received the B.E. degree from Central
 attack,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, China Normal University in 2023. He is currently
 pp. 2333–2348, Jul. 2022. pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Intel-
[17] O. A. Wahab, J. Bentahar, H. Otrok, and A. Mourad, “Resource-aware ligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University.
 detection and defense system against multi-type attacks in the cloud: His research interests include edge and cloud com-
 Repeated Bayesian Stackelberg game,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure puting, network economics, and online learning.
 Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 605–622, Mar. 2021.
[18] H. Li, J. Wu, H. Xu, G. Li, and M. Guizani, “Explainable intelligencedriven defense mechanism against advanced persistent threats: A joint
 edge game and AI approach,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
 vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 757–775, Mar. 2022.
[19] L. Xiao, D. Xu, C. Xie, N. B. Mandayam, and H. V. Poor, “Cloud Fan Yang received the M.S. degree from the School
 storage defense against advanced persistent threats: A prospect theoretic of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
 study,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 534–544, University (SYSU), Shenzhen, China, in 2025. His
 Mar. 2017. primary research interests include edge computing,
[20] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, and S. Yu, “An SDN-enabled proactive defense game theory, and online learning.
 framework for DDoS mitigation in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 5366–5380, 2021.
[21] J. Liu, X. Wang, S. Shen, G. Yue, S. Yu, and M. Li, “A Bayesian
 Q-learning game for dependable task offloading against DDoS attacks
 in sensor edge cloud,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 9,
 pp. 7546–7561, May 2021.
[22] S. Myneni, A. Chowdhary, D. Huang, and A. Alshamrani, Qian Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 “SmartDefense: A distributed deep defense against DDoS attacks from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommuniwith edge computing,” Comput. Netw., vol. 209, May 2022, Art. no. cations, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree from
 108874. the Department of Information Engineering, The
[23] Y. Feng, W. Zhang, S. Yin, H. Tang, Y. Xiang, and Y. Zhang, “A Chinese University of Hong Kong, in 2017. From
 collaborative stealthy DDoS detection method based on reinforcement 2018 to 2019, she was a Post-Doctoral Research
 learning at the edge of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., Associate with Northeastern University. She is curvol. 10, no. 20, pp. 17934–17948, Oct. 2023. rently an Associate Professor with the School
[24] Y. Deng et al., “Resource provisioning for mitigating edge DDoS of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
 attacks in MEC-enabled SDVN,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 23, University. Her research interests include network
 pp. 24264–24280, Dec. 2022. optimization and economics. She was a recipient of
[25] H. Huang, B. Sun, and L. Hu, “A task offloading approach based on risk the Best Paper Award from the IEEE International Symposium on Modeling
 assessment to mitigate edge DDoS attacks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks (WiOpt) in 2021,
 May 2024, Art. no. 103789. and the Best Student Paper Award from the IEEE International Symposium
[26] Y. Xu, S. Zhang, C. Lyu, J. Liu, Y. Shen, and S. Norio, “Mitigating on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks
 distributed DoS attacks on bandwidth allocation for federated learning (WiOpt) in 2015.
 in mobile edge networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
 vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1941–1960, May 2025.
[27] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, Z. Ouyang, and Z. Chen, “Resource-efficient low- Guocheng Liao (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
 rate DDoS mitigation with moving target defense in edge clouds,” degree from Sun Yat-sen University in 2016 and the
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 168–186, Ph.D. degree from the Department of Information
 Feb. 2025. Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
[28] Z. Chen, Q. Ma, L. Gao, and X. Chen, “Price competition in multi- in 2021. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
 server edge computing networks under SAA and SIQ models,” IEEE the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
 Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 754–768, Jan. 2024. University. His current research interests include
[29] (2024). Huawei HiSecEngine AntiDDoS1900 DDoS Pro- data privacy, game theory, and mechanism design.
 tection System Datasheet-V600R23C10–Huawei Enterprise. He received the 2017 IEEE GLOBECOM ComSoc
 [Online]. Available: https://e.huawei.com/eu/material/enterprise/ Young Professional Best Paper Award.
 df5547163f8e4743b9f21363afcc3fa1
[30] T. Roughgarden and É. Tardos, “How bad is selfish routing?,” J. ACM, Xu Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 236–259, Mar. 2002. degree in information engineering from The Chinese
[31] Alibaba. Anti-DDoS: Intelligent DDoS Protection Service. Accessed: University of Hong Kong in 2012. He was a Post-
 Jan. 20, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.alibabacloud.com/en/ Doctoral Research Associate with Arizona State
 product/ddos? p lc=1 University, Tempe, AZ, USA, from 2012 to 2014,
[32] X. Chen, W. Feng, Y. Luo, M. Shen, N. Ge, and X. Wang, “Defending and a Humboldt Scholar Fellow with the Institute
 against link flooding attacks in Internet of Things: A Bayesian game of Computer Science, University of Göttingen, Gerapproach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 117–128, Jan. many, from 2014 to 2016. He is currently a Full
 2022. Professor with Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
[33] X. Chen, L. Jiao, W. Li, and X. Fu, “Efficient multi-user computation China, and the Vice Director of the National and
 offloading for mobile-edge cloud computing,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., Local Joint Engineering Laboratory. He received the
 vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2795–2808, Oct. 2016. prestigious Humboldt Research Fellowship awarded by the Alexander von
[34] J. B. Rosen, “Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave Humboldt Foundation of Germany, the 2014 Hong Kong Young Scientist
 N-Person games,” Econometrica, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 520–534, Jul. 1965. Runner-Up Award, the 2017 IEEE Communication Society Asia–Pacific
[35] T. Roughgarden, Selfish Routing and the Price of Anarchy. Cambridge, Outstanding Young Researcher Award, the 2017 IEEE ComSoc Young Pro-
 MA, USA: MIT Press, 2005. fessional Best Paper Award, the Honorable Mention Award of 2010 IEEE
[36] M. Shreedhar and G. Varghese, “Efficient fair queuing using deficit International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), the
 round-robin,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 375–385, Jun. Best Paper Runner-Up Award of 2014 IEEE International Conference on
 1996. Computer Communications (INFOCOM), and the Best Paper Award of 2017
[37] U. M. G. Palomares and O. L. Mangasarian, “Superlinearly conver- IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). He is an Area
 gent quasi-Newton algorithms for nonlinearly constrained optimization Editor of IEEE O PEN J OURNAL OF THE C OMMUNICATIONS S OCIETY and
 problems,” Math. Program., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Dec. 1976. an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON W IRELESS C OMMUNICA -
[38] J. Yao, G. Ding, and T. Zhu, “Detection of non-uniform Byzantine TIONS , IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 attacks in collaborative spectrum sensing,” in Proc. IET Int. Conf. Inf. V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY, and IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN
 Commun. Technol. (IETICT), Apr. 2013, pp. 446–451. C OMMUNICATIONS Series on Network Softwarization and Enablers.