4562 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 DRL-Based Weakly Supervised Traffic Anomaly
 Detection for IoT Networks
 Ziteng Wang , Yiheng Ruan, Xianjun Deng , Senior Member, IEEE, Xiaoxuan Fan , Student Member, IEEE,
 Shenghao Liu , Wei Feng, and Deng Zhang

 Abstract—With the proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT) Index Terms—Internet of Things (IoT), network traffic,
devices, IoT systems face increasingly severe threats from large- anomaly detection, deep reinforcement learning, weakly supervised
scale cyberattacks during network communications. To effectively learning.
recognize potential network threats and ensure the security of
IoT, network traffic anomaly detection has been widely studied.
Due to the high cost of manual labeling in real-world scenarios, I. INTRODUCTION
only limited network traffic data is explicitly labeled as abnormal ITH the rapid advancement of network technologies
or normal. However, most existing anomaly detection methods
struggle to enhance detection accuracy with minimal supervision
and perform ineffectively at identifying potential unknown anoma-
 W and widespread adoption of connected devices, Internet
 of Things (IoT) has been increasingly integrated into diverse
lies in unlabeled data. To address these limitations, this paper domains, such as smart city, healthcare and manufacturing,
proposes WADE, a Weakly supervised Anomaly DEtection method demonstrating immense market potential. By 2025, global IoT
based on Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). WADE enables device count is projected to reach 75 billion [1], while IoT market
simultaneous identification of known and unknown anomaly traffic
with limited labeled data. Specifically, it incorporates a Dueling Qsize is anticipated to attain $76.97 billion. In IoT networks, the
network architecture and introduces a novel reward optimization deployment of large-scale devices and the complexity of netmechanism that: 1) strengthens feature extraction from unlabeled work communications lead to generate massive data traffic. Condata and 2) elevates decision accuracy via dynamic reward adapta- sequently, the risk of cyber-attacks, such as denial-of-service,
tion. Extensive experiments on IoT traffic datasets demonstrate on IoT systems is escalating, posing a growing threat to IoT
that WADE outperforms four peer weakly supervised methods,
achieving performance improvements of 12.2% in Area Under
 security [2].
the Precision-Recall Curve (AUC-PR) and 6.6% in Area Under Although security solutions such as encryption algorithms,
the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC), which authentication protocols and firewalls can mitigate threats to
validate the effectiveness of WADE in safeguarding IoT systems. some extent, IoT networks remain vulnerable to numerous malicious activities. Anomaly detection (AD) is a critical field
 Received 4 June 2025; revised 11 November 2025; accepted 30 November in data mining that aims to identify deviant samples within a
2025. Date of publication 4 December 2025; date of current version 24 December
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and general data distribution [3]. Within IoT network scenarios, traf-
Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFE0138600, in part by the fic anomaly detection facilitates the recognition of anomalous
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U24B20153, Grant behaviors and potential threats, thereby enhancing the security
62272182, Grant 62472442, and Grant 62202181, in part by the Hubei Provincial
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 2023AFB998, in part by the and stability of networks [4].
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Huazhong University In real-world scenarios, network traffic data often exhibits
of Science and Technology under Grant YCJJ20251306, Grant YCJJ20252330, a static nature and encompasses multiple characteristics (feaand Grant 2025JYCXJJ060, in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant JCYJ20220530161004009, in part by the Chongqing Natural tures). Given the large-scale deployment and inherent resource
Science Foundation of China under Grant CSTB2024NSCQMSX0812, and in limitations of IoT devices, only limited traffic data is typically
part by the Scientific and Technological Research Program of Chongqing Mu- labeled as normal or abnormal. These labeled abnormal data with
nicipal Education Commission under Grant KJZDK202401604. Recommended
for acceptance by Dr. Jiong Jin. (Ziteng Wang and Yiheng Ruan are co-first specific classes (types) is regarded as known anomalies. On the
authors.) (Corresponding author: Xianjun Deng.) other hand, extensive unlabeled data encompasses both known
 Ziteng Wang, Yiheng Ruan, and Xiaoxuan Fan are with the Hubei Key Labora- classes of anomalies and previously unseen classes of anomalies,
tory of Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big
Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University referred as unknown anomalies [5]. Recently, Deep Learning
of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: wzt@hust.edu.cn; (DL) algorithms have emerged as pivotal tools in cybersecurity
ruanyiheng@hust.edu.cn; fxxdx@hust.edu.cn). applications, offering advanced solutions for network traffic
 Xianjun Deng and Shenghao Liu are with the Hubei Key Laboratory of
Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data anomaly detection. DL can automatically extract data features
Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of without extensive and laborious feature selection [6], which
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the Shenzhen is well-suited for handling high-dimensional and large-scale
Huazhong University of Science and Technology Research Institute, Shenzhen
518057, China (e-mail: dengxj615@hust.edu.cn; liushenghao@hust.edu.cn). network traffic. Therefore, we focus on DL-based anomaly
 Wei Feng and Deng Zhang are with the Network and Industrial Con- detection to identify known and unknown anomaly traffic, as
trol Information Security Technology Department, China Nuclear Power illustrated in Fig. 1.
Operation Technology Company, Ltd., Wuhan 430070, China (e-mail:
fengwei01@cnnp.com.cn; zhangdeng@cnnp.com.cn). Considering the anomaly detection task involving large-scale
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3640175 unlabeled data (consisting mostly of normal data) and limited
 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS 4563

 ignoring critical state features. Additionally, DQN struggles
 in high-dimensional state spaces, limiting its ability to extract
 action-relevant information from complex states. Furthermore,
 the combined reward function in DPLAN cannot fully explore
 unknown anomalies in unlabeled data, for which the reward
 mechanism fails to provide optimal training rewards.
 Motivated by these challenges and inspired by [13], this
 paper further proposes a DRL-based weakly supervised anomaly
 detection method (WADE) to fully explore unlabeled data and
 identify unknown anomaly traffic for IoT networks. Firstly,
 Dueling Q-network (Dueling DQN) is adopted [19] as network
 architecture of the agent, enhancing its modeling capacity and
Fig. 1. An illustration of IoT network anomaly detection, where 0 and 1 learning efficiency by accurately capturing relationships berespectively represent labels for normal and abnormal traffic, n represents no
labels. The network attacks generate abnormal traffic affecting network security. tween states and actions under anomaly conditions. Secondly,
Through DL empowered AD system, both known and unknown anomalies are a novel reward optimization mechanism is designed to enhance
identified to safeguard the security of network communication. learning from unlabeled data. In this mechanism, Variational
 Auto-Encoder (VAE) [20] is adopted to design intrinsic reward
 function, which improves detection performance for unlabeled
labeled anomalies that only cover partial classes of anomalies, data without supervision. Then an external reward function that
it is consequently hard to employ supervised learning methods balances internal factors (from unlabeled data) and external
like [7], [8], [9] that rely on comprehensive labeled data for train- factors (from labeled data) is designed, which encourages the
ing anomaly detection models. Unsupervised learning methods agent to learn known anomalies while amplifying rewards for
like [10], [11], [12] train anomaly detection models without potential correct detections in unlabeled data. Furthermore, we
using labeled data, which can detect diverse anomalies (different employ Magnify Saltatory Reward (MSR) algorithm [21] for
classes of anomalies) since they are not constrained by labeled anomaly detection, and thus design a MSR reward optimizer
data [13]. However, the detection accuracy of these methods that continuously monitors changes in rewards. The optimizer
decreases as the false positive rate increases, rendering them dynamically adjusts current reward by magnifying or decreasing
inadequate to meet specific requirements. Semi-/weakly super- it under real-time conditions.
vised learning methods utilize only limited labeled anomalies The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
and can provide valuable information for training [14], which r A Dueling DQN-based anomaly detection framework is
are thus more relevant to this study. These methods offer signifi- proposed to identify both known and unknown abnormal
cant advantages in reducing computational costs and enhancing network traffic patterns in partially labeled data.
efficiency, demonstrating the scalability for large-scale datasets. r A reward optimization mechanism that fully explores un-
However, current semi-supervised learning methods still have labeled data is designed, which consists of VAE-based
certain problems. Typically, methods in [15], [16] are primarily intrinsic reward function, external reward function and
designed to detect only known anomalies, failing to identify MSR reward optimizer.
unknown anomalies that are absent from the training set. In r Extensive experiments on real-world IoT traffic datasets
contrast, methods in [3], [17], [18] can detect both known and demonstrate that WADE outperforms four weakly superunknown anomalies. However, during training phase, they ne- vised methods, achieving average improvements of 12.2%
glect to explore potential anomalies in unlabeled data, resulting in AUC-PR and 6.6% in AUC-ROC.
the decrease in accuracy of unknown anomaly detection. The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II intro-
 To address the aforementioned issues of semi-supervised duces the research background and comprehensively reviews
methods based on deep learning, DPLAN [13] leverages the various DL-based traffic anomaly detection methods. Section III
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) framework to learn describes the tailed DRL for traffic anomaly detection task.
anomalies in both labeled and unlabeled data. DRL au- Section IV presents the details of WADE. Section V presents
tonomously learns normal and abnormal traffic patterns from experimental results. Section VI concludes this paper.
massive data without extensive manual annotation, making it
ideal for large-scale network traffic analysis. Moreover, DRL II. RESEARCH BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
adapts to dynamic network environments through real-time
 A. IoT Network Traffic Data
decision-making, improving detection accuracy for both known
and unknown anomalies. However, the Deep Q-Network (DQN) IoT network traffic data refers to the packets, protocol interacused in the agent of DPLAN struggles to effectively model tions and connection behaviors generated by IoT devices during
state-instance relationships. For network traffic anomaly detec- network communication. The accidental operational patterns
tion, different traffic states have varying importance in iden- of devices make anomalous traffic indicating potential security
tifying anomalies, while DQN’s direct learning of Q-values threats. This characteristic has established IoT traffic data as
fails to separate state values from action advantages, potentially a foundation for cybersecurity research [22]. Table I provides
4564 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I C. Anomaly Detection Model Architecture
 IOT NETWORK TRAFFIC DATASETS AND ATTACK TYPES
 Considering different model architectures, network traffic
 anomaly detection studies are categorized into forecastingbased, reconstruction-based and hybrid approaches, summarized in Table II.
 1) Forecasting-Based Models: These methods train predictive models that comprehensively capture traffic patterns.
 Researchers have employed Convolutional Neural Networks
 (CNN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Long Short-
 Term Memory (LSTM)-based temporal models for traffic
 anomaly detection. Bakhsh et al. [29] integrate Feedforward
 Neural Networks (FFNN), LSTM and Random Neural Networks (RandNN), where FFNN handles complex traffic patterns, LSTM captures long-term dependencies and RandNN
 provides dynamic adaptability. Wang et al. [30] propose an
 attention-weighted model combining bidirectional LSTM and
 self-attention mechanism, which captures packet transmission
 relationships by constructing a perceptual node collection graph.
detailed descriptions of representative IoT network traffic Moreover, multiple enhancement strategies of traditional LSTM
datasets with their attack types. are recently studied. Zou et al. [31] design a feature-attended
 multi-flow LSTM that employs an innovative feature grouping
 algorithm. Wang et al. [32] propose a spatial-temporal knowl-
B. Network Traffic Anomaly Detection Workflow edge distillation framework that integrates spatial-temporal
 1) Data Preprocessing: Network traffic data contains both residual networks and focal loss function, effectively addressing
numerical and categorical features, where the preprocessing is model complexity and class imbalance issues by stacking CNN
required to support AD task. For categorical features, one-hot and LSTM modules.
encoding is typically employed to convert them into numeri- The Graph Neural Networks (GNN)-based methods also atcal form by creating binary columns. For numerical features, tracted great attention recently. Caville et al. [33] leverage edge
Min-Max/Z-Score normalization is required to eliminate scale features and graph topological structure in self-supervised prodifferences. The former scales features to [0,1] range, which cess for GNN-based anomaly detection. Duan et al. [34] propose
is effective for bounded distributions with limited anomalies. the dynamic line GNN using semi-supervised paradigm, signif-
The latter standardizes features to achieve zero mean and unit icantly enhancing performance through spatiotemporal graph
variance, exhibiting enhanced robustness against anomalies. modeling and message aggregation. Furthermore, to achieve
 2) Anomaly Detection: During training, anomaly detection lightweight AD for IoT network, Zhou et al. [35] design a graph
models learn to distinguish feature patterns between normal representation learning model combining GNN and knowledge
and anomalous traffic by optimizing network parameters. Then, distillation. Based on Graph Attention Network (GAT) and MLP,
anomaly scores are calculated to evaluate the anomaly degrees. it extracts structural and traffic features from graph and traffic
In practical applications, the trained models execute real-time data respectively, improving knowledge transfer efficiency and
analysis of incoming network traffic to identify potential anoma- classification accuracy.
lies [28]. 2) Reconstruction-Based Models: These methods detect
 3) Performance Evaluation: Multiple metrics are required anomalies by comparing the inputs with their reconstructed
for comprehensive evaluation, mainly comprising: outputs. Autoencoder (AE) and its improved variants show
 r Accuracy: quantifies the ratio of correctly predicted in- remarkable efficacy in unsupervised anomaly detection by learnstances, representing the overall classification efficiency. ing normal data distributions through encoding-decoding, while
 r Precision: evaluates the capability to correctly identify true producing significant reconstruction errors for anomalous inpositive samples while considering false alarm rates. puts. Lanvin et al. [36] introduce a novel p-value statistical analr Recall: assesses the ability to detect all positive instances, ysis of reconstruction errors, enabling both accurate anomaly
 reflecting the effectiveness in identifying anomalies. detection and interpretable feature localization. Then, to address
 r F1-score: provides a harmonic mean of precision and re- the challenge of threshold setting in AE, Tang et al. [37] design
 call, offering balanced performance evaluation particularly an adaptive reconstruction error threshold algorithm that dyfor attack detection scenarios. namically optimizes thresholds by jointly modeling training data
 r AUC-ROC: assesses the model discrimination capability distribution and anomaly priors. In addition, Zhang et al. [38]
 across all possible thresholds using the area under the propose a Linear Autoencoder (LAE) by directly removing
 receiver operating characteristic curve. the activation function from AE, and introduces adversarial
 r AUC-PR: assesses performance via the area under the methods from image domain into network intrusion detection.
 precision-recall curve, particularly valuable for imbal- Alrayes et al. [39] emphasis on the effectiveness of the Denoising
 anced datasets where anomalies are rare. Autoencoder (DAE) for identifying and mitigating intrusions.
WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS 4565

 TABLE II
 A COMPARISON OF TRAFFIC AD METHODS WITH DIFFERENT MODEL ARCHITECTURES

 Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) and its variants have
shown remarkable effectiveness in addressing data imbalance D. Anomaly Detection Learning Strategy
issues. Wang et al. [40] employ conditional tabular GAN to This section reviews different anomaly detection learning
generate minority class samples, significantly improving mul- strategies including continual learning, online learning and DRL
ticlass detection accuracy through enhanced data diversity and for dynamic IoT environments, summarized in Table III.
particularly excelling in detecting rare attack types. Changala 1) Continual Learning (CL): For dynamic IoT environet al. [41] integrate Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for ments, CL-based methods enable anomaly detection systems to
feature selection, enabling dimensionality reduction while ex- continuously evolve through progressive knowledge accumulatracting fundamental traffic patterns. It then leverages GAN to tion and adaptation to emerging threats. Memory replay reprelearn the distribution of normal traffic and generate synthetic sents a crucial direction in CL studies. Channappayya et al. [48]
samples for anomaly detection. AE-WGAN [42] creatively com- propose the augmented memory replay framework innovabines advantages of denoising autoencoders and wasserstein tively integrating class-balanced reservoir sampling (CBRS) and
GAN, achieving superior performance. perturbation-assisted parameter approximation (PAPA). CBRS
 3) Hybrid Models: These methods integrate multiple DL addresses class imbalance issues, while PAPA reduces training
paradigms to significantly improve model performance and time and enhances practical deployment. For privacy preservadaptability. Yang et al. [43] innovatively combine 1D-CNN ing, SPIDER [49] combines gradient projection memory with
and BERT, effectively addressing the challenge of extracting semi-supervised continual learning, attaining performance comcomplex payload dependencies. Latif et al. [44] transform net- parable to fully supervised approaches using merely 20% labeled
work data into image formats for CNN-driven feature analysis, data.
employs GA for hyperparameter optimization and ultimately To address the concept drift issue in IoT networks, Amalapuutilizes ensemble techniques. Similarly, ENIDS [45] adopts ram et al. [50] conduct a comparison of elastic weight consoltwo-layer ensemble architecture, where the base layer comprises idation and gradient episodic memory across various learning
CNN, LSTM and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) as base learners, environments. Experimental results reveal that a hybrid stratthe top layer employs DNN for meta-learning. Furthermore, egy enhanced by experience forgetting-aware memory filling,
Kunang et al. [46] utilize multiple autoencoder variants for achieves optimal performance in domain incremental learning
unsupervised feature extraction, achieving near 100% ACC. scenarios. Zhang et al. [51] propose the strategic CL that in-
Zhong et al. [47] design DNN and contrastive learning-based corporates a dynamic memory buffer and strategic forgetting
framework integrating GAN and deep K-Nearest Neighbor mechanism. By selecting representative drifting samples and
(KNN), which can implicitly defend against adversarial attacks eliminating outdated knowledge, it enables continuous adaptaand detect fine-grained unknown attacks. tion to novel network threats.
4566 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE III
 A COMPARISON OF TRAFFIC AD METHODS WITH DIFFERENT LEARNING STRATEGIES

 Jin et al. [52] propose a federated learning-based intrusion framework that leverages deep stochastic neural networks to endetection framework, utilizing class gradient balance loss to able autonomous learning, completely eliminating dependency
reduce the learning of new classes and sample label smoothing on pre-training and manual annotation. It demonstrates potential
loss to enhance the model memory for old classes. It then for real-time monitoring in resource-limited scenarios. Latest
employ relay client fusing sample reconstruction to mitigate the research [58] introduces a novel drift-adaptive ensemble learnspread of catastrophic forgetting globally without compromising ing framework comprising three stages (preprocessing, base
data privacy. Latest research [53] leverages a learning-based model learning and online ensemble), specifically combining
feature extractor that dynamically updates representations and a four online learning methods and optimizing key parameters
novelty detector leveraging PCA reconstruction mechanism to through particle swarm optimization.
identify emerging attacks, achieving efficient continual learning 3) Deep Reinforcement Learning: DRL has demonstrated
for streaming data. human-level capability, making it increasingly important for
 2) Online Learning (OL): Online learning contributes to anomaly detection [72]. In term of DQN and its variants, Dong
real-time anomaly detection in dynamic environments through et al. [59] develop a semi-supervised framework combining
model adaptation. Odiathevar et al. [54] propose a offline-online autoencoder with double DQN. Specifically, the current network
framework where the offline model establishes benchmark fea- is responsible for feature reconstruction and classification, while
tures of normal traffic and online component dynamically ad- the target network leverages K-Means clustering for auxiliary
justs detection threshold. Then, Wahab et al. [55] propose an predictions. DC-IDS [60] further focuses on two sub-tasks
integrated detection-adaptation framework that employs PCA- (known traffic fine-grained classification and unknown attacks
based feature variance analysis for concept drift detection. identification) and applies conditional VAE-enhanced DQN for
The system dynamically optimizes its online DNN architecture reconstructing traffic features. Furthermore, Shen et al. [61]
through a hedge weighting mechanism, reducing in false pos- propose a zero-day attacks detection system for social IoT, which
itives while maintaining stable long-term detection accuracy. first processes the traffic samples and computes similarity scores.
Gelenbe et al. [56] propose a novel distributed intrusion de- Then the LSTM-based DQN is adopted to optimize the heuristic
tection algorithm that features online self-supervised federated learning network strategy by maximizing cumulative rewards.
learning capabilities and employs the Dense Random Neural For other structures, Mouyart et al. [62] integrate condi-
Networks (DRNN). Moreover, Zhang et al. [28] propose an on- tional tabular GAN with multi-agent reinforcement learning,
line intrusion detection system that integrats the pseudo-label au- utilizing generated synthetic samples to balance the dataset.
toencoder with customized contrastive loss function, effectively Similarly, Louati et al. also [63] employ a distributed multiachieving autonomous evolution of features and novel attacks agent reinforcement learning framework, which harnesses
detection. Nakip et al. [57] present an online self-supervised collaborative inter-agent communication, parallelized data
WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS 4567

 TABLE IV
 A COMPARISON OF TABULAR AD METHODS WITH DIFFERENT LEARNING PARADIGMS

preprocessing and cloud-based computational resources. Then, adapts to a set of interrelated training data distributions, enabling
Strickland et al. [64] propose to train models using synthetic automatic zero-shot generalization to unseen anomaly detection
data generated by GAN. Experimental results demonstrate that tasks. Furthermore, Tsai et al. [70] leverage large language
DRL-based models achieve superior detection performance of models (LLMs) for unsupervised tabular anomaly detection. By
minority classes when trained on GAN-generated data rather converting tabular data into textual formats, fine-tuned LLMs
than imbalanced real-world datasets. Furthermore, He et al. [65] process serialized input and calculate anomaly scores based on
introduce a universal state representation and adaptive reward negative log-likelihood.
mechanism, achieving cross-dataset generalization. The system For semi-/weakly supervised learning paradigm, DevNet [73],
converts raw traffic into standardized environmental states, en- PReNet [17], EDAE [3] DPLAN [13], FEAWAD [18] and Dualsuring dimensional independence. MGAN [14] are latest methods. DevNet assumes a gaussian
 prior on anomaly scores and generates reference score samples
E. Tabular Anomaly Detection accordingly. The deviation loss ensures normal data clusters
 around reference scores while maintaining significant separa-
 Given the structural similarities between tabular and network
 tion from labeled anomaly scores. PReNet extends DevNet by
traffic data, AD techniques for tabular can be effectively adapted
 employing relation neural network to minimize the three-way
for network traffic data. Therefore, this section reviews the
 prediction loss. It learns both pairwise relation features and
advanced tabular AD methods, as summarized in Table IV.
 anomaly scores of randomly selected instance pairs. FEAWAD
 For unsupervised learning paradigm, Qiu et al. [10] design
 improves on DevNet by integrating AE to encode inputs. It
two coupled loss functions to extract learning signals from
 uses hidden representation, reconstruction residual vector and
noisy datasets and utilize iterative block coordinate updates to
 reconstruction errors to enhance scores learning. EDAE deteroptimize model parameters and label inferences, demonstratmines the anomaly threshold by estimating score distribution
ing strong generalization capabilities across tabular, image and
 and employs an empirical distribution-based batch sampling
video AD tasks. SLAD [11] utilizes scale-annotated data to train
 strategy to enhance robustness against data contamination. Dualmodels and introduces a data-driven supervision mechanism to
 MGAN detects both discrete anomalies and partially identified
derive anomaly scores directly from loss values. To overcome
 group anomalies. It utilizes multiple generative adversarial acdata augmentation challenges for contrastive learning-based tabtive learning to construct reference distribution and multiple genular AD, Tao et al. [67] leverages semantic information from colerative adversarial over-sampling to balance minority classes.
umn names to generate effective augmented views. Yin et al. [68]
 DPLAN employs DQN to detect both known and unknown
adapt masked modeling paradigms from vision/language doanomalies by interactively exploiting labeled anomalies and acmains to tabular data and propose MCM, which incorporates
 tively exploring unlabeled data for rare anomalies. Additionally,
learnable masking strategy to determine input-specific masking
 Dong et al. [71] propose nearest neighbor gaussian mix-up for
patterns and employs ensemble learning with the diversity loss
 data augmentation, which generates additional pseudo-anomaly
to capture multiple correlations in training data. Ye et al. [69]
 samples, facilitating the detection of novel anomalies.
address the data entanglement issue in reconstruction-based
methods by introducing decomposed representation learning. It
remaps data into a designed constrained space to capture latent F. Research Limitations
common normal patterns and identify anomalous patterns. Kloft Despite the effectiveness of the above methods, several reet al. [66] introduce the adaptive central representation, which search limitations remain: 1) Some forecasting-based models
4568 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 2. Overview of DRL-based anomaly detection, which describes the process of interaction between the agent and the environment.

struggle to accurately capture rapidly changing traffic patterns, Fig. 2 illustrates the DRL-based anomaly detection approach,
while reconstruction-based models face challenges in threshold where the environment E contains anomaly-biased sampling
optimization and training stability. Hybrid models are hindered function g, external reward function h, intrinsic reward function
in practical applications by their complex structure and high f and MSR reward optimizer M . The agent A is driven to
computational costs. 2) Continual learning and online learning automatically interact with E through the optimization reward
methods struggle to maintain adaptability against large-scale rt∗ . To this end, we transform anomaly detection task into a
traffic and complex cyber threats. DQN-based methods still need DRL problem by defining the following key components. For
improvements in state-action estimation and complex feature reference, Table V summarizes the symbols used in associated
extraction. 3) Unsupervised methods may suffer significant per- mathematical descriptions.
formance degradation when processing high-noise and high- r State space (s): The state space s for a network traffic
dimensional traffic. Meanwhile, semi-supervised approaches instance in D at time step t contains all features (excluding
show limited effectiveness in detecting unknown attacks due label-related attributes) from the instance, including both
to inadequate exploration in unlabeled anomalies. categorical and numerical features that covers information
 Therefore, we proposes a DRL-based weakly supervised such as bytes per IP, session time per IP, service type, etc.
network traffic anomaly detection method that adopts Dueling Formally, the state is represented as s = {v 1 , v 2 , . . ., v N }
DQN to enhance the state-action value estimation and feature where N denotes the number of features in traffic instance
extraction, while designing novel reward mechanism to fully and v i corresponds to the value of the i-th feature.
explore potential anomalies in unlabeled data. r Action space (a): The action a is the decision or choice
 made by the agent in response to the current state s of the
 III. DRL TAILORED FOR ANOMALY DETECTION environment. For network traffic anomaly detection tasks,
 the action space a = {a0 , a1 } represents the binary classi-
A. Problem Formulation fication decision for a given state s, where a0 corresponds
 IoT network traffic data D is characterized by a N - to a normal classification and a1 indicates an anomalous
dimensional feature space. During training, D comprises large- classification.
 r Agent (A): The agent A is the decision-making entity that
scale unlabeled dataset Du and limited labeled known anomaly
dataset Da , where Du encompasses unknown normal data and aims to learn an optimal policy for mapping states to acfew unknown anomalies. This study aims to train a anomaly tions by maximizing the cumulative rewards. For network
scoring function ϕ : D → R that evaluates anomaly degrees of traffic anomaly detection, A is implemented by a neural
data instances including both known and unknown anomalies, network to determine an optimal action out of {a0 , a1 }
where higher anomaly scores indicate higher anomaly degrees. for the current traffic state s. During training, it updates
 the network parameters to refine its policy selection. The
 trained network is ultimately used to evaluate the anomaly
B. DRL-Based Anomaly Detection Framework scores of the testing set.
 To identify both known and unknown attacks, we propose r Simulation Environment (E): The environment E in
a DRL framework, comprising the environment, agent, action, anomaly detection tasks serves to emulate real-world netstate and reward specifically designed for anomaly detection. work traffic data D and interacts automatically with the
Based on the problem formulation, the core objective is to design agent A. It contains the sampling function g and the reward
the anomaly detection agent capable of effectively exploiting Da function r.
to learn known anomalies, while actively exploring potential r Sampling Function (g): The sampling function g deterunlabeled known/unknown anomalies in Du . mines the next state st+1 from D based on the current state
WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS 4569

 TABLE V final reward rt∗ . The random sampled mini-batch from R
 MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS AND DESCRIPTIONS
 is adopted to train A.
 By making this transformation, the reward function drive A
 to automatically and interactively learn known anomalies from
 Da and learn unknown anomalies in Du . The workflow of the
 DRL-based anomaly detection is as follows:
 1) At each time step t, A receives st sampled by g and
 executes an action at to maximize the cumulative reward
 it can obtain. The reward is elaborated in steps 3)–5).
 2) Within E, g selects the next state st+1 to A, contingent
 upon at that A has executed on st . To effectively leverage
 both Da and Du , g is designed to return as many possible
 unlabeled anomalies while at the same time equivalently
 presenting labeled anomalies to A.
 3) f generates an unsupervised reward rti that encourages A
 to identify unlabeled anomalies within Du .
 4) h confers a positive reward rte if it detects anomalies from
 Da or identifies anomalies/normals correctly in Du . This
 mechanism enables A to learn known anomalies while
 enhancing its ability to detect unknown anomalies.
 5) The combined reward rt , calculated as the aggregate of
 intrinsic and extrinsic rewards, undergoes optimization.
 Subsequently, A receives the optimized reward rt∗ .
 The agent engages in iterative training, adhering to steps
 (1)–(5) throughout multiple episodes with each episode comprising a predefined number of states. The agent is trained to
 optimize cumulative rewards, enabling it to adaptively identify
 known/unknown anomalies.

 IV. PROPOSED WADE
 A. Dueling DQN-Based Anomaly Detection Agent A
 The anomaly detection agent A aims to learn an optist and executed action at . In network traffic anomaly demal anomaly detection-oriented action-value function. Followtection, g is designed to bias towards anomalies to enhance
 ing [74], the action-value function is approximated as:
 the learning for abnormal patterns and better detect known
 and unknown anomalies.  T
 
 r Reward Function (r): For anomaly detection, the reward 
 ∗ t −t
 Q (s, a) = max E Rt = γ rt |st = s, at = a, π ,
 function r provides crucial feedback (positive/negative π
 t =t
 reward) based on the agent’s correct/incorrect classifica- (1)
 tion of s. This feedback mechanism in return drives A which is the maximum expected return when A takes the action
 to optimize network parameters and decision-making, ul- at for each state st following the policy π, with the return defined
 timately improving its discrimination capability between as the sum of rewards rt discounted by a factor γ at each time
 benign and malicious traffic data. Specifically, the intrin- step t.
 sic reward function f drives A to simultaneously learn Given the varying importance of different states in anomaly
 known/unknown anomalies in Du , where the positive re- detection, learning discriminative features of anomalies is particward is provided when discovering novel anomaly state s. ularly crucial in class-imbalanced scenarios. Dueling DQN [19]
 The external reward h encourages A to automatically learn can effectively assess the contribution of different actions under
 labeled anomalies from Da , while amplifying learning for anomalous states, thereby strengthening the learning of critical
 Du based on ri . h assigns positive rewards for correct anomaly features. Thus, this study adopts Dueling DQN to
 identification of both normal and anomalous instances, learn Q∗ (s, a) and maximize the expected return for anomaly
 while imposing negative rewards for misclassification. The detection. Dueling DQN employs a deep neural network where
 MSR reward optimizer M aims to optimize the final reward the lower layers are convolutional (consistent with the original
 received by A. DQN [74]), followed by two streams of fully-connected layers
 r Reply Memory (R): The reply memory R stores a set of subsequently. Particularly, it decomposes Q-value function into
 interactive information at each step t, including the next state and advantage functions, accurately capturing the associastate st+1 , the current state st , the current action at and the tions between states and actions under anomaly conditions, with
4570 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

the Q-value function defined as: reward rti for each state st is calculated using the reconstruction
 error as follows:
 Q(s, a; θ, α, β) = V (s; θ, β)
  
 1  rti = f (st ) = M SE(st_recon , st ). (5)
 
 + A(s, a; θ, α) − A(s, a ; θ, α) , (2)
 |A|  Particularly, rti is scaled into the range [0,1] through activation
 a

where V (s; θ, β) and A(s, a; θ, α) respectively represent a scalar function (Sigmoid) in the decoder network, which ensures a
and a vector of the two streams, and |A| denotes dimension of the balanced relationship between the reward values of f and h.
vector. In addition, θ represents parameters of the convolutional Thus, the agent will receive large rti when st is supposed as
layers, while α and β are parameters of the two streams of fully- potential anomaly, regardless of the specific action at taken.
connected layers. 2) External Reward Function: h comprehensively learns po-
 The network then learns parameters θ, α and β by iteratively tential unlabeled anomalies and labeled anomalies from Du and
minimizing the following loss: Da respectively. For each state st , h produces corresponding
   reward rte based on the taken action (a0 or a1 ) and the intrinsic
 Lj (θj , αj , βj ) = E(s,a,r,s ) (yj − Q(s, a; θj , αj , βj ))2 , reward rti from f , which is defined as:
 (3a) ⎧
 ⎪
 ⎪ 1, if at = a1 and st ∈ Da
 ⎪
 ⎨−1,
 yj = r + γ max Q̂(s , a ; θj− , αj− , βj− ), (3b) if at = a0 and st ∈ Da
  a rte = h(st , at , rti ) = , (6)
 ⎪
 ⎪ lt − lt , if at = a1 and st ∈ Du
where (s, a, r, s ) is a random mini-batch sampled from the reply ⎪
 ⎩
 lt − l t , if at = a0 and st ∈ Du
memory. a is the taken action for s . Parameters θj , αj and βj
belong to the main Q-network, while θj− , αj− and βj− denote
 where lt = rti and lt = 1 − rti respectively represents anomaly
parameters of the target Q-network.
 and normality degree of the current data instance. For Da ,
 At each step, the action at ∈ [a0 , a1 ] is selected as which
 positive and negative rewards (1 and -1) are assigned when
maximizing Q(st , a; θj , αj , βj ) for current state st . When
 the agent correctly or incorrectly identifies anomalies. For Du ,
evaluating the test set, data instances (or states) with large
 which contains both unknown normal and abnormal data, the
Q∗ (s, a; θ∗ , α∗ , β ∗ ) values (i.e., high anomaly scores) are supdifference between the normality and anomaly degree (lt and
posed to be anomaly-biased data, where θ∗ , α∗ and β ∗ are palt ) is utilized to compute the rewards associated with the taken
rameters of the trained Q-network.
 action at . By doing this, the model receives positive rewards
 through potential correctly identification of both normal and
B. The Reward Optimization Mechanism
 abnormal instances in Du .
 To address the challenges of difficult data annotation and the Overall, h maximizes rewards by encouraging the agent to
prevalence of diverse unknown attacks in real-world network effectively exploit in Da and enhance the exploration in Du
environments, we design the reward optimization mechanism based on f . Compared to the strategy described in [13], which
comprising VAE-based intrinsic reward function f , external maintains neutrality (provides no reward) in Du , our design
reward function h and MSR reward optimizer M . f encourages performs better (as discussed in Section V-D).
A to explore potential anomalies in Du , while h drives A to 3) MSR Reward Optimizer: To fully learn both Da and Du ,
interactively learn Da to achieve high true positive detection the total reward is designed as rt = rti + rte . However, [21]
and strengthens the awareness of potential anomalies in Du . M reveals a phenomenon in DRL that the reward in last step
refines the total reward to optimize the decision-making. rt−1 significantly deviates from the current reward rt defined
 1) VAE-Based Intrinsic Reward Function: VAE [20] learns as reward saltation. It is categorized as positive saltation or
latent data distribution by encoding inputs as parameters (mean negative saltation when current reward is better or worse. Such
and variance) of the latent space. The reconstruction error, reward saltation occurring in DRL-based anomaly detection may
which measures the discrepancy between input samples and result policy collapse and influence detection performance. To
their reconstructed outputs, serves as an effective indicator for address this, we adopt the Magnify Saltatory Reward (MSR)
anomaly detection. Specifically, normal samples typically yield algorithm [21] to dynamically refine the total reward rt by
small reconstruction errors, while anomalous instances gener- amplifying it during positive saltation while reducing it during
ally produce significantly larger errors. negative saltation.
 Consequently, to discover potential anomalies in unlabeled To determine when to optimize the reward, a parameter ρ is
data, the reconstruction error (or loss) of VAE is utilized as the introduced to quantify the magnitude of change between rt and
foundation for f . Specifically, we train the VAE model using rt−1 , which is defined as follows:
Du with the follow loss function:
 rt − rt−1
 1 ρ= , (7)
 Lvae = M SE(xrecon , x) − (1 + log σ 2 − μ2 − σ 2 ), (4) min(|rt + σ| , |rt−1 + σ|)
 2
where μ and σ 2 denote the mean and variance of the samples, where σ is a number that approaches zero. In addition, to ensure
xrecon represents the reconstructed output. Then, the intrinsic an appropriate magnification of rt , a monotonically increasing
WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS 4571

bounded function k is designed as follows: Algorithm 1: Training Procedure of WADE.
 
 π 1 Input: The labeled dataset Da and unlabeled dataset Du
 k(x) = arctan x ∗ ∗ , (8a) Output: Action-value function Q(s, a; θ∗ , α∗ , β ∗ )
 2 η
 1: Initialize Q-value function Q with random parameter
 x = ρ + sgn(rt − rt−1 ), (8b) θ, α and β
where η is a certain number as the threshold. When x > η or 2: Initialize target Q-value function Q̂ with parameter
x < −η, the current reward rt is optimized as: θ− = 0, α− = 0 and β − = 0
 3: Initialize experience replay memory R to capacity C
 rt∗ = rt + (k(x) − λ) ∗ |rt | . (9) 4: for j = 1 to n_episodes do
 5: Initial the state s1 ∼ Du
C. Anomaly Biased Sampling Function g 6: for t = 1 to n_steps do
 Considering how to select st+1 , the anomaly-biased sampling 7: With probability select at from {a0 , a1 }
function in [13] is employed as follows: 8: Otherwise select at = arg maxa Q(st , a; θ, α, β)
 9: With probability p select st+1 from Da using ga
 st+1 = ga (Da ) ∼ U (Da ), (10a) based on Eq. (10a)
 ⎧ 10: Otherwise select anomaly-biased st+1 from Du
 ⎨arg min d(st , s; θe ) if at = a1
 e s∈S using gu based on Eq. (10b)
 st+1 = gu (st , at ; θ ) = ,
 ⎩arg max d(st , s; θe ) if at = a0 11: Compute the intrinsic reward rti by VAE-based
 s∈S intrinsic reward function f based on Eq. (5)
 (10b) 12: Compute the external reward rte by designed
 u external reward function h based on Eq. (6)
where S ⊂ D is a random subsample, |S| and the other parameters align with those described in [13]. To empower balanced 13: The combined reward rt = rti + rte
exploitation and exploration across the entire data, both ga and 14: Compute the optimized reward rt∗ of rt by MSR
gu have probability 50% being adopted. reward optimizer based on Eq. (9)
 This study focuses on the scenarios with a limited number 15: Store experience (st , at , rt∗ , st+1 ) in R
and imbalanced distributions of anomalies. While the adopted 16: Randomly sample mini-batch (sl , al , rl∗ , sl+1 )
anomaly-biased sampling function g essentially drives the se- from R with batch _ size l, received by the agent A
lection of data instances surrounding anomalies as st+1 , thereby 17: Set yl = rl if episode terminates at step l + 1
enhancing the learning of limited anomalies. It also guides A to 18: Else set yl = rl + γ maxa Q̂(sl+1 , a ; θ− , α− , β − )
make optimal decisions, while facilitating continuous learning 19: Perform gradient descent on
and strategy optimization through iterative interactions with E. (yl − Q(sl , al ; θ, α, β))2 with respect to the
After selecting, st+1 together with st , at and rt∗ are added into network parameter θ, α and β
the reply memory R. 20: Update Q̂ = Q every K steps
 21: end for
D. Algorithms Details 22: end for

 Algorithm 1 outlines the detailed training procedure of
WADE. Specially, steps 1-3 initialize the size of replay memory
and parameters of the main and target Q-network that are trained comprises one normal class and nine anomaly classes. To
with n_episodes episodes, with each episode including n_steps achieve balanced class distribution, we exclude two rare classes
steps. Steps 7-8 describes the process to select the action at , (shellcode and worms) and random downsampling [73] the
where -greedy [74] exploration is adopted. In steps 9-10, two remaining seven anomaly classes to under 3,000 instances each.
sampling functions are used to select st+1 . In steps 11-14, For NSL-KDD (groups 39 attack types into four categories), we
the final reward is computed through reward functions and retain all original anomalies without downsampling in it, simuoptimizer. Besides, steps 15-16 store experience in the reply lating a scenario with imbalanced numbers of various anomaly
memory and select the mini-batch. The other steps perform the types.
updating process of the Q-network. Following Section II-B1, we preprocess the datasets using
 After training, the anomaly scores for testing set are calculated one-hot encoding and Min-Max normalization. Table VI sumas: score = arg maxa Q(s, a; θ∗ , α∗ , β ∗ ) through the trained marizes the processed datasets, which are divided into training
Q-network based on (2). Specifically, higher anomaly scores and testing sets with the ratio 4:1 and serve as the foundation
generally correspond to greater anomaly degrees. for different experimental scenarios.
 2) Metrics: AUC-ROC and AUC-PR are adopted as evalua-
 V. EXPERIMENT tion metrics, with values ranging from [0,1] where higher scores
 indicate better performance. The reported values represent av-
A. Datasets and Metrics
 erages from 10 independent runs, with standard deviations cal-
 1) Datasets: We adopt UNSW-NB15 and NSL-KDD (in culated to assess model stability. Following [11], the average
Section II-A) to evaluate WADE. Specifically, UNSW-NB15 ranking is also calculated across all datasets.
4572 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE VI WADE exhibits remarkable stability across all sub-datasets, as
 DATASETS SUMMARY. D REPRESENTS DATA DIMENSIONALITY, N-SIZE IS THE
 SIZE OF NORMAL DATA, A-CLASS CONTAINS ANOMALY CLASSES OF THE
 indicated by its lower standard deviation values.
 DATASET, AND A-SIZE IS THE SIZE OF EACH ANOMALY CLASS. 2) Larger Amount and Multiple Classes in Known Anomalies: This section examines how the quantity and diversity of
 labeled anomalies influence detection performance, where the
 anomaly amount and classes in Da are increased. Considering the diverse anomaly classes in UNSW-NB15, we extend
 the seven sub-datasets from it by incrementally adding 1-6
 anomaly classes to Da , which correspondingly increases the
 known anomaly classes in testing set. Then six experimental
 groups are conducted, each randomly selecting 1-6 anomaly
 classes from unknown anomalies (fixed at 60 samples per class).
 For comprehensive comparison, we introduces WADE∗ which
 maintains the original anomaly classes while increasing sample
B. Baseline Methods and Parameter Settings counts to match the total anomaly quantity. Comparative results
 are presented in Fig. 3–4.
 1) Baseline Methods: Considering the IoT scenarios with Experimental results demonstrate significant performance
limited labeled anomalies and abundant unlabeled data, we adopt improvements for WADE as the increasing of anomaly
four weakly supervised methods (DPLAN [13], DevNet [73], classes and amount. Specially, AUC-PR increases remark-
FEAWAD [18] and PReNet [17]) in Section II-E for comparison. ably from 0.544-0.707 up to 0.741-0.775 and AUC-ROC
These baselines employ diverse detection principles, offering increases from 0.843-0.906 up to 0.928-0.935. Meanwhile,
comprehensive performance benchmarks. the performance of DPLAN generates more fluctuations in-
 2) Parameter Settings: All baselines follow their original dicating that WADE is better at leveraging known supervirecommended configurations for optimal performance. Then sion information. Furthermore, WADE consistently outperforms
a single hidden layer with 20 units and ReLU activation is WADE∗ with the same number of anomalies, demonstrating
applied in the network architecture of all methods. For WADE, that expanding the diversity of anomaly classes enhances the
we train VAE model with 15 episodes (batchsize = 128) and coverage of known anomalies and yields more supervision
set the MSR threshold η = 2. Other parameter settings are information.
consistent with DPLAN, including episodes n_episodes = 20, 3) Increasing Anomaly Pollution: To evaluate model robusteach episode steps N e = 2000, warming-up steps N w = 10000, ness in IoT environments where training data may contain untarget network updated steps N t = 30000 [13] and default set- known anomalies, we systematically vary the contamination rate
tings of the original DQN [74]. c of Du across {0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.1}. Figs. 5/6 present the
 AUC-PR/ROC performance under these conditions. Overall, all
 methods exhibit clear performance degradation on most datasets
C. Anomaly Detection Performance as c increases. While WADE maintains superior performance
 1) Known Anomalies From One Class: In this scenario, Da with a less pronounced decline compared to baselines under
contains only one specific class of anomalies with a fixed number varying contamination rates. Notably, WADE shows relatively
n = 60. Contamination rate c = 0.02 represents the ratio of stable performance on Exploits, Generic, DoS, Probe and U2r.
abnormal data to total data in Du , where almost all classes of This stability stems from its enhanced ability to learn potenanomalies are controlled to a certain quantity. After processing, tial anomalies from Du , confirming that learning known and
two basic datasets are divided into 11 sub-datasets (each named unknown anomalies can appropriately tolerate increasing noise
by specific anomaly class). Here, Da account for 0.05%-0.07% levels. Moreover, compared to DPLAN (another DRL method),
of the training sets for different sub-datasets. WADE exhibits smaller performance variation, validating
 Table VII presents the experimental results across all sub- our architectural improvements substantially enhance model
datasets. Overall, WADE achieves the best AUC-PR on 7 robustness.
sub-datasets and AUC-ROC on 6 sub-datasets. Compared to
baselines, WADE averagely obtains AUC-PR improvement of
3.5% (DPLAN), 19.9% (FEAWAD), 12.2% (DevNet), 13.3% D. Ablation Study
(PReNet) and AUC-ROC improvement of 1.4% (DPLAN), This section presents a systematic ablation study to evaluate
17.6% (FEAWAD), 4.7% (DevNet), 2.8% (PReNet). Across the impact of key components on detection performance of
different datasets, WADE performs well on UNSW-NB15. While WADE. Four variants are examined by respectively removing: 1)
for NSL-KDD, it achieves better results on R2l and U2r (contain- intrinsic reward (DME), 2) MSR algorithm (DVE), 3) external
ing fewer anomalies) but shows slightly reduced performance reward (DVM) and 4) Dueling DQN (VME). The results are
on DoS and Probe (containing more anomalies). This discrep- summarized in Table VIII.
ancy likely stems from the imbalanced distribution of anomaly Experiments on DME: DME variant excludes intrinsic resamples across different classes, further confirming WADE’s ward rti when computing the total reward rt , resulting in the
strength in scenarios with severely limited anomalies. Moreover, decreases of 3.7% in AUC-ROC and 1.8% in AUC-PR. This
WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS 4573

 TABLE VII
 DETECTION PERFORMANCE (AUC-ROC/AUC-PR ± STANDARD DEVIATION) OF WADE AND BASELINE METHODS

Fig. 3. AUC-PR performance of WADE, DPLAN and WADE∗ w.r.t. the number of known anomaly classes.

Fig. 4. AUC-ROC performance of WADE, DPLAN and WADE∗ w.r.t. the number of known anomaly classes.

Fig. 5. AUC-PR performance of WADE and its competing methods w.r.t. different contamination rates.

discrepancy stems from the distinct learning focuses of rti and the learning of labeled anomalies by rte is less affected, resulting
rte . The former primarily learns from unlabeled data (mainly in a relatively smaller decline in AUC-PR, which specifically
normal samples), while the latter specializes in learning labeled evaluates anomaly detection performance. Building upon DME,
anomalies. AUC-ROC reflects the overall discriminative ability we further develop DME* by eliminating intrinsic rewards from
for positive/negative samples, removing rti (which focuses on the extrinsic reward function design. Experimental results show
learning normals) causes significant metric decline. In contrast, that DME* achieves inferior performance (AUC-ROC: 0.825%,
4574 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 6. AUC-ROC performance of WADE and its competing methods w.r.t. different contamination rates.

 TABLE VIII
 ABLATION EXPERIMENT RESULTS

 TABLE IX negative reward of -1 is given when at = a1 and st ∈ Du , while
 TRAINING TIME COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS
 no reward is given when at = a0 and st ∈ Du . DVM obtains
 average reductions of 5.0% in AUC-ROC and 2.0% in AUC-PR,
 validating the efficacy of the designed external reward function
 h. Specifically, [13] treats unlabeled data as exclusively normal
 but penalizes anomalies inherently degrading discrimination
 performance. In contrast, WADE assigns positive rewards for
 correct identification of both normal and anomalous instances
 within Du . This optimization framework maximizes cumulative
 rewards and enhances discriminative learning, leading to superior performance.
AUC-PR: 0.673%) compared to DME, providing additional
 Experiments on VME: VME variant substitutes the Dueling
empirical evidence for the beneficial role of intrinsic rewards.
 DQN with a standard DQN architecture, resulting in perfor-
 Experiments on DVE: DVE variant computes the combined
 mance declines of 3.0% in AUC-ROC and 6.5% in AUC-PR.
reward through direct summation of intrinsic and external
 This significant decline, particularly in AUC-PR, confirms that
rewards (without MSR optimization), resulting in average perthe separate estimation of state and advantage values in the
formance degradation of 3.2% in AUC-ROC and 2.6% in AUC-
 Dueling DQN contributes to anomaly detection tasks. Notably,
PR. Notably, on highly imbalanced datasets like U2r and R2l
 the standard DQN shows marginally better performance on the
where anomalies are extremely scarce, removing the MSR mod-
 Generic and R2l, likely due to the highly localized nature of
ule leads to pronounced degradation in detection performance.
 anomaly patterns in these data features that may not benefit from
These results demonstrate that the MSR reward optimization
 the separation of state and advantage functions provided by the
module effectively stabilizes training under extreme anomaly
 Dueling DQN.
sparsity and significantly improves the model’s ability to learn
rare anomalies. Furthermore, comparative training time experiments (in Table IX) confirm that the MSR module introduces E. Convergence Analysis
negligible computational overhead. Considering that reward curves effectively reflect the con-
 Experiments on DVM: DVM variant incorporates the ex- vergence behavior of DRL, we plot the training reward curves
ternal reward function mentioned in [13]. In this design, across all datasets (in Fig. 7). The results show that WADE
WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS 4575

 of WADE in detecting both known and unknown anomalies
 compared to four semi-/weakly supervised methods.
 This study significantly enhances IoT network security by
 enabling timely detection of attacks within large-scale network
 traffic. Future research will focus on advancing zero-shot and
 multi-classification anomaly detection approaches, through the
 integration of LLMs, optimized data preprocessing and representation learning methods.

 REFERENCES
 [1] W. Zhou, Y. Jia, A. Peng, Y. Zhang, and P. Liu, “The effect of IoT
Fig. 7. Episode reward w.r.t. training steps.
 new features on security and privacy: New threats, existing solutions,
 and challenges yet to be solved,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2,
 pp. 1606–1616, Apr. 2019.
 [2] Y. Yang et al., “ASTREAM: Data-stream-driven scalable anomaly detecachieves early reward stabilization across all datasets, typically tion with accuracy guarantee in IIoT environment,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
converging within 30,000 steps, which supports our adoption of Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3007–3016, Sep./Oct., 2023.
 [3] M.-S. Kwon, Y.-G. Moon, B. Lee, and J.-H. Noh, “Autoencoders with
the 30,000-step training setting. Additional, the observed slower exponential deviation loss for weakly supervised anomaly detection,”
convergence of WADE on U2r, Probe and R2l datasets can be Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 171, pp. 131–137, 2023.
attributed to their constrained sample sizes and severe class [4] Y. Yuan et al., “Enhancing network abnormal detection with NMF-
 SECNN: Leveraging deep feature learning for high-precision traffic
imbalance, both of which adversely affect strategy optimization analysis,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 2069–2080,
and convergence stability. May/Jun. 2025.
 [5] X. Zhou et al., “Hierarchical adversarial attacks against graph-neuralnetwork-based IoT network intrusion detection system,” IEEE Internet
F. Training Time Analysis Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9310–9319, Jun. 2022.
 [6] H. Huang, P. Wang, J. Pei, J. Wang, S. Alexanian, and D. Niyato, “Deep
 Table IX presents the training time (2,000 steps) of the base- learning advancements in anomaly detection: A comprehensive survey,”
line methods. Compared to DL-based methods, WADE incurs IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 21, pp. 44318–44342, Nov. 2025.
lower training overhead than FEAWAD but slightly higher than [7] U. Fiore, A. D. Santis, F. Perla, P. Zanetti, and F. Palmieri, “Using
 generative adversarial networks for improving classification effectiveness
DevNet and PReNet. This moderate increase in training time in credit card fraud detection,” Inf. Sci., vol. 479, pp. 448–455, 2019.
primarily stems from: 1) the complex model architecture in- [8] J. L. P. Lima, D. Macêdo, and C. Zanchettin, “Heartbeat anomaly detection
corporating additional VAE training, and 2) the dual-network using adversarial oversampling,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
 2019, pp. 1–7.
parameter updates (Q-network and target Q-network) in the [9] Y. Xie, M. Qiu, H. Zhang, L. Peng, and Z. Chen, “Gaussian distribuagent. Notably, WADE achieves comparable training efficiency tion based oversampling for imbalanced data classification,” IEEE Trans.
to DRL-based DPLAN, demonstrating that WADE increases no Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 667–679, Feb. 2022.
 [10] C. Qiu, A. Li, M. Kloft, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Latent outlier
computational complexity. exposure for anomaly detection with contaminated data,” in Proc. Int.
 Considerding model deployment, WADE exhibits inherent Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 18153–18167.
real-time anomaly detection capabilities. It integrates stream- [11] H. Xu, Y. Wang, J. Wei, S. Jian, Y. Li, and N. Liu, “Fascinating supervisory
 signals and where to find them: Deep anomaly detection with scale learning data into the replay memory, enabling dynamic parameter ing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, vol. 202, pp. 38655–38673.
updates through randomized batch sampling without requiring [12] Y. Liu, Y. Gu, X. Shen, Q. Liao, and Q. Yu, “MSCA: An unsupervised
complete model retraining. This efficient update mechanism anomaly detection system for network security in backbone network,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 223–238, Jan./Feb. 2023.
provides robust adaptability to data streams with experiments [13] G. Pang, A. Van Den Hengel, C. Shen, and L. Cao, “Toward deep superdemonstrating its computational efficiency (2000 steps in 82 s), vised anomaly detection: Reinforcement learning from partially labeled
indicating strong potential for real-time deployment. anomaly data,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Mining, 2021, pp. 1298–1308.
 [14] Z. Li, C. Sun, C. Liu, X. Chen, M. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Dual-MGAN: An
 VI. CONCLUSION efficient approach for semi-supervised outlier detection with few identified
 anomalies,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1–30,
 This paper proposes a DRL-based weakly supervised traffic 2022.
 [15] T. Qiu, X. Liu, X. Zhou, W. Qu, Z. Ning, and C. L. P. Chen, “An adaptive
anomaly detection method (WADE) for IoT networks. WADE social spammer detection model with semi-supervised broad learning,”
tackles the challenge of detecting unknown anomalies with IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 4622–4635, Oct. 2022.
limited labeled anomalies (containing few known classes) and [16] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020, pp. 1–23.
large-scale unlabeled data (with both normal and anomalous [17] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep weakly-supervised
instances). Specifically, WADE adopts Dueling DQN to design anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
the anomaly detection-oriented agent. Then, to enhance the Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1795–1807.
 [18] Y. Zhou, X. Song, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Feature encoding
environment-agent interaction and unlabeled data exploration, with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
WADE introduces a reward optimization mechanism and an Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2454–2465, Jun. 2022.
anomaly biased sampling function. The reward mechanism [19] Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and N. Freitas,
 “Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc.
comprises VAE-based intrinsic reward function, external reward Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016, vol. 48, pp. 1995–2003.
function and MSR reward optimizer. Experimental results on [20] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc.
real-world traffic datasets demonstrate the superior performance Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014, pp. 1–14.
4576 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[21] Z. Hu, K. Wan, X. Gao, and Y. Zhai, “A dynamic adjusting reward function [44] S. Latif, W. Boulila, A. Koubaa, Z. Zou, and J. Ahmad, “DTL-IDS: An opmethod for deep reinforcement learning with adjustable parameters,” timized intrusion detection framework using deep transfer learning and ge-
 Math. Problems Eng., vol. 2019, pp. 1–10, 2019. netic algorithm,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 221, 2024, Art. no. 103784.
[22] F. De Keersmaeker, Y. Cao, G. K. Ndonda, and R. Sadre, “A survey of [45] I. M. Sayem, M. I. Sayed, S. Saha, and A. Haque, “ENIDS: A deep
 public IoT datasets for network security research,” IEEE Commun. Surveys learning-based ensemble framework for network intrusion detection sys-
 Tut., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1808–1840, thirdquarter 2023. tems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manage., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 5809–5825,
[23] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for Oct. 2024.
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in [46] Y. N. Kunang, S. Nurmaini, D. Stiawan, and B. Y. Suprapto, “An end-
 Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6. to-end intrusion detection system with IoT dataset using deep learning
[24] M. S. Hoque, M. A. Mukit, and M. A. N. Bikas, “An implementation of with unsupervised feature extraction,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 23, no. 3,
 intrusion detection system using genetic algorithm,” Int. J. Netw. Secur. pp. 1619–1648, 2024.
 Appl., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 109–120, Mar. 2012. [47] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A robust
[25] Q. K. Kadhim, “Classification of human skin diseases using data mining,” fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on hetero-
 Int. J. Adv. Eng. Res. Sci., vol. 4, no. 1, 2017, Art. no. 237008. geneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
[26] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards the pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
 development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things for network [48] S. K. Amalapuram, S. S. Channappayya, and B. Tamma, “Augmented
 forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 100, memory replay-based continual learning approaches for network intrupp. 779–796, 2019. sion detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36,
[27] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward gen- pp. 17156–17169 .
 erating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic char- [49] S. K. Amalapuram, B. R. Tamma, and S. S. Channappayya, “Spider:
 acterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, A semi-supervised continual learning-based network intrusion detection
 pp. 108–116. system,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2024, pp. 571–580.
[28] X. Zhang et al., “AOC-IDS: Autonomous online framework with con- [50] S. K. Amalapuram, A. Tadwai, R. Vinta, S. S. Channappayya, and B. R.
 trastive learning for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Tamma, “Continual learning for anomaly based network intrusion detec-
 Commun., 2024, pp. 581–590. tion,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Commun. Syst. Netw., 2022, pp. 497–505.
[29] S. A. Bakhsh, M. A. Khan, F. Ahmed, M. S. Alshehri, H. Ali, and J. Ahmad, [51] X. Zhang et al., “Continual learning with strategic selection and forgetting
 “Enhancing IoT network security through deep learning-powered intrusion for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.,
 detection system,” Internet Things, vol. 24, 2023, Art. no. 100936. 2025, pp. 1–10.
[30] X. Wang, X. Wang, M. He, M. Zhang, and Z. Lu, “Spatial-temporal [52] Z. Jin, J. Zhou, B. Li, X. Wu, and C. Duan, “FL-IIDS: A novel federated
 graph model based on attention mechanism for anomalous IoT intrusion learning-based incremental intrusion detection system,” Future Gener.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3497–3509, Comput. Syst., vol. 151, pp. 57–70, 2024.
 Mar. 2024. [53] S. Fuhrman, O. Gungor, and T. Rosing, “CND-IDS: Continual novelty
[31] L. Zou, Y. Wei, L. Ma, and S. Leng, “Feature-attended multi-flow LSTM detection for intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 62nd ACM/IEEE
 for anomaly detection in Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Design Autom. Conf., 2025, pp. 1–7.
 Commun. Workshops, 2022, pp. 1–6. [54] M. Odiathevar, W. K. Seah, M. Frean, and A. Valera, “An online offline
[32] X. Wang, Z. Wang, E. Wang, and Z. Sun, “Spatial-temporal knowledge framework for anomaly scoring and detecting new traffic in network
 distillation for lightweight network traffic anomaly detection,” Comput. streams,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 5166–5181,
 Secur., vol. 137, 2024, Art. no. 103636. Nov. 2022.
[33] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-e: A [55] O. A. Wahab, “Intrusion detection in the IoT under data and concept drifts:
 self-supervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural Online deep learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 20,
 networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, 2022, Art. no. 110030. pp. 19706–19716, Oct. 2022.
[34] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic [56] E. Gelenbe, B. C. Gül, and M. Nakıp, “DISFIDA: Distributed selfline graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised supervised federated intrusion detection algorithm with online learning
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 699–714, for health Internet of Things and internet of vehicles,” Internet Things,
 2023. vol. 28, 2024, Art. no. 101340.
[35] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge [57] M. Nakıp and E. Gelenbe, “Online self-supervised deep learning for
 distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
 Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024. pp. 5668–5683, 2024.
[36] M. Lanvin, P.-F. Gimenez, Y. Han, F. Majorczyk, L. Mé, and E. Totel, [58] Y. Wu, L. Liu, Y. Yu, G. Chen, and J. Hu, “Online ensemble learning-based
 “Towards understanding alerts raised by unsupervised network intrusion anomaly detection for IoT systems,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 173, 2025,
 detection systems,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Art. no. 112931.
 Defenses, 2023, pp. 135–150. [59] S. Dong, Y. Xia, and T. Peng, “Network abnormal traffic detection model
[37] J. Tang and W. Shuang, “Research on network traffic anomaly detection based on semi-supervised deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 method based on autoencoders,” in Proc. 5th Int. Seminar Artif. Intell. Serv. Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4197–4212, Dec. 2021.
 Netw. Inf. Technol., 2024, pp. 1078–1083. [60] S. Yu et al., “Deep Q-network-based open-set intrusion detection solution
[38] Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, and X. Huang, “Toward transferable adversarial attacks for industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7,
 against autoencoder-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE Trans. Ind. pp. 12536–12550, Apr. 2024.
 Inform., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 13863–13872, Dec. 2024. [61] S. Shen, C. Cai, Z. Li, Y. Shen, G. Wu, and S. Yu, “Deep q-network-based
[39] F. S. Alrayes, M. Zakariah, S. U. Amin, Z. I. Khan, and M. Helal, “Intrusion heuristic intrusion detection against edge-based SIoT zero-day attacks,”
 detection in IoT systems using denoising autoencoder,” IEEE Access, Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 150, 2024, Art. no. 111080.
 vol. 12, pp. 122401–122425, 2024. [62] M. Mouyart, G. M. Machado, and J.-Y. Jun, “A multi-agent intrusion
[40] X. Wang, L. Dai, and G. Yang, “A network intrusion detection system detection system optimized by a deep reinforcement learning approach
 based on deep learning in the IoT,” J. Supercomputing, vol. 80, no. 16, with a dataset enlarged using a generative model to reduce the bias effect,”
 pp. 24520–24558, 2024. J. Sensor Actuator Netw., vol. 12, no. 5, 2023, Art. no. 68.
[41] R. Changala, S. Kayalvili, M. Farooq, L. M. Rao, V. S. Rao, and S. Muthu- [63] F. Louati, F. B. Ktata, and I. Amous, “Big-IDS: A decentralized multi
 perumal, “Using generative adversarial networks for anomaly detection in agent reinforcement learning approach for distributed intrusion detection
 network traffic: Advancements in ai cybersecurity,” in Proc. Int. Conf. in Big Data networks,” Cluster Comput., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 6823–6841,
 Data Sci. Netw. Secur., 2024, pp. 1–6. 2024.
[42] M. Arafah, I. Phillips, A. Adnane, W. Hadi, M. Alauthman, and A.-K. [64] C. Strickland et al., “DRL-GAN: A hybrid approach for binary and
 Al-Banna, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection using denoising multiclass network intrusion detection,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 9, 2024,
 autoencoder and wasserstein GAN synthetic attacks,” Appl. Soft Comput., Art. no. 2746.
 vol. 168, 2025, Art. no. 112455. [65] M. He, X. Wang, P. Wei, L. Yang, Y. Teng, and R. Lyu, “Reinforcement
[43] T. Yang, Z. Jiang, P. Liu, Q. Yang, and W. Wang, “A traffic anomaly learning meets network intrusion detection: A transferable and adaptable
 detection approach based on unsupervised learning for industrial cyber– framework for anomaly behavior identification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serphysical system,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 279, 2023, Art. no. 110949. vice Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2477–2492, Apr. 2024.
WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS 4577

[66] A. Li, C. Qiu, M. Kloft, P. Smyth, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Zero- Xiaoxuan Fan (Student Member, IEEE) received
 shot anomaly detection via batch normalization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. the B.S. degree from the College of Informatics,
 Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36, pp. 40963–40993 . Huazhong University of Agriculture, Wuhan, in 2021
[67] S. Tao, T. Zhu, H. Wang, and X. Meng, “Semanticmask: A contrastive and the M.S. degree from the School of Cyber Science
 view design for anomaly detection in tabular data,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Joint and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 2370–2378. and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, in 2023. She is cur-
[68] J. Yin, Y. Qiao, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, and J. Yang, “MCM: Masked cell rently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the School
 modeling for anomaly detection in tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. of Cyber Science and Engineering, (HUST). Her
 Representations, 2024, pp. 1–23. current research interests include Internet of Things
[69] H. Ye, H. Zhao, W. Fan, M. Zhou, D. dan Guo, and Y. Chang, “DRL: security, data and information content security, and
 Decomposed representation learning for tabular anomaly detection,” in artificial intelligence security.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025, pp. 1–36.
[70] C.-P. Tsai, G. Teng, P. Wallis, and W. Ding, “AnoLLM: Large language
 models for tabular anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025, pp. 7562–7592.
[71] H. Dong, G. Frusque, Y. Zhao, E. Chatzi, and O. Fink, “NNG-Mix: Improving semi-supervised anomaly detection with pseudo-anomaly generation,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 10635–10647,
 Jun. 2025. Shenghao Liu received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
[72] X. Ma and W. Shi, “AESMOTE: Adversarial reinforcement learning with from the School of Electronic Information and Com-
 SMOTE for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, munications, Huazhong University of Science and
 pp. 943–956, Apr.–Jun. 2021. Technology (HUST), Wuhan, in 2016 and 2021, re-
[73] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection with spectively. He is currently an Associate Professor
 deviation networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 Data Mining, 2019, pp. 353–362. HUST. His research interests include data and in-
[74] V. Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” formation content security, recommender systems,
 Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015. social network security, and deep learning and neural
 networks. He was the recipient of the IEEE SCSTC
 Early Career Award.

 Ziteng Wang received the B.S. degree in network
 engineering from the Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China, in 2021. He is currently working
 toward the Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber
 Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
 Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. His current
 research interests include Internet of Things security, Wei Feng received the M.S. degree in computer
 and data and information content security. software and theory from Wuhan University, Wuhan,
 China, in 2009. She is currently working toward the
 Ph.D. degree in the School of Artificial Intelligence
 and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and
 Technology, Wuhan. She is with China Nuclear Power
 Operation Technology Company Ltd. (CNPO), a sub-
 Yiheng Ruan received the B.S. degree in communi- sidiary of China National Nuclear Corporation. Her
 cation engineering from the China University of Geo- current research interests include network security for
 sciences, Wuhan, China, and the M.S. degree from the industrial control systems, network security detection
 University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K. He is and assessment, and neural networks.
 currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong
 University of Science and Technology, Wuhan. He
 is also the General Manager of Hubei Chutian
 Smart Communication Company Ltd., Wuhan. His
 research interests include Big Data and intelligent
 transportation.

 Deng Zhang received the M.S. degree from the
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
 Wuhan, China, in 2014. He is currently working
 toward the Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber Sci-
 Xianjun Deng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 ence and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan. He
 Ph.D. degree from the School of Electronic Inforis also a Senior Engineer with China Nuclear Power
 mation and Communications, Huazhong University
 Operation Technology Corporation, Ltd., Wuhan. His
 of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2014. current research interests focuses on threat identifica-
 He is currently a Professor with the School of Cyber
 tion of network security.
 Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
 Science and Technology. He has authored or coauthored more than 100 technical papers in international
 top journals and conferences. His current research
 interests include industrial Internet of Things security
 and reliability, data and information content security,
artificial intelligence security, and social network security. He was the recipient
of the IEEE TCSC Early Career Award and IEEE SCSTC Middle Career Award.