370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 DSecO: Domain Name System (DNS) Data as a
 Knowledge Graph for Enhanced Security Analysis
 Didier Bringer and Lionel Tailhardat

 Abstract—Managing Domain Name System (DNS) records Listing 1 Example of DNS records with a CNAME clause:
presents challenges in terms of consistency and tracking over CNAME allows one domain name to alias another for address
time, which can have operational impacts, particularly on cyber- redirection. For instance, when a user attempts to access
security. In this paper, we explore the use of ontologies and www.example.org, the operating system converts it to
knowledge graphs to facilitate DNS system audit activities. We
define nine key use cases derived from real DNS operations data 203.0.113.1, enabling the browser to connect to the server
of a large-scale telco company and demonstrate how querying with this IP address and retrieve the requested page.
and inference techniques can address these use cases using an
RDF knowledge graph structured by the DSecO vocabulary, an
open-source ontology available at https://w3id.org/dseco. Overall,
we demonstrate the feasibility of providing a unified view of DNS
records and the practicality of explainable and shareable DNS
administration rules for extended analysis and informed decisionmaking by NetOps and SecOps teams regarding DNS records.
 Index Terms—DNS audit, network operations, cybersecurity, removed for a complete cleanup when www.example.org
ontologies, knowledge graphs, semantic web, AXFR, domain is no longer in use. It is noteworthy that the CNAME of
hijacking.
 CNAME pattern (known as a CNAME chain) – although not
 recommended1 – can still be found in many DNS records.2
 I. I NTRODUCTION Stale DNS records can also pose cybersecurity risks. For
 N THE Internet, a primary address such as example, DNS record chains that include a DNS record part
O www.example.org – referred to as a fully qualified
domain name, or FQDN [13, §2.3.5] – must resolve to
 of a bankrupt Web agency’s DNS zone can lead to a “domain
 hijacking”, as hackers could purchase the agency’s domain
one or more final IP addresses (either IPv4, IPv6, or both). name and receive requests made to www.example.org.
The FQDN to IP lookup is a key mechanism, commonly This can result in credential leaks, as the user’s Web browser
implemented using a Domain Name System (DNS) [40], to may send cookies to the hackers’ server. While HTTPS and
determine how to connect to network services (e.g. the host HSTS [20] help reduce this risk, it remains high due to
serving Web pages for www.example.org). Organizations automated and free Certificate Authorities (CAs) like Let’s
managing large-scale networks, such as international Encrypt.3 Indeed, hackers can obtain valid certificates in
corporations or Internet service providers, may utilize the someone else’s name and succeed the identity verification
DNS CNAME (Canonical Name) [40, §3.3.1] functionality challenge by simply placing a nonce file on the target server
(Listing 1), for example to handle the complexity and constant they control.4
evolution of the network infrastructures and services they These examples highlight the numerous rules needed to
operate by defining generic addresses. However, this constant analyze DNS records, which can be tedious and error-prone
evolution also requires ongoing adjustments of DNS records when done manually within a given organization, especially
by NetOps and SecOps teams, both to ensure the proper for medium to large-sized companies with thousands to tens
functioning of services and to prevent cybersecurity issues. of thousands of records and complex interconnections.
 For instance, the CNAME example of Listing 1 summa- Automating DNS record analysis can enhance operational
rizes as a rule chain akin to www.example.org−−−−−−→ efficiency, prevent incomplete cleanups and security vulner-
 CN AM E
www.example.myotherzone.org − → 203.0.113.1, abilities, and improve overall DNS service performance by
 A reducing lookup operations [6]. However, challenges in data
where www.example.myotherzone.org should be
 integration and knowledge representation arise due to the
 Received 14 January 2025; revised 3 July 2025; accepted 8 August 2025; sharing of DNS data across different zone owners and hetapproved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor E. Bertino. Date
of publication 11 September 2025; date of current version 30 December 2025.
 erogeneous systems. Indeed, providing a unified view of DNS
This work was supported in part by the Orange - Fonds d’Innovation pour 1 CNAME chains increase DNS server load, cause name resolution delays
la Sécurité (FSI) led by Jean Marc Blanco. (Corresponding author: Lionel
Tailhardat.) [6], and expand the trusted computing base (TCB), posing security risks [45].
 2 Particularly in CDNs to improve content delivery efficiency [50].
 The authors are with Orange Company, 92449 Issy-les-Moulineaux, France
 3 https://letsencrypt.org/
(e-mail: lionel.tailhardat@orange.com).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3598374 4 CAA DNS records [42] can mitigate this.

 2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
BRINGER AND TAILHARDAT: DSecO: DNS DATA AS A KNOWLEDGE GRAPH FOR ENHANCED SECURITY ANALYSIS 371

records, potentially linked to network infrastructure and busi- discussed below). Thus, there is an opportunity to bridge DNSness data, is essential for informed decision-making by NetOps related security methods and tools with semantic models. In
and SecOps teams for both DNS administration tasks and the following paragraphs, we review existing works on these
day-to-day monitoring of the networks behavior. Additionally, two aspects and then conclude with the positioning of our
establishing explainable and shareable DNS administration DNS-KG proposal.
rules is crucial to ensure a clear understanding of their a) Glass-box methods & tools: GRooT [50] and Heracles
execution and mutual agreement among zone owners. [25] are two methods aiming at verifying DNS configurations,
 In this work, we hypothesize that an explicit graph represen- with GRooT apparently the first formal approach in this field
tation could reflect the chaining nature of DNS records and of study. Both methods are able to capture the entirety of
provides formal guarantees for various use cases. To tackle DNS behavior within a graph representation (a DNS configuthe above-mentioned challenges, we propose the “DNS-KG” ration interpretation graph), encompassing the transformation
approach, which involves building an RDF knowledge graph of DNS zone files into graphs to enhance the consistency
[1] from heterogeneous DNS data within an organization to verification process. This verification can be performed as
facilitate cross-zone analysis of DNS records. The graph is either a self-check or a cross-check. In GRooT, users can
structured by DSecO, a lightweight ontology we have imple- implement new analysis cases as C++ functions, ensuring high
mented in RDFS [9] / OWL [54] to enable a query-based audit performance in processing the interpretation graph. However,
approach of DNS data and facilitate connections to third-party developing additional use cases (e.g. identifying risky or
knowledge bases for broader inference cases, such as linking useless DNS entries) requires abstraction and programming
DNS configuration to Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) data skills from SecOps teams. Additionally, the specific data
[24], [56]. We formalize nine DNS administration use cases structure of the interpretation graph and the static nature of
based on interviews with DNS operation experts from Orange analysis functions make it difficult to extend graph data with
– a leading international network infrastructure and service external sources or incorporate new data objects at runtime
provider – and implement them as SPARQL queries [55] to for non-monotonic reasoning. In the same vein as GRooT and
evaluate the query-based audit approach on both generated Heracles, Moura et al. [18] developed and open-sourced the
and real-world data. The DSecO implementation, evaluation CycleHunter framework to analyze data from DNS zone files.
dataset, and the associated documentation are available as open Their work addresses a specific issue in DNS records: cyclic
source at https://w3id.org/dseco. Overall, we demonstrate the dependencies, highlighting the significant associated risk (i.e.
feasibility of providing a unified view of DNS records and the a potential collapse of the entire Internet), which they refer to
practicality of explainable and shareable DNS administration as a TsuNAME, and proposing methods for its remediation.
rules for extended analysis and informed decision-making by Regarding tools, the dns-graph6 project (a small GitHub
NetOps and SecOps teams regarding DNS records. project with no updates since 2018) introduces a database
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In model for HOST, MX, DOMAIN and NS records but does
Section II, we review related work, focusing on DNS-related not take CNAME records into account. The overall approach
security methods and tools, as well as semantic models for involves populating a Neo4J7 graph database with data and
knowledge representation. In Section III, we provide details subsequently execute queries. Another interesting project is
of the DNS-KG approach with a deep dive into the use case PowerDNS8 which implements a DNS system that can intedefinitions, domain modeling with DSecO, and knowledge grate a database backend and provide an API, facilitating
graph construction and exploitation for DNS records audit. In queries compared to traditional file-based DNS systems. How-
Section IV, we present the experiments conducted and their ever, it only queries zones under its delegation.
results on the DNS-KG approach, including running SPARQL b) Closedbox methods & tools: Ramasubramanian et al.
queries related to the use case definitions. Finally, we conclude [45] surveyed nearly 600’000 Web server names to establish
and outline some future work in Section V. a dependency graph of authoritative name servers. For a
 given Web server name, they highlighted that a larger Trusted
 II. R ELATED W ORK Computing Base (TCB) increases risk, as compromising any
 Various studies have explored DNS-related security methods name server within the delegation graph can jeopardize the
and tools to detect vulnerabilities or malfunctions due to non- name. They also compiled known vulnerabilities of public
compliance or discrepancies in DNS, using either a glass-box name servers to perform a risk assessment. While this study
or closed-box strategy on medium to large-scale systems (e.g. provides a valuable overview of name system vulnerabilities,
academic or corporate networks, the Internet).5 However, few it does not provide details about how the data was stored.
studies examine this field through the lenses of knowledge Also on the topic of trust, Daiping et al. [8] demonstrated
representation and reasoning (KRR) and linked open data that subdomains inherit the trust of their apex domains, which
principles [1], even though several existing semantic models is particularly valuable for illicit online activities. Indeed, the
could be applied for explicit representation and reasoning on theft of Fully Qualified Domain Names (FQDNs) through IP
DNS configurations (e.g. UCO [56] and ICAS [31], further hijacking or domain hijacking – cases tackled by our DNS-

 5 Glass-box testing analyzes a system’s internal workings with full access
 6 https://github.com/abhisek/dns-graph
to its source code, focusing on identifying vulnerabilities, while closed-box
 7 https://neo4j.com/
testing evaluates functionality from an external perspective, simulating user
interactions without knowledge of the internal code. 8 https://github.com/PowerDNS/pdns
372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

KG approach – can lead to a variety of serious and detrimental To achieve this, an ICS-SEC knowledge graph is constructed
consequences for the brand that owns the domain. by aggregating several well-known security databases and data
 More focused on DNS record management, the authors of models, such as ATT&CK10 and NVD.11 Like the work in
[7], [15], [17], and [26] all highlight the often-overlooked [5], the proposed solution does not directly relate to DNS
severity of dangling or stale DNS records. Since they operate configuration data, but principles and technique for situation
in a closed-box manner, they use passive DNS traffic data classification can generalize to side application domains.
or brute force techniques to identify domains, followed by Still in relation to cybersecurity, but focusing on software,
live testing to ascertain DNS responses. They all conclude Taghavi asserts in [37] that the rapid increase in vulnerabilities
that maintaining one’s DNS properly over time is essential across various types of assets has rendered the synthesis of
for security. In [44], DNS configuration updates are also this knowledge inherently more challenging. In this context,
discussed through the study of orphan and abandoned records knowledge graphs and their accompanying technology stack
in the Top-Level Domains (TLDs) zone file. The conclusion have been advocated as a viable solution for modeling, interemains consistent across this body of work: mitigating related grating, and facilitating interoperability among diverse data
cybersecurity risks involves the process of cleaning areas. sources. We note that, surprisingly, Taghavi does not leverage
 Finally, regarding tools, the DNSDumpster9 project is a the Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)12 inventory to model
free online solution for DNS reconnaissance and domain the dependencies between components. Further, Taghavi did
information gathering. It offers insights into a domain’s DNS not made available any open source ontology from his work.
records, identifies (some of the) subdomains, and visually Going a same line of thoughts, Alqahtani et al. introduced
represents the domain’s DNS structure. It is commonly used SECONT and MAVON [53], ontologies covering software
by security professionals and researchers for network analysis artifacts and ontologies for software vulnerability databases.
and vulnerability assessments. Focusing more on facilitating Another work, the Software Evolution Ontologies (SEON)
navigation and analysis of the Internet data space through [35], enables to bootstrap a modeling of GitLab activities, and
semantic integration of various data sources, Fontugne et al. thereby track code quality evolution over time, however no
[46] have developed and open-sourced the Internet Yellow direct link to the analysis of vulnerabilities is available through
Pages (IYP) project, which integrates 46 publicly available SEON.
datasets into a Neo4j database. The project is designed to be Finally, in relation to representing network infrastructures,
community-driven, allowing dataset curation and data model the DevOpsInfra [39] ontology describes sets of computing
evolution with provenance metadata (e.g. data source, collec- resources and how they are allocated for hosting services.
tion date, update date). However, the ontology mostly focuses on the provisioning
 c) Semantic models: In this paragraph, we briefly describe activity and concepts are missing for risk assessment and
works involving semantic models in the form of RDFS/OWL a finer grain description of the network topology. In close
ontologies. In direct relation to the field of cybersecurity, relation, NORIA-O [30] allows to describe an infrastructure,
UCO [56] is a popular community-developed ontology built its events, and diagnosis and repair actions performed during
around the cyber security domain, covering a wide range incident management. NORIA-O connects to UCO, enabling
of important concepts such as agents, resources, or actions. reasoning about network topology and cybersecurity aspects
Original motivations for this work were knowledge discovery simultaneously; however, it does not include concepts or
and After Action Report (AAR) annotation tasks. The ICAS relationships for DNS data.
ontology [31] closely resembles UCO in both structure and d) Dns-KG positioning: The work presented in our
intent: a lengthy enumeration of objects that are more or less DSecO paper globally aligns with the high-level objectives of
related and grouped by discourse domain for networking and the related works studied above, in that the DNS-KG approach
cybersecurity. Although ICAS has interesting concepts and aims to provide a method and tools for risk assessment and
relationships to represent DNS configuration data, its structure remediation for network service infrastructures heavily relying
seems overcomplicated and no example of implementation in on DNS. For instance, several studies propose defining and
a knowledge graph is available. Further, it is no longer main- executing assessment cases in a glass-box manner on a graphtained. Similar to the idea of leveraging CTI data in ontologies based representation of DNS configurations (e.g. GRooT [50],
like UCO and ICAS, the authors in [5] propose an anomaly Heracles [25], CycleHunter [18], and dns-graph).
detection system that utilizes a combination of a SWRL- However, works such as GRooT and Heracles conduct
based [19] inference rule set and SPARQL queries to classify analyses to identify inconsistencies by deducing DNS behavior
and provide guidance on various situations. Although this based on the subtleties of the domain’s RFCs as interpretation
work has been evaluated on sensor data and does not directly rules, whereas DNS-KG focuses on analyzing the DNS “tree”
relate to DNS configuration data, the principles developed for itself to detect both risky and redundant entries, capturing
situation classification using reasoning can be generalized to CNAME and A records in a straightforward manner, without
other application domains. In a similar vein, authors in [24] considering Time to Live (TTL) values or additional features.
introduce the ICS-SEC ontology to enable threat intelligence For example, TTL is a concept that refers to the duration
exploration, as well as vulnerability assessment and remediation use cases to the field of Industrial Control Systems (ICSs). 10 https://attack.mitre.org/
 11 https://nvd.nist.gov/
 9 https://dnsdumpster.com/ 12 https://www.cisa.gov/sbom
BRINGER AND TAILHARDAT: DSecO: DNS DATA AS A KNOWLEDGE GRAPH FOR ENHANCED SECURITY ANALYSIS 373

for which DNS data is considered valid, and because DNS- ple relationships and rich properties, whereas RDF knowledge
KG collects data directly from zone files rather than from graphs facilitate handling heterogeneous data and emphasize
an authoritative DNS server, TTL is not applicable at all semantics and reasoning for complex relationships and interas it would be in a closed-box approach. In our glass- connected knowledge, thanks to shared explicit knowledge
box methodology, entries possess an infinite TTL, remaining representations [1]. Furthermore – in contrast with [37] and
valid as long as they exist in the zone file. Despite these [45] – our work clearly articulates the approach to data storage
differences in approaches, GRooT and Heracles do have points and the methods of processing it, and is fully open-source.
of convergence with DNS-KG in that their research has already Overall, we note that the DNS-KG approach addresses a gap
contributed one use case in this paper (see uc_loop in in the aforementioned related works by providing explainable
Section III-A), which is a scenario likely to occur over time. risk assessment over DNS configuration data and being open to
 While we acknowledge that the DNS-KG structured by including all data objects and relationships pertinent to security
DSecO (Section III-B) does not capture all DNS features, we concerns (such as machines, Docker images, CaaS,15 PaaS,16
believe it is sufficient for DNS operations and administration HTTP L7, organizations, CVEs,17 CPEs,18 and more).
use cases, starting with the nine defined with SecOps experts
in Section III-A. For example, although DSecO currently does III. M ETHODOLOGY —T HE DNS-KG A PPROACH
not implement NS records – such as for preventing TsuNAME In this section, we introduce our DNS-KG approach to
attacks [18] – it does include the CNAME concept, which allows facilitate DNS administration operations – such as the cleanup
the analysis of CNAME chains and the detection of CNAME- of outdated records or those that pose cybersecurity risks –
based cyclic dependencies, among other things. It should by leveraging an explicit representation of DNS record data
be noted that the decision to implement specific concepts as a knowledge graph. We assume that this representation
generally depends on the objectives of the projects studied, can capture the chaining nature of DNS records and provide
such as IYP [46], which, for example, chose not to include formal guarantees for various use cases through graph traversal
non-resolvable CNAMEs. Furthermore, DSecO can easily be and subsumption based on an ontology (i.e. the explicit
extended with new concepts (e.g. a NS concept to materialize representation of a discourse domain through concepts and
records already at hand in DNS zone dumps) and by linking relationships). Figure 1 summarizes the DNS-KG approach.
the DNS-KG to other knowledge bases based on linked- First, in Section III-A, we focus on operation support by
open data principles (e.g. by adding vulnerability information identifying and formalizing nine key DNS administration use
about CTI informations [5], [45]; network informations [46]; cases based on the analysis of DNS administration operations
SBOM information [37], [53]) to broaden the scope of risk with SecOps experts from Orange. We use a Behavior-Driven
assessment inference, thereby refining the risk categorization Development (BDD) methodology to describe these use cases
and remediation. in natural language, making them suitable for automated
 The DNS-KG approach also aligns with the need to clean data processing. Next, in Section III-B, we introduce the
DNS configurations regarding cybersecurity risks, as proposed DSecO vocabulary, an open-source RDFS/OWL ontology that
by Borgolte et al. [26] and in [17]. However, while these works structures DNS-related data from various sources and enables
emphasize systematizing DNS operations using public data, reasoning related to the identified use cases. In Section III-C,
the DNS-KG proposal adopts a glass-box strategy to secure we detail the data processing pipeline for constructing the
dangling records on managed systems, including zones not knowledge graph using a no-code approach, and how it is
directly under our control (unlike PowerDNS), provided we queried by translating use cases into SPARQL queries to
have access to the configuration data in some form. identify and classify potential non-compliance in DNS data.
 Finally, we also observe that, compared to works such We present the related experiments and results in Section IV.
as GRooT, Heracles, dns-graph, and IYP, the DNS-KG
approach brings a no-code approach to the field by leveraging
RDF/RDFS/OWL syntax and vocabularies for the knowledge A. Use Cases Definition
graphs and the DSecO ontology. For example, while knowl- To provide more detail about the analysis to be performed,
edge graph construction and DNS assessment use cases could we conducted a survey of DNS administration operations with
be implemented using programming languages (e.g. script- a panel of SecOps experts from Orange. This panel consists
based data integration and Cypher13 queries in IYP, C++ of 12 operations specialists from the security department, who
functions in GRooT), the DNS-KG approach aims to enable collectively represent over 20 years of experience managing
users to build the graph using a declarative data integration more than 20’000 DNS records for Orange. Based on this
approach (making it portable and logically auditable) by survey, we define the following nine use cases, that will
utilizing the RDF Mapping Language (RML) [3] vocabulary serve as a reference for the utilization of the knowledge
and performing assessments through SPARQL [55] queries.14 graph developed in Section III-C. For each use case, we
We also opted for RDF knowledge graphs, rather than labeled provide a brief description of the situation to monitor, and
property graphs (LPGs) (as in [18], [46], and dns-graph). its formalization in Gherkin syntax [51]. The names of the
LPGs are oriented towards performance and flexibility for sim-
 15 Container as a Service.
 13 Cypher is the query language for Neo4J. 16 Platform as a Service.
 14 SPARQL is a standardized, widely used query language for RDF in both 17 CVEs: Common Vulnerabilities & Exposures.

academia and industry. 18 CPE: Common Platform Enumeration.
374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 1. The DNS-KG approach. This diagram outlines our approach as a workflow for DNS configuration assessment and correction, based on the definition of
assessment use cases (upper-left branch) and DNS configuration data of managed zones represented as a knowledge graph (lower-left branch). The knowledge
graph construction step leverages a set of data transformation rules – using the RML vocabulary [3] – applied to DNS configuration data dumps from managed
zones, and subnet/AS number (ASN) relationship dumps from the BGPKIT public API [38]. The use case descriptions are formalized in Gherkin syntax [51].
DNS administration teams are responsible for correcting configurations, guided by inferences from the RDF knowledge graph (DNS-KG) through SPARQL
queries that represent the use cases (UC Query).

items hereunder are the names of the queries utilized later Listing 3 The uc_complete_cleanup_not_resolving
in Section III-C and Section IV in the form of unit tests. Gherkin model.
The use cases are grouped according to the goals they aim
to achieve: configuration cleanup (a, b, c, d), information
on the DNS data (e, f), and vulnerability analysis (g, h,
i). The Gherkin clause Then indicates the nature of the
operational response to be provided and the implicit level of
risk.
 Listing 4 The uc_loop Gherkin model.
 1) [a)]uc complete cleanup: In the case of a public zone
 and internal zones, entries within the internal zone
 should not exist unless their corresponding entries in
 the public zone are also present.

Listing 2 The uc_complete_cleanup Gherkin model.
 d) uc ultimately do not resolve to an ip address: An
 entry on example.org “A” points to “B” that points
 to “C” (A → B → C); if C is removed, A is not
 resolving anymore, thus it should be removed because
 it is a useless link. Such cases happen when NetOps
 are migrating a service, they may forget to clean the
 2) [b)]uc complete cleanup not resolving: In the case of DNS entry.
 a public zone and internal zones, entries within the
 internal zone should not exist unless their corresponding Listing 5 The uc_ultimately_do_not_resolve_to_
 entries in the public zone are also present. As we also an_IP_address Gherkin model.
 check the last A record, these entries are not resolving
 thus easier to decide to remove.
 c) uc loop: This use case derives from the Heracles [25]
 and TsuNAME [18] works. It is useful for detecting
 loops in DNS. For example, although cyclic dependencies based on CNAMEs are said not to trigger a
 “TsuNAME” [18, §4.3], we have learned that they pose 3) [e)]uc entries using our cdn: Questions a manager
 operational risks and cause service disruptions; thus, might ask to understand the percentage of migration to
 such loops should be fixed. a CDN solution, for example.
BRINGER AND TAILHARDAT: DSecO: DNS DATA AS A KNOWLEDGE GRAPH FOR ENHANCED SECURITY ANALYSIS 375

Listing 6 The uc_entries_using_our_CDN Gherkin Listing 8 The uc_domain_hijacking Gherkin model.
model.

 and MITRE ATT&CK categorizes them under “Acquire
 f) uc resolving to a single ip address: Depending on
 Infrastructure: Server”.21
 your architecture, you may wish to identify the entries
 IP hijacking may permit the attacker to obtain a valid
 that resolve to a single IP address. If you are not utilizing
 certificate for the domain, but even once the domain RR
 a Virtual IP (VIP),19 it may be beneficial to recognize
 is fixed, it may lead to a security risk as the hacker can
 that these entries are not redundant.
 use the SSL certificate in a man-in-the-middle attacks in
Listing 7 The uc_resolving_to_a_single_IP a closed network, such as a coffee shop [26].
_address Gherkin model.
 Listing 9 The uc_ip_hijacking Gherkin model.

 g) uc domain hijacking: An entry on example.org i) uc ip hijacking filter: This use case derives from the
 directs to a Web agency; if the Web agency goes uc ip hijacking, connecting the AS, subnet, and organibankrupt, the domain may become available for pur- zational units concepts to filter the results more strictly.
 chase. A black-hat hacker might attempt to buy it We assume that a list of friendly AS organizations
 and thus receiving the traffic. The hacker may take is available, enabling to focus on other AS (i.e. nonadvantage of the domain name for phishing activities or friendly organizations are to be scrutinized).
 potentially for distributing code to clients or the loading
 of JavaScript scripts. Alternatively, the hacker could Listing 10 The uc_ip_hijacking_filter Gherkin
 create a webpage on this domain that redirects users model.
 to a site mimicking the appearance of example.org,
 using their own certificate, in an attempt to deceive
 users into entering their credentials. However, there
 exists a potentially more perilous scenario in which
 a hacker generates an SSL certificate in the name
 of example.org, utilizing certificate providers that
 authenticate the identity of the domain owner merely
 by requesting a nonce file to be placed on the website.
 Nevertheless, the risk of domain hijacking – an “Acquire
 Infrastructure: Domains”20 technique as per MITRE B. Domain Modeling With DSecO
 ATT&CK – may be reduced due to the widespread use In relation to RFC 1035, which describes the details of
 of HTTPS and HSTS [20] as well as CAA DNS records the domain system and protocol (see particularly [40, §3]),
 [42]. Identifying these domains is crucial for security, we identify the essential concepts and relationships from
 as indicated by the action “Then it should be monitored the above Gherkin models (Listings 2 to 10) to establish
 closely” in Listing 8. This means that NetOps/SecOps the necessary terminology for the DNS-KG. For example,
 must manage the risk of domain hijacking by obtaining analyzing the uc complete cleanup case of Listing 2 leads
 guarantees from the provider or thorough pentesting. us to the following axiomatisation (Eq. 1) as a first approach:
 h) uc ip hijacking: An entry on example.org directs 
 to an IP address that is outside the company’s subnet ToRemove ≡ FQDNend u managedBy.ORGint u
 and belongs to another Internet Service Provider (ISP). ¬ FQDNtop
 A black-hat hacker might attempt to obtain the same u linkedTo+ .FQDNend
 IP by purchasing services from that ISP. Borgolte et al. 
 u managedBy.ORGtop (1)
 [26] call these “IP address use-after-free vulnerabilities”
 We choose to implement this terminology in the form of
 19 VIP: an IP address not tied to a specific physical interface, used for load an RDFS/OWL ontology to address knowledge representation
balancing, failover, or redundancy in networking.
 20 https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1583/001/. Includes domain takeover. 21 https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1583/004/
376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 2. The DSecO ontology. This diagram provides an overview of the ontology using the Chowlk notation [49]. The base namespace is dseco, which
URI is https://w3id.org/dseco/ontology/. Additional namespaces are: observable = https://ontology.unifiedcyberontology.org/uco/observable/, org = http://
www.w3.org/ns/org#, owl = http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#, and xsd = http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#. The shaded forms highlight the concepts
and properties of third-party vocabularies reused in DSecO, while the others are defined by DSecO.

and reasoning (KRR) challenges, particularly regarding the The dseco:is_CNAME_of property links FQDN entities
management of heterogeneous data sources (e.g. data fetched to represent FQDN aliases – typically expressed as DNS
from various DNS sources, combined with data from BGPKIT CNAME records, as shown in Listing 1. FQDN to IP reasoning
[38] for subnet/AS number (ASN) [22] relationships, and is supported by the dseco:is_A_to property, which
internal databases for zone ownership) and ensuring linked ranges to the UCO observable:IPv4Address class
and interoperable data representation (e.g. associating DNS- used to describe DNS A records [40, §3.4.1], such as
KG entities with cyber threat intelligence [24], [37], [56] www.example.myotherzone.org. A 203.0.113.1
knowledge graphs or LDAP22 directory data [48]). In terms of in Listing 1. Reusing the UCO observable:IPAddress
ontology design principles, we also have considered the RFCs class within DSecO facilitates interoperability of the
as a normative information source for the rules of transforming DNS-KG with third-party CTI-related knowledge bases.
DNS configuration data into a knowledge graph representation; Similarly, we define the dseco:is_AAAA_to property
the principle here is to prioritize understanding among users by with range observable:IPv6Address. From UCO,
adhering as closely as possible to the standard to minimize data we also reuse the observable:NetworkSubnet
wrangling and interpretation efforts back and forth between the class, and define the dseco:hasAS property with
DNS-KG and the source data. To further enhance usability, range observable:AutonomousSystem to represent
we also considered essential to hide the complexity of the that a subnet is declared by an AS. Similarly,
use cases-related SPARQL queries (Section III-C), making the we define the dseco:is_part_of property to
DNS-KG system more accessible. Additionally, minimizing enable representing observable:IPAddress to
graph traversal times is crucial for improving performance observable:NetworkSubnet relationships. Using
(e.g. for closure calculus on CNAME chains). transitivity of dseco:hasAS and dseco:is_part_of,
 As a result, we have implemented the DSecO conceptual we enable reasoning on observable:IPAddress to AS
model which – for its release v1.6.1 – consists of two classes relationships. Finally, we define the dseco:ZONE class to
(FQDN, ZONE), eight objects properties (hasAS, hasOrgu, enable reasoning about FQDNs of the same zone using the
is_A_to, is_AAAA_to, is_CNAME_of, is_in_zone, dseco:is_in_zone property. The dseco:hasAS,
is_part_of, managedBy) fully mapped to the RFC 1035, dseco:is_part_of, and dseco:is_in_zone
and four data type properties. These elements are defined in the properties were introduced to address gaps in UCO and
dseco namespace. The ontology connects to the well-known support the DNS-KG use cases in Section III-A. For
ORG [10] and UCO [56] vocabularies, thereby enabling instance, these properties facilitate zone-based assessment,
connections of the DNS-KG to third-party knowledge bases such as the uc complete cleanup case in Listing 2, by
and adhering to Linked Open Terms (LOT) principles [32]. linking dseco:ZONE entities to organizational units
The DSecO expressivity is ALU RF (D) as per Protégé 5.1.23 in charge of the zone via the dseco:managedBy
Figure 2 gives an overview of the ontology. Its implementation property. To represent organizational units, we reuse
is directly available online at https://w3id.org/dseco/ontology/ the org:OrganizationalUnit class from the ORG
using an ontology browser, and its documentation at https:// vocabulary.
w3id.org/dseco/doc/.
 In this paragraph, we introduce the DSecO concepts and C. Knowledge Graph Construction & Exploitation
properties. We define the dseco:FQDN class for representing In this work, we refer to the UNIX philosophy [16],
fully qualified domain names (e.g. www.example.org) as [33] as guideline for designing the DNS-KG data processing
individuals, with domain names attached as strings via the architecture, which aims to achieve the audit and correction of
dseco:hasName property (e.g. for text-based searches). DNS records in a timely manner while minimizing the need
 for specific or additional codebases and storage resources. For
 22 LDAP: Lightweight Directory Access Protocol. instance, using ontologies is a way to write the minimum
 23 https://protege.stanford.edu/ amount of code by leveraging declarative techniques and
BRINGER AND TAILHARDAT: DSecO: DNS DATA AS A KNOWLEDGE GRAPH FOR ENHANCED SECURITY ANALYSIS 377

reusing open-source models from the community. Further- Listing 11 Snippet of data transformation rules using the
more, the use cases in Section III-A suggest that a fundamental RML vocabulary to materialize AS & subnet entities and relagoal of this work is to answer queries without the need tionships from a BGPKIT dump. An adhoc dseco:hasAS
for a backend (e.g. a lambda architecture to feed a graph property is used to assert subnet/AS relationships before
database [29])24 or frontend (e.g. a graphical user interface joining with DNS configuration entities from other sources
combining data rendering and anomaly detection tools [28]), and filtering out irrelevant AS & subnet entities.
but to only focus on ontologies and inferences. Therefore, in
what follows, we provide the details of a two-fold process: a
knowledge graph construction step (i.e. instantiate the DSecO
ontology in a simple text file through data wrangling of many
managed DNS zones and other sources) followed by a DNS
configuration assessment step (i.e. inferring on the resulting
knowledge graph by querying directly on the corresponding
text file and discard the file once finished). Overall, we assume
that no memory or long-term retention of the data is required
for the current DNS-KG objectives, but the use cases results
(e.g. “UC #1 Inference Response” in Figure 1) and their
explicability (i.e. the intrinsic explainability of the inference
process based on the DSecO ontology and the logical form of
the use case queries) are essential.
 a) Knowledge graph construction: For this step, we consider a declarative data transformation approach to enable a
knowledge graph construction process that is easily auditable,
extensible, and platform-independent. We leverage the RML
[3] vocabulary to implement a set of data transformation rules Listing 12 Example of triple generated for the BPGKIT source
(i.e. TriplesMaps) for DNS configuration dumps of managed from the RML in Listing 11.
zones gathered from the technical ecosystem at Orange, and
subnet/AS relationships dumps gathered from the BGPKIT
public API.25 Listings 11 & 12 provide an example of such
transformation rule for the BGPKIT source and resulting
knowledge graph, respectively.
 Given the potential severe consequences of incorrect DNS
modifications (e.g. deleting the wrong DNS entry can disrupt Listing 13 Example of a SPARQL enrichment query
services), we employ a version control system for the trans- that inserts dseco:isinOurSubnet facts based on
formation rules and adopt a CI/CD26 approach for knowledge observable:IPAddress entities being part of specific
graph construction. This includes calling an RML engine (like subnets.
RMLMapper27 or BURP [14]), applying software engineering
practices such as unit testing with SPARQL queries for posterior validation of the construction process at the knowledge
graph level, and automated documentation generation using
Ontopsy [36] for visual inspection of RDF models.
 The resulting knowledge graph is saved to a file for further
processing, including syntax and structure validation (which
was mentioned earlier under the term “unit test”), enrichment
with SPARQL UPDATE queries (Listings 13 and 14), and
inference with a combination of SPARQL UPDATE, ASK,
and SELECT queries (further discussed below as the DNS
configuration assessment step).
 Listing 14 Example of a SPARQL enrichment query that
 Regarding unit tests, we implement a set of tests following
 inserts mykg:FQDN_resolving facts in the knowledge
the BDD approach by defining test cases in Gherkin linked to
 graph based on the transitive closure of a CNAME chain using
SPARQL queries (Listings 15 and 16 for execution by the
 a property path.

 24 A first approach for the DNS-KG work was to use a Neo4J database
(https://neo4j.com/), but it led to writing specific code and design a specific
data model, thus distancing us from the community.
 25 BGPKIT, pfx2as: https://data.bgpkit.com/pfx2as
 26 CI/CD: Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery.
 27 https://github.com/RMLio/rmlmapper-java
378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

CI/CD automation during each code and knowledge graph Listing 17 Example of an assessment case SPARQL query for
construction process update. uc_ip_hijacking related to the Gherkin model in Listing
 This involves creating baseline datasets and corresponding 9.
knowledge graphs for each test case. We use the behave
library28 to parse unit tests and verify expected results. We
also implement LibOntology, a Python package that facilitates ontology-related operations from the command line
(e.g. querying, updating, validating, converting, and reasoning). The LibOntology code is available as open source at
https://w3id.org/dseco/tools/libontology, along with its documentation.

Listing 15 Example of a unit test in Gherkin syntax to validate
the knowledge graph construction step for the dseco:ZONE
concepts against a baseline dataset.
 knowledge graph after data wrangling using the query in
 Listing 13.
 Assessment queries may also require knowledge
 beyond the data wrangling domain, such as the
 uc_domain_hijacking example in Listing 18, which uses
 organizational units responsible for DNS zones. To achieve
 this, we incorporate a Domain Specific Individuals knowledge
 base (Figure 1) during the knowledge graph construction step
Listing 16 Example of a unit test SPARQL query to validate
 by concatenating a flat knowledge graph file. For instance,
the knowledge graph construction process in relation to the
 this includes detailed entities like mykg:ORGU_HQ and
Gherkin model in Listing 15.
 mykg:ORGU_Affiliate (Listing 18), facilitating the
 execution of uc_domain_hijacking.

 Listing 18 Example of a assessment case SPARQL query for
 uc_domain_hijacking in relation to the Gherkin model
 in Listing 8.

 b) DNS configuration assessment: We approach decision
making on the DNS configuration as a classification task
over the knowledge graph entities. We specifically consider
that the DNS & Network Configuration Update actions (Figure 1) resulting from the assessment process (i.e. configuration
cleanup, information, and vulnerability analysis as outlined in
Section III-A) are defined based on the existence of entities
that meet the axiomatic criteria for each use case.
 We observe that the aforementioned testing framework
developed for the knowledge graph construction step aligns
with the goals of DNS configuration assessment. Therefore,
we consider reusing the same toolset and coupling each use
case Gherkin model from Section III-A with its translation into
SPARQL queries to run on the resulting knowledge graph.29
For example, uc_ip_hijacking in Listing 9 translates as
the SPARQL query in Listing 17.
 Assessment queries may require knowledge graph enrich- Overall, this approach enables the decoupling of the ontolment, such as the uc_ip_hijacking example in Listing 17 ogy and assessment queries from the application context,
which identifies if a given IP address belongs to a collection of allowing each DNS-KG user to customize the assessment
managed subnets. To achieve this, we add ad-hoc statements process by adding, updating, or removing use cases and
during the knowledge graph construction step via SPARQL domain-specific individuals. We foresee that by applying these
UPDATE queries to benefit multiple use cases. For instance, principles (i.e. graph enrichment, knowledge base concatedseco:isinOurSubnet statements are inserted into the nation, assessment parametrization), the DNS-KG could not
 28 https://github.com/behave/behave only identify inconsistencies and non-compliances but also
 29 Queries for the use cases in Section III-A are available open-source at mitigate risks through a what-if approach by incorporating fichttps://w3id.org/dseco/ tive entities (e.g. potential misconfigurations or cybersecurity
BRINGER AND TAILHARDAT: DSecO: DNS DATA AS A KNOWLEDGE GRAPH FOR ENHANCED SECURITY ANALYSIS 379

 TABLE I Listing 19 Base DNS-KG file with import statement for the
 DNS-KG DATASET S TATISTICS DSecO vocabulary.

 validate the DNS-KG file syntax through LibOntology (i.e.
 using the libontology-validate method); 4)configure
 a filesystem using the queries/<UseCaseName>/
 scheme to store Gherkin models (Section III-A) and
 assessment SPARQL queries according to the set of

 Listing 20 Command line for knowledge graph construction
 and processing logs, highlighting three data sources (bgpkit,
 data, and janus), twelve RML rule files (each implementing one TripleMap), and the number of individuals
 generated by each rule set for the real-world dataset.

vulnerabilities) to explore use cases and understand associated
risks, in accordance with the method proposed in [52], thereby
facilitating proactive risk management.

 IV. E XPERIMENTS
 In this section, we present the experiments conducted to
evaluate the DNS-KG approach as defined in Section III. We
begin by presenting the experimental setup in Section IV-A,
which involves executing the knowledge graph construction
and DNS configuration assessment steps on a toy example
dataset and a real-world dataset based on Orange data. use cases to run; 5) enrich the DNS-KG using a set of
 We then present the results of these executions (in terms of SPARQL UPDATE queries (e.g. Listings 13 & 14) through
execution time and statistics on the queries) in Section IV-B, LibOntology (i.e. using the libontology-update
followed by a discussion of these results in Section IV-C. The method); 6) run the use cases against the DNS-KG file using
queries used for these experiments and the generated dataset a Bash for loop30 to automatically discover implemented
are available at https://w3id.org/dseco/. Due to confidentiality, queries/<UseCaseName>/test.sparql SPARQL
the real-world dataset is not made public. Table I summarizes queries and call these through LibOntology (i.e. using the
the characteristics of the two datasets, and Table II summarizes libontology-query method embedded into a Bash time
the results of the DNS configuration assessment step for both command31 to measure the query execution time); 7) save the
the toy example and real-world dataset. output and execution time of each assessment SPARQL query
 into separate text files and make them available for further
A. Experimental Setup analysis (e.g. identification of misconfiguration patterns in
 Whether for the toy example dataset or the real-world the dataset w.r.t. query responses, statistical comparison
dataset, we performed the knowledge graph construction of the query execution times w.r.t. query complexity [23],
and DNS configuration assessment steps as follows: 1) in a and DNS and network misconfiguration remediation by
dedicated GitLab project, we initiate a base DNS-KG graph NetOps/SecOps); 8) to establish a baseline for query
file that imports the DSecO vocabulary (Listing 19); 2) start execution times, we repeat steps #6 and #7 using a semantic
the data wrangling process (Listing 20), which loops over a graph database (i.e. a local GraphDB32 instance) by loading
set of sources (bgpkit, data, janus) and for each source 30 https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/
loops over RML mappings and concatenates the resulting set 31 https://www.gnu.org/software/time/

of triples to the aforementioned base DNS-KG graph file; 3) 32 https://graphdb.ontotext.com/
380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE II
 Q UERY E XECUTION T IME

the DNS-KG file into the database and running the queries process duration of tqueries = 65.76 s using a sequential
against its SPARQL endpoint. execution scheme (i.e. average t̄query = 65.76/9 ≃ 7.3 s per
 SPARQL query).35 Over 547 non-compliances were reported
B. Results and subsequently forwarded to a SecOps team through a tick-
 The results presented below – particularly the timing eting system for further analysis and remediation.36 Among
measures – stem from the execution of the methods and these non-compliances, the top three use cases in terms of
tools described in Section IV-A on a MacBook M1 Pro operational complexity for carrying out the remediations and
2021 (32 Gbyte RAM) test machine. Table I summarizes, associated cybersecurity risks break down as follows:
for each dataset (i.e. toy example & real-world), the • uc_complete_cleanup: a total of 347 noncharacteristics of the DNS-KG resulting from the knowledge compliances were directly remediated with the
graph construction step on which the DNS configuration elimination of redundant or incorrect DNS records
assessment step was conducted. It includes the number of in less than two days of work, as they relate to internally
entities per class and the number of instantiated properties, managed records and SecOps has high confidence in the
grouped into facts derived from data transformation (e.g. remediation actions based on the use case definition.
dseco:FQDN, dseco:hasName) and those computed (e.g. • uc_domain_hijacking: at least 100 nonmykg:FQDN_resolving, dseco:isinOurSubnet). compliances related to the front-facing records were
Similarly, Table II reports on the execution time of the reviewed by experts, as the question posed involves
different queries for the DNS configuration assessment step. identifying entries that pass through an intermediate
We break down the results for each dataset below. organizational unit. Two were then remediated by
 a) Toy example dataset: The dataset consists of 43 DNS triggering remediation operations with third-party teams
records and contains 31 hand-crafted non-compliances.33 managing these records. Another non-compliance,
The execution of the libontology-validate similar to the NS case described in [4], was also detected
step takes tvalidate = 0.10 s. The execution of using this use case and corrected promptly.
the libontology-query step takes an average • uc_ip_hijacking: in the same way as for
t̄query = 0.16 s per SPARQL query (this amounts to a uc_domain_hijacking, at least 100 nontotal of tqueries = 1.40 s for the entire process using a compliances were reviewed, of which one was
sequential execution scheme),34 with correct detection of all remediated through the intervention of third-party
31 non-compliant configuration cases. Executing the same teams.
queries on the GraphDB SPARQL endpoint results in a
consistent tquery = 0.10 s per query and also allows for the C. Discussion
detection of all non-conformities. files. From the results presented in the previous paragraph, the
 b) Real-world dataset: For this dataset, 300 375 DNS detection of 100% of cases in the toy example dataset
records were used for constructing the DNS-KG, with 40 000 demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed architecture.
of these records being internally managed (ORGint in Eq. 1) Additionally, the handling of over 547 non-compliance reports
and 210 000 from affiliates (ORGtop in Eq. 1). The knowledge in the real-world dataset, along with the rapid identification
graph construction step (i.e. data fetching & RML-based data of 350 cases needing remediation, confirms the operational
transformation) takes twrangling = 43 s. The resulting knowl- relevance of the DNS-KG approach proposal.
edge graph is roughly 10 Mbyte in size. The execution of the We note that before the implementation of the DNS-KG
libontology-validate step takes tvalidate = 4.90 s. proposal, the DNS configuration assessment (i.e. auditing and
The execution of the libontology-query shows a total cleaning tasks) was rarely conducted in such depth, if at all,
 by the involved SecOps team. This allows us to conclude that
 33 Non-compliances details are available online in the overall DNS-KG approach improves operational efficiency
https://w3id.org/dseco/evaluation/dseco-<release>/
queries/uc_<name>/test.csv 35 As for the toy example, parallel execution of SPARQL queries is possible,
 34 Parallel execution of SPARQL queries is possible, enabling shorter overall enabling shorter overall assessment times.
assessment times. 36 Specific cases are undisclosed to protect Orange’s interests.
BRINGER AND TAILHARDAT: DSecO: DNS DATA AS A KNOWLEDGE GRAPH FOR ENHANCED SECURITY ANALYSIS 381

(from nearly infinite operation time to approximately 1.5 days DFA-compiled regular expression against a string [47]) and
for internally managed records) by instilling confidence in the thoroughness (keeping subnet entities and FQDN name values
corrective actions to be carried out over a large number of updated). Incorporating network topology data into the knowlrecords. Beyond operational efficiency, we also assessed learn- edge graph could improve network element selection efficiency
ing and adoption among the SecOps team. Using the DSecO for the uc_entries_using_our_CDN case through graph
online resources – notably the ontology documentation with traversal and reduce regex reliance, though it would require
examples and the RML & SPARQL constructs – operation linking DSecO to third-party vocabularies to accommodate
engineers built their knowledge graph and ran queries within new data objects (e.g. [30], [39]).
a few hours. Although creating SPARQL queries from scratch
was initially challenging, Gherkin models and their connection V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
to existing queries enabled quick adaptation for user-defined In this work, we aimed to simplify Domain Name System
use cases. Furthermore, we observed that every instance of (DNS) administration, particularly in systems where DNS
non-compliance detected could be transformed into unit tests configuration information includes a large number of records,
for DSecO, as part of a continuous improvement cycle, thereby originates from heterogeneous sources, and is managed by
strengthening confidence in the solution. different organizational units.
 The operational complexity observed in the We initially hypothesized that an explicit graph reprecase of the real-world dataset (i.e. reme- sentation could reflect the chaining nature of DNS records
diating uc_complete_cleanup versus and provide formal guarantees, notably in terms of a shared
uc_domain_hijacking and uc_ip_hijacking) understanding of the unified view of DNS records among
raises questions about the scope of the knowledge graph stakeholders, while also establishing actionable, explainable,
construction (KGC) step (i.e. are we missing some external and shareable DNS administration rules.
data that could help provide a more reliable diagnosis? is the Based on this idea, we proposed the “DNS-KG” approach,
KGC step accurate regarding real-world data?) in relation which firstly involved conducting an analysis of DNS adminto the “almost zero doubt” goal for DNS configuration istration operations with SecOps experts from Orange. This
assessment. Therefore, integrating additional non-managed first step allowed us to define nine key use cases and formalize
data & auditable KGC with data quality checks should be them using a Behavior-Driven Development (BDD) approach.
further explored. The resulting structuring of the use cases proved beneficial
 We also note that, based on the execution times in Table II, for establishing consensus among the experts and facilitating
the DNS-KG approach, while not real-time (focused on pro- the translation of the use cases into actionable rules. We
ducing easily comprehensible and explainable results), exhibits focused on auditing DNS records from diverse data sources
highly variable query execution durations for both LibOn- by creating an RDF knowledge graph structured with the
tology and GraphDB, with similar trends observed for both. DSecO vocabulary, an open-source RDFS/OWL ontology we
To begin with, comparing the timings of LibOntology and implemented and make available at https://w3id.org/dseco.
GraphDB questions about the principle of minimizing the need This implementation derives from the use cases defined with
for specific or additional codebases and storage resources, the SecOps experts and adheres to DNS standards defined
as discussed in Section III-C, and provides an indication in RFCs. We used a declarative approach based on the
of the proportion and actual duration of query execution RML vocabulary for knowledge graph construction. DNS
time within the process. Indeed, with GraphDB, the initial configuration assessment is performed with SPARQL queries
loading time of the graph is bypassed in the measurements corresponding to the nine use cases. The evaluation on a
in Table II since the graph is loaded once at the beginning toy example dataset confirmed the effective functioning of
of the process, whereas LibOntology requires loading the the proposed DNS-KG approach. Similarly, the evaluation on
graph into memory for each query execution. Taking this a real-world dataset highlighted the relevance of the DNSfurther, comparing measurements across the use cases also KG approach in an industrial setting, enabling SecOps teams
raises questions about the relationship between the size of to confidently identify and resolve numerous non-compliant
the DNS-KG (Table I), the formulation of use cases into DNS configurations. It also indicated that the inference pro-
SPARQL queries (i.e. could the queries be rewritten for cess performance during the DNS-KG assessment step could
lower algorithmic complexity? [23], [47]), and the inference be enhanced by reducing the computational complexity of
techniques used (e.g. would SHACL or SWRL be more efficient SPARQL queries through the incorporation of additional data
regarding the expressiveness expected by the use cases? [2], during knowledge graph construction, rather than relying on
[5]). For example, the use case uc_ip_hijacking involves SPARQL FILTER statements.
adding dseco:isinOurSubnet true facts using a Based on these insights, we are considering future work
SPARQL VALUE statement (Listing 13). Similarly, the along three axes. A first focus area is the extension of the
uc_entries_using_our_CDN implementation currently use cases. This can be achieved by conducting interviews
combines a FILTER statement with a regular expres- with a broader range of NetOps and SecOps experts, reviewsion to match a dseco:hasName value pattern on a ing RFCs for configuration rules (e.g. RFC 1912 [6] on
dseco:is_CNAME_of property path. While functional, this common DNS operational and configuration errors), examincan be optimized for processing performance (time complexity ing research papers for configuration corner cases (e.g. the
is O(n) for VALUE & FILTER statements and O(n) for “zombie awakening” [15], TCB [45], and TsuNAME [12]
382 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

concepts), and analyzing incident tickets in relation to DNS- Trialog38 for helping them initiate this work, and also would
KG graph patterns [27]. Another approach is to tag DNS-KG like to express their gratitude to Antoine Cawet for his dediassessment cases with STIX/DRM [5] concepts or MITRE cation and efforts in implementing and improving the DSecO
ATT&CK techniques37 to create a reusable rule catalog based Project. They would also like to thank Yoan Chabot for reviewon community-shared concepts. This tagging could also sup- ing and providing feedback on the preliminary version of this
port downstream decision systems, such as ticketing systems, article and IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING
where risk calculus, remediation prioritization, and causal editorial committee and reviewers for their detailed analysis
reasoning (e.g. on network reachability/connectivity incidents) and recommendations for improving the article.
could be assessed through the DNS-KG.
 A second focus is the extension of the input data range R EFERENCES
and DSecO vocabulary. Indeed, we recognize that adding use [1] A. Hogan et al., “Knowledge graphs,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
cases involves broadening the DSecO inference scope and no. 4, pp. 1–37, May 2022, doi: 10.1145/3447772.
 [2] A. Guittoum, F. Aı̈ssaoui, S. Bolle, F. Boyer, and N. De Palma, “Inferring
integrating more data sources (e.g. network topology, details threatening IoT dependencies using semantic digital twins toward
of Docker instances, CVEs) for knowledge graph construction. collaborative IoT device management,” in Proc. 38th ACM/SIGAPP
This entails extending the DSecO ontology with new concepts Symp. Appl. Comput., Mar. 2023, pp. 1732–1741, doi: 10.1145/
 3555776.3578573.
and relationships, such as NS, CAA, TXT, DNAME, NSEC3, [3] A. Dimou, “RML: A generic language for integrated rdf mappings of
RRSIG, MX, and other DNS record types. It may also involve heterogeneous data,” in Proc. Workshop Linked Data Web, LDOW Costrenghtening the linking of DSecO to other vocabularies (e.g. Located 23rd Int. World Wide Web Conf. (WWW), vol. 1184, 2014.
 [4] B. Krebs. (2025). MasterCard DNS Error Went Unnoticed for Years.
UCO [56] & D3FEND [41] for cyber threat intelligence; [Online]. Available: https://krebsonsecurity.com/2025/01/mastercard-
NORIA-O [30] & SEON [35] for information system topology dns-error-went-unnoticed-for-years/
and operations; HTTPinRDF [21] for L7 details). For instance, [5] C. Sánchez-Zas, V. A. Villagrá, M. Vega-Barbas, X. Larriva-Novo,
 J. I. Moreno, and J. Berrocal, “Ontology-based approach to realreasoning about HTTP redirect responses [43] as a graph time risk management and cyber-situational awareness,” Future Gener.
within a DNS-KG instance could assist NetOps & SecOps Comput. Syst., vol. 141, pp. 462–472, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1016/
in tracing the causes of network service performance issues j.future.2022.12.006.
 [6] D. Barr, Common DNS Operational and Configuration Errors, document
or cyberattacks. Similarly, “what if scenarios” reasoning on RFC 1912, 1996, doi: 10.17487/RFC1912.
potential service impact of changing an IP address or CNAME [7] D. Liu, S. Hao, and H. Wang, “All your DNS records point to U.S.:
could also assist NetOps & SecOps before planned network Understanding the security threats of dangling DNS records,” in Proc.
 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., New York, NY, USA,
changes. Oct. 2016, pp. 1414–1425, doi: 10.1145/2976749.2978387.
 Finally, a third focus area is the improvement of the technical [8] D. Liu, Z. Li, K. Du, H. Wang, B. Liu, and H. Duan, “Don’t let one
aspects of DNS-KG. Leveraging data provenance [34], [46] at rotten apple spoil the whole barrel: Towards automated detection of
 shadowed domains,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
the DNS-KG level could help monitor data quality and infer- Secur., New York, NY, USA, Oct. 2017, pp. 537–552, doi: 10.1145/
ences, increasing trust in the graph’s exploitation. In cases of 3133956.3134049.
incomplete DNS data, inserting blank nodes to ensure use case [9] D. Brickley and R. V. Guha. (2014). RDF Schema 1.1. W3C. [Online].
 Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/
functionality is a potential solution to explore. Additionally, [10] D. Reynolds. (2014). The Organization Ontology. W3C Recommendainvestigating stream processing for the DNS-KG approach – tion, W3C. [Online]. Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-org/
with RML rules for graph construction and SPARQL queries [11] D. F. Barbieri, D. Braga, S. Ceri, E. Della Valle, and M. Grossniklaus, “C-SPARQL: SPARQL for continuous querying,” in Proc. 18th
remaining unchanged thanks to already existing tools [11], Int. Conf. World Wide Web, Apr. 2009, pp. 1061–1062, doi: 10.1145/
[29] – may enable real-time applications. Although the current 1526709.1526856.
use cases do not require stream processing, this could facilitate [12] D. Kontokostas et al., “Test-driven evaluation of linked data quality,”
 in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. World Wide Web, Apr. 2014, pp. 747–758, doi:
higher-level use cases in network change or fault manage- 10.1145/2566486.2568002.
ment. In a similar vein, integrating the DNS-KG approach [13] J. C. Klensin, Simple Mail Transfer Protocol, document RFC 5321,
into Infrastructure-as-Code systems may prevent risky DNS 2008, doi: 10.17487/RFC5321.
 [14] D. Van Assche and C. Debruyne, “BURPing through RML test cases,”
deployments, such as fast-failing CI/CD pipelines responsible in Proc. 5th Int. Workshop Knowl. Graph Construct. Co-Located With
for DNS configuration. Lastly, improving graph enrichment 21st Extended, Semantic Web Conf. (ESWC), vol. 3718, Hersonissos,
and assessment query performance might involve comparing Greece, May 27, 2024.
 [15] E. Alowaisheq, S. Tang, Z. Wang, F. Alharbi, X. Liao, and X. Wang,
the execution time of current DNS-KG SPARQL queries “Zombie awakening: Stealthy hijacking of active domains through DNS
with their SWRL [5] and SHACL [2] equivalents. Since hosting referral,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
SWRL performance degrades with increased dependencies [2], Secur., New York, NY, USA, Oct. 2020, pp. 1307–1322, doi: 10.1145/
 3372297.3417864.
this comparison can help establish an indicator for expected [16] E. S. Raymond, The Art of UNIX Programming: With Contributions
expressiveness in DNS-KG use cases and guide the selection From Thirteen UNIX Pioneers, Including its Inventor, Ken Thompson
of preferred inference techniques. (Addison-Wesley Professional Computing Series). Reading, MA, USA:
 Addison-Wesley, 2008.
 [17] G. Akiwate et al., “Retroactive identification of targeted DNS infrastruc-
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT ture hijacking,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas. Conf., Oct. 2022,
 pp. 14–32, doi: 10.1145/3517745.3561425.
 The authors would like to thank Maxime Jerome and Dao- [18] G. C. M. Moura, S. Castro, J. Heidemann, and W. Hardaker,
Lam Trinh-Huu-Phap for their support on preparatory work “TsuNAME: Exploiting misconfiguration and vulnerability to DDoS
 DNS,” in Proc. 21st ACM Internet Meas. Conf., Nov. 2021, pp. 398–418,
and for providing access to specific datasets. They appreciate doi: 10.1145/3487552.3487824.
 37 https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/enterprise/ 38 https://www.trialog.com/
BRINGER AND TAILHARDAT: DSecO: DNS DATA AS A KNOWLEDGE GRAPH FOR ENHANCED SECURITY ANALYSIS 383

[19] I. Horrocks, P. F. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, S. Tabet, B. Grosof, and [41] P. E. Kaloroumakis and M. J. Smith, “Toward a knowledge graph
 M. Dean, “SWRL: A semantic web rule language combining OWL and of cybersecurity countermeasures,” MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA,
 RuleML,” Nat. Res. Council Canada, Netw. Inference, Stanford Univ., USA, Tech. Rep. D3FEND Paper, 2021.
 Stanford, CA, USA, W3C Member Submission, Tech. Rep. SUBM- [42] P. Hallam-Baker, R. Stradling, and J. Hoffman-Andrews, DNS Certifi-
 SWRL-20040521, 2004. cation Authority Authorization (CAA) Resource Record, document RFC
[20] J. Hodges, C. Jackson, and A. Barth, HTTP Strict Transport Security 8659, 2019, doi: 10.17487/RFC8659.
 (HSTS), document RFC 6797, 2012, doi: 10.17487/RFC6797. [43] R. Fielding, M. Nottingham, and J. Reschke, HTTP Semantics, document
[21] J. Koch, C. A. Velasco, and P. Ackermann. (2017). HTTP Vocabulary in RFC 9110, 2022, doi: 10.17487/RFC9110.
 RDF 1.0. W3C Working Group Note, W3C. [Online]. Available: https:// [44] R. Sommese, M. Jonker, R. van Rijswijk-Deij, A. Dainotti,
 www.w3.org/TR/HTTP-in-RDF10 K. C. Claffy, and A. Sperotto, “The forgotten side of DNS: Orphan
[22] J. A. Hawkinson and T. J. Bates, Guidelines for Creation, Selection, and abandoned records,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy
 and Registration of an Autonomous System (AS), document RFC 1930, Workshops (EuroS&PW), Sep. 2020, pp. 538–543, doi: 10.1109/
 1996, doi: 10.17487/RFC1930. EUROSPW51379.2020.00079.
[23] J. Pérez, M. Arenas, and C. Gutierrez, “Semantics and complexity of [45] V. Ramasubramanian and E. G. Sirer, “Perils of transitive trust in the
 SPARQL,” ACM Trans. Database Syst., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 1–45, Aug. domain name system,” in Proc. 5th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet
 2009, doi: 10.1145/1567274.1567278. Meas. (IMC), 2005, p. 1, doi: 10.1145/1330107.1330152.
[24] K. Kurniawan, E. Kiesling, D. Winkler, and A. Ekelhart, “The ICS-SEC [46] R. Fontugne, M. Tashiro, R. Sommese, M. Jonker, Z. S. Bischof, and
 KG: An integrated cybersecurity resource for industrial control systems,” E. Aben, “The wisdom of the measurement crowd: Building the internet
 in The Semantic Web—ISWC 2024. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2025, yellow pages a knowledge graph for the internet,” in Proc. ACM Internet
 doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-77847-6 9. Meas. Conf., Nov. 2024, pp. 183–198, doi: 10.1145/3646547.3688444.
[25] K. Hu, H. Du, and Y. Wang, “Heracles: A novel state-based dis- [47] Russ Cox.(2007). Regular Expression Matching Can Be Simple and Fast.
 tributed verification framework for DNS configurations,” in Proc. [Online]. Available: https://swtch.com/∼rsc/regexp/regexp1.html
 SIGCOMM Workshop Formal Methods Aided Netw. Operation, Aug. [48] S. Dietzold, “Generating RDF models from LDAP directories,” in Proc.
 2024, pp. 27–32, doi: 10.1145/3672199.3673890. SFSW Workshop Scripting Semantic Web, vol. 135, 2005, pp. 1–7.
[26] K. Borgolte, T. Fiebig, S. Hao, C. Kruegel, and G. Vigna, “Cloud [49] S. Chvez-Feria, R. Garca-Castro, and M. Poveda-Villaln, “Chowlk:
 strife: Mitigating the security risks of domain-validated certificates,” From UML-based ontology conceptualizations to OWL,” in Semantic
 in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, doi: 10.14722/ Web, vol. 13261. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 338–352, doi:
 ndss.2018.23327. [Online]. Available: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ 10.1007/978-3-031-06981-9 20.
 ndss2018/acceptedpapers/ [50] S. K. R. Kakarla, R. Beckett, B. Arzani, T. Millstein, and G. Varghese,
[27] L. Tailhardat, R. Troncy, and Y. Chabot, “Leveraging knowledge graphs “GRooT: Proactive verification of DNS configurations,” in Proc. Annu.
 for classifying incident situations in ICT systems,” in Proc. 18th Conf. ACM Special Interest Group Data Commun. Appl., Technol.,
 Int. Conf. Availability, Rel. Secur., Aug. 2023, pp. 1–9, doi: 10.1145/ Architectures, Protocols Comput. Commun., New York, NY, USA, Jul.
 3600160.3604991. 2020, pp. 310–328, doi: 10.1145/3387514.3405871.
 [51] (2019). SmartBear Software: Gherkin Syntax. [Online]. Available:
[28] L. Tailhardat, Y. Chabot, A. Py, and P. Guillemette, “NORIA UI:
 https://cucumber.io/docs/gherkin/
 Efficient incident management on large-scale ICT systems represented
 [52] S. Wu, Y. Zhang, and W. Cao, “Network security assessment
 as knowledge graphs,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Availability, Rel. Secur.,
 using a semantic reasoning and graph based approach,” Com-
 Jul. 2024, pp. 1–10.
 put. Electr. Eng., vol. 64, pp. 96–109, Nov. 2017, doi: 10.1016/
[29] L. Tailhardat, Y. Chabot, and R. Troncy, “Designing NORIA: A
 j.compeleceng.2017.02.001.
 knowledge graph-based platform for anomaly detection and incident
 [53] S. S. Alqahtani, E. E. Eghan, and J. Rilling, “Tracing known security
 management in ICT systems,” in Proc. 4th Int. Workshop Knowl. Graph
 vulnerabilities in software repositories—A semantic web enabled mod-
 Construct. (KGCW), vol. 3471, 2023, pp. 1–16.
 eling approach,” Sci. Comput. Program., vol. 121, pp. 153–175, Jun.
[30] L. Tailhardat, Y. Chabot, and R. Troncy, “NORIA-O: An ontology for
 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.scico.2016.01.005.
 anomaly detection and incident management in ICT systems,” in Proc.
 [54] W3C OWL Working Group. (2012). OWL 2 Web Ontology Language.
 Semantic Web 21st Int. Conf. (ESWC), Hersonissos, Greece, May 2024,
 W3C. [Online]. Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/
 pp. 21–39, doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-60635-9 2.
 [55] W3C SPARQL Working Group. (2013). SPARQL 1.1. W3C. [Online].
[31] M. B. Salem and C. Wacek, “Enabling new technologies for cyber Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-overview/
 security defense with the ICAS cyber security ontology,” in Proc. 10th [56] Z. Syed, A. Padia, M. L. Mathews, T. Finin, and A. Joshi, “UCO: A
 Conf. Semantic Technol. Intell., Defense, Secur., Fairfax VA, USA, 2015, unified cybersecurity ontology,” in Proc. AAAI Workshop Artif. Intell.
 pp. 1–8. Cyber Secur., 2016, pp. 195–202.
[32] M. Poveda-Villalón, A. Fernández-Izquierdo, M. Fernández-López, and
 R. Garcı́a-Castro, “LOT: An industrial oriented ontology engineering
 framework,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 111, May 2022, Art. no.
 104755, doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2022.104755.
[33] M. D. McIlroy, E. N. Pinson, and B. A. Tague, “UNIX time-sharing
 system: Foreword,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1899–1904, Didier Bringer received the Engineering degree in computer science from
 Jul. 1978. [Online]. Available: http://archive.org/details/bstj57-6-1899 Polytech Montpellier, ISIM, France, in 1995, and the another Engineering
[34] M. Herschel, R. Diestelkämper, and H. Ben Lahmar, “A survey on degree in cybersecurity and formal knowledge representation from the Conprovenance: What for? What form? What from?,” VLDB J., vol. 26, servatoire National des Arts et Métiers (CNAM), France, in 2022. Currently,
 no. 6, pp. 881–906, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1007/s00778-017-0486-1. he is a full-time Cybersecurity Engineer with Orange Company, France.
[35] M. Würsch, G. Ghezzi, M. Hert, G. Reif, and H. C. Gall, “SEON: Prior to specializing in cybersecurity, he was a System Engineer and the
 A pyramid of ontologies for software evolution and its applications,” IT Platform Manager for various companies. His research interests include
 Computing, vol. 94, no. 11, pp. 857–885, Nov. 2012, doi: 10.1007/ system vulnerability analysis, risk management, case-based reasoning, and
 s00607-012-0204-1. knowledge capture.
[36] M. Pasin. (2017). Ontopsy: Python Library and Command-Line Interface
 for Inspecting and Visualizing RDF Models. [Online]. Available: https://
 github.com/lambdamusic/ontospy
[37] M. Taghavi, “A knowledge graph to represent software vulnerabilities,”
 M.S. thesis, Dept. Comput. Sci. Softw. Eng., Concordia Univ., Lionel Tailhardat received the M.Sc. degree in telecommunication networks
 Montreal, QC, Canada, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:// and broadband technologies from the Conservatoire National des Arts et
 spectrum.library.concordia.ca/id/eprint/991794/ Métiers (CNAM), France, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree in data science and
[38] M. Zhang. (2021). Bgpkit. [Online]. Available: https://bgpkit.com/ knowledge engineering from EURECOM, Sorbonne University, France, in
[39] O. Corcho et al., “A high-level ontology network for ICT 2024. Currently, he is a full-time Researcher with Orange Research. Prior
 infrastructures,” in Proc. 20th Int. Semantic Web Conf. (ISWC), 2021, to pursuing research, he held various positions in network operations and
 doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-88361-4 26. monitoring system architecture. His research interests include distributed and
[40] P. Mockapetris, Domain Names–Implementation and Specification, doc- dynamic systems, data science and graph theory, coding schemes, and highument RFC 1035, 1987, doi: 10.17487/RFC1035. performance computing.