IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026 4701

Dual-Masked and Discriminative Reconstruction for
 Unified Vision Anomaly Detection
 Bin-Bin Gao

 Abstract—Unsupervised reconstruction networks have shown research attention. Notably, most existing anomaly detection
promise for unified vision anomaly detection, i.e., image-level methods [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19],
anomaly classification and pixel-level anomaly segmentation, [20] mainly focus on training separate models (i.e., one model
where a single model trained on multi-class normal images can
detect various anomalies. This is more challenging than most for one class) for different objects. However, this separate
existing separate methods, i.e., one model for one class, as it paradigm may not be practical in real-world applications, as
requires handling a more complex data distribution. Notably, it requires high memory consumption and storage overhead,
pure reconstruction networks often suffer from overfitting due especially when increasing the number of categories. In conto “identity shortcut”, where both normal and anomaly images trast, unified anomaly detection (i.e., one model for multiple
may be well recovered and thus fail in detecting anomalies.
Recent efforts have focused on developing specific modules for classes) detects anomalies for multi-class objects with a single
different network architectures, e.g., Convolutions and Trans- model. Notably, the categorical information (i.e., class label)
formers. However, it is still unclear how to essentially and is inaccessible at both the training and inference stages in
effectively prevent learning from this shortcut in a simpler this unified setting. Undoubtedly, the unified paradigm is both
and more general manner. Furthermore, most existing methods more practical and more challenging, but it remains a relatively
consider anomaly detection solely as unsupervised classification,
resulting in inaccurate anomaly segmentation due to “weak new and under-explored area.
discrimination”, where normal and anomaly features may be UniAD [21] is the first unified unsupervised anomaly detecentangled. To address these challenges, we propose a simple tion work, which is typically based on an encoder-decoder
yet general Dual-masked and Discriminative Reconstruction transformer. Notably, the pure encoder-decoder transformer
(D2Rec) for unified vision anomaly detection. First, we propose suffers from overfitting. It cannot achieve satisfactory perfora general dual-masked reconstruction, i.e., using a pair of
complementary masks, resolving the “identity shortcut” so that mance because of “identity shortcut” issue, which returns a
all masked positions are reconstructed by unmasked original direct copy of the input disregarding its content, as shown
features. Second, we propose a self-supervised discriminator, in Fig. 1a. Layer-wise query decoder and neighbor-masked
which refines reconstruction errors with synthesized anomaly attention are proposed in UniAD [21] to prevent the model
images to enhance the discrimination ability between normal from learning the shortcut. Similar to UniAD, DUMA [22]
and abnormal features. The dual-masked reconstruction and selfsupervised discriminator can serve as universal plugins, easily applies a max-mask matrix in self-attention to reduce the noise
integrated into reconstruction-based anomaly detection methods dependencies in transformer-based reconstruction networks,
of any architecture. Despite its simplicity, D2Rec outperforms and SSPCAB [23] proposes a masked convolutional kernel for
previous methods on three industrial benchmarks (MVTec, convolutional-based reconstruction networks. However, these
BTAD, and VisA), and three medical datasets (Brain MRI, Liver methods are limited to specific network architectures, such as
CT and Retinal OCT). The code for D2Rec is available at https://
github.com/gaobb/D2Rec transformers or convolutions. Furthermore, RD [16] proposes
 a simple student-teacher reconstruction model, where the
 Index Terms—Dual-masked reconstruction, self-supervised dis- student restores the multiscale representations of the teacher
criminator, unsupervised anomaly detection, unified anomaly
detection. from high-level to low-level. EfficientAD [19] combines a
 lightweight student-teacher model and an autoencoder model
 I. I NTRODUCTION for efficient and accurate detection of vision anomalies. However, RD [16] and EfficientAD [19] are originally designed
U NSUPERVISED vision anomaly detection aims to identify anomaly images (i.e., classification or detection) and
segment anomaly regions (i.e., segmentation or localization)
 for separate settings, and there is still a large performance
 gap when they are extended to a unified setting. Here, we
 raise a question: how to prevent the reconstruction networks
using only normal training images. It is increasingly emerging
 regardless of architecture under a unified setting from falling
with wide applications, such as quality inspection in intelligent
 into overfitting in a simpler and more general manner?
manufacturing [1], [2], [3], medical image diagnosis [4], [5],
 Furthermore, the current unified anomaly detection
and video surveillance [6], [7], [8], [9], thus attracting more
 methods, e.g., UniAD [21] and MoEAD [24], are still not
 Received 25 January 2025; revised 27 October 2025; accepted 5 April 2026. satisfactory for pixel-level anomaly segmentation when
Date of publication 1 May 2026; date of current version 6 May 2026. The using a more suitable evaluation metric (see more detailed
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for
publication was Prof. Vittoria Bruni.
 discussions in Sec. V), e.g., Pixel-level AUPR, as shown in
 The author is with the Tencent YouTu Lab, Shenzhen 518057, China Figs. 1c and 2. The main reason is “weak discrimination”
(e-mail: csgaobb@gmail.com). between normal and anomaly features because they are trained
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2026.3687095, provided by the authors.
 only on normal training images in low-resolution feature
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2026.3687095 space. The “weak discrimination” makes normal and anomaly
 1941-0042 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4702 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

Fig. 1. Comparisons among (a) AE, (b) MAE, (c) UniAD and our (d) DRec and (e) D2Rec with Eb4 +Trans architecture on MVTec. The simple
AE tends to learn an “identity shortcut”, i.e., regressing the overall network to an identity mapping, which can result in the model copying input as output at
inference, thereby failing to detect anomalies. We also observe that AE suffers from serious overfitting, i.e., low training loss but poor testing performance, due
to the “identity shortcut”. The UniAD can alleviate the “identity shortcut”, but it is primarily designed for transformer architectures. To some extent, Masked AE
(MAE) can also mitigate the “identity shortcut”, but its effectiveness depends on an ideal mask ratio. In contrast, the proposed Dual-masked Reconstruction
(DRec) is simple, general, and robust across various mask ratios. DRec effectively resolves the “identity shortcut” by reconstructing all masked positions
using unmasked features. However, both UniAD and DRec still suffer from the “weak discrimination” issue, which leads to entanglement between normal
and anomaly features, ultimately resulting in inaccurate anomaly segmentation. To this end, our D2Rec integrates DRec and Self-Supervised Discriminator
(SSD) into a unified framework. This approach successfully resolves both the “identity shortcut” and “weak discrimination” issues simultaneously, achieving
superior anomaly detection performance, particularly in anomaly segmentation.

Fig. 2. Comparisons of popular reconstruction-based anomaly detection models, e.g., AE and RD, and our DRec and D2Rec with diverse architectures.
The averaged results of all classes on each dataset are reported in P-AUPR for anomaly segmentation and I-AUROC for anomaly classification, respectively.

features always entangled, and ultimately results in inaccurate proposed a lightweight Self-Supervised Discriminator (SSD)
anomaly segmentation. We expect that anomaly segmentation to further refine the reconstruction error from low-resolution to
performance can be improved if the “weak discrimination” high-resolution (coarse to fine) with normal and anomaly-free
issue is mitigated through discriminative learning. Recently, pseudo images. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
some discriminative models have been trained on synthetic • We rethink and analyze reconstruction networks for
anomalies generated on anomaly-free images [15], [20], [25], unified anomaly detection, and then find that they
[26] or features [17]. However, current approaches either use severely suffer from overfitting and result in unsatisfacsynthetic anomalies at the image level, resulting in weak per- tory performance due to “identity shortcut” and “weak
formance, or utilize a complex segmentation model, incurring discrimination”.
high computational costs. We expect to design a discriminator • We propose a simple and general dual-masked reconthat is as lightweight as possible to refine reconstruction struction for unsupervised reconstruction networks, which
errors for achieving better anomaly segmentation. provides a unified solution to address the “identity
 To overcome “identity shortcut” and “weak discrimination” shortcut” in reconstruction networks of any architecture.
issues for unified visual anomaly detection, we propose • To alleviate “weak discrimination”, we propose a selfan embarrassingly simple but general D2Rec framework. supervised discriminator to refine reconstruction errors
First, we proposed a Dual-masked Reconstruction (DRec) with synthesized anomaly images, which significantly
mechanism, which ensures that all masked positions are boosts anomaly segmentation performance.
reconstructed using unmasked features, thus completely solv- • We propose a simple, effective, general and robust vision
ing the “identity shortcut” in unsupervised reconstruction. anomaly detection framework integrating unsupervised
Experiments have demonstrated that the proposed DRec is dual-masked reconstruction and self-supervised
robust and insensitive to mask ratio. Second, to further boost discriminator, and achieve competitive performance
the anomaly segmentation performance caused by “weak on both industrial and medical anomaly detection
discrimination” between normal and abnormal features, we benchmarks.
GAO: DUAL-MASKED AND DISCRIMINATIVE RECONSTRUCTION FOR UNIFIED VISION ANOMALY DETECTION 4703

 II. R ELATED W ORK C. Reconstruction-Based Methods
 Unsupervised vision anomaly detection methods can assume that anomaly image regions cannot be properly
be mainly grouped into three types, i.e., embedding-, reconstructed since they do not exist in normal training images.
discrimination-, and reconstruction-based methods. Some works use generative models such as auto-encoders
 [37], [38], [39] and GANs [40], [41], [42] to reconstruct
A. Embedding-Based Methods normal images. Recent works frame anomaly detection as
 aim at leveraging deep models pre-trained on large-scale an inpainting problem, where patches from images are partly
data to extract offline features from images for anomaly detec- masked. RIAD [43] randomly removes partial image regions
tion. It assumes that offline features preserve the discriminative and reconstructs the image from partial inpaintings with a
information that helps distinguish anomalies from normal convolutional neural network. SSPCAB [23] learns to reconsamples. PaDiM [11], MDND [27], and DFM [12] model struct masked regions using contextual information with a
a multivariate Gaussian distribution for normal features, then masked convolutional kernel. RGI [44] proposes a robust
utilize a distance metric to measure anomalies. PatchCore [13] GAN-inversion that can restore any input image (even with
captures normal features and then stores them in a memory gross corruptions) to a clean image and identify the corrupted
bank, and finally calculates anomaly scores by Euclidean region mask by solving the optimization problems thereof. A
distance between query features and the memory bank at pyramid deformation module is proposed to model diverse
inference. CS-Flow [10] and PyramidFlow [28] transform normal and measure the severity of anomaly in [45]. These
normal feature distribution into a Gaussian distribution via methods tend to be computationally expensive because they
normalizing flow. CFA [14] and PADA [29] propose feature involve reconstruction in image space.
adaptation for adapting target datasets. Recent studies have UniAD [21] reconstructs features and achieves strong
shown that multiple designed or learnable text prompts on performance for unified anomaly detection. Moreover, RD
a powerful vision-language model [30], [31], [32] or only [16] and EfficientAD [19] propose a simple and lightweight
one normal image prompt on a pure vision model [33] can student-teacher reconstruction model, where the student
yield excellent performance for zero- and few-shot anomaly restores the teacher’s multiscale representations from highdetection. However, these methods mainly focus on a sep- level to low-level. Recently, some works, e.g., DiAD [46] and
arate setting, which has significant performance degradation OneNIP [47], try to use additional conditions or complex modwhen they are naively extended to a unified paradigm. While ules, such as normal image prompts and stable diffusion, to
zero-/few-shot variants offer practical flexibility, they still improve reconstruction models and achieve good performance
lag behind full-shot methods. We focus on a unified setting for unified anomaly detection. However, these works are either
and aim to achieve competitive performance with separate designed for specific architectures, such as Trans or Convs,
approaches. or are originally designed for separate settings. Therefore,
 they do not work well when extended to a unified setting or
 are difficult to generalize to different network architectures.
B. Discrimination-Based Methods
 This paper aims to propose a simple and general method for
 are typically trained to distinguish normal images from reconstruction networks of any architecture.
synthesized anomaly images and hope that they can generalize
to unseen real anomalies at test time. CutPaste [25] proposes a
simple strategy to generate synthetic anomalies. It cuts a small III. M ETHOD
rectangular area of variable sizes and aspect ratios from normal The proposed Dual-masked and Discriminative Reconstructraining images and pastes this patch back to the image at a tion (D2Rec) jointly learns by reconstruction and discrimrandom location. Similar to CutPaste, DRAEM [15] generates ination for unified vision anomaly detection, as shown in
noise images using Perlin. A boundary-guided semi-push-pull Fig. 3. It is composed of a multi-level features fusion, a dualloss is proposed to learn more discriminative features with syn- masked reconstruction, and a self-supervised discriminator. We
thetic samples in [34]. PRN [35] presents a variety of anomaly elaborately introduce them in this section.
generation strategies for more accurate anomaly localization.
Instead of synthesizing anomalies on images, SimpleNet [17]
synthesizes anomaly features by adding Gaussian noise to A. Multi-Level Features Fusion
normal features and then learns a binary discriminator to Following existing anomaly detection works, we extract
distinguish anomaly features from normal ones. Recently, image features using pre-trained models. Given an input image
GLASS [20] synthesizes global and local anomalies and I ∈ R3×H×W , we extract multi-level features {Zi } from multiple
achieves excellent performance in industrial anomaly detection stages of a pre-trained backbone F, that is
and localization tasks. AnoGen [36] guides a diffusion model
to generate realistic and diverse anomalies with only a few Zi = F(I), (1)
real anomaly images. Different from generating anomalies,
this paper mainly aims to propose a simple, general, and where Zi ∈ Rci ×hi ×wi , ci is the channel number, and hi × wi
lightweight self-supervised discriminator trained with normal is the spatial shape of the i-th level feature. Considering
 l
and anomaly-free pseudo images to alleviate the issue of that multi-level features {Zi }i=1 usually represent hierarchical
inaccurate anomaly segmentation. semantic information and their shapes may be different, we
4704 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

Fig. 3. Framework of the proposed D2Rec for unified vision anomaly detection. In the training stage, both normal and synthetic pseudo anomaly images
are fed a pre-trained backbone for extracting multi-level features. These features are transformed into a unified space to obtain compact representations with
multi-level features fusion. Next, a dual-masked reconstruction is utilized to reconstruct normal features, and a self-supervised discriminator with a mask head
is used to refine the reconstruction errors from coarse to fine. At inference, the synthesized images are removed, and only testing images are fed into D2Rec.
The final prediction is a weighted combination of the reconstruction error and the segmentation map from the mask head.

Fig. 4. Visualization comparisons of several baselines and our DRec and D2Rec with diverse network architectures on selected testing images from MVTec
[1], BTAD [2], VisA [3] and BMAD [50] datasets. Here, the superscript † , ‡ and ? means Eb4 +Trans, WR50 +Convs and ViT-B+Trans, respectively.

have to fuse them into a unified space to obtain a compact is that MAE adopts an asymmetric encoder-decoder, which
representation F, that is allows the encoder to operate only on a small portion of the
 observed signal through random masking with a mask ratio,
 F = Fuse{Zi }i=1
 l
 . (2) and the decoder reconstructs the full signal from the latent
For a fair comparison, we adopt the same multi-scale feature representation and learnable mask tokens. We empirically
fusion strategy consistent with the state-of-the-art methods, found that pure MAE is only effective when using a high
which varies across backbones and model architectures. The mask ratio, but its performance is highly sensitive to mask
respective fusion details are described in Section IV-A. ratios and still suffers from overfitting, as shown in Fig. 6.
 In MAE, unmasked features are easily reconstructed by
 learning a shortcut. To avoid overfitting (shortcut), we propose
B. Dual-Masked Reconstruction a Dual-masked Reconstruction (DRec), which works well with
 MAE reconstructs the original signal given its partial obser- various mask ratios for unsupervised vision anomaly detection.
vation. It has proven to be a powerful self-supervised method The DRec consists of a dual-masked encoder/decoder.
for both computer vision [48] and natural language processing.
Similar to all autoencoders, MAE has an encoder-decoder 1) Dual-Masked Encoder: The dual-masked encoder is
architecture, where the encoder maps the observed signal applied only to visible (i.e., unmasked) features. The encoder
to a latent representation and the decoder reconstructs the embeds the compact representation F derived from multioriginal signal from the latent representation. The difference level features fusion. Different from the general encoder, our
GAO: DUAL-MASKED AND DISCRIMINATIVE RECONSTRUCTION FOR UNIFIED VISION ANOMALY DETECTION 4705

Fig. 5. Comparisons of Performance, Complexity and Efficiency of different methods with a unified setting on MVTec [1]. Note that M means million (106 )
and FPS means the number of inferencing images in one second on one NVIDIA V100 GPU, with a batch size of 64. Our methods (DRec and D2Rec)
equipped with a lightweight network architecture (Eb4 +Trans) outperform most previous ones in Pixel AUPR (about 10%) with comparable parameters (7.1M)
and inference speed (400 + FPS). The best anomaly detection performance is obtained by our D2Rec when using a more powerful network (ViT-B+Trans)
but with acceptable parameter size (58.8M) and inference speed (104 FPS).

Fig. 6. Comparisons of training loss and testing metrics on MVTec using MAE, DRec, and D2Rec, with varying mask ratios and Eb4 +Trans architecture.
Notably, dual mask ratios are used in D2Rec, e.g., 10% corresponds to 10% and 90%. The MAE only works well with a high masking ratio, e.g., 90%, as
shown in the last of the first row, while lower mask ratios still suffer from overfitting. In contrast, DRec demonstrates robust performance across various mask
ratios, suggesting that the dual-masked mechanism effectively addresses the over-fitting issue of MAE. Moreover, D2Rec shows significant improvements in
pixel-level AUPR across all mask ratios, indicating that the self-supervised discriminator enhances the discriminability between normal and anomaly features.
Consequently, D2Rec is most effective when integrating dual-masked reconstruction and self-supervised discriminator.

encoder only operates on a partial subset (e.g., 50%) of the as a complementary component of common random masking
full features, i.e., any spatial features are in F, through random as follows:
masking M ∈ Rh×w , where each element of M is either 0 or F̄1−m = (1 − M) F. (4)
1. Therefore, the input of our encoder is
 Combining Eqs. 3 and 4 together (i.e., dual-masked encoder),
 F̄m = M F, (3)
 we can ensure that all masked (reconstructed) features depend
where represents an element-wise multiplication and masked on unmasked ones rather than themselves. Therefore, the
tokens are removed from F̄m . For simplicity, the corresponding overfitting issue in MAE may be thoroughly resolved by using
latent representation of the encoder is still denoted as F̄m . the proposed dual-masked mechanism.
Notably, the masked encoder operates on a subset of the 2) Dual-Masked Decoder: The input to our dual-masked
visible features and reconstructs the full features, including decoder is a full set consisting of latent representations F̄m
both visible (unmasked) and invisible (masked) features, with derived from the dual-masked encoder on visible features and
another decoder described below. To some extent, the random mask tokens T ∈ Rc . Each mask token T is a shared and
masking operation alleviates over-fitting during the reconstruc- learned embedding that indicates the presence of invisible
tion process. However, the issue of over-fitting still exists features to be predicted. In our implementation, we first restore
because the observed features can be completely reconstructed the latent representation F̄m into the original spatial location
by simply copying inputs as the outputs, especially for low depending on the mask M, and fill the remaining locations with
mask ratios. To alleviate this issue, we propose a dual mask this shared mask token. Notably, the mask token would have
4706 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

no location information, and we add positional embeddings Given a normal training image I n and the corresponding
to the mask token in this constructed full set. Then, we feed anomaly mask Y n , we denote its synthesized anomaly image
the resulting full set via the decoder. Here, we denote the and anomaly mask as I a and Y a , respectively. We feed the
output of the masked-decoder as F̂mc×h×w . On the other hand, synthesized anomaly image I a into a pre-trained backbone and
 c×h×w
we can derive another reconstructed feature F̂1−m adopting derive multi-level features {Zia }. Then, we can derive the comthe above decoder processing on another latent representation pact representation F a applying Eq. 2. Then, we reconstruct
F̂1−m . F a with the proposed DRec, and denote the corresponding
 Notably, F̂m and F̂1−m are reconstructed by visible F̄m and features as F̂ a . Here, we use an element-wise reconstruction
F̄1−m , respectively. In other words, the visible features could be error E a between reconstructed and original features, that is
completely reconstructed by copying the input as the output.
In order to avoid the issue, we combine F̂m and F̂1−m with E a = Error(F̂ a , F a ). (7)
their corresponding opposite masks, that is To ensure stable training, we set the reconstruction error E a
 F̂ = (1 − M) F̂m + M F̂1−m . (5) matching the corresponding reconstruction loss, i.e., Eq. 6.
 The discriminator is designed with several convolution
 3) Reconstruction Function: The reconstruction function is blocks following a 1 × 1 convolution layer for performing
used to measure pixel-wise errors between the reconstructed pixel segmentation. Here, each convolution block is composed
output F̂ of the dual-masked decoder and the original input of a 3 × 3 convolution, a BatchNorm, a ReLU, and a 2 × 2
features F. In Eq. 5, each element of F̂ is reconstructed by deconvolution. The reconstruction error E a is fed into the
its corresponding unmasked features without relying on its designed discriminator to obtain an estimated anomaly map
own original (i.e., visible or masked) features. Therefore, it as Ŷ a . For computing the loss between Ŷ a and the groundthoroughly solves the “identity shortcut” because all masked truth Y a , we resize Ŷ a to the size of Y a . Considering that
positions are reconstructed by unmasked original features, anomaly pixels are typically in the minority in anomaly
where there is no overlap between masked and unmasked detection, we utilize Dice loss [49], which is effective for
features. We use the same loss function as state-of-the-arts to learning from extremely imbalanced data, that is
measure reconstruction errors between the reconstructed and
original features as 2 · Ŷ a · Y a
 Lrec (F̂, F), (6) L seg = 1 − , (8)
 (Ŷ a )2 + (Y a )2
where Lrec is either mean squared error or cosine similarity,
depending on the used framework. The loss details for different D. Training
frameworks are described in Section IV-A. Considering both the reconstruction and discrimination
 objectives of the two sub-networks, the total loss used in
C. Self-Supervised Discriminator training D2Rec is
 The DRec partially solves “identify shortcut” and achieves
 L = Lrec + λL seg , (9)
good performance on both I- and P-AUROC for unified
anomaly detection. However, it still performs poorly when where λ > 0 is a weight that balances the importance of the
using a more rigorous metric (i.e., P-AUPR) as shown in two loss functions Lrec and L seg .
Fig. 1d. It is not surprising that DRec (like UniAD) is only
trained on normal training images, which may result in “weak E. Inference
discrimination” between normal and abnormal features. 1) Anomaly Segmentation: The result of anomaly segmen-
 To enhance the discrimination between normal and anomaly tation is an anomaly score map, which assigns an anomaly
features, the easiest way is to learn a binary classifier by score for each pixel. For the dual-masked reconstruction, the
normal and anomaly training images. Unfortunately, there are anomaly score map, S rec , is calculated by the reconstruction
only normal images for unsupervised anomaly detection tasks. error. For the self-supervised discriminator, the anomaly score
This is, in fact, also a sound setting for practical applications, map is predicted as the Ŷ ∈ RH×W . Finally, we combine S rec
such as industry inspection and medical image diagnosis, and Ŷ and take it as the final anomaly segmentation map, that
because anomaly images are always rare and difficult to collect is
on a large scale. Therefore, we have to synthesize anomaly S = w · S rec + (1 − w) · Ŷ, (10)
images using normal ones for learning a discriminator. Fortunately, some researchers have tried to synthesize anomaly where w ∈ [0, 1] is a weight.
images and achieved good performance in anomaly detection 2) Anomaly Classification: Anomaly classification aims
fields, such as CutPaste [25] and DRAEM [15]. In this paper, to detect whether an image contains anomaly regions. We
we directly utilize CutPaste [25] and DRAEM [15] to synthe- transform the anomaly score map S to the anomaly score of
size anomaly images. Different from CutPaste [25], we learn the image by taking the maximum value of S .
a pixel-level discriminator with these synthesized anomaly IV. E XPERIMENTS
images. Furthermore, we design a lightweight discriminator
to refine the dual-masked reconstruction errors, which is also A. Experimental Setup
different from DRAEM [15], using a heavy segmentation We follow the previous works and evaluate our method
model in image space. on three popular industry anomaly detection benchmarks,
GAO: DUAL-MASKED AND DISCRIMINATIVE RECONSTRUCTION FOR UNIFIED VISION ANOMALY DETECTION 4707

MVTec [1], BTAD [2], and VisA [3], and three medical Here, the multi-level features are extracted from the intermedidatasets [50], Brain MRI, Liver CT and Retina OCT. ate 8 stages, i.e., {2, 3, · · · , 9}. For simplicity, we average these
 Protocol: Following the unified anomaly detection protocol features from different stages to obtain the final representation
in UniAD, we train a single model for detecting all categories. F. Furthermore, we built a reconstruction decoder with the
For fair comparisons, we use the original training/testing splits standard ViT block, which is also different from the original
given in previous works [1], [2], [3], [50]. convolution block. The cosine similarity is used to measure
 Metric: We evaluate and compare state-of-the-art anomaly reconstruction loss and error in Eqs. 6 and 7, which is the
detection methods and our D2Rec for image-level anomaly same as RD [16].
classification and pixel-level anomaly segmentation with Implementation Details: Unless otherwise specified, we
AUPR and AUROC metrics. It is worth noting that the resize input images to 224 × 224 resolution for all methods
AUPR metric is better for anomaly segmentation measurement both training phase and inference time. For DRec and D2Rec,
due to the imbalance issue between normal and anomaly we set the layer numbers of the encoder and decoder to 4 for
pixels [3], [51]. Eb4 +Trans, and build the encoder for the identity function
 Competed Methods: Our approach is compared with pop- for WR50 +Convs and ViT-B+Trans, respectively. For the
ular anomaly detection methods including CS-Flow [10], self-supervised discriminator, the number and dimension of
PaDiM [11], DFM [12], PatchCore [13], CFA [14], DRAEM the convolution block are set to 2 and 128 for balancing
[15], SimpleNet [17], RD [16], UniAD [21], MoEAD [24] and performance and computation costs. The loss weight λ in
OneNIP [47]. To fully verify the effectiveness of our method, Eq. 9 and coefficient w in Eq. 10 are set to 0.5 by default,
we insert the proposed D2Rec into several popular baselines, respectively.
AE [21], RD [16], and RD? , using diverse backbones and We conduct experiments based on the open-source framereconstruction networks, e.g., EfficientNet-b4 + Transform- work PyTorch and NVIDIA V100 GPU. For Eb4 +Trans, we
ers, WideRes-50 + Convolutions, ViT-B/14 + Transformers train the reconstruction model with a total of 1000 epochs
(denoted as Eb4 +Trans, WR50 +Convs and DINOv2 ViT- on 8 Tesla V100 GPUs with batch size 64, and use AdamW
B+Trans for simplicity). The details of these baselines are optimizer with weight decay 1 × 10−4 . The learning rate is
summarized as follows: 1×10−4 initially and drops by 0.1 after 800 epochs. For WR50
 UniAD [21] is the first work for unified anomaly detection. +Convs and ViT-B+Trans, we train the reconstruction model
It builds on an encoder-decoder transformer architecture with a total of 50 epochs on 1 Tesla V100 GPUs with batch
and an EfficientNet-b4 [52] backbone. To prevent the size 16, and use AdamW optimizer with weight decay 1×10−4 .
“identity shortcut”, UniAD introduces layer-wise query and The initial learning rate is set to 2 × 10−3 and using a cosine
neighborhood-masked attention. AE is a degraded version annealing learning rate scheduler. We use the official codes for
of UniAD. To ensure fair comparisons, we use the same DRAEM [15], SimpleNet [17], RD [16], UniAD [21], MoEAD
hyperparameters and network architecture as in UniAD [24] and OneNIP [47], and publicly available implementations
[21] but fully remove all components in UniAD. Following for other methods (e.g., CS-Flow [54], PaDiM [11], PatchCore
 4
UniAD, we extract multi-scale features {Zi }i=1 from the [13] and CFA [14]).
1-th to 4-th stage of a pre-trained EfficientNet-b4. All these
features are resized to the same size (h × w), i.e., the size of
the smallest one. Then, we concatenate these resized features B. Comparisons With State-of-the-Arts
in the channel dimension to obtain the fusion representation Results of industrial anomaly segmentation on MVTec,
F. The reconstruction loss, Eq. 6, is set to the mean squared BTAD and VisA are reported in Tab. I. 1) Most baseline and
error (MSE), and the error, Eq. 7, is measured by the absolute state-of-the-art methods with a unified setting (one model for
element-wise subtraction, respectively. multiple classes) suffer from a performance drop compared to
 RD [16] is convolution-based reconstruction network using the original results reported in their papers with one model
WideRes-50 backbone. It is originally designed for a separate for one class setting, which is also consistent with obsersetting, and here we extend it to the unified paradigm. Instead vations in UniAD. For example, state-of-the-art SimpleNet
of reconstructing a compact feature in AE and UniAD, RD [17] drops about 17% (from 98.1% to 81.0%) in pixel-level
takes the compact feature as input and reconstructs multi-level AUROC. 2) The pixel-level AUPR performance is far lower
original features in a reverse manner. Following RD [16], we than AUROC for all methods under a unified setting (e.g.,
 3
extract multi-scale feature maps {Zi }i=1 from the 1-th to 3-th less than 50%). This indicates that AUPR metric may be better
stage of a pre-trained WideRes-50. Different from the simple than AUROC for measuring pixel-level anomaly segmentation.
resizing operation in UniAD, RD utilizes two trainable blocks, 3) Our method beats all baselines and achieves the best pixel-
MFF and OCE, for obtaining the compact representation F. level AUPR on two widely used industrial benchmarks, 74.3%
We use cosine similarity as reconstruction loss and error in on MVTec, and 48.5% on VisA. Our method significantly
Eqs. 6 and 7. outperforms state-of-the-art by a larger margin. On BTAD, the
 RD? is a simple extension of RD using a more powerful anomaly segmentation performance of our D2Rec is slightly
backbone, DINOv2 ViT-B/14 [53], and a transformer decoder. weaker than its baseline (RD) when using a reverse distillation
Unlike convolution-based EfficientNet-b4 and WideRes-50, network with a powerful ViT-B+Trans. We hypothesize that
DINOv2 ViT-B/14 adopts full transformer architectures, and the limitations may be attributed to the annotation quality of
all features from different stages share the same dimensions. the dataset, as BTAD contains a certain level of noise [55].
4708 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 TABLE I TABLE II
 P IXEL -L EVEL A NOMALY S EGMENTATION (U PPER PART ) AND P IXEL -L EVEL A NOMALY S EGMENTATION (U PPER PART ) AND I MAGE -
 I MAGE -L EVEL A NOMALY C LASSIFICATION (B OTTOM PART ) L EVEL A NOMALY C LASSIFICATION (B OTTOM PART ) C OMPARISONS
 C OMPARISON W ITH AUROC/AUPR ON T HREE I NDUSTRIAL W ITH AUROC/AUPR ON T HREE M EDICAL DATASETS , I NCLUDING
 B ENCHMARKS , MVT EC , BTAD AND V IS A. T HE B EST B RAIN MRI, L IVER CT AND R ETINAL OCT, F ROM THE BMAD
 R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD [50]. T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISONS OF D IFFERENT R ESOLUTIONS U SING D2R EC W ITH
 V I T-B+T RANS ON MVT EC , BTAD, V IS A AND BMAD

 Results of industrial anomaly classification on MVTec,
BTAD and VisA are presented in Tab. I. 1) We observe a
significant drop in anomaly classification performance when Results on Different Resolutions The results in Tab. III
extending separated methods (one model for one class) to demonstrate that increasing the input resolution to 448 × 448
the unified setting (one model for multiple classes), which generally benefits both anomaly segmentation and classifiis consistent with the findings for anomaly segmentation. cation tasks, with a more significant and consistent positive
2) Our method outperforms all baselines and state-of-the- impact on the pixel-level localization capability. This suggests
arts and achieves the best average AUROC and AUPR that the D2Rec benefits from finer spatial details provided by
scores on MVTec, BTAD and VisA. It is noteworthy that the higher resolution, which is crucial for precise anomaly
our method only introduces a dual-masked mechanism to segmentation.
reconstruction networks and refines the reconstruction errors Qualitative comparisons of anomaly segmentation. In
with self-supervised discriminator, supporting any network Fig. 4, we visualize the prediction heatmaps of our methods
architectures, e.g., convolution and transformer. Compared to (DRec and D2Rec) and several strong baselines (AE, UniAD,
UniAD [21], our approach is simpler and more general and RD and RD? ) on MVTec, BTAD, VisA and BMAD testing
can be considered as an alternative to UniAD for different images with the unified setting. Our D2Rec provides the most
network architectures. precise predictions of anomaly regions with high confidence,
 Results of medical anomaly classification and especially on small and slender defects (e.g., contamination
segmentation on BMAD [50] are reported in Tab. II. First, on bottle, hole on hazelnut, and crack on title), while the
the performance trend of our method on the medical dataset baseline methods exhibit some ambiguous predictions due
is consistent with that of industrial datasets. It significantly to the confusion between normal and anomaly samples in
outperforms the corresponding baseline methods including feature space. This further suggests that the proposed
AE, UniAD [21], RD [16] and RD? in both image-level self-supervised discriminator indeed enhances the
anomaly classification and pixel-level anomaly segmentation. discrimination between normal and anomaly samples,
Second, our method can be flexibly scaled to stronger and thus alleviates the “weak discrimination” issue in existing
backbones, such as DINOv2 ViT-B/14, and more diverse reconstruction-based anomaly detection methods.
reconstruction networks, such as transformer-based reversed Comparison of complexity and efficiency Under a unified
distillation, and can steadily improve the performance of setting (one model for multiple classes), we compare the
image-level anomaly classification (from 82.3% to 88.6% in number of learnable parameters (M) and inference speed
AUROC) and pixel-level anomaly segmentation (from 42.7% (FPS) of our methods (DRec and D2Rec) with their baselines
to 60.6% in AUPR). (AE, MAE and RD) and all competitors, CS-Flow [54],
GAO: DUAL-MASKED AND DISCRIMINATIVE RECONSTRUCTION FOR UNIFIED VISION ANOMALY DETECTION 4709

 TABLE IV
C OMPLEXITY (#LP S , THE N UMBER OF L EARNABLE PARAMS ), E FFICIENCY (FPS) AND P ERFORMANCE (P-/I-AUPR AND P-/I-AUROC) C OMPARISONS
 A MONG O UR M ETHODS (DR EC AND D2R EC ), T HEIR BASELINES (AE, MAE, RD AND RD? ) AND OTHER C OMPETITORS

PaDiM [11], PatchCore [13], CFA [14], DRAEM [15], ablation studies on MVTec with a unified setting with Eb4
SimpleNet [17], RD [16], UniAD [21], MoEAD [24] and +Trans architecture, as shown in Tab. V and Fig. 6.
OneNIP [47]. The experimental results are shown in Tab. IV 1) Dual-Masked Reconstruction: First, simple random
and Fig. 5. The main observations can be summarized as masking is effective for preventing over-fitting. However,
follows: simple masked reconstruction only works well with a high
 Firstly, our methods (DRec and D2Rec) and their baselines masking ratio (90%), while others with low mask ratios still
(AE and MAE) enjoy a reasonable complexity among all suffer from over-fitting (first row in Fig. 6); Second, the
competitors if we measure it with the number of learnable masked reconstruction with low mask ratios causes over-fitting
parameters. Specifically, our D2Rec (DRec+SSD) with Eb4 because it may learn a simple copying operation that directly
+Trans still has fewer parameters compared to the state-of-the- outputs unmasked features as reconstruction. To prevent this
art UniAD [21] (7.1M vs. 7.7M). This benefit mainly comes simple copying, we present dual-masked reconstruction, DRec,
from two aspects. One is that we remove all components of which works well with various mask ratios (second row
UniAD, especially layer-wise queries in each decoder layer. in Fig. 6). This means that the dual-masked mechanism
The second one is the designed discriminator module as thoroughly resolves the over-fitting of masked reconstruction.
lightweight as possible (only 0.6M). Third, the proposed dual-masked reconstruction is simple yet
 Secondly, our methods (DRec and D2Rec) with Eb4 +Trans general, and it can be freely extended to reconstruct networks
achieve about 400 FPS at inference, which is faster than the with different architectures. It is worth noting that most
popular PatchCore [13] (about 20×) and comparable to state- existing works are elaborately designed for specific network
of-the-arts, such as UniAD [21], MoEAD [24] and OneNIP architectures.
[47]. We find that D2Rec is faster (392 FPS vs. 131 FPS) than
 2) Self-Supervised Discriminator: It can be observed that
MoEAD in actual inference, despite MoEAD having fewer
 pixel-level AUPR curves (red) are still very low using DRec
trainable parameters (4.9M vs. 7.1M). Note that PaDiM [11]
 (second row in Fig. 6) because it is only trained on anomalyalso drives a high inference speed (478 FPS) but brings a larger
 free training data, which may result in weak discrimination
number of parameters (950M).
 between normal and abnormal samples in feature space. To
 Thirdly, our final solution (D2Rec) with Eb4 +Trans inteenhance feature discrimination, we propose a self-supervised
grates two proposed proposals, dual-masked reconstruction
 discriminator to refine reconstruction errors. In the last row
and self-supervised discriminator, into a framework, which
 of Fig. 6 and Tab. V, it is most effective for anomaly
achieves better anomaly segmentation in pixel-level AUPR
 classification and segmentation when integrating dual-masked
(61.1%) and anomaly classification in image-level AUROC
 reconstruction and self-supervised discriminator into a network
(96.8%) with fewer parameters (7.1M) and comparable infer-
 (i.e., D2Rec). In order to analyze the effects of the selfence speed (393 FPS). Our D2Rec with Eb4 +Trans shows
 supervised discriminator, we ablate it from model complexity
a slight degradation compared to the current state-of-the-art
 and synthesis methods. In Tab. Vb, we can see that more
OneNIP [47], but it is worth noting that OneNIP requires one
 convolution blocks and larger convolution dimensions help
additional normal image at inference.
 improve the performance of anomaly detection. In Tab. Vf,
 Last but not least, our D2Rec with ViT-B+Trans still
 increasing the diversity of synthesis methods also contributes
enjoys reasonable inference speed (104 FPS) and achieves
 to performance improvements. In addition, we empirically find
the best anomaly detection performance (74.3% in pixel-level
 that stopping the gradient in the self-supervised discriminator
AUPR and 98.9% in image-level AUROC) when extended
 is helpful to improve performance, as shown in Tab. Va. The
to a transformer-based reversed distillation network with a
 stop-gradient effectively isolates the learning of unsupervised
more powerful backbone, DINOv2 ViT-B/14. This also implies
 reconstruction and self-supervised discriminator, thereby these
the strong scalability of our method. In other words, the
 synthesized anomaly images only train the discrimination. It
proposed two key components of our method can be freely
 is worth noting that there is a distribution gap between the
plugged into reconstructed networks of different architectures
 synthesized and the real anomaly images. The independent
and backbones.
 optimization strategy effectively mitigates the overfitting risk
 of reconstruction networks.
C. Ablation Studies
 3) Effects of Hyper-Parameters: We carefully ablate the
 To verify the effectiveness of all proposed components effects of other hyperparameters, e.g., the combination coefand the effects of hyperparameters, we implement extensive ficient w, the mask ratio, and the weight of the loss function
4710 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 TABLE V
 A BLATION S TUDIES ON MVT EC . D EFAULT S ETTINGS A RE IN B LUE

for our D2Rec. The experimental results are reported in Tab. TABLE VI
Vc, d, and e. It can be seen that our D2Rec is robust when C OMPARISONS OF S EPARATE AND U NIFIED M ODELS . T HE S UPERSCRIPT ?
the mask ratio and loss weights are set to a reasonable M EANS T HAT THE R ESULTS A RE R E -P RODUCED BY U S
interval. Furthermore, it is important to choose a reasonable
combination coefficient w for better performance. It will be
dependent on the DRec when the coefficient is large, and on
the self-supervised discriminator when the coefficient is small.
 V. M ORE D ISCUSSIONS
 this separate paradigm may not be practical in real-world
A. AUROC and AUPR Metrics applications, as it may require high memory consumption and
 For imbalanced anomaly segmentation, the AUROC metric storage overhead, especially when increasing the number of
is, in fact, difficult to measure the performance gap for categories. In addition, these separate models only perform
different methods, and the AUPR is a more appropriate met- well on simple distributions (i.e., one model for one class)
ric. The relationship between AUROC and AUPR has been but fail to handle such a challenging task (one model for
comprehensively studied [51] and some takeaways can be multiple classes). Therefore, the unified paradigm is both more
concluded as follows: A random classifier has an AUROC practical and more challenging. Furthermore, it is necessary
of 50% and an AUPR of the rate of positive examples; An to study unified anomaly detection from a foundational model
imbalanced dataset might skew ROC-curves and make them perspective.
look more similar than PR-curves; AUPR is more informative Following previous separate arts, we train separate models,
than AUROC for an imbalanced dataset. which are learned in the same way as our unified model, but
 Anomaly detection is a typical binary classification with a on simple data distributions (one model for one class). And
severe imbalance issue, especially in anomaly segmentation. we compare separate models with unified ones in Table VI.
For example, the proportion of anomaly pixels is only 3.2% on For fair comparisons, we re-implement UniAD for separate
MVTec testing set, which means that a random classifier only training because the original paper doesn’t report the AUPR
obtains 3.2% AUPR but 50% AUROC for anomaly segmen- results. Our D2Rec is better than the re-produced UniAD in
tation. Furthermore, the AUROC (64.0%) is still high (but the both image-level classification and pixel-level segmentation
AUPR is low, i.e., 4.4%) even if we incorrectly predict all pix- with AUROC, and significantly better in pixel-level segmenels of each anomaly testing image as anomaly ones. Therefore, tation with AUPR (61.1% vs. 44.5%). More importantly, there
we believe that AUROC may be suitable to measure image- is no significant performance drop from the separate case to
level anomaly classification and AUPR is better for pixel-level the unified case (60.4% vs. 61.1%). In contrast, most existing
anomaly segmentation because image-level anomaly clas- separate (i.e., one model for one class) methods suffer from
sification is relatively balanced, while pixel-level anomaly a significant performance drop when they are extended to
segmentation is extremely imbalanced. This also explains why complex and challenging distributions (i.e., one model for
our method is very significant compared to state-of-the-art multiple classes).
when using the AUPR metric and marginal when using the
AUROC metric. In addition, the reliability of AUPR metric
as a measure is also corroborated in qualitative comparisons C. Unsupervised Reconstruction on Real Normal Images and
in Fig. 4. Self-Supervised Discriminator on Pseudo Anomaly Images
 We learn the dual-masked reconstruction model by opti-
B. Comparisons of Separated and Unified Models mizing the reconstruction loss between the reconstructed and
 Most existing anomaly detection methods mainly focus original features of normal training images. This process
on training separate models for different classes. However, allows the model to learn how to detect anomalies because
GAO: DUAL-MASKED AND DISCRIMINATIVE RECONSTRUCTION FOR UNIFIED VISION ANOMALY DETECTION 4711

 TABLE VII discriminator. The dual-masked reconstruction is simple and
C OMPARISONS OF R ECONSTRUCTION - AND M EMORY-BANK -BASED M OD - general, and it provides essential insights into addressing
 ELS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN “identity shortcut” that all masked positions are reconstructed
 R ED AND B LUE , R ESPECTIVELY
 using unmasked features implemented with a simple dualmasked mechanism. Meanwhile, it is robust for mask ratio
 and doesn’t involve other additional hyperparameters and thus
 greatly simplifies state-of-the-art UniAD. Furthermore, when
 integrating the dual-masked reconstruction and self-supervised
 discriminator into a unified network, D2Rec achieves competitive performance on image-level anomaly classification and
 pixel-level anomaly segmentation. Furthermore, the proposed
 dual-masked reconstruction and self-supervised discriminator
 can be easily used as a general plug-in into various reconanomaly images are absent in normal training samples, and
 struction networks, consistently improving their performance.
they should not be accurately reconstructed. To enhance the
model’s discrimination ability, it is crucial to introduce pseudo
(synthesized) anomaly images for self-supervised training. A. Limitation
Notably, the pseudo anomaly images are generated by applying Our method requires a doubling of computational cost
region-level perturbations or disruptions to freely available during training due to the self-supervised discriminator on
normal images, resulting in features that naturally contain additional synthesized images. However, the computational
both positive (normal) and negative (anomaly) samples. There- consumption is comparable to its competitors at inference
fore, it is possible to train the self-supervised discriminator because the synthesized branch will be removed.
using Eq. 8. The self-supervised discriminator refines reconstruction errors from low to high resolution for accurate
anomaly segmentation. It is worth noting that it is effective R EFERENCES
to independently train the reconstruction network with real [1] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
normal images and the discrimination network with pseudo comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
anomaly images due to the distribution gap between real and 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
synthesized anomaly images. Here, the independent training [2] P. Mishra, R. Verk, D. Fornasier, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti, “VTis effectively achieved by applying a stop-gradient operation ADL: A vision transformer network for image anomaly detection and
 localization,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Symp. Ind. Electron. (ISIE), Jun.
on the discrimination network, ensuring that the two networks 2021, pp. 01–06.
are trained separately yet effectively. [3] Y. Zou, “Spot-the-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly
 detection and segmentation,” in Proc. ECCV, 2024, pp. 392–408.
D. Comparisons of Reconstruction and Memory-Bank [4] T. Xiang, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, A. L. Yuille, C. Zhang, W. Cai, and Z. Zhou,
 “SQUID: Deep feature in-painting for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
Methods in Proc. CVPR, Jun. 2023, pp. 23890–23901.
 [5] J. Guo, S. Lu, L. Jia, W. Zhang, and H. Li, “Encoder–decoder contrast
 Reconstruction-based methods are vulnerable to large-size for unsupervised anomaly detection in medical images,” IEEE TMI,
defects compared to memory-bank methods. However, our vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1102–1112, Mar. 2023.
D2Rec exhibits excellent performance on both large and [6] K.-W. Cheng, Y.-T. Chen, and W.-H. Fang, “Gaussian process
small defects. We roughly define large defects as more than regression-based video anomaly detection and localization with hierarchical feature representation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 24,
800 pixels with 224 × 224 resolution, and others as small no. 12, pp. 5288–5301, Dec. 2015.
defects. We list top5 and bottom5 classes on MVTec and [7] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
the corresponding pixel AUPR results of PatchCore [13], surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
UniAD [21], and our D2Rec in Table VII. We can see [8] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
that reconstruction-based UniAD is good at detecting small for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
defects (bottom5) and memory-bank-based PatchCore is better Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14360–14369.
 [9] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu,
at detecting large defects in many cases. However, this issue and M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via self-supervised and multican be effectively balanced using our D2Rec method, which task learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
significantly outperforms PatchCore (4 classes in top5) and (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 12737–12747.
 [10] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully
UniAD (4 classes in bottom5). convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
 pp. 1829–1838.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [11] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch dis-
 In this paper, we rethink reconstruction networks for unified tribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
 in Proc. ICPR, 2021, pp. 475–489.
unsupervised vision anomaly detection, and then find that [12] N. Ahuja, I. J. Ndiour, T. Kalyanpur, and O. Tickoo, “Probabilistic modthey severely suffer from over-fitting and result in unsatis- eling of deep features for out-of-distribution and adversarial detection,”
factory performance because of “identity shortcut” and “weak in Proc. NeurIPSW, 2019.
 [13] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
discrimination”. To address these two issues, we propose an “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
embarrassingly simple but effective D2Rec, which is mainly IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
composed of a dual-masked reconstruction and self-supervised pp. 14298–14308.
4712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

[14] S. Lee, S. Lee, and B. C. Song, “CFA: Coupled-hypersphere-based fea- [38] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryture adaptation for target-oriented anomaly localization,” IEEE Access, augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 vol. 10, pp. 78446–78454, 2022. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
[15] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRAEM—A discrimina- pp. 1705–1714.
 tively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” [39] J. Hou, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, S. Pu, and H. Zhou, “Dividein Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, and-assemble: Learning block-wise memory for unsupervised anomaly
 pp. 8310–8319. detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct.
[16] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from 2021, pp. 8771–8780.
 one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [40] P. Perera, R. Nallapati, and B. Xiang, “OCGAN: One-class novelty
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736. detection using GANs with constrained latent representations,” in Proc.
[17] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
 for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. pp. 2893–2901.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411. [41] X. Yan, H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Hu, and P. Heng, “Learning semantic
[18] Y. Liang, J. Zhang, S. Zhao, R. Wu, Y. Liu, and S. Pan, “Omni-frequency context from normal samples for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
 channel-selection representations for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Proc. AAAI, vol. 35, 2021, pp. 3110–3118.
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 4327–4340, 2023. [42] M. Zaigham Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Old is
[19] K. Batzner, L. Heckler, and R. König, “EfficientAD: Accurate visual gold: Redefining the adversarially learned one-class classifier training
 anomaly detection at millisecond-level latencies,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF paradigm,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 127–137. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14171–14181.
[20] Q. Chen, H. Luo, C. Lv, and Z. Zhang, “A unified anomaly synthesis [43] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
 strategy with gradient ascent for industrial anomaly detection and for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
 localization,” in Proc. ECCV, 2024, pp. 37–54. Art. no. 107706.
[21] L. Cui et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in [44] S. Mou et al., “RGI: Robust GAN-inversion for mask-free image
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 4571–4584. inpainting and unsupervised pixel-wise anomaly detection,” in Proc.
[22] J. Pan, W. Ji, B. Zhong, P. Wang, X. Wang, and J. Chen, “DUMA: Dual ICLR, 2023.
 mask for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Sensors J., [45] W. Liu, H. Chang, B. Ma, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Diversity-measurable
 vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2433–2442, Feb. 2023. anomaly detection,” in Proc. CVPR, 2023, pp. 12147–12156.
[23] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive [46] H. He et al., “A diffusion-based framework for multi-class anomaly
 block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. detection,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 38, 2024, pp. 8472–8480.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13566–13576. [47] B.-B. Gao, “Learning to detect multi-class anomalies with just one
[24] S. Meng, W. Meng, Q. Zhou, S. Li, W. Hou, and S. He, “MoEAD: A normal image prompt,” in Proc. ECCV, 2024, pp. 454–470.
 parameter-efficient model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in Proc. [48] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 ECCV, 2024, pp. 345–361. autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
[25] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self- Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988.
 supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. [49] Q. Wei et al., “Learn to segment retinal lesions and beyond,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 7403–7410.
 pp. 9659–9669. [50] J. Bao, H. Sun, H. Deng, Y. He, Z. Zhang, and X. Li, “BMAD:
[26] M. Z. Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.- Benchmarks for medical anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 I. Lee, “Stabilizing adversarially learned one-class novelty detection Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2024,
 using pseudo anomalies,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 4042–4053.
 pp. 5963–5975, 2022. [51] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between precision-recall
[27] O. Rippel, P. Mertens, and D. Merhof, “Modeling the distribution of and ROC curves,” in Proc. ICML, 2006, pp. 233–240.
 normal data in pre-trained deep features for anomaly detection,” in Proc. [52] M. Tan and Q. V. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for
 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 6726–6733. convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. ICML, 2019, pp. 6105–6114.
[28] J. Lei, X. Hu, Y. Wang, and D. Liu, “PyramidFlow: High-resolution [53] M. Oquab et al., “DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without
 defect contrastive localization using pyramid normalizing flow,” in Proc. supervision,” TMLR, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, forum?id=a68SUt6zFt
 pp. 14143–14152. [54] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
[29] T. Reiss, N. Cohen, L. Bergman, and Y. Hoshen, “PANDA: Adapting students: Student–teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
 pretrained features for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in Proc. embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191.
 pp. 2805–2813. [55] X. Jiang et al., “SoftPatch: Unsupervised anomaly detection with noisy
[30] J. Jeong, Y. Zou, T. Kim, D. Zhang, A. Ravichandran, and O. Dabeer, data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 15433–15445.
 “WinCLIP: Zero-/few-shot anomaly classification and segmentation,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
 2023, pp. 19606–19616.
[31] Q. Zhou, G. Pang, Y. Tian, S. He, and J. Chen, “AnomalyCLIP: Objectagnostic prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 ICLR, 2023.
[32] B.-B. Gao et al., “AdaptCLIP: Adapting CLIP for universal visual
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 40, 2026, pp. 4095–4103.
[33] B.-B. Gao, “MetaUAS: Universal anomaly segmentation with one- Bin-Bin Gao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
 prompt meta-learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 37, 2024, applied mathematics in 2010 and 2013, respectively,
 pp. 39812–39836. and the Ph.D. degree in computer science and tech-
[34] X. Yao, R. Li, J. Zhang, J. Sun, and C. Zhang, “Explicit boundary guided nology from Nanjing University, China, in 2018. He
 semi-push-pull contrastive learning for supervised anomaly detection,” is currently a Senior Researcher with the Tencent
 in Proc. CVPR, Jun. 2023, pp. 24490–24499. YouTu Lab. His research interests include computer
[35] H. Zhang, Z. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Prototypical vision and machine learning. He has served as the
 residual networks for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. Area Chair for NeurIPS 2024/2025/2026 and ICML
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, 2025/2026. He also has served as a regular reviewer
 pp. 16281–16291. for top-tier journals and conferences in his field, such
[36] G. Gui, B.-B. Gao, J. Liu, C. Wang, and Y. Wu, “Few-shot anomaly- as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING,
 driven generation for anomaly classification and segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M EDICAL I MAGING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 ECCV, 2024, pp. 210–226. N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
[37] Y. Bengio, L. Yao, G. Alain, and P. Vincent, “Generalized denoising I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND
 auto-encoders as generative models,” in Proc. NeurIPS, vol. 26, 2013, DATA E NGINEERING, Neural Networks, Pattern Recognition, CVPR, ICCV,
 pp. 899–907. ECCV, and AAAI.