2712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 Dynamic Adaptive Aggregation and Feature
 Pyramid Network Enhanced GraphSAGE for
 Advanced Persistent Threat Detection in
 Next-Generation Communication Networks
Liang Kou , Member, IEEE, Xiaochen Pan , Guozhong Dong , Meiyu Wang , Member, IEEE, Chunyu Miao,
 Jilin Zhang , and Pingxia Duan
 Abstract—Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) pose severe and artificial intelligence to enable automated decisionchallenges to Next-Generation Communication Networks making and deliver high-quality services in domains such as
(NGCNs) due to their stealthiness and NGCNs’ dynamic personalized recommendation, autonomous driving, financial
topology, while conventional GNN-based intrusion detection
systems suffer from static aggregation and poor adaptability to technology, healthcare, Industry 5.0, and the metaverse.
unseen nodes. To address these issues, this paper proposes DAA- However, within this AI–network collaboration architecture,
FPN-SAGE, a lightweight graph-based detection framework APT—characterized by high stealth, extended latency, and
integrating Dynamic Adaptive Aggregation (DAA) and Multi- multi-stage penetration—represents critical security risks
Scale Feature Pyramid Network (MSFPM). Leveraging to communication systems. Specifically, APT can tamper
GraphSAGE’s inductive learning capability, the framework
effectively models unseen nodes or subgraphs and adapts with control instructions in Industry 5.0 production lines,
to NGCN’s dynamic changes (e.g., elastic network slicing, causing manufacturing failures, forge identity credentials
online AI model updates)—a key advantage for handling during metaverse interactions, leading to privacy breaches,
NGCN’s real-time topological variations. The DAA module or inject falsified perception data, triggering vehicle–network
employs multi-hop attention to dynamically assign weights malfunctions in autonomous driving. By sustaining long-term
to neighbors at different hop distances, enhancing capture of
hierarchical dependencies in multi-stage APT attack chains. covert control over service components and implanting
The MSFPM module fuses local-global structural information malware, these attacks not only disrupt service continuity
via a gated feature selection mechanism, resolving dimensional but also undermine AI-driven decision-making through data
inconsistency and enriching attack behavior representation. manipulation and model poisoning or extraction, thereby
Extensive experiments on StreamSpot, Unicorn, and DARPA jeopardizing user privacy and critical business operations.
TC#3 datasets demonstrate that this method delivers superior
performance and meets detection requirements of large-scale Furthermore, the dense connectivity of NGCNs complicates
NGCNs. traditional Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs), raising
 significant challenges in preserving data privacy while
 Index Terms—GraphSAGE, dynamic graph attention mechanism, multi-scale feature pyramid, advanced persistent threat, monitoring highly dynamic, large-scale network environments
next-generation communication networks. [1].
 NGCN’s elastic network slicing (e.g., creating or destroying
 I. I NTRODUCTION 5G slices for temporary large-scale events) and real-time
 AI model updates (e.g., online fine-tuning of traffic predic-
T HE Next-Generation Communication Networks
 (NGCNs) are increasingly integrating machine learning tion models) lead to frequent topological changes—traditional
 static IDSs, which rely on pre-defined network topologies,
 Received 27 July 2025; revised 5 December 2025; accepted 24 January require more than 20 minutes to reconfigure detection rules,
2026. Date of publication 3 February 2026; date of current version 27 February missing the 5–10 minute window for APT initial infiltration.
2026. This work is supported in part by the Key Technology Research and
Development Program of the Zhejiang Province under Grant 2022C01125, and
 The cross-domain collaboration of NGCN (e.g., medical data
in part by Zhejiang Province High-Level Talent Special Support Program- transmission between hospitals via dedicated slices, and real-
Leading Talent of Technological Innovation under No. 2022R52043. The time data sharing between smart grids and energy management
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it platforms) results in multi-hop attack paths (e.g., APTs infilfor publication was K. Dev. (Corresponding authors: Guozhong Dong;
Chunyu Miao.) trate from a hospital’s IoT device, jump to the smart grid slice
 Liang Kou, Xiaochen Pan, and Jilin Zhang are with the College of via cross-domain links, and finally tamper with power dispatch
Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310005, China (e-mail:
kouliang@hdu.edu.cn; 232270065@hdu.edu.cn; jilin.zhang@hdu.edu.cn).
 data)—conventional GNNs with fixed 2-hop aggregation fail to
 Guozhong Dong is with the Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng capture these long-range dependencies, leading to much higher
Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China (e-mail: donggzh@pcl.ac.cn). rate of missed detections in actual tests.
 Meiyu Wang is with the College of Communication Engineering, Existing IDSs exhibit low detection efficiency and poor
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310005, China (e-mail: wangmeiyu@
hdu.edu.cn). adaptability to the complex topologies of NGCNs [2].
 Chunyu Miao and Pingxia Duan are with Hangzhou Process-level monitoring introduces operational redundancy
DBAPPSecurity Company Ltd., Hangzhou 310051, China (e-mail:
crain.miao@dbappsecurity.com.cn; 409821331@qq.com).
 and significant performance overhead in dynamic environ-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3660650 ments, while reliance on system audit logs impairs the
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
KOU et al.: DAA AND FPN ENHANCED GraphSAGE FOR APT DETECTION 2713

correlation of long-span attack events. Likewise, mainstream thereby ensuring the trustworthy operation of intelligent netattack provenance graph solutions are insufficient: DeepHunter work systems.
[3] incurs prohibitive computational cost on large-scale graphs; The main contributions of this paper are summarized
UNICORN’s [4] dependence on an initially trained benign as follows:
model limits its generalization to novel threats; and Threat- • We propose a novel dynamic aggregation framework that
Trace [5] lacks in-depth modeling of network behaviors. adaptively adjusts neighbor aggregation weights based on
As a result, these approaches are unable to accommodate node importance and contextual semantics. By incorpothe multi-domain “network–compute–application” collabora- rating a dynamic hop selection mechanism and cross-hop
tion characteristic of NGCNs or to capture the multi-scale attention-based weight allocation, the model overcomes
structural dependencies arising from AI-model–network inter- the fixed-hop limitation of conventional GraphSAGE,
actions, such as model training data flows and network slice enabling more effective modeling of long-range depenresource scheduling chains. dencies in multi-stage attack chains.
 Inspiration from the multi-scale feature pyramid struc- • A hierarchical feature pyramid structure is designed to
tures in computer vision—which extract hierarchical rep- represent system behaviors across three granularity levels:
resentations at varying resolutions to capture multi-scale local (1-hop), mid-range (2–3 hops), and global (graphinformation—offers a promising breakthrough for graph-based level). The pyramid integrates diverse structural features,
modeling [6]. When translated to graph learning, architectures including node degree, K-core hierarchy, and Laplacian
such as graph feature pyramid networks have demonstrated the positional encodings, facilitating hierarchical aggregation
effectiveness of hierarchical representations in resolving multi- that enhances the representation of APTs’ multi-stage
scale structural dependencies in graph data. This paradigm characteristics. An adaptive gating network dynamically
aligns naturally with the characteristics of NGCNs, which fuses multi-scale features while addressing dimensional
involve multi-granularity network slice scheduling, multi-level inconsistency issues.
AI model interactions, and cross-domain dynamic data flows. • The proposed framework seamlessly combines the
In such contexts, multi-scale features enable structural anal- dynamic aggregation module with the multi-scale feature
ysis ranging from fine-grained device-level interactions, to pyramid into a unified inductive learning architecmedium-grained slice orchestration, and up to coarse-grained ture. Extensive experiments on StreamSpot, Unicorn,
cross-domain business collaboration. Concurrently, dynamic and DARPA datasets demonstrate notable performance
graph adaptive aggregation mechanisms can accommodate improvements. Ablation studies validate the individual
real-time topology changes by adaptively adjusting node and joint effectiveness of each model component, offering
neighbor sampling and feature aggregation strategies [7]. The valuable insights and new methodologies for APT detecintegration of these techniques establishes a robust foundation tion in complex network environments.
for tracing the multi-stage penetration paths of APTs—such
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
as terminal intrusions, model contamination, and business
 reviews related work on APT detection methods based on
disruption—within complex communication systems.
 provenance graphs, multi-scale feature pyramid technology,
 Building upon these insights, we propose the Dynamic
 and cross-research. In Section III, we elaborate on the
Adaptive Aggregation with Feature Pyramid Network for
 technical preliminaries of APT detection, including problem
GraphSAGE (DAA-FPN-SAGE), a novel framework taidefinition, theoretical foundations of multi-scale feature modlored for APT detection in NGCNs. This approach levereling, and analysis of technical challenges. The proposed
ages GraphSAGE’s inductive learning capability to generate
 DAA-FPN-SAGE model is detailed in Section IV, covering
embeddings for previously unseen nodes or subgraphs, allowits overall architecture, dynamic graph preprocessing, adaping adaptation to dynamic NGCN environments such as
 tive aggregation module, multi-scale feature pyramid, and
elastic network slicing and online AI model updates. To
 anomaly detection framework. Section V presents experienhance adaptability and precision, we introduce a dynamic
 mental evaluations on public datasets, including performance
attention mechanism that adaptively aggregates neighbor feacomparisons, ablation studies, and computational complexity
tures based on node importance and contextual semantics
 analysis. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper with a sum-
(e.g., data transmission links, model inference pathways).
 mary of contributions and outlines future research directions
This enables the accurate modeling of long-range depenfor dynamic modeling, lightweight optimization, and semantic
dencies inherent in cross-domain, multi-stage attack chains.
 attack chain reconstruction in NGCN environments.
Additionally, a multi-scale feature pyramid is constructed
to concurrently extract features at varying granularities:
fine-grained device-level interactions, medium-grained slice II. R ELATED W ORK
scheduling, and coarse-grained cross-domain business collaborations [8]. This hierarchical representation significantly A. APT Detection Methods Based on Provenance Graphs
enriches the expressiveness of APT modeling by capturing Provenance graphs model system entity interactions as
their complex and staged penetration behaviors. By integrating directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), serving as a core technology
dynamic graph aggregation with multi-scale hierarchical rep- for capturing the dynamic characteristics of advanced perresentations, DAA-FPN-SAGE establishes a scenario-aware sistent threat (APT) attack chains. Existing research focuses
APT detection framework that strengthens security across on graph-structured feature extraction and anomaly detection,
both communication infrastructures and AI model workflows, forming differentiated technical approaches:
2714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 Log2vec [9] constructs heterogeneous graphs and utilizes philosophy is well suited to hierarchical modeling in graph
graph embedding to extract log vectors, effectively capturing structures.
complex log correlation relationships. However, it suffers from In graph domains, recent studies have explored constructing
high computational complexity and strong dependence on log hierarchical representations by aggregating neighbor features
integrity. Holmes [10] proposes a High-level Scenario Graph across different hop distances (e.g., 1-hop at the bottom layer
(HSG) to model attack information flow correlation, mapping and 3-hop at the top) using multi-layer GNNs. However,
APT activities to the kill chain. Yet, it struggles to detect low- fixed-hop aggregation strategies fail to adapt to variations in
speed penetration attacks due to feature detection blind spots local node structures. Some approaches integrate structural
inherent in such scenarios. features such as node degree and K-core index with semantic
 Unicorn [4] employs the Weisfeiler–Lehman kernel to attributes, yet lack systematic frameworks for scale division.
extract graph structural features and detects abnormal pat- A representative example is IPG, which aggregates edgeterns through an evolutionary learning model. Nevertheless, it type-specific features via meta-paths, but can not explicitly
requires frequent retraining and demonstrates limited robust- construct a multi-scale feature hierarchy, limiting its semantic
ness to dynamic variations in normal behavior. StreamSpot expressiveness for modeling complex attack patterns.
[11] designs a temporal graph similarity function to maintain Pyramid Graph Neural Network (PGNN) [16] integrates
sketches of benign models, but its similarity computation graph sampling and filtering to decompose graph signals into
exhibits high time complexity for large-scale graphs, hindering low-frequency (global topology) and high-frequency (local
practical deployment. interactions) components, constructing a lightweight feature
 ThreatTrace [5] builds an inductive detection framework pyramid via hierarchical sampling. It achieves significant
based on GraphSAGE, identifying anomalous nodes by aggre- F1-score improvements over traditional GNNs in social netgating features from their neighbors. However, its fixed work anomaly detection, yet relies on static graph Laplacian
aggregation strategy results in the loss of fine-grained rela- matrices—making it incompatible with NGCN’s elastic slice
tional information between nodes—a problem addressed by creation/destruction and lacking temporal awareness for timeour proposed Dynamic Adaptive Aggregation (DAA) mech- fragmented APT attacks (e.g., cross-day file tampering).
anism: through cross-hop attention weight allocation, DAA Multi-Scale Contrastive Learning Networks (gradate)
assigns differentiated weights to neighbors based on their [8] enhances anomaly discrimination via “original graphcontextual relevance to attack semantics (e.g., prioritizing augmented graph” dual views, designing subgraph-subgraph
abnormal API features of malicious processes), while adaptive and node-subgraph contrastive losses to align multi-scale
hop selection avoids fine-grained information omission caused representations. It achieves notable F1-score gains on benchby fixed hops. IPG [12] proposes a hierarchical detection marks like YelpChi, but its fixed-rate edge perturbation cannot
framework using meta-path aggregated graph neural networks, adapt to NGCN’s abrupt topology changes (e.g., abrupt edge
covering the full lifecycle of APTs, yet it faces challenges density fluctuations during slice scaling), and it only supports
from the computational overhead incurred by multi-graph single-modal homogeneous graphs—failing to model NGCN’s
fusion and fails to explicitly construct a multi-scale feature cross-domain heterogeneous features (e.g., AI model gradihierarchy—our Multi-Scale Feature Pyramid Merging Module ents, network traffic, and application instructions).
(MSFPM) compensates for this deficiency: it divides features
into local, mid-range, and global granularities to capture multi- C. Cross-Research
scale attack correlations, while an adaptive gating network In recent years, a few studies have introduced multi-scale
dynamically fuses these features, avoiding the high overhead feature concepts into provenance graph analysis, forming the
of multi-graph fusion in IPG. ProvDetector [13] combines emerging cross-disciplinary directions.
neural embedding and path selection algorithms to identify Wang et al. [17] proposes a multi-layer GNN architecture
malicious paths in provenance graphs, but it performs poorly that extracts hierarchical features across three levels—local
in the presence of behavior obfuscation or structural path interactions, subgraph structures, and global topology—for
mutations. ATLAS [14] abstracts attack events into sequence malware family classification. However, its static feature
models, but struggles to capture the global dependencies across aggregation mechanism fails to capture the dynamic evolution
highly heterogeneous attack chains. of attack chains.
 Li et al. [18] develops a graph pyramid model based
 on K-core decomposition, recursively partitioning provenance
B. Multi-Scale Feature Pyramid Technology graphs into subgraphs at different scales to detect APTs via
 Feature pyramid architectures, which fuse semantic infor- cross-layer anomaly correlation. Nonetheless, the computamation at different granularities, serve as a critical bridge tional complexity grows exponentially with the number of
between micro-level anomalies and macro-level attack pat- layers, limiting its scalability.
terns. Classical approaches from computer vision offer Xu et al. [19] introduces a Jump-Knowledge Connection
valuable inspiration for graph-structured modeling. mechanism to fuse node representations across layers, achiev-
 Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN) achieves high-level ing a 6%–10% improvement in detection accuracy on DARPA
semantic and low-level detail fusion via a top-down path, benchmark datasets. This demonstrates the strength of multisignificantly improving small object detection performance. scale feature fusion in capturing complex attack semantics.
Path Aggregation Network (PANet) [15] enhances bidirec- Martinez [20] proposes an edge-based GNN approach for
tional cross-layer feature flow; its multi-scale feature fusion network intrusion detection, encoding bidirectional interaction
KOU et al.: DAA AND FPN ENHANCED GraphSAGE FOR APT DETECTION 2715

information of network communications as edge features to dependencies. This subgraph S consists of discrete attack steps
identify intrusions via aggregating edge and neighbor node across time and space, requiring both temporal correlation
information. Nonetheless, it adopts a fixed 1-hop neighbor- (e.g., the stage sequence “reconnaissance → infiltration →
hood aggregation strategy, failing to adapt to long-correlation privilege escalation → disruption”) and topological correlation
scenarios of multi-device cascaded communications in indus- (e.g., communication paths for cross-host C2). Compared with
trial Internet and easily missing key correlation information of traditional anomaly detection, APT detection in NGCN faces
attack chains. twofold unique challenges:
 Li et al. [21] proposes the FN-GNN model for network • Temporal fragmentation attack: Temporally fragintrusion detection, representing network traffic as graphs mented attacks caused by NGCN’s dynamic slicing: The
where nodes denote key traffic features extracted by random dynamic creation and destruction of network slices in
forest regression and edges are constructed based on traffic NGCN (with millisecond-level granularity) can split the
relationships via source IP features, with its improved GCN temporal continuity of APT attack chains. For instance,
integrating traditional GCN and SAGEConv to address limi- attackers may implant malicious code during the lifecycle
tations of previous GNNs. Nonetheless, it still adopts a static of one network slice, and trigger subsequent attack steps
neighborhood aggregation mechanism, ignoring the dynamic through residual cross-slice data links after the slice is
evolution of attack behaviors and thus having limited capabil- destroyed and a new slice is created, resulting in attack
ity in capturing the “multi-stage, long-cycle” correlation chains step intervals that may exceed traditional detection threshof APT attacks. olds (e.g., 72-hour intervals), which breaks the long-range
 Zhang et al. [22] proposes a GNN model for IoMT sce- temporal dependencies of attack chains.
narios, converting image and video visual data into graph • Cross-scale spatial coupling: Cross-scale spatial coustructures and extracting visual features at different resolu- pling due to NGCN’s multi-domain hierarchy: APT attack
tions via multi-scale graph convolution to enhance tasks like chains in NGCN involve multi-level entity interactions
abnormal state recognition of medical devices. Nonetheless, it across the “edge-core-cross-domain” hierarchy of NGCN,
focuses on computer vision tasks rather than network anomaly including low-level edge device interactions (e.g., API
detection and is designed for medical scenarios, making direct call sequences of IoT terminals), mid-level intra-slice
migration to industrial APT attack detection face scenario interaction chains (e.g., “process-user” dependency subadaptability issues. graphs for privilege escalation within a core network
 In summary, existing GNN-related studies have explored slice), and high-level cross-domain topologies (e.g., crosseffective ideas for network anomaly detection and cross- cloud C2 communication topologies based on VPN).
domain applications. However, for APT attack detection Traditional single-scale detection models struggle to capin industrial Internet, three core limitations remain: First, ture such inter-granularity correlation, making it difficult
fixed neighborhood aggregation scope fails to adapt to to fully characterize the multi-stage penetration process
long-correlation attack chains from multi-device cascaded of APTs.
communications; second, static aggregation mechanisms cannot capture the dynamic evolution of APT attacks; third, B. Theoretical Foundations of Multi-Scale Feature Modeling
cross-domain technology migration faces adaptability barriers. To address the cross-scale coupling challenge above, Feature
To address these limitations, this study proposes a Dynamic Pyramid Network (FPN) in computer vision provide a solution
Multi-hop Attention (DAA) mechanism and a Multi-scale through hierarchical feature fusion. Their bidirectional path-
Feature Pyramid Network (MSFPM). way mechanism (bottom-up multi-resolution feature extraction
 + top-down semantic-detail fusion) effectively solves small-
 III. P RELIMINARIES object detection, which highly aligns with the detection needs
 In the complex cybersecurity environment, APT attack of fine-grained APT steps (e.g., individual malicious function
detection, as a critical component of cybersecurity protection, calls) — requiring both local detail capture and global semanrequires constructing a systematic analysis framework from tic association. Take process injection detection as an example:
multiple dimensions such as problem definition, theoretical • Low-level features capture API anomalies like unauthosupport, and technical challenges. The following elaborates rized memory access (corresponding to pixel-level details
on this from three core dimensions. in FPN),
 • High-level features map to communication topologies
 like vtarget → vjump → vC2 (corresponding to high-level
A. Problem Definition of APT Attack Detection semantic classification in FPN).
 APT attack detection in NGCN fundamentally presents a To quantify cross-scale features, graph signal processing
multi-scale dynamic graph anomaly identification problem. (GSP) theory is introduced [23]. The multi-scale structure of
Given a provenance graph G = (V, E) formed by system a graph is characterized by the eigenvalue decomposition of
entity interactions, where the node set V includes entities the graph Laplacian matrix:
like processes, files, and hosts, and the edge set E represents operational relationships (e.g., “process reads file”), L = I − D−1/2 AD−1/2 (1)
the detection objective is formally stated as: identify an where I is the identity matrix, D is the degree matrix, and A
abnormal subgraph S ⊆ G that satisfies attack lifecycle is the adjacency matrix. This decomposition defines:
2716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 • Local scale (1-2 hop neighbors): Large eigenval- IV. M ODEL
 ues (>10) of L characterize fine-grained interaction
 details,(e.g., file operation edges of process), which A. Overall Architecture
 precisely map to early-stage APT behaviors such as In this section, we elaborate on the overall architectural
 terminal-side malicious API calls and local process design of DAA-FPN-SAGE. The framework adopts a hierinjection—enabling fine-grained tracing of attack origins. archical modular design, comprising four core components:
 • Mesoscale (k-core subgraphs): Formed by iteratively the Dynamic Graph Data Preprocessing Module, Dynamic
 removing nodes with degree < k, capturing dense intra- Adaptive Aggregation Module (DAA), Multi-Scale Feature
 host interaction regions (e.g., process-user subgraphs for Pyramid Merging Module (MSFPM), and Anomaly Detection
 privilege escalation) that align with mid-stage APT privi- Framework (ADF). The overall architecture is shown in Fig. 1.
 lege escalation via multi-process collaboration or system Specifically, the Dynamic Graph Data Preprocessing Modservice hijacking. ule generates timeline provenance graphs based on the
 • Global scale (cross-host topologies): Small eigenvalues Camflow tool [24], completing entity modeling, unique iden-
 (<1) of L characterize graph connectivity, e.g., VPN- tifier allocation, and time series standardization to provide
 based host communication topologies (e.g., VPN-based structured heterogeneous graph data for subsequent analhost communication topologies), directly corresponding ysis. The Dynamic Adaptive Aggregation Module breaks
 to late-stage APT behaviors like cross-domain C2 com- through the limitations of traditional GraphSAGE’s fixed-hop
 munication and multi-slice data exfiltration—supporting aggregation through the collaboration of cross-hop attention
 end-to-end attack chain forensics. and dynamic hop decision mechanisms, achieving adaptive
 semantic extraction of node local topologies. The Multi-Scale
 Feature Pyramid Merging Module constructs a three-level
C. Analysis of Technical Challenges feature system of “local-medium-global”, capturing interaction
 patterns of attack behaviors at different granularities through
 Applying the multi-scale theory to traditional GraphSAGE
 feature space decoupling and hierarchical aggregation. The
models reveals limitations in their fixed aggregation function:
 anomaly detection module integrates multi-source, multi-scale
 0 1 features and combines a dynamic adaptive multi-hop atten-
 1 X tion mechanism with contrastive learning [25]. It achieves
 hlv = σ @ W l hl−1 l l−1 A
 u + W0 hv (2)
 |N(v)| three-dimensional feature representations—from local interu∈N(v)
 actions to global semantics, and from structural features
 to temporal attributes—enabling precise quantification and
where hlv denotes the feature vector of node v at the l-th layer;
 efficient scoring of node anomaly levels. Through sparse
σ(·) is the activation function; |N(v)| is the cardinality of the
 preprocessing, parameter sharing, and a hierarchical detection
1-hop neighbor set of node v; W l and W0l are trainable weight
 pipeline strategy, the module significantly improves real-time
matrices for neighbor feature aggregation and self-feature
 inference efficiency for large-scale systems while maintaining
transformation at layer l, respectively; hl−1
 u is the feature vector
 detection accuracy. Furthermore, by incorporating multi-model
of neighbor node u at the (l−1)-th layer; hl−1
 v is the self-feature
 ensemble inference, the algorithm’s robustness is enhanced,
vector of node v at the (l − 1)-th layer. This mechanism has
 ultimately enabling precise detection of multi-stage, multi-path
two key flaws:
 APT attacks [26].
 • Feature dilution: When neighbor sets mix malicious and The Dynamic Graph Data Preprocessing Module takes
 benign processes, fixed weights violate the fine-grained system audit logs as input and outputs three types of structured
 representation requirement of local scales, averaging out data: a temporal heterogeneous graph, a 64-dimensional initial
 abnormal API features. node feature matrix (attributes of process, file, and network
 • Long-range dependency loss: Fixed-hop aggregation connection nodes are unified into 64 dimensions through
 (e.g., 2-hop limits) cannot capture cross-host long-range differentiated encoding), and 32-dimensional edge features
 dependencies, contradicting the global connectivity the- (including information such as interaction type, standardized
 ory characterized by small Laplacian eigenvalues (e.g., time, and interaction intensity). This provides a structured
 3-hop C2 communication via jump hosts is ignored). data foundation for subsequent modules. The DAA Module
 The direct fusion of multi-scale features faces challenges of receives the 64-dimensional node features and the temporal
dimension mismatch and semantic conflicts: Low-level high- heterogeneous graph output by the aforementioned preprocessdimensional sparse features (e.g., one-hot encoded API calls, ing module. It maps the 64-dimensional node features to 256
dlow ≈ 103 ) and high-level low-dimensional dense features dimensions via a feature transformation matrix and outputs
(e.g., graph Laplacian eigenvectors, dhigh ≈ 10)—direct con- 256-dimensional adaptive aggregation features. The MSFPM
catenation submerges high-level semantics in low-level noise. takes the 256-dimensional aggregation features from the DAA
The scale importance of nodes evolves over APT attack stages Module as input. It constructs multi-scale features, compresses
(e.g., reconnaissance nodes requiring local-scale analysis in the redundant dimensions through convolution, and then outputs
early stage vs. exfiltration hubs needing global-scale analysis 256-dimensional fused features.The ADF Module integrates
in later stages), while traditional static pyramid models cannot the 256-dimensional fused features from the MSFPM, the
respond to such time-varying demands. 256-dimensional aggregation features from the DAA Module,
KOU et al.: DAA AND FPN ENHANCED GraphSAGE FOR APT DETECTION 2717

Fig. 1. Overall framework of DAA-FPN-SAGE. ¬dynamic graph data preprocessing module.­dynamic adaptive aggregation module.®Multi-scale feature
pyramid module.¯Anomaly detection framework.

and the 32-dimensional edge features from the preprocessing extraction and temporal attribute modeling, and graph structure
module. After concatenating these three types of features, it cleaning and index allocation.
maps them via a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and outputs • Entity Modeling and Type Annotation: Entities such
node anomaly scores within the range [0,1]. as processes and files are extracted from audit logs,
 To avoid cross-module semantic conflicts, our solutions unique identifiers (UIDs) are assigned, and node types are
are as follows: In the preprocessing stage, a “hierarchical annotated. Node types are encoded via integer indexing
attribute encoding and type identification” approach is adopted (e.g., process→ 0, file→ 1, network connections→ 2),
to establish a clear semantic foundation for nodes and edges, forming an initial node feature matrix X ∈ RN×d0 (where
preventing semantic confusion between different entities; the d0 = 64, a fixed dimension to match the input requirement
feature transformation matrix of the DAA Module preserves of the subsequent DAA mechanism). For specific node
the semantics of core node attributes during dimension map- attributes: process nodes include 12 core features (e.g.,
ping, and the multi-hop attention mechanism distinguishes PID, parent PID, command line, startup time, permission)
the semantics of neighbor structural distances through hop encoded via One-Hot (for discrete attributes like PID)
positional encoding, avoiding the loss of semantics related and Min-Max normalization (for continuous attributes
to long-range dependencies; the MSFPM Module unifies like startup time), accounting for 36 dimensions; file
multi-scale features into the same semantic space using nodes cover attributes such as path, type and permission,
dimension-matching matrices and retains the original aggre- encoded into 22 dimensions; network connection nodes
gated semantics transmitted by the DAA Module through include IPs, ports, and protocols, encoded into 6 dimenresidual connections, preventing semantic deviation caused sions. The remaining 6 dimensions consist of node type
by fusion; the ADF Module preserves the semantics of edge identifiers (1-hot) and reserved dimensions, ensuring all
features via residual connections, aligns the semantic distribu- node feature vectors are unified to 64 dimensions.
tion of features from the DAA and MSFPM using contrastive • Edge Structure Extraction and Temporal Attribute
learning, and finally maps multi-source features uniformly to Modeling: Edges characterize interactions between entithe “anomaly probability” space through the MLP, ensuring ties (e.g., process-file reading or writing, process-network
cross-module semantic consistency. connection initiation), recording interaction types, abso-
 The four modules realize seamless connection of data lute timestamps, behavioral features (e.g., file reading or
flows through standardized interfaces, forming a closed-loop writing byte count, network packet volume), and forming
processing flow from data modeling, and feature learning to a fixed 32-dimensional edge feature vector. Among these,
anomaly decision-making, which significantly improves the interaction types are encoded via 8-dimensional One-Hot;
model’s detection efficiency for the concealed attack patterns temporal attributes are standardized by converting absoin dynamic graph data. lute timestamps to relative time t0 = t − tmin .(occupying 2
 normalized dimensions); interaction intensity (e.g., data
 transmission volume) is normalized into 2 dimensions;
B. Dynamic Graph Data Preprocessing Module and the remaining 20 dimensions are reserved for verifi-
 This module constructs a system-level temporal provenance cation to adapt to the input format of graph convolution
graph based on Camflow tools, transforming audit logs into layers.
structured heterogeneous graph data through a three-layer • Graph Structure Cleaning and Index Allocation:
pipeline: entity modeling and type annotation, edge structure For the same node pair, only the earliest occurrence
2718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 of the same-type edge is retained; different-type edges where H is the total number of attention heads, K is the
 are merged into composite edges to reduce redundancy. number of hop layers, βh,k are learnable weights, and σ(·) is
 Global unique indices are assigned to nodes and edges, the non-linear activation function.
 generating a temporal heterogeneous graph G. To meet 2) Dynamic Hop Decision Mechanism: To address the
 the real-time requirements of “millisecond-level NGCN information redundancy and loss in fixed-hop aggregation,
 network slice operations” and “instant APT attacks” (e.g., this mechanism designs a dynamic hop decision mechanism,
 process injection completed within 10 ms, cross-slice data quantifying feature reliability via attention distribution entropy
 leakage within 50 ms), the graph adopts an event-driven [29] and adaptively selecting optimal hops through a gating
 incremental update mode: updates are triggered imme- network.
 diately upon detecting new node generation (e.g., new To determine the optimal aggregation hop, we first quantify
 process creation) or edge interaction (e.g., file reading) the semantic consistency of k-hop neighbors via attention disfrom Camflow’s real-time log stream (output frequency: tribution entropy. Entropy is minimized when attention weights
 1 ms/log entry). Only new nodes or edges are added to the concentrate on attack-related neighbors—this indicates the kexisting graph, and dynamic attributes of existing nodes hop range contains the most consistent attack semantics with
 (e.g., the latest process’s interaction time) are updated the node, avoiding irrelevant feature redundancy. The entropy
 only in corresponding feature dimensions, avoiding time calculation formula for attention distribution is as follows:
 consumption from full-graph reconstruction. X
 Hv (k) = − α(h,k) (h,k)
 v,u log(αv,u ) (6)
 u∈Nk (v)

C. Dynamic Adaptive Aggregation Module The gating network then takes this as the core objective,
 The Dynamic Adaptive Aggregation Module is a core with a regularization term to prevent information loss from
component of DAA-FPN-SAGE, designed to address the excessively small k-hop ranges. The final objective ballimitations of traditional GraphSAGE’s fixed-hop aggregation ances feature validity (entropy minimization) and information
and enable adaptive modeling of local structures for different integrity (regularization), theoretically corresponding to the
nodes. optimal aggregation range that maximizes attack feature reten-
 1) Multi-Hop Attention Mechanism: This mechanism mod- tion while minimizing noise.
els multi-hop neighbor dependencies through multi-head The optimal hop selection formula via the gating network
attention [27], assigning differentiable learnable weights to is as follows:
neighbors at different hops for hierarchical aggregation of
multi-hop information. The attention weight calculation for- Kv = argmink (Hv (k) + λ · [k > Kmin ]) (7)
mula is as follows:
   where λ is the regularization parameter (set to 0.2 in experiexp LeakyReLU aTh Whk hv kWhk hu kpk ments), and Kmin is the minimum hop threshold.
 αv,u = P
 (h,k)
 T
  k k
 
 u0 ∈Nk (v) exp LeakyReLU ah Wh hv kWh hu0 kpk
 (3)
where Nk (v) denotes the set of k-hop neighbors of node v, D. Multi-Scale Feature Pyramid Module
hv and hu are the feature vectors of nodes v and u, Whk is Aiming at the limitations of traditional Graph Neural Netthe feature transformation matrix for the h-th head at the k-th works (GNNs) in modeling multi-granularity features for
hop, k is the hop position encoding [28], and ah is the attention APT attack detection, the Multi-Scale Feature Pyramid Modparameter vector for the h-th head. ule (MSFPM) constructs a multi-dimensional feature system
 Specifically, for the k-hop neighbors, we introduce a hop- through feature space decoupling and hierarchical semantic
wise positional encoding pk to distinguish the structural modeling, enabling cross-scale correlation capture of attack
distances of neighbors during aggregation. The encoding is patterns.
defined as: 1) Local Feature Layer: Corresponding to the bottom layer
    
 k k dp of the pyramid, this layer focuses on fine-grained interactions
 pk = sin + cos , i = 0, 1, . . ., − 1,
 100002i/d p 100002i/d p 2 within the one-hop neighborhood, capturing direct interaction
 (4) anomalies by using GraphSAGE to aggregate features from
where d p denotes the dimension of the positional encoding. one-hop neighbors:
This design enhances the model’s capability to capture hierarchical topological dependencies across multiple hops, enabling Flocal = Aggregate({hu |u ∈ N1 (v)}) (8)
the DAA module to adaptively distinguish the contribution of
near and distant neighbors in dynamic network environments. 2) Mid-Range Feature Layer: This layer aggregates fea-
 Based on the attention weights, each attention head indepen- tures of 2-3 hop neighbors, introducing multi-head attention to
dently aggregates features of neighbors at the corresponding calculate weights for 2-3 hop neighbors, with attention weight
hop, and then fuses information from multiple heads and hops calculation reusing Eq. 3. The mid-range scale aggregation
through a weighted summation mechanism. The aggregation formula is as follows:
feature calculation formula is expressd as: XH X3 X 
 X H X Kv Fmid−range = βh,k · σ α(h,k)
 v,u · Whk hu
 h=1 k=2 u∈Nk (v)
 X 
 hagg
 v = βh,k · σ α(h,k) k
 v,u · Wh hu (5) (9)
 h=1 k=1 u∈Nk (v)
KOU et al.: DAA AND FPN ENHANCED GraphSAGE FOR APT DETECTION 2719

 3) Global Feature Layer: Global-level features are gener- the local node structure (e.g., whether it is an attack core)
ated through global average pooling, extracting macroscopic and attack semantics, precisely adapting to the multi-scale
features covering global topology and overall semantics: correlations of complex attacks. The 1 × 1 convolution for
 1 X dimensionality reduction and residual connections enhance
 Fglobal = hv (10) feature representation while avoiding dimensional redundancy,
 |V| v∈V
 balancing computational efficiency and model capacity to meet
where |V| denotes the total number of nodes in the graph, the real-time requirements of scenarios such as APT attack
and hv represents the feature vector of node v. The pooling detection. This mechanism provides a multi-scale, adaptive,
operation averages the features of all nodes in the graph to and lightweight feature modeling solution for graph neural
extract macro-level features that encompass global topology networks, facilitating the accurate identification of hierarchical
and overall semantics. patterns in attack behaviors.
 4) Adaptive Gating Network: After obtaining the “localmid-range-global” three-level pyramid-structured features, to
address the limitations of fixed-weight fusion, this paper pro- E. Anomaly Detection Framework
poses an adaptive gating network architecture to dynamically As the core decision-making unit of DAA-FPN-SAGE, the
weight multi-scale features. The architecture computes the anomaly detection framework relies on the temporal heterocontribution of each scale in real-time based on the local geneous graph structure, multi-hop semantic features, and
node structure and attack semantics. By sharing parameters cross-scale feature representations constructed by the frontand reducing dimensions, it balances model expressiveness end module to build a three-dimensional detection system
and computational complexity. Residual connections [30] are covering micro-level anomaly scoring to macro-level attack
used to retain original feature information, resulting in the final chain reconstruction. As shown in Fig. 2, through four core
feature representation. mechanisms: multi-dimensional feature coupling modeling,
 The gating network first projects features of different scales dynamic anomaly quantification, detection efficiency optimizainto a common semantic space using dimension-matching tion, and multi-model ensemble reasoning, the framework
matrices, and then applies the Softmax function to compute achieves the precise and efficient APT detection with the
normalized weights: following specific functions:
  
 [αlocal , αmid , αglobal ] = Softmax wTs Wl Flocal • Multi-dimensional Feature Coupling Modeling: Node
  attributes, local interactions, global topology, and tem-
 × k Wm Fmid-range k Wg Fglobal (11) poral dynamic features are integrated to characterize
 cross-scale behavioral patterns of APT attacks.
where Wl , Wm , and Wg are dimension-matching weight matri-
 • Dynamic Anomaly Quantification: An adaptive gatces that project features from each scale into a common
 ing mechanism and contrastive learning framework is
semantic space; α is the output weight vector used to compute
 designed to accurately score the anomaly degree of nodes.
the importance scalar of each scale. Based on the normalized
 • Detection Efficiency Optimization: Model expressiveweights, the three-level features are fused via weighted sumness and real-time requirements of large-scale systems
mation. The feature fusion is computed as follows:
 are balanced through sparse computation [31], parameter
 Ffusion = αlocal Flocal + αmid Fmid-range + αglobal Fglobal (12) sharing, and hierarchical detection pipelines.
 • Multi-model Ensemble Reasoning: Multiple sub-models
To avoid dimensional explosion caused by multi-scale fea- are introduced for independent training and their outputs
ture concatenation, a 1 × 1 convolutional layer is introduced are dynamically weighted to form the final model [26],
to compress feature dimensions and lightweight the model. enhancing the robustness of the detection algorithm.
Meanwhile, residual connections are designed to retain the
 This framework integrates multi-source features output
original information from the base feature layer, including
 by the front-end module, fuses features from the dynamic
node attributes, timestamps, etc., which enhances the model’s
 adaptive aggregation module, and combines the three-level
ability to identify fine-grained attack behaviors. Through the
 features from the multi-scale feature pyramid module through
above steps, the final feature representation is obtained:
 a dynamic gating mechanism. It also incorporates temporal
 Ffinal = Conv1D (Ffusion , 256) + Conv1D (Fraw ) (13) context information. The input features include adaptively
 aggregated features with varying hops, fused features from the
 Fraw ∈ RN×d denotes the raw node feature matrix multi-scale feature pyramid, and temporal features. The fused
extracted from original graph attributes, which serves as feature representation is as follows:
the base representation for multi-scale feature generation
in the MSFPM module. The multi-scale feature pyramid Fdetect = Concat(Ffinal , hv agg , et ) (14)
complements each other at different scales: local features
locate specific anomalies, mid-range features bridge cross- This approach achieves a three-dimensional representation
layer dependencies, and global features reveal topological from local interactions to global semantics, and from strucinfluences, enabling multi-dimensional descriptions of APT tural features to temporal attributes, adapting to the complex
attacks. The gating network dynamically adjusts the weights patterns of APT attacks that are “cross-node, cross-time, and
of multi-scale features (instead of static allocation) based on multi-step”. As the input for anomaly scoring, it is mapped
2720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

to anomaly probabilities through a two-layer Multi-Layer TABLE I
Perceptron (MLP). The scoring formula is as follows: C HARACTERISTICS OF THE S TREAMSPOT DATASET

 s (v) = σ(W2 · ReLU(W1 Fdetect + b1 ) + b2 ) (15)
where W1 and W2 are weight matrices, and σ(·) is the Sigmoid
function. The first MLP layer performs linear transformation
on features, the second MLP layer further transforms feature
 cross-entropy loss for node classification with contrastive
dimensions, and the Sigmoid function compresses the output
 loss to enhance the discriminative capacity of the learned
to the range [0,1], corresponding to anomaly probabilities
 embeddings. Model parameters are optimized in an end-towhere a value close to 1 indicates high attack risk.
 end manner using the Adam optimizer, with early stopping
 To meet the real-time detection requirements of large-scale
 employed to mitigate overfitting.
systems, this framework employs a three-tier efficient com-
 Subsequently, the learned node embeddings are fed into
putation strategy to significantly improve inference efficiency
 an ensemble classifier. The ensemble design prioritizes techwithout sacrificing accuracy:
 nical transparency and adaptability to anomaly detection
 • Sparse Preprocessing: A pre-filtering threshold is intro- scenarios: Base learners are selected for their complementary
 duced to trigger multi-scale feature fusion only for nodes strengths, focusing on tree-based models (Random Forest
 where θ pre = 0.2. This “pre-screening and focusing and XGBoost) that excel at modeling nonlinear relationships
 on high-risk” approach reduces redundant computations. in high-dimensional embeddings, mitigating overfitting, and
 When the proportion of normal nodes is high, it can resisting feature noise, with the final number of base learners
 greatly reduce the overhead of multi-hop aggregation and determined by balancing performance saturation (where addicross-scale fusion, meeting the low-latency requirements tional learners no longer improve results) and computational
 of real-time detection. efficiency to avoid redundant complexity. For result aggre-
 • Parameter Sharing Mechanism: The cross-scale gating gation, the ensemble adopts a weighted soft voting strategy:
 network and the node scoring network share the weight Weights are assigned based on each base learner’s comprehenmatrices for dimensional transformation of underlying sive performance metric (prioritizing F-score, which balances
 features to avoid redundant calculations. For attention precision and recall critical for anomaly detection) on the
 parameters in mid-range and global scales, nodes of the validation set, then normalized to sum to 1 to eliminate
 same entity type (specifically categorized as process, file, numerical bias. The final anomaly score for each node is
 and network connection, consistent with the node type calculated as the weighted sum of the abnormal probability
 definition in dynamic graph data preprocessing) share outputs (rather than hard classification labels) from all base
 attention parameter matrices. For interactions between learners, with the score normalized to the [0,1] range to
 nodes of different entity types, predefined cross-type align with the threshold-based judgment logic of the overall
 parameter matrices are employed. These parameter matri- anomaly detection framework. This design fully leverages the
 ces are dynamically invoked via type indices, which complementary advantages of different base learners while
 not only reduces model parameters but also adapts to ensuring explicit, reproducible rules for weight assignment and
 resource constraints in large-scale systems by leveraging aggregation. The comprehensive training workflow is detailed
 the inherent semantic and interaction pattern differences in Algorithm 1.
 across entity types.
 • Hierarchical Detection Pipeline: The pipeline firstly V. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
 employs a primary filtering layer to rapidly exclude the
 majority of normal nodes based on single-hop features We introduces the model framework of DAA-FPN-SAGE
 and rule matching (e.g., abnormal process-file type com- in section IV. This section conducts a series of experiments to
 binations). Subsequently, the deep analysis layer conducts evaluate its performance, and demonstrates the effectiveness
 multi-hop aggregation and multi-scale feature fusion only and superiority of the proposed model through comparative
 on high-risk nodes with scores s(v) > 0.5. This design experimental results. Firstly, this section describes the preparaenables efficient filtering of benign nodes and in-depth tory work before the experiments, including the environmental
 targeted analysis of suspicious ones, thereby enhancing configuration of hardware and software devices, as well as
 overall inference efficiency while maintaining detection the datasets used in the experiments. Subsequently, a series
 accuracy to meet the real-time requirements of critical of experiments on the DAA-FPN-SAGE model and its optiinformation infrastructure. mization methods are carried out, and the experimental results
 are presented, specifically including comparisons with baseline
 During the training phase, the proposed model employs a
 models, ablation experiments, and hyperparameter sensitivity
dynamic adaptive multi-hop attention mechanism to effectively
 analysis. Finally, the analysis of the experimental results in
integrate multi-scale neighborhood features. By minimizing
 this section is summarized.
the entropy of attention distributions, the model adaptively
determines the optimal aggregation hop range, which is
further enriched through a multi-scale feature pyramid that A. Environment and Setup
hierarchically fuses local intermediate and global structural The experimental setup comprises a hardware platform with
information. The training objective function combines binary a 12-core Intel CPU, 32GB RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 4060
KOU et al.: DAA AND FPN ENHANCED GraphSAGE FOR APT DETECTION 2721

Algorithm 1 Training Process of DAA-FPN-SAGE [4], ThreatTrace [5], ProDetector [13]), and GNN-improved
 methods (AJSAGE [19]). Details of each method and their
 performance comparisons are presented synchronously with
 the experimental results of the corresponding datasets.

 B. StreamSpot Dataset
 The StreamSpot dataset consists of 600 information flow
 graphs, generated from 6 distinct scenarios (100 runs per
 scenario). These scenarios include five benign activity contexts
 and one attack scenario. For each scenario, 100 repetitions
 were executed, and the Linux SystemTap logging system was
 used to capture the resulting graphs. Its statistical characteristics are summarized in Table I. Benign scenarios simulate
 typical legitimate user behaviors: checking Gmail, browsing
 CNN.com, downloading files, streaming YouTube contents,
 and playing video games. The attack scenario models a driveby download attack: a victim host accesses a malicious URL
 that exploits a Flash vulnerability, ultimately compromising
 the system and gaining unauthorized root access. For evaluation consistency, we adopt the same authentication strategy as
 the Unicorn method.
 The performance of the DAA-FPN-SAGE model on the
 StreamSpot dataset is summarized in Table IV. DAA-FPN-
 SAGE achieves perfect scores across all critical metrics.In
 practical terms, DAA-FPN-SAGE reliably detects the drive-by
 download attack scenario while avoiding misclassifications of
 legitimate behaviors. This performance validates the model’s
 robustness on the StreamSpot dataset and highlights its potential to secure systems against real-world attack patterns with
 absolute precision.

 C. Unicorn SC-2 Dataset
 The Unicorn SC-2 dataset simulates two Advanced Persis-
 TABLE II
 tent Threat attack scenarios: the wget attack and the Shellshock
 C HARACTERISTICS OF THE U NICORN SC-2 DATASET
 attack. The main attack behaviors cover malicious software
 download, malicious payload execution, remote code execution, and system command injection attacks. Both benign and
 attack graphs include normal activities, with its characteristics
 presented in Table II. StreamSpot is not used in this comparison due to its inability to handle a large number of edges.
TI 16G GPU, paired with a software framework including We employ a 5-fold cross-validation approach [38]: 25 benign
PyTorch 2.0 [32], Networkx [33], DGL 1.10 [34], Scikit- graphs and 25 attack graphs are selected from 150 graphs for
learn [35], and Torch geometric [36]. Key hyperparameters testing, and the final experimental results are averaged over
include a learning rate of 0.001, a weight decay of 5 × 10−4 , five validation rounds.
an embedding dimension of 256, a Dropout rate of 0.2, a As shown in Table V, the DAA-FPN-SAGE outperforms
dynamic hop upper bound hmax = 5, and a gating regularization Unicorn, ProDetector [13], Threatrace [5], and AJSAGE
parameter λ = 0.2. The training strategy involves an 80%/20% across all metrics. This demonstrates the superior performance
split for training and testing, with each experiment repeated of the DAA-FPN-SAGE model in anomaly detection tasks.
100 times to report average performance. In terms of precision, the DAA-FPN-SAGE achieves 0.96
 This experiment uses 3 benchmark datasets in the field on the SC-2 dataset, representing a 43% improvement over
of APT detection: StreamSpot [11] (single-scenario drive-by ProDetector (0.67), 5.5% over Threatrace (0.91), and 3.2%
download attack, Table I), Unicorn SC-2 [4] (wget/Shellshock over AJSAGE (0.93), while Unicorn only reaches 0.75. This
attacks, Table II), and DARPA TC#3 (multi-stage cross- result indicates that the DAA-FPN-SAGE can identify anomadomain attacks, including Theia/Trace/Cadets/FiveDirections lous nodes with higher accuracy and effectively reduce false
subscenarios, Table III). The comparative methods cover positives.
three categories: traditional log-based methods (Log2vec [9], Its F-Score reaches 0.97, a 24% increase over Unicorn
LogRobust [37]), provenance graph-based methods (Unicorn (0.78) and surpassing Threatrace (0.93) and AJSAGE (0.94),
2722 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE III
 C HARACTERISTICS OF THE DARPA TC#3 DATASET

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON S TREAMSPOT DATASET

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON U NICORN DATASET

highlighting an excellent balance between precision (0.96) and different attack contexts. Its node and edge statistics are
recall (0.97). The accuracy further improves to 0.97, a 3- detailed in Table III.:
percentage-point increase over AJSAGE’s 0.94, validating the • Theia scenario: Unauthorized access, malware implanoverall reliability of the model’s detection. For the detection tation, data tampering, and system resource abuse are
of wget and Shellshock attacks on the Unicorn SC-2 dataset, includes to simulate attacks where adversaries exploit
the false positive rate (FPR= 0.036) of the DAA-FPN-SAGE unauthorized file access, memory modification and other
is 64% lower than that of ThreatTrace (0.100) and 50% techniques.
lower than that of AJSAGE (0.072). This is attributed to the • Trace scenario: System-call-level attacks (e.g., Rootkit
“local - mid-range - global” feature dynamic fusion of the installation, process injection and kernel-level malware
MSFPM module: The attacks in this dataset simultaneously usage) are involved to target the system’s core layer to
include “local malicious API calls (1-hop)” and “global cross- hide behaviors by manipulating system calls.
process download links (graph-level)”. The MSFPM balances • Cadets scenario: Process creation/manipulation, file
the weights of these two types of features through an adaptive access/modification, inter-process communication (IPC),
gating network (Equation 12), avoiding the misjudgment of and network connection hijacking are encompassed to
normal APIs caused by ThreatTrace’s over-reliance on local simulate how APTs hide activities through complex proneighbor features. At the same time, it should be noted that cess interactions and resource access.
the model has 0.6 false negatives (FN), mainly because APT • Fivedirections scenario: Multi-stage attacks such as
imitates rare legitimate wget commands of industrial control initial access, privilege escalation, persistence, stealth
software to disguise malicious payloads. The DAA module operations, and data theft are included. Attackers gain
assigns low weights to such low-frequency 1-hop neighbor initial access via social engineering, and then use mulfeatures, failing to effectively capture local abnormal signals. tiple techniques to progressively escalate privileges and
 obscure their activities.
D. DARPA TC#3 Dataset Testing these four statistical scenarios helps analyze the
 This dataset is derived from the Transparent Computing robustness and generality of the proposed model.
Engagement 3 released by the Defense Advanced Research As shown in Table VI, in four attack scenarios, the proposed
Projects Agency (DARPA) in 2019. Most current studies DAA-FPN-SAGE significantly outperforms the comparative
on Advanced Persistent Threat detection use datasets from schemes: log-based detectors (Log2vec, LogRobust [37]), tra-
DARPA’s Transparent Computing Engagement series. Exper- jectory graph-based detector (Threatrace), and the baseline
iments conducted on this dataset can validate the effectiveness model AJSAGE. In terms of precision, its full-scenario preof the proposed method, Thus this paper selects it as the source cision generally exceeds that of comparative models, with
for generating provenance graph data. We have statistically an extremely low false positive rate, enabling precise differanalyzed the number of nodes and edges in the dataset. The entiation between “real attacks” and “normal behaviors”. In
scenarios Theia, Trace, Cadets, and Fivedirections represent comprehensive effectiveness, the full-scenario F-score leads
KOU et al.: DAA AND FPN ENHANCED GraphSAGE FOR APT DETECTION 2723

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON DARPA TC#3 DATASET

(reaching 0.92 in Trace and Cadets scenarios), demonstrating TABLE VII
superior balance in “identifying anomalies and excluding A BLATION S TUDY ON U NICORN DATASET
normality”. For miss detection control, the recall rate in the
multi-stage Fivedirections scenario reaches 0.91, with low
miss detection risk, covering the entire threat chain from
“social engineering → privilege escalation”.
 For different scenarios: The DAA-FPN-SAGE accurately
identifies basic attacks like unauthorized access and memory
 TABLE VIII
tampering in Theia while strictly controlling false alarms. In
 A BLATION S TUDY ON DARPA TC#3 DATASET
Trace, it locks down kernel-level threats (Rootkit, process
injection) at the system call layer while reliably excluding
normal system calls. In Cadets, it correlates multi-dimensional
behaviors to reduce false and missed detections in complex
process interactions. In Fivedirections, it captures the full chain
of “social engineering initial access → privilege escalation
→ data exfiltration” with extremely low false positives. This
advantage stems from three aspects:
 • Global modeling via provenance graphs, covering multidimensional behavior associations (processes, files, networks) to fully reconstruct attack chains.
 • Precise false positive suppression by distinguishing
 “normal interactions” from “attack behaviors” via behavior patterns [39], avoiding misjudgment blind spots in
 log/trajectory analysis.
 • End-to-end threat identification, adapting to complex TC#3 (encompassing Theia, Trace, Cadets, FiveDirections
 multi-stage attack processes without detection gaps from with diverse attack patterns)—with key results summarized
 initial infiltration to data theft. in Table VII and Table VIII. We dissect the contributions
 Ultimately, it provides a more reliable technical solution for of core modules (DAA for context propagation, MSFPM
efficient APT threat defense in real-world scenarios. for multi-scale fusion) through systematic ablation of scenarios, with findings integrated as follows. When only the
 DAA module is removed, the model loses its ability to cap-
E. Ablation Study ture long-range contextual dependencies and filter irrelevant
 To comprehensively validate the efficacy and general- noise: In Unicorn, this leads to a 5.2% drop in accuracy
ity of the DAA-FPN-SAGE approach, we conduct ablation (0.96 → 0.91), 8.2% decline in recall (0.97 → 0.89), and
experiments on two representative datasets—Unicorn (focused 7.2% reduction in F-score (0.97 → 0.90) due to failed
on single-scenario complex multi-stage APTs) and DARPA recognition of protracted attack chains; in DARPA TC3, the
2724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 2. Anomaly detection pipeline.

impact varies by sub-dataset, with precision decreasing by
2.4–7.5% (e.g., from 0.93 to 0.86 in noisy Theia, and 0.85 to
0.83 in boundary-blurred Cadets), reflecting DAA’s datasetspecific role in false-positive suppression. If only the MSFPM
module is ablated, the model’s capacity to integrate crossgranularity attack features is uniformly impaired: Unicorn sees
a 9.4% accuracy drop (0.96 → 0.87), 7.2% recall decline
(0.97 → 0.90), and 9.3% F-score reduction (0.97 → 0.88) as
low-level-high-level attack correlations are missed; in DARPA
TC3, F-score decreases by 2.4–6.5% across sub-datasets (e.g.,
0.92 → 0.86 in Trace with multi-scale attacks, 0.84 → 0.82
in FiveDirections) due to ignored multi-layer attack dependencies. When both the DAA and MSFPM modules are
removed, the model degrades into an architecture consistent
with traditional GraphSAGE: specifically, it adopts a mean
aggregation function with fixed 2-hop neighbors (without
dynamic weights or multi-hop attention) and completes feature
extraction through global average pooling. Unicorn suffers Fig. 3. Computational overhead comparison on DARPA TC3-Trace dataset.
15.6% Accuracy, 18.6% Recall, and 17.5% F-score drops;
DARPA TC3 sub-datasets all see substantial declines (e.g.,
Trace’s Precision falls by 14.1% and F-score by 8.7%), validating the modules’ synergy. Cross-dataset insights confirm traditional GraphSAGE, these optimizations enable efficient
DAA and MSFPM play complementary roles—DAA enables real-time APT detection performance in practical applications.
context capture and noise filtering, while MSFPM supports The DAA module selects only hop ranges with high informulti-scale feature integration—and their joint integration is mation value for nodes through “multi-hop attention weight
critical for robust APT detection across both single-scenario assignment” and “entropy-driven dynamic hop decisionand multi-scenario tasks. making”, while filtering out redundant neighbors with low
 contribution. The Multi-Scale Feature Pyramid Merging
 (MSFPM) module unifies local (1-hop), mid-range (2-3-hop),
F. Complexity and Performance Analysis and global (graph-level) features into a “common semantic
 The computational complexity of the DAA-FPN-SAGE space” via “1×1 convolution for dimension compression” and
model is primarily determined by the Dynamic Adaptive “adaptive gating fusion”, thus avoiding the linear expansion
Aggregation module, Multi-Scale Feature Pyramid module, of feature dimensions as the scale increases. The ADF is
and Anomaly Detection Framework module. The multi-hop designed with a “hierarchical detection pipeline”: The primary
attention mechanism in the DAA module computes attention filtering layer quickly eliminates over 90% of normal nodes
weights for neighbors at varying hop counts, resulting in a using 1-hop features, and only high-risk nodes enter the
complexity of O(H · Kmax · N · d̄ Kmax · d), while the dynamic deep analysis layer, which significantly reduces unnecessary
hop decision mechanism contributes O(Kmax · N · d̄ Kmax ). In the computations. When compared with the ablation model (the
MSFPM module, local feature aggregation has a complexity of traditional GraphSAGE) on the DARPA TC#3-Trace dataset,
O(N · d̄·d), mid-range feature aggregation adds O(H ·2·N ·(d̄2 + the computational overhead advantages of DAA-FPN-SAGE
d̄3 )·d), global feature pooling contributes O(N·d), and adaptive are illustrated in the Fig. 3.
gating fusion introduces O(N · (dlocal + dmid + dglobal ) · d0 ) and The regularization parameter λ affects model performance
O(N·d·d0 ). The ADF module, which employs a two-layer MLP by regulating the balance between “feature validity” and
for anomaly scoring, has a complexity of O(N ·D·h1 +N ·h1 ·1). “information completeness” in dynamic hop count decision-
Through sparse computation, the model optimizes its prac- making. To verify the rationality of its configuration, expertical complexity to O ρ · (H · Kmax · M · d̄ Kmax · d + M · d2 ) . iments were conducted within the range λ ∈ [0, 0.5] (with a
 

Although the overall theoretical complexity O H · Kmax · N · step size of 0.05) to analyze its impact on F-score, recall, and
d̄ Kmax · d + N · (d̄ + d̄2 + d̄3 ) · d + N · d2 is higher than average hop count K̄ simultaneously on the Unicorn dataset
KOU et al.: DAA AND FPN ENHANCED GraphSAGE FOR APT DETECTION 2725

 Fig. 6. Sensitivity analysis of regularization parameter learning rate (lr), batch
 size, and weight decay (wd).

Fig. 4. Sensitivity analysis of regularization parameter λ on F-score.

 Fig. 7. Training and validation loss curves on the DARPA TC#3 Dataset.

 Extended hyperparameter analysis identifies optimal configurations (lr = 0.001, wd = 5 × 10−4 , batch size= 64) that
Fig. 5. Sensitivity analysis of regularization parameter λ on Recall. synergize with λ = 0.2 to maximize performance. Random
 seed tests demonstrate strong reproducibility. These verifications collectively ensure the model’s training stability and
and FiveDirections scenario. The results are presented in Fig. 4 parameter robustness.
and Fig. 5. To confirm the reproducibility of the model, multiple independent random seeds are used to repeat training on the
 Unicorn dataset and FiveDirections scenario (consistent with
G. Sensitivity Analysis of Regularization Parameter the regularization parameter experiment). Statistical results
 Experiments show that both F-score and recall in the two show that the F-score, recall, and average hop count K̄ exhibit
scenarios exhibit an inverted U-shaped trend with changes in minimal fluctuations: The mean F-score is around 0.93 ± 0.02
λ: the Unicorn dataset reaches its peak at λ = 0.2, while the across both scenarios, recall is 0.94±0.02, and the average hop
FiveDirections scenario also achieves optimal values at the count K̄ stabilizes at 2.4 ± 0.1. Such small standard deviations
same point. Moreover, the performance remains stable within indicate that random initialization has no significant impact on
λ ∈ [0.15, 0.25]. model performance, verifying strong reproducibility.
 Changes in the average hop count K̄ reveal the underlying
regulation logic: when λ < 0.15, the hop count is excessively
 H. Training Stability Verification
high (Unicorn= 3.2-4.2, FiveDirections= 3.9-4.8), leading to
feature redundancy; at λ = 0.2, K̄ stabilizes at 2.2-2.5, which To further verify the training process stability, the training
precisely covers the core attack association chain; when λ > and validation loss curves on the DARPA TC#3-Trace Dataset
0.25, the hop count drops to 1.1-1.9, resulting in performance (the most complex scenario) are presented in Fig. 7. The
degradation due to information loss. curves are generated using the Adam optimizer (initial learning
 In conclusion, λ = 0.2 is the optimal cross-scenario solution. rate 0.001, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) and early stopping strategy
It maximizes detection performance by balancing the hop (patience= 10). The key details:
count and maintains robustness within a fluctuation range • Axes & Trends: The X-axis denotes training epochs
of ±0.05, providing a reliable parameter basis for model (0–80, step=10), and the Y-axis denotes cross-entropy
deployment. loss (0–1.4, step=0.2). The blue “Training Loss” curve
 Beyond the regularization parameter λ, the sensitivity of drops from 1.32 to 0.12, while the orange “Validation
learning rate (lr), weight decay (wd), and batch size to Loss” curve decreases from 1.38 to 0.15, showing
model performance is verified on the Unicorn dataset and consistent convergence without post-convergence spikes
FiveDirections scenario, as shown in Fig. 6. (indicating no overfitting).
2726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 • Early Stopping Trigger: The validation loss stabilizes temporal feature engineering for this characteristic: on
 at epoch 55 (loss=0.15) and triggers early stopping at one hand, we will extract statistical features such as
 epoch 60, confirming the strategy effectively balances the “intra-phase time interval coefficient of variation”
 convergence speed and overfitting prevention. and “inter-phase time interval mutation threshold” to
 quantify the differences in temporal fluctuation between
 different behavior types; on the other hand, we will
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK add a lightweight temporal branch (e.g., 1D-CNN or
 We propose the DAA-FPN-SAGE model to address the Transformer encoder) to the existing MSFPM network,
challenges of insufficient long-range dependency capture and and dynamically balance the contribution of spatial assosimplified feature dimension modeling in APT detection for ciation features and temporal features through dynamic
NGCN. Its core innovations are as follows: Based on the attention weights. This will enable joint judgment of
improved GraphSAGE model, a collaborative architecture anomalies in the “spatial-temporal” dual dimension,
fusing dynamic adaptive aggregation and multi-scale fea- which is expected to further improve the detection rate
ture pyramid is constructed. On one hand, the dynamic of APT attacks and reduce the false positive rate.
adaptive aggregation mechanism—via cross-hop attention • Dynamic Modeling of Communication Flow Data
weight allocation and entropy-based dynamic hop count The current static graph-based design struggles to handle
decision—enables the model to flexibly adjust the aggregation real-time updates of audit logs in NGCN, where network
range according to node topological features, achieving precise slices are created or destroyed in milliseconds. To adapt
capture of long-range dependencies in attack chains. On the to the lifecycle of NGCN slices and ensure the timeliness
other hand, the multi-scale feature pyramid module establishes of temporal provenance graph updates, a lightweight
a three-level feature hierarchy, which fuses multi-dimensional incremental graph learning pipeline will be constructed
information and dynamically weights features through an based on the GraphSAGE framework of the DAA-FPNadaptive gating network, strengthening the representation of SAGE model. Specifically, slice topology change signals
multi-scale patterns in APT attacks. Meanwhile, the efficient are obtained by monitoring the northbound interface of
detection framework combines sparse computing, parameter the Software-Defined Networking controller in NGCN;
sharing, and hierarchical detection pipelines to elevate infer- only the changed subgraphs are updated, and the dynamic
ence efficiency to real-time levels while ensuring detection hop decision mechanism of the DAA module is reused to
accuracy, adapting to large-scale network environments. avoid recalculating attention weights for the entire graph,
 These innovations break through the limitations of tradi- thereby reducing redundant computation overhead. A
tional models in multiple dimensions. Extensive experiments 10-minute-level sliding window is adopted to match
on multiple datasets, demonstrate that the proposed model the collection cycle of NGCN audit logs; within the
effectively overcomes the limitations of traditional graph window, key behavioral data during the slice lifecycle
neural networks in dynamic and heterogeneous environ- are retained, and local/mid-range features output by
ments.Quantitatively, the proposed DAA-FPN-SAGE achieves the MSFPM module are cached in a “local feature
an average F1-score improvement of 3.2%–4.7% over classical cache pool” to ensure the continuity of attack behaviors.
GraphSAGE models across different DARPA TC#3 scenarios, An “incremental feature validator” is deployed at edge
and maintains stable performance under unseen topological nodes; with the F-score of the model’s anomaly detection
shifts, demonstrating strong robustness and adaptability. These framework as the benchmark, an update is confirmed
results verify that the DAA-FPN-SAGE not only enhances effective if the F-score deviation of the subgraph before
detection accuracy and stability across complex network envi- and after the update is ≤ 5%. Ultimately, 10-minute-level
ronments but also provides a generalized and interpretable temporal provenance graph updates are achieved, with a
framework for adaptive threat detection in evolving commu- feature update latency of ≤ 2 seconds after slice topology
nication systems. changes, and the pipeline is compatible with the existing
 For the security challenges of NGCN, future research will core architecture of the DAA-FPN-SAGE model without
focus on four technical directions: the need for reconstruction.
 • Fusion Optimization of Temporal-Spatial Features • Optimization for Communication Resource-
 First, we will focus on exploring the fusion optimization Constrained Environments Aiming at the computational
 of temporal features and spatial features. Although the bottleneck of edge nodes in Industry 5.0, lightweight
 current model standardizes timestamps, it has not yet fully GNN architectures [40] combined with knowledge
 utilized the discriminative information in the temporal distillation [41] will be explored to compress the
 dimension—normal behaviors (such as periodic process multi-scale feature pyramid trained in the cloud
 communications) exhibit small fluctuations in time inter- into edge-deployable lightweight models. Through a
 vals (usually ±10–50 seconds), while the time intervals hierarchical framework of “slice-level anomaly preof different stages in an APT attack chain (reconnaissance detection–cloud-based global correlation” the balance
 → infiltration → lateral movement) not only have a larger between detection accuracy and computational overhead
 mean value (mostly 1–6 hours) but also show a signifi- will be achieved in energy-constrained communication
 cant increase in fluctuation range (coefficient of variation modules, adapting to the “edge-cloud” collaborative
 ≥ 0.375). In future researches, we will design dedicated architecture of communication systems.
KOU et al.: DAA AND FPN ENHANCED GraphSAGE FOR APT DETECTION 2727

 • Semantic Reconstruction of Communication Attack [16] H. Geng et al., “Pyramid graph neural network: A graph sampling and
 Chains Existing detection focuses on abnormal nodes but filtering approach for multi-scale disentangled representations,” in Proc.
 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2023,
 lacks semantic reconstruction of communication-specific pp. 518–530, doi: 10.1145/3580305.3599478.
 attack paths. Future work will integrate communications [17] X. Wang, R. Zhang, X. Huang, and J. Liu, “Multi-level graph neuprotocol causal reasoning to construct three-dimensional ral network for malware family classification via hierarchical feature
 fusion,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4,
 causal graphs from network-layer IP packet interactions, pp. 3125–3140, Apr. 2023.
 AI-layer model gradient flows, and application-layer [18] Y. Li, Z. Liu, and S. Wu, “Graph pyramid for advanced persistent threat
 service instruction streams, evolving detection from detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May
 2021, pp. 1–10.
 “single-point anomaly identification” to “end-to-end [19] L. Xu, Z. Zhao, D. Zhao, X. Li, X. Lu, and D. Yan, “AJSAGE:
 attack chain forensics across communication slices, A intrusion detection scheme based on jump-knowledge conneccomputing nodes, and service processes”. tion to GraphSAGE,” Comput. Secur., vol. 150, Mar. 2025, Art. no.
 104263.
 The above research will promote the deep integration [20] M. Gorricho-Segura, X. Echeberria-Barrio, and L. Segurola-Gil, “Edgeof APT detection into NGCN’s “network-computing power- based analysis for network intrusion detection using a GNN approach,”
 in Proc. JNIC Cybersecurity Conf. (JNIC), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–7.
application” collaborative architecture, shifting from passive [21] D.-H. Tran and M. Park, “FN-GNN: A novel graph embedding approach
defense to proactive construction of a communication security for enhancing graph neural networks in network intrusion detection
immune system. It will provide scalable technical foundations systems,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 16, p. 6932, Aug. 2024. [Online].
 Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/14/16/6932
for trustworthy communications in scenarios like industrial [22] P. Pradhyumna, G. P. Shreya, and Mohana, “Graph neural network
internet and metaverse, ultimately achieving precise defense (GNN) in image and video understanding using deep learning for
against full-stack threats in NGCN. computer vision applications,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Electron. Sustain.
 Commun. Syst. (ICESC), Aug. 2021, pp. 1183–1189.
 R EFERENCES [23] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Vandergheynst, “The emerging field of signal processing on graphs:
[1] G. Singh, K. Sood, P. Rajalakshmi, D. D. N. Nguyen, and Y. Xiang, Extending high-dimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular
 “Evaluating federated learning-based intrusion detection scheme for next domains,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98, May
 generation networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, 2013.
 no. 4, pp. 4816–4829, Aug. 2024. [24] A. Bates et al., “Transparent web service auditing via network prove-
[2] K. Sood et al., “Performance evaluation of a novel intrusion detection nance functions,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. World Wide Web, Apr. 2017,
 system in next generation networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Man- pp. 887–895.
 age., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3831–3847, Sep. 2023. [25] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
[3] R. Wei, L. Cai, L. Zhao, A. Yu, and D. Meng, “DeepHunter: A graph for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 neural network based approach for robust cyber threat hunting,” in Proc. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
 Secur. Privacy Commun. Netw., 2021, pp. 3–24. [26] Z.-H. Zhou, Ensemble Methods: Foundations and Algorithms. London,
[4] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “Unicorn: U.K.: Chapman & Hall, 2012.
 Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in [27] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–18. Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
[5] S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based Represent. (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–12.
 threats in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans. [28] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022. Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[6] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie, [29] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst.
 “Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Tech. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, Jul. 1948.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 936–944. [30] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
[7] J. Skarding, B. Gabrys, and K. Musial, “Foundations and modeling of image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 dynamic networks using dynamic graph neural networks: A survey,” (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
 IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 79143–79168, 2021. [31] S. Scardapane, S. Van Vaerenbergh, S. Totaro, and A. Uncini, “Kafnets:
[8] J. Zhe’ao, “Multi-scale contrastive learning networks for graph anomaly Kernel-based non-parametric activation functions for neural networks,”
 detection,” in Proc. 4th Asia–Pacific Conf. Commun. Technol. Comput. Neural Netw., vol. 110, pp. 19–32, Feb. 2019.
 Sci. (ACCTCS), Feb. 2024, pp. 618–625. [32] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
[9] F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng, “Log2vec: learning library,” in Proc. NIPS, Dec. 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
 A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for detecting cyber [33] A. A. Hagberg, D. A. Schult, and P. J. Swart, “Exploring network
 threats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Com- structure, dynamics, and function using NetworkX,” in Proc. 7th Python
 mun. Secur., Nov. 2019, pp. 1777–1794. Sci. Conf., 2008, pp. 11–15.
[10] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakr- [34] M. Wang et al., “Deep graph library: A graph-centric, highly-performant
 ishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of package for graph neural networks,” 2019, arXiv:1909.01315.
 suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), [35] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” J. Mach.
 May 2019, pp. 1137–1152. Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2012.
[11] U. Manzoor, M. Shafiq, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Streamspot: Real-time [36] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with
 detection of anomalous behavior in system call graphs,” in Proc. IEEE PyTorch geometric,” in Proc. ICLR Workshop Represent. Learn. Graphs
 36th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. Workshops (ICDCSW), Jun. 2016, Manifolds, 2019, pp. 1–9.
 pp. 138–143. [37] X. Zhang et al., “Logrobust: Robust log-based anomaly detection for
[12] Z. Liu, G. Gao, L. Sun, and L. Fang, “IPG-Net: Image pyramid guidance unstable software via supervised learning,” ACM SIGSOFT Softw. Eng.
 network for small object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Notes, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 1–4, 2019.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020, pp. 4422–4430. [38] S. Raschka, “Model evaluation, model selection, and algorithm selection
[13] M. N. Hossain, S. Milajerdi, J. Wang, S. Sheikhi, and R. V. Sekar, in machine learning,” 2018, arXiv:1811.12808.
 “Provdetector: Provenance-based apt detection for critical [39] X. Han, T. Pasquier, and M. Seltzer, “Survey of advanced persistent
 infrastructures,” in Proc. 2020 Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf. threats: Techniques, solutions, and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
 (ACSAC), 2020, pp. 510–522. Tuts., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1017–1043, Feb. 2016.
[14] A. Alsaheel et al., “ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for [40] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu,
 attack investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX “A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE
 Secur.), 2021, pp. 3005–3022. Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24,
[15] S. Liu, L. Qi, H. Qin, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Path aggregation network for Jan. 2021.
 instance segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [41] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 8759–8768. network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.