IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026 4361

 Early Attack Identification in the Wild
 Minji Kim, Dongeun Lee , Kookjin Lee, Doowon Kim, Member, IEEE, Jinpyo Kim , Sangman Lee ,
 and Jinoh Kim , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—While characterizing network connections in their (the gap between the time to compromise and the time to
early stage is vital for providing timely responses against network defend) [2]. That is, the network should be able to prethreats, existing methods become less attractive due to the pare and enforce relevant countermeasures against individual
requirement of complete connection information (thus unable to
make timely identification) or packet payload inspection (there- attack activities before they are successfully executed. To
fore limited to unencrypted packets under no privacy regulation). this end, there would be at least two prerequisites: First, the
To this end, this paper takes an approach of packet stream class of attacks should be identified in the detection time to
analysis referencing statistical information of packet sequences, prepare relevant countermeasures (e.g., based on predefined
requiring neither packet inspection nor complete connection security policies). Second, the detection process should be
information. To enable practical packet stream analysis, there
exist several challenges, such as out-of-order packet sequences done as early as possible while the attack is active and in
introduced by network dynamics and class imbalance with a tiny progress.
fraction of attack connections. To overcome these challenges, we Recently a body of studies has employed machine learning
design two deep sequence models: 1) a bidirectional recurrent (ML) techniques for detecting network attacks [3], [4]. Despite
structure designed for greater resilience to out-of-order packet their promising detection performance reported, most (if not
streams; and 2) a pre-training-enabled sequence-to-sequence
structure designed for creating consistent representations from all) of previous studies assume the availability of complete
unbalanced class distributions using self-supervised learning. We connection records that are only available at the connection
evaluate the presented deep sequence models using real and termination time. For instance, common public datasets (e.g.,
synthetic network data collections for extensive experimentation. KDDCup 1999/NSL-KDD [5], UNSW-NB15 [6], and CIC-
The experimental results support the feasibility of the proposed IDS2017 [7]) provide the complete connection information
models outperforming baseline deep learning models, yielding up
to 94.8% (F1 score) only with the first five packets (k=5) from such as duration, aggregated bytes, and number of packets,
the Internet traffic collection containing a substantial fraction of through CSV-formatted files. Such reliance confines the capanetwork flows experiencing out-of-order delivery. bility of attack detection to postmortem analysis rather than
 Index Terms—Packet stream, early characterization, out-of- live online detection for timely actions. Moreover, a large body
order packets, class imbalance, deep sequence, neural networks. of ML-based detection studies targeted anomaly detection (i.e.,
 binary decision whether it is likely an attack or not); attack
 I. I NTRODUCTION detection is a more complicated problem and requires the abil-

N ETWORK-BASED attacks happen increasingly with
 growing volume and impacts. This becomes more critical
with ever-growing connectivity with less secure Internet of
 ity to identify the type of attacks (e.g., Web, DoS, and scanning
 attacks). Deep packet inspection is an effective method for
 identifying attack classes at the early stage of connections
Things (IoT) devices through wireless mobile communica- by applying pattern matching with predefined byte sequences
tions. One of the essential functions to protect computing (“signatures”) [8]. However, any payload inspection approach
resources in the networking environment is the effective is extremely expensive for analyzing packet payloads. It is
detection of network attacks. The approach to network attack also limited to unencrypted packets only. Moreover, there
detection can be either host-based or connection-based (i.e., is a trend of banning payload scanning with an increasing
host-independent), and the latter would be an attractive option demand on privacy, which renders it unlawful to read even
with relatively low deployment and operation costs [1]. In cleartext packets. In this study, we take an approach of
addition to detection, the capability of timely responses is packet stream analysis referencing statistical information of
another vital requirement, so as to minimize detection deficit packet sequences, thus requiring neither packet inspection nor
 Received 21 May 2023; revised 10 November 2024, 3 May 2025,
 complete connection information.
and 29 August 2025; accepted 10 March 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSAC - For practical packet stream analysis, there exist several
TIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor D. Pei. Date of publication 24 March 2026; intricate challenges. First, the communication network is wild
date of current version 27 March 2026. (Corresponding author: Jinoh Kim.)
 Minji Kim, Dongeun Lee, Jinpyo Kim, and Jinoh Kim are with the
 and network dynamics (e.g., routing oscillation) may lead
Computer Science Department, East Texas A&M University, Commerce, to out-of-order packet sequences in collection. For example,
TX 75428 USA (e-mail: jinoh.kim@etamu.edu). packet loss rates are non-negligible in reality, ranging from
 Kookjin Lee is with the School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, 0.01% to 20%, even in wired networking settings [9]. Packet
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA.
 Doowon Kim is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Com- reordering refers to the reception of packets in a different
puter Science, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 USA. order than what were originally sent, and it is inevitable to see
 Sangman Lee is with the Department of AI Cyber Security, Korea University, Sejong-si 30019, South Korea.
 packet reordering in packet-switched networks due to several
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3677135 reasons, such as multi-path forwarding routes, parallelism, and
 2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4362 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE I
 P RIOR R ESEARCH ON PACKET S TREAM A NALYSIS

 TABLE II network. Such dynamics is generally more critical in wireless
 ATTACK C LASS I NFORMATION D EFINED IN THE I NTRUSION L OG mobile communications with greater loss and retransmission
 rates. Second, the measured data collection shows a high
 degree of class imbalance with only a small fraction of attack
 connections. We can also find significant variations even from
 the distribution of attack types (also observed from our dataset
 in Table III). Another challenge would be a trade-off between
 the number of packet stream variables to be managed and
 analyzed vs. the corresponding time/space complexity: for
 example, a greater set of variables in analysis may yield better
 performance, while imposing greater overheads and expenses.
 This paper sheds light on the design of deep learning
 models for effective packet stream analysis in the wild, which
 enables us to make timely responses against network attacks
 by identifying in their early stages. The key contributions of
 this study can be summarized, as follows:
 TABLE III
 C ONSTRUCTED DATA W ITH C LASS L ABELS F ROM WIDE
 • We formulate the problem of packet stream analysis with
 T RACE (09/01/2020-09/30/2020) the notion of time series classification, which optimizes
 identification performance while minimizing the number
 of packets on a flow referenced in the analysis process.
 • We present two deep sequence models designed to overcome the challenges of incomplete packet sequences and
 class imbalance: (i) a bidirectional recurrent structure
 designed for greater resilience to missing/out-of-order
 packet streams, and (ii) a pre-training-enabled sequenceto-sequence structure designed for creating consistent
 representations from unbalanced class distributions using
packet loss and retransmission [10]. Possibly, recovering from self-supervised learning.
packet reordering by referring to the sequence number field • We share evaluation details with our observations and
is an option, but it is a highly expensive operation with extra analysis. We conduct extensive evaluations using three
space and time requirements in an intermediate point in the different data collections, one from the Internet backbone
KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD 4363

Fig. 1. Early attack identification: Each flow is represented with the size and time information, and the framework performs the identification of attack
classes based on the flow representation. Note that ψ(·) is the flow representation function and φ(·) is the flow identification function that takes the input
flow represented by ψ(·) to determine its class.

 links and the others collected from simulated networking packet time recorded for each packet within the flow, which
 environments. The experimental results show that our has often been considered as time series analysis for traffic
 deep sequence models consistently outperform baseline classification [11]. For flow f , let bj (f ) be the number of
 deep learning models across diverse experimental set- bytes of the j-th packet and tj (f ) be the inter-packet time
 tings, yielding up to 94.8% (F1 score) with the first between the (j-1)-th and j-th packets (t1 (f ) = 0). Let ψ be
 five packets (k = 5) from the Internet traffic collection the function that transforms a flow into this representation:
 containing a substantial fraction of network flows expe- ψ(f ) = h(b1 (f ), . . . , bn (f )), (t1 (f ), . . . , tn (f ))i, for flow f
 riencing out-of-order delivery. consisting of n packets. Note that ψk (f ) takes the first k
 The organization of this paper is as follows. We begin packets in the observation (for the purpose of early decision).
with providing the description of the problem and a summary Figure 1 depicts the data transformation from a series of
of closely related studies in Section II. We next introduce packets captured on a communication link.
the dataset constructed from the Internet backbone and syn- For attack types, suppose m attack classes under considthetic traffic traces with the associated ground-truth logs in eration. A flow may either be a part of an attack connection
Section III. Section IV presents our deep sequence models or have nothing to do with any of attack classes (referred
developed to analyze the potentially imperfect and unbalanced to as “background”). Let U be a set of different classes,
packet stream data, with a schematic overview of the the U = {Ai |0 ≤ i ≤ m, i ∈ Z}, where A0 is a class for
framework model implementing the deep sequence models background traffic while Aj (j > 0) is an attack class. In
to tackle the problem of early identification. We share the other words, a flow belongs to Ai (0 ≤ i ≤ m) depending
experimental setting and results with our observations and on its class. The identification function φ(·) takes the input
implications in Section V, conducted with three data collec- representation of a flow ψ(f ) and determines its class, i.e.,
tions. We finally conclude our presentation in Section VI, with φ ◦ ψ : F → U. As shown in Figure 1, the early identification
the summary of the study and future directions. framework performs φ(·) to characterize attack classes by
 monitoring the size and time information measured from the
 II. BACKGROUND first k packets on a flow.
 This section provides the description of the problem and To measure the performance of the identification function,
our framework model designed to tackle the problem. we utilize standard metrics based on the confusion matrix,
 including F1 score and false positive rate (FPR) (defined in
 Section V-A). As described, only the first k packets in a flow
A. Problem Description
 are monitored for early identification. The goal is then to
 This study aims to accurately identify the type of the maximize the identification performance for a given packet
network connections in their early stages by analyzing the constraint k ∗ as follows:
stream of packets. To formulate the problem, we employ
the general concept of connections and flows defined for max φ(·) F1 score subject to k ≤ k ∗ .
point-to-point communications. A connection consists of two For simplicity, we set k = k ∗ , i.e., the number of packets
flows for bidirectional communication (e.g., client-to-server monitored is equal to the constraint.
and server-to-client directions). Let ci be a connection and
C the set of connections in a captured network trace. Then,
the size of flow set F is twice the corresponding connection B. Related Work
set size, i.e., |F| = 2 × |C|. A common way of repre- 1) Intrusion and Anomaly Detection: Intrusion detection
senting a flow (for early identification) is to associate it is a typical second line of defense mechanism, which can
with a two-dimensional vector containing the packet size and broadly be classified into two groups of signature-based and
4364 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

anomaly-based approaches [8]. Conventional intrusion detec- model for traffic classification. Authors in [20] investigated the
tion tools, such as Snort (https://www.snort.org/) and Zeek applicability of multi-task learning, simultaneously performing
(https://zeek.org/), have the capability of detecting unwanted multiple tasks leveraging information across the tasks, for the
connections in real time often using textual byte patterns. purpose of traffic classification using a one-dimensional CNN
Given the wider reliance on payload encryption, however, model. The study by [23] explores packet representation using
those signature-based approaches would be less attractive [8]. an attention-based encoding mechanism that can be used for
Moreover, there is an increase of privacy disputes and legal different downstream classification tasks, not based on flows
regulations, and the payload inspection may not be a valid but based on individual packets.
option, particularly at a certain network point. Packet stream analysis for early classification has also been
 A body of studies investigated various ML approaches explored in the context of attack detection. In [36], the authors
for detecting anomalies from network traffic traces [3], [4]. extract features from the initial set of packets to perform
Despite substantial improvement with brand-new methods, binary classification (i.e., benign or malicious). Similarly, the
anomaly detection is inherently limited to the binary decision study in [26] uses a one-dimensional CNN to process raw
without providing information specific to attack classes. Addi- packet contents from the early portion of a flow, followed
tionally, existing studies largely rely on complete connection by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for classification, while
information, which only becomes available after the commu- the authors in [27] focused on updating the classifier model
nication is over. Several studies [7], [12], [13] focused on for new types of attacks. Several studies focused on the
attack identification (rather than anomaly detection). A recent challenge of limited training data, particularly the scarcity
study [14] compares shallow learning and deep learning meth- of attack samples. For example, the authors in [28] explore
ods for network attack identification. Using public network the potential of transfer learning not only to mitigate data
datasets, the authors demonstrate that deep learning models, scarcity but also to address computational constraints in edge
such as convolutional neural network (CNN)-based ones, do network environments. Similarly, the works in [29] and [37]
not outperform traditional shallow learners like random forest. investigate the use of few-shot learning to handle the scarcity
Another study [15] explores the impact of mislabeled data of attack samples, particularly for novel or emerging threats
in network attack identification, proposing a clustering-based where labeled data is difficult to obtain. A related study
classification method with boundary augmentation to better in [30] further examines the effectiveness of both few-shot
classify difficult samples located near the decision boundary. and transfer learning in scenarios constrained by both limited
While these studies provide valuable insights, they do not samples and computing resources. In regard to data scarcity,
address the early identification capability that our study aims our study considers the challenge of class imbalance, where
to achieve. attack samples represent only a small portion of the training
 Another active line of research avenue in this field focuses data. While previous research highlights transfer learning as a
on online detection at the data plane. Several studies have promising solution, we explore an alternative approach—selfexplored the feasibility of performing detection directly on supervised learning. This direction is motivated by recent
programmable switches to enable real-time intrusion detec- findings suggesting that pre-training a supervised learning
tion. For example, an early effort in [16] demonstrates the model using unlabeled samples can enhance performance [38].
integration of a tree-based classification model into the data Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, prior work has not
plane, addressing the resource constraints of switch hardware. addressed the challenge of out-of-order packet sequences,
The work in [17] extends online analysis to support line-rate which are common in real-world network environments and
performance (scaling up to multi-terabit speeds), while intro- can significantly affect detection accuracy. In this study,
ducing runtime programmability that allows model updates we propose a deep sequence modeling approach specifically
without requiring a switch reboot. Another work in [18] designed to handle incomplete and potentially disordered
presents a co-design approach that incorporates deep learning packet sequences, thereby enhancing the practicality of earlymodels, particularly recurrent neural networks (RNNs), into stage traffic analysis.
the architecture of programmable switches. Table I summarizes prior research on packet stream anal-
 2) Packet Stream Analysis: Traffic classification is one of ysis, focusing on approaches that utilize packet-level data
the core functions in network monitoring and management for extracted from flows or biflows, as opposed to aggregated
traffic engineering, resource provisioning, Quality-of-Service flow-level statistics, to enable early decisions. Several studies
(QoS) preservation, and security purposes. Several studies [26], [28], [30] employ CNNs to extract features directly
tackled the problem of traffic classification based on packet from raw traffic bytes. In contrast, our work takes a different
stream analysis, and hence, their proposed method might direction by avoiding the parsing of raw packet bytes, thereby
provide the function of early classification of network flows enabling analysis of encrypted traffic streams. To improve
by referencing the first few packets. For instance, the study in practicality, we leverage only packet size and inter-arrival time
[35] utilized statistical information, such as mean and variance information—features that are easy to obtain with light collecof packet size and inter-arrival time, for classifying TCP tion and computing complexities. Furthermore, as summarized
connections by referring to the first k packets. The work in in the table, previous studies largely rely on conventional
[19] records the packet size difference and inter-arrival time back-end classifiers (e.g., MLPs) combined with front-end
for the first 10 packets on the network flow, which is then convolutional networks. In contrast, our approach emphasizes
converted to an image to apply a CNN-based classification temporal modeling through deep sequence architectures based
KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD 4365

on recurrent structures, which are better suited for time-series traces for early identification in this study. In this section, we
analysis. Lastly, while existing studies often rely on network introduce the process of the packet stream data construction,
traffic data collected from simulated environments, our work primarily with the real Internet traces.
leverages real-world traffic captured from Internet backbone
links, offering a more realistic and representative foundation
for evaluation. A. Data Construction From Internet Traces
 3) Early Detection Studies: Early detection has been a As discussed, we utilize the WIDE trace with the correkeyword for many application domains, with the goal of sponding intrusion logs for labeling of traffic [48], [49]. The
minimizing the impact of adversarial events by detecting traffic trace contains TCP/IP packet header information in a
them in the premature stage. For example, authors in [39] pcap file, while the associated intrusion log is provided in a
presented a neural network structure combining recurrent and comma-separated values (CSV) file with the attack information
convolutional networks for the early detection of fake news inferred by multiple detectors. Each pcap file is a recording of
on social media, motivated to reduce societal and economic 15-minute traffic collected on a specific day. A previous study
damages. Similarly, the studies in [40] and [41] are in the in [51] constructed network data by combining these traffic
loop of rumor detection using graph-structured neural net- traces and intrusion logs, but the resulting dataset contains
works. Fraudulent event detection is closely related to the NetFlow-like statistical information made only available at
fake news detection, with the focus on the early detection of the connection release time. In this work, we construct packet
malicious activities like posting harmful links on social media stream data to develop the function for the early identification
by using an RNN-based survival analysis [42] and fraudulent of network attacks.
reviews through one-class adversarial networks [43]. Recent Here, we describe the details of our data construction
research efforts extend fake news and rumor detection by process. Basically, the intrusion log contains the flow idenintroducing sophisticated modeling techniques. For instance, tification information (“5-tuple”), including the IP address
the work in [44] defines a dual convolution networks for pair, source/destination port numbers, and the transportcapturing the dynamics of messages in propagation and the layer protocol (e.g., TCP). The log also provides the attack
background knowledge, while the study in [45] designs a class information, including HTTP-relevant attacks (“HTTP”),
multi-view representation method to jointly capture textual heavy hitter traffic (“Alpha”), point-to-multipoint anomalies
and visual features. Additionally, early detection would be (“Multi”), denial-of-service attacks (“DoS”), port scanning
highly crucial in the healthcare domain as well, and the authors (“PortScan”), network scanning (“ICMPScan”, “TCPScan”,
in [46] presented a survival analysis-based method predicting and “UDPScan”), and tunneling behaviors (“IPv6Tunnel”)
when a patient develops complications after being diagnosed. [49]. As can be seen from Table II, a specific attack is
Unlike our problem, these studies need less attention to the categorized to one of the attack classes based on its intrinsic
inconsistency in data sequences owing to the assumption of characteristics.
messages on social media posted with time stamps. Using the flow identifier, the traffic trace is combined with
 the associated intrusion log. If the flow from the traffic trace
 III. PACKET S TREAM DATA C ONSTRUCTION has a match to a log entry, then the flow is marked as an
 To identify different classes of attacks, the availability of attack with the class information (Ai ∈ U ∧ i 6= 0). If no
annotated datasets (with the labeled class information) would match is found, then the combining procedure falls back to
basically be required for the unique representation of each 4-tuple (excluding the source port number information from
class. Many intrusion detection studies relied exhaustively 5-tuple) and performs the same combining task. In case of no
on CSV-formatted connection data provided in, for example, match again from the fall-back process, the flow is considered
KDD Cup 1999 [47], UNSW-NB15 dataset [6], and CIC- background traffic (A0 ∈ U). The statistical packet stream
IDS2017 [7], but those connection files contain the information information is then recorded with the class information for
of flows that can be only collected after the completion of each flow in the traffic trace. In this work, we consider TCP
communication. Hence, such connection logs would rather be flows only since it is safe to construct a flow using connection
useful for postmortem analysis than for early detection of management flags (e.g., a SYN packet for a new flow start).
ongoing malicious flows. Table III shows the extracted flow information from the
 In this work, we construct fine-grained packet-level datasets 25-day network traffic collected in September 2020, excluding
including the size (in bytes) and time information of individ- five days due to unavailability (3rd, 14th, 27th, 28th, and 29th).
ual packets (i.e., constructing ψ(f )) by combining network In the table, we use the label of “Unlabeled” to indicate the
traffic traces with corresponding intrusion detection logs. background traffic (i.e., flows that have not been assigned to
We consider both real and synthetic traces for constructing any of the attack classes during the combining phase). From
packet-level datasets. The real traffic (known as the WIDE the one-month trace, we observe a set of flows in five attack
trace) is captured from Internet backbone links in Japan classes in addition to background traffic, while there exists no
[48], [49], while the synthetic packet traces are recorded flow for the rest of the attack classes. Note that it is natural that
on simulated network environments, including UNSW-NB15 the number of flows decreases with greater k values, because
[6] and HIKARI-2021 [50]. Note that UNSW-NB15 provides there can be a subset of flows consisting of a small number
both packet-level traces and CSV-formatted connection files of packets only, and any flow with less than k packets should
(compiled from the raw traces), and we consider the packet be excluded from the collection.
4366 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 2. Visualization of the packet size and time for 100 random samples (WIDE): Each row shows a flow and each column shows a time step (packet
number) from 1 to 10. Each class shows somewhat distinctive patterns across time steps.

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 BACKGROUND T RAFFIC S TATISTICS (T OP -5) C ONSTRUCTED DATA W ITH C LASS L ABELS (UNSW-NB15)

 Table IV provides additional details about the background
traffic, including the distribution of source and destination
ports. While HTTPS accounts for the largest share of TCP
traffic, standard HTTP remains widely used in web communi- data normalization was performed with the min-max scaling
cations. Secure Shell (SSH) contributes to the second largest function: {log(·)−min(log(·))}/{max(log(·))−min(log(·))}.
portion of the traffic. We observe traffic asymmetry in both
directions, which may be attributed to factors such as traffic
 B. Data Construction From Simulated Traffic
engineering, load balancing, asymmetric routing, and multipath forwarding. This observation supports our assumption For comprehensive experiments, we further construct two
regarding the importance of out-of-order packet sequences for additional datasets derived from the synthetic traffic recorded
effective traffic characterization. from simulated network environments.
 As described in Section II-A, we primarily collect the 1) UNSW-NB15 [6]: This dataset was created in 2015
packet length bj (f ) and inter-packet time tj (f ) information from a simulated environment consisting of servers for traffic
for the characterization. Figure 2 shows the visualization of generations and routers capturing packets (and saving them
the sampled flows in different classes, with respect to bj (fi ) to pcap files). The simulated network contains two servers
(Figure 2(a)) and tj (fi ) (Figure 2(b)), where i = [1, 100] for the normal spread of the traffic and one server for
and j = [1, 10]. Although randomly sampled, we can see generating malicious traffic. This dataset defines nine attack
somewhat distinctive patterns for individual classes across time classes: Fuzzers, Analysis, Backdoors, DoS, Exploits, Generic,
steps, which signals the feasibility of the identification process Reconnaissance, Shellcode, and Worms. The ground-truth log
in their early stage. information was obtained using the Bro-IDS tool (https://
 Finally, the extracted data samples are pre-processed before www.zeek.org/) The dataset contains two collections, each of
being fed to ML algorithms, which largely includes rescaling which contains a single data trace captured in January and
and data normalization. Collectively, they constitute φ(·). In February, respectively. We construct the packet stream data
particular, we observed high skewness from both the byte from the January collection.
and inter-packet time fields. To resolve this, in the rescaling Table V shows the number of instances for each class, which
process, logarithm functions were applied to take the skewness shows the majority of classes (other than Unlabeled, Fuzzers,
of distributions into account: log(bj (f )) and log(tj (f )). Then, and Exploits) contain a small number of instances only. In the
KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD 4367

 TABLE VI
 C ONSTRUCTED DATA W ITH C LASS L ABELS (HIKARI-2021)

table, Unlabeled indicates background traffic that has not been
assigned to any of the attack classes, as in Table III.
 2) HIKARI-2021 [50]: This dataset was published in 2021.
 Fig. 3. LSTM cell information flow. At the tth time step, the LSTM cell
The network configuration shows an attacker network, a victim takes the previous hidden state h t−1 and the previous cell state c t−1 . The
network, and an interface to the public Internet. Like the forget gate, f t , controls the information flow from the previous cell state,
WIDE and UNSB-NB15 data, HIKARI-2021 provides the the input gate, g t , controls the information flow to update the cell state, and
 the output gate q t controls the information flow from the current cell state c t
raw packet traces in the pcap format with the ground-truth to the output h t . The operator denotes the element-wise multiplication.
data. The collection defines four attack types: Bruteforce,
Bruteforce-XML, Probing, and XMRIGCC (malicious cryptomining). The non-attack data contains both simulated benign where ΘRNN denotes the model parameters of RNN and
 (`)
traffic and background traffic to/from the public network. ht denotes a hidden state at the `th RNN layer. For the
From our data construction using the entire traces and ground- classification task, a classifier network takes (a part of) the
truth, we found no instance of XMRIGCC. Table VI shows last hidden state h last to make a prediction on a probability
the number of instances for each class constructed from the distribution over a set of classes, i.e., p = cξ (h hlast ), where
HIKARI-2021 collection. p = [p0 , . . . , pm ]T denotes a vector of probability masses; each
 pi denotes the probability that the flow is classified as the ith
 IV. M ETHODS —D EEP S EQUENCE M ODELS label; and cξ is a classifier network with a set of trainable
 The primary goal of this study is to develop an effective parameters ξ. In our scenario, we pre-process ψk (f ) and set
packet stream analysis tool that provides accurate early attack it to xt . For a given p , the attack (or background) class Ai
identification from potentially incomplete, skewed packet is determined by the index i that satisfies pi ≥ pj for all
stream datasets with out-of-order sequences and unbalanced j ∈ {0, . . . , m}.
class distributions. In this section, we initially describe the 1) Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM): As standard RNNs
overview of deep learning for time series analysis, and typically suffer from vanishing or exploding gradient problems
then present our deep sequence models designed to address [53], modern RNN architectures such as LSTM [54] and
the above challenges: (i) bidirectional long short-term mem- gated recurrent unit (GRU) [55] were proposed as gating
ory (LSTM) as an implementation of bidirectional recurrent mechanisms to mitigate such problems by creating compustructure, and (ii) sequence-to-sequence autoencoder as an tational paths whose gradients do not vanish or explode for
implementation of pre-training-enabled sequence-to-sequence a long period. In this study, we choose LSTM over GRU as
structure. LSTM is known to be strictly more expressive, outperforming
 GRU in many complex applications [56]. LSTM resolves
A. Deep Learning for Time Series Analysis vanishing/exploding gradient problems by adding LSTM cells.
 Considering a sequence of packets in a flow as the input In addition to the standard RNN hidden states h t , LSTM
variable and a class as the target variable, we can formulate cells have a cell state c t , which is updated by an internal
the identification problem as a classification problem in a recurrence and creates paths where the gradient can flow over
supervised learning setting. In particular, we aim to learn a longer duration. Then the gating mechanisms control the flow
function φΘ , which predicts an attack class or the background of information by employing three gates: input, output, and
class given the first k packets of a flow: Ai = φΘ (ψk (f )), forget gates. The input gate controls the extent to which new
where Θ is a set of model parameters to be learned; and ψk (·) input data is transferred to update ct , the output gate controls
maps the flow representation to k tuples. the extent to which the LSTM cell output flows out to the
 Among various forms of φΘ ,1 we choose recurrent neural output (the hidden state), and the forget gate controls the
networks (RNNs) because they are specifically designed for extent to which ct remains unchanged. The gating mechanisms
processing time series data by utilizing shared and recurring allow important information to last longer while forgetting less
units [52]. At time index t, RNNs operate on an input xt significant information. Now, the recurring function becomes
 (1) (2)
and update hidden states h t = (ht , ht , . . .) by applying a h t , c t = LSTM(xt , h t−1 , c t−1 ; ΘLSTM ).
recurring function,
 Figure 3 illustrates the information flow of the LSTM cell.
 h t = RNN(xt , h t−1 ; ΘRNN ), 2) Bidirectional LSTM: The use of bidirectional LSTM
 1 We assume that φ also includes pre-processing of data samples: rescaling
 Θ
 represents a novel approach to network traffic modeling,
and data normalization. especially in scenarios with missing or out-of-order elements
4368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

in the input sequence. While RNNs, including LSTM and B. Self-Supervised Learning
GRU, have been explored for traffic classification tasks In many applications, the distribution of classes of interest
[57], they often struggle when sequence data is incomplete could be biased or skewed, and training a classifier directly
[58] or unordered [59]. Traditional LSTM models rely on could fail to capture an underlying distribution correctly.
single-direction processing and typically require customized To mitigate this class imbalance issue, a training algorithm
pre-processing, such as interpolating missing values based on that does not require the knowledge of class labels can be
domain-specific heuristics [58], which may not be adaptable employed to pre-train the classifier. As pointed out in the
across different applications. state-of-the-art unsupervised learning study (contrastive-loss-
 In contrast, bidirectional LSTM provides a more advanced based models, e.g., [38]), a main purpose of unsupervised
solution by processing information bidirectionally (both for- learning is to pre-train a model, which is in turn fine-tuned
ward and backward) within a sequence. This dual-directional with supervised learning. We follow this approach in this
analysis enhances the model’s ability to infer context around study.
missing or misaligned data points, leading to higher accuracy 1) Sequence-to-Sequence Autoencoder: Autoencoder is a
without requiring application-specific data handling techniques feed-forward neural network, which attempts to copy its input
[60]. By offering improved contextual awareness and more sequence to its output sequence. We consider a type of autoenrobust dependency modeling [61], [62], bidirectional LSTM coder, called sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) autoencoder
can capture crucial relationships across sequential data, even model, whose input and output are sequences. In general,
when elements are out of order. This approach positions the Seq2Seq model consists of three parts: an encoder, a
the bidirectional LSTM as a promising advancement for decoder, and a context vector. To handle the sequence, the
resilient and adaptable traffic classification in diverse network encoder and the decoder are typically modeled as RNN-type
conditions. neural networks. The encoder processes an input sequence
 In our task of the attack classification, the performance of and produces the context vector, which would contain the
the task depends not only on understanding “causal” relation- most salient features of the input sequence. Figure 4 depicts
ship of packets in the input sequence, but also on extracting the network architecture of the Seq2Seq autoencoder model.
other useful features that would otherwise be overlooked by Internally, the multilayer perceptron (MLP) component inside
only focusing on causality. However, a regular LSTM only the encoder compresses the output of the LSTM to produce the
employs a past history to extract features. To address this context vector projected in a lower-dimensional space, and the
issue, bidirectional LSTM [63] has been studied and has other MLP at the decoder performs the decompression.
demonstrated its effectiveness in many applications [64]. Thus, We now formally describe the Seq2Seq model. Specifically,
in this study, we consider the bidirectional LSTM, which the model can be written in a form:
combines two LSTM architectures: one moving forward from
the beginning to the end of the input sequence and the other x̃ = gdec (genc (x; Θenc ); Θdec ),
moving backward from the end to the beginning of the input where genc and gdec denote the encoder and the decoder,
sequence. That is, respectively; Θenc and Θdec denote the model parameters
 for the encoder and the decoder, respectively; x̃ denotes the
 h fwd fwd
 t , ct = LSTM(xt , h fwd fwd fwd
 t−1 , c t−1 ; ΘLSTM ), reconstruction of x that is a pre-processed version of ψk (f ).
 h bwd bwd
 t , ct = LSTM(xt , h bwd bwd bwd
 t+1 , c t+1 ; ΘLSTM ), The encoder takes the input sequence and produces the context
 vector c:
where the superscripts fwd and bwd indicate the quantities c = genc (x; Θenc ).
associated with the forward and backward operations. The
final hidden representation at time t can be obtained by the The decoder performs the reverse action of the encoder,
concatenation, h t = [hhfwd bwd
 t , h t ]. With this architecture, we x̃ = gdec (c; Θdec ),
anticipate that the model can handle a flow better even if
packets arrive out of order. where the output approximates the input x̃ ≈ x.
 3) Training: As the classifier network is designed to pro- 2) Training: The goal of the training is to find sets of model
duce a probability that the input flow is categorized into each parameters (Θenc , Θdec ) that minimize mean squared error
class, the last component of the classifier is a softmax layer, (MSE) between the output sequence and the input sequence:
 P o into the probability vector p
which turns its input vector nX
 train
 1 2
such that pi = exp(oi )/ i exp(oi ). Then, the model can be LMSE = kxi − x̃i k2 ,
 ntrain i=1
trained by minimizing the cross-entropy loss:
 nX m
 train X
 where xi and x̃i denote the i-th training sample for the input
 1 and the reconstruction, respectively.
 LCE = − yj,i log(pj,i ),
 ntrain j=1 i=0 Note that this approach can be categorized as selfsupervised learning, as it does not require additional labels
where yj,i ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator denoting if the index i of for training, except the input variable. Once the training of
a training sample j is the correct classification; pj,i is the pi the Seq2Seq autoencoder is finished, we take the network
of the training sample j; and ntrain is the number of training weights and biases of the encoder as initial values of network
samples. weights and biases of the LSTM network for the classification,
KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD 4369

Fig. 4. Seq2Seq autoencoder for self-supervised learning: The encoder and the decoder are typically modeled as RNN-type neural networks to handle the
sequence. Internally, the MLP component inside the encoder compresses the output of the LSTM to produce the context vector projected in a lower-dimensional
space, and the other MLP at the decoder performs the decompression to restore the sequence.

i.e., ΘRNN = Θenc . After that, we continue training the described in Section III. In fact, the ML part is the core of the
LSTM network to minimize the cross-entropy explained in framework performing learning and decisions. As mentioned,
Section IV-A. there would be several challenges for realizing early decisions
 The mathematical ground as to why self-supervised learning from potentially imperfect and unbalanced network packet
can be more robust in learning representations in the scenarios data. We develop two deep sequence models for addressing
of class imbalance is still an active area of research. However, those challenges, as discussed earlier in this section. The
strong empirical evidence has been presented in a recent designed sequence-based models include a bidirectional recurwork where self-supervised learning resulted in more robust rent structure built upon long short-term memory (LSTM)
representations [65]. for resiliency against packet missing and reordering (designed
 for Main Trainer), and a pre-training-enabled sequence-to-
C. Proposed Framework sequence structure based on the autoencoding architecture for
 To realize early identification based on the deep sequence stability from unbalanced class distributions (designed for Premethod, we design a framework consisting of a set of Trainer). The framework has been implemented using PyTorch
functional components to fulfill its mission, as illustrated in and we will discuss the evaluation of the proposed method in
Figure 5. The following are the details about the framework the following section.
components: In Figure 5, the process flow is as follows: (i) The frame-
 • Data Gen creates normalized, labeled data instances by work starts by creating labeled training data from raw packet
 combining the given packet traces and the associated traces and the associated intrusion logs; (ii) The labeled data
 intrusion logs, which will be used for constructing the is then fed into the deep sequence model, which characterizes
 learning model. Attack flows are labeled with their spe- each attack class using the first k packets from each sample;
 cific attack class, while the rest of the flows are labeled (iii) Self-supervised learning may be employed to enhance
 as “Unlabeled”; model initialization, making the neural network distribution-
 • Packet Stream Gen groups a stream of packets based aware; (iv) The deep sequence model (bidirectional LSTM or
 on the flow identifier information. The statistical packet Seq2Seq) is trained to learn the unique features of each class;
 stream information from the predetermined number of (v) The trained model is subsequently deployed for real-time
 packets (k) on the same flow is measured and delivered testing on individual flows captured from live traffic; (vi) Flow
 to Early Identifier; information is extracted based on five-tuple identification from
 • Pre-trainer is equipped to perform self-supervised learn- the raw traffic; (vii) Finally, the deep sequence model makes
 ing, which helps initialize the neural network in a way to a classification decision based on the extracted flow data.
 stabilize the learning model from the impact by proba-
 V. E VALUATION
 bilistic skewness and class imbalance. Note that the label
 information is not referenced in the pre-training stage; In this section, we share the evaluation results with our
 • Main Trainer learns the characteristics of individual observations and implications. We first describe the experattack classes by referencing the annotated class label imental setting for compared models, data preparation, and
 information. The pre-trained model is loaded as the evaluation metrics. Then we report the experimental results,
 initialization of the Main Trainer, and the labeled samples which demonstrate the feasibility of our deep sequence models
 are injected to construct the learning model for early for early decisions with improved performance compared
 attack identification; to the baseline models. This section primarily reports the
 • Early Identifier performs the identification of attack experimental results collected with the WIDE dataset. Addiclasses against the given data instance delivered from tionally, we share the results obtained with the synthetic
 Packet Stream Generator. The learning model built by datasets (UNSW-NB15 and HIKARI-2021) and the (UDP-
 Main Trainer is loaded to this component for actual based) QUIC dataset (CESNET-QUIC22 [34]).
 decisions. The early decision is then made by classifying
 each instance into one of the classes (Ai ∈ U). A. Experimental Setting
 Basically, there are two parts in the presented framework. We evaluate a set of deep learning models for packet stream
The data measurement part (Data Gen and Packet Stream Gen) analysis in the context of network attack identification. As the
4370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 5. Overview of the proposed framework for early attack identification, which analyzes packet streams using a time series-aware ML component for
learning and classifying. The circled numbers represent the process flow in the framework.

 2T P
baseline, we consider two neural network models: (i) a multi- metric of F1 score is defined as: F1 score = 2T P +F P +F N ,
layer perceptron (MLP) model that takes a vector containing and hence, the model performs better if the score is higher.
the packet size and time without the notion of time sequences Since the attack identification is not a binary classification
(“MLP”) and (ii) a unidirectional LSTM model widely applied problem, we calculate F1 score based on the number of
for time series analysis (“FWD”). As the realization of the true instances for each class (i.e., Macro Avg. F1 score).
proposed models, we implement two deep sequence models: We additionally report false positive rate (FPR) defined as:
(iii) the bidirectional LSTM model (“BI”) and (iv) the unidi- FPR = F PF+T P
 N . In our setting, a false positive event refers
rectional LSTM model pre-trained with Seq2Seq autoencoder to a case where Unlabeled (A0 ) is classified into one of the
(“SEQ”). Note that we configure FWD with the identical attack classes ({Ai |i 6= 0}).
neural network architecture to SEQ, with the same level of Our implementation and the WIDE dataset can be
optimizations for fair comparison; hence, SEQ can be regarded accessible online through: https://github.com/dcstamuc/
as a pre-trained version of FWD with self-supervised learning. PacketStreamDataCollection
For BI, we test models with an additional fully-connected
layer that produces a hidden vector, which has the same size B. Performance Comparison
as the context vector. Internally, we use ReLU for MLP and We first perform a fair comparison under the assumption of
tanh for LSTM for non-linear activation. For each ML model, the identical configuration setting for the number of hidden
we utilize check-pointing to search a model instance with layers (HLAYER) and the hidden dimension size (HDIM):
the greatest validation accuracy over 1,000 epochs with the HLAYER = 3 and HDIM = 20. Additionally, we set the size
learning rate 10−3 . of context vector (or hidden vector) (CV) to three for BI and
 As shown in Table III, the created dataset mainly contains SEQ as their default values (i.e., CV = 3). We then report the
three attack classes (HTTP, Multi, and Alpha). We com- configuration of each model yielding the best F1 score with
posed the ML models to classify the traffic into four classes the corresponding FPR. Finally, we analyze the performance
(i.e., three attack classes and the background). For training, of BI and SEQ with different values for CV and HDIM.
min(10000, x) number of instances were randomly chosen Figure 6 shows the classification performance in F1 score
from each class pool, where x is the actual size of the pool. under the fair comparison setting. From the figure, we can see
Hence, the sampled dataset is intrinsically unbalanced with that our deep sequence models (BI and SEQ) substantially outless than or equal to 10,000 samples, particularly if k gets perform MLP consistently across different k’s. Interestingly,
larger. The validation set contains 200 instances for each the unidirectional LSTM model (FWD) collapses to 0.1 when
class, and the testing set includes 100 instances per class. To k = 10, implying high sensitivity and instability of the model
ensure no-overlap among training, validation, and test sets, the when the sampled dataset gets more unbalanced. BI and SEQ
validation and test samples had been drawn before composing are capable of providing early identification of attack flows
the training set. with fairly acceptable performance even with three packets
 To measure model performance, we basically refer to the (k = 3), while monitoring the first five packets (k = 5)
confusion matrix consisting of TP (True Positive), FP (False escalates the identification performance to 93.5% (BI) and
Positive), FN (False Negative), and TN (True Negative). We 93.7% (SEQ). One interesting observation is that increasing
measure the identification performance using F1 score, since the number of packets (k ≥ 10) does not help improve
the metric of accuracy may lead to a biased outcome under the identification performance, which will be discussed in
a setting with unbalanced classes (same as our setting). The Section V-F.
KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD 4371

 Fig. 7. Performance comparison for different feature sets (k = 5): Utilizing
Fig. 6. Performance comparison: BI and SEQ consistently outperform MLP both features perform highly consistently across different identification modand FWD across different k values, yielding up to 93.5% (BI) and 93.7% els. Relying on the size information shows slightly better performance than
(SEQ) with k = 5. Note that FWD collapses to around 10% when k ≥ 10 utilizing the time information that produces an F1 score of at least 79.9%.
(thus showing the broken line).

 The results in Table VIII suggest a room to optimize the
 TABLE VII
 models with non-negligible improvements compared to the
 B EST-P ERFORMING C ONFIGURATION FOR E ACH M ODEL (k = 5)
 default setting, i.e., (CV = 3, HDIM = 20). In the table,
 the bold-faced result indicates the best performance among
 the entire settings for a given k. We also italicize the best
 performance of the other model for the comparison of the
 two models (i.e., BI and SEQ). For example, BI(3,40) yields
 the best performance (and bold-faced) when k = 3, while
 SEQ(3,40) works the best among the SEQ settings (and
 TABLE VIII italicized). Overall, BI(3,40) performs consistently, yielding
P ERFORMANCE (F1 S CORE ) U NDER D IFFERENT C ONFIGURATIONS over 91% without any significant variations across different
 (B OLD =B EST, I TALIC = B EST FOR THE OTHER M ODEL ) configurations. SEQ works well by and large but shows
 some degraded performance with the longest sequence (k =
 20), presumably due to the increased complexity of the
 reconstruction.

 C. Significance of Packet Size and Time Features
 Thus far, we assumed a two-dimensional vector containing
 the packet size and packet time as input for characterizing a
 flow f , i.e., h(b1 (f ), t1 (f )), . . . , (bk (f ), tk (f ))i, from k packets measured for that flow. As shown in Figure 2, individual
 classes may have distinctive patterns when visualizing the
 sample instances using the size and time information, respectively. To see their impact on identification performance, we
 conduct another experiments with a single variable sequences
 We next compare the best performance of the models. In (i.e., either size or time).
fact, we have performed extensive hyper-parameter-search on Figure 7 shows the performance comparison with difa grid and here we report the results of the best configurations ferent feature sets: packet size information only (i.e.,
with respect to F1 score when k = 5 (as observed in Figure 6). hb1 (f ), b2 (f ), . . . , bk (f )i), packet time information only (i.e.,
Table VII provides the performance with F1 score and FPR ht1 (f ), t2 (f ), . . . , tk (f )i), and both the size and time inforfor each model. In the table, CV is not applicable for MLP mation. The number of packets is set to five (k = 5) in
or FWD. The results show that SEQ is slightly better than this comparison study. The figure shows that using both
the others, while BI shows the lowest FPR. Although the features leads to highly consistent performance across different
performance gap between the baseline models (MLP and identification models. Relying solely on the size information
FWD) and our deep sequence models (BI and SEQ) is small shows slightly better performance than utilizing only the time
here, BI and SEQ perform more consistently, which is a crucial information that produces an F1 score of 79.9% in the worst
factor in actual deployment. case. This result supports the significance of utilizing both the
 Lastly, we provide further results for BI and SEQ under size and time information for packet stream analysis.
different CV and HDIM settings. For the exposition purpose, Table IX and Table X provide further details of the measured
we name a model with a suffix of (CV, HDIM): for example, performance when using the packet size information only
BI(3,20) refers to the BI model with CV = 3 and HDIM = 20. (Table IX) and the packet time information only (Table X). We
4372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 8. Performance comparison with other datasets: BI and SEQ do not show substantial performance improvements with the synthetic traffic sets that have
relatively low rates of out-of-order delivery compared to the WIDE dataset, as shown in Table XI.

 TABLE IX function since other classes contain only a small number of
 P ERFORMANCE W ITH PACKET flows when k is large. In Table V, DoS contains only 310
 S IZE I NFORMATION samples when k = 20, while other attacks than Fuzzers and
 Exploits have an even smaller number of instances than DoS
 has. Figure 8(a) shows the identification performance over
 different k values. We can see that k = 3 would not be enough
 to accurately classify, while k ≥ 5 show significantly improved
 performance. Note that FWD failed when k = 10, 20, similar
 to what we observed in Figure 6.
 TABLE X We next report experimental result conducted with the
 P ERFORMANCE W ITH PACKET HIKARI-2021 collection. We experimented with the four
 T IME I NFORMATION classes defined in Table VI. The performance comparison in
 Figure 8(b) shows somewhat closer patterns to the WIDE
 evaluation result in Figure 6. All the models perform the best
 with k = 5, while referring to more packets reduces the chance
 of correct identification.
 The experimental results with the synthetic collections
 (Figure 8(a) and Figure 8(b)) show that BI and SEQ do not
 TABLE XI make any substantial performance enhancement, unlike the
 F RACTION OF F LOWS E XPERIENCING observation from WIDE (Figure 6). We conjecture that this is
 O UT- OF -O RDER PACKETS because the synthetic traffic was collected in highly controlled
 networking settings.
 We measured packet losses from the three data collections
 by analyzing packet sequence numbers. Table XI compares
 the three datasets with respect to the fraction of flows experican see from both tables that our deep sequence models overall encing out-of-order packets. The real Internet trace (WIDE)
outperform the baseline models, yielding over 80% of perfor- shows considerably greater losses. The HIKARI-2021 colmance across different k values consistently. In particular, the lection partly includes the Internet traffic as well as the
SEQ model trained with the packet size information shows an simulated traffic, which results in a higher loss rate than the
F1 score of 93.3% when k = 10, approximating to the best entirely synthetic UNSW-NB15 trace. This result supports our
result in Table VIII. We also observed that FWD collapses with hypothesis that the presented deep sequence models (BI and
poor performance with k ≥ 10, as in the previous experiments. SEQ) are beneficial for characterizing packet streams in the
 wild with out-of-order packets in the measurement.
D. Experiments With Synthetic Traces
 Here, we carry out experiments with the synthetic collec- E. Experiments With QUIC Traffic Dataset
tions of UNSW-NB15 and HIKARI-2021. The experimental QUIC is a transport protocol built on top of UDP, designed
setting is identical to what was used for the WIDE collection to improve performance for HTTPS traffic [66]. With features
analysis (described in Section V-A). like encryption and low latency, this protocol has quickly
 For UNSW-NB15, we selected three classes of Fuzzers, gained popularity, supporting a variety of applications such
Exploits, and Unlabeled for evaluating our identification as web browsers (Chrome) and video streaming services
KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD 4373

 TABLE XII TABLE XIII
 QUIC T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE F1 S CORE W ITH D IFFERENT DATASET C ONFIGURATIONS (k=5):1,000
 (F1 S CORE ) S AMPLES FOR S ET 1 & S ET 3 AND 10,000 FOR S ET 2 & S ET 4

 described, we randomly sampled min(10000, x) number of
 instances from each class pool for the evaluation (including
(YouTube) [67], [68]. The rapid adoption of QUIC led to 200 for validation and 100 for testing), where x is the actual
increased share in the Internet traffic and over 8% of websites size of the pool. In Table XIII, we organize four different
worldwide are QUIC-capable as of November 2024 [69]. How- sets for evaluation: Set1 has 1,000 instances sampled and Set2
ever, this growing adoption also raises security concerns, as the 10,000 instances sampled from the first week, while Set3 has
relatively new protocol may still have vulnerabilities, including 1,000 samples and Set4 10,000 samples from the whole month.
susceptibility to DoS attacks on QUIC-enabled servers [70]. In With the week-long datasets (Set1 and Set2), we can clearly
this study, we evaluate our deep sequence models with QUIC see the benefit of the increased training set size. In contrast, the
traffic to assess the applicability of our proposed method. month-long setting does not give any progress even with the
 The CESNET-QUIC22 dataset [34] provides a month-long larger dataset. One possible explanation is that using 10,000
QUIC traffic captured from Internet backbone links. The instances would not be enough to capture the distribution
dataset includes bidirectional connection data, featuring packet of data from the month-long pool, while that same number
sequence information (such as packet sizes, directions, and would suffice for the relatively small week-long pool. This
inter-packet times) for the first 30 packets, along with aggre- would also be a reason why Set2 shows the better performance
gated connection statistics (including duration, transmitted than Set4. However, if we have to draw a less number of
bytes and packets, and packet histograms). The dataset defines instances (i.e., 1,000 samples for Set1 and Set3), the result
18 class labels, and we chose four majority classes (Streaming, shows that sampling from the whole month performs better;
Social, Advertising, and Search) having the highest number of presumably, it would be beneficial to choose samples from the
data instances for our experiments. larger (month-long) pool if we have to choose only a small
 Table XII compares the performance of models for QUIC number of instances. We observed almost the same patterns
traffic classification when k = 20 and k = 30. For evaluation, from different BI and SEQ configurations. In fact, this study
we employed the model configuration that had performed the limits the number of samples to 10,000 to keep computational
best in Section V-B without extra optimizations. Additionally, complexity manageable but evaluating the models with an
we excluded the use of meta information (connection statis- extensive set of data samples from a longer-term capture would
tics), relying solely on the packet size and inter-packet time be interesting to better understand the impact of data quantity
features. The results indicate that the proposed models (BI and and quality.
SEQ) outperform the baseline models (MLP and FWD) in both
settings. The FWD model shows poor performance, collapsing VI. C ONCLUSION
to 0.1, which is consistent with previous experiments. Our
 This paper presented the design and evaluation of deep
proposed models show at least a 5% improvement, with no
 sequence models designed for effective packet stream analysis
significant difference observed between BI and SEQ.
 to achieve accurate identification of network attacks in a timely
 manner. With the rationale of network dynamics (causing
F. Discussion out-of-order packet sequences) and class imbalance (resulting
 Now, we discuss some interesting observations from our in learning inconsistent representations), we designed two
experiments with the WIDE dataset. In Figure 6, we observed deep sequence models based on a bidirectional structure
that increasing the number of packets (k ≥ 10) does not (for the former concern) and a pre-training-enabled Seq2Seq
improve any identification performance, which is somewhat structure (for the latter concern). To develop and evaluate
counter-intuitive since monitoring more packets could give fur- the deep sequence models, we construct packet-level datasets
ther information about the communication. Regarding this, we from the network traffic traces collected from the Internet
can get some clues from previous studies. A pioneering study backbone links and simulated networking environments. Our
in [35] claims that the first four packets of a TCP connection experimental results support the feasibility of the presented
would be sufficient to characterize network applications, and deep sequence models, showing up to 94.8% (F1 score) for
the authors observed that monitoring more than four packets identifying three different attack types (with one background
even results in the degradation of identification performance. traffic class) from the Internet traffic collection containing a
A recent study in [20] also concludes that keeping track of substantial fraction of network flows that experienced out-ofmore packets does not help the prediction accuracy for traffic order delivery. The results from the three data collections also
classification, in which k ranged between 30 and 60. suggest that monitoring the first five packets (k = 5) would
 Another interesting observation in our evaluation is the suffice, enabling timely responses against network threats
impact of training samples on identification performance. As while the connection is still active and in progress.
4374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 There are several directions for further investigations. We [14] A. Lichy, O. Bader, R. Dubin, A. Dvir, and C. Hajaj, “When a RF
examined the two deep sequence models independently, but beats a CNN and GRU, together—A comparison of deep learning and
 classical machine learning approaches for encrypted malware traffic
ultimately the models would be combined to expect a syn- classification,” Comput. Secur., vol. 124, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 103000.
ergistic benefit, which will be the next step of this study. [15] Q. Yuan et al., “BoAu: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels based
Data quantity would be a concern for analyzing the data on boundary augmentation,” Comput. Secur., vol. 131, Aug. 2023, Art.
 no. 103300.
collected over an extended period (e.g., several years). Since [16] B. M. Xavier, R. S. Guimarães, G. Comarela, and M. Martinello,
the learning complexity is proportionate to data quantity, “Programmable switches for in-networking classification,” in Proc.
discovering a more represented group of data samples would IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10.
 [17] S. U. Jafri, S. Rao, V. Shrivastav, and M. Tawarmalani, “Leo: Online
be interesting and statistical approaches could be investigated ML-based traffic classification at multi-terabit line rate,” in Proc.
for that purpose. In this study, we considered the number of USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Des. Impl. (NSDI), 2024, pp. 1573–1591.
packets as the criterion for early attack identification. Another [18] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, F. Zhang, and B. Chen, “RIDS: Towards
 advanced IDS via RNN model and programmable switches co-designed
criterion would be a time constraint (e.g., making a decision approaches,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., May
within t seconds), and it will be interesting to explore neural 2024, pp. 591–600.
sequence structures to support such an alternative criterion. [19] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2Img: A sequence-to-image
Additionally, we plan to apply the deep sequence approach for based approach towards IP traffic classification using convolutional
 neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec.
conventional traffic classification and application identification 2017, pp. 1271–1276.
to see its feasibility in other network monitoring tasks. [20] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Multitask learning for network traffic
 classification,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw.
 (ICCCN), 2020, pp. 1–9.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [21] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
 just a few labels: A semisupervised approach using sampled packets,”
 The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to the in Proc. Ind. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), 2019, pp. 28–42.
anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive [22] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorfeedback. This work was supported in part by the East Texas bani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
A&M University Presidential GAR Initiative program. features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
 pp. 407–414.
 [23] X. Meng, Y. Wang, R. Ma, H. Luo, X. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Packet
 R EFERENCES representation learning for traffic classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM
 SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2022, pp. 3546–3554.
[1] Q. Zou, A. Singhal, X. Sun, and P. Liu, “Deep learning for detecting [24] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari,
 network attacks: An end-to-end approach,” in Proc. IFIP Conf. Data “Detection of DoH tunnels using time-series classification of
 Appl. Secur. Priv. (DBSec), 2021, pp. 221–234. encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Depend. Auton.
[2] A. Oprea, Z. Li, R. Norris, and K. Bowers, “MADE: Security analytics Secure Comput. Int. Conf. Pervasive Intell. Comput. Int. Conf.
 for enterprise threat detection,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Cloud Big Data Comput. Int. Conf. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr.
 Conf., Dec. 2018, pp. 124–136. (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), 2020, pp. 63–70.
[3] N. Moustafa, J. Hu, and J. Slay, “A holistic review of network anomaly [25] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 detection systems: A comprehensive survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 vol. 128, pp. 33–55, Feb. 2019. learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
[4] G. Fernandes, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, L. F. Carvalho, J. F. Al-Muhtadi, Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
 and M. L. Proença, “A comprehensive survey on network anomaly [26] T. Ahmad, D. Truscan, J. Vain, and I. Porres, “Early detection of network
 detection,” Telecommun. Syst., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 447–489, Mar. 2019. attacks using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Test.,
[5] L. Dhanabal and S. Shantharajah, “A study on NSL-KDD dataset Verification Validation Workshops (ICSTW), Apr. 2022, pp. 30–39.
 for intrusion detection system based on classification algorithms,” Int. [27] J. Zhang, F. Li, and F. Ye, “Sustaining the high performance of AI-based
 J. Adv. Res. Comput. Commun. Eng., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 446–452, 2015. network traffic classification models,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
[6] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for no. 2, pp. 816–827, Apr. 2023.
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
 [28] D. A. Bierbrauer, M. J. De Lucia, K. Reddy, P. Maxwell, and N. D. Basin Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
 tian, “Transfer learning for raw network traffic detection,” Expert Syst.
[7] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
 Appl., vol. 211, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 118641.
 generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
 [29] D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, P. Voria, M. De Ieso, and
 characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
 A. Pescapè, “Few-shot class-incremental learning for network intrusion
 pp. 108–116.
 detection systems,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 5, pp. 6736–6757,
[8] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
 2024.
 of intrusion detection systems: Techniques, datasets and challenges,”
 [30] X. Zhang et al., “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via
 Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, Dec. 2019.
 integrating knowledge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE
[9] H. X. Nguyen and M. Roughan, “Rigorous statistical analysis of
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
 internet loss measurements,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 21, no. 3,
 pp. 734–745, Jun. 2013. [31] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
[10] A. El-Atawy, Q. Duan, and E. Al-Shaer, “A novel class of robust covert “Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of
 channels using out-of-order packets,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE
 Comput., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 116–129, Mar. 2017. Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
[11] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar, [32] H. Seo and M. Yoon, “Generative intrusion detection and prevention on
 “Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network data stream,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2023,
 traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., pp. 4319–4335.
 vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019. [33] A. Parmisano, S. Garcia, and M. J. Erquiaga, “A labeled dataset
[12] C. Zhang, X. Costa-Perez, and P. Patras, “Tiki-taka: Attacking and with malicious and benign IoT network traffic (1.0.0),” Zenodo, 2020.
 defending deep learning-based intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4743746
 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Cloud Comput. Secur. Workshop, Nov. 2020, [34] J. Luxemburk, K. Hynek, T. Čejka, A. Lukačovič, and P. Šiška,
 pp. 27–39. “CESNET-QUIC22: A large one-month QUIC network traffic dataset
[13] R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. P. Soman, P. Poornachandran, A. Al- from backbone lines,” Data Brief, vol. 46, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 108888.
 Nemrat, and S. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach for intelligent [35] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, and K. Salamatian, “Early application
 intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 41525–41550, identification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol.
 2019. (CoNEXT), 2006, pp. 1–12.
KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD 4375

[36] I. Guarino, G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, and [59] O. Vinyals, S. Bengio, and M. Kudlur, “Order matters: Sequence to
 A. Pescapé, “On the use of machine learning approaches for the early sequence for sets,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., May 2016,
 classification in network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. pp. 1–11.
 Meas. Netw. (M&N), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6. [60] S. Siami-Namini, N. Tavakoli, and A. S. Namin, “The performance of
[37] G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè, LSTM and BiLSTM in forecasting time series,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 “Classifying attack traffic in IoT environments via few-shot learning,” Big Data, Dec. 2019, pp. 3285–3292.
 J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 83, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 103762. [61] R. L. Abduljabbar, H. Dia, and P.-W. Tsai, “Development and evalu-
[38] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for ation of bidirectional LSTM freeway traffic forecasting models using
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. simulation data,” Sci. Rep., vol. 11, no. 1, p. 23899, Dec. 2021.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738. [62] X. Lu, L. Yuan, R. Li, Z. Xing, N. Yao, and Y. Yu, “An improved
[39] Y. Liu and Y.-F. Wu, “Early detection of fake news on social media bi-LSTM-based missing value imputation approach for pregnancy examthrough propagation path classification with recurrent and convolutional ination data,” Algorithms, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 12, Dec. 2022.
 networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 32, no. 1, 2018, [63] M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural
 pp. 354–361. networks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2673–2681,
[40] X. Yang, Y. Lyu, T. Tian, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, and X. Zhang, “Rumor detection Nov. 1997.
 on social media with graph structured adversarial learning,” in Proc. 29th [64] A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, and G. Hinton, “Speech recognition with
 Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2020, pp. 1417–1423. deep recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
[41] T. Bian et al., “Rumor detection on social media with bi-directional Speech Signal Process., May 2013, pp. 6645–6649.
 graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, [65] H. Liu, J. Z. HaoChen, A. Gaidon, and T. Ma, “Self-supervised learn-
 2020, pp. 549–556. ing is more robust to dataset imbalance,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
[42] P. Zheng, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “SAFE: A neural survival analysis Represent. (ICLR), 2021, pp. 1–24.
 model for fraud early detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, [66] A. Langley et al., “The QUIC transport protocol: Design and internetvol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1278–1285. scale deployment,” in Proc. Conf. ACM Special Interest Group Data
[43] P. Zheng, S. Yuan, X. Wu, J. Li, and A. Lu, “One-class adversarial nets Commun. (SIGCOMM), 2017, pp. 183–196.
 for fraud detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), vol. 33, [67] T. Shreedhar, R. Panda, S. Podanev, and V. Bajpai, “Evaluating QUIC
 2019, pp. 1286–1293. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ performance over web, cloud storage, and video workloads,” IEEE
 AAAI/article/view/3924 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1366–1381, Jun. 2022,
[44] M. Sun, X. Zhang, J. Zheng, and G. Ma, “DDGCN: Dual dynamic graph doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2021.3134562.
 convolutional networks for rumor detection on social media,” in Proc. [68] A. Bujari, C. E. Palazzi, G. Quadrio, and D. Ronzani, “Emerging
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), vol. 36, 2022, pp. 4611–4619. interactive applications over QUIC,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Annu. Consum.
[45] Q. Ying, X. Hu, Y. Zhou, Z. Qian, D. Zeng, and S. Ge, “Bootstrapping Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), Jan. 2020, pp. 1–4.
 multi-view representations for fake news detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. [69] Usage Statistics of QUIC for Websites. Accessed: Nov. 5, 2024. [Online].
 Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 2022, pp. 5384–5392. Available: https://w3techs.com/technologies/details/ce-quic
 [70] E. Chatzoglou, V. Kouliaridis, G. Karopoulos, and G. Kambourakis,
[46] B. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Sun, S. Ghosh, and K. Ng, “Early prediction of
 “Revisiting QUIC attacks: A comprehensive review on QUIC security
 diabetes complications from electronic health records: A multi-task
 and a hands-on study,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 347–365,
 survival analysis approach,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
 Apr. 2023.
 vol. 32, 2018, pp. 101–108.
[47] M. Ahmed, A. Naser Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of network anomaly detection techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 60,
 pp. 19–31, Jan. 2016.
[48] R. Fontugne, P. Borgnat, P. Abry, and K. Fukuda, “MAWILab: Combining diverse anomaly detectors for automated anomaly labeling and
 performance benchmarking,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp.
 Technol., Nov. 2010, pp. 1–12.
[49] J. Mazel, R. Fontugne, and K. Fukuda, “A taxonomy of anomalies
 in backbone network traffic,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Minji Kim received the master’s degree in computer
 Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), Aug. 2014, pp. 30–36. science from the Computer Science Department,
[50] A. Ferriyan, A. H. Thamrin, K. Takeda, and J. Murai, “Generating East Texas A&M University. Her research internetwork intrusion detection dataset based on real and encrypted synthetic ests include network traffic analytics, deep sequence
 attack traffic,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 17, p. 7868, Aug. 2021. models, healthcare informatics, time series analysis,
[51] J. Kim, C. Sim, and J. Choi, “Generating labeled flow data from MAW- and machine learning.
 ILab traces for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. ACM Workshop
 Syst. Netw. Telemetry Anal., Jun. 2019, pp. 45–48.
[52] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning internal
 representations by error propagation,” in Parallel Distributed Processing,
 Volume 1: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition: Foundations.
 The MIT Press, Jul. 1986. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.7551/
 mitpress/5236.003.0012
[53] Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi, “Learning long-term dependencies
 with gradient descent is difficult,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 5,
 no. 2, pp. 157–166, Mar. 1994.
[54] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
 Dongeun Lee received the B.S. degree in computer
[55] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN
 science and engineering and the Ph.D. degree in
 encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc.
 electrical engineering and computer science from
 Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP), 2014,
 Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea,
 pp. 1724–1734.
 in 2006 and 2014, respectively. He was a Com-
[56] D. Britz, A. Goldie, M.-T. Luong, and Q. Le, “Massive exploration puter Systems Engineer with the Lawrence Berkeley
 of neural machine translation architectures,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical National Laboratory and also jointly affiliated as a
 Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2017, pp. 1442–1451. Post-Doctoral Research Associate with the School
[57] M. Camelo, P. Soto, and S. Latré, “A general approach for traffic of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ulsan
 classification in wireless networks using deep learning,” IEEE Trans. National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan,
 Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 5044–5063, Dec. 2022. South Korea. He joined the Department of Computer
[58] Z. C. Lipton, D. C. Kale, and R. C. Wetzel, “Directly modeling missing Science, East Texas A&M University, in 2016, where he is currently an
 data in sequences with RNNs: Improved classification of clinical time Associate Professor. His current research interests include big data analytics
 series,” in Proc. Mach. Learn. Healthc. Conf., 2016, pp. 253–270. for time-series data and scientific machine learning.
4376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 Kookjin Lee received the B.S. and M.S. degrees Sangman Lee received the master’s degree in
 from Seoul National University and the Ph.D. mathematical data science from Korea University,
 degree in computer science from the University of Sejong-si. He is currently an Industry-Academia
 Maryland, College Park. He is currently an Assistant Collaboration Professor in AI cyber security at
 Professor with the Computer Science Department, Korea University. He works as the CEO of Seqryp-
 School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, ton and the Director of the Korea Institute of
 Arizona State University. Before joining ASU, he Information Security & Cryptography. His research
 was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the San- interests include intrusion detection systems, netdia National Laboratories. He received the NSF work security, cryptography, and quantum circuit
 CAREER Award in 2024. optimization.

 Doowon Kim (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from the University of Maryland in 2020. He
 is currently an Assistant Professor in electrical engineering and computer science with the University
 of Tennessee, Knoxville. He conducts research on
 computer and web security, with particular expertise in phishing attacks and network threats. His
 contributions to cybersecurity have been recognized
 through the NSF CAREER Award in 2025, the ACM
 CCS Distinguished Paper Award in 2025, and the
 NSA Best Scientific Cybersecurity Paper Award in
 2017.

 Jinoh Kim (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
 Jinpyo Kim received the master’s degree in com- University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. He is
 puter science from the Computer Science Depart- currently a Professor in computer science with East
 ment, East Texas A&M University. His research Texas A&M University, an Affiliate Faculty Scientist
 interests include network traffic analytics, temporal with the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
 point processes, neural instantiation of stochastic (LBNL), and an Executive Member of the Silicon
 methods, and machine learning. Valley Cybersecurity Institute (SVCSI). His
 research spans distributed systems, network security,
 IoT/CPS, toward intelligent, resilient, and autonomic
 systems using AI/ML methodologies. He is a
 member of ACM.