4460 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Early-Stage Detection of Encrypted Malware Traffic
 via Multi-Flow Temporal Graph Learning
 Jizhe Jia, Yi Zhao , Member, IEEE, Meng Shen , Member, IEEE, Susu Cui , Jing Wang, Bufan Zhao,
 Wei Wang , Member, IEEE, and Liehuang Zhu , Senior Member, IEEE
 Abstract—Malware widely adopts network traffic encryption I. I NTRODUCTION
techniques to conceal malicious activities. Recent research has
demonstrated the effectiveness of machine learning (ML)-, deep
learning (DL)-, and pre-training-based malware traffic detection
methods. However, a vast majority of these methods rely on
 T HE proliferation of network encryption protocols
 (SSL/TLS [1]), while essential for privacy protection, has
 inadvertently empowered cyber attackers to weaponize cryptothe collected complete traffic during the malware attack. While graphic channels. Modern malware, particularly remote access
certain methods can operate on partial traffic, their detection trojans (RATs) that grant attackers administrative control
accuracy often significantly decreases when the available data is over compromised systems, increasingly leverages encrypted
restricted to the extreme early stage, where information is most
sparse. In this paper, we propose DawnGuard, an effective early- traffic to evade traditional signature-based network intrusion
stage encrypted malware traffic detection framework through detection systems (NIDS) [2], [3], [4], [5]. This encryption
multi-flow temporal graph learning. Specifically, based on the paradigm fundamentally reduces observable payload informatemporal packet density distribution analysis, DawnGuard inno- tion at the transport layer [6], [7], [8], [9], resulting in sparser
vatively proposes a self-adjusting data augmentation strategy for features available for detection. Alarmingly, 60% of malware
early-stage malware traffic, which can force the model to focus
on the early-stage interaction phase with more distinguishable spread over encrypted connections during Q4 of 2024, which
properties. Meanwhile, considering that temporal-topological is an 8% increase from last quarter and a continued increase
correlations among multiple flows can provide more distinguish- for the year [10].
able properties in a malware attack, we further develop a Researchers have proposed various detection methods that
temporal graph learning framework to extract features, which can be categorized into four types based on their technican form Multi-Flow Graph Features (MGF). By utilizing MGF,
DawnGuard implements a Vision Transformer-based detection cal approaches: rule-based methods [11], machine learning
mechanism, enabling accurate and precise encrypted malware (ML)-based methods [2], [4], [12], deep learning (DL)-based
traffic detection with early-stage traffic by capturing both local methods [3], [13], [14], and pre-training-based methods [15],
and global contextual relationships. Extensive experiments with [16], [17]. Most of these methods mainly focus on specific
two real-world datasets demonstrate that DawnGuard outper- field features, statistical features, and packet sequence features
forms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in three typical
scenarios: varying early-stage time windows, imbalanced data, of full flows to build detection models. However, malware
and unseen malware detection. Particularly, DawnGuard achieves attacks typically unfold through a phased and sequential proan average F1 of 95.11%, 8.7% higher than the SOTA method, cess, and waiting for a complete flow collection will result in
by only utilizing the first 20% loading ratio of complete traffic. delayed detection, which introduces a prolonged period before
 Index Terms—Malware traffic detection, encrypted traffic taking countermeasures, resulting in non-negligible security
analysis, graph learning. risks (e.g., financial losses and confidential data thefts). For
 instance, in 2022, Costa Rica declared a nationwide emergency
 following a major ransomware attack by the Conti Group,
 impacting its Department of Finance and business activities.
 Received 19 May 2025; revised 12 January 2026 and 24 March 2026; The ransom demanded up to 20 million [18]. Early-stage
accepted 12 April 2026. Date of publication 17 April 2026; date of current
version 4 May 2026. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Project malware traffic detection refers to a continuous monitoring
U25A20428, Project U23A20304, and Project 62472036; in part by Beijing and detection mechanism that can detect malware traffic as
Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing; early as possible (i.e., 20%, 30%) before the complete flow
and in part by Beijing Nova Program. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Daisuke transmission, which mitigates the risks to the victim, including
Mashima. (Corresponding author: Meng Shen.) system file encryption, credential theft, and data exfiltration.
 Jizhe Jia and Meng Shen are with the School of Cyberspace Science and Despite some progress on detection accuracy and efficiency
Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China, and also
with the State Key Laboratory of Cryptology, Beijing 100878, China (e-mail: in encrypted malware traffic detection [2], [3], [4], critical
jiajizhe@bit.edu.cn; shenmeng@bit.edu.cn). challenges remain, which can be summarized as follows:
 Yi Zhao, Bufan Zhao, and Liehuang Zhu are with the School of Cyberspace 1) Information sparsity in early-stage traffic. While certain
Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081,
China (e-mail: zhaoyi@bit.edu.cn; bitzbf@163.com; liehuangz@bit.edu.cn). methods [14], [16], [20] have explored detection using partial
 Susu Cui is with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy traffic features, they heavily rely on the temporal accumulation
of Sciences, Beijing 100089, China (e-mail: cuisusu@iie.ac.cn). of intra-flow features. For instance, sequence-based models
 Jing Wang is with the National Computer Network Emergency Response
Technical Team/Coordination Center of China, Beijing 100094, China (e-mail: like RNNs with attention [14] often require a substantial
wangjing str@163.com). observation budget (e.g., a large number of initial packets or
 Wei Wang is with the Key Laboratory for Intelligent Networks and Network higher loading ratios) to achieve stable performance. When the
Security, Ministry of Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049,
China (e-mail: wangwei1@bjtu.edu.cn). available traffic is extremely limited (e.g., the first 20%), the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2026.3685079 information within a single isolated flow is often too sparse
 1556-6021 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
JIA et al.: EARLY-STAGE DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED MALWARE TRAFFIC VIA TEMPORAL GRAPH LEARNING 4461

 TABLE I The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
F LOW D URATION S TATISTICS (S ECONDS ) OF THE S IX T YPICAL M ALWARE • We propose DawnGuard, an effective early-stage malware
 IN THE CTU-M ALWARE DATASET [19]
 traffic detection framework based on multi-flow temporal
 graph learning. By focusing on information sparsity and
 attack pattern heterogeneity, it achieves high-precision
 early-stage detection by emphasizing high-density information, expanding multi-flow distinguishable properties,
 as well as integrating local and global contextual
 relationships.
to provide a definitive signature, leading to a significant drop • To solve information sparsity and boost training data
in accuracy for these methods. 2) Heterogeneity of attack diversity, we propose a self-adjusting data augmentation
patterns. The heterogeneity of malware attack patterns is a strategy, which combines temporal packet density analynatural concealment method relative to detection methods, thus sis with a tail-masking method, thereby forcing the model
posing a critical challenge to achieving high precision in early- to focus on the early-stage interaction phase with more
stage traffic detection. For example, malicious activities (e.g., distinctive characteristics.
victim scanning, spam propagation, or click fraud) exhibit • To adapt to the heterogeneity of attack patterns, we
highly divergent flow duration characteristics [21]. Botnets develop the temporal graph learning method to extract
like Zeus predominantly generate short-lived flows (median temporal-topological correlations among multiple flows
duration < 1 second), whereas advanced threats like TrickBot in a malware attack (i.e., MGF), which can provide more
sustain prolonged connections (median duration > 1 minute), distinguishable properties for early-stage detection.
as quantified in TABLE I. • We evaluate DawnGuard in two real-world datasets in
 In this paper, we propose DawnGuard, an effective three typical scenarios, i.e., varying early-stage time winearly-stage detection method that can accurately distin- dows, imbalanced data, and unseen malware detection.
guish encrypted malware traffic based on early-stage traffic. The results demonstrate that DawnGuard significantly
Specifically, due to information sparsity, existing single-flow outperforms existing methods in all scenarios. Particudetection methods fail to identify encrypted malware traffic larly, DawnGuard achieves an average F1 of 95.11%,
in the early stage [20], [22]. To maximize the utilization of 8.7% higher than the SOTA method, with the first 20%
available information in the early stage, we can analyze multi- loading ratio of complete traffic. We release the dataset
flow temporal interaction patterns that reveal distinct attack and source code of DawnGuard.1
behaviors (e.g., abnormal spam bot-SMTP communications The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first
[4]) that deviate from benign traffic. introduce the background and the threat model in Section II.
 DawnGuard is composed of three key modules. First, the We present the high-level design of DawnGuard in Section III
early-stage interaction phase (e.g., protocol handshake and and the design details in Section IV. Next, we conduct the
configuration download) contains more distinctive properties theoretical analysis in Section V and comprehensive experithan the subsequent phase [2], [23]. To force the model ments to evaluate the detection performance of DawnGuard
to focus on the early-stage interaction phase, we design in Section VI. Finally, we review related works in Section VII
a self-adjusting data augmentation strategy. Crucially, this and conclude this paper in Section VIII.
strategy is self-adjusting because it dynamically determines
the optimal cut-off point for tail-masking for each flow by II. P RELIMINARIES
analyzing its unique temporal packet density distribution.
 In this section, we introduce the threat model and the
This ensures that the augmented data consistently retains the
 definition of early-stage detection.
most discriminative, the early-stage interaction phase of the
traffic, which systematically addresses the sparsity of earlystage traffic information. Second, to address attack pattern A. Threat Model
heterogeneity, we design a multi-flow temporal graph learn- From the attacker’s perspective, the attack surface comprises
ing algorithm, which can explore temporal and topological the network boundary where compromised internal devices
correlations between multiple flows to enrich discriminative interact with external malicious infrastructures, such as C&C
features in a malware attack, named Multi-Flow Graph Fea- servers and malware delivery sites [2]. We assume that the
tures (MGF) from multiple flows. Notably, compared with attacker can leverage encryption protocols (e.g., SSL/TLS) to
single flow-based detection methods, a more global view obscure payloads, rendering traditional Deep Packet Inspection
based on multiple flows within a malware attack reflects (DPI) ineffective. In addition, they can coordinate multiple
more flow inter-relationships. Finally, we construct a Vision network flows to execute sophisticated, multi-stage objectives.
Transformer (ViT)-based detector, which can capture both Note that, these attacks are typically constructed with numerlocal and global contextual relationships for accurate and ous addresses controlled by attackers [4].
precise encrypted malware traffic detection with early-stage From the defender’s perspective, DawnGuard operates at
traffic. For real-world deployments, DawnGuard employs a the network level, collecting traffic via port mirroring at
persistent monitoring mechanism that iteratively collects pack- edge routers without deploying agents on end-user devices
ets and performs progressive traffic analysis across subsequent
monitoring cycles. 1 https://github.com/jiajizhe1997/DawnGuard
4462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 1. The KDE of malware and benign traffic across packet length and IAT
in CTU-Malware dataset [19].

[3]. Our detection model operates under the assumptions that
the encryption algorithms can not be decrypted. Furthermore, Fig. 2. Packet load ratio analysis over time for the flows of six typical malware
 in the CTU-Malware dataset [19].
our detection scope is focused on detecting active network
attacks, excluding passive eavesdropping or side-channel anal- Afterward, we explore the possibility of achieving earlyysis which do not generate network traffic. stage malware traffic detection without waiting for the whole
 flow termination. While recent methods [14] have investi-
B. Early-Stage Detection gated early detection by focusing on initial packet segments
 A core challenge in this threat landscape is achieving effec- within isolated flows, they remain constrained by single-flow
tive early-stage detection, the ability to identify and prevent information scarcity. Our analysis of such methods reveals
damage before an attack sequence fully unfolds. Ideally, a that they often require a relatively high observation budget
detection model should react within the initial phase of a (e.g., a substantial number of initial packets or higher loadconnection (e.g., the first 20-40% of the complete traffic).2 ing ratios) to extract stable signatures. When the available
This not only enables timely mitigation but also ensures traffic is extremely limited (e.g., the first 20%), the internal
the model acquires sufficient discriminative data before a information of a single flow is often too sparse to provide a
potentially short-lived malicious flow terminates [24]. definitive malicious signature, leading to degraded reliability.
 A natural question that arises is the selection between However, temporal packet density analysis (Fig. 2) reveals
relative and absolute early-stage time windows. We analyze that even within these sparse segments, early interactions
the flow durations of six representative malware families (i.e., (e.g., handshakes, C&C establishment) exhibit higher packet
Dridex, Emotet, Geodo, Miuref, Zeus, and TrickBot) from the concentrations and more distinctive properties than subsemalware capture project [19]. As shown in TABLE I, the quent phases. Thus, the key challenge is to extract these
flow durations exhibit significant statistical variations across discriminative signals from minimal and sparse early-stage
different malware. An absolute window that is effective for data.
a short-lived attack might be insufficient for a long-running Driven by these observations, the design of DawnGuard
one. Therefore, to ensure that DawnGuard remains effective is guided by two core intuitions to overcome the limitations
across diverse malware, we adopt a relative early-stage time of current detection approaches. First, to resolve single-flow
window, analyzing packets across different loading ratios of a ambiguity and filter global noise, we propose a multi-flow temflow rather than relying on a fixed absolute time window. poral graph learning framework. Unlike single-flow sequence
 III. D ESIGN OF DAWN G UARD models that hit an information bottleneck in the earliest
 In this section, we present the motivation for our design and phases, this framework leverages the topological structure
provide an overview of DawnGuard. of concurrent flows to reconstruct the global attack context,
 thereby isolating attack progression from background noise
A. Motivation even with minimal data. Second, to specifically address information sparsity at extremely low loading ratios, we design
 Malware traffic detection faces a dual challenge. As shown a self-adjusting data augmentation mechanism. By dynamiin Fig. 1, fundamental single-flow features (e.g., packet length, cally locating high-density interaction phases and generating
IAT) exhibit significant overlap between benign and malware diverse, realistic training samples, this mechanism forces the
traffic in CTU-Malware [19]. This ambiguity limits single model to learn intrinsic malicious patterns that remain invisible
flow-based methods [15], [25], [26], which lack the context to methods relying on isolated single flow or static observation
to detect multi-flow patterns like C&C communication. windows.
 To incorporate such context, graph-learning techniques [2],
[4], [27] have been adopted but suffer from two shortcomings. B. Overview of DawnGuard
First, global modeling paradigms indiscriminately include all As shown in Fig. 3, itDawnGuard consists of three
concurrent flows, introducing noise from irrelevant activities. modules: Self-Adjusting Data Augmentation, Multi-Flow
Second, static graph modeling ignores temporal interdepen- Temporal Graph Learning, and Early-Stage Malware
dencies, causing flows with different chronological orders to Detection.
yield isomorphic structures, thus eroding the detection of time- 1) Self-Adjusting Data Augmentation: To address inforsensitive patterns. mation sparsity, we design a self-adjusting mechanism that
 2 For instance, DawnGuard detects TrickBot traffic, which has an average
 dynamically determines the optimal tail-masking point for
duration exceeding 60 seconds, using only the first ∼12 seconds (20%) of the each flow. This approach generates diverse training samples
flow, as shown in TABLE I.
JIA et al.: EARLY-STAGE DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED MALWARE TRAFFIC VIA TEMPORAL GRAPH LEARNING 4463

 Fig. 3. The system overview of DawnGuard.

and directs the model’s attention to the critical early interaction TABLE II
phase with distinctive characteristics. We detail this module in L IST OF N OTATIONS
Section IV-A.
 2) Multi-Flow Temporal Graph Learning: To address
attack pattern heterogeneity, we design an algorithm to synergistically explore temporal-topological correlations among
multiple flows (i.e., MGF). This approach integrates distinguishable properties reflected by flow inter-relationships to
enhance early-stage malware detection. We elaborate on this
module in Section IV-B.
 3) Early-Stage Malware Detection: Given the multi-flowbased traffic representation, i.e., MGF of each flow, we develop
a ViT-based detector to capture both local and global contextual relationships from spatial-temporal features and detect
early-stage encrypted malware traffic accurately and precisely.
We will describe the details of our detector in Section IV-C.

 IV. D ESIGN D ETAILS
 In this section, we present the design details of Dawn-
Guard, including self-adjusting data augmentation, multi-flow
temporal graph learning, and early-stage malware detection.
The main notations are illustrated in Table II.

A. Self-Adjusting Data Augmentation
 To address the challenge of information sparsity in earlystage traffic, we propose a self-adjusting data augmentation
module. Self-adjusting refers to the mechanism that dynamically determines the optimal tail-masking point for each
traffic flow, rather than applying a fixed or random masking
ratio. This process aims to precisely preserve the critical, high-density early-stage interaction phase (e.g., protocol
handshakes) within the augmented traffic. Consequently, this
strategy forces the model to focus on the more distinguishable flows into loading ratio slots. We define the packet density
property part in the early stages, thereby boosting training data di ∈ D = {d1 , d2 , . . ., dn } as the ratio of packets in the i-th slot
diversity and enhancing detection performance. to the total packet count. For generality, we analyze six typical
 1) Temporal Packet Density Distribution Analysis: To malware from the CTU-Malware dataset [19].
ensure the augmented traffic contains sufficient information As illustrated in Fig. 2, packet density is significantly
for detection, we analyze packet distributions by dividing higher in the early-stage interaction phase than in subsequent
4464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

phases. Specifically, 35% of total packets (and up to 96% Algorithm 1 Self-Adjusting Data Augmentation
for Geodo) are typically transmitted within the initial 10%
of flow duration, driven by protocol handshakes and C&C
establishment. This pattern concludes with a low-activity phase
or session termination. Consequently, we design a mask-based
data augmentation strategy that preserves these high-density,
discriminative early-stage interactions.
 2) Mask-Based Data Augmentation: Data augmentation
improves model performance by boosting training diversity,
but fixed masking ratios either erase critical semantics or retain
redundant noise. To address this, we propose a density-aware,
self-adjusting data augmentation strategy. By dynamically
generating early-stage samples with adaptive tail-masking,
it enables the subsequent graph learning module to capture
multi-scale temporal dependencies and resolve information
sparsity. As detailed in Algorithm 1, the process involves
three phases: adaptive time bin partition, density-aware dualthreshold selection, and adaptive tail masking.
 a) Adaptive Time Bin Partition (Algorithm 1, Lines 3-8).
To handle flows of varying durations, we partition each flow
into K adaptive time bins and calculate the raw packet density
array D in each time bin in Eq. (1).
 (k − 1)
 B = {bk }k=1
 K+1
 where bk = t1 + T total (1)
 K
 We then apply Savitzky-Golay smoothing [28] to suppress
high-frequency noise while preserving critical phase transition
patterns, yielding the smoothed density curve D̃, thereby
facilitating the robust location of density plunge points for
threshold calculation in Eq. (2).
 D̃[k] = SG-Filter(D, window, poly order) (2)
Here, window denotes the number of adjacent data points used
for local polynomial fitting, while poly order denotes the
polynomial degree to model the underlying trend.
 b) Density-Aware Dual-Threshold Selection (Algorithm 1, The final termination point is determined by the minimum of
Lines 10-16). We design a dual-threshold mechanism to locate kh , k s , and a pre-defined minimum retention bound derived
the optimal plunge point of early-stage interactions. A hard from ratio α (Algorithm 1, lines 15-16).
threshold τh detects sharp traffic drops (e.g., handshake com- c) Adaptive Tail Masking (Algorithm 1, Lines 18-22). Based
pletion) by finding the first bin where density falls below a on the identified termination point, we establish a masking
fraction γ of the peak density within a search bound β: window Wi to obscure the non-critical tail traffic of flow fi ,
 yielding Fmasked (Algorithm 1, lines 18-22). This strategic trunkh = min k ∈ {1, . . . , K} | D̃[k] < γ · max(D̃[1 : dβKe]) (3)
 ˚
 cation forces the subsequent graph learning module to focus on
 Alternatively, a soft threshold τ s identifies progressive den- highly distinguishable early-stage interaction representations.
sity decay. We introduce a sensitivity hyperparameter θ (i.e.,
representing the declination angle) to control this progressive
decay detection. The soft threshold is dynamically calculated B. Multi-Flow Temporal Graph Learning
based on the average density scaled by this slope factor, as Utilizing the early-stage traffic generated by the selfdefined in Eq. (4). adjusting data augmentation module, the multi-flow temporal
 K
 1 X graph learning module explores temporal-topological correla-
 τ s = tan(θ) · D̃[k] (4) tions among multiple flows in a malware attack (i.e., MGF),
 K
 k=1 which enriches discriminative features for early-stage malware
Here, D̃[k] represents the packet density in the k-th bin, traffic detection. Specifically, we first design a traffic represenand tan(θ) adjusts the threshold relative to the overall traffic tation method to extract single-flow features (i.e., Packet Byte
volume. We then slide a three-slot window to find the first Matrix) efficiently from raw traffic. Afterward, we construct a
point k s where the density decrease ∆ s across three consecutive host-server bipartite graph to capture the interactions between
bins consistently exceeds τ s : hosts and external servers. Based on the bipartite graph,
 8 9 we design a multi-flow temporal graph learning algorithm
 2
 < ^ = to extract temporal-topological correlations between multiple
 k s = min k ∈ {3, . . . , K} | (∆ s [k − j] > τ s ) (5)
 : ; flows in a malware attack. The details are as follows:
 j=0
JIA et al.: EARLY-STAGE DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED MALWARE TRAFFIC VIA TEMPORAL GRAPH LEARNING 4465

 Algorithm 2 Temporal Graph Learning

Fig. 4. Illustration of observable unencrypted metadata (e.g., Extensions)
within the payload bytes of encrypted traffic.

 1) Single-Flow Feature Extraction: To extract multidimensional features efficiently, we design the Packet Byte
Matrix (PBM). For each flow, we strictly monitor the first M
consecutive packets. Each packet is partitioned into a header
segment (X bytes) and a payload segment (Y bytes). To prevent
the model from overfitting to network-specific artifacts (e.g.,
MAC/IP addresses and port numbers), we apply standard
traffic anonymization strategies [29] to these raw bytes.
 We preserve complete header fields and retain the first
Y bytes of the packet payload. Crucially, while encryption
obscures the semantic content of the payload, the initial
bytes in early-stage traffic often carry unencrypted protocol
metadata specific to malware families [2], [20], such as TLS
handshake extensions and Server Name Indication (SNI), as
shown in Fig. 4. By including these payload segments in
the PBM, we enable the model to capture these fingerprints
that remain observable even in encrypted traffic. The headerpayload sequences from M packets are reshaped into a 2D
matrix M ∈ R2×Q . Here, Q = M × (X + Y)/2.
 2) Bipartite Graph Construction: We design a bipartite
graph, G = (H, S, E, F, T ) to represent the interaction relationships between hosts and external servers that are linked to each
host. We denote the hosts as a vertex set H, where each host is
uniquely identified by its IP address. Differently, we denote the
external servers as a vertex set S, where each external server a) Sinusoidal Temporal Encoding (Algorithm 2, Line 2). To
is uniquely identified by its IP address and port. Besides, we model the sequential dependencies of concurrent flows without
adopt an edge set E = {e|e = {he , se }, ∀he ∈ H, ∀se ∈ D} to introducing absolute timestamp bias, we project flow initiadenote all interaction relationships between hosts and servers. tion timestamps into a continuous vector space. Inspired by
If there is a connection between the host h and an external Transformer positional encodings [31], we apply a sinusoidal
server s, then an edge e = (h, s) is constructed between them. mapping Φ(te ) as shown in Eq. (6).
We denote the features extracted from every single flow e as ! !
F = { fe |∀e ∈ E} through the single-flow feature extraction. te te
 Φ(te )2i = sin 2i/d p , Φ(te )2i+1 = cos 2i/d p (6)
We denote the corresponding timestamp of every flow e as τbase τbase
T = {te |∀e ∈ E}. Here, te is defined as the timestamp of the
 Note that d p is the encoding dimension and τbase = 10000.
first packet in flow e.
 Instead of directly concatenating Φ(te ) with node features, we
 3) Graph Representation Learning: To explore temporal- maintain it as a parallel structural context to calculate the
topological correlations among concurrent flows in a malware relative time lag ∆tu,e between flows, dynamically modulating
attack, we design a Temporal Graph Learning Algorithm subsequent neighbor filtering and aggregation.
tailored for early-stage detection. Compared to traditional b) Time-Aware Neighbor Sampling (Algorithm 2,
Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGM) [30] that rely on Lines 7-11). Malware attacks typically exhibit strong temporal
predefined assumptions and struggle with continuous traffic, locality [20], while older flows often represent unrelated
our approach enables joint end-to-end optimization of intra- background noise. To maintain computational efficiency and
flow features and inter-flow topologies, effectively capturing focus on highly correlated events, we dynamically filter the
complex non-linear malware attack correlations. host-centric neighborhood Ce . At each layer k, we restrict
 As outlined in Algorithm 2, the learning process integrates candidate neighbors to a sliding time window τk and retain
sinusoidal temporal encoding, time-aware neighbor sampling, only the top-n most recent interactions:
and time-weighted aggregation across K layers to generate the
 Nt(k) (e) = Top-n u ∈ Ce | ∆tu,e ≤ τk
 ˚
final Multi-Flow Graph Features (MGF). (7)
4466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 c) Time-Weighted Aggregation (Algorithm 2, Lines 13-21). b) Transformer Encoder. The embedded patches pass
Standard graph convolutions treat all neighbors equally, failing through six Transformer encoder layers, each consisting of
to capture the time-sensitive nature of attack behaviors. We Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) with eight heads to model
introduce a time decay factor λ to assign higher attention long-range dependencies, layer normalization after each subweights to recent interactions. For each neighbor u, the weight layer, a position-wise feed-forward network with Gaussian
wu,e is computed as shown in Eq. (8). Error Linear Unit (GELU) activation, and residual connections around each sub-layer. Specifically, MHSA projects the
 wu,e = exp(−λ · ∆tu,e ) (8)
 queries, keys, and values into h independent subspaces through
A positive λ ensures recent edges receive higher weights linear transformations in Eq. (12).
(wu,e ≈ 1 when ∆t → 0). Neighbor features are then aggregated
into a latent space as detailed in Eq. (9): MHS A(Q, K, V)
 0 1 = CONCAT (head1 , head2 , . . . , headh )W O (12)
 X w
 h(k)
 N (e) = σ @
 B Pu,e h̃(k−1)
 u
 C
 (9) Note that headi = Attention(QWiQ , KWiK , VWiV ), and WiQ , WiK ,
 w
 A
 (k)
 u∈Nsampled WiV , and W O are all learnable parameter matrices.
 w Following the self-attention mechanism in our ViT archiwhere Pu,ew is the normalized temporal coefficient ensuring
 tecture, the second sublayer implements a position-wise
scale-invariance, and h̃(k−1)
 u denotes the neighbor representation feed-forward network (FFN), which consists of two confrom the previous iteration (with h̃(0) = F). secutive linear transformations with a GELU activation in
 To update the edge representation, we concatenate self- Eq. (13).
information with aggregated context, as shown in Eq. (10).
 FFN(x) = W2 · GELU(W1 x + b1 ) + b2 (13)
  
 (k) (k−1) (k)
 e = σ CONCAT(Wself h̃e
 h̃(k) , hN (e) ) (10)
 Here, W1 and W2 are the weight parameters, b1 and b2 are the
Here, W(k) self is a learnable matrix designed to preserve the bias parameters.
edge’s own information from the previous state, while σ(·)
 c) Classification Head. We apply a lightweight classification
(ReLU) mitigates gradient vanishing. After K iterations, the
 head to the final [CLS] token embedding, consisting of layer
representation is normalized to a unit vector (Algorithm 2,
 normalization and a linear layer with a softmax function. The
line 18). For notational convenience, we denote the final
 model is optimized via Adam with weight decay and crossrepresentation output at depth K as zeK (Algorithm 2, line 19).
 entropy loss, using dropout for regularization.
Finally, to prevent the dilution of original single-flow features
 fe , we extract MGF (i.e., zeK ) as shown in Eq. (11).
 zeK = CONCAT ( fe , zeK ) (11) V. T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
 To quantitatively analyze the optimality of DawnGuard, we
C. Early-Stage Malware Detection model the malware traffic detection process as an information
 In this module, we propose a ViT-based detector to preservation problem. Let the optimal detection performance
capture both local and global contextual relationships and be bounded by the mutual information I(X ; Y) between the
achieve early-stage encrypted malware traffic detection, con- raw traffic space X and the label space Y. We demonstrate that
sisting of an input layer and a ViT-based architecture, as our three-stage design minimizes the information loss Lin f o
follows: compared to existing methods.
 1) Input Layer: The proposed ViT-based detector accepts
the output MGF (i.e., zeK ) of the multi-flow feature extraction
as input, represented as a 2D matrix M ∈ R2×(Q+L) with a A. Entropy Model Setup
single channel (1 × 2 × (Q + L)). By adjusting the number We formalize a single flow as a random variable sequence
of packets M, the number of bytes for the packet header X, X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xL } governed by a distribution P(X). For
and the payload Y, we extract various lengths of PBM, i.e., detection methods treating flows in isolation, performance is
Q. By adjusting the output length of the multi-flow feature theoretically bounded by the mutual information I(X; Y) with
embedding, we extract various lengths of zeK , i.e., L. the label Y. By the data processing inequality [33], any feature
 2) ViT-Based Architecture: We adopt the ViT framework extraction φ(X) yields I(φ(X); Y) ≤ I(X; Y), establishing an
[32] to capture both local and global contextual relationships information barrier for intra-flow methods.
in the traffic data. The architecture consists of three main However, in real-world networks, X correlates with neighbor
components as follows. flows, denoted as context C. Consequently, the true approacha) Patch Embedding and Positional Encoding. We split able bound is their joint mutual information: I(X, C; Y) =
the input tensor into non-overlapping patches. Each patch is I(X; Y) + I(C; Y|X). While single-flow baselines are limited to
projected into an embedding space through a linear layer. I(X; Y), our graph-based framework leverages this expanded
To retain positional information, we add learnable 1D posi- observable space to capture the conditional mutual information
tional embeddings and a [CLS] token to aggregate global I(C; Y|X), fundamentally raising the theoretical upper bound of
features. detection accuracy.
JIA et al.: EARLY-STAGE DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED MALWARE TRAFFIC VIA TEMPORAL GRAPH LEARNING 4467

B. Analysis of Main Modules in DawnGuard information I(u; Y). This targeted prioritization allows the
 1) Self-Adjusting Augmentation as Optimal Information model to effectively extract temporal discriminative patterns
Selection: Unlike simply assigning more weight to early while suppressing interference from outdated noise.
stages of data, our Self-Adjusting Data Augmentation iden- 3) ViT as Optimal Information Aggregation: Finally, we
tifies and preserves the region of highest information density. analyze the encoding efficiency. Let Z be the final represen-
Given a flow X with packet densities D = {d1 , . . ., dL }, the tation. A standard CNN encoder with local receptive fields
goal of tail masking is to find an optimal truncation point effectively applies a mask M, losing long-range dependencies:
k∗ such that the retained subsequence X1:k∗ maximizes the I(ZCNN ; Y) = I(X; Y) − H(Xlong ). In contrast, the ViT architecrelevant information density while minimizing redundancy, as ture in DawnGuard, with its global self-attention mechanism,
shown in Eq. (14). maintains a global receptive field. Thus, it minimizes the
 encoding loss, as shown in Eq. (18).
 I(X1:k ; Y)
 k∗ = arg max s.t. k ≥ αL (14)
 k k HDawnGuard ≥ HCNN =⇒ I(ZViT ; Y) ≈ I(Zoptimal ; Y) (18)
Our dual-threshold mechanism (Algorithm 1) dynamically
estimates this k∗ by detecting the plunge point of packet
 (i) C. Quantitative Analysis of Information Loss
density. By synthesizing augmented samples {X1:k ∗ } concentrated around this high-density phase (e.g., handshakes), we To evaluate the theoretical optimality discussed in
reconstruct a training distribution P̂aug that approximates the Section V-B, we conduct a quantitative evaluation of the infortrue intrinsic distribution Pint of malware behaviors more mation preservation capabilities of DawnGuard. Following
accurately than the raw distribution Praw . Thus, the entropy model setup, we need to measure the Mutual
 Information I(Z; Y) between the extracted high-dimensional
 H(P̂aug ) ≈ H(Pint ) =⇒ I(Daug ; Y)  I(D static ; Y) (15) continuous features Z and the discrete label space Y. To quan-
This proves that our density-aware strategy theoretically tify this, we utilize the Kraskov-Stögbauer-Grassberger (KSG)
retains more discriminative information than static weighting. estimator [34]. Because traditional binning-based methods
 2) Temporal Graph Learning as Causal Information Recov- suffer from severe bias in high-dimensional continuous spaces.
ery: While existing graph learning based methods exploit In contrast, the KSG estimator provides estimation based
contextual information, they typically treat all neighbors N (e) on k-nearest neighbors. It adjusts neighborhood distances to
equally, ignoring the temporal interdependencies between mul- mitigate estimation bias for continuous, discrete variable pairs
tiple flows. In malware detection, attack patterns exhibit strong without requiring prior assumptions about the data distribution,
causal dependencies. Treating historical neighbors (high ∆t) thereby ensuring the reliability of our information loss quanas equivalent to recent ones introduces temporal noise, which tification. Our evaluation subset comprises randomly selected
increases the conditional entropy H(Y|N (e)). Our module 1000 TrickBot samples in the CTU-Malware dataset [19] from
addresses this by maximizing the Causal Mutual Information D1 and 1000 benign samples from D4 .
through two mechanisms as follows. As shown in Table III, the results demonstrate a significant
 a) Time-Aware Sampling as Relevance Denoising: Let the reduction in information loss across all three dimensions:
neighborhood set Nall contain all historical interactions. Most 1) Sparsity-Induced Loss Reduction: Compared to applying
elements in Nall are statistically independent of the current a static high weight to the first 30% traffic, our self-adjusting
attack state Y due to large time lags (i.e., larger than 5 minutes data augmentation preserves more discriminative information
[20]). DawnGuard filters neighbors using a sliding window τk by dynamically locating high-density interaction phases.
to construct a subset Nt∗ . This process can be modeled as 2) Independence-Assumption Loss Reduction: By expandsearching for the optimal context window that maximizes the ing the observation space from isolated single flows to
information density, as shown in Eq. (16). temporal multi-flow graphs, DawnGuard captures the condi-
 I(S; Y) tional mutual information I(C; Y|X), and reduces the entropy
 Nt∗ = arg max s.t. ∀u ∈ S, ∆tu,e ≤ τk (16) noise from irrelevant background traffic.
 S⊆Nall |S|
 3) Locality-Induced Loss Reduction: The ViT-based archi-
By discarding outdated interactions, we effectively prune the tecture, benefiting from its global self-attention mechanism,
graph topology to remove uncorrelated edges that would act minimizes encoding loss by maintaining long-range depenas entropy noise sources. dencies that are often masked by the local receptive fields of
 b) Time-Weighted Aggregation as Causal Weighting: Even CNN-based models.
within the active window, P relevance is different. The stan- These findings demonstrate that unlike the methods that
dard aggregation sum hu assumes a uniform prior on suffer from sparsity-induced loss (low Ĥ), independenceneighbor importance [27]. Our decay mechanism wu,e = assumption loss (missing I(C|X)), and locality-induced loss
exp(−λ∆tu,e ) introduces a temporal prior Ptime (∆t) that aligns (masking Xlong ), DawnGuard minimizes these information
with the natural decay of network causality. The aggregated losses, theoretically approaching the detection optimality.
 (k)
representation hN (e) thus represents a weighted information
integration: X VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
 (k)
 I(hN (e) ; Y) ≈ wu,e · I(u; Y) (17) We prototype DawnGuard and conduct extensive experiu∈Nt∗ ments to evaluate its effectiveness. Moreover, we compare its
Specifically, our mechanism aligns the attention weights wu,e accuracy with state-of-the-art methods on existing datasets,
with the temporal decay of causal dependencies, thereby pri- including two well-known real-world datasets. In general, the
oritizing recent neighbors that inherently maximize the mutual experiments will demonstrate that DawnGuard is able to:
4468 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE III
 Q UANTITATIVE R EDUCTION OF I NFORMATION L OSSES ACROSS D IFFERENT M ODULES IN DAWN G UARD

 • detect various malware traffic in varying early-stage loading ratios and time windows (Section VI-B).
 • achieve reliable early-stage malware detection in highly
 imbalanced data scenarios, effectively mitigating the bias
 towards the majority benign class (Section VI-C).
 • achieve zero-shot detection ability to capture unseen patterns of malware traffic generated by unknown malware
 types (Section VI-D).
 • exhibit strong stability across different parameter configurations (Section VI-E). Fig. 5. The evaluation results (%) of different detection methods at different
 loading ratios of malware in D3 .

 Z 1
A. Experiment Setting 2 · Precision · Recall
 F1 = , AUC = ROC(x) dx
 Baseline Methods. To measure the improvement achieved Precision + Recall 0
by DawnGuard, we establish five baselines, among which two (20)
are multi-flow-based, i.e., ST-Graph [2] and CBSeq [3]. Addi- T P, T N, FP, and FN denote the number of True Positives,
tionally, YaTC [16] is included as a representative baseline True Negatives, False Positives, and False Negatives.
that enables detection without requiring complete traffic. Implementation Details. To ensure the reproducibility of
 • Kitsune [13] uses unsupervised autoencoders for feature our results and facilitate fair comparisons with baselines, we
 learning and anomaly detection. provide the implementation details as follows.
 • FC-Net [15] detects malicious traffic by extracting image- • Setup & Scalability. All experiments were conducted
 based feature maps from raw flows. on a server with an Intel Core i73.4 GHz, 32GB RAM,
 • ST-Graph [2] explores network behaviors using graph and an RTX 3080 using PyTorch. To ensure scalability
 learning frameworks integrated with TLS metadata. on RAM-constrained hardware, DawnGuard avoids full
 • CBSeq [3] characterizes attacking intents via a dataset loading by streaming traffic via mini-batches.
 Transformer-based multi-flow representation. • Data Partitioning & Preprocessing. Datasets (D1 –D4 )
 • YaTC [16] leverages a Masked Autoencoder architecture were split into training, validation, and testing sets at flow
 and raw-byte representations for traffic classification. granularity via stratified sampling with an 8 : 1 : 1 ratio.
 Evaluation Dataset. As shown in TABLE IV, we use the To build inter-flow interaction graphs, we sorted flows
following public datasets for evaluation. chronologically, which bridges the gap between discrete
 flows and the required graph structure.
 • CTU-Malware [19]. Comprising continuous real-world
 • Evaluation Setting. For fair comparison, baseline hyper-
 PCAP traces, this dataset preserves flow chronology
 parameters were tuned on our validation set to match
 for the temporal-topological reconstruction of multi-flow
 or exceed their reported performance. Under loading
 attacks. We select six malware families (Dridex, Emotet,
 ratio η, input traffic was truncated for all methods to
 Geodo, Miuref, Zeus, TrickBot) for D1 , reserving the
 the same initial segment and all statistics were derived
 remainder (D2 ) for unseen malware evaluation.
 from these observed segments to eliminate look-ahead
 • USTC-TFC2016 [35]. Comprising ten categories each of
 bias.
 benign and malware traffic, this dataset’s timestamps and
 • Validation. It is important to note that the datasets used
 IPs are used to establish session contexts, grouping interin training and testing are entirely independent. To reduce
 actions into local subgraphs. D3 and D4 are constructed
 the impact of randomness in sample selection, we repeat
 from its malware and benign subsets, respectively.
 all experiments ten times to ensure more credible results.
 Evaluation criteria. The fundamental goal of encrypted • Hyperparameter Settings. Data Augmentation: retention
malware traffic detection is to be accurate. To achieve this goal, ratio α = 0.1, min packets µ = 6, Savitzky-Golay smoothwe mainly use the F1 and AUC because they are most widely ing (window 11, poly order 3), threshold coefficient
used in the literature [3], [4], [13]. We also use precision to γ = 0.3, peak density bound β = 0.15, and soft threshold
validate DawnGuard’s improvements. The formal definitions angle θ = 30◦ . Feature Extraction: initial packets M = 6,
of these metrics are presented in Eq. 19 and 20. header bytes X = 80, and payload bytes Y = 240 [16].
 TP TP Graph Learning: time window τk = 5 minutes [20], max
 Precision = , Recall = (19) neighbors n = 8, depth K = 2, time encoding dimension
 T P + FP T P + FN
JIA et al.: EARLY-STAGE DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED MALWARE TRAFFIC VIA TEMPORAL GRAPH LEARNING 4469

 TABLE IV
 S UMMARY OF THE DATASETS W ITH T RAFFIC T YPES AND F LOW C OUNTS PER C ATEGORY

 TABLE V
 T HE E VALUATION R ESULTS (%) OF D IFFERENT D ETECTION M ETHODS AT D IFFERENT L OADING R ATIOS OF M ALWARE IN D1

 TABLE VI
 T HE E VALUATION R ESULTS (%) OF D IFFERENT D ETECTION M ETHODS AT D IFFERENT E ARLY-S TAGE T IME W INDOWS OF M ALWARE IN D1

 m = 64, edge embedding dimension ω = 512, and dropout absolute windows (t ∈ {1s, 3s, 5s, 10s}) based on Table I. We
 0.1. Detection Phase: 2D matrix M ∈ R2×1088 (fusing build binary classifiers for malware in D1 , D3 , and benign
 1920 single-flow and 256 multi-flow features), patch size traffic in D4 . To observe the performance of these methods
 2×64. The Transformer Encoder uses 6 layers, 8 attention in detecting early-stage malware traffic, we generate testing
 heads, and a hidden dimension of 512. We trained the traffic in different loading ratios and time windows based on
 model with a batch size of 150, learning rate 0.0001, and packet timestamps. The results are illustrated in Fig. 5 and 6,
 weight decay 0.001. TABLE V and VI.
 As shown in TABLE V and Fig. 5, itDawnGuard achieves
 the best detection F1 and AUC under each early-stage time
B. Malware Detection in Varying Early-Stage Time Window window setting in both evaluation datasets. Specifically, Fig. 5
 We evaluate detection performance in relatively early-stage (a) and (b) visualize the Precision and F1 trends on D3 . It is
windows (loading ratios η ∈ {20%, 30%, 40%, 100%}) and evident that while the performance of all methods improves
4470 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 6. ROC of different detection methods at different loading ratios of
malware in D1 and D3 .

 Fig. 8. The detection F1 (%) of different parameter settings at different loading
 ratios of malware in D3 .

Fig. 7. The early-stage unseen malware detection F1 of different methods
under different imbalance ratios in D2 .

as the loading ratio increases from 20% to 100%, DawnGuard
maintains a consistently high performance curve. In contrast,
the curves for baseline methods like FC-Net and Kitsune
show a sharp decline in the low loading ratio region (e.g., Fig. 9. Ablation study: comparing existing models.
20%-30%), visually demonstrating their inability to handle
sparse early-stage information. Even in the smallest loading As shown in TABLE V, DawnGuard consistently outperratio scenario in D1 , i.e., η = 20%, where data is most sparse, forms baselines across all early-stage settings, exhibiting the
DawnGuard still achieves an average F1 of 95.11%, which highest average and minimum precision on the six malware
is 8.7% improvement over the best accuracy of the SOTA families. This demonstrates its reliability in early-stage detecmethods. DawnGuard demonstrates a significant advantage tion. It stems from our multi-flow temporal graph learning,
in early-stage detection compared with the SOTA methods, which extracts distinguishable properties among multiple flows
which can be primarily attributed to our self-adjusting data to precisely detect diverse malware attacks.
augmentation and the MGF representation. The self-adjusting In addition, we also evaluate the performance of Dawndata augmentation dynamically creates effective training sam- Guard under the complete dataset without splitting early-stage
ples from limited early-stage data (see the 22.33% F1 drop time windows. As shown in TABLE V and Fig. 5, it can
without the data augmentation module in ablation study in be found that DawnGuard achieves the F1 of 99.36% and
Fig. 9), while the MGF representation’s ability to model inter- AUC of 99.81% on average in D1 , and the F1 of 99.88% and
flow dependencies allows it to extract meaningful patterns even AUC of 99.99% on average in D3 , which are higher than the
from scarce data (see the 14.57% F1 drop without multi-flow best accuracy of the SOTA methods. While Kitsune fails in
features in ablation study in Fig. 9). In contrast, methods D1 due to ineffective feature extraction, these results confirm
relying on single flow or static graph fail to compensate that our MGF representation efficiently captures discriminative
for the information scarcity. The results at different specific- features for malware traffic detection.
size time windows are illustrated in TABLE VI and also To further evaluate the robustness against false positives,
demonstrate the effectiveness of DawnGuard in early-stage which is critical for deployment in large-scale networks, we
detection. analyze the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves of
JIA et al.: EARLY-STAGE DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED MALWARE TRAFFIC VIA TEMPORAL GRAPH LEARNING 4471

 TABLE VII
 T HE E VALUATION R ESULTS (%) OF D IFFERENT D ETECTION M ETHODS U NDER D IFFERENT I MBALANCE R ATIOS OF B ENIGN AND M ALWARE IN D1

 TABLE VIII
 T HE E VALUATION R ESULTS (%) OF D IFFERENT D ETECTION M ETHODS U NDER D IFFERENT I MBALANCE R ATIOS OF B ENIGN AND M ALWARE IN D3

different methods. Fig. 6 illustrates the ROC curves for loading which reinforces discriminative features in sparse early stages
ratios of 20% and 30% on both D1 and D3 . We observe that to mitigate bias towards the majority class. The evaluation
DawnGuard consistently maintains a better performance, with results under different imbalanced ratios in D3 are shown in
its curve significantly closer to the top-left corner compared to TABLE VIII, which also demonstrates the generalization capaall baselines. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (c), even at bility of DawnGuard in imbalanced data.
a challenging 20% loading ratio, DawnGuard achieves a high In addition, TABLE VII also illustrates that DawnGuard
True Positive Rate (TPR) while suppressing the False Positive achieves the most stable detection performance in average
Rate (FPR) to a near-zero level. In contrast, baseline methods and minimum precision across different malware under each
like Kitsune and FC-Net exhibit a much slower rise in TPR, imbalance ratio setting. From ρ = 4 : 1 enlarges to ρ = 48 : 1,
indicating they would trigger significantly more false alarms average precision remains higher than 89% and only reduces
to reach the same detection sensitivity. This high resistance to by 4.54%, which is superior to the SOTA methods. In the
false positives demonstrates that our multi-flow temporal graph highest imbalance ratio, i.e., ρ = 48 : 1, DawnGuard achieves
learning can extract discriminative features that effectively an average and minimum precision of 91.53% and 89.73%,
distinguish coordinated malware activities from benign traffic. which are 34.83% and 42.75% higher than the SOTA method
 in this scenario, FC-Net.
C. Early-Stage Malware Detection in Imbalanced Data
 To evaluate the ability against imbalanced data in early- D. Unseen Malware Early Detection in Imbalanced Data
stage detection, we construct a binary classifier for each type In this section, we evaluate the ability of different methods
of malware traffic in D1 and D3 and benign traffic in D4 . to deal with imbalanced datasets in early-stage unseen mal-
Performance across varying imbalance ratios of benign and ware detection. Specifically, we construct a binary classifier
malware samples ρ ∈ {4 : 1, 16 : 1, 48 : 1} is summarized in trained by D1 and detect malware traffic in D2 in the early
TABLES VII and VIII. stage. To observe the detection performance of these methods
 As shown in TABLE VII, DawnGuard consistently out- when the imbalance ratio changes, we set the imbalance ratios
performs baselines across all imbalance ratios. Even under of the data as ρ ∈ {4 : 1, 16 : 1, 48 : 1}.
extreme imbalance, i.e., ρ = 48 : 1, it achieves an aver- As shown in Fig. 7, itDawnGuard achieves the best
age F1 of 92.9% and an AUC of 99.54%, surpassing the unseen malware detection accuracy under each imbalance ratio
best SOTA method by 35.19% and 7.89%, respectively. This setting. Even in the most highly imbalanced dataset scenario,
advantage stems from our self-adjusting data augmentation, i.e., ρ = 48 : 1, DawnGuard still achieves an average F1 of
4472 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE IX F. Evaluation of Efficiency
 E VALUATION OF E FFICIENCY: T RAINING AND T ESTING T IME We evaluate the time cost of all methods across training
 and testing phases, as summarized in TABLE IX. The training
 process comprises feature extraction time (FET), classifier
 training time (CTT), and pre-training time (PTT) specifically
 for meta-learning methods. Testing time represents the inference latency of the trained classifier. We set the sample size
 for model retraining to 10.
 As shown in TABLE IX, DawnGuard achieves a relatively short CTT and the second-shortest testing time. Since
 TABLE X
 FC-Net directly converts raw traffic into color images, it
E UCLIDEAN D ISTANCE B ETWEEN M ALWARE AND B ENIGN T RAFFIC
 U NDER D IFFERENT R EPRESENTATIONS achieves the shortest FET and testing time. However, this
 simple representation lacks the expressiveness of our MGF.
 While DawnGuard’s longer FET stems from computational
 overheads in data augmentation and graph learning, these
 modules are crucial for detection accuracy improvements
 (Section VI-G).

 G. Ablation Experiment
 In this section, we evaluate the contribution of the main
 modules of DawnGuard separately, illustrated in Fig. 9. We
91.34%, which is 42.68% higher than the SOTA method in
 conduct experiments with the loading ratio η = 30% and
this scenario, i.e., ST-Graph, demonstrating DawnGuard can
 the imbalance ratio ρ = 4 : 1 in D1 . We also evaluate the
extract general features of malware traffic and remain resistant
 effectiveness of MGF with quantitative measures.
in the high imbalance ratio. When the imbalance ratio enlarges,
 1) Self-Adjusting Data Augmentation Module: To validate
FC-Net, CBSeq, and YaTC lose the ability to detect unseen
 our augmentation strategy, we first remove the module entirely.
malware traffic, which achieves F1 of 17.08%, 18.18%, and
 This results in a significant performance degradation, with an
27.63%, respectively, when ρ = 48 : 1. This is because the
 average drop of 22.33% in F1 and 5.33% in AUC. Furtherfeatures extracted by these methods are not distinguishable
 more, we evaluate an alternative strategy that applies a static
enough to detect unseen malware traffic, evidenced by quanhigh weight to the first 30% of the traffic. While this simple
titative analysis of feature representation in TABLE X.
 weighting improves the F1 to 82.95% from the non-augmented
 baseline (74.11%), it remains 13.49% lower than DawnGuard.
 This substantial gap demonstrates that the effectiveness of our
E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis approach stems from generating diverse, structurally-aware
 samples, rather than merely biasing the model’s attention
 We further study the impact of different parameter values towards the beginning of the flow.
on the performance of DawnGuard. We select six key param- 2) Multi-Flow Temporal Graph Learning Module: To juseters across different modules, including the hard threshold tify our choice of temporal graph learning, we compare
coefficient γ, the peak density search upper bound β, the soft DawnGuard against two categories of modeling paradigms:
threshold angle θ, the number of initial consecutive packets static graph neural networks (GraphSAGE [36] and GAT
M, the neighborhood sample max size n, and the dimension [37]) and fundamental Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGMs)
of edge embeddings ω. We measure the F1 of DawnGuard in including Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [38], Bayesian
D3 under different loading ratios (i.e., 20%, 30%, and 40%). Networks [39], and Markov Random Field (MRF) [40].
 As shown in Fig. 8, itDawnGuard demonstrates strong The results clearly show the necessity of capturing temporobustness to these parameters. For instance, the number ral dynamics. Replacing Temporal GraphSAGE with static
of initial packets M, which defines the input granularity GraphSAGE and GAT causes the F1 to drop to 87.46% and
of single-flow features, shows minimal impact on the F1 58.60%, respectively. Furthermore, the PGM-based models
within the range of [4, 8]. Specifically, at a 20% loading (HMM, Bayesian Networks, and MRF) exhibit limited effecratio, the F1 only varies between 92.76% and 94.69% as tiveness, achieving F1 of only 71.01%, 71.00%, and 74.92%.
M changes. Similarly, the performance remains stable when This performance gap demonstrates that PGMs, limited by
the edge embedding dimension ω varies from 128 to 1024, structural assumptions and feature representation scalability,
and when the neighborhood sample size n ranges from 2 to cannot effectively model the temporal-topological correlations
14. The high stability across these parameters, particularly that DawnGuard extracts.
those governing the self-adjusting augmentation (i.e., γ, β, θ), 3) Early-Stage Malware Detection Module: We select ViT
confirms that DawnGuard effectively captures the intrinsic [32] as the backbone for its superior feature extraction capapatterns of early-stage traffic through its design rather than bilities. To validate this choice, we conduct experiments
relying on an over-optimized parameter space. In conclusion, by replacing ViT with other powerful architectures suitthe performance of DawnGuard is not sensitive to parameter able for processing our 2 × 1216 MGF matrix: Transformer
choices. [31], ResNet50, and LSTM. All three alternatives lead to a
JIA et al.: EARLY-STAGE DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED MALWARE TRAFFIC VIA TEMPORAL GRAPH LEARNING 4473

 TABLE XI
 C OMPARISON B ETWEEN DAWN G UARD AND THE SOTA BASELINE M ETHODS E VALUATED IN T HIS W ORK

notable performance decline. Specifically, their F1 decrease by [44] extracts characteristic sequences of message lengths to
14.09%, 18.65%, and 21.01%, respectively, compared to the achieve classification. Kitsune [13] uses autoencoders for
ViT-based DawnGuard. This demonstrates that ViT’s global packet-level statistical feature analysis. To utilize multi-flow
self-attention mechanism is more effective at mining high- features, CBSeq [3] employs Transformers to analyze behavlevel discriminative features from the MGF representations, ior sequences from full channels. Other approaches include
thus enhancing the overall detection performance. attention-based certificate identification [45] and methods that
 4) Effectiveness of Feature Representation: To evaluate adopt the sequential nature of packets within isolated flows
the effectiveness of our multi-flow representation MGF, we for early detection [14].
compare it against three flow-based baselines: Color Image
[15], ST-Graph [2], and MFR [16], excluding non-flow-based C. Pre-Training-Based Methods
methods [3], [13]. Using 3,000 samples per category from
 In recent years, pre-training frameworks have been intro-
D1 , we vectorize the initial 30% of each flow to compute
 duced to malware traffic detection models. FC-Net [15]
the Euclidean distance between benign and malware samples
 leverages meta-learning for few-shot detection by representing
(larger indicates better discriminability). The hyperparamefull flows as color images datasets. In another approach,
ters chosen for baselines are identical to those in [2], [15],
 YaTC [16] utilizes masked autoencoders to learn high-level
and [16].
 representations from the first five packets.
 As shown in TABLE X, MGF achieves the highest average distance across all malware categories. This quantitative
evidence confirms that MGF extracts more discriminative D. Summary
features than existing representations, creating a feature space In conclusion, the limitations of existing methods reflect
where benign and malicious traffic are more separable thereby, two fundamental challenges of NIDS [46], [47], [48]: 1)
reducing the detection difficulty in early stages. Information sparsity in early-stage traffic. Most methods rely on intra-flow features within a flow and suffer
 VII. R ELATED W ORK
 from a significant performance drop when only a small
 Existing malware traffic detection methods can be broadly
 fraction of traffic is available. 2) Heterogeneity of attack
categorized into rule-based, machine learning (ML)-based,
 patterns. Existing methods often treat flows in isolation,
deep learning (DL)-based, and pre-training-based methods.
 failing to capture the features across contextual flows. Dawn-
We summarize the multi-dimensional differences between
 Guard addresses these gaps by integrating self-adjusting data
DawnGuard and the representative SOTA baseline methods
 augmentation, which dynamically optimizes tail-masking to
evaluated in this study in Table XI.
 focus the model on discriminative early-stage interaction
 phases, with multi-flow temporal graph learning to extract
A. Rule- and ML-Based Methods temporal-topological correlations for reliable detection with
 Traditional malware traffic detection methods often rely on early-stage traffic data.
predefined rules. Bro [11] utilizes a layered architecture to
separate event engines from policy scripts for real-time detec- VIII. C ONCLUSION
tion. To handle encrypted traffic, ML-based methods focused
 In this paper, we proposed DawnGuard, an effective
on extracting statistical features from specific protocols (e.g.,
 and reliable early-stage encrypted malware traffic detection
TLS/DNS) [20] or leveraging graph models. For instance,
 method. Specifically, DawnGuard utilized the temporal packet
ST-Graph [2] constructs spatio-temporal graphs to analyze
 density distribution of malware traffic to achieve self-adjusting
full flows. Other methods leverage factor graphs to infer user
 data augmentation and employed temporal graph learning
states [41]. Furthermore, to achieve detection without complete
 to extract temporal-topological correlations among multiple
traffic, researchers have explored side-channel features [42],
 flows, which formed MGF. By utilizing MGF, DawnGuard
randomness tests [12], and transport-layer behaviors [43].
 constructed a ViT-based detector to capture both local and
 global contextual relationships, thereby enabling early-stage
B. DL-Based Methods encrypted malware traffic detection. We conducted extensive
 To reduce reliance on expert knowledge, DL-based methods experiments to evaluate DawnGuard, and the results demonhave been proposed for automated feature extraction. GGFAST strated that DawnGuard achieved effectiveness for early-stage
4474 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

encrypted malware traffic detection. In future work, we will [23] X. Deng, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Robust and reliable early-stage webcombine DawnGuard with unsupervised learning to improve site fingerprinting attacks via spatial–temporal distribution analysis,”
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Dec. 2024,
the performance of early-stage unknown encrypted malware pp. 1997–2011.
traffic detection. Furthermore, we plan to deploy Dawn- [24] A. Alqahtani, M. Gazzan, and F. T. Sheldon, “A proposed
Guard in an edge gateway for analysis on large-scale ISP crypto-ransomware early detection(CRED) model using an integrated deep learning and vector space model approach,” in Proc.
traffic to further validate its robustness in high-throughput 10th Annu. Comput. Commun. Workshop Conf. (CCWC), Jan. 2020,
environments. pp. 0275–0279.
 [25] S. Rahmat, Q. Niyaz, A. Mathur, W. Sun, and A. Y. Javaid, “Network
 R EFERENCES traffic-based hybrid malware detection for smartphone and traditional networked systems,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Annu. Ubiquitous
[1] E. Rescorla, SSL and TLS: Designing and Building Secure Systems, Comput., Electron. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON), Oct. 2019,
 vol. 1. Reading, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2001. pp. 0322–0328.
[2] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based [26] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
 network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
 Defenses, Oct. 2022, pp. 495–509. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021.
[3] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lü, “CBSeq: [27] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “E-
 A channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., pp. 5011–5025, Aug. for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., Apr.
 2023. 2022, pp. 1–9.
[4] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic [28] R. W. Schafer, “What is a Savitzky-Golay filter? [lecture notes],” IEEE
 in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Signal Process. Mag., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 111–117, Jul. 2011.
 Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023. [29] D. Koukis, S. Antonatos, D. Antoniades, E. P. Markatos, and P. Trim-
[5] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic intzios, “A generic anonymization framework for network traffic,” in
 analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2006, pp. 2302–2309.
 vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023. [30] D. Koller and N. Friedman, Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles
[6] C. V. Wright, F. Monrose, G. M. Masson, and P. Chan, “On inferring and Techniques. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2009.
 application protocol behaviors in encrypted network traffic,” JMLR, [31] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017,
 vol. 7, pp. 2745–2769, Dec. 2006. pp. 6000–6010.
[7] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- [32] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. ICLR, 2020.
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, [33] R. Zamir, “A proof of the Fisher information inequality via a data
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021. processing argument,” IEEE TIT, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 1246–1250, May
[8] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting 1998.
 website fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in [34] W. Gao, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Estimating mutual
 Proc. USENIX Secur., Aug. 2023, pp. 607–624. information for discrete-continuous mixtures,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
[9] M. Shen et al., “Swallow: A transfer-robust website fingerprinting attack Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5988–5999.
 via consistent feature learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. [35] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 Commun. Secur., Nov. 2025, pp. 1574–1588. classification using convolutional neural network for representation
[10] (2024). WatchGuard’s Threat Lab Analyzes the Latest Malware and learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
 Internet Attacks. [Online]. Available: https://www.watchguard.com/ Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
 wgrd-resource-center/security-report-q4-2024 [36] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
[11] V. Paxson, “Bro: A system for detecting network intruders in real-time,” learning on large graphs,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
 Comput. Netw., vol. 31, nos. 23–24, pp. 2435–2463, Dec. 1999. [37] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and
[12] W. Niu, Z. Zhuo, X. Zhang, X. Du, G. Yang, and M. Guizani, Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018.
 “A heuristic statistical testing based approach for encrypted net- [38] L. R. Rabiner and B. Juang, “An introduction to hidden Markov models,”
 work traffic identification,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 4, IEEE ASSP Mag., vol. ASSPM-3, no. 1, pp. 4–16, Jan. 1986.
 pp. 3843–3853, Apr. 2019. [39] F. V. Jensen, “Bayesian networks,” Encyclopedia Statist. Quality Rel.,
[13] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 307–315, 2009.
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in [40] S. Z. Li, Markov Random Field Modeling in Image Analysis. Cham,
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018. Switzerland: Springer, 2009.
[14] T. E. T. Djaidja, B. Brik, S. Mohammed Senouci, A. Boualouache, [41] P. Cao, E. Badger, Z. Kalbarczyk, R. Iyer, and A. Slagell,
 and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Early network intrusion detection enabled by “Preemptive intrusion detection: Theoretical framework and real-world
 attention mechanisms and RNNs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, measurements,” in Proc. Symp. Bootcamp Sci. Secur., Apr. 2015,
 vol. 19, pp. 7783–7793, 2024. pp. 1–12.
 [42] G. Stergiopoulos, A. Talavari, E. Bitsikas, and D. Gritzalis, “Automatic
[15] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 detection of various malicious traffic using side channel features on TCP
 detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forenpackets,” in Proc. ESORICS, 2018, pp. 346–362.
 sics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
 [43] Z. Berkay Celik, R. J. Walls, P. McDaniel, and A. Swami, “Malware
[16] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked
 traffic detection using tamper resistant features,” in Proc. MILCOM -
 autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM TON, vol. 32, no. 3,
 IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf., Oct. 2015, pp. 330–335.
 pp. 2012–2025, Jan. 2024.
 [44] J. Piet, D. Nwoji, and V. Paxson, “GGFAST: Automating generation
[17] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection
 of flexible network traffic classifiers,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf.,
 of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 2023, pp. 850–866.
 Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.
 [45] I. Torroledo, L. D. Camacho, and A. C. Bahnsen, “Hunting malicious
[18] M. Cen, F. Jiang, X. Qin, Q. Jiang, and R. Doss, “Ransomware early
 TLS certificates with deep neural networks,” in Proc. 11th ACM
 detection: A survey,” Comput. Netw., vol. 239, Feb. 2023, Art. no.
 Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur. (CCS), S. Afroz, B. Biggio, Y. Elovici,
 110138.
 D. Freeman, and A. Shabtai, Eds., Toronto, ON, Canada: ACM, Oct.
[19] Stratosphere.(2015). Stratosphere Laboratory Datasets. [Online]. Avail- 2018, pp. 64–73.
 able: https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-overview [46] J. Sowa et al., “Post-quantum cryptography (PQC) network instrument:
[20] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Identifying encrypted malware traffic Measuring PQC adoption rates and identifying migration pathways,”
 with contextual flow data,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur., in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Quantum Comput. Eng. (QCE), Sep. 2024,
 Oct. 2016, pp. 35–46. pp. 1835–1846.
[21] G. Jacob, R. Hund, C. Kruegel, and T. Holz, “JACKSTRAWS: Picking [47] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
 command and control connections from bot traffic,” in Proc. USENIX learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 Secur. 11, 2011, p. 29. Privacy, May 2010, pp. 305–316.
[22] F. Tegeler, X. Fu, G. Vigna, and C. Kruegel, “BotFinder: Finding bots in [48] L. Yang et al., “True attacks, attack attempts, or benign triggers? An
 network traffic without deep packet inspection,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. empirical measurement of network alerts in a security operations center,”
 Emerg. Netw. experiments Technol., Dec. 2012, pp. 349–360. in Proc. USENIX Secur., 2024, pp. 1525–1542.