706 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 Effective Sample Generation for Industrial
 Control Systems: A GAN-Based Approach
 Zhongyuan Qin , Yuxuan Liu, Tiantian Wang, Liquan Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yubo Song

 Abstract—In industrial control systems (ICSs), safe- center for monitoring and management. This comprehensive
guarding system security is vital, and intrusion detection framework enables effective monitoring of industrial processes,
is an effective protective measure. In real-world ICS envi- facilitating timely anomaly detection [1]. However, as ICS adronments, however, the training data for intrusion-detection
models are dominated by normal traffic, with very few ab- vances, malicious attacks on sensors or higher level machines
normal samples. This scarcity prevents the model from are also on the rise. Consequently, real-time intrusion detection
fully learning abnormal characteristics, thereby limiting for time-series traffic data has become a research priority, and
anomaly-detection performance. ICS traffic is also noisy improving detection accuracy by leveraging the temporal nature
and often captured incompletely, which is especially prob- of industrial traffic data remains a long-term challenge [2].
lematic because it possesses strong temporal dependencies. Moreover, ICS operations tend to be highly regular At present, numerous remarkable research outcomes exist in
and follow a strict logical order, causing data to clus- the realm of ICS intrusion detection, with machine learning and
ter densely in certain regions while edge regions remain deep learning approaches being predominant. These techniques
sparsely populated—an imbalance that easily leads to mis- analyze ICS traffic, compare key fields in normal traffic, extract
classification. To tackle data imbalance, missing tempo- crucial semantic features from ICS traffic, and employ these
ral features, and edge-sample scarcity, we propose the
DualCGAN-AE approach. It employs two conditional gener- features for anomaly detection [3]. Thanks to their capacity
ative adversarial networks to perform dynamic learning on for autonomous learning and enhancement, these methods have
global and edge features and to enrich samples with tem- somewhat reduced the costs associated with feature selection.
poral information; a multimodel discriminator is incorpo- As a result, recent research has predominantly focused on this
rated to enhance training stability. We validated the method area.
on two datasets, assessing both the quality of the generated samples and their impact on intrusion detection However, as new attack types continue to emerge, legacy
performance. Experimental results show that the samples models gradually lose their effectiveness and struggle to counter
produced by DualCGAN-AE significantly boost detection these novel threats. Consequently, leveraging unsupervised
accuracy. learning for ICS intrusion detection is vital for defending against
 Index Terms—Edge distribution, generative adversarial an increasingly diverse array of attacks [4]. Yet, because attack
network (GAN), industrial control system (ICS), intrusion samples are scarce, the training data consist almost entirely
detection. of normal traffic, resulting in severe class imbalance. This
 imbalance readily leads to overfitting during model training,
 thereby degrading the model’s decision accuracy. Moreover, the
 I. INTRODUCTION
 ICS environment is inherently noisy, often corrupting traffic
 ITH the ongoing development of industrial control sys-
W tems (ICSs), their scale and complexity are continuously
increasing, as seen in natural gas plants, power plants, and
 data and even causing partial data loss—situations to which
 the logic-driven operations of ICS are especially sensitive [5].
 Therefore, completing missing traffic data and mitigating the
water treatment facilities. Within these systems, devices, such impact of heavy noise on model judgments are crucial for
as sensors, follow instructions from upper level components, improving training precision, with data repair and augmentation
such as programmable logic controllers (PLCs) and remote ter- playing key roles in this process.
minal units. They carry out periodic operations based on logical To address the issues in industrial traffic sample generation,
patterns and transmit control commands via network traffic to this article proposes the DualCGAN-AE sample generation
the supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) control approach, with specific contributions as follows.
 1) We propose an effective sample generation approach that
 Received 29 May 2025; revised 8 July 2025; accepted 22 August employs two generative adversarial networks (GANs)
2025. Date of publication 10 October 2025; date of current version in an interactive training scheme. The first GAN learns
5 February 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural the overall data distribution; its low-scoring samples are
Science Foundation of China under Grant U22B2026. Paper no. TII-25-
3556. (Corresponding author: Zhongyuan Qin.) passed to the second GAN as learning targets. This allows
 The authors are with the School of Cyber Science and En- the second GAN to focus on the data’s edge-distribution
gineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211102, China (e-mail: characteristics and generate samples with those properzyqin@seu.edu.cn; 220224934@seu.edu.cn; 220235240@seu.edu.cn;
lqchen@seu.edu.cn; songyubo@seu.edu.cn). ties, thereby mitigating the long-tail distribution problem
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3609080 in the dataset.

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH 707

 2) To enhance training stability and cope with potential tem- with weights below a threshold, addressing class overlap and
 poral data loss in industrial traffic samples, we introduce centrality issues without increasing methodological complexa time interval matrix (TIM) to preserve the completeness ity. Bao and Yang [8] proposed methods to tackle this issue.
 of temporal features. In addition, we adopt a multimodel They pointed out that the imbalanced classification problem is
 discriminator: the single discriminator score is replaced a significant challenge in neural networks and machine learnwith the weighted average of multiple model scores, ing. Although SMOTE is widely used to address this issue, it
 which stabilizes the discriminator’s training process. has a major limitation: noisy samples may be involved in the
 3) To resolve the issue of label-containing sample generation sample-synthesis process, reducing the rationality of newly synand enable category-specific sample generation, modify thesized samples and degrading network classification perforthe original GAN network to a conditional GAN (CGAN). mance. Arafa et al. [9] presented RN-SMOTE. In data balancing
 Introduce label condition information to achieve control- research, random over-sampling (ROS), random under-sampling
 lable and targeted data generation, while still meeting (RUS), and SMOTE [10], [11], [12] remain primary methods.
 the training requirements of unsupervised learning for RN-SMOTE introduces noisy oversampling in the minority
 labeled data. class, uses DBSCAN for noise detection and removal, combines
 4) Experiment on two different datasets and meticulously the processed instances with original data, and then applies
 evaluate the generated samples. Assess our proposal in SMOTE again before introducing the dataset to the underlying
 terms of data quality and its impact on intrusion detection classifier, thereby improving evaluation performance metrics.
 performance. Combining SMOTE with various networks is an effective way
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II to enhance its performance. For example, Liaw et al. [13] proreviews related work. Section III details our method. Section posed the H-SMOTE-FAM model, which integrates histograms,
IV presents results and discussion. Finally, Section V concludes SMOTE, and fuzzy ARTMAP (FAM) networks. This model first
this article. organizes minority-class samples into histogram bins, calculates
 the target number of samples for each bin, and then generates
 synthetic samples within each bin using SMOTE. This sys-
 II. RELATED WORKS tematic approach addresses SMOTE’s limitations in handling
 In recent years, research on addressing sample data imbal- intraclass imbalance and small disjunctive samples. The FAM
ance has fallen into two categories: traditional artificial data network then processes the increased data volume through
generation techniques and GAN-based data augmentation meth- incremental learning to improve classification performance.
ods. Traditional artificial data generation techniques rebalance Experimental results show that H-SMOTE-FAM outperforms
datasets by increasing the number of minority class samples. other SMOTE variants and GAN-based oversampling methods.
Common approaches, such as random oversampling and the syn- Similarly, Liu et al. [14] combined SMOTE with a deep twin
thetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) algorithm, multihead self-attention network to develop a feature-level data
raise the minority class’s share by duplicating or synthetically augmentation method. This method uses the network structure to
creating samples. Oversampling, however, can introduce over- map original data to a feature space with better class separability
fitting, whereas undersampling risks discarding critical infor- and then generates samples in this space using SMOTE. This
mation. GAN-based data-augmentation methods use generative approach has demonstrated good performance on multiple pubmodels to create new minority-class samples from random noise, lic datasets. In summary, by addressing SMOTE’s limitations
producing more diverse data that better match the original and improving data augmentation, combining it with different
distribution. CGANs incorporate auxiliary information, such as networks can enhance its performance, and these combined
class labels during generation, yielding samples that are both methods have shown promising results in various applications.
more structured and more varied. These GAN-based approaches In recent years, the advancements in GANs have been rehave proven highly effective for remedying sample imbalance, markable, leading to significant achievements in fields, such as
particularly with complex data types, such as images and text. natural language processing and image generation. Using GANs
 SMOTE is a common sample generation solution that allevi- for data generation to enhance data quality and address data
ates data imbalance to some extent. Dablain et al. [6] proposed imbalance issues has also become one of the current research
DeepSMOTE, a method specifically designed for deep learning priorities. For example, Yuan et al. [15] proposed the B-GAN
models. It preserves the attributes of original images during pro- method for intrusion detection systems in ICS. This method
cessing and generates high-quality artificial images. Composed captures data features through long short-term memory (LSTM)
of an encoder or decoder framework, SMOTE-based oversam- networks and uses GANs to generate high-quality abnormal
pling, and a penalty-enhanced loss function, DeepSMOTE has samples, effectively tackling data imbalance. Chen et al. [16]
the advantage of not requiring a discriminator, and the generated introduced the DAGAN method, which constructs a dual GAN
images are information-rich and suitable for visual inspection. model to learn the underlying data distribution without abnormal
Maldonado et al. [7] introduced a SMOTE-like method using samples. By optimizing abnormal scores based on the learned
weighted Minkowski distance to define the neighborhood of normal and marginal distributions, this approach reduces the
each minority-class sample. This approach better defines neigh- misjudgment of marginal samples as outliers. In summary,
borhoods by prioritizing features relevant to the classification these GAN-based methods have demonstrated great potential
task and performs feature selection by discarding attributes in solving data imbalance problems, particularly in generating
708 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

high-quality and diverse samples to enhance model performance to repeat and concentrate in specific regions, with sparse
in tasks such as intrusion detection. samples in marginal areas. This makes model training in
 Meslet-Millet et al. [17] proposed NeCSTGen, a novel archi- marginal regions error-prone, necessitating supplementecture based on variational autoencoders (VAEs) and recurrent tary data in these areas to improve accuracy.
neural networks (RNNs) for generating diverse network traf- 3) Temporal Characteristics and Data Integrity: ICS traffic
fic. This architecture can generate packets, flows, aggregates, is highly temporal, but the complex ICS environment
and external data without protocol or dynamic knowledge. Its introduces high-noise operational data, inevitably causing
core methods include: using VAE for feature vector embedding traffic data loss and disrupting temporal integrity. Thereof packets, Gaussian mixture models for similarity identifi- fore, missing temporal traffic data must be supplemented
cation and clustering, and RNN with transition matrices for to ensure feature completeness.
flow and aggregate generation. Li et al. [18] introduced two To address these issues, we propose the DualCGAN-AE
models, DCCSO-Res-BIGRU and GFDA-WGAN. DCCSO- model for high-quality sample generation. As shown in Fig. 1,
Res-BIGRU extracts features through attribute core matrices the model consists of an encoder, a generator, and a discriminaand their associative relationships, while GFDA-WGAN detects tor. Generator: It uses a TIM to supplement missing temporal
imbalanced attack traffic using a conditional Wasserstein gen- features and modifies the traditional GAN to a CGAN to hanerative adversarial network (WGAN) to generate pseudosample dle insufficient labeled samples. Discriminator: It employs a
features of unseen classes, optimized by the GFDA strategy. multimodel weighted averaging mechanism to enhance train-
Geng et al. [19] proposed a few-shot anomaly-driven generation ing stability. Dual CGAN structure: It replaces single CGAN
method, which leverages only a small number of real anomaly training to learn data features of both concentrated and marginal
samples to guide a diffusion model in generating realistic and distributions, mitigating the long-tail distribution problem.
diverse anomalies, thereby facilitating the training of anomaly In DualCGAN-AE, the encoder of the autoencoder (AE)
detection models. Specifically, it learns the anomaly distribution is shared by two CGAN models to ensure consistent lowfrom limited real anomalies, injects the learned knowledge into dimensional latent representations of input noise and labels [21].
an embedding vector, and then uses this vector together with a This design avoids initialization differences, provides rich feagiven bounding box to guide the diffusion model in generating tures for the generator, and facilitates rapid learning of data disrealistic and diverse anomalies. tributions to improve generation quality. The encoder’s effective
 learning of data representations helps the generator quickly cap-
 III. PROPOSED APPROACH ture data distributions, enhancing generation performance and
 alleviating mode collapse. By deeply analyzing the differences
 This section describes the methodology of the GAN model.
 between ICS traffic and general traffic, we optimize the model
By modifying the original GAN structure, introducing variant
 design to significantly improve sample generation quality.
GAN models, and enhancing training stability and completeness, the model better adapts to training tasks with labeled data.
It addresses issues, such as long-tail distribution and temporal B. Enhanced CGAN and Stability Optimization Strategy
data loss in industrial control traffic data, improving training ef- 1) CGAN Model: When training generators and discriminators
fectiveness [20], sample diversity, and the generalization ability using traditional GAN models, the primary reason for generating
for industrial control traffic sample generation . The proposal is low-quality fake data is the lack of effective information. To adpresented in the following three sections. Section III-A shows dress this issue, CGANs [22], [23] have been proposed. CGANs
an overview of the overall architecture. Section III-B gives an assist adversarial training by adding extra effective information
introduction to the enhanced CGAN and stability optimization (such as original data labels and different data modes) to the
strategies. Section III-C discusses design principles and strate- generator or discriminator. Specifically, the model inputs real
gies of the DualCGAN-AE model. labels to both the generator and the discriminator, making the
 discriminator’s output a conditional probability based on real
A. Architecture of Our Scheme labels and ensuring that the fake samples generated by the
 generator “know” their corresponding real labels [24]. The loss
 To generate high-quality samples for ICS traffic, we optimize
 function of CGANs is improved based on the original GAN, as
the model design using a CGAN-based approach, considering
 shown in the following equation:
the differences between industrial and general traffic. The specific challenges are as follows. minG maxD V  (D, G)
 1) Imbalanced Data Distribution: ICS traffic contains a high
 proportion of normal samples and few abnormal samples, = Ex∼Pdata(x) [log(D(x|y))]
 a characteristic not reflected in public datasets. This leads + Ez∼Pz(z) [log (1 − D(G(z|y)))]. (1)
 to poor performance of models trained on public data in
 real ICS scenarios. The model must accurately generate In this way, CGANs use original data labels as conditional
 abnormal samples from a large number of normal sam- inputs to influence the generator and discriminator. This not
 ples. only addresses the issue of insufficient input data in labeled
 2) Gaussian Distribution of Data: Devices, such as PLCs imbalanced datasets but also provides insights for the architecin ICS, operate according to logical rules, causing data ture proposed in this article for training marginal distribution
QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH 709

Fig. 1. DualCGAN-AE model structure.

data using dual GANs. In subsequent related research, the loss contains three distinct discriminator models, they collectively
function of CGANs for marginal distribution training will be form a traditional “generator-discriminator” structure. This
adjusted according to modified training objectives. In summary, improved architecture stabilizes the training process of the
modifying traditional GAN models into label-embedded CGAN discriminators, diversifies the samples output by the generator,
models can alleviate data imbalance in industrial control traffic and thus meets the task objectives. Fig. 2 compares the
to some extent, but further enhancement of CGAN models is still multimodel discriminator structure used in this article with the
needed to ensure training stability and generate higher quality traditional structure.
data. 3) Time Interval Matrix: This article proposes the TIM to
 2) Multimodel Discriminator: To enhance the stability of enhance model training. Before constructing TIM, it is crucial
CGAN training and avoid discriminator fitting issues caused to ensure that the dataset contains time feature values suitable
by model differences, a multimodel discriminator is adopted in- for timestamps. For each time-series data point denoted as st,
stead of the traditional single-model discriminator. Specifically, we first check whether the time intervals between samples in the
three discriminator models—multilayer perceptron, gate recur- dataset are regular. For each missing value, we calculate the time
rent unit (GRU), and LSTM—are used to capture data features difference between the two nearest observations; if the missing
from different perspectives through their complementarity and value is at the start or end of the sequence (with no preceding
diversity, thereby improving overall discriminative capability. or succeeding observations), we use the minimum time interval
Considering the temporal characteristics of industrial control in the dataset as the default. Based on these calculated time
traffic data, GRU and LSTM are selected as discriminator mod- differences, we construct a matrix X with the same shape as the
els. These models are trained using real and generated samples original time-series data, where each element xdt in matrix X
to score the data, and the final discriminative result is determined represents the time interval corresponding to a specific timesby the weighted average of the three models’ scores, enhancing tamp.
judgment accuracy and reducing misjudgment. During model training, TIM is incorporated as part of the
 During training, higher weights (40% each) are assigned to the input to the generator, helping the model better capture the
temporal feature-capturing discriminators (GRU and LSTM), temporal characteristics of the data and improve its predictive
with the multilayer perceptron accounting for the remaining and generalization capabilities for time-series data. As shown in
20%. This strategy improves the feedback accuracy of discrimi- Fig. 3, TIM adjusts the generator’s sample-generation ability by
nator training, enhances its generalization ability, and motivates serving as part of its input. In the final DualAE-CGAN model,
the generator to produce traffic sample data with richer features. noise and label attributes are part of a common embedding, while
The overall discriminator loss function is shown in the following TIM exists independently, acting solely as an imputation matrix
equation: for capturing time dependencies.

 
 N
 Lvote = w i Li . (2) C. DualCGAN-AE Scheme Introduction
 i=1
 Based on the traditional GAN, this article introduces a second
 Here, Li denotes the loss of the ith discriminator model, and GAN model dedicated to learning marginal distribution data.
wi represents its corresponding weight. Although each GAN By analyzing the discriminator scores from the original GAN,
710 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 2. Multimodel discriminator compared with traditional discriminator.

Fig. 3. TIM structure.

marginal and concentrated data in the samples are distinguished. The second CGAN (CGAN2) is crucial for addressing
After each training round, the discriminator scores all samples, CGAN1’s limitation in learning marginal sample features. Durwith the scores reflecting the type of data distribution. For ing training, CGAN1 uses a training set of size N. After each
labeled samples, the traditional GAN is switched to a CGAN training round, its discriminator scores the N samples and ranks
model. The proposed DualCGAN model consists of two CGANs them in ascending order. Samples with the lowest scores are
with different training objectives: selected as marginal distribution samples according to a critical
 The first CGAN (CGAN1) serves as the core model, learning ratio, and their average score x̂ becomes the target score for
features from the entire dataset through preset multiple training CGAN2. Through alternating training of CGAN1 and CGAN2,
rounds. After each round, CGAN1 scores the data, and its results dynamic learning of central and marginal distribution features
influence the second CGAN responsible for processing marginal is achieved. The proportion of marginal distribution samples is
data. Although CGAN1 cannot accurately learn marginal data set based on industrial control traffic distribution—similar to a
features, its training process still positively impacts the final Gaussian distribution, which is nonuniform due to production
generated data due to the majority of the data being concentrated. environment noise. The Gaussian distribution formula is shown
The discriminator loss function of CGAN1 remains unchanged, in the following equation:
as shown in the following equation: 1
 √ e2( σ ) .
 1 x−μ 2
 g (x) = (4)
 σ 2π
 LCGAN1
 D = − Ex∼Pdata(x) [log(D1 (x))]
 The mean is μ, and the variance is σ 2 . The distribution
 − Ez∼Pz(z) [log (1 − D1 (G1 (z)))]. (3) probability within the interval [μ − 3σ, μ + 3σ] is 99.7%, and
QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH 711

within [μ − 2σ, μ + 2σ], it is 95.4%. When selecting data, two data are denoted as x, and the reconstructed output data are
tradeoffs are considered: avoiding insufficient data points that represented as x . After the generator produces samples, the data
lead to incomplete marginal distribution learning, and prevent- are fed into the discriminator, and the discriminator’s loss funcing excessive data from including central distribution samples, tion also undergoes changes. Unlike traditional single-model
which could affect CGAN2 training. Therefore, in the experi- discriminators, this article employs a multimodel discriminator;
ment, the 95.4% probability value corresponding to the marginal therefore, the discriminator loss function of CGAN2 is adjusted
distribution is used as the basis—after each CGAN1 training as shown in the following equation:
round, all sample scores are sorted in ascending order, and the
lowest 4.6% are designated as marginal samples. Their average LCGAN2
 D = − Ex∼Pdata(x) [logD2 (x)]
score, x̂, serves as the target score for CGAN2. x − D2 (G2 (z)))]
 − Ez∼Pz(z) [log (
 In traditional GAN discriminator training, scores range from  
0 to 1, where values closer to 1 indicate more realistic samples. 
 N

However, in this article, both the target score and loss function = − Ex∼Pdata(x) log wi Li (x)
for CGAN2 training are adjusted: samples closer to the target i=1
  
score x̂ are more likely to be identified as marginal distribution 
 N
samples. Consequently, the generative adversarial loss in the − Ez∼Pz(z) log (
 x− wi Li (x) (G2 (z))) .
generator’s loss function is adjusted as shown in (5), while the i=1
discriminator’s loss function is presented in (6) (8)

 LCGAN2
 adv x − D2 (G2 (z))]
 = Ex∼Pdata [ (5) In this article, Di represents the ith discriminator in the
 multimodel discriminator, which forms the overall discriminator
 LCGAN2
 D = − Ex∼Pdata(x) [log D2 (x)] after weighted averaging. The proposed model improvements
 − Ez∼Pz(z) [log (
 x − D2 (G2 (z)))]. (6) aim to address the challenge of generating labeled industrial
 control traffic samples. The specific process is as follows: noise
 In the DualCGAN-AE model, the encoder of the AE serves and label data are embedded into the encoding layer, decoded
as a shared module for the two CGAN models, ensuring that by CGAN1’s generator, and then evaluated by the multimodel
input noise and labels produce consistent low-dimensional latent discriminator. The resulting marginal distribution scores serve as
representations. This design avoids initialization discrepancies the target scores for CGAN2, which are then trained accordingly.
and provides rich features for the generator, facilitating rapid The detailed description of the algorithm process is shown in
learning of data distributions and enhancing data generation Algorithm 1 as follows.
quality. These improvements mean that the CGAN network
includes the AE encoder in addition to the generator and dis- IV. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
criminator. Consequently, the training loss functions of the two
components have also changed: an encoder loss term is added Common industrial control datasets include ISCX2012, CIto the original generator loss function. As shown in (7), the CIDS2017, and UNSW-NB15 [25], [26], [27]. Thomas Morris
generator loss function of CGAN1 includes both encoder loss from MSU released lab-scale natural gas pipeline and water
and adversarial loss, while the generator loss function of CGAN2 tower datasets [28]. These datasets, preprocessed to remove
differs only in the adversarial loss component low-level transport data (e.g., TCP and MAC), focus on traffic
 between ICS control layers and SCADA. They include seven
 LCGAN2
 G = wenc LCGAN2
 enc + wadv LCGAN2
 adv attack types targeting PLCs and normal data categories. The gas
 pipeline dataset has 26 features (excluding labels), and the water
 1
 N
 (GE (x) − E(x ))
 2
 = wenc (7) tower dataset has 23.
 N i=1 We chose these datasets because they reflect real industrial
 control environments, with most traffic being safe, leading to
 x − D2 (G2 (z)))].
 + wadv Ez∼Pz(z) [log (
 highly imbalanced label distributions. This imbalance, challeng-
 The generator’s loss function in the DualCGAN-AE model ing for multiclassification, highlights the effectiveness of our
incorporates both encoder and adversarial losses, with wenc and sample generation. Both datasets have eight labels: seven attack
wadv representing their respective weights. The original input types and one normal traffic type.
data are denoted by x, and the reconstructed output data are The datasets released by Thomas Morris have undergone
represented by x . After the generator produces samples, the data certain preprocessing to strip underlying transmission data in
are fed into the discriminator, which also experiences loss func- network communications, such as TCP and MAC data. They
tion changes. Unlike traditional single-model discriminators, include seven types of attacks targeting basic Internet of Things
this article employs a multimodel discriminator. Consequently, devices, such as PLCs: simple malicious response injection
the discriminator’s loss functions for CGAN2 are modified, as (NMRI), complex malicious response injection (CMRI), mashown in (8). licious state command injection (MSCI), malicious parameter
 In the DualCGAN-AE model, the generator’s loss function command injection (MPCI), malicious function code injection
incorporates both encoder loss and adversarial loss, where ωenc (MFCI), denial of service (DoS), and reconnaissance, along with
and ωadv denote their respective weights. The original input a normal data category. The datasets primarily focus on traffic
712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE I TABLE III
 DATASET I DISTRIBUTION MODE SCORES UNDER TWO DATASETS

 TABLE IV
 GAUSS MMD OF VARIOUS SAMPLE GENERATION METHODS

 TABLE II
 DATASET II DISTRIBUTION

 TABLE V
 KMMD OF VARIOUS SAMPLE GENERATION METHODS ON DATASET I

data between the control layer of ICSs and SCADA. The natural
gas pipeline dataset contains 26 features excluding labels, while
the water tower dataset has 23 features excluding labels. The
specific dataset classifications are given in Tables I and II.
 To verify the superiority of our proposed DualCGAN-AE
over other common sample generation methods, we selected
four popular schemes for comparison: SMOTE, traditional
GAN, WGAN-GP, and AE-GAN. These include three different
GAN models, with AE-GAN serving as an ablation study for
DualCGAN-AE.
 In the experiment, 5000 samples of each type were generated.
This number balances different attack samples well and keeps
generated samples from overwhelming the real ones, ensuring
data authenticity.
 1) Generate sample quality assessment: In the mode score
evaluation experiment, five different sample generation methods
were tested on two datasets. The mode score calculation involved Fig. 4. Gaussian KMMD of various sample generation methods on
the inertia clustering evaluation index, which is the sum of different datasets.
squared distances from all data points to their cluster centers.
Lower inertia indicates better clustering, meaning more similar
samples within each cluster. MMD values for five sample generation methods across different
 During training, cluster size parameters were tested from datasets are given in Table IV, with comparisons in Fig. 4.
1 to 9. The proposed DualCGAN-AE and SMOTE showed The results indicate that DualCGAN-AE outperforms the other
better inertia, while WGAN-GP had lower inertia but better methods in terms of MMD, followed by WGAN-GP, while
mode score performance. However, SMOTE’s final sample SMOTE shows relatively poorer performance.
distribution mode score was poor; Table III gives the mode In GAN performance evaluation, maximum mean discrepscores for all generation methods. Under the mode score criteria, ancy (MMD) measures the distribution difference between gen-
DualCGAN-AE performed best, followed by WGAN-GP, with erated and real samples by mapping them to a high-dimensional
SMOTE performing relatively poorly. space using a kernel function and computing the mean differ-
 In GAN performance evaluation, MMD measures the dis- ence. Smaller MMD values indicate more similar distributions,
crepancy between the distributions of generated and real sam- meaning the generated samples are closer to the real ones. In this
ples by mapping them to a high-dimensional space using a study, four kernel functions were tested, but the Gaussian kernel
kernel function and computing the mean difference. The Gauss was chosen, as it aligns with the industrial control environment’s
QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH 713

 TABLE VI
 1-NN SCORES ON TWO DATASETSS

 Fig. 6. Intrusion detection accuracy of various sample.

 samples. Although DualCGAN-AE optimizes the generation
 of minority-class samples through its dual-CGAN architecture,
 the detection accuracy of these extremely rare categories has
 only increased by approximately 8% compared with baseline
Fig. 5. Radar chart of 1-NN classification accuracy for various sample
generation methods. methods, which is still lower than that of common attack types.
 This indicates that when the proportion of original samples in the
 minority class is below a critical threshold, the model’s ability
noise distribution. Due to large datasets, this article uses random to capture fine-grained features may be affected.
sampling to approximate MMD calculation, effectively reducing As shown in the 1-NN classification accuracy results, a score
memory requirements. closer to the random distribution probability of 0.5 indicates that
 For kernel maximum mean discrepancy (KMMD), it can be the generated samples are more realistic. The DualCGAN-AE
used to calculate the distribution difference between generated model proposed in this article achieves 1-NN scores closer to 0.5
samples and real samples in the performance evaluation of on both datasets, outperforming the other four methods. In addi-
GANs. By using different kernel functions, the corresponding tion, the ablation study AE-GAN also shows good performance.
samples are mapped into a high-dimensional space to calculate This highlights the importance of using multiple evaluation
the corresponding distribution differences for effect comparison. metrics for sample quality assessment. While AE-GAN may
It can be seen that except for the Gaussian kernel function, the perform poorly in terms of Gaussian kernel mean maximum
fluctuations of the linear kernel and polynomial kernel are rela- difference, it performs well in the 1-NN classifier evaluation.
tively large, making them unsuitable as measurement standards. 2) Impact of Generated Samples on Intrusion Detection Per-
Although the Laplacian kernel function has a smaller fluctua- formance: In the experiments assessing the impact of generated
tion range, the Gaussian kernel function is finally selected for samples on intrusion detection algorithms, three machine learnexperimental evaluation according to the principle of choosing ing models were used: SVM, random forest (RF), and decision
kernel functions based on the noise distribution characteristics of tree (DT). These algorithms were chosen as they are common in
industrial control environments as much as possible. The kernel intrusion detection and require minimal manual tuning, allowing
MMD value experiments are carried out for five different sample a clearer assessment of sample quality on results.
generation schemes, as given in Table V. To ensure result authenticity and fairness, the original datasets
 In addition to the above two evaluation metrics, this article were split into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1 ratio.
employs the 1-NN classifier as a third metric for sample gener- We generated 5000 samples for each type of label, and after
ation quality. Unlike traditional classification evaluations where generating new samples, they were mixed with the original data
higher 1-NN scores indicate better performance, for sample to create a new dataset for retraining the three intrusion detection
generation, mixing generated and real samples and achieving a algorithms and calculating their accuracy. Experimental results
classification accuracy close to 50% (i.e., random level) suggest are given in Table VII. The radar chart for the result comparison
better generated sample quality. Specific results are given in is shown in Fig. 6.
Table VI and Fig. 5 . The DualCGAN-AE model enhances the performance of in-
 In addition, when the model processes rare attack types in the dustrial control intrusion detection algorithms in two main ways.
experimental dataset (such as DoS and MFCI, which usually First, it trains on global data by leveraging the characteristics of
have fewer original samples), the quality of generated samples CGAN to train labeled samples as unlabeled ones. This prevents
may be constrained by the scarcity of training data, thereby model training bias caused by insufficient samples. Second,
leading to insufficient diversity or mode collapse in generated it can learn the long-tail distribution of samples, particularly
714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE VIII
 Algorithm 1: DualCGAN-AE Model Training Algorithm. INTRUSION DETECTION ACCURACY OF DEEP LEARNING ALGORITHMS ON
 Input: σ, Gaussian distribution variance; DATASET I
 θE , parameters of the initial encoder E;
 θG , θG
 CGAN 1 CGAN 2
 , parameters of the initial generator G1
 and G2 ;
 θD1 , θD2
 CGAN 1 CGAN 1 CGAN 1
 , θD3 and
 θD1
 CGAN 2
 , θD2
 CGAN 2
 , θD3
 CGAN 2
 ,
 parameters of the initial discriminator D1 and D2 ;
 focusing on the easily overlooked marginal distribution feaw1 , w2 , w3 are the weight of three discriminator models,
 tures. It generates samples in proportion to ensure the generated
 w1 = w2 = 0.4, w3 = 0.2;
 samples retain the long-tail distribution characteristics of in-
 λ1 , λ2 , λ3 are the learning rates of encoder, generator and
 dustrial control traffic. This guarantees distribution consistency
 discriminator,
 in the mixed samples. As a result, when intrusion detection
 λ1 = λ2 = 5 × 10−4 , λ3 = 1 × 10−3
 algorithms are trained on these mixed samples, they learn the
 distribution features of industrial control traffic more com-
 WHILE θG , θG
 CGAN 1 CGAN 2
 do not reach convergence:
 prehensively, rather than just focusing on centrally distributed
 /∗Step 1: Data compression processing:∗/
 data.
 (x, y) = Batch(T rainingset) //Get Label
 Table VIII gives the intrusion detection accuracy of deep
 Calc AE: z = E((x, y); θE )
 learning algorithms on Dataset I. From the table, we can see that
 /∗Step 2: Training CGAN1: ∗/
 the DualCGAN-AE model demonstrates distinct performance
 x1 = G1 (z; θGCGAN 1
 )
 N patterns when applied to deep learning and machine learning
 LE = N i=1 (G1 (x) − E(x1 ))2
 1
 methods. In terms of accuracy, the mixed samples generated by
 Update encoder parameters: θE
 CGAN 1  DualCGAN-AE proposed in this article provide more positive
 DCGAN 1 = w1 DD1 (x1 ; θD1
 CGAN 1
 )+
 CGAN 1  CGAN 1  effects on industrial control intrusion detection algorithms comw2 DD2 (x1 ; θD2
 CGAN 1
 ) + w3 DD3 (x1 ; θD3
 CGAN 1
 )
 pared with other schemes. The quality of samples generated by
 x̂ = average(T raniningset, 2σ)
 other schemes varies: although they can improve the final results
 LCGAN
 D
 1
 = −E x∼Pdata(x) [logD1 (x)]
 in some detection algorithms, there are still cases where the
 −Ez∼Pz(z) [log(1 − D1 (G1 (z)))]
 final results may decrease. The time-series schemes generally
 Update discriminator parameters:
 show better results than the convolutional schemes, which is
 θD1 , θD2 , θD3
 CGAN 1 CGAN 1 CGAN 1
 N  2
 related to the fact that industrial control traffic data have fewer
 LCGAN
 G
 1
 = w enc N
 1
 i=1 (GE (x) − E(x )) dimensional characteristics and the spatial extraction effect is not
 +wadv Ez∼Pz(z) [log (1 − D1 (G1 (z)))] good.
 Update generator parameters: θG CGAN 1
 In summary, the DualCGAN-AE model can generate traf-
 /∗Step 3: Training CGAN2: ∗/ fic data that better match the distribution characteristics of
 x2 = G2 (z; θGCGAN 2
 ) ICSs. The generated samples are diverse and similar to real
   2
 LE = N N 1
 i=1 (G 2 (x) − E(x2 )) data, effectively improving the accuracy of intrusion detec-
 Update encoder parameters: θE tion algorithms and unlocking their potential for performance
 CGAN 2 
 DCGAN 2 = w1 DD1 (x2 ; θD1
 CGAN 2
 )+ improvement.
 CGAN 2  CGAN 2 
 w2 DD2 (x2 ; θD2
 CGAN 2
 ) + w3 DD3 (x2 ; θD3
 CGAN 2
 )
 LCGAN
 D
 2
 = −E x∼Pdata(x) [logD 2 (x)]
 V. CONCLUSION
 −Ez∼Pz(z) [log(x̂ − D2 (G2 (z)))]
 Update discriminator parameters: In recent years, with the expansion of ICSs, cybersecurity has
 θD1 , θD2 , θD3
 CGAN 2 CGAN 2 CGAN 2 become a critical issue. Both upper layer control hosts and lower
 N  2
 LGCGAN 2
 = wenc N1 i=1 (GE (x) − E(x ))
 layer industrial devices rely on traffic for information transmis-
 +wadv Ez∼Pz(z) [log(x̂ − D2 (G2 (z)))] sion, where the traffic may contain malicious instructions, pos-
 Update generator parameter: θG CGAN 2 ing significant security risks to industrial systems. These systems
 END WHILE use traffic to transmit information between control devices and
 industrial equipment but they may be exploited by malicious
 TABLE VII actors to disrupt operations. To address the above problems and
INTRUSION DETECTION ACCURACY OF MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS ON improve the actual detection accuracy of intrusion detection in
 DATASETS
 ICSs, this article focuses on enhancing the application of GANs
 in sample generation. We propose the DualCGAN-AE model,
 which improves the model structure, training algorithm, and
 intrusion detection model for ICS traffic samples. This model
 strengthens training stability and the ability to learn marginal
 distribution data. Experiments conducted on two datasets, evaluating both data quality and impacts on intrusion detection
QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH 715

performance, demonstrate that the proposed DualCGAN-AE [19] Z. Geng, C. Shi, and Y. Han, “Intelligent small sample defect detection
solution significantly improves detection accuracy and has the of water walls in power plants using novel deep learning integrating
 deep convolutional GAN,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 6,
potential for further performance enhancements. pp. 7489–7497, Jun. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TII.2022.3159817.
 [20] R. Liu et al., “Anomaly-GAN: A data augmentation method for train
 REFERENCES surface anomaly detection,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 228, Oct. 2023, Art.
 no. 120284, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2023.120284.
 [1] A. Md Hossain et al., “Deep learning and ensemble methods for anomaly [21] X. Kang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, N. Ma, and L. Wen, “Anomaly detection
 detection in ICS security,” Int. J. Inf. Tecnol., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1761–1775, in concrete dam using memory-augmented autoencoder and generative
 Apr. 2025, doi: 10.1007/s41870-024-02299-7. adversarial network (MemAE-GAN),” Autom. Construction, vol. 168,
 [2] A. H. El-Kady, S. Halim, M. M. El-Halwagi, and F. Khan, “Analysis of Dec. 2024, Art. no. 105794, doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2024.105794.
 safety and security challenges and opportunities related to cyber-physical [22] Y. Chen, J. Xu, Z. An, and F. Zhuang, “Multi-scale conditional reconsystems,” Process Saf. Environ., vol. 173, pp. 384–413, May 2023, struction generative adversarial network,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 141,
 doi: 10.1016/j.psep.2023.03.012. Jan. 2024, Art. no. 104885, doi: 10.1016/j.imavis.2023.104885.
 [3] F. Mesadieu, D. Torre, and A. Chennamaneni, “Leveraging deep rein- [23] C. Ravi and S. Gaddadevara Matt, “IC-CGAN: Imbalanced classforcement learning technique for intrusion detection in SCADA infras- conditional generative adversarial network with weighted loss function,”
 tructure,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 63381–63399, 2024, doi: 10.1109/AC- Int. J. Elect. Comput. Eng., vol. 15, no. 2, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 1632,
 CESS.2024.3390722. doi: 10.11591/ijece.v15i2.pp1632-1646.
 [4] Y. Lu, “The current status and developing trends of Industry 4.0: [24] X. Qin, F. Jiang, X. Qin, L. Ge, M. Lu, and R. Doss, “CGAN-
 A review,” Inf. Syst. Front., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 215–234, Feb. 2025, based cyber deception framework against reconnaissance attacks
 doi: 10.1007/s10796-021-10221-w. in ICS,” Comput. Netw., vol. 251, Sep., Art. no. 110655. 2024,
 [5] A. M. Y. Koay, R. K. L. Ko, H. Hettema, and K. Radke, “Machine learning doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110655.
 in industrial control system (ICS) security: Current landscape, opportu- [25] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward denities and challenges,” J. Intell. Inf. Syst., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 377–405, veloping a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for intru-
 Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s10844-022-00753-1. sion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374, May 2012,
 [6] D. Dablain, B. Krawczyk, and N. V. Chawla, “DeepSMOTE: Fus- doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2011.12.012.
 ing deep learning and SMOTE for imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. [26] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 6390–6404, Sep. 2023, network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 Network Data Set),”
 doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3136503. in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., MilCIS, Canberra, ACT, Australia,
 [7] S. Maldonado, C. Vairetti, A. Fernandez, and F. Herrera, “FW-SMOTE: 2015, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/MilCIS.2015.7348942.
 A feature-weighted oversampling approach for imbalanced classifi- [27] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generatcation,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 124, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108511, ing a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2021.108511. in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116,
 [8] Y. Bao and S. Yang, “Two novel SMOTE methods for solving imbalanced doi: 10.5220/0006639801080116.
 classification problems,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 5816–5823, 2023, [28] T. Morris and W. Gao, Industrial Control System Traffic Data Sets for
 doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3236794. Intrusion Detection Research, vol. 441, J. Butts and S. Shenoi, Eds., Berlin,
 [9] A. Arafa, N. El-Fishawy, M. Badawy, and M. Radad, “RN-SMOTE: Germany: Springer, 2014, pp. 65–78, doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-45355-1_5.
 Reduced noise SMOTE based on DBSCAN for enhancing imbalanced
 data classification,” J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 34, no. 8,
 pp. 5059–5074, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.jksuci.2022.06.005.
[10] H. Ebrahimy, B. Mirbagheri, A. A. Matkan, and M. Azadbakht, “Effectiveness of the integration of data balancing techniques and tree-based ensemble machine learning algorithms for spatially-explicit land cover accuracy
 prediction,” Remote Sens. Appl.: Soc. Environ., vol. 27, Aug. 2022, Art.
 no. 100785, doi: 10.1016/j.rsase.2022.100785.
[11] A. A. Hussin A. Khatir, and M. Bee, “Machine learning models and data- Zhongyuan Qin received the Ph.D. degree in
 balancing techniques for credit scoring: What is the best combination?,” communication and information systems from
 Risks, vol. 10, no. 9, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 169, doi: 10.3390/risks10090169. Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 2003.
[12] D. Elreedy, A. F. Atiya, and F. Kamalov, “A theoretical distribution He is currently an Associate Professor with
 analysis of synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) for im- the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 balanced learning,” Mach Learn, vol. 113, no. 7, pp. 4903–4923, Jul. 2024, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His redoi: 10.1007/s10994-022-06296-4. search interests include Internet of Things se-
[13] L. C. M. Liaw, S. C. Tan, P. Y. Goh, and C. P. Lim, “A histogram curity and mobile intelligent terminal security.
 SMOTE-based sampling algorithm with incremental learning for imbalanced data classification,” Inf. Sci., vol. 686, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 121193,
 doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2024.121193.
[14] D. Liu, S. Zhong, L. Lin, M. Zhao, X. Fu, and X. Liu, “Feature-level
 SMOTE: Augmenting fault samples in learnable feature space for imbalanced fault diagnosis of gas turbines,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 238,
 Mar. 2024, Art. no. 122023, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122023.
[15] L. Yuan, S. Yu, Z. Yang, M. Duan, and K. Li, “A data balancing approach
 based on generative adversarial network,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
 vol. 141, pp. 768–776, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.future.2022.12.024.
[16] L. Chen, Y. Li, X. Deng, Z. Liu, M. Lv, and H. Zhang, “Dual auto-encoder Yuxuan Liu received the B.S. degree in software engineering from the School of Computer
 GAN-Based anomaly detection for industrial control system,” Appl. Sci.,
 Science and Engineering, Nanjing University
 vol. 12, no. 10, May 2022, Art. no. 4986, doi: 10.3390/app12104986.
 of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in
[17] F. Meslet-Millet, S. Mouysset, and E. Chaput, “NeCSTGen: An approach
 for realistic network traffic generation using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE 2022, and the M.S. degree in cybersecurity from
 the School of Cyberspace Security, Southeast
 Globecom, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2022, pp. 3108–3113.
 University, Nanjing, in 2025.
[18] K. Li, W. Ma, H. Duan, H. Xie, J. Zhu, and R. Liu, “Unbal-
 His research focuses on malicious traffic analanced network attack traffic detection based on feature extraction and
 GFDA-WGAN,” Comput. Netw., vol. 216, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 109283, ysis in the field of cybersecurity.
 doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2022.109283.
716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 Tiantian Wang received the B.S. degree in Yubo Song received the B.Sc. degree in electric
 computer science from the Nanjing University of engineering, the M.Sc. degree in communica-
 Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, tion and information systems, and the Ph.D. dein 2023. She is currently working toward the gree in signal and information processing from
 M.S. degree in cybersecurity with the School Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2005.
 of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast He joined the School of Cyber Science and
 University, Nanjing. Engineering, Southeast University as a Lecturer
 Her research interests include deep learning after graduation, where he is currently an Assoand its applications in industrial control system ciate Professor and the Vice Director. He also
 traffic detection. works with Purple Mountain Laboratories. He
 has authored or coauthored more than 30 technical articles in international journals and conferences. His research
 interests include mobile security, wireless network security, and security
 protocol analysis.

 Liquan Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the Ph.D. degree in signal and information
 processing from Southeast University, Nanjing,
 China, in 2005.
 From 2005 to 2007, he was a Postdoctoral
 Researcher with Southeast University, where
 he was an Associate Professor from 2008 to
 2018. From 2011 to 2012, he was a Visiting
 Scholar with the National University of Singapore, Singapore. He is currently a Professor with
 the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University. His research interests include information security,
cryptography, network security protocol, and others.
 Dr. Chen became a Senior Member of IEEE in 2022.