7662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 Encrypted Traffic Classification Based on
 Two-Phase Feature Fusion
 Xiaobin Tan , Member, IEEE, Chaoming Huang , Hao Wang, Shuangwu Chen , Member, IEEE,
 and Quan Zheng , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The existing encrypted traffic classification schemes and ensuring application security [1], [2], [3]. However, as
have not taken full advantage of the principles of network traffic the demand for data privacy and security keeps growing, an
encryption technology, resulting in poor classification accuracy increasing proportion of network traffic is encrypted, making
and interpretability. In fact, the transmission process of encrypted
flows can be divided into a handshake phase and a secure classification more challenging [4], [5], [6].
data transmission phase, each with distinct characteristics and Traditional network traffic classification approaches, such as
inter-packet correlations. Therefore, an effective approach for port-based, deep packet inspection (DPI) based, and machine
encrypted traffic classification should employ different processing learning-based, are ineffective in classifying encrypted netmethods for each phase and then combine the results. In work traffic. Port-based approaches rely on known ports
this paper, we propose the Two-Phase Feature Fusion (2P2F)
approach for classifying encrypted network flows. In 2P2F, assigned by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA),
during the handshake phase, a convolutional neural network rendering them incapable of handling dynamic or disguised
(CNN) processes the encryption protocol extension field to extract ports [7]. DPI-based approaches analyze the payload data of
application-related features. For the secure data transmission the entire data packet to match predefined regular expresphase, a transformer model captures content-related features sions, but they cannot inspect encrypted packet payloads [8].
from the TCP segment length sequence. Finally, an attention
mechanism is used to fuse the refined features from both phases, Machine learning-based approaches heavily rely on feature
allowing the classification model to focus more on important engineering and professional knowledge, which can be a
features and achieve accurate classification of encrypted network challenging and laborious task [9], [10], [11], [12], [13].
flows. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the Recently, deep learning (DL) has gained significant attention
proposed scheme. as a potential solution for encrypted network traffic classi-
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, two-phase fea- fication due to its capability to effectively extract complex
tures, feature fusion, deep learning. features and capture intricate relationships automatically [14].
 However, many existing deep learning-based approaches tend
 I. I NTRODUCTION to focus solely on either classifying the application types [15],

W ITH the rapid development of the Internet technology and its applications, network traffic is constantly
increasing, which puts a strain on network management. Effec-
 [16], [17], [18], [19] or content types [20], [21], [22] of
 encrypted traffic. Furthermore, these approaches often exhibit
 limitations, such as either solely considering the characteristics
tive network traffic classification is essential for enhancing of individual packets rather than the packet sequences within
network management capabilities, improving service quality, network flows, or failing to address the underlying principles
 of network encryption protocols.
 Received 5 May 2025; revised 25 November 2025 and 10 February 2026; The most widely used encryption protocols are Secure Sockaccepted 6 April 2026. Date of publication 14 April 2026; date of current
version 30 April 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key ets Layer (SSL) and its successor Transport Layer Security
R&D Program of China under Grant 2020YFA0711400, in part by the Anhui (TLS) protocol [23]. According to the workflow of SSL/TLS,
Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant 2408085MF165, in part by an encrypted network flow can be naturally divided into two
the China Environment for Network Innovations under Grant 2016-000052-
73-01-000515, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China phases, namely, the TLS handshake phase and the secure
under Grant U23A20275, 62341113, and 62021001, by the Fundamental data transmission phase [24], [25]. These two phases expose
Research Funds for the Central Universities. The associate editor coordinating different observable information and exhibit distinct interthe review of this article and approving it for publication was L. Z. Granville.
(Corresponding author: Shuangwu Chen.) packet correlations. In the handshake phase, packets follow
 Xiaobin Tan, Shuangwu Chen, and Quan Zheng are with the Department a well-defined protocol format and contain unencrypted handof Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230000, China, and also with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei
 shake metadata that reflects negotiation details between the
Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, Anhui 230000, China (e-mail: client and server. In the secure data transmission phase,
xbtan@ustc.edu.cn; chensw@ustc.edu.cn; qzheng@ustc.edu.cn). the application payload is encrypted and remains opaque.
 Chaoming Huang is with the Department of Automation, University of Nevertheless, traffic-analysis side-channel patterns such as the
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230000, China (e-mail:
huangcm@mail.ustc.edu.cn). sequence and distribution of TCP segment lengths can still
 Hao Wang is with the Institute of Advanced Technology, University of be observed and may correlate with coarse content types.
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230000, China (e-mail:
wanghao1014@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
 Importantly, we do not decrypt or inspect application payload
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2026.3683889 contents at any stage. Therefore, to improve classification
 2332-7731 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION 7663

accuracy and interpretability, a sensible strategy is to extract classification scheme is proposed in Section IV. The expercomplementary features from these two phases using phase- iment results and analysis are given in Section V, and the last
appropriate models, and then fuse them to obtain the final Section VI gives the conclusion of this paper.
classification result.
 However, many existing approaches treat an encrypted flow II. R ELATED W ORK
as a single homogeneous entity and apply one generic model to In this section, we provide an overview of prior research
the entire flow, or they focus on coarse intra-packet divisions on traffic classification, categorized into traditional, machine
(e.g., header/body) rather than the protocol-phase workflow. learning-based, and deep learning-based approaches.
As a result, they may fail to fully exploit the heterogeneous
yet complementary information available in the handshake
 A. Traditional Traffic Classification
metadata and in the transmission-phase traffic patterns.
 In this paper, we present a novel encrypted network traffic Port-based schemes [7] encounter challenges in scenarclassification scheme called Two-Phase Feature Fusion (2P2F). ios involving dynamic ports, while DPI-based approaches
This scheme is motivated by the analysis that different phases [26] prove ineffective in classifying encrypted traffic. Protoof the encrypted network flows play distinct roles in traffic col analysis-based methods extract the distinctive behavioral
classification. In 2P2F, during the handshake phase, a convolu- characteristics of specific applications by analyzing their comtional neural network (CNN) processes the encryption protocol munication processes. Korczyński and Duda [15] proposed
extension field to extract application-related features. Mean- first-order homogeneous Markov model fingerprints to characwhile, in the secure data transmission phase, a transformer terize the dynamics of SSL/TLS sessions. Shen et al. [16], [17]
model captures side-channel statistical features from the TCP extended it to the second-order Markov model by clustering
segment length sequence. Finally, the attention mechanism is the certificate length and the first packet length to improve
employed to fuse refined features from both phases, allowing the classification performances. However, due to the caching
the model to focus more on important features, effectively mechanism, not all encrypted flow contains a certificate.
classify encrypted network data flows. Pan et al. [18] combined Message Type Sequence (MTS)
 The contributions of this paper can be summarized as and the lengths of the first several packets in a network flow
follows: to construct the Markov model and hidden Markov model
 • We propose an encrypted traffic classification framework (HMM) and then used a weighted ensemble classifier to
 based on two-phase feature fusion. In this framework, improve the results. Despite achieving commendable clasfeatures are extracted from both the handshake phase sification performance, this approach has limitations due to
 and the secure data transmission phase, which are sub- the potential lack of clear distinctions in packet length when
 sequently fused to achieve accurate classification. This different applications transmit identical business content.
 scheme leverages the unique characteristics of both In summary, the failure of these traditional methods to reliphases, enabling precise classification results while uti- ably handle encrypted payloads necessitates the shift towards
 lizing only a limited number of features. more advanced, learning-based approaches.
 • We design two feature extraction schemes tailored to the
 characteristics of each phase. The CNN-based scheme B. Traditional Machine Learning Based Traffic Classification
 is designed to process the encryption protocol extension Anderson et al. [9] employed logistic regression with a
 field of handshake phase to extract application-related combination of flow metadata, packet length distributions,
 features, while a transformer model is employed to cap- time distributions, byte distributions, and unencrypted TLS
 ture content-related features from the TCP segment length header information to identify malware-encrypted traffic.
 sequence in the secure data transmission phase. Sun et al. [10] applied TLS pattern matching to filter out all
 • We design an attention mechanism based feature fusion TLS traffic, followed by Naı̈ve Bayes classification, achieving
 algorithm for the semantic features from the handshake a classification precision of 93%–96% for HTTPS and TOR
 phase with the statistical features from the secure data traffic.
 transmission phase of encrypted network flows. This Sivanathan et al. [11] effectively identified encrypted trafapproach effectively classifies encrypted network data by fic, particularly IoT devices, by leveraging carefully selected
 focusing on the most important features. features through the Random Forest algorithm. Cao et al. [12]
 • We implement an encrypted traffic classification testbed proposed a real-time accurate SVM training model. They used
 and construct a real-world network traffic dataset. PCA to extract features from the data to reduce the dimension
 Through extensive experiments, we compare the perfor- of the original features and a particle swarm optimization
 mance of our proposed scheme against state-of-the-art algorithm to search the optimal working parameters of the
 methods. The experimental results demonstrate the supe- kernel function automatically. This method can improve traffic
 riority and effectiveness of the proposed scheme. classification accuracy through a small number of training
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. samples compared with the traditional SVM. Lashkari et al.
Section II describes some of the related work of net- [13] used time-related features such as the duration of the
work traffic classification. Section III introduces the concept flow, flow bytes per second, forward and backward inter-arrival
of encrypted traffic classification problem and motivation. time, etc., to characterize the network traffic using k-nearest
Then, the two-phase feature fusion-based encrypted traffic neighbor (k-NN) and C4.5 decision tree algorithms.
7664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 However, the performance of machine learning methods
depends on the rich experience, professional knowledge, and
features that are artificially selected.

C. Deep Learning Based Traffic Classification
 Deep learning has emerged as a promising technique for
encrypted traffic classification. Wang [27] applied a simple
SAE automatic encoder to traffic classification. Li et al. [28]
 Fig. 1. The composition of encrypted flow.
introduced the recurrent neural network to network traffic
classification and designed the byte segment neural network
where the segments of payloads are put into the attention In the handshake phase, certain TLS handshake metadata
encoder to get the features. Then the softmax classifier is used (e.g., message fields and extension information) is observable
for classification. and follows a well-defined protocol format. For a specific
 References [20] and [29] designed a novel method that network application, these data possess distinct meanings and
combined the convolutional network and the recurrent network represent the distinct status and characteristics of a flow. As
to improve the accuracy of the classification results. The a result, they serve as valuable features for application-type
convolutional network extracts the packet features for a single classification.
packet. The recurrent network is trained to pick out the flow On the other hand, the secure data transmission phase
features based on the inputs of the packet features of any three involves the transmission of content segmented into a sequence
consecutive packets in a flow. Liu et al. [19] considered the of encrypted packets [36]. Although the packets in this phase
length of packets in the encrypted traffic and proposed an end- are encrypted, different content types (e.g., video streaming,
to-end model taking a multi-layer bi-GRU encoder to learn the text, or digital files) exhibit discernible behavioral characterisrepresentation of the flow sequence, and reconstructing the tics, including packet size distribution, packet arrival interval
original sequence with a multi-layer bi-GRU decoder. distribution, and other statistical features. These features can
 Recently, more advanced deep learning models, such as be effectively utilized for content-type classification of netgraph neural networks (GNNs) and transformers, have been work flow.
widely adopted for encrypted traffic analysis. For instance,
researchers have utilized GNNs to capture complex flow B. Problem Definition
interaction patterns for encrypted malware detection [30], [31]. Encrypted traffic classification is generally performed to
Some works have even begun to differentiate the physical identify the application and/or content type of packet sequence
components of a packet, such as the header and payload, within a given network flow. Specifically, the application
for more fine-grained classification [32], [33]. Concurrently, type refers to application-related information such as Baidu,
Transformer-based models have demonstrated their potential a website search engine and Bilibili, an online video platby applying self-attention mechanisms to traffic sequences form, or other network applications, while the content
[34], [35]. type refers to the nature of the transmitted data, such as
 However, existing deep learning-based approaches often video, image, text, and so on. To be precise, we define
neglect the intricate working mechanism and distinctive char- three distinct classification tasks which will be evaluated:
acteristics of encrypted network protocols, or apply a single, “Application-Type Classification” (identifying only the appligeneric model to the entire flow, failing to optimally extract cation, e.g., “Baidu”), “Content-Type Classification” (identifythe heterogeneous features from different phases. ing only the content, e.g., “video”), and “Application-Content
 Classification” (the joint and granular task of identifying the
 III. P RELIMINARIES specific pair, e.g., “Baidu-video”) theClassification is con-
 In this section, we first investigate the mechanisms of ducted at three levels: packet level, stream level, and session
encrypted protocols, then define the problem of encrypted traf- level, depending on the specific classification requirements or
fic classification, and finally present our research motivation. techniques employed for network traffic classification.
 The aim of this paper is to propose a methodology for jointly
A. Encryption Protocol Analysis classifying the application and content types of encrypted net-
 As shown in Fig. 1, the interaction process of a typical work flows at the session level, specifically those utilizing the
encryption protocol, such as SSL/TLS, consists of two distinct SSL/TLS protocol, as they traverse network nodes including
phases: the handshake phase and the secure data transmis- switches or gateways. In this context, a network flow is defined
sion phase. In the handshake phase, we use only observable as a series of packets that share the same five-tuple (Source IP,
handshake metadata. In the secure data transmission phase, Source port, Destination IP, Destination port, Transport layer
payload contents are encrypted and are not inspected; we use protocol) information.
only side-channel statistical feature, represented by the TCP
segment length sequence. This phase-wise design avoids any C. Motivation
payload decryption while leveraging complementary cues from As discussed in Section III-A, a typical encrypted network
protocol metadata and transmission behaviors. flow consists of two distinct phases: the handshake phase and
TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION 7665

the secure data transmission phase, each exhibiting unique
packet sequence characteristics. Unfortunately, previous studies often treat the encrypted network data flow as a whole
entity, overlooking the distinctions between these two phases.
This oversight has resulted in poor classification accuracy.
 To address the aforementioned issue, we believe that a
reasonable solution should utilize distinct processing methods
for different phases of encrypted network flows and then
fuse the results to achieve accurate classification. Specifically,
for the handshake phase, since each field in this phase is
unencrypted and holds a specific meaning, we propose to
employ a CNN model to analyze the handshake phase and
extract application-type-relevant features.
 The secure data transmission phase relies on encryption
technology, rendering the classification of content through
the inspection of payload contents infeasible. Nevertheless,
statistical features derived from the packet sequence within
this phase can be leveraged for content-type classification. To
this end, we propose the adoption of a transformer model
to analyze the statistical features of the packet sequence,
including packet size distribution, with the aim of extracting
content-type-relevant features.
 Moreover, as web browsing typically generates multiple
network flows corresponding to various web components
with different types (e.g., video, image, text, etc.), the accuracy of application-content classification can be enhanced by
combining the application-type-relevant features and contenttype-relevant features extracted from these two distinct phases. Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed two-phase feature fusion traffic classification.

 IV. T WO -P HASE F EATURE F USION BASED E NCRYPTED
 T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION B. Feature Extraction
 We conduct experiments to evaluate various features
 This section introduces the overview and detail of the
 extracted from both phases and select two highly effective
proposed encrypted traffic classification scheme.
 features, namely the protocol extension information in the
 handshake phase and the TCP segment length sequence in
 the secure data transmission phase. Features susceptible to
A. Overview
 network conditions, such as packet inter-arrival time, are
 The architecture of two-phase feature fusion-based deliberately excluded. Additionally, using IP addresses directly
encrypted traffic classification is shown in Fig. 2, which for classification is not a good choice due to the existence
consists of the modules of traffic preprocessing, feature of content delivery network (CDN) or other load balancing
extraction, feature refinement, and feature fusion. mechanisms.
 In the traffic preprocessing module, the first step involves 1) Protocol Extension Field: The extension fields in the
partitioning the raw traffic into session flows based on their SSL/TLS protocol are used to transmit additional information
five tuples. Following this, in the feature extraction module, and functionality during the handshake process. For different
features are extracted and normalized to mitigate the influence applications, there are significant differences in the specific
of variations in magnitudes. To refine the quality of the negotiation content and the encryption suite between the client
extracted features, a CNN model is employed to process and server which are recorded in the protocol extension fields
the features from the handshake phase, while a transformer of the SSL/TLS layer. Thus, we extract the raw extension
model handles the features from the secure data transmission field data from the ‘Client Hello’ and ‘Server Hello’ messages
phase. Finally, the refined features are fused using an attention during the handshake phase and convert it to hexadecimal
mechanism [37], facilitating the classification of application- format, which facilitates its transformation into grayscale
content types and yielding the final classification results. images. The server name field in the protocol extension field
 Furthermore, it is worth noting that the CNN model respon- can be forged, so we replace its content with 0.
sible for processing features obtained from the handshake 2) TCP Segment Length Sequence: During the secure data
phase and the transformer model responsible for processing transmission phase, content is encrypted to ensure confidentialfeatures extracted from the secure data transmission phase are ity, rendering the analysis of the encrypted content ineffective
pre-trained offline in advance. in obtaining useful information about the network flow.
7666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 3. The mapping between TCP session flow and IP packet sequence.

 Fig. 5. Grayscale images converted from the features of the extension field
 for different types of content.

 TABLE I
 PARAMETERS OF CNN M ODEL U SED FOR F EATURE R EFINEMENT
 OF H ANDSHAKE P HASE

 sequence. Finally, We select the length information of the first
 32 TCP data segments in the secure data transmission phase
 as the feature for classifying encrypted traffic.
 Fig. 4 showcases an example histogram illustrating the
 distribution of the first 32 TCP segment lengths during the
 secure data transmission phase for four different types of
 content. It is evident that the transmission of different contents
 exhibits distinct distributions, further highlighting the potential
 of utilizing this feature for content classification.
Fig. 4. Distributions of the TCP segment lengths for different types of content.
 C. Feature Refinement
However, even in the presence of encryption, it is still possible 1) Feature Refinement for Handshake Phase: According to
to differentiate between various types of transmitted content, the standard of encryption protocols, the data in each fixed
such as text or video, based on the statistical distribution of the position in the protocol extension field denotes a specific
packet sequence within the flow. This statistical distribution meaning, so the data in the protocol extension field has a
can serve as a distinctive feature for classifying encrypted certain regularity, and this regularity can be analyzed by
network flows. using the CNN model. Crucially, this 2D image conversion
 As illustrated in Fig. 3, the data segments of the TCP is applied only to the unencrypted handshake field, as it
session flow are fragmented into a sequence of IP packets, with preserves the spatial structure of the protocol data and creates
most packets having uniform sizes. This fragmentation leads an information-dense (non-sparse) representation for the CNN
to the partial loss of application-related information within to analyze.
the IP packet sequence. To address this, we adopt a different In order to preserve the information of the protocol extenapproach compared to previous research that primarily focused sion field in its entirety and also to facilitate the input of this
on the statistical distribution of packets in the IP layer. Instead, information into the CNN model, we convert the extension
we use Scapy1 to parse the handshake layer and record layer field into grayscale image format. The length of extended fields
protocol types of all TLS packets, which are unencrypted, and varies depending on the data type, but most will not exceed
divide the handshake phase and secure data transmission phase 448 bytes, we transform the protocol extension field into a
of the encrypted flow based on them. For packets that have 16 × 28 grayscale image, as shown in Fig. 5. The structure
been split due to their length exceeding the IP layer limit, and parameters of the CNN model are shown in Table I.
we merge them and extract the original TCP segment length 2) Feature Refinement for Secure Data Transmission Phase:
 The specific content of the data transmission phase is
 1 https://scapy.net encrypted, but we can still extract sequence features to predict
TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION 7667

 TABLE II V. E VALUATION
PARAMETERS OF T RANSFORMER M ODEL FOR F EATURE R EFINEMENT OF This section provides an overview of the dataset and
 S ECURE DATA T RANSMISSION P HASE
 experimental setup utilized in the evaluation, followed by a
 comprehensive analysis of the experimental results.

 A. Experimental Setting
 1) Datasets: The first dataset in our experiments, 2P2F
 Website Dataset, was captured by ourselves on the China
 Environment for Network Innovations (CENI-HeFei) platform
 [38]. it consists of five commonly used applications, including
 Bilibili, TouTiao, Himalaya, Netease cloud, and Baidu, and
 these traffic data are categorized into five types: image, audio,
user behavior, which are more suitable to be analyzed by using radio, live video, and video. The figures in the table represent
an transformer model. As a special type of RNN, Transformer the number of session flows, with a total size of 175.8Gb.
model not only has the ability for neurons to directly affect In addition, we conducted experiments on the publicly
themselves at the next moment but also solves the limitation available dataset CIC IoT 2022 [39] and mobile app dataset
of ordinary RNNs by adding gating mechanisms within the [40] to validate the generality of our approach. We selected
network, to train TCP segment length sequences. The structure 10 use cases with larger sample sizes from these two datasets
and parameters of the model are shown in Table II. for experimentation. The ratio of training and testing data for
 all datasets is 8:2, and the specific composition is shown in
D. Feature Fusion the table III below.
 For the classification of encrypted network flow, the features 2) Preprocessing: We divided the Pcap file that contains all
of different phases of encrypted flow play a certain role in captured packets into multiple Pcap files based on the transport
different classification tasks. Feature fusion is to fuse the layer protocol type (TCP or UDP) using SplitCap.2 We then
features extracted and refined from different phases together selected the largest SSL/TLS session flow as our classification
to achieve more accurate classification results. object, after dividing the Pcap file generated by accessing a
 In feature fusion, we employ an attention mechanism in our specific website into multiple session flows. This approach
encrypted traffic classification scheme. The attention mecha- reduces the impact of background traffic and ensures the flow
nism allows our approach to selectively focus on the most is related to the content type.
informative features from each phase of the encrypted flow 3) Experiment Setup: All these experiments use the Intel
during the fusion process. It assigns different weights or 6142 server equipped with 16 core CPU as the hardware
importance to the features based on their relevance to the platform, a NVIDIA Tesla P4 GPU as the training and testing
classification task at hand. The attention mechanism helps us of the model, with 512G memory and 256G SSD. The software
overcome the unbalanced role of features from different phases is based on the depth model framework Pytorch 2.0, with cuda
by dynamically adjusting the contribution of each feature version 11.8 and operating system Ubuntu 16.04.
during the fusion process. It allows us to effectively combine
the relevant information from different phases and enhance the B. Comparison Algorithms
overall classification performance. Suppose the output of the We compare our proposed scheme with three state-of-the-art
CNN model is Fc , and the output of the transformer model solutions. These baselines were selected to be representative
is Ft , we use them separately to generate the query, key, and of the primary categories of classification methods: classic
value: machine learning (CCIT), deep sequence models (FS-Net), and
 Q = WQ · Fc , (1) modern semi-supervised fingerprinting (FlowPrint).
 K = W K · Fc , (2) • CCIT [11] is a classical method that utilizes a carefully
 selected set of features to accurately identify encrypted
 V = WV · Ft , (3)
 traffic originating from IoT devices. This method employs
where WQ , WK and WV is the learnable parameter matrix. the random forest algorithm to achieve effective classifi-
Then we use them to calculate attention scores: cation.
 QK T • FS-Net [19] considered the length of the first n packets
  
 Ffused = Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √ V, (4) in the encrypted data flow and proposed an end-to-end
 dk
 model taking a multi-layer bi-GRU encoder to learn the
where dk is the dimension of the key.
 representation of the flow sequence and reconstruct the
 Finally, the fused features are input into the classifier to
 original sequence.
obtain the traffic label:
 • FlowPrint [41] is a semi-supervised approach for finy = arg max(softmax(Wcls · Ffused + b)), (5) gerprinting mobile apps from encrypted network traffic.
 k
 It can automatically find temporal correlations among
where Wcls and b is the learnable parameter, k is the index of
classes. 2 https://www.netresec.com/?page=SplitCap
7668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE III
 T HE C OMPOSITION OF T HREE DATASETS IN T ERMS OF THE N UMBER OF S ESSION F LOWS

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE OF 2P2F AND C OMPARISON
 A LGORITHMS ON T HREE DATASETS

 Fig. 6. The accuracy of application type classification among features.

 destination-related features of network traffic and use need to isolate each phase’s contribution. On the 2P2F
 these correlations to generate app fingerprints. Website dataset, 2P 2F -handshake (handshake-only) and
 • DE-GNN [32] is a state-of-the-art method for fine-grained 2P 2F -transmission (transmission-only) achieve F1-scores
 encrypted traffic classification. This model uses a dual of 0.82 and 0.90, respectively. Our full 2P2F-fuse model
 embedding layer to encode the packet header and payload significantly outperforms both, with an F1-score of 0.96. This
 separately, then constructs the data flow into a Traffic explicitly validates our core thesis that both phases contribute
 Interaction Graph (TIG), and utilizes Graph Neural Net- unique, essential information, and our fusion mechanism is
 works (GNN) to extract flow-level features. necessary to achieve the best results.
 Compared to the baselines, this optimized 2P2F-fuse model
 also shows clear advantages. The baseline methods falter
C. Classification Results With Compared Algorithms
 because they fail to properly distinguish and process the two
 In this evaluation, the 2P 2F -f use is the complete ver- distinct phases of encrypted traffic. CCIT’s manual features
sion of the proposed method, which combines features from lack generalization. FS-Net’s “one-size-fits-all” model ignores
two phases to achieve a joint classification of application the differing semantics of handshake and transmission packets.
and content types. The 2P 2F -assoc5 signifies the utiliza- FlowPrint’s narrow fingerprinting fails in diverse scenarios,
tion of features from the handshake phase to determine the and DE-GNN’s physical-based header/payload division is less
application type, and the utilization of features from the effective than 2P2F’s protocol-based (handshake/transmission)
secure data transmission phase to determine the content type, split. The failure of these methods further validates that
followed by the simple concatenation of the two results. processing each phase with specialized models and fusing the
The 2P 2F -handshake and 2P 2F -transmission respec- results is crucial for accurate classification.
tively represent the direct recognition of application and
content types using features solely from the handshake phase
and secure data transmission phase. D. Effectiveness of Our Selected Feature
 As shown in Table IV, 2P 2F -f use shows excellent perfor- To evaluate the effectiveness of our selected features, we
mances on encrypted traffic classification. It is observed that compared the protocol extension field, TCP segment length
the proposed 2P2F method has significant improvements. sequence, and other features to test their effectiveness in
 The results in Table IV demonstrate the superiority of identifying application types and content types, respectively.
our approach. We first analyze our own model variants It can be observed from Fig. 6 that considering only the
as an ablation study to justify our design, addressing the handshake protocol state is better than using the full protocol
TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION 7669

 TABLE VI
 T HE P ERFORMANCE OF C ONTENT T YPES BASED ON
 T WO -P HASE F EATURE F USION

Fig. 7. The accuracy of content type classification among features.
 TABLE VII
 TABLE V T HE P ERFORMANCE OF A PPLICATION -C ONTENT T YPE C LASSIFICATION
T HE P ERFORMANCE OF A PPLICATION T YPES BASED ON T WO -P HASE BASED ON T WO -P HASE F EATURE F USION
 F EATURE F USION

state. Therefore, it is more reasonable to consider different
types of features for different phases of the flow. Although the
application type classification can be achieved to some extent
by using the handshake protocol state, the results show that the
classification accuracy of Bilibili and TouTiao is significantly
 secure data transmission phase. Furthermore, the performance
lower compared to the experiment results based on packet
 of fused features for classification is better than that of
features. This also indicates the inability to achieve the best
 individual features.
classification result by using features from only one phase of
 The content-type classification results are presented in
the flow.
 Table VI indicate that the length information of the TCP
 As shown in Fig. 7, although we can observe that the
 data segment in the secure data transmission phase is more
classification of content types based on encrypted payload
 suitable than the information of the protocol extension field
is effective to some extent through comparison experiments,
 in terms of content-type classification. This finding confirms
the classification results do not change much if we change
 the correctness of our feature selection method. Moreover,
all payload data to 255. Therefore, we believe that the real
 the two-phase feature fusion leads to an improvement in the
information processed by the CNN should be the contour
 accuracy of content type classification, which is similar to
information constructed by different packet payload lengths in
 the improvement observed in application classification. The
the grayscale image. This contour information also verifies that
 precision, recall, and F1-Measure of feature fusion are also
the length should be considered in encrypted traffic analysis
 higher than those of individual features.
rather than the specific content after encryption.
 2) Effectiveness of Feature Fusion for Multi-Task:
 2P 2F -assoc10 uses the two features mentioned above for
E. Effectiveness of Feature Fusion application-content type recognition directly and selects the
 1) Effectiveness of Feature Fusion for Single Task: We now result with higher confidence of the two features.
study the classification by using different sets of features in The accuracy of the comprehensive classification obtained
order to understand the impact of each feature in classifica- by combining different classification tasks using feature fusion
tion performance. We study three scenarios: using the fused is higher than that obtained by direct combination application
features from both phases, using the feature only from the type and content type and higher than that obtained by direct
handshake phase, and using the feature only from the secure combination application-content type (Probability addition).
data transmission phase. This finding highlights the effectiveness of feature fusion
 The application-type classification results are shown in for multi-task classification. Moreover, the superiority of
Table V. It can be observed that the extended field information application-content type classification based on feature fusion
in the handshake phase is more suitable for application classi- is confirmed by the evaluation of other indicators presented in
fication than the length information of the TCP segment in the Table VII.
7670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON (F1-S CORE ) U NDER
 L ENGTH -O BFUSCATION S CENARIOS

 for each TCP segment length L, we construct a padded length
 L0 using one of the following strategies:
 • Random Padding: L0 = L · (1 + δ), where
 δ ∼ U(0.10, 0.30). This emulates mild and variable
 padding/noise that partially perturbs length statistics.
 • Block Padding: L0 = dL/256e · 256. This emulates aggressive block-quantization shaping that coarsens
 length resolution and makes different flows more similar
 from a length-statistics perspective.
 Table VIII indicates that the transmission-only variant is
 sensitive to block padding. When lengths are rounded to
Fig. 8. Confusion matrix of the proposed 2P2F method. The class indices
correspond to: 1) Baidu image, 2) Baidu video, 3) Bilibili radio, 4) Bilibili 256-byte blocks, fine-grained length differences across traffic
live video, 5) TouTiao image, 6) TouTiao live video, 7) Netease cloud audio, classes are removed, making the resulting length sequences
8) Netease cloud video, 9) Himalaya audio, and 10) Himalaya radio. more similar and therefore harder to separate, which leads to
 a large F1 drop (0.90 → 0.59).
 In contrast, the fused model remains robust because it can
 To further analyze the detailed performance of the 2P2Fstill rely on handshake-phase TLS metadata (extension fields)
fuse model on application-content classification task, we
 that is not affected by transmission-phase length obfuscation.
plotted its confusion matrix on the 2P2F Website test set,
 Consequently, even when length cues are degraded, the handas shown in Fig. 8. The diagonal elements of the matrix
 shake branch provides complementary information, allowing
represent the number of correctly classified samples, while
 2P2F-fuse to retain strong performance (F1 = 0.88).
the off-diagonal elements show the specific confusion between
 2) Discussion on Contextual Overfitting: The above
different classes. It is clear from the figure that the model
 padding stress-test complements recent SoK findings on
performs exceptionally well on most classes, such as “TouTiao
 encrypted traffic classifiers, which caution that performance
live” and “Himalaya radio”, which achieved near-perfect clasmay be driven by contextual artifacts (e.g., collection environsification. The main confusion occurs between semantically
 ment, implementation behaviors, or network conditions) rather
similar classes. For example, a small number of “Bilibili radio”
 than intrinsic application/content-type regularities. From this
samples were misclassified as “Bilibili live”, and there was
 perspective, padding and traffic shaping can be viewed as one
also minor confusion between “Baidu image” and “Baidu
 practical source of context shift that directly perturbs lengthvideo”. This aligns with the relatively lower F1-scores for
 based side channels.
the “Bilibili radio” and “Bilibili live” classes presented in
 To reduce context dependence, we deliberately exclude
Table VII.
 highly variable features such as packet inter-arrival time
 and avoid using IP addresses directly due to the instability
F. Robustness Analysis introduced by CDN and load balancing. Nevertheless, we
 Recent systematization efforts (e.g., the SoK by Wickramas- acknowledge that side-channel-based methods may still be
inghe et al. [42]) highlight that modern encrypted traffic may sensitive to broader context shifts (e.g., device/browser verbe subject to padding and traffic-shaping mechanisms, which sions, network paths, and server deployments). We therefore
can substantially weaken classifiers that rely on packet/record treat cross-context evaluation (e.g., train/test splits across time
length statistics. Since the transmission branch of 2P2F models or network environments) as an important direction for future
the TCP segment length sequence with a Transformer, it is work and include this limitation to contextualize applicability.
necessary to assess how sensitive the overall framework is to
length obfuscation.
 G. Time Overhead Analysis
 1) Experimental Setup: We perform a controlled simulation on the 2P2F-Website dataset by perturbing the test-set Time overhead is a critical metric for practical, real-time
TCP segment length sequences to emulate different degrees traffic classification scenarios. To evaluate the feasibility of
of length obfuscation, while keeping the handshake inputs our 2P2F scheme, we conducted an experiment to measure
unchanged. This isolates the effect of padding on the its processing latency per network flow, and compared it with
transmission-phase features and allows us to evaluate the ben- DE-GNN, a representative SOTA method that also requires
efit of two-phase fusion under adverse conditions. Specifically, complex feature engineering.
TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION 7671

 TABLE IX transformer model. The CNN analyzes the encryption protocol
 T IME OVERHEAD C OMPARISON (AVERAGE P ER F LOW ) extension field during the handshake phase, extracting features
 relevant to the application type. Meanwhile, the transformer
 model processes the sequences of TCP segment lengths in the
 secure data transmission phase, extracting features related to
 the content type. Finally, an attention mechanism fuses the
 features extracted from both phases, facilitating the classification of the encrypted network data flow. The effectiveness of
 the 2P2F method is validated through comparative experiments
 The analysis was performed on our testbed, which is and feature analysis, demonstrating its superior performance.
equipped with an Intel Xeon Silver 4214 CPU and an NVIDIA
V100 GPU. We measured the average time for two main
stages: R EFERENCES
 • Preprocessing & Feature Extraction: For our 2P2F, [1] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and X. Cao, “An efficient feature
 this includes parsing the flow from raw packets, identify- generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection
 techniques for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 132, pp. 81–98,
 ing the handshake and secure data transmission phases, Feb. 2018.
 generating the protocol extension field image (16 × 28), [2] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
 and extracting the TCP segment length sequence (first Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
 32 segments). For DE-GNN, this involves the complex pp. 439–454.
 construction of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) for [3] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Analyzing
 each flow. Android encrypted network traffic to identify user actions,” IEEE Trans.
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 114–125, Jan. 2016.
 • Model Inference Time: This is the computation time [4] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions in
 required by the respective pre-trained models (2P2F-fuse traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, Jan. 2012.
 vs. DE-GNN) to process the features and produce a [5] A. Shahraki, M. Abbasi, A. Taherkordi, and A. D. Jurcut, “Active
 learning for network traffic classification: A technical study,” IEEE
 classification result. Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 422–439, Mar. 2022.
 The results of this comparison are summarized in [6] Z. Niu, J. Xue, Y. Wang, T. Lei, W. Han, and X. Gao, “QARF: A
Table IX. Our 2P2F model demonstrates high efficiency. novel malicious traffic detection approach via online active learning for
 evolving traffic streams,” Chin. J. Electron., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 645–656,
The combined preprocessing and feature extraction, which May 2024.
involves lightweight parsing and sequence extraction, takes [7] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, “Learning to classify: A flowonly 4.82 ms on average. The model inference is also very based relation network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. Web
 Conf., Apr. 2020, pp. 13–22.
fast, at 0.91 ms. [8] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
 In contrast, the DE-GNN model incurs a significantly higher of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
overhead. As hypothesized, its preprocessing stage, which memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
 [9] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of
requires constructing a complete Traffic Interaction Graph for TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14,
each flow, is computationally intensive, averaging 25.41 ms. no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1007/s11416-017-0306-6.
While its GNN inference time is also efficient (2.15 ms), its [10] G.-L. Sun, Y. Xue, Y. Dong, D. Wang, and C. Li, “An novel hybrid
 method for effectively classifying encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE
total overhead is nearly 5 times that of our method. Global Telecommun. Conf. GLOBECOM, Dec. 2010, pp. 1–5.
 [11] A. Sivanathan et al., “Characterizing and classifying IoT traffic in smart
 cities and campuses,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops
H. Summary (INFOCOM WKSHPS), May 2017, pp. 559–564.
 Based on the experimental findings, we can conclude that [12] J. Cao, Z. Fang, G. Qu, H. Sun, and D. Zhang, “An accurate traffic
 classification model based on support vector machines,” Int. J. Netw.
the grayscale image of the protocol extension fields during the Manage., vol. 27, no. 1, p. e1962, Jan. 2017.
handshake phase is suitable for application-type classification, [13] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorwhile the TCP segment length sequence during the secure bani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
data transmission phase is most suitable for content-type pp. 407–414.
classification. The features from both phases complement each [14] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification:
other, which is why we have fused them together. By doing so, An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May
 2019.
we have improved the accuracy of both application and content [15] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
type classification. Furthermore, our feature fusion approach encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun.,
has achieved the best results for application-content type Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
 [16] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware
classification, thus confirming the effectiveness and superiority encrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” in
of the proposed 2P2F scheme. Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016,
 pp. 1–10.
 [17] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of
 VI. C ONCLUSION encrypted traffic with second-order Markov chains and application
 In this paper, we propose 2P2F for classifying encrypted attribute bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
 pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
network data flows by leveraging the distinct characteristics [18] W. Pan, G. Cheng, and Y. Tang, “WENC: HTTPS encrypted traffic
of different network communication phases and effectively classification using weighted ensemble learning and Markov chain,” in
fusing the extracted features. The 2P2F integrates a CNN and a Proc. IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, Aug. 2017, pp. 50–57.
7672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

[19] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence Xiaobin Tan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Com- Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science and
 put. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179. Technology of China (USTC), China, in 1996
[20] Z. Zou, J. Ge, H. Zheng, Y. Wu, C. Han, and Z. Yao, “Encrypted and 2003, respectively. He is currently an Assotraffic classification with a convolutional long short-term memory neural ciate Professor with the Department of Automation,
 network,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Com- School of Information Science and Technology,
 munications; IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Smart City; IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Data USTC. His research interests include future internet
 Sci. Syst. (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), Jun. 2018, pp. 329–334. architecture, adaptive streaming, and information
[21] Y. He and W. Li, “Image-based encrypted traffic classification with security.
 convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci.
 Cyberspace (DSC), Jul. 2020, pp. 271–278.
[22] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
 2017, pp. 43–48.
[23] J. Clark and P. C. van Oorschot, “SoK: SSL and HTTPS: Revisiting
 past challenges and evaluating certificate trust model enhancements,” in Chaoming Huang received the M.S. degree from
 Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, May 2013, pp. 511–525. the University of Science and Technology of China
[24] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (TLS) protocol (USTC), China, in 2019, where he is currently
 version 1.2,” Standards Track, IETF, Fremont, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. pursuing the Ph.D. degree. He is currently with the
 Request for Comments 5246, Aug. 2008. [Online]. Available: http:// Department of Automation, USTC, and the Instiwww.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5246.txt tute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive
[25] J. Xu et al., “A cascaded broad learning network embedded image fea- National Science Center, Hefei. His research intertures for malware traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. ests include encrypted traffic classification, machine
 Netw., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2426–2439, Apr. 2024. learning, and network security.
[26] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Müller, and K. Hanssgen,
 “A survey of payload-based traffic classification approaches,” IEEE
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1135–1156, 2nd Quart.,
 2014.
[27] Z. Wang, “The applications of deep learning on traffic identification,”
 BlackHat USA, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 1–10, 2015.
[28] R. Li, X. Xiao, S. Ni, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “Byte segment neural
 Hao Wang received the M.S. degree from the Instinetwork for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int.
 tute of Advanced Technology, University of Science
 Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
 and Technology of China (USTC), China, in 2023.
[29] B. Zhou, J. Liu, S. Cui, and Y. Zhao, “A large-scale spatio-temporal
 His research interests include encrypted network
 multimodal fusion framework for traffic prediction,” Big Data Mining
 traffic identification.
 Analytics, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 621–636, 2024.
[30] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
 network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Def.,
 2022, pp. 495–509.
[31] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” 2023,
 arXiv:2301.13686.
[32] X. Han et al., “DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for
 fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245,
 May 2024, Art. no. 110372.
[33] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph Shuangwu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science
 ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075. and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
[34] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder in 2011 and 2016, respectively. He is currently
 based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc. an Associate Professor with USTC. His research
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427. interests include future networks, multimedia com-
[35] F. Wu et al., “Multi-variate time series prediction of traffic and users for munication, and network security.
 dynamic RRH-BBU mapping in C-RAN,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
 vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 10557–10572, Oct. 2025.
[36] H. Liu, Z. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Semi-supervised encrypted traffic
 classification using composite features set,” J. Netw., vol. 7, no. 8,
 pp. 1195–1200, Aug. 2012.
[37] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
 jointly learning to align and translate,” 2014, arXiv:1409.0473.
[38] (2024). China Environment for Network Innovations (CENI-Hefei).
 [Online]. Available: https://ceni.ustc.edu.cn/
[39] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong, Quan Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidi- degree in production process automation from
 mensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning,
 Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2022, pp. 1–11. China, in 1992, and the M.S. degree in automatic
[40] S. Zhao, S. Chen, F. Wang, Z. Wei, J. Zhong, and J. Liang, “A large-scale control theory and application and the Ph.D. degree
 mobile traffic dataset for mobile application identification,” Comput. J., in computer software and theory from the University
 vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1501–1513, 2023. of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei,
[41] T. V. Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting Anhui, China, in 1995 and 2003, respectively. He is
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. currently an Associate Professor with the Depart-
 (NDSS), vol. 27, Feb. 2020, pp. 1–18. ment of Automation and the Deputy Director with
[42] N. C. Wickramasinghe, A. Shaghaghi, G. Tsudik, and S. Jha, “SoK: the Laboratory for Future Networks. His research
 Decoding the enigma of encrypted network traffic classifiers,” in Proc. interests include video semantic retrieval, media content distribution, video
 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1825–1843. quality detection, and future networks.