5324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Encrypted Traffic Detection in Resource Constrained
 IoT Networks: A Diffusion Model and LLM
 Integrated Framework
 Hongjuan Li , Hui Kang , Chenbang Liu, Ruolin Wang, Jiahui Li , Member, IEEE,
 Geng Sun , Senior Member, IEEE, Jiacheng Wang , Shuang Liang , and Shiwen Mao , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—The proliferation of Internet-of-things (IoT) infras- variance across data distributions. Comprehensive experimental
tructures and the widespread adoption of traffic encryption present validation on benchmark datasets confirms the effectiveness of DMsignificant challenges, particularly in environments characterized LITE, achieving classification accuracies of 98.87%, 92.61%, and
by dynamic traffic patterns, constrained computational capabil- 99.83% on USTC-TFC, ISCX-VPN, and Edge-IIoTset datasets,
ities, and strict latency constraints. In this paper, we propose respectively. This improves classification accuracy by an average of
DMLITE, a diffusion model and large language model (LLM) 3.7% and reduces training time by an average of 41.9% compared
integrated traffic embedding framework for network traffic de- to the representative deep learning model.
tection within resource-limited IoT environments. The DMLITE
overcomes these challenges through a tri-phase architecture includ- Index Terms—IoT network traffic classification, diffusion model,
ing traffic visual preprocessing, diffusion-based multi-level feature feature extraction, large language model (LLM), and feature
extraction, and LLM-guided feature optimization. Specifically, the selection.
framework utilizes self-supervised diffusion models to capture both
fine-grained and abstract patterns in encrypted traffic through
multi-level feature fusion and contrastive learning with representa- I. INTRODUCTION
tive sample selection, thus enabling rapid adaptation to new traffic HE rapid proliferation of Internet-of-things (IoT) techpatterns with minimal labeled data. Furthermore, DMLITE incorporates LLMs to dynamically adjust particle swarm optimization
parameters for intelligent feature selection by implementing a dual
 T nology is profoundly reshaping contemporary network
 ecosystems and digital infrastructure [1], [2]. With connected
objective function that minimizes both classification error and IoT devices projected to exceed 75 billion by 2025 [3], [4],
 network traffic detection has emerged as a critical component in
 Received 29 August 2025; revised 24 November 2025; accepted 22 December ensuring the security and operational stability of these complex
2025. Date of publication 30 December 2025; date of current version 13 January environments [5]. Effective traffic detection not only identifies
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and anomalous behaviors and malicious attacks but also supports
Development Program of China under Grant 2024YFE03000104, in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272194 and Grant optimized allocation of network resources and quality of ser-
62471200, in part by the Science and Technology Development Plan Project vice guarantees [6], [7]. In increasingly sophisticated threat
of Jilin Province under Grant 20240302079GX, in part by the Postdoctoral landscapes, particularly when facing zero-day attacks and en-
Fellowship Program of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant
GZC20240592, in part by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation General Fund crypted traffic challenges [8], [9], precise traffic classification
under Grant 2024M761123, and in part by the Scientific Research Project and anomaly detection mechanisms have become essential pilof Jilin Provincial Department of Education under Grant JJKH20250117KJ. lars for maintaining the integrity and reliability of IoT ecosys-
Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Yuan Wu. (Corresponding authors: Jiahui
Li; Geng Sun.) tems [10].
 Hongjuan Li, Hui Kang, Chenbang Liu, Ruolin Wang, and Jiahui Li are with Despite significant advances in network traffic detection
the College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun research [11], existing methods face mounting challenges
130012, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and
Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun as IoT environments become more complex and traffic en-
130012, China (e-mail: hongjuan23@mails.jlu.edu.cn; kanghui@jlu.edu.cn; li- cryption technologies become increasingly sophisticated and
ucb23@mails.jlu.edu.cn; wangrl24@mails.jlu.edu.cn; lijiahui@jlu.edu.cn). widespread [12]. Traditional traffic classification methods, in-
 Geng Sun is with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin
University, Changchun 130012, China, also with the Key Laboratory of Sym- cluding port-based approaches and deep packet inspection
bolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin (DPI) [13], [14], have become unsuitable for modern IoT net-
University, Changchun 130012, China, and also with the College of Comput- work environments due to the prevalence of port disguising teching and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
(e-mail: sungeng@jlu.edu.cn). niques and encrypted traffic [15]. To address these limitations,
 Jiacheng Wang is with the College of Computing and Data Sci- traffic detection methods based on machine learning (ML) [16]
ence, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: ji- and deep learning (DL) were subsequently introduced [17],
acheng.wang@ntu.edu.sg).
 Shuang Liang is with the School of Information Science and Technol- [18]. ML methods aim to identify network traffic through manogy, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130117, China (e-mail: liang- ually designed features and trained classifiers [19], offering
shuang@nenu.edu.cn). improvements in pattern recognition capabilities. Concurrently,
 Shiwen Mao is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36830 USA (e-mail: smao@ieee.org). DL methods employ neural networks to automatically learn
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3649259 representations from raw traffic data, processing traffic in an
 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5325

end-to-end fashion by transforming it into image or sequence and LLMs for IoT traffic detection. This architecture
formats [20], [21]. transforms raw network traffic into visual representations
 However, both ML and DL approaches present significant and employs the denoising diffusion probabilistic model
limitations in IoT contexts [22], [23]. ML-based methods such as (DDPM) to extract discriminative features even from enensemble classifiers and support vector machine (SVM) heavily crypted traffic. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
rely on manually engineered features and struggle to adapt to first work to integrate diffusion models and LLM-guided
dynamically changing network environments, thereby limiting optimization for network traffic classification, establishing
their effectiveness against evolving threats and traffic patterns in a new paradigm that moves beyond traditional discrimina-
IoT networks [24]. Moreover, DL-based methods require large tive approaches to network security.
volumes of high-quality labeled training data [25], [26], which r Diffusion-based Multi-level Feature Extraction: We deare difficult to obtain in rapidly changing IoT environments [27], velop an innovative self-supervised feature extraction apand suffer from high computational complexity and limited proach using denoising diffusion models that captures both
representation capabilities for encrypted traffic [28], [29]. These fine-grained and abstract traffic patterns through multishortcomings collectively result in low deployment efficiency level feature fusion. Our method combines contrastive
in the resource-constrained environments typical of many IoT learning with representative sample selection to enable efapplications [30]. In addition, while some works have employed ficient fine-tuning on minimal labeled data. This approach
self-supervised learning methods such as masked autoencoders overcomes the limitations of traditional feature extraction
for traffic classification to reduce labeled data requirements [31], techniques by effectively modeling the complex distributhese approaches typically focus on reconstruction-based learn- tion of network traffic data and extracting more discrimiing objectives and fail to leverage the powerful representation native representations, particularly valuable for encrypted
learning capabilities of generative models [32], [33], which traffic where subtle patterns determine classification
could potentially overcome many of these limitations through accuracy.
more sophisticated representation learning and reduced depen- r LLM-guided Adaptive Feature Selection: We introduce a
dence on labeled data [34]. novel optimization framework that employs the DeepSeek
 Based on an extensive analysis of the aforementioned limita- LLM to dynamically tune particle swarm optimization
tions, we seek to propose a novel framework that intelligently (PSO) parameters for intelligent feature selection. Our
integrates the advantages of self-supervised learning and gener- dual objective function minimizes both the maximum
ative artificial intelligence (AI), thereby addressing challenges classification error and the variance across different data
including scarcity of labeled data, difficulties in extracting distributions, ensuring robust performance across diverse
meaningful features from encrypted traffic, and deployment deployment scenarios. This approach significantly reduces
constraints in resource-limited IoT environments. However, im- computational requirements while maintaining high clasplementing the above framework presents several significant sification accuracy, making the system viable for resourcetechnical challenges. Firstly, extracting discriminative features constrained IoT environments where existing methods offrom network traffic visual representations requires overcoming ten fail to balance performance with efficiency.
the noisy characteristics of network data, particularly in en- r Comprehensive Performance Evaluation and Analysis:
crypted traffic scenarios where patterns are obscured [35], [36]. Through extensive experiments on multiple real-world IoT
Secondly, achieving optimal feature selection that balances clas- traffic datasets, we demonstrate that DMLITE achieves
sification accuracy with computational efficiency necessitates significant improvements over the best baseline model,
navigating a complex, high-dimensional search space that tradi- with an average increase of 3.7% in classification accuracy.
tional optimization methods struggle to effectively explore [37]. Moreover, ablation results further reveal important insights
Finally, ensuring the adaptability of the framework across di- about the effectiveness of generative models for encrypted
verse IoT environments with varying computational resources traffic analysis.
and traffic patterns demands solutions that can maintain perfor- The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
mance under resource constraints while adapting to shifting data reviews related work in network traffic detection, diffusion moddistributions [38]. Conventional approaches fail to address these els, and LLMs. Section III presents the detailed architecture and
interrelated challenges comprehensively, often sacrificing either components of our DMLITE framework. Section IV presents
performance or efficiency, and lacking the adaptability required and analyzes the experimental results. Finally, Section V confor heterogeneous IoT deployments. cludes the paper.
 Accordingly, we propose DMLITE, i.e., diffusion model
and large language model (LLM) integrated traffic embedding,
which is a novel solution that directly addresses these challenges II. RELATED WORK
through an integrated approach combining diffusion models and In this section, we present a comprehensive review of
LLMs. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as existing research related to network traffic detection, fofollows: cusing on the evolution from traditional methods to adr Generative AI-Powered Traffic Detection Architecture: We vanced DL and generative approaches. The key differences
 design and implement DMLITE, a novel framework that between our work and existing approaches are summarized
 leverages the complementary strengths of diffusion models in Table I. We categorize the literature into four main
5326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I
 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THIS WORK AND EXISTING WORKS

areas, which are traditional and ML-based traffic detection, camouflage and dynamic port utilization [48], [49]. Specifically,
DL approaches for network traffic analysis, diffusion mod- some applications exploit legitimate port numbers to transmit
els for representation learning, and LLMs for optimization unauthorized traffic data, such as malware concealed within
tasks. HTTP streams. In addition, several applications can eschew
 standardized port assignments in favor of randomly selected or
 ephemeral ports for service delivery, as commonly observed in
A. Traditional and ML-Based Network Traffic Detection Voice over Internet Protocol implementations [50].
 Traditional network traffic detection methods have evolved Subsequently, DPI, alternatively designated as signaturesignificantly over the past decades, from simple rule-based based detection methods, have been developed for traffic classystems to sophisticated ML approaches [39], [40]. Initially, the sification [51]. This type of method compares packets against
port-based classification approach was used for traffic analysis, predefined signature databases, thereby enabling accurate traffic
where application recognition depended on the standardized classification through payload examination rather than relying
port mappings established by the Internet assigned numbers on potentially misleading port associations [38]. For instance,
authority (IANA) [41]. For example, the authors in [42] pro- the authors in [52] introduced a novel approach for peer-to-peer
posed a TCP/IP traffic classification method based on port traffic identification by using application-layer signatures, which
number correlation with applications. Similarly, the authors achieves accurate detection without relying on port numbers.
in [43] introduced an application traffic classification method Based on this, the authors in [53] proposed PortLoad, a hybrid
using fixed IP-port information automatically collected from traffic classification approach that combines the efficiency and
application behavior analysis, which enables fast and accurate reduced privacy invasiveness of port-based methods with the
real-time traffic classification through simple packet header accuracy of DPI techniques, achieving a better balance between
matching. Moreover, the authors in [44] and [45] evaluated classification performance and computational overhead. Further
port-based network application classification approaches. For achieving faster DPI-based traffic monitoring, the authors in [54]
further improving the classification accuracy of UDP traffic, the introduced a quotient filter-based DPI approach for signatureauthors in [46] investigated a component-based method, where based packet payload matching. Furthermore, the authors in [55]
connected half-tuples are grouped into subgraphs and classified proposed an open-source high-speed DPI library and verified
according to the most frequently used port numbers within its protocol detection accuracy and efficiency in some monieach group. Although port-based traffic classification methods toring projects. To tackle the growing challenge of encrypted
have advantages such as faster identification speed and lower communications, the authors in [56] designed a system aimed
computational resources [47], they have become increasingly at performing DPI operations over encrypted traffic without
inadequate for modern network environments due to protocol compromising data privacy through specialized cryptographic
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5327

techniques. However, these approaches rely heavily on static a one-dimensional CNN and a bidirectional long short-term
rules and signatures, which makes them inadequate for detect- memory with self-attention to distinguish various darknet aping zero-day attacks and emerging threats in the dynamic IoT plications and protocols. For traffic analysis in IoT security,
ecosystem. Moreover, they become inoperative once laws and the authors in [71] developed an automatic and efficient DL
privacy policies restrict payload access or when applications method specifically designed for resource-constrained IoT enviemploy obfuscation and encapsulation strategies [57]. ronments that maintains high detection accuracy while reducing
 To overcome these limitations, researchers have applied var- computational overhead. Likewise, the authors in [72] presented
ious ML techniques to network traffic classification [58]. The a hypergraph convolution-based framework for detecting maliauthors in [59] evaluated ensemble ML classifiers, including cious encrypted traffic in non-terrestrial IoT networks spanning
random forest and gradient boosting, for virtual private network satellites, uncrewed aerial vehicles, and base stations. Recently,
(VPN) and non-virtual private network (non-VPN) traffic classi- the authors in [73] introduced RBLJAN that employs byte-label
fication, and demonstrated that ensemble methods significantly joint attention mechanisms and adversarial training to capture
outperform single classifiers like k-nearest neighbors (KNN). long-range dependencies in traffic patterns, thus enabling ef-
Likewise, the authors in [60] conducted a comprehensive ex- ficient encrypted network traffic classification. However, these
perimental analysis of various ML algorithms for IoT network approaches typically require large volumes of labeled training
traffic classification, comparing them in terms of accuracy, data, which is often scarce in rapidly evolving IoT environments,
speed, and training time. Recent works like [61] implemented a and their complex architectures demand substantial computadetection framework by combining ML approaches with feature tional resources that may exceed the capabilities of many IoT
selection for network intrusion detection, and the experiment devices [31].
results demonstrated that carefully selected features could sig- To address the challenge of labeled data scarcity, several
nificantly improve detection accuracy. Moreover, the author researchers have explored semi-supervised and self-supervised
in [62] designed a cost-sensitive multi-class support vector learning approaches [74], [75]. The authors in [76] introduced a
machine method with active learning for network traffic clas- novel semi-supervised deep reinforcement learning method that
sification, tackling the class imbalance problem by dynamically adaptively optimizes detection strategies through environmenassigning weights to applications. Additionally, the ML-based tal feedback. Likewise, the authors in [77] and [78] designed
approach for encrypted traffic classification has gained traction. the semi-supervised learning-based ConvLaddernet and flow
The authors in [63] proposed a granular multi-label classification transformer frameworks, respectively, aimed at achieving imframework that utilizes classifier chains to classify at three proved classification performance when only a small quantity
levels of granular classification of encrypted network traffic for of annotated data is available. Recently, the authors in [79] detackling the growing challenge of encrypted communications. veloped a federated semi-supervised learning framework using
Similarly, the authors in [64] developed three ML approaches autoencoder-based models for privacy-preserving network trafcombining neural networks and bidirectional long short-term fic analysis in smart home environments. In addition, the authors
memory (LSTM) with ensemble voting techniques for encrypted in [80] proposed a contrastive pre-training approach combined
network traffic classification, achieving up to 96.8% accuracy with semi-supervised learning to achieve robust traffic reprein classifying applications such as browsing, VoIP, file transfer, sentation and mitigate classification bias. For reducing labeling
and video streaming without inspecting packet contents directly. dependency in traffic classification, the authors in [81] and [82]
Despite these advances, ML-based approaches are hampered by leveraged a masked autoencoder-based traffic transformer with
the insufficient volume of labeled network traffic samples [65]. multi-level flow representation to capture both local and global
Furthermore, most of them still rely heavily on domain expertise traffic patterns. Similarly, the authors in [31] employed a masked
for feature engineering and struggle to adapt to the ever-changing autoencoder architecture and transformer-based backbone, efnature of network traffic patterns [22]. ficiently extracting features from non-redundant traffic data.
 Moreover, the authors in [83] introduced a federated selfsupervised generative adversarial network-based approach that
B. DL Approaches for Network Traffic Analysis enables the recognition of traffic originating from unidentified
 The limitations of traditional ML approaches have led re- services and produces artificial samples mimicking the distrisearchers to explore DL techniques for network traffic analysis, butional properties of unknown traffic patterns. In addition,
which can automatically learn feature representations from raw the authors in [84] developed a self-supervised learning-based
data [66], [67]. The authors in [68] pioneered the application multi-feature fusion framework that introduces random subset
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for malware traffic selection for data augmentation and a novel fusion mechanism
classification, and this method utilized representation learning to extract temporal features from traffic tables. Nevertheless,
that treats raw traffic data as images, thus achieving practical even these advanced DL approaches struggle with the dual
accuracy requirements without requiring hand-designed fea- challenges of computational efficiency and representational catures. Extending this, the authors in [69] designed Deep Packet, pacity for encrypted traffic. Specifically, most of them often fail
a DL-based framework using CNN and stacked autoencoders to capture the subtle patterns that distinguish different types
that integrates feature extraction and classification for both of encrypted traffic while maintaining the computational effiapplication types and traffic categories. Similarly, the authors ciency required for deployment in resource-constrained IoT
in [70] presented a cascaded neural framework that combines environments.
5328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 1. Sketch map of the traffic visual preprocessing.

C. Diffusion Model Appliactions Several studies have proposed exploiting the unique ability of
 Diffusion models have recently emerged as powerful gen- diffusion models to learn complex data distributions and extract
erative approaches that can be combined with other learning- meaningful representations [102]. The authors in [103] systembased algorithms for control and optimization [85], [86]. For atically deconstructed modern diffusion models to identify their
example, the authors in [87] explored diffusion model-based essential components for effective representation learning. Furpolicy networks in deep reinforcement learning frameworks thermore, the authors in [34] investigated the inherent represenfor energy management optimization. Similarly, the authors tation learning capabilities of denoising diffusion autoencoders
in [88] integrated discrete diffusion models with hierarchical (DDAEs) and demonstrated that these models can obtain highmulti-agent deep reinforcement learning for enhancing goal- quality discriminative representations within their intermediate
conditioned navigation and sensing. Furthermore, the authors layers through generative pre-training alone. Based on this, the
in [89] demonstrated how diffusion model-based approaches authors in [104] further proposed DDAE++, which introduces
can enhance traditional optimization methods to achieve supe- a self-conditioning mechanism that leverages the rich semantic
rior performance in complex network resource allocation and information within diffusion networks to simultaneously imcoordination problems. Likewise, the authors in [90] explored prove both generative quality and discriminative performance.
attention-enhanced diffusion models for edge service optimiza- The authors in [105] leveraged pre-trained diffusion models for
tion. Recent works such as [91] explored diffusion-enhanced re- unsupervised concept extraction. Similarly, the authors in [106]
inforcement learning methods that employ the generative poten- and [107] explored the applications of diffusion models as featial of diffusion models while integrating the powerful decision- ture extraction in sensing change detection and medical imaging,
 respectively. To learn complex unknown noise distributions, the
formulation mechanisms of reinforcement learning. Additionally, the authors in [92] investigated the application of generative authors [108] introduced the application of diffusion models
 to signal detection in near-field communication systems and
diffusion models combined with deep learning approaches for
 presented a maximum likelihood estimation diffusion detector.
multi-objective optimization problems. Likewise, the authors
in [93] leveraged diffusion models as prediction strategies and Despite these advances, diffusion models have seen limited
 application in network security contexts, with most research fopresented a dynamic multi-objective evolutionary approach.
 cusing on their generative capabilities rather than their potential
 Moreover, some works have investigated applications of the
diffusion model within network security [94]. For example, the for discriminative feature extraction in complex domains like
 encrypted network traffic. Moreover, current applications of difauthors in [95] explored the applications of diffusion models
as network optimizers and demonstrated that they can achieve fusion models typically utilize only single-layer representations,
flexible and efficient network performance optimization. Recent failing to leverage the rich multi-level features formed during the
 diffusion process that could potentially capture both fine-grained
works like [96] and [97] designed diffusion model-based approaches for Wi-Fi data processing for defending against mem- and abstract patterns in network traffic data.
bership inference attacks and enhancing indoor localization accuracy, respectively. Furthermore, the authors in [98] introduced D. LLM Applications in Optimization and Parameter Tuning
a generative diffusion model-enabled approach for secure beamforming optimization in intelligent reflecting surface-assisted LLMs have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across vari-
IoT communications. Likewise, the authors in [99] developed ous domains, including optimization and parameter tuning tasks,
an improved twin delayed deep deterministic policy gradient due to their powerful reasoning capabilities [112], [113]. For
algorithm based on the diffusion model to enhance uncrewed example, the authors in [23] presented a model-centric optimizaaerial vehicle-enabled secure data collection in IoT networks. tion approach for democratizing LLM deployment on mobile
In addition, the authors in [100] developed a novel secure edge networks. In addition, the authors in [114] proposed a
sensing system based on diffusion mode that leverages both framework where LLMs guide the optimization process for
the discrete conditional diffusion model for graph generation complex engineering problems by iteratively refining solution
to optimize link activation and continuous conditional diffusion strategies based on performance feedback. Building on this, the
models to generate safeguarding signals, protecting users against authors in [115] introduced a reinforcement learning with LLMs
unauthorized monitoring. To tackle data scarcity challenges in interaction framework that leverages LLM-empowered genera-
IoT malware detection, the authors in [101] leveraged the DDPM tive agents to provide real-time subjective quality of experience
for synthetic network traffic image generation. feedback for optimizing resource allocation in distributed diffusion model services. Similarly, the authors in [116] deployed a
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5329

hybrid approach based on LLM for simultaneously optimizing diverse problem domains. Furthermore, existing optimization
vehicle-to-infrastructure communication and autonomous driv- approaches typically focus on single-objective functions, neing policies, where LLMs optimize driving decisions through glecting the importance of performance robustness across difexperience learning while collaborating with the double deep ferent data distributions, which is a critical consideration for IoT
Q-learning algorithm for communication optimization. Further- traffic detection systems that typically operate effectively across
more, the authors in [117] introduced an inventive paradigm heterogeneous deployment environments.
exploiting LLM-enabled graphs for dynamic network optimiza- Different from these approaches, the proposed DMLITE
tion, demonstrating how LLMs can effectively optimize UAV framework aims to combine the representational power of diffutrajectory planning and communication resource allocation. sion models with the reasoning capabilities of LLMs to create a
 Moreover, some works have focused on utilizing LLMs for comprehensive solution for IoT traffic detection that overcomes
parameter adjustment [118], [119]. For example, the authors the limitations identified in the literature. In the following, we
in [120] and [121] explored the use of LLMs for hyperparameter present the details of the DMLITE framework.
optimization in ML models, showing that language models can
effectively reason about parameter relationships and suggest
promising configurations based on previous performance data. III. DMLITE FRAMEWORK: DIFFUSION MODEL AND LLM
Building on this, the authors in [122] utilized DeepSeek to facil- INTEGRATED TRAFFIC EMBEDDING
itate flexible hyperparameter adjustment in deep reinforcement
 In this section, we introduce a novel DMLITE framework for
learning, evidencing the ability of LLMs to strengthen algo-
 IoT network traffic classification. In the following, we detail
rithmic outcomes through contextually-driven parameter adapthe framework, beginning with an overview of the framework
tation. Similarly, the authors in [123] proposed an LLM-enabled
 architecture, followed by detailed descriptions of each compoparameter tuning framework for robotic systems, where LLMs
 nent, and concluding with a computational complexity analysis.
interpret user preferences and dynamically adjust operational
parameters to optimize human-robot interaction performance in
physical care tasks. Recent work like [124] introduced an LLMbased hyperparameter adaptation framework for evolutionary A. Overview of DMLITE Framework
reinforcement learning, where the Qwen model dynamically As aforementioned, network traffic classification faces unique
adjusts learning rate and discount factor based on fitness. Like- challenges, including rapidly changing communication patterns,
wise, the authors in [125] proposed a novel LLM-based hyperpa- limited labeled data for emerging threats, and resource conrameter optimization framework aimed at improving parameter straints in edge computing environments [135], [136]. Tradispace exploitation. Additionally, the authors in [126] proposed tional classification methods often struggle with these chala novel system aimed at employing LLMs for automatically lenges due to their reliance on manual feature engineering or
designing dense reward functions within reinforcement learning their inability to adapt to new traffic patterns without extensive
environments, significantly improving agent learning efficiency retraining [137]. To address these challenges, we aim to propose
in complex tasks through iterative reward function refinement. an integrated approach that leverages both diffusion models
 In evolutionary algorithms, several researchers have inves- and LLMs to extract and optimize discriminative features from
tigated strategies for parameter adaptation [127], [128]. For network traffic.
instance, the authors in [129], the authors designed a success- Specifically, the designed DMLITE framework addresses
history based parameter adaptation mechanism for the dif- these limitations through a three-stage pipeline that combines
ferential evolution algorithm that dynamically adjusts control the representation power of diffusion models with the optimizaparameters by leveraging historical information of successful tion capabilities of LLMs, and it consists of the following key
parameters. Building on this, the authors in [130] and [131] components:
further enhanced this approach by introducing distance-based r Traffic Visual Preprocessing: In this process, we convert
and nearest spatial neighborhood-based improvements, respec- raw network traffic into visual representations suitable for
tively. Likewise, the authors in [132] developed a parameter DL models. This transformation enables the application
adaptation-enhanced ant colony optimization method with a of powerful computer vision techniques to the domain of
dynamic hybrid mechanism that analyzes historical search infor- network traffic analysis.
mation to adjust key parameters during optimization. Moreover, r Diffusion-based Feature Extraction: We leverage DDPMs
the authors in [133] employed the policy gradient method to to extract discriminative traffic features. This approach
acquire parameter control strategies from optimization experi- capitalizes on the diffusion models to learn complex data
ences, which enables algorithms to autonomously adjust their distributions and capture multi-scale features.
behavior based on the characteristics of the problem being r LLM-guided Feature Selection Optimization: Employing
solved. Recent works like [134] integrated multiple information LLMs to optimize the feature selection process, reducing
sources to evaluate optimization progress and adjust algorithm dimensionality while maintaining classification accuracy
parameters accordingly. Nevertheless, these approaches rely on across diverse network environments.
predefined adaptation rules or heuristics rather than leveraging The DMLITE framework integrates these components to
the reasoning capabilities and contextual understanding offered enhance classification accuracy, generalization capability, and
by LLMs, thus limiting their flexibility and generalization across computational efficiency in IoT traffic classification tasks. In
5330 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

the following subsections, we detail each component and ex- The visual representation captures both local byte-level patterns
plain how they collectively address the challenges of IoT traffic and global flow-level structures, providing a rich foundation for
classification. our diffusion-based feature extraction process.

B. Traffic Visual Preprocessing C. Diffusion-Based Feature Extraction
 IoT network traffic presents unique challenges for classifi- In general, IoT traffic classification faces challenges related to
cation due to its heterogeneous nature, protocol diversity, and feature representation, such as the presence of noise in raw traffic
evolving patterns [138]. Traditional feature extraction methods data, and the lack of discriminative features for distinguishoften rely on domain expertise and manual feature engineering, ing between similar traffic types. Traditional feature extraction
which can be time-consuming and may not generalize well methods often rely on handcrafted features or general-purpose
across different IoT environments [60], [139]. Visual representa- neural networks that may not effectively capture the unique
tions offer a promising alternative, as they can preserve structural characteristics of network traffic [141].
information while enabling the application of advanced DL In this case, diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable
techniques [68]. capability in learning complex data distributions and extracting
 As such, we transform raw network traffic into visual rep- meaningful representations in various domains such as computer
resentations, enabling the application of powerful computer vision and natural language processing [142], [143]. Moreover,
vision techniques to the traffic classification domain [22], [140]. diffusion models have proven effective in self-supervised rep-
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, our preprocessing module resentation learning scenarios [103], which makes them paremploys the USTC-TK2016 toolkit [68] to convert raw network ticularly suitable for limited labeled network traffic data in
traffic data in PCAP format into standardized image representa- IoT environments. In particular, diffusion models demonstrate
tions. In particular, the transformation process consists of four superior efficiency in modeling complex training distributions
critical steps: compared to other generative approaches, and have been demon-
 1) Traffic Splitting: We divide the continuous network traffic strated to extract high-quality discriminative features from their
 capture into discrete traffic units based on flow granularity. intermediate layers during the denoising process [34].
 Each flow Fi is defined as a sequence of packets sharing Thus, we introduce a novel application of DDPMs [144]
 the same 5-tuple (source IP, destination IP, source port, for network traffic feature extraction, leveraging their ability to
 destination port, protocol), which is given by progressively denoise data and capture multi-scale features that
 Fi = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn } | ∀pj ∈ Fi : are particularly valuable for distinguishing subtle differences in
 traffic patterns. Fig. 2 illustrates the framework of our diffusion-
 5-tuple(pj ) = 5-tuple(p1 ). (1) based feature extraction approach. This approach consists of
 four key stages, which are DDPM model training, optimal
 2) Traffic Sanitization: To eliminate network-specific bias
 feature layer identification, representative sample selection and
 and ensure privacy, we perform traffic anonymization by
 fine-tuning, and multi-level feature fusion. The details are as
 randomizing MAC and IP addresses. Additionally, empty
 follows.
 and duplicate samples are removed to prevent model bias,
 1) DDPM Model Training: We first train a DDPM based
 i.e.,
 on a U-Net architecture to learn the underlying distribution of
 Fi = A(Fi ) | A : anonymization function. (2) network traffic images. The diffusion process follows a forward
 process that gradually adds Gaussian noise to the data and a
 3) Uniform Transformation: Each traffic unit is trimmed or reverse process that learns to denoise [145]. In particular, the
 padded to a fixed length of L = w × h bytes to ensure forward process is given by [144]
 consistency in processing. This standardization is essential
 
 for the subsequent visual transformation, which is given q(xt |xt−1 ) = N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I). (5)
 by
 ⎧ Moreover, the reverse process is given by
 ⎪  
 ⎨trim(Fi , L) if |Fi | > L,
 
 Fi = pad(Fi , L) if |Fi | < L, (3) pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; μθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t)), (6)
 ⎪
 ⎩ 
 Fi otherwise. where βt is the noise schedule, μθ and Σθ are learned by the
 4) Image Generation: The byte sequence is converted into a neural network.
 w × h grayscale image, where each pixel corresponds to Following this, the model is trained using the variational lower
 a byte value, i.e., bound objective as follows:
  
 Ii = reshape(Fi , w, h). (4) L(θ) = Ex0 ,,t  − θ (xt , t)2 , (7)

 Note that this preprocessing approach transforms network where  is the random noise and θ is the noise predicted by the
traffic into a visual domain that preserves the inherent patterns model.
and byte-level relationships while enabling the application of DL 2) Optimal Feature Layer Identification: Then, we evaluate
techniques for subsequent feature extraction and classification. different layers of the trained denoising network to identify
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5331

Fig. 2. Comprehensive architecture of the diffusion-based multi-level feature extraction process, demonstrating: (1) the forward diffusion process that progressively
adds noise to traffic images, (2) the U-Net network architecture used for denoising, (3) optimal feature layer identification through evaluation metrics, (4)
representative sample selection using K-means clustering for efficient fine-tuning, and (5) multi-level feature fusion that combines features from adjacent network
layers to capture both fine-grained and abstract traffic patterns.

the optimal feature extraction layer that provides the most dis- is the number of samples. This contrastive loss encourages the
criminative representations. This process is important because model to learn representations where samples from the same
different layers in the network capture features at varying levels class are close to each other while samples from different classes
of abstraction. For each layer l, we compute a classification are pushed apart in the feature space.
performance metric Pl using a simple classifier as follows: Following this, the optimization objective is given by
 l∗ = arg max Pl , (8)
 l min Lcontra . (11)
 θ l∗
 ∗
where l is the optimal layer.
 3) Representative Sample Selection and Fine-Tuning: In this 4) Multi-Level Feature Fusion: To capture features at difprocess, we select a representative subset of the training data to ferent levels of abstraction, we concatenate features from the
fine-tune the optimal feature extraction layer by using K-means optimal layer with its adjacent layers (above and below) to form
clustering [146]. This approach aims to reduce computational a comprehensive feature representation [148]. This multi-level
requirements while maintaining performance by focusing on the fusion enhances the robustness of the extracted features by
most informative samples, which can be given by incorporating both fine-grained and abstract patterns, which is
 S = {xi |i ∈ KMeans(Fl∗ (D), k = n × 0.05)}, (9) given by

where Fl∗ represents the feature extraction at the optimal layer Ffused (x) = [Fl∗ −1 (x) ⊕ Fl∗ (x) ⊕ Fl∗ +1 (x)], (12)
l∗ , D is the training dataset, and S is the selected subset.
 Note that the fine-tuning process employs contrastive learn- where ⊕ denotes the concatenation operation.
ing loss for enhanced feature discrimination. The contrastive As can be seen, this diffusion-based feature extraction aplearning loss based on InfoNCE is defined as follows [147]: proach captures the intricate patterns in network traffic while
 1 exp(zi · zi /τ ) providing robust representations that are less sensitive to noise
Lcontra = − log ,
 N i
 exp(zi · zi /τ ) + j=i exp(zi · zj /τ ) and domain shifts. By leveraging the hierarchical nature of the
 U-Net architecture and the denoising capabilities of diffusion
 (10)
 models, our method extracts features that effectively distinguish
where zi is the normalized feature vector, τ is a temperature between different types of IoT traffic, even when the differences
parameter controlling the sharpness of the distribution, and N are subtle or when limited labeled data is available.
5332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 3. The LLM-guided PSO-based feature selection optimization workflow, showing how the pre-trained DeepSeek model dynamically tunes PSO parameters.

D. LLM-Guided Feature Selection Optimization optimization, and finally detail the iterative parameter search
 Due to the high dimensionality of extracted features, we and evaluation method.
aim to conduct feature selection to avoid the increased com- 1) Dual Optimization Objective: To ensure both high perputational complexity and potential overfitting. Conventional formance and robustness across different data distributions,
feature selection methods often rely on fixed heuristics or require we define a dual optimization objective that aims to minimize
extensive manual tuning of hyperparameters [149], limiting both the maximum classification error rate across multiple data
their effectiveness across diverse IoT environments. However, subsets and the variance of error rates between these subsets,
the dynamic nature of IoT traffic patterns necessitates adaptive which is given by
feature selection strategies that can account for varying data
distributions across different network settings. min maxi∈{1,2,...,n} Erri (θ)+
 θ
 In this case, we integrate the LLMs into the feature selection process to develop a more intelligent and adaptive fea- λ · Var({Err1 (θ), Err2 (θ), . . . Errn (θ)}) , (13)
ture selection strategy. We select PSO as the foundation for
feature selection due to several key advantages. Specifically, where Erri (θ) is the classification error rate on subset i with
PSO demonstrates excellent convergence properties for binary feature selection parameters θ, and λ is a weighting factor
optimization problems like feature selection [150]. Additionally, balancing the two components. This dual objective encourages
PSO offers superior computational efficiency with fewer param- the selection of features that perform well across all data subsets,
eters to adjust compared to genetic algorithms and other swarm rather than features that excel on some subsets but perform
intelligence algorithms [151]. Furthermore, the social learning poorly on others.
mechanism of PSO balances global and local search through 2) PSO Parameter Optimization: Following this, we utilize
particle information exchange while maintaining population the DeepSeek LLM to optimize three critical parameters of the
diversity throughout the optimization process, helping prevent PSO algorithm, which are inertia weight w, cognitive learning
premature convergence to suboptimal feature subsets [152]. factor c1 , and social learning factor c2 during optimizing the
By guiding the parameter optimization of the PSO algorithm, aforementioned optimization objective shown in (13). In gen-
LLMs can help identify the most discriminative features while eral, the standard PSO update equations are given by [152]
maintaining computational efficiency. Fig. 3 shows the proposed
LLM-guided PSO-based feature selection algorithm. In the
following, we first introduce the optimization objective during vit+1 = w · vit + c1 · r1 · (pti − xti ) + c2 · r2 · (g t − xti ), (14)
the feature selection process, then present the PSO parameter xt+1
 i = xti + vit+1 , (15)
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5333

 Algorithm 1: LLM-Guided Parameter Optimization via Step 3: Response Parsing. Extracting numerical parameter
 DeepSeek. changes from the natural language response of DeepSeek using
 regex patterns that recognize common directive formats such as
 increase w by 0.1 or set c1 to 1.8.
 Step 4: Validated Parameter Update. Applying the suggested
 changes while enforcing theoretically sound boundary constraints.
 Step 5: Fallback Mechanism. Reverting to previous parameter
 values if parsing fails or suggested values violate bounds, ensuring algorithmic robustness against ambiguous or invalid LLM
 responses.
 3) Iterative Parameter Search and Evaluation: In what follows, the LLM iteratively refines the PSO parameters based on
 performance feedback, creating a feedback loop that continuously improves the feature selection process. In each iteration,
 the PSO algorithm with the LLM-suggested parameters selects
 a feature subset, which is then evaluated using the dual optimization objective, i.e.,

 Fselected = PSO(w∗ ,c∗1 ,c∗2 ) (Ffused , Dtrain ). (17)

 Then, the results are fed back to the LLM, which generates
 improved parameter suggestions:
   
 (w∗ , c∗1 , c∗2 ) = LLMrefine ((w∗ , c∗1 , c∗2 ), P(Fselected )), (18)

 where P(Fselected ) represents the performance metrics of the
 selected feature subset.
 Algorithm 2 shows the pseudocode of the LLM-guided feature selection optimization strategy. By integrating the reasoning
 capabilities of LLMs [155] with the exploration efficiency of
 PSO, this approach intelligently navigates the feature space to
 identify the most discriminative features for IoT traffic classification.
where vit and xti are the velocity and position of particle i at
iteration t, pti is the best position found by particle i, g t is the
global best position, and r1 , r2 are random numbers in [0,1]. E. Computational Complexity Analysis
 The PSO convergence analysis demonstrates that parame-
 The practical deployment of IoT traffic classification systems
ter configuration (w, c1 , c2 ) critically determines explorationoften requires careful consideration of computational resources,
exploitation balance [153], [154]. Different from static paramespecially in edge computing environments. Thus, we anaeter configurations or linear parameter adjustment methods, we
 lyze the computational complexity of each component of the
use the LLMs to optimize these parameters based on historical
 DMLITE framework and discuss optimizations for resourceperformance data and domain knowledge, which is given by
 constrained environments. Specifically, the computational com-
 (w∗ , c∗1 , c∗2 ) = LLMoptimize (H, Dval ), (16) plexity of the DMLITE framework can be analyzed for each of
 its major components:
where H represents historical performance data and Dval is the 1) Traffic Visual Preprocessing: The complexity is O(N · L),
validation dataset. Algorithm 1 details the interaction between where N is the number of traffic flows and L is the
PSO and DeepSeek LLM. Specifically, the PSO-DeepSeek in- maximum flow length (capped at 784 bytes in our imteraction is described as follows: plementation). This step is relatively lightweight and can
 Step 1: Prompt Construction. Designing a structured natural be efficiently implemented on edge devices.
language query that includes current PSO parameters (w, c1 , c2 ), 2) Diffusion-based Feature Extraction:
recent performance metrics, such as fitness value, classification r DDPM Model Training: O(T · E · N · D), where T
accuracy, and feature counts over the past 6 iterations, and is the number of diffusion steps, E is the number of
explicit instructions requesting specific numerical parameter epochs, N is the number of training samples, and D
adjustments to improve convergence behavior. is the dimensionality of the data. This is the most
 Step 2: DeepSeek API Query. Invoking the LLM with the computationally intensive phase, but it is performed
constructed prompt. offline during the development stage.
5334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Algorithm 2: LLM-guided PSO Feature Selection. size, D is the feature dimension, and I is the number
 of iterations for K-means. Our approach reduces this
 cost by operating on only 5% of the training data.
 r Fine-tuning: O(E  · N  · D), where E  is the number
 of fine-tuning epochs and N  is the size of the
 representative subset (5% of N ). This phase is
 significantly more efficient than full model training
 due to the reduced dataset size.
 3) LLM-guided Feature Selection:
 r PSO Optimization: O(P · I · D · C), where P is the
 number of particles, I is the number of iterations, D is
 the feature dimension, and C is the cost of evaluating
 the fitness of each particle. The LLM guidance helps
 reduce the number of iterations required to reach an
 optimal solution.
 r LLM Parameter Refinement: O(R · ILLM ), where R
 is the number of refinement rounds and ILLM is the
 inference cost of the LLM. This step is performed on a
 server rather than edge devices.
 The overall computational complexity of the DMLITE framework is dominated by the DDPM model training phase. However, once the model is trained, the feature extraction and selection phases are relatively efficient, especially since we only
 use 5% of the training data for fine-tuning. The LLM-guided
 optimization introduces additional computational cost, but this
 is offset by the improved efficiency of the resulting feature
 selection, leading to better classification performance with fewer
 features.
 For deployment in resource-constrained IoT environments,
 the trained model can be further optimized through techniques
 such as model quantization, pruning, and knowledge distillation, reducing the overall computational requirements while
 maintaining classification accuracy. Additionally, the modular
 nature of our framework allows for flexible deployment configurations, where more computationally intensive components
 can be offloaded to cloud servers while lightweight inference
 can be performed at the edge.
 Compared to traditional approaches that require extensive
 feature engineering or complex DL models that need to process
 raw traffic data directly, our framework offers a more balanced
 approach to the accuracy-efficiency trade-off, making it particularly suitable for real-world IoT security applications.

 IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
 In this section, we present a comprehensive evaluation of the
 proposed DMLITE framework. We first describe the datasets and
 implementation details, followed by performance comparison
 with state-of-the-art methods, and conclude with ablation studies
 to validate the contribution of different components.

 A. Dataset and Implementation
 r Optimal Layer Identification: O(L · N · D), where L To evaluate the performance of the DMLITE framework,
 is the number of layers evaluated. This is also per- we conduct experiments on three widely-used public network
 formed offline during model development. traffic datasets, i.e., USTC-TFC [68], ISCX-VPN [156], and
 r Representative Sample Selection: O(k · N · D · I), Edge-IIoTset [157]. Table II summarizes the characteristics
 where k is the number of clusters, N is the dataset of datasets, including the number of classes, total samples,
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5335

 TABLE II
 DATASET INFORMATION PROCESSED BY THE USTC-TK2016 TOOLKIT [68] IN OUR EXPERIMENTS

and class distribution of samples. Specifically, the USTC-TFC TABLE III
 TRAINING PARAMETERS OF THE DMLITE IMPLEMENTATION
dataset contains network traffic data for both malicious and
benign applications. It includes 10 types of malware traffic (such
as Cridex, Geodo, Htbot, Zeus, etc.) and 10 types of normal
traffic activities, providing a balanced environment for evaluating traffic classification performance. Moreover, the ISCX-
VPN dataset focuses on encrypted traffic classification with 12
traffic categories (6 VPN and 6 non-VPN), including audio,
chat, file transfer, email service, streaming, and VoIP. This
dataset is particularly valuable for evaluating performance on
encrypted traffic since traditional pattern-matching techniques
often fail. The Edge-IIoTset dataset comprises network traffic
data collected from various edge computing and IoT devices.
It includes traffic from multiple IoT device categories (such as
temperature, humidity, and ultrasonic sensors) with both benign comparative experiments. Table III presents the other training
operational patterns and simulated attack traffic vectors, includ- parameters used in the DMLITE framework.
ing DDoS, information gathering, man-in-the-middle, injection As for evaluation metrics, we employ multiple compleattacks, and malware. This comprehensive dataset captures the mentary evaluation metrics that capture different aspects
unique characteristics of resource-constrained IoT communica- of classification performance, including accuracy (AC),
tions at network edges, which makes it particularly valuable for precision (PR), recall (RC), and weighted F1-score (F1)
evaluating traffic classification algorithms in edge computing as evaluation metrics. Additionally, we conduct per-class
environments where processing capabilities and bandwidth are F1-score analysis to assess the effectiveness of the framework
limited. across individual traffic categories, enabling a more granular
 The proposed framework is implemented using PyTorch 2.7.1 understanding of classification capabilities for specific traffic
along with CUDA 12.6 and conducted on a server equipped types.
with NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 GPU. For the diffusion model
component, we employ a U-Net architecture, and the diffusion
process follows a cosine noise schedule, in which we use the B. Comparison With Baselines
AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 and weight To verify the performance of the proposed DMLITE framedecay of 0.05. For the LLM component, we utilize a pre-trained work, we conduct comprehensive experiments comparing it
DeepSeek model, in which the population size N = 10, the with several state-of-the-art baselines, including supervised
maximum iteration count T = 50, and the number of data learning methods (i.e., 2D-CNN [68], Deep Packet [69], and
subsets is 4. Each data subset is selected through the K-means RBLJAN [73]), and self-supervised learning approaches (i.e.,
clustering algorithm and contains approximately 5% of the total YaTC [81] and MTC-MAE [31]). Note that DP-CNN and DPsample. Moreover, we utilize a KNN classifier with K = 5 as SAE are Deep Packet with the one-dimensional CNN and the
the performance evaluator for comparing feature representations stacked autoencoder, respectively, and the key parameter settings
extracted from different intermediate layers of the diffusion of these baselines are shown in Table IV.
model, and the light gradient boosting machine (LightGBM) Table V demonstrates that DMLITE achieves superior peras the primary classifier for final performance evaluation and formance across the three datasets. The reason may be that
5336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE IV homogeneous, thereby reducing the discriminative power of
 KEY PARAMETER SETTINGS OF BASELINE METHODS
 extracted features.
 The computational overhead comparison is illustrated in
 Table VI, showing training duration requirements for all three
 datasets. Although 2D-CNN exhibits superior computational
 efficiency, its classification accuracy proves insufficient when
 handling intricate network traffic patterns, as evidenced by our
 performance assessments. DMLITE strikes an optimal balance
 between computational demands and classification quality,
 requiring reasonable training durations while substantially
 outperforming self-supervised alternatives such as YaTC and
 MTC-MAE in terms of efficiency.
 The detailed category-specific performance analysis is illustrated in Tables VII, VIII, and IX, which provide an exhaustive
 evaluation comparing DMLITE against baseline approaches
 across three distinct datasets. The experimental results indicate
 that baseline methods exhibit significant performance fluctuations, failing entirely to identify certain traffic categories, particularly when dealing with encrypted network traffic or complex
 network patterns. In contrast, the proposed DMLITE framework
 achieves remarkably stable and superior performance across all
 traffic categories throughout the three experimental datasets.
 Notably, self-supervised approaches such as MTC-MAE exhibit substantially diminished detection capabilities for multiple
 traffic categories, where DMLITE demonstrates exceptional
 proficiency, thereby validating the superior feature extraction
 capabilities. Furthermore, these experimental results show the
 superiority of DMLITE in preserving classification effectiveness across heterogeneous network environments, especially
 for security-critical deployment scenarios where uniform crosscategory performance reliability is paramount.

 C. Ablation Study
 To evaluate the effectiveness of each component in the proposed DMLITE framework, we conduct an ablation study by
 incrementally adding key components to the baseline model.
 Specifically, we compare and analyze four variants of our approach, which are as follows:
the diffusion-based multi-level feature extraction mechanism r DMLITE-1: Utilizes only the optimal feature extraction
effectively captures meaningful features through the U-Net ar- layer from the diffusion model without any enhancements.
chitecture during the progressive denoising process. Moreover, r DMLITE-2: Extends DMLITE-1 by incorporating the
compared to supervised methods, the enhanced performance ex- contrastive learning-based fine-tuning strategy.
hibited by DMLITE and other self-supervised approaches, i.e., r DMLITE-3: Builds upon DMLITE-2 by adding the multi-
YaTC and MTC-MAE, validates the efficacy of self-supervised layer feature fusion mechanism.
learning paradigms in network traffic classification tasks. Mean- r DMLITE: Our complete framework that enhances
while, the self-supervised learning paradigm of DMLITE effec- DMLITE-3 with the LLM-guided feature selection optitively overcomes the critical challenge of labeled data in rapidly mization.
evolving IoT environments. Additionally, the well-balanced pre- Fig. 4 presents the comparative performance of these variants
cision and recall scores obtained by DMLITE underscore its on both the USTC-TFC, ISCX-VPN, and Edge-IIoTset datasets
effectiveness in reducing both false positives and false negatives, across four evaluation metrics, including accuracy, precision, rewhich is crucial for practical traffic classification systems that call, and F1-score. Although these components of the DMLITE
focus on classification stability. However, the relatively lower framework may introduce the complexity of deployment and
accuracy on the ISCX-VPN dataset reveals potential challenges maintenance, experimental results show that each component
when handling certain types of complex encrypted VPN traffic delivers performance improvements across three datasets, which
patterns. The reason may be that VPN encryption introduces validates the necessity and effectiveness of this multi-stage
additional layers of obfuscation that make traffic patterns more design approach.
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5337

 TABLE V
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN DMLITE AND BASELINE ALGORITHMS ON THREE DATASETS

Fig. 4. Performance comparison on three datasets, including accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.

 TABLE VI where we document a substantial 2.27% accuracy improve-
 TRAINING TIME OF DIFFERENT MODELS (S)
 ment compared to the baseline DMLITE-1 configuration. This
 enhancement can be attributed to the introduced contrastive
 learning framework, which learn discriminative embeddings by
 maximizing similarity between positive pairs while minimizing
 similarity between negative samples, thus refining the feature
 space organization for improved classification boundaries.
 Finally, LLM-guided feature selection optimization is
 integrated into the model as a final enhancement. Although
 this component introduces additional computational overhead,
 it achieves consistent performance refinements across all
 evaluation metrics and experimental datasets. This component
 leverages the reasoning capabilities of LLMs to identify and prioritize the most informative features, resulting in a more robust
 classification framework. The comprehensive ablation analysis
 The variant DMLITE-1 shows remarkable classification perdemonstrates that our proposed multi-component architecture
formance on both USTC-TFC and Edge-IIoTset datasets, which
 achieves optimal performance through the synergistic combivalidates that diffusion models possess capabilities for extractnation of diffusion-based representation learning, contrastive
ing meaningful representations from complex network traffine-tuning, and intelligent feature optimization strategies.
fic patterns. The reason can be explained by the diffusion
model’s unique denoising methodology, which progressively
 D. Feature Extraction Analysis
learns to reconstruct traffic data from noise, thereby acquiring
a deep understanding of the underlying data distribution char- The diffusion-based feature extraction process represents a
acteristics that effectively distinguish between different traffic critical component of the DMLITE framework. Thus, we concategories. duct experiments to investigate how varying training epochs
 The incorporation of contrastive learning-based fine-tuning affects the quality of extracted features in our diffusion-based
mechanisms produces the most significant performance boost feature extraction module. Specifically, we evaluate four difamong all proposed enhancements. This improvement is par- ferent training configurations with epochs set to 50, 100, 150,
ticularly pronounced on the challenging ISCX-VPN dataset, and 200, respectively, while maintaining other hyperparameters
5338 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE VII
 CATEGORY-WISE F1 COMPARISON BETWEEN DMLITE AND BASELINE ALGORITHMS ON THE USTC-TFC DATASET

 TABLE VIII
 CATEGORY-WISE F1 COMPARISON BETWEEN DMLITE AND BASELINE ALGORITHMS ON THE ISCX-VPN DATASET

 TABLE IX
 CATEGORY-WISE F1 COMPARISON BETWEEN DMLITE AND BASELINE ALGORITHMS ON THE EDGE-IIOTSET DATASET

constant. For each configuration, we extract features from the and Edge-IIoTset, respectively. This improvement can be
optimal layer and evaluate their classification accuracy across attributed to the progressive learning of the underlying traffic
all three benchmark datasets. data distribution by the diffusion model, where additional
 As shown in Fig. 5, classification accuracy improves as training iterations allow the denoising network to better capture
training epochs increase from 50 to 100, with accuracy gains fine-grained features through the U-Net architecture. However,
of 0.30%, 0.86%, and 0.03% on USTC-TFC, ISCX-VPN, further increasing epochs from 100 to 150 shows mixed
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5339

 Fig. 6. Classification accuracy achieved across the three datasets using different extraction timesteps.
Fig. 5. Classification accuracy achieved across the three datasets using different training epochs.
 These findings indicate that features extracted at later stages
 of the diffusion process contain richer semantic information
 beneficial for classification tasks, especially for complex traffic
results. Specifically, while ISCX-VPN achieves a marginal
 patterns. The progressive improvement with increasing extracimprovement of 0.23%, both USTC-TFC and Edge-IIoTset
 tion timesteps can be attributed to the diffusion model’s ability
experience slight performance degradation of 0.12% and
 to gradually refine its understanding of the underlying data dis-
0.13%, respectively. When extending training to 200 epochs, we
 tribution through iterative denoising steps. However, it is worth
observe consistent performance degradation of approximately
 noting that the performance gains begin to plateau, particularly
0.01%-0.09% across all datasets, which suggests potential
 for the USTC-TFC and Edge-IIoTset datasets, suggesting an
overfitting where the model begins to memorize training-specific
 optimal range for the extraction timestep parameter rather than
patterns rather than generalizing to discriminative traffic
 an indefinite improvement with increasing values.
features. Although ISCX-VPN achieves its peak performance
at 150 epochs, the marginal 0.23% improvement comes at the
cost of nearly 50% additional training time. Thus, we select 100 V. CONCLUSION
epochs as the default configuration in the DMLITE framework, This paper proposes the DMLITE framework that combines
as it provides an optimal balance between feature extraction diffusion models with DeepSeek to tackle network traffic clasquality and computational efficiency across diverse datasets. sification challenges in computationally restricted IoT environ-
 Moreover, the extraction timestep parameter (tex ) directly in- ments. The proposed DMLITE first introduces a self-supervised
fluences the quality and characteristics of the extracted features. diffusion-based hierarchical feature extraction method that iden-
This parameter determines at which point in the diffusion pro- tifies multiscale traffic characteristics within encrypted commucess features are captured, thereby affecting the balance between nication channels without extensive labeled datasets. Then, an
low-level details and high-level semantic information. Specifi- LLM-guided adaptive feature selection method that dynamically
cally, following the diffusion formulation, the noised version of optimizes the feature space while preserving computational
x0 at timestep t is defined as xt = αt x0 + σt , where αt and efficiency through intelligent parameter tuning. Extensive ex-
σt control how much original semantic information is preserved perimental validation across diverse benchmark datasets conversus how much stochastic noise is introduced [34]. In this case, firms DMLITE delivers substantial performance enhancements
different timesteps activate distinct levels of semantic informa- compared to baselines, and achieves exceptional classification
tion within the denoising network. Moreover, a more optimal accuracy across different traffic categories while dramatically
timestep creates an implicit information bottleneck that com- reducing computational overhead. However, the framework
presses high-level semantics into compact, linearly-separable presents higher computational complexity during the DDPM
features, with alignment and uniformity metrics demonstrating training phase and introduces deployment complexity due to
that features extracted at optimal timesteps achieve balanced its multi-component architecture, requiring careful coordination
semantic consistency and discriminative specificity [104]. Thus, between different modules.
to systematically evaluate the impact of this parameter on classi- Future research directions include investigating lightweight
fication performance, we conducted experiments with three dif- diffusion architectures tailored for resource-constrained enviferent extraction timestep values, which are tex = 10, tex = 25, ronments through neural architecture search or knowledge disand tex = 50. tillation techniques to further reduce computational overhead
 Fig. 6 presents the classification accuracy achieved across while maintaining feature quality. Additionally, developing authe three datasets using different extraction timesteps. The ex- tomatic timestep selection mechanisms based on dataset charperimental results show that increasing the extraction timestep acteristics would enhance the generalizability of the method
generally leads to improved classification performance across across diverse traffic distributions without manual hyperpaall datasets. In particular, this significant enhancement on the rameter tuning. Finally, extending the framework to handle
more challenging encrypted traffic dataset suggests that higher continual learning scenarios where new traffic patterns emerge
extraction timesteps enable the diffusion model to capture more dynamically would address the evolving nature of IoT network
abstract and discriminative features that are particularly valuable environments and enhance long-term deployment viability in
for distinguishing between complex encrypted traffic patterns. real-world applications.
5340 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 REFERENCES [23] R. Zhang et al., “Interactive AI with retrieval-augmented generation for
 next generation networking,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 414–424,
 [1] H. Tran-Dang, N. Krommenacker, P. Charpentier, and D. Kim, “To- Nov. 2024.
 ward the Internet of Things for physical internet: Perspectives and [24] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classificachallenges,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 4711–4736, Jun. tion: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81,
 2020. May 2019.
 [2] J. Li et al., “Aerial secure collaborative communications under eavesdrop- [25] P. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Ye, and X. Chen, “ByteSGAN: A semi-supervised
 per collusion in low-altitude economy: A generative swarm intelligent generative adversarial network for encrypted traffic classification in SDN
 approach,” 2025, arXiv:2503.00721. edge gateway,” Comput. Netw., vol. 200, 2021, Art. no. 108535.
 [3] D. Alao, V. C. W. Younang, and A. Sen, “Extending IoT devices network [26] M. Nakip and E. Gelenbe, “Online self-supervised deep learning for
 lifetime using IoT service prediction and recommendation,” IEEE Trans. intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
 Serv. Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2879–2891, Sep./Oct. 2025. pp. 5668–5683, 2024.
 [4] J. Li, G. Sun, L. Duan, and Q. Wu, “Multi-objective optimization for UAV [27] J. Tong and Y. Zhang, “A real-time label-free self-supervised deep
 swarm-assisted IoT with virtual antenna arrays,” IEEE Trans. Mobile learning intrusion detection for handling new type and few-shot attacks in
 Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4890–4907, May 2024. IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19, pp. 30769–30786,
 [5] C. Sheng et al., “Network traffic fingerprinting for IIoT device identifica- Oct. 2024.
 tion: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 3541–3554, [28] W. Wei, H. Gu, W. Deng, Z. Xiao, and X. Ren, “ABL-TC: A lightweight
 May 2025. design for network traffic classification empowered by deep learning,”
 [6] H. Wu, X. Zhang, and J. Yang, “Deep learning-based encrypted network Neurocomputing, vol. 489, pp. 333–344, 2022.
 traffic classification and resource allocation in SDN,” J. Web Eng., vol. 20, [29] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network trafno. 8, pp. 2319–2334, Nov. 2021. fic: Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network
 [7] Y. Liu, X. Wang, B. Qu, and F. Zhao, “ATVITSC: A novel encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2,
 traffic classification method based on deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
 Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 9374–9389, 2024. [30] W. Liang, Y. Hu, X. Zhou, Y. Pan, and K. I. Wang, “Variational few-
 [8] I. Stellios, P. Kotzanikolaou, M. Psarakis, C. Alcaraz, and J. López, “A shot learning for microservice-oriented intrusion detection in distributed
 survey of IoT-enabled cyberattacks: Assessing attack paths to critical industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 5087–5095,
 infrastructures and services,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 20, no. 4, Aug. 2022.
 pp. 3453–3495, 4th Quart. 2018. [31] K. Xu et al., “Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification
 [9] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network based on masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
 traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM pp. 17330–17340, May 2024.
 Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 123:1–123:35, 2022. [32] S. De, M. Bermudez-Edo, H. Xu, and Z. Cai, “Deep generative models
 [10] J. Dai, X. Xu, and F. Xiao, “GLADS: A global-local attention data in the industrial Internet of Things: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.,
 selection model for multimodal multitask encrypted traffic classification vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 5728–5737, Sep. 2022.
 of IoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 225, 2023, Art. no. 109652. [33] W. Xie et al., “Generative AI for energy harvesting Internet of Things
 [11] A. Nascita, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. network: Fundamental, applications, and opportunities,” IEEE Internet
 Pescapé, “A survey on explainable artificial intelligence for internet traf- Things Mag., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 72–80, May 2025.
 fic classification and prediction, and intrusion detection,” IEEE Commun. [34] W. Xiang, H. Yang, D. Huang, and Y. Wang, “Denoising diffusion
 Surv. Tut., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 3165–3198, Oct. 2025. autoencoders are unified self-supervised learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 [12] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), 2023, pp. 15802–15812.
 of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient [35] M. Abbasi, A. Shahraki, and A. Taherkordi, “Deep learning for network
 management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, 2021, Art. no. 107974. traffic monitoring and analysis (NTMA): A survey,” Comput. Commun.,
 [13] A. Blaise, M. Bouet, V. Conan, and S. Secci, “Detection of zero-day vol. 170, pp. 19–41, 2021.
 attacks: An unsupervised port-based approach,” Comput. Netw., vol. 180, [36] Z. Li and X. Xu, “L2-BiTCN-CNN: Spatio-temporal features fusion-
 2020, Art. no. 107391. based multi-classification model for various internet applications identi-
 [14] H. Yan et al., “PGSM-DPI: Precisely guided signature matching of deep fication,” Comput. Netw., vol. 243, 2024, Art. no. 110298.
 packet inspection for traffic analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. [37] X. Song et al., “Evolutionary computation for feature selection in clas-
 Conf., 2019, pp. 1–6. sification: A comprehensive survey of solutions, applications and chal-
 [15] S. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Gao, and F. Xiao, “CMTSNN: A deep learning model lenges,” Swarm Evol. Comput., vol. 90, 2024, Art. no. 101661.
 for multiclassification of abnormal and encrypted traffic of Internet of [38] A. Azab, M. Khasawneh, S. Alrabaee, K. R. Choo, and M. Sarsour,
 Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11773–11791, “Network traffic classification: Techniques, datasets, and challenges,”
 Jul. 2023. Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 676–692, 2024.
 [16] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting [39] T. T. T. Nguyen and G. J. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for internet
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut.,
 2020. vol. 10, no. 1/4, pp. 56–76, 4th Quart. 2008.
 [17] C. Zhang, P. Patras, and H. Haddadi, “Deep learning in mobile and [40] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J. Müller, and K. Hanssgen,
 wireless networking: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 21, no. 3, “A survey of payload-based traffic classification approaches,” IEEE
 pp. 2224–2287, 3rd Quart. 2019. Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1135–1156, 2nd Quart. 2014.
 [18] H. Zhang et al., “Revolutionizing encrypted traffic classification with [41] M. Cotton, L. Eggert, J. Touch, M. Westerlund, and S. Cheshire, “Internet
 MH-Net: A multi-view heterogeneous graph model,” in Proc. 39th AAAI assigned numbers authority (IANA) procedures for the management of
 Conf. Artif. Intell. 37th Conf. Innov. Appl. Artif. Intell. 15th Symp. Educ. the service name and transport protocol port number registry,” RFC,
 Adv. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 1048–1056. vol. 6335, pp. 1–33, 2011.
 [19] A. Gaurav, B. B. Gupta, and P. K. Panigrahi, “A comprehensive survey [42] P. Schneider, “TCP/IP traffic classification based on port numbers,”
 on machine learning approaches for malware detection in IoT-based Division Appl. Sci., vol. 2138, no. 5, pp. 1–6, 1996.
 enterprise information system,” Enterprise Inf. Syst., vol. 17, no. 3, 2023, [43] S. Yoon, J. Park, J. Park, Y. Oh, and M. Kim, “Internet application
 Art. no. 2023764. traffic classification using fixed IP-port,” in Proc. 12th Asia-Pacific Netw.
 [20] H. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Lei, and Y. Liu, “A method of improved CNN Operations Manage. Symp., 2009, vol. 5787, pp. 21–30.
 traffic classification,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Comput. Intell. Secur., 2017, [44] A. W. Moore and K. Papagiannaki, “Toward the accurate identification of
 pp. 177–181. network applications,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Passive Act. Netw. Meas.,
 [21] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN: 2005, vol. 3431, pp. 41–54.
 Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,” [45] A. Madhukar and C. L. Williamson, “A longitudinal study of P2P traffic
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538, classification,” in Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Symp. Model., Anal. Simul., 2006,
 Sep./Oct. 2022. pp. 179–188.
 [22] J. Xu et al., “A cascaded broad learning network embedded image features [46] Q. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. Wang, and X. Li, “UDP traffic classification using
 for malware traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., most distinguished port,” in Proc. 16th Asia-Pacific Netw. Operations
 vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2426–2439, Aug. 2025. and Manage. Symp., 2014, pp. 1–4.
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5341

 [47] H. Doroud et al., “Speeding-up DPI traffic classification with chaining,” [71] X. Zhang, L. Hao, G. Gui, Y. Wang, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari, “An autoin Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2018, pp. 1–6. matic and efficient malware traffic classification method for secure Inter-
 [48] W. de Donato, A. Pescapè, and A. Dainotti, “Traffic identification engine: net of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 8448–8458,
 An open platform for traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 28, no. 2, Mar. 2024.
 pp. 56–64, Mar./Apr. 2014. [72] X. Li et al., “Protect NTN-IoT security by malicious traffic detection: A
 [49] D. Liu, X. Xu, M. Liu, and Y. Liu, “Dynamic traffic classification multi-dimensional hypergraph learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things
 algorithm and simulation of energy Internet of Things based on ma- J., early access, Jun. 23, 2025, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3582027.
 chine learning,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 3967–3976, [73] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
 2021. network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput.,
 [50] A. Azab, P. Watters, and R. Layton, “Characterising network traffic vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2161–2178, May/Jun. 2025.
 for skype forensics,” in Proc. 3rd Cybercrime Trustworthy Comput. [74] M. Abdel-Basset, H. Hawash, R. K. Chakrabortty, and M. J. Ryan, “Semi-
 Workshop, 2012, pp. 19–27. supervised spatiotemporal deep learning for intrusions detection in IoT
 [51] A. Dainotti, A. Pescapè, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future direc- networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 12251–12265,
 tions in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, Aug. 2021.
 Jan./Feb. 2012. [75] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Self-supervised traffic classi-
 [52] S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and D. Wang, “Accurate, scalable in-network fication: Flow embedding and few-shot solutions,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 identification of P2P traffic using application signatures,” in Proc. 13th Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3054–3067, Jun. 2024.
 Int. Conf. World Wide Web, 2004, pp. 512–521. [76] S. Dong, Y. Xia, and T. Peng, “Network abnormal traffic detection model
 [53] G. Aceto, A. Dainotti, W. De Donato, and A. Pescapé, “PortLoad: Taking based on semi-supervised deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans.
 the best of two worlds in traffic classification,” in Proc. INFOCOM IEEE Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4197–4212, Dec. 2021.
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2010, pp. 1–5. [77] J. Ning et al., “Malware traffic classification using domain adaptation and
 [54] M. Al-Hisnawi and M. Ahmadi, “Deep packet inspection using quotient ladder network for secure industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet
 filter,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 2217–2220, Nov. 2016. Things J., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17058–17069, Sep. 2022.
 [55] L. Deri, M. Martinelli, T. Bujlow, and A. Cardigliano, “nDPI: Open- [78] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, “MT-FlowFormer:
 source high-speed deep packet inspection,” in Proc. Int. Wireless A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted traffic classification,”
 Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf., 2014, pp. 617–622. in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022,
 [56] J. Sherry, C. Lan, R. A. Popa, and S. Ratnasamy, “BlindBox: Deep packet pp. 2576–2584.
 inspection over encrypted traffic,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., 2015, Art. [79] Z. Wang, Z. Li, M. Fu, Y. Ye, and P. Wang, “Network traffic classification
 no. 264. based on federated semi-supervised learning,” J. Syst. Archit., vol. 149,
 [57] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar, “To- 2024, Art. no. 103091.
 wards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network traffic [80] X. Lin et al., “CETP: A novel semi-supervised framework based on
 classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 21, contrastive pre-training for imbalanced encrypted traffic classification,”
 no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, Secondquarter 2019. Comput. Secur., vol. 143, 2024, Art. no. 103892.
 [58] T. T. T. Nguyen, G. J. Armitage, P. Branch, and S. Zander, “Timely [81] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder based
 and continuous machine-learning-based classification for interactive IP traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc. 37th
 traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1880–1894, Dec. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 35th Conf. Innov. Appl. Artif. Intell. 13th Symp.
 2012. Educ. Adv. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 5420–5427.
 [59] A. A. Afuwape, Y. Xu, J. H. Anajemba, and G. Srivastava, “Perfor- [82] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked
 mance evaluation of secured network traffic classification using a ma- autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
 chine learning approach,” Comput. Stand. Interfaces, vol. 78, 2021, no. 3, pp. 2012–2025, Jun. 2024.
 Art. no. 103545. [83] Y. Xiao et al., “Distributed traffic synthesis and classification in edge
 [60] R. Kumar, M. Swarnkar, G. Singal, and N. Kumar, “IoT network traf- networks: A federated self-supervised learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
 fic classification using machine learning algorithms: An experimental Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1815–1829, Feb. 2024.
 analysis,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 989–1008, Jan. [84] X. Zheng, X. Ma, L. Xu, Y. Jin, and C. Ke, “Augmentation and fu-
 2022. sion: Multi-feature fusion-based self-supervised learning approach for
 [61] S. Das et al., “Network intrusion detection and comparative analysis traffic tables,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 3,
 using ensemble machine learning and feature selection,” IEEE Trans. pp. 2647–2662, Jun. 2025.
 Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4821–4833, Dec. 2022. [85] G. Sun et al., “Generative AI for deep reinforcement learning: Frame-
 [62] S. Dong, “Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for network work, analysis, and use cases,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 32, no. 3,
 traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 176, 2021, Art. no. 114885. pp. 186–195, Jun. 2025.
 [63] F. Zaki, F. Afifi, S. A. Razak, A. Gani, and N. B. Anuar, “GRAIN: Gran- [86] W. Fang, W. Du, R. He, Y. Tang, Y. Jin, and G. G. Yen, “Diffusion
 ular multi-label encrypted traffic classification using classifier chain,” model-based multiobjective optimization for gasoline blending schedul-
 Comput. Netw., vol. 213, 2022, Art. no. 109084. ing,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 61–76, May 2024.
 [64] R. T. Elmaghraby, N. M. A. Aziem, M. A. Sobh, and A. M. Bahaa-Eldin, [87] Y. Zhang, Z. Mei, X. Wu, H. Jiang, J. Zhang, and W. Gao, “Two-step
 “Encrypted network traffic classification based on machine learning,” Ain diffusion policy deep reinforcement learning method for low-carbon
 Shams Eng. J., vol. 15, no. 2, 2024, Art. no. 102361. multi-energy microgrid energy management,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
 [65] A. Shahraki, M. Abbasi, A. Taherkordi, and A. D. Jurcut, “Active learning vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 4576–4588, Sep. 2024.
 for network traffic classification: A technical study,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. [88] Y. Zhao, C. H. Liu, T. Yi, G. Li, and D. Wu, “Energy-efficient ground-
 Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 422–439, Mar. 2022. air-space vehicular crowdsensing by hierarchical multi-agent deep rein-
 [66] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “Mobile encrypted forcement learning with diffusion models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
 traffic classification using deep learning,” in Proc. Netw. Traffic Meas. vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 3566–3580, Dec. 2024.
 Anal. Conf., 2018, pp. 1–8. [89] X. Zheng et al., “UAV swarm-enabled collaborative post-disaster commu-
 [67] J. H. Kalwar and S. Bhatti, “Deep learning approaches for network nications in low altitude economy via a two-stage optimization approach,”
 traffic classification in the Internet of Things (IoT): A survey,” 2024, 2025, arXiv:2501.05742.
 arXiv:2402.00920. [90] Y. Liu et al., “QoS-aware multi-AIGC service orchestration at edges: An
 [68] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classi- attention-diffusion-aided DRL method,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun.
 fication using convolutional neural network for representation learning,” Netw., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1078–1090, Apr. 2025.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2017, pp. 712–717. [91] Z. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Chen, H. Fu, Z. Tong, and C. Jiang, “Diffusion-
 [69] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep based reinforcement learning for cooperative offloading and resource
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep allocation in multi-UAV assisted edge-enabled metaverse,” IEEE Trans.
 learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 7, pp. 11281–11293, Jul. 2025.
 [70] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Li, and T. Geng, “DarkNetSec: A novel [92] C. Zhang et al., “Multi-objective aerial collaborative secure commuself-attentive deep learning method for darknet traffic classification nication optimization via generative diffusion model-enabled deep reand application identification,” Comput. Secur., vol. 116, 2022, inforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 4,
 Art. no. 102663. pp. 3041–3058, Apr. 2025.
5342 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 [93] F. Wang, J. Xie, A. Zhou, and K. Tang, “A new prediction strat- [117] G. Sun et al., “Large language model (LLM)-enabled graphs in dynamic
 egy for dynamic multi-objective optimization using diffusion model,” networking,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 290–301, Jul. 2025.
 IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1575–1589, Oct. [118] L. L. Custode, F. Caraffini, A. Yaman, and G. Iacca, “An investigation
 2025. on the use of large language models for hyperparameter tuning in evo-
 [94] G. Sun et al., “Generative AI for advanced UAV networking,” IEEE Netw., lutionary algorithms,” in Proc. Genet. Evol. Comput. Conf. Companion,
 vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 244–253, Jul. 2025. 2024, pp. 1838–1845.
 [95] R. Liang et al., “Diffusion models as network optimizers: Explorations [119] R. Kochnev, A. T. Goodarzi, Z. A. Bentyn, D. Ignatov, and R. Timofte,
 and analysis,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 13183–13193, “Optuna vs code LlaMa: Are LLMs a new paradigm for hyperparameter
 May 2025. tuning?,” 2025, arXiv:2504.06006.
 [96] N. Wang, T. Zhao, S. Mao, and X. Wang, “Privacy-preserving Wi-Fi data [120] M. R. Zhang, N. Desai, J. Bae, J. Lorraine, and J. Ba, “Usgeneration via differential privacy in diffusion models,” in Proc. IEEE ing large language models for hyperparameter optimization,” 2023,
 INFOCOM 2025 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2025, pp. 1–10. arXiv:2312.04528.
 [97] T.-Y. Yang and A. I.-C. Lai, “WIFIND: Enhancing Wi-Fi fingerprint [121] S. Liu, C. Gao, and Y. Li, “AgentHPO: Large language model agent for
 indoor localization with a spatially conditioned diffusion model-based hyper-parameter optimization,” in Proc. Conf. Parsimony Learn., 2025,
 data augmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., 2025, vol. 280, pp. 1146–1169.
 pp. 1–6. [122] J. Li et al., “LLM-guided DRL for multi-tier LEO satellite networks with
 [98] J. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Feng, H. Yang, and S. Liang, “Enhanced secure hybrid FSO/RF links,” 2025, arXiv:2505.11978.
 beamforming for IRS-assisted IoT communication using a generative- [123] T. Miyake, Y. Wang, P. Yang, and S. Sugano, “Feasibility study on
 diffusion-model-enabled optimization approach,” IEEE Internet Things parameter adjustment for a humanoid using LLM tailoring physical care,”
 J., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 13398–13414, May 2025. in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Soc. Robot., 2023, vol. 14453, pp. 230–243.
 [99] S. Liang et al., “UAV-enabled secure data collection and energy transfer [124] B.-N. Chen, F.-F. Wei, and W.-N. Chen, “Evolutionary reinforcement
 in IoT via diffusion-model-enhanced deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE learning with LLM-based hyperparameter adaptation,” in Proc. 17th Int.
 Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 13455–13468, May 2025. Conf. Adv. Comput. Intell., 2025, pp. 87–94.
[100] J. Wang et al., “Generative AI based secure wireless sensing for ISAC [125] K. Mahammadli, “Sequential large language model-based hypernetworks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 5195–5210, parameter optimization,” 2024, arXiv:2410.20302.
 2025. [126] H. Li et al., “Auto MC-Reward: Automated dense reward design with
[101] C. Camerota, L. Pappone, T. Pecorella, and F. Esposito, “Addressing data large language models for minecraft,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 security in IoT: Minimum sample size and denoising diffusion models Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 16426–16435.
 for improved malware detection,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Netw. Service [127] H. D. Phan, K. Ellis, J. C. Barca, and A. Dorin, “A survey of dynamic
 Manage., 2024, pp. 1–7. parameter setting methods for nature-inspired swarm intelligence algo-
[102] K. Yun, Y. Kim, K. Seo, C. W. Seo, and J. Noh, “Representative fea- rithms,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 567–588, 2020.
 ture extraction during diffusion process for sketch extraction with one [128] P. Melin, F. Olivas, O. Castillo, F. Valdez, J. Soria, and J. M. G. Valdez,
 example,” 2024, arXiv:2401.04362. “Optimal design of fuzzy classification systems using PSO with dynamic
[103] X. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Xie, and K. He, “Deconstructing denoising diffusion parameter adaptation through fuzzy logic,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 40,
 models for self-supervised learning,” 2024, arXiv:2401.14404. no. 8, pp. 3196–3206, 2013.
[104] W. Xiang, H. Yang, D. Huang, and Y. Wang, “DDAE: Enhancing diffusion [129] R. Tanabe and A. Fukunaga, “Success-history based parameter adaptation
 models towards unified generative and discriminative learning,” 2025, for differential evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., 2013,
 arXiv:2505.10999. pp. 71–78.
[105] S. Hao, K. Han, Z. Lv, S. Zhao, and K. K. Wong, “ConceptExpress: [130] A. Viktorin, R. Senkerik, M. Pluhacek, T. Kadavy, and A. Zamuda, “Dis-
 Harnessing diffusion models for single-image unsupervised concept ex- tance based parameter adaptation for success-history based differential
 traction,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, vol. 15117, pp. 215–233. evolution,” Swarm Evol. Comput., vol. 50, 2019, Art. no. 100462.
[106] W. G. C. Bandara, N. G. Nair, and V. M. Patel, “DDPM-CD: Denoising [131] A. Ghosh et al., “Using spatial neighborhoods for parameter adaptation:
 diffusion probabilistic models as feature extractors for remote sensing An improved success history based differential evolution,” Swarm Evol.
 change detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., Comput., vol. 71, 2022, Art. no. 101057.
 2025, pp. 5250–5262. [132] X. Zhou, H. Ma, J. Gu, H. Chen, and W. Deng, “Parameter adaptation-
[107] R. T. Sadia, J. Zhang, and J. Chen, “Multiscale latent diffusion based ant colony optimization with dynamic hybrid mechanism,” Eng.
 model for enhanced feature extraction from medical images,” 2024, Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 114, 2022, Art. no. 105139.
 arXiv:2410.04000. [133] J. Sun, X. Liu, T. Bäck, and Z. Xu, “Learning adaptive differential
[108] C. Zhao, J. Wang, R. Zhang, D. Niyato, D. I. Kim, and H. Du, “Signal de- evolution algorithm from optimization experiences by policy gradient,”
 tection in near-field communication with unknown noise characteristics: IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 666–680, Aug. 2021.
 A diffusion model method,” 2024, arXiv:2409.14031. [134] B. Chen, H. Ouyang, S. Li, and D. Zou, “Differential evolution algorithm
[109] Y. Ginige, T. Dahanayaka, and S. Seneviratne, “TrafficGPT: An LLM with a complementary mutation strategy and data fusion-based parameter
 approach for open-set encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. 19th Asian adaptation,” Inf. Sci., vol. 668, 2024, Art. no. 120522.
 Internet Eng. Conf., 2024, pp. 26–35. [135] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and J. Wu, “Robust network traffic
[110] H. Zhou, X. Huang, and L. Deng, “Enhancing network traffic classifi- classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1257–1270,
 cation with large language models,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Aug. 2015.
 2024, pp. 7282–7291. [136] W. Xiong et al., “Anomaly secure detection methods by analyzing dy-
[111] Y. Chen, R. Li, Z. Zhao, and H. Zhang, “MERLOT: A distilled LLM- namic characteristics of the network traffic in cloud communications,”
 based mixture-of-experts framework for scalable encrypted traffic clas- Inf. Sci., vol. 258, pp. 403–415, 2014.
 sification,” 2024, arXiv:2411.13004. [137] J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, Y. Wang, W. Zhou, Y. Xiang, and Y. Guan, “Network
[112] J. Li et al., “Fundamental capabilities of large language models and their traffic classification using correlation information,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
 applications in domain scenarios: A survey,” in Proc. Annu. Meeting Distrib. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 104–117, Jan. 2013.
 Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2024, pp. 11116–11141. [138] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. H.
[113] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, E. Björnson, D. Niyato, and B. Ai, “Optimal bilinear den Hartog, “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for
 equalizer for cell-free massive MIMO systems over correlated rician standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion
 channels,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., early access, Mar. 11, 2025, data sets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan.
 doi: 10.1109/TSP.2025.3547380. 2022.
[114] S. Jiang, M. Xie, and J. Luo, “Large language models for combinatorial [139] X. Ren, H. Gu, and W. Wei, “Tree-RNN: Tree structural recurrent neural
 optimization of design structure matrix,” in Proc. Des. Soc., vol. 5, 2025, network for network traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 167,
 pp. 2201–2210. 2021, Art. no. 114363.
[115] H. Du et al., “Reinforcement learning with LLMs interaction for dis- [140] Y. Ding, G. Zhu, D. Chen, X. Qin, M. Cao, and Z. Qin, “Adversarial
 tributed diffusion model services,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. sample attack and defense method for encrypted traffic data,” IEEE Trans.
 Intell., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 8838–8855, Oct. 2025. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 18024–18039, Oct. 2022.
[116] Z. Yan, H. Zhou, H. Tabassum, and X. Liu, “Hybrid LLM-DDQN-based [141] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
 joint optimization of V2I communication and autonomous driving,” IEEE filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE
 Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1214–1218, Apr. 2025. Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 397–405.
LI et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN RESOURCE CONSTRAINED IoT NETWORKS: A DIFFUSION MODEL 5343

[142] F. Croitoru, V. Hondru, R. T. Ionescu, and M. Shah, “Diffusion models Chenbang Liu received the B.S. degree in softin vision: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, ware engineering in 2023 from Jilin University,
 no. 9, pp. 10850–10869, Sep. 2023. Changchun, China, where he is currently working
[143] G. Liu et al., “Semantic communications for artificial intelligence gen- toward the M.S. degree in computer science and
 erated content (AIGC) toward effective content creation,” IEEE Netw., technology. His research interests include wireless
 vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 295–303, Sep. 2024. networks and collaborative beamforming.
[144] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
 in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851.
[145] C. He et al., “Diffusion models in low-level vision: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
 Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 4630–4651, Jun. 2025.
[146] N. Shi, X. Liu, and Y. Guan, “Research on K-means clustering algorithm:
 An improved k-means clustering algorithm,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Intell.
 Inf. Technol. Secur. Inform., 2010, pp. 63–67. Ruolin Wang received the B.S. degree in com-
[147] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. B. Girshick, “Momentum contrast puter science and technology from Jilin University,
 for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Changchun, China, in 2024, where she is currently
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735. working toward the M.S. degree in computer sci-
[148] J. Yang, J. Yang, D. Zhang, and J. Lu, “Feature fusion: Parallel strategy vs. ence and technology with Jilin University. Her reserial strategy,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 1369–1381, 2003. search mainly focuses on low Earth orbit (LEO)
[149] R. Diao and Q. Shen, “Nature inspired feature selection meta-heuristics,” satellite communication systems and explores re-
 Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 311–340, 2015. inforcement learning–based approaches, aiming to
[150] Y. Zhang, S. Wang, P. Phillips, and G. Ji, “Binary PSO with mutation op- enhance service continuity and transmission perforerator for feature selection using decision tree applied to spam detection,” mance through optimization and intelligent decision-
 Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 64, pp. 22–31, 2014. making.
[151] H. Li et al., “Multi-objective deployment optimization for integrated
 sensing and communication-enabled unmanned aerial vehicle swarm,”
 Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 162, 2025, Art. no. 112368.
[152] M. S. Abbasi, H. Al-Sahaf, M. Mansoori, and I. Welch, “Behavior-based
 ransomware classification: A particle swarm optimization wrapper-based
 Jiahui Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in
 approach for feature selection,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 121, 2022, Art.
 software engineering, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 no. 108744.
 in computer science and technology from Jilin Uni-
[153] M. Clerc and J. Kennedy, “The particle swarm - explosion, stability, and
 versity, Changchun, China, in 2018, 2021, and 2024,
 convergence in a multidimensional complex space,” IEEE Trans. Evol.
 respectively. He was a Visiting Ph.D. degree Student
 Comput., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 58–73, Feb. 2002.
 with the Singapore University of Technology and De-
[154] I. C. Trelea, “The particle swarm optimization algorithm: Convergence
 sign (SUTD), Singapore. He is currently an Assistant
 analysis and parameter selection,” Inf. Process. Lett., vol. 85, no. 6,
 Researcher with the College of Computer Science and
 pp. 317–325, 2003.
 Technology, Jilin University. His research interests in-
[155] J. Sun et al., “A survey of reasoning with foundation models: Concepts,
 clude integrated air-ground networks, UAV networks,
 methodologies, and outlook,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 11,
 wireless energy transfer, and optimization.
 pp. 278:1–278:43, 2025.
[156] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414.
[157] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke, “Edge-
 IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of IoT and Geng Sun (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE Access, degree in communication engineering from Dalian
 vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022. Polytechnic University, Dalian, China, and the Ph.D.
 degree in computer science and technology from
 Jilin University, Changchun, China, in 2011 and
 2018, respectively. He was a Visiting Researcher with
 the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
 Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. He is currently
 Hongjuan Li received the B.S. degree in computer a Professor with the College of Computer Science and
 science and technology from Hebei Normal Uni- Technology, Jilin University. He is also a Visiting
 versity, Shijiazhuang, China, in 2020, and the M.S. Scholar with the College of Computing and Data
 degree in software engineering in 2023 from Jilin Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He has authored or
 University, Changchun, China, where she is currently coauthored more than 100 high-quality papers, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS
 working toward the Ph.D. degree in computer science. ON MOBILE COMPUTING, IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNI-
 Her research interests include classification, feature CATIONS, IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS
 selection, and UAV networks. ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS,
 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, IEEE INTERNET OF
 THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASURE-
 MENT, IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE GLOBECOM, and IEEE ICC. His research
 interests include low-altitude wireless networks, UAV communications and
 networking, mobile edge computing (MEC), Intelligent reflecting surface (IRS),
 generative AI and agentic AI, and deep reinforcement learning. He is also an
 Hui Kang received the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees from Associate Editors for IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, IEEE
 Jilin University, Changchun, China, in 1996 and 2007, TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR
 respectively. She is currently a Professor with the TECHNOLOGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEER-
 College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin ING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, and
 University. Her research interests include information IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS. He is the Lead Guest Editor of Special Issues
 integration and distributed computing. for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, IEEE
 INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS. He is the Guest
 Editor of Special Issues for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING,
 IEEE Communications Magazine, and IEEE OPEN JOURNAL OF THE COMMU-
 NICATIONS SOCIETY.
5344 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Jiacheng Wang received the Ph.D. degree from the Shiwen Mao (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Professor
 School of Communication and Information Engineer- and the Earle C. Williams Eminent Scholar Chair,
 ing, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommu- and the Director with Wireless Engineering Research
 nications, Chongqing, China. He is currently a Re- and Education Center, Auburn University, Auburn,
 search Associate of computer science and engineer- AL, USA. His research interest includes wireless neting with Nanyang Technological University, Singa- works, multimedia communications, and smart grid.
 pore. His research interests include wireless sensing, He was the recipient of the IEEE ComSoc MMTC
 semantic communications, and metaverse. Outstanding Researcher Award in 2023, IEEE Com-
 Soc TC-CSR Distinguished Technical Achievement
 Award in 2019, and NSF CAREER Award in 2010. He
 is also the co-recipient of the 2022 Best Journal Paper
 Award of IEEE ComSoc eHealth Technical Committee, 2021 Best Paper Award
 of Elsevier/Digital Communications and Networks (KeAi), 2021 IEEE Internet
 of Things Journal Best Paper Award, 2021 IEEE Communications Society Outstanding Paper Award, IEEE Vehicular Technology Society 2020 Jack Neubauer
 Shuang Liang received the B.S. degree in commu- Memorial Award, 2018 ComSoc MMTCBestJournal Paper Award and the 2017
 nication engineering from Dalian Polytechnic Uni- Best Conference Paper Award, 2004 IEEE Communications Society Leonard G.
 versity, Dalian, China, in 2011, the M.S. degree Abraham Prize in the Field of Communications Systems, and several ComSoc
 in software engineering, and the Ph.D. degree in Technical Committee and Conference Best Paper/Demo awards. He is the
 computer science from Jilin University, Changchun, Editor-in-Chief of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND
 China, in 2017 and 2022, respectively. She is currently NETWORKING. He is also a Distinguished Lecturer of IEEE Communications
 a Postdoctoral Researcher with the School of Infor- Society and the IEEE Council of RFID.
 mation Science and Technology, Northeast Normal
 University, Changchun. Her research interests include
 wireless communication, design of array antennas,
 collaborative beamforming, and optimizations.