IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026 1347

End-to-End Open-Set Semi-Supervised Learning for
 Fine-Grained Encrypted Traffic Classification
 Qian Yang, Wenxuan He, Minghao Chen, Hongyu Du, Sisi Shao, Fei Wu , Shangdong Liu , Yimu Ji ,
 and Kui Ren , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Encrypted traffic classification is crucial for enhanc- I. I NTRODUCTION
ing network management, service quality, and security. However,
real-world network environments are inherently open-world scenarios in which traffic not only consists of known classes but also
includes the continuous emergence of unknown classes. Existing
deep learning methods typically rely on the closed-world assump-
 W ITH the rapid advancement of network technologies,
 traffic classification has become a core technology
 for enhancing network management efficiency, optimizing the
tion, which significantly limits their classification performance quality of service (QoS), and ensuring network security (e.g.,
when dealing with unknown traffic types. This limitation makes malware identification and intrusion detection) [1]. However,
it challenging to accurately classify known traffic classes and the proportion of encrypted traffic has increased dramatically
effectively identify unknown ones. Although few studies have along with increasing awareness of user privacy protection and
focused on open-world scenarios, these methods often use staged
strategies and struggle to reliably detect unknown traffic or to the continuous advancement of encryption technology [2], [3],
estimate novel classes. To address these challenges, we propose an [4]. Although encryption effectively safeguards user privacy,
end-to-end Fine-grained Encrypted traffic Classification method it simultaneously introduces unprecedented challenges to netbased on Open-set Semi-supervised Learning, called FEC-OSL. work security monitoring. Traditional plaintext-based traffic
This method comprises three mutually reinforcing core compo- analysis and detection methods [5], [6] are gradually becoming
nents. First, we design a dual-branch flow feature extraction
module to capture detailed and discriminative flow features. ineffective, as they cannot directly access packet payloads.
Second, we introduce a novel energy-based perspective that lever- Moreover, an increasing number of malware and cyber attacks
ages energy-boundary learning to distinguish known traffic from leverage encrypted channels, such as SSL/TLS, to evade detecunknown traffic, enabling precise detection of known classes. tion, making it more difficult for intrusion detection systems
Finally, an adaptive deep clustering approach integrates feature (IDSs) and firewalls to identify threats promptly. According to
learning with clustering to achieve fine-grained classification of
unknown flows. We conduct extensive experiments on three real- the latest report from Zscaler, approximately 85.9% of network
world datasets, and the results validate that our proposed method threats are now transmitted through encrypted channels [7],
exhibits outstanding performance in handling both known and highlighting the urgent need for encrypted traffic analysis and
unknown encrypted traffic in open-world scenarios. management.
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, open-set semi- In recent years, encrypted traffic classification has made
supervised learning, end-to-end, energy-based model, network significant progress with the use of deep learning techniques.
security. However, most existing methods are based on the closed-
 Received 13 January 2025; revised 8 August 2025, 14 October 2025, world assumption [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], which assumes
and 18 November 2025; accepted 8 January 2026. Date of publication that the classes of test samples are already known during
12 January 2026; date of current version 29 January 2026. This work was the training phase. As a result, these methods can only
supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant
2023YFB2904000 and Grant 2023YFB2904004, in part by Jiangsu Key classify test samples into a predefined and limited set of
Development Planning Project under Grant BE2023004-2, and in part by classes. However, in real-world network environments, traffic
the Future Network Scientific Research Fund Project under Grant FNSRFP- classes are highly dynamic, with new applications and attack
2021-YB-15. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and
approving it for publication was Dr. Prosanta Gope. (Corresponding author: methods emerging constantly. As a result, the testing phase
Yimu Ji.) often encounters unknown classes that were never seen during
 Qian Yang, Wenxuan He, Minghao Chen, Hongyu Du, Shangdong Liu, training. We define this as an open-world scenario, where
and Yimu Ji are with the School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210023, China (e-mail: the model needs to handle entirely novel and unseen classes
yq112641@163.com; 1223045429@njupt.edu.cn; 1224045412@njupt.edu.cn; that were not defined or labeled during the training phase.
2024040408@njupt.edu.cn; lsd@njupt.edu.cn; jiym@njupt.edu.cn). Traditional closed-world classification models perform poorly
 Sisi Shao is with the School of Internet of Things, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210023, China (e-mail: in such scenarios and struggle to effectively identify unknown
2021070701@njupt.edu.cn). traffic. As shown in Figure 1, compared with closed-world
 Fei Wu is with the School of Automation, Nanjing University of Posts settings, open-world scenarios are more complex [13], as they
and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210023, China (e-mail:
wufei 8888@126.com). require addressing both the detection of unknown traffic and
 Kui Ren is with the State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data the accurate classification of known classes.
Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China (e-mail:
kuiren@zju.edu.cn). (i) The first challenge is that traffic classification models
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2026.3653575 must support open-set recognition (OSR) [14], [15],
 1556-6021 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1348 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 [16], enabling fine-grained classification of known traffic values, where low-energy samples are classified as known
 classes while identifying novel and unknown classes. flows and high-energy samples are identified as unknown
 One of the key factors in addressing this challenge is flows. Finally, feature learning is integrated with clustering
 the ability to learn high-quality traffic representations. algorithms to iteratively refine the clustering of unknown flow
 Existing OSR methods often rely on features from a sin- classes by updating sample feature representations. Through an
 gle perspective, such as packet-level statistical features end-to-end collaborative optimization strategy, the three mod-
 [17], [18], which fail to capture subtle variations among ules are jointly trained with a unified loss function, iteratively
 complex traffic. This leads to limited class separability refining the feature space and improving both classification
 in the feature space and compromises the performance and clustering performance. Overall, FEC-OSL achieves endof downstream classifiers. In addition, the classifier’s to-end open-set multitask learning, providing a novel and
 ability to distinguish unknown classes plays a critical effective solution for encrypted traffic detection in open-world
 role in overall OSR effectiveness, as it directly influ- scenarios.
 ences the model’s ability to generalize in open-world In summary, the main contributions of this paper include
 scenarios. Some studies [19], [20], [21] use classifier the following:
 confidence scores to detect unknowns, but these meth- • We propose FEC-OSL, an end-to-end fine-grained trafods are often unreliable since high-confidence unknown fic classification framework. It effectively addresses key
 samples may still be misclassified. Yang et al. [22] challenges in open-world scenarios, including distinguishproposed a multistage detection framework using class- ing flows from known and unknown traffic classes, clasconditioned autoencoders and extreme value theory to sifying known classes, and clustering unknown classes.
 identify unknown attacks. However, this method requires • We design a dual-branch flow feature extraction module
 separate training for each stage, which increases overall to capture fine-grained discriminative information from
 complexity and introduces potential error propagation flows. Additionally, we introduce an energy-based conbetween stages. straint that effectively distinguishes between known and
 (ii) Another challenge is enabling the model to efficiently unknown flows while ensuring reliable classification of
 estimate unknown traffic classes. The goal is to allow the known flows. Furthermore, we propose an adaptive deep
 model to autonomously learn novel classes, supporting clustering method that uses feature learning to refine
 threat analysis and expanding the attack knowledge pseudo labels generated during clustering. By iteratively
 base for security management [16]. Research on this optimizing the clustering process, the model progressively
 issue remains limited in the field of traffic classification. adapts to unknown flow classes and achieves more accu-
 Existing methods rely primarily on manual analysis or rate clustering results.
 offline clustering [23], [24]. Zhao et al. [17] proposed • We conduct extensive experiments on three real-world
 a method that integrates multiple clustering algorithms datasets to evaluate the performance of FEC-OSL. The
 through adjacency matrices. The clustering results were results show that FEC-OSL outperforms existing methevaluated using cut-off point filtering and silhouette ods. In addition, a series of supplementary experiments
 coefficients. However, this approach is heavily reliant on are performed to verify its superior generalization ability
 expert knowledge, as each clustering algorithm requires and robustness.
 manual parameter tuning.
 In this study, we propose FEC-OSL, an end-to-end fine- II. R ELATED W ORK
grained encrypted traffic classification method based on
open-set semi-supervised learning. This method is designed A. Deep Learning for Encrypted Traffic Classification
to address three challenges: distinguishing between known In recent years, deep learning has shown significant advanand unknown traffic flows, classifying known flow classes, tages in feature extraction and has become a key research
and clustering unknown flows. FEC-OSL is composed of focus in encrypted traffic classification. These methods are
three key modules: a dual-branch flow feature extraction mod- generally categorized into supervised, unsupervised, and semiule for capturing fine-grained flow features, an energy-based supervised learning approaches. Supervised learning relies on
classification module for distinguishing between known and fully labeled datasets and uses models such as convolutional
unknown flows, and an adaptive deep clustering module for neural networks (CNNs), transformers, and graph neural netunknown flow classes. First, flow byte sequences are reshaped works (GNNs) to automatically extract latent traffic features,
into matrices and processed through a convolution-enhanced greatly increasing classification accuracy. For instance, Lotvision transformer network to extract byte-level features. Addi- follahi et al. [11] employed 1D-CNNs to capture the spatial
tionally, we construct a flow interaction graph and apply dependencies of bytes within packets, extracting key discrimia topology-adaptive graph convolutional network to extract native patterns. Zhou et al. [25] applied transformers to extract
interaction features. The dual-branch module extracts features temporal features from traffic traces, improving the classifrom complementary views of low-level byte patterns and fication of Tor-encrypted traffic. Hu et al. [10] constructed
high-level interaction behaviors, reducing information loss and flow graphs from interactive packets in bidirectional flows
enhancing the discriminative power of the feature space. The (biflows) and used graph2vec embeddings to represent these
fused features yield a comprehensive flow representation. Sec- graphs as vectors. Unsupervised methods focus on normal
ond, an energy-based model converts flow features into energy traffic patterns to detect anomalies by identifying deviations
YANG et al.: END-TO-END OPEN-SET SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1349

from typical behaviour. For example, Kitsune, proposed by
Mirsky et al. [26], employs autoencoders to dynamically
reconstruct features of normal traffic, enabling anomaly detection. semi-supervised learning methods address the challenge
of obtaining large-scale labeled data by combining small
amounts of labeled traffic with large volumes of unlabeled
traffic. The study in [9] demonstrates that application fingerprints in encrypted traffic can be effectively extracted using
semi-supervised learning, which improves the classification
performance while reducing the labelling dependency. While
these methods have achieved promising results in detecting
known traffic within closed sets, their performance in identifying unknown attacks in open sets remains limited. In contrast,
our proposed method combines the adaptability of open- Fig. 1. Schematic of an open-world fine-grained classification task for known
 and unknown encrypted traffic, including the distinction between known and
set learning with the low labelling cost of semi-supervised unknown traffic, classification of known classes, and clustering of unknown
learning. Additionally, end-to-end joint training further reduces classes.
silent misclassification in fine-grained encrypted traffic classification.
 traffic set Dk and an auxiliary unknown class traffic set Dau .
B. Open-Set Recognition for Encrypted Traffic Classification The known class set Dk contains traffic flows annotated with
 explicit class labels drawn from the known label set Yk and
 In open-world scenarios, encrypted traffic classification
 is formally defined as Dk = {(xi , yi )|yi ∈ Yk }i=1
 Nk
 , where xi is
must address two key tasks: fine-grained classification of
 a network flow instance, yi is its corresponding label, and Nk
known traffic classes and detection of unknown traffic
classes, which falls under the framework of open-set recog- S totalk−1number of known class flows. The label set Yk =
 is the
 {B} {Ai }Ci=1 comprises Ck distinct classes, where B represents
nition (OSR). OSR has received increasing attention, with
 benign traffic and each Ai denotes a specific known attack
methods broadly categorized as confidence-based, reconstructype. The set Dau = {xi }i=1 Nau
 consists of unlabeled flows that
tion error-based, and generative model-based approaches.
 are treated as belonging to an auxiliary unknown class Uau ,
Confidence-based methods assess whether a sample belongs
to an unknown class through the classifier’s confidence. T set Yau strictly disjointed
 which is associated with a latent label
 from the known classes, i.e., Yk Yau = ∅. During testing,
Hendrycks et al. [20] analyzed softmax output distributions
 the model must handle a more complex open-world scenario.
to detect unknown samples based on prediction confidence.
 The test set Dtest includes traffic flows from known classes
Reconstruction error-based methods leverage autoencoders to
 Yk , from the auxiliary unknown class Yau , and from entirely
model known traffic and identify unknown traffic through
 novel unknown classes not seen during training, denoted as
reconstruction errors. Yang et al. [27] improved the sample
 Dnu with a label set Ynu . The novel unknown classes T are also
distance metric in the latent space using a contrastive learningdisjointed from all previously observed classes: Ynu Yau = ∅
based autoencoder. They applied a dynamic threshold based
 and Ynu Yk = ∅.
 T
on the median absolute deviation to identify out-of-distribution
 The goal is to train an end-to-end classification model M
drifting samples. Zhao et al. [17] developed a one-class learner
 that, at test time, (1) accurately classifies flows belonging to
for each class. The traffic for each class was reconstructed,
 known classes Yk ; (2) effectively detects and distinguishes
and an outlier threshold was applied to detect unknown traffic.
 flows from novel unknown classes Ynu ; and (3) performs
However, these methods suffer from confidence misjudgement
 fine-grained classification of flows in the auxiliary unknown
and sensitivity to reconstruction errors, which reduces the
 set Dau using pseudo labels. Reliably identified unknown
overall effectiveness of OSR. Generative model-based methods
 traffic flows are progressively accumulated and integrated with
identify unknown traffic by generating samples or learning 0
 the auxiliary set Dau to form an updated set Dau , which
data distributions. Yang et al. [22] trained generative models
 is periodically used for retraining to improve the model’s
to learn feature distributions of known classes and identified
 adaptability against evolving unknown traffic.
unknown classes using reconstruction errors. In contrast, our
method involves the construction of an efficient feature representation mechanism and introduces a classification method B. Method Overview
using an energy-based model. This model achieves robust The overall framework of our proposed FEC-OSL is shown
performance in distinguishing between known and unknown in Figure 2. It consists of three modules: i) Dual-branch
flows, enhancing the detection of unknown classes while flow feature extraction module: This module preprocesses
maintaining high accuracy for known classes. raw traffic pcap data and splits it into independent biflows.
 Byte-level features and flow interaction features are extracted
 III. M ETHODOLOGY
 separately. These features are fused and concatenated to form
A. Problem Statement a comprehensive representation. ii) Energy-based model for
 In the open-world traffic classification task, we are given known/unknown class classification module: The energy funca training dataset Dtrain consisting of a labeled known class tion maps flow samples to energy values, with the Weibull
1350 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 2. Overall structure of FEC-OSL. The model is trained in an end-to-end manner using a combination of cross-entropy loss, energy-based boundary
regularization loss and clustering loss.

distribution modeling known and unknown sample boundaries. packets per flow in this study to strike a reasonable balance
Energy values are compared to a threshold to classify samples between performance and efficiency.
as known or unknown. iii) Unknown class adaptive deep clus- Convolution-Enhanced ViT Feature Extraction: The vision
tering module: This module iteratively optimizes the clustering transformer (ViT) [32] applies the transformer [33] to comof unknown flows by jointly updating flow sample feature puter vision. However, ViT lacks locality and translation
representations through clustering and feature learning. invariance, limiting its performance on small-scale datasets
 [34]. To address this, we propose a convolution-enhanced ViT
 (CViT), which combines convolutional local feature extraction
C. Dual-Branch Flow Feature Extraction
 with ViT’s global modeling to efficiently extract multilevel
 To improve the accuracy of encrypted traffic classification, features from raw byte matrices.
we propose a dual-branch flow feature extraction module that For both the flow header matrix xh and payload matrix x p ,
integrates byte-level and flow interaction features. the same feature extraction process is applied. Taking xh as
 1) Byte-Level Flow Feature Extraction: In encrypted traffic an example, it is divided into P × P patches that do not cross
classification, the raw byte information of network flows is packet boundaries. The total number of patches is N p , and
critically important. Compared with statistical features [12], 2
 the patches are represented as x̃h ∈ RN p ×P . Convolutional
[28], raw byte data retain fine-grained content and better operations are then applied to each patch to extract local
reflect the inherent characteristics of flows [29]. To preserve features:
the interaction patterns between endpoints, the raw pcap data ch,i = Conv( x̃h,i ; θ) (1)
are segmented into independent biflows using the Splitcap
tool. For each packet, Ethernet headers are removed, and IP where θ is the convolution kernel. The features are flattened
addresses and port numbers are anonymized. and embedded into high-dimensional space and augmented
 Byte Matrix Reshaping: For each input flow sample x, we with positional embeddings to retain spatial information:
select the first M consecutive packets to ensure traffic data z(0)
 h = [ch,1 E emb ; ch,2 E emb ; · · · ; ch,N p E emb ] + E pos (2)
consistency. Each packet is divided into two parts, the header
and the payload, which differ in semantics and length [11], where Eemb denotes the embedding matrix and E pos denotes
[30]. These parts are processed separately and reshaped into the positional embedding.
fixed-size matrices for model input. The byte sequence of each The embedded features are fed into a transformer encoder
packet header is reshaped into a matrix of size mrh × mch , with with L layers. For the l-th layer:
zero-padding applied for uniformity. The header matrices of M z̄(l) (l−1)
 h = MHA(LN(zh )) + zh(l−1) (3)
packets are concatenated along the packet sequence dimension
 r c z(l) (l) (l)
 h = FFN(LN(z̄h )) + z̄h (4)
to form a fixed-size flow header matrix xh ∈ R(M×mh )×mh ,
where M ×mrh = mch . Similarly, the payloads are processed into where MHA(·) denotes the multi-head attention mechanism,
 r c
a flow payload matrix x p ∈ R(M×m p )×m p , where M × mrp = mcp . FFN(·) denotes the feed-forwards network, and LN(·) denotes
Given that prior studies have shown that selecting the first the layer normalization.
few packets of a flow is generally sufficient to capture its After processing, global pooling is applied to the flow
fundamental characteristics [31], we uniformly set M = 5 header matrix and payload matrix, resulting in flow-level
YANG et al.: END-TO-END OPEN-SET SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1351

feature representations zh and z p . These features are then com- is denoted as h(0) i , where i = 1, 2, · · · , Nv and Nv is the
bined to form the final flow-level byte feature representation, number of nodes. All node features form a feature matrix
hb = [zh , z p ]. Ĥ = [â1 , â2 , · · · , âD ] ∈ RNv ×D , where the d-th feature dimen-
 2) Flow Interaction Feature Extraction: In encrypted flows, sion is given by vector âd ∈ RNv . The TAGCN network consists
attributes such as packet time intervals and transmission direc- of L0 layers. The input, including Ĥ and the adjacency matrix
tions (e.g., upstream or downstream) reflect the interaction A, is passed into a set of graph filters to perform convolution
patterns between hosts. These features are crucial for distin- operations across different 0
 dimensions of node features. The
guishing between normal and malicious behaviors [28], [35]. f -th graph filter G(ld, f) ∈ RNv ×Nv in the l0 -th layer is defined as
 Flow Interaction Graph Construction: To capture such a polynomial of A:
features, we construct a flow interaction graph (FIG), where K
 0 X 0
each biflow is represented as a graph, providing an intu- G(ld, f) = w(ld, f) ,k Ak (5)
itive representation of the communication patterns between k=1
endpoints. Specifically, we follow the graph construction pro- 0

cedure proposed in the seminal work [35], where each packet where w(ld, f) ,k are learnable coefficients that determine the
within a flow is regarded as a node in the graph. The concept contribution of k-hop neighbourhood information. The term
of a burst, which refers to a sequence of consecutive packets Ak denotes the k-th power of the adjacency matrix, where
transmitted in the same direction within a short time interval, Aki, j is the number of paths of length k from node j to node i.
is introduced to define the connections between nodes. This The f -th output feature mapping of node i is calculated as
forms a graph G = (V, E), where nodes V and edges E are follows:
defined as follows: D D
 K X
 0 X 0 X 0
 Nodes: Node features are crucial for accurate classification. hi,(l f) = G(ld, f) âd + b f = (l )
 wd, k
 f ,k A âd + b f (6)
On the basis of the approach in [35], we expand it by extracting d=1 k=1 d=1

key attributes from packets across multiple dimensions as node where b f is a learnable bias term. After filtering, the output
embeddings. These features include packet direction, length, feature 0 maps are concatenated to update the node representatimestamp, total number of packets in a burst, total number of tion h(li ) .
bytes in a burst, the ratio of packet counts between consecutive Readout Layer: After the node features are obtained, the
bursts, and the ratio of total bytes between consecutive bursts. readout layer generates the graph-level representation of the
These seven types of features provide strong discriminative flow. This is defined as follows:
power for encrypted traffic classification: packet direction 0 0 0

captures host interaction patterns, length is a critical attribute hg = Readout(h(l1 ) , h2(l ) , · · · , h(lNv) ) (7)
for identifying encrypted fingerprints [36], timestamp reflects 3) Feature Fusion: We concatenate the byte-level flow
temporal dynamics, and burst-related features reveal commu- features hb and flow interaction features hg obtained from
nication density and stage-wise behaviors. All the features are the dual-branch feature extraction process to form a more
concatenated into a vector to serve as the initial representation comprehensive flow representation h = [hb , hg ].
of each node. From the traffic feature perspective, the byte-level branch
 Edges: The packet sequence within a biflow is divided focuses on fine-grained packet composition that encodes strucinto multiple bursts based on a predefined burst threshold. In tural patterns, whereas the interaction branch captures flow
FIG, nodes are connected through intra-burst and inter-burst characteristics such as temporal dependencies, burst behaviour,
edges. Within the same burst, intra-burst edges are constructed and direction correlation between hosts. These complementary
sequentially according to timestamps, connecting each pair representations jointly reflect both intrinsic packet characof adjacent nodes. This captures the temporal sequence of teristics and extrinsic communication behaviors, leading to
packets while reducing the computational complexity of fully more discriminative feature embeddings for clustering and
connecting all nodes. For nodes across adjacent bursts, inter- classification.
burst edges are added: the first node of each burst is connected
to the first node of the previous burst, and the last node is
connected to the last node of the previous burst. This preserves D. Energy-Based Model for Known/Unknown Class
the relationships between bursts and the temporal continuity Classification
of the flows. Additionally, undirected edges are used in the In open-world detection, the presence of unknown class
graph to flexibly represent the relationships between packets. traffic is inevitable. Softmax-based methods perform well for
 Graph Representation Learning: We construct a FIG G known classes but often produce high-confidence predictions
for each flow x and input the graph into a GNN consisting for unknown classes, leading to misclassification [19], [20].
of topology-adaptive graph convolutional network (TAGCN) To address this, we design a module for distinguishing known
[37] layers and a readout layer. and unknown classes based on an energy-based model (EBM)
 TAGCN Layer: Given the complex behavioural patterns [38], [39]. This module identifies known and unknown traffic
in flows, such as packet bursts and frequent interactions, by evaluating the compatibility between the input features and
we employ TAGCN to aggregate multi-hop neighbourhood class labels.
information for feature extraction and iteratively update node Given a flow sample x, its feature representation h ∈ H
representations. In the FIG G, the initial feature of node i in the latent space, and its label, we aim to learn an energy
1352 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

function E(h) that assigns lower energy values to known
classes and higher energy values to unknown classes. E(h)
is defined as the Helmholtz free energy of h, computed by
marginalizing over the energy values E(h, y0 ) corresponding
to individual classes y0 . This is expressed as follows:
 Z
 E(h) = −T log exp(−E(h, y0 )/T ) (8)
 y0

where T is a temperature parameter that regulates the energy
scale. E(h, y0 ) quantifies the compatibility between h and class
y0 , while E(h) aggregates these values into a holistic energy
representation. Fig. 3. Comparison of the negative energy Weibull distributions for known
 and unknown flows. The histogram shows the density distributions of known
 EBMs are naturally related to traditional discriminative classes (blue) and unknown classes (red) across different energy ranges. The
models [39]. We employ a discriminative classifier g(h) with dashed line indicates the threshold used to distinguish between known and
Ck + 1 classes, where the first Ck represents known classes unknown classes.
and the additional class represents all unknown classes. The
classifier maps h to Ck + 1 logits. The energy values are then
 bound mk , whereas the second term treats auxiliary unknown
converted into a class probability distribution using the Gibbs
 class flows (without labels) as negative examples, encouraging
distribution, similar to the output of a softmax layer:
 their energy to exceed the lower bound mau . The regularization
 exp(−E(h, y)/T ) exp(−E(h, y)/T ) mechanism enables the model to form a distinct and general-
 P(y|h) = R 0 )/T )
 =
 y0 exp(−E(h, y exp(−E(h)/T ) izable boundary between known and unknown classes in the
 exp(gy (h)/T ) energy space. Consequently, it can effectively separate the two
 = PCk +1 (9) classes and better generalize them to identify novel unknown
 j=1 exp(gy j (h)/T ) classes during testing.
where gy (h) is the logit value for class y and E(h, y) is its In the inference phase, the learned energy function E(h; g)
corresponding energy value, where E(h, y) = −gy (h). Using computes the energy values of flows. To distinguish between
Equation (9), the free energy function can be expressed as known and unknown flows, the negated energy values −E(h; g)
follows: of known class samples are modeled using the Weibull distri-
 0 1 bution [40], as illustrated in Figure 3. By comparing the energy
 k +1
 CX
 value with a threshold τ, flows are classified as either known
 E(h; g) = −T log @
 
 exp gy j (h)/T A (10)
 or unknown:
 j=1 8
 <arg min E(h, y), if − E(h; g) ≥ τ,
The energy function E(h; g) provides a global representation of
 r= y∈Yk (13)
h by considering all classes. Unlike softmax, which relies only :U, otherwise.
on the relative magnitudes of logits, the energy-based model
effectively avoids false high-confidence predictions through If −E(h; g) exceeds τ, the flow is assigned to the known
global modeling. class with the minimum energy value. Otherwise, it is clas-
 During training, we design a total loss function that sified as unknown. The term −E(h; g) is used to ensure
combines cross-entropy loss and energy-based boundary reg- that higher scores correspond to positive samples, following
ularization loss. This function improves the classification conventional definitions.
accuracy for known classes and enhances the ability to distinguish between known and unknown classes. The total loss
 E. Unknown Class Adaptive Deep Clustering
function is given as follows:
 In an open-world scenario, novel classes constantly emerge,
 L1 = E(h,y)∼Htrain [− log P(y|h)] + λLenergy (11) making it crucial to generate effective pseudo labels for
 unknown class samples. To address this challenge, we design
where Htrain denotes training flow samples in the latent space
 an adaptive deep clustering module that integrates deep feature
and λ denotes the weight factor that balances the two loss
 extraction with clustering techniques to adaptively cluster
terms. The energy-based boundary regularization loss Lenergy
 unknown flows.
is defined as follows:
 For unknown flow x, the dual-branch feature extraction
 Lenergy = E(h,y)∼Hk (max(0, E(h) − mk ))2 module first generates its feature representation. To mitigate
 + E(h,y)∼Hau (max(0, mau − E(h)))2 (12) the feature bias caused by the EBM, which might incorrectly
 map unknown flows to an auxiliary (Ck +1)-th class, we apply
where Hk and Hau denote the training distributions of known a CNN to refine the feature representations. The overall feature
class flows and auxiliary unknown class flows, respectively. extraction network is denoted as ψθ (·). A classifier g0 (·) is then
mk and mau are energy-boundary parameters for known and applied, where the initial number of classes is set to a value
auxiliary unknown classes, respectively. Specifically, the first larger than the potential true number of unknown classes. In
term drives the energy of known class flows below the upper the initialization phase, we employ a clustering algorithm to
YANG et al.: END-TO-END OPEN-SET SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1353

assign initial pseudo labels ỹ to x. A sample base is constructed During testing, we incrementally identify credible novel
to store flow features and their pseudo labels, while a centroid unknown flows, denoted as Dnu , with energy values in the
base maintains the current feature representation of the cluster tail (p <0.01) of the Weibull distribution of known classes
centroid. We obtain the corresponding pseudo labels of xau and with feature distances lying in the top 5% tail region and
from the sample base and update the parameters of ψθ (·) by forming high-density clusters. These samples are merged with
minimizing the following loss function: the original auxiliary unknown set Dau to form an updated
 0
 set Dau , which is periodically used to refine model parameters
 L2 = E(x,ỹ)∼Dau [CE(g0 (ψθ (x), ỹ)] (14) and enhance adaptability to emerging unknown traffic.
where CE(·) denotes the cross-entropy loss function. After
updating the feature representations, to ensure a smoother
 IV. E VALUATION
transition of the features in the sample base, we adopt the
following momentum update formula to update the features A. Experimental Overview
stored in the sample base:
 In this section, the performance of FEC-OSL is thoroughly
 ψθ (xu )
 Fβ (x) ← β · + (1 − β) · Fβ (x) (15) evaluated through comparisons with baseline methods in
 kψθ (x)k2 closed-set and open-set scenarios, an analysis of adaptability
where β ∈ (0, 1] is the momentum coefficient, balancing the to concept drift, ablation studies of key components, and a
contributions between the new and old features. Moreover, sensitivity analysis of hyperparameter effects.
the pseudo labels of the flow samples are reassigned based on
their current features by finding the nearest cluster center as
follows: B. Experimental Setup
 ỹ0 = arg min kFβ (x) − cỹ k22 (16) 1) Datasets: The proposed method is extensively evaluated
 ỹ∈{1,··· ,Cau }
 on three real-world benchmark datasets: USTC-TFC-2016
where cỹ denotes the cluster center feature of class ỹ. As [41], CIC-IDS-2018 [42], and ISCX-Tor-2016 [43]. The details
the network iteratively updates, the feature representations of the datasets are as follows:
of the flow samples and their pseudo label assignments are
progressively refined. Erroneous features and labels are grad- • USTC-TFC-2016: Released by researchers from the Uniually corrected, uncovering the fine-grained classes within the versity of Science and Technology of China (USTC),
unknown flows. this dataset contains encrypted traffic from 10 types of
 malware and 10 types of benign applications.
 • CIC-IDS-2018: Collected by the Canadian Institute for
F. End-to-End Training Cybersecurity, this dataset serves as a benchmark for
 During training, the FEC-OSL model is trained using an intrusion detection systems. It includes normal traffic as
end-to-end joint training strategy, where the known/unknown well as six types of malicious traffic, such as brute force
class classification module and the unknown class adaptive attacks, botnets, and denial-of-service (DoS) attacks.
deep clustering module are alternately optimized in an iterative • ISCX-Tor-2016: This dataset contains encrypted traffic
manner. The dual-branch flow feature extraction module is from 16 types of applications that use the Onion Router
shared by both modules and provides consistent and informa- (Tor) for communication, such as e-mail, Chat, and FTP.
tive flow features. The joint loss function for the model is Owing to the considerable disparity in the number of
defined as follows: samples across different classes in the employed datasets, a
 class-balanced sampling strategy is adopted to alleviate the
 Ltotal = L1 + L2 (17)
 impact of class imbalance on model training and evaluation.
where L1 is the loss for the known/unknown classification 2) Baselines: To comprehensively evaluate the performance
task. It includes cross-entropy loss and energy-based boundary of FEC-OSL, we conduct experimental comparisons with nine
regularization loss. L2 denotes the clustering loss for unknown baseline methods under both closed-set and open-set scenarios:
classes. i) For the traditional closed-set scenario, we include supervised
 The alternating optimization strategy guides known class methods (GraphDApp [35], Deeppacket [11], PERT [44], and
features towards low-energy regions and auxiliary unknown ET-BERT [45]), unsupervised methods (Kitsune [26]), and
features towards high-energy regions, thereby reducing intr- semi-supervised methods (FlowPrint [9]). ii) For the openaclass variance for known classes and enlarging the feature set scenario, we compare it with open-set learning methods
margin between known and unknown classes. Moreover, specifically designed for this setting (CVAE-EVT [22], ECNet
the clustering module refines pseudo labels and aggregates [31], and Trident [17]).
features to increase the intraclass compactness of auxiliary 3) Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate our method and baseunknown flows, reinforcing separability in the energy space. lines using accuracy (AC), precision (PR), recall (RC), and
This synergy improves classification accuracy for known F1 score (F1) for known class classification; AUC of the
classes, generalization to novel unknowns, and fine-grained ROC curve for distinguishing between known and unknown
clustering of auxiliary unknown flows, fulfilling the multi-task classes; and adjusted mutual information (AMI) for clustering
objective of open-world traffic classification. unknown classes.
1354 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS IN THE C LOSED -S ET S CENARIO (%)

 4) Implementation Details: Our proposed method is imple- interpacket interactions, allowing it to extract more compremented using Python 3.8.19, PyTorch 1.8.1, and trained on a hensive feature representations. As a result, FEC-OSL achieves
server equipped with NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs. We superior performance, with AC improvements of 1.56%,
train the model using the SGD optimizer. The learning rate 0.43%, and 1.4% and F1 score increases of 1.16%, 0.42%,
is set to 0.0001 for the dual-branch flow feature extraction and 1.1% on the three datasets, respectively. The unsupervised
module and the known/unknown classification module and method Kitsune, which focuses only on individual packets and
0.001 for the unknown class clustering module. The flow ignores correlations between packets, performs significantly
header matrix dimensions mch and payload matrix dimensions worse than FEC-OSL on the two malicious traffic datasets.
mcp are set to 20 and 40, respectively. The number of nodes in Similarly, the semi-supervised method FlowPrint, which conthe flow interaction graph Nv is set to 30. Energy thresholds τ siders only interaction-related information, also shows weaker
are determined separately for each dataset by fitting a Weibull performance than FEC-OSL does.
distribution to the negated energy values of known samples. With respect to the open-set learning methods, CVAE-EVT
The threshold for each dataset is then set to the value at a and ECNet achieve relatively good results but still fall slightly
specified quantile of the fitted distribution, with quantile levels behind FEC-OSL. The Trident series (AE, RNN, and GNN)
of 0.05 for USTC-TFC-2016, 0.05 for CIC-IDS-2018, and 0.1 performs well on the CIC-IDS-2018 dataset, with Trident
for ISCX-Tor-2016. The weight λ is set to 0.1. The temperature (RNN) achieving the highest accuracy, ranking FEC-OSL
parameter T is set to 10, determined via grid search in the second. Trident (RNN) has lower F1 scores and significantly
range from 0.01 to 100 in steps of the base-10 scale. The decreases in performance on the USTC-TFC-2016 and ISCXenergy-boundary parameters mk and mu are set to −10 and Tor-2016 datasets. This indicates a lack of stability and
−5, respectively, and are selected by performing a grid search generalizability when diverse traffic environments are considover candidate sets constructed based on the statistics of the ered. In contrast, FEC-OSL integrates features from packet
energy distribution. The training process uses 50 epochs with headers, payloads, and interpacket interactions, enabling it to
a batch size of 64. capture fine-grained discriminative details of network traffic.
 As a result, FEC-OSL consistently delivers outstanding perfor-
C. Closed-Set Classification Evaluation mance across varying network scenarios and complex traffic
 To evaluate the classification performance of FEC-OSL on characteristics.
known traffic classes in a closed-set scenario, we conduct
experiments with all classes known. Table I compares the
performance of FEC-OSL with eight other closed-set classi- D. Open-Set Classification Evaluation
fication methods, including supervised (SUM), unsupervised 1) Open-Set Traffic Classification: In this section, we
(USM), semi-supervised (SSM), and open-set learning (OSM) evaluate the performance of the FEC-OSL model in openapproaches. The results indicate that FEC-OSL achieves set traffic classification, aiming to simulate and assess its
the best overall classification performance across the three applicability in real-world open environments. Experiments
datasets. are conducted on the USTC-TFC-2016, CIC-IDS-2018, and
 Among the supervised methods, ET-BERT is the most stable ISCX-Tor-2016 datasets. To simulate open-set conditions,
and has the best performance. However, it relies mainly on we divide the selected classes into three parts: labeled
packet payload information, which limits its ability to utilize known classes, unlabeled auxiliary unknown classes, and novel
useful information from packet headers. In contrast, FEC- unknown classes that only appear during testing. The auxiliary
OSL integrates information from packet headers, payloads, and unknown classes constitute half (rounded down) of the total
YANG et al.: END-TO-END OPEN-SET SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1355

 Fig. 4. Evaluation of the AUC, F1 score, and AMI metrics under different known/unknown class ratios on the USTC-TFC-2016 dataset.

 Fig. 5. Evaluation of the AUC, F1 score, and AMI metrics under different known/unknown class ratios on the CIC-IDS-2018 dataset.

 Fig. 6. Evaluation of the AUC, F1 score, and AMI metrics under different known/unknown class ratios on the ISCX-Tor-2016 dataset.

unknown classes and participate in training without labels into the open-set classification capabilities of the FEC-OSL
to support energy-boundary learning and deep clustering. model.
The remaining unknown classes are held out for testing to Figures 4-6 compare the performance of FEC-OSL with that
evaluate generalizability. Specifically, for the USTC-TFC- of various baseline methods (e.g., CVAE-EVT, ECNet, and the
2016 dataset, we set multiple known/unknown class ratios Trident series) across the three datasets. Notably, the baseline
as Nk : Nu = {16 : 4, 12 : 8, 8 : 12, 4 : 16}. In each methods CVAE-EVT and ECNet are not capable of clustering
case, half of the Nu classes (rounded down if Nu is odd) unknown classes.
are selected as auxiliary unknown classes and included in For the task of distinguishing between known and unknown
training without labels, while the other half are used as novel classes, as shown by the AUC results in Figure 4(a), Figunknown classes during testing. Similarly, for CIC-IDS-2018, ure 5(a), and Figure 6(a), FEC-OSL consistently maintains
the class ratio is Nk : Nu = {5 : 2, 4 : 3, 3 : 4, 2 : 5}, and a high level of AUC across all ratio settings. Notably, when
for ISCX-Tor-2016, it is Nk : Nu = {6 : 2, 4 : 4, 2 : 6}, the degree of openness is low (i.e., a higher proportion of
following the same auxiliary/novel split policy. Under these known classes), the corresponding AUC values approach 1,
ratio settings, we conduct comparative experiments with vari- demonstrating the excellent ability of FEC-OSL to distinguish
ous open-set learning methods. The evaluation focuses on key between known and unknown classes. Moreover, as the propormetrics for the three tasks (AUC, F1, and AMI) and exam- tion of unknown classes increases, the decline in the AUC for
ines how these metrics vary under different known/unknown FEC-OSL is significantly smaller than that for the other baseclass ratios. This comprehensive analysis provides insight line methods. In contrast, the performance of the other models
1356 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 7. Visualization of feature space at different stages. (a) Before training: known (colored) and auxiliary unknown (grey) flows are mixed. (b) After training:
known flows form compact clusters, and unknown flows are well separated. (c) Testing: novel unknown flows (purple) remain clearly separated from known
clusters.

appears to be less robust across the various ratio settings. For increases), FEC-OSL consistently outperforms the baseline
instance, on the USTC-TFC-2016 dataset, when the ratio of methods. This finding indicates that FEC-OSL can more
known to unknown classes is 4:16, FEC-OSL still maintains effectively capture the differences between unknown classes
a high AUC value, while the AUC values for the CVAE-EVT to achieve effective clustering. In summary, the experimenand the Trident series (AE, RNN, and GNN) decrease sharply tal results demonstrate that FEC-OSL exhibits exceptional
to approximately 80%. These results highlight that FEC-OSL effectiveness and robustness in open-set traffic classification
effectively distinguishes between known and unknown classes tasks. Across various known/unknown class ratios, FEC-OSL
under varying known/unknown class ratios. Even in highly consistently outperforms the other methods in terms of the
open environments, it demonstrates superior differentiation AUC, F1, and AMI metrics while maintaining high stability.
ability and robustness. This strong performance lays a solid These findings strongly validate the efficiency of the proposed
foundation for the subsequent tasks of classifying known method in addressing the challenges of encrypted malicious
classes and clustering unknown classes. traffic detection in open-world scenarios.
 For the task of classifying known classes, we use the F1 2) Feature Space Visualization and Feature-Level Interprescore as a comprehensive metric to evaluate the classification tation: To verify the discriminative ability of the dual-branch
performance. From the results in Figure 4(b), Figure 5(b), design in FEC-OSL, we visualize feature distributions on the
and Figure 6(b), it can be observed that FEC-OSL achieves USTC-TFC2016 dataset with a known/unknown class ratio of
significantly higher F1 scores across all the ratio settings on 12:8. As shown in Figure 7, before training, the features of
the three datasets, demonstrating its strong classification capa- different classes are highly mixed without clear boundaries.
bility for known classes. This is primarily due to the strong After training, the known class flows form compact, lowcorrelation between the AUC and F1 metrics: an increase in variance clusters, whereas the auxiliary unknown flows are
the AUC indicates that the model is more effective at avoiding distributed in separate and concentrated regions that are clearly
misclassifying unknown class flows as known classes, which separated from the known clusters. This finding demonstrates
directly enhances the classification performance of known that the model effectively learns a discriminative feature space
classes and leads to an improvement in the F1 score, and vice during training. During testing, most novel unknown flows
versa. This correlation is also reflected in the stability of the F1 (purple) fall within the regions previously occupied by auxilscore. Although the F1 score for the known class classification iary unknown classes and remain clearly separated from the
task gradually decreases as the proportion of unknown classes known class clusters. These results confirm that the feature
increases, the decrease is relatively small and less pronounced space learned through the joint optimization of classification
than that of the baseline methods. This finding indicates that and clustering has a strong discriminative ability for open-
FEC-OSL can still classify known classes accurately and world traffic recognition.
reliably in scenarios with high openness. These experimental To further explain this from the feature perspective, Weibo
results further validate that the advantage of FEC-OSL in traffic (known) and Zeus traffic (auxiliary unknown) are
terms of the AUC directly contributes to the stability of the selected, with two random flow samples from each class. The
F1 score, enabling effective recognition of known traffic in attention heatmaps of the byte branch, generated via attention
open-set scenarios. rollout by aggregating multilayer attention weights and map-
 For the task of clustering unknown classes, we use the ping them back to the original packet header-byte matrices,
AMI metric to evaluate clustering performance. As shown are shown in Figure 8. The model focuses mainly on stable
in Figure 4(c), Figure 5(c), and Figure 6(c), although the fields such as the TCP window size in Weibo traffic while
AMI values for all the methods inevitably decrease as open- emphasizing variable fields such as TCP flags and SYN-related
ness increases (i.e., as the proportion of unknown classes options in Zeus traffic. This finding indicates that FEC-OSL
YANG et al.: END-TO-END OPEN-SET SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1357

 TABLE II
D ETAILS OF T RAINING AND T ESTING S ET A LLOCATIONS FOR THE CIC-IDS-2018 DATASET AND THE R ESTRUCTURED CIC-IDS-2018-N EW DATASET

 Fig. 10. Results of concept drift evaluation.

 Overall, the byte branch captures fine-grained structural
Fig. 8. Header-byte attention heatmaps for Weibo and Zeus flows. Darker patterns, whereas the interaction branch models communicacolors indicate higher model attention to the corresponding byte regions during tion behaviors. Their complementarity enables FEC-OSL to
inference.
 learn interpretable and discriminative representations, effectively separating known and unknown traffic in open-world
 scenarios.

 E. Concept Drift Evaluation
 In traffic classification tasks, concept drift often manifests as
 changes in attack strategies, tools, or characteristics, causing
 discrepancies between training and testing feature distributions. To evaluate the FEC-OSL model under concept drift,
 experiments are conducted using the CIC-IDS-2018 dataset.
 A new dataset, CIC-IDS-2018-new, is created by restructuring
Fig. 9. Feature importance for Weibo and Zeus flows. The violins depict the the training and testing sets to simulate real-world drift, with
per-sample |shape| distributions of each interaction feature. The vertical bars
indicate the median SHAP values, reflecting the central contribution of each benign traffic from different dates and similar attacks executed
feature for Weibo (left, blue) and Zeus (right, red) flows. with different tools assigned to separate sets. For instance,
 the DDoS traffic in the training set originates from the LOIC
 for HTTP attacks, whereas the DDoS traffic in the testing
distinguishes traffic by learning structural discrepancies at the set originates from the LOIC for UDP attacks. The detailed
byte level. dataset allocation is shown in Table II.
 Similarly, we take Weibo and Zeus traffic as examples and We conduct experiments under both the closed-set scenario
compute the importance of their interaction features using the (CIC-IDS-2018 dataset) and the concept drift scenario (CIC-
SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) method. The top six IDS-2018-new dataset), with the results shown in Figure 10.
key features identified are direction-length, timestamp, packets While the performance of the FEC-OSL model decreases
in a burst, bytes in a burst, packet-count ratio, and byte ratio. under concept drift, it still achieves high classification metrics,
Since direction is encoded as ±1, it is combined with length with F1 scores close to 90% and accuracy, precision, and
to capture directional correlations. The distributions of feature recall values all exceeding 90%. Despite the introduction of
importance for Weibo and Zeus traffic are shown in Figure 9. new attack tools and traffic patterns, the model leverages fine-
We observe that Weibo traffic relies primarily on direction- grained features of known classes to extract transferable and
length and bytes in a burst, whereas Zeus traffic relies mainly generalized feature representations. This allows FEC-OSL to
on the timestamp and direction-length. This finding indicates associate concept drift samples with the most similar known
that interaction features differ across traffic types. classes, effectively minimizing significant classification errors.
1358 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE III
 A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN THE
 C LOSED -S ET S CENARIO (%)

 Fig. 11. Comparison between the distributions of (a) Softmax confidence
 scores and (b) energy values from the EBM.

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN
F. Ablation Study THE O PEN -S ET S CENARIO (%)
 To evaluate the impact of key components on the overall
performance of the model, we design and conduct ablation
experiments on the USTC-TFC-2016 dataset. The experiments
are carried out in both closed-set and open-set scenarios, with
the open-set scenario using a known/unknown class ratio of
16:4. The specific test configurations are as follows:
 • w/o BFE: FEC-OSL without the byte-level flow feature
 extraction branch. To further analyze the contribution of
 specific components within the BFE module, we conduct
 additional fine-grained ablation experiments.
 • w/o header: FEC-OSL relies solely on packet pay- class distinction from 99.13% to 86.42% and 80.35%, respecload features, with the header features removed. tively, highlighting the critical role of byte-level flow and
 • w/o payload: FEC-OSL relies solely on packet flow interaction features in capturing fine-grained details for
 header features, with the payload features removed. distinguishing traffic. Similarly, removing header and payload
 • w/o FIE: FEC-OSL without the flow interaction feature features causes performance declines, with header features
 extraction branch. contributing more substantially. To further investigate the
 • w/ Softmax: FEC-OSL with the energy-based classifier effectiveness of the EBM classifier, we replace the EBM clasreplaced by a conventional softmax classifier. sification head with a conventional softmax confidence-based
 In the closed-set scenario, several ablation configurations classifier and extend the classification task to a Ck + 1 setting
are analyzed to assess the contributions of different feature to simulate open-set scenarios. In this setting, the softmax
extraction components, including “w/o BFE”, “w/o header”, approach achieves an AUC of only 89.65%. Furthermore,
“w/o payload”, and “w/o FIE”, as shown in Table III. The we visualize the distribution of softmax confidence scores
complete FEC-OSL model achieves optimal performance, and EBM energy values for known and unknown class flows
demonstrating the effectiveness of combining all the compo- under both methods, as depicted in Figure 11. The results
nents. Removing the byte-level flow feature extraction branch indicate that under the conventional softmax approach, the
reduces the F1 score by 1.80%, highlighting its role in confidence scores for known flows cluster tightly within a
capturing fine-grained patterns in encrypted traffic. Removing high confidence range (0.8 1.0), whereas those for unknown
header features results in the largest performance decrease flows are mainly at lower confidence levels. However, there
(2.61%), highlighting the critical role of structured header is significant overlap between these distributions, highlighting
information. In contrast, removing payload features causes that the softmax method is prone to misclassifying unknown
a smaller decrease (1.52%), as payload features alone are flows with high confidence in open-set tasks. In contrast,
less useful and may introduce noise when combined with the EBM method clearly separates known and unknown
flow interaction features. Removing flow interaction features distributions with distinctly defined energy boundaries and
reduces the F1 score by 2.29%, further confirming their minimal overlap. These findings demonstrate the inherent limsignificance. Overall, the results show that byte-level and flow itation of softmax normalization in reliably rejecting unseen
interaction features are complementary, and their integration classes, whereas the EBM approach explicitly captures global
improves classification accuracy. distribution differences between known and unknown flows,
 In the open-set scenario, we additionally evaluate the significantly enhancing robustness and generalization in openperformance under the “w/Softmax” setting to analyze the set recognition.
impact of the EBM classifier. The results are shown in
Table IV, where Kn/Unk, Kn, and Unk represent the tasks of
known/unknown class distinction, known class classification, G. Sensitivity Analysis
and unknown class clustering, respectively. Removing the BFE To investigate the impact of hyperparameters on the perand FIE significantly reduces the AUC for known/unknown formance of the FEC-OSL model, we conduct an in-depth
YANG et al.: END-TO-END OPEN-SET SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1359

 of consecutive packets selected from a flow. We evaluate the
 impact of different numbers of nodes on the performance of
 FEC-OSL, and the results are shown in Figure 12(c). The
 results indicate that the overall impact of the number of nodes
 on performance is relatively small. When the number of nodes
 is low (e.g., 10 or 20), the performance is slightly reduced
 because of insufficient feature capture. The model achieves
 the best performance when the number of nodes is set to
 30. However, when the number of nodes increases to 40,
 the performance decreases. Therefore, setting Nv = 30 is an
 optimal configuration.
 3) Energy Threshold: We evaluate the impact of different
 quantile levels used to determine the energy threshold τ on the
 performance of FEC-OSL using the USTC-TFC-2016 dataset
 with a known/unknown class ratio of 16:4. The experimental
 results are shown in Figure 12(d). Varying the quantile level
 significantly affects the model’s F1 score and AUC. When the
 quantile is low (e.g., between 0.1 and 0.5), the corresponding
 thresholds yield stable and near-optimal performance. However, as the quantile increases further (e.g., above 0.5), the
 performance gradually decreases. These results suggest that
 lower quantile levels lead to more effective separation between
 known and unknown flows. Therefore, selecting a quantile
 level of 0.1 to derive the energy threshold τ is a reasonable
 choice.
 4) Temperature Parameter: The temperature parameter T
 serves to smooth the model’s output logits and to regulate the
 sensitivity of the energy function. We evaluate its impact on
 FEC-OSL through a grid search to determine the optimal value
 Fig. 12. Impact of various hyperparameters on FEC-OSL performance.
 of T . We perform a grid search over the range from 10−2 to
 102 with logarithmic step sizes, resulting in the candidate set
sensitivity analysis on the USTC-TFC-2016 dataset. The ana- {0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10, 100}. Each candidate is experimentally
lyzed parameters include the dimensions of the flow header evaluated, and the optimal value is selected based on the AUC
matrix mch and payload matrix mcp , the number of nodes in the performance in distinguishing between known and unknown
flow interaction graph Nv , and the energy threshold τ used to classes. As shown in Figure 12(e), the model achieves the best
distinguish between known and unknown classes. separation performance when T = 10. Therefore, T = 10 is
 1) Flow Header/Payload Matrix Dimension: In the dual- adopted as the optimal temperature parameter.
branch flow feature extraction module, we evaluate the 5) Energy-Boundary Parameters: The parameters mk and
model’s performance under different matrix dimensions. As mau are used to explicitly define the upper and lower bounds
illustrated in Figure 12(a), smaller flow header matrix dimen- of energy values for known and unknown classes, respectively.
sions (e.g., 10×10) lead to slightly lower performance because We construct the candidate set for mk based on the mean
of insufficient information representation, resulting in informa- energy of known class flows in the training set and apply
tion loss. Increasing the size to 20 × 20 significantly enhances empirically determined downwards offsets in steps of 2 to genthe performance, achieving an F1 score of 99.59%. Beyond erate values {−8, −10, −12, −14, −16}. Similarly, we build
this point, performance stabilizes with minimal fluctuations, the candidate set for mau from the mean energy of auxiliary
indicating that mch = 20 is sufficient to represent traffic packet unknown class flows and apply an upwards offset in steps of 1
headers, whereas larger sizes introduce redundancy without to produce values {−7, −6, −5, −4, −3}. We then evaluate all
notable gains. Similarly, Figure 12(b) shows the performance the valid combinations (mk , mau ) formed from these sets. To
of FEC-OSL with different flow payload matrix dimensions. maintain a clear margin between known and unknown energy
As the matrix size increases from 20 × 20 to 50 × 50, the distributions, we impose a constraint such that mau > mk . The
performance generally tends to improve, especially reaching experimental results are shown in Figure 13, where parameter
the best performance at 40×40. Therefore, mcp = 40 is selected combinations with a margin |mau − mk | ∈ [5, 7] consistently
because it provides a good trade-off between performance and lead to higher AUC values. Among these, the combination
computational cost. of mk = −10 and mau = −5 results in the best performance,
 2) Number of Nodes in the Flow Interaction Graph: In the with the most distinct separation between known and unknown
flow interaction feature extraction branch, the number of nodes energy distributions. We therefore select this setting as the final
Nv in the flow interaction graph Nv corresponds to the number configuration for energy-boundary regularization.
1360 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 In this study, we propose a novel end-to-end multitask
 encrypted traffic classification method, FEC-OSL, designed
 for open-set scenarios, to achieve fine-grained classification
 of both known and unknown traffic. The method begins with
 a dual-branch flow feature extraction module, which extracts
 both byte-level and interaction-level features to capture finegrained discriminative information within traffic flows. Next,
 we introduce an energy-based model that maps traffic features
 to energy values, enabling precise classification of known
 traffic and effective identification of unknown traffic through
Fig. 13. Impact of energy-boundary parameter combinations (mk , mu ) on energy-boundary learning. Finally, we integrate feature learnopen-set recognition performance. The x-axis represents the absolute margin ing with clustering techniques to achieve further fine-grained
|mau − mk |, while the y-axis shows the AUC values for each parameter pair. classification of unknown traffic.
The color of each point represents the corresponding performance, with darker
shades indicating a higher AUC. Extensive experiments on widely used benchmark datasets
 demonstrate the significant performance advantages of the proposed method in both known traffic classification and unknown
 V. D ISCUSSION traffic identification. In future work, we plan to further explore
 In this section, we analyze and discuss the FEC-OSL test-time training/adaptation approaches to enable the model
framework in terms of feature separability, model scalability to dynamically adjust its parameters through adaptive learning
and robustness, and methodological limitations. during the testing phase. This will enhance the model’s ability
 to address entirely new and unknown traffic patterns, improv-
A. Feature Representation and Class Separability ing its robustness and effectiveness in recognizing evolving
 Effective open-world encrypted traffic classification relies attack strategies. Ultimately, this research aims to provide
on constructing a feature space where known and unknown more reliable and flexible solutions for network security.
classes are clearly distinguishable. FEC-OSL employs a dualbranch feature extractor that captures both byte-level and R EFERENCES
interaction-level features. The convolution-enhanced trans-
 [1] F. Santoso and A. Finn, “An in-depth examination of artificial
former models fine-grained structural patterns, while the flow intelligence-enhanced cybersecurity in robotics, autonomous systems,
interaction graph captures temporal and directional dependen- and critical infrastructures,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 17,
cies via graph convolution. These features are complementary no. 3, pp. 1293–1310, May 2024.
 [2] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
and, under the joint supervision of classification and clustering traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
losses, promote tighter intraclass cohesion and clearer inter- Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2022.
class boundaries. This representation improves both known [3] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification:
class classification and unknown class clustering. An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May
 2019.
 [4] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of
B. Scalability and Robustness encrypted traffic with second-order Markov chains and application
 attribute bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
 The byte matrix and interaction graph, used in the dual- pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
branch feature extraction module, are constructed with fixed [5] Z. Ling, J. Luo, K. Wu, W. Yu, and X. Fu, “TorWard: Discovery of
dimensions, ensuring consistent per-flow computation. The malicious traffic over tor,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
 (INFOCOM), Apr. 2014, pp. 1402–1410.
overall cost scales linearly with the number of flows, support- [6] N. Hua, H. Song, and T. V. Lakshman, “Variable-stride multi-pattern
ing the scalability of the framework to large traffic volumes. matching for scalable deep packet inspection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
In concept drift evaluations, FEC-OSL maintains stable per- Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2009, pp. 415–423.
 [7] Zscaler ThreatLabz. (Dec. 2023). 2023 State of Encrypted Attacks
formance, demonstrating adaptability to shifting traffic patterns Report. Zscaler. [Online]. Available: https://www.zscaler.com/resources/
and robustness in real-world environments. industry-reports/threatlabz-2023-state-of-encrypted-attacks-report.pdf
 [8] R. R. Jagat, D. S. Sisodia, and P. Singh, “Detecting web attacks from
 HTTP weblogs using variational LSTM autoencoder deviation network,”
C. Limitations and Future Work IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 2210–2222, Sep.
 FEC-OSL currently depends on the first 30 packets for 2024.
 [9] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
byte-level features, which may fail to capture late-stage on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.
attack behaviors. Future work may explore variable-length (NDSS), Feb. 2020, pp. 1–18.
or context-aware flow modeling. Moreover, the dual-branch [10] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
 and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
feature extraction and clustering processes may introduce Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
additional computational overhead, which could limit the [11] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
applicability of the method in low-latency or resource- packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
 learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
constrained environments. Exploring lightweight alternatives [12] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning
or approximation strategies could help reduce the overall enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
computational burden. vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, Dec. 2022.
YANG et al.: END-TO-END OPEN-SET SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1361

[13] E. M. Rudd, A. Rozsa, M. Günther, and T. E. Boult, “A survey of stealth [36] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
 malware attacks, mitigation measures, and steps toward autonomous fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
 open world solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 2, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021.
 pp. 1145–1172, 2017. [37] J. Du, S. Zhang, G. Wu, J. M. F. Moura, and S. Kar, “Topology adaptive
[14] W. J. Scheirer, A. de Rezende Rocha, A. Sapkota, and T. E. Boult, graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
 “Toward open set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., (ICLR), 2017, pp. 1–13.
 vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1757–1772, Jul. 2013. [38] W. Grathwohl et al., “Your classifier is secretly an energy-based model
[15] J. Jia and P. K. Chan, “Representation learning with function call graph and you should treat it like one,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
 transformations for malware open set recognition,” in Proc. Int. Joint (ICLR), Apr. 2020, pp. 1–23.
 Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–8. [39] R. Peng, H. Zou, H. Wang, Z. YaWen, Z. Huang, and J. Zhao, “Energy-
[16] S. Dang, Z. Cao, Z. Cui, Y. Pi, and N. Liu, “Open set incremental based automated model evaluation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
 learning for automatic target recognition,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote (ICLR), May 2024, pp. 1–39.
 Sens., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4445–4456, Jul. 2019. [40] C. Lai, D. N. P. Murthy, and M. Xie, “Weibull distributions and their
[17] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A univer- applications,” in Springer Handbooks. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
 sal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic 2006, pp. 63–78.
 detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619. [41] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation
[18] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
 paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE
 [42] Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. (2018). CSE-CIC-IDS2018 on
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
 AWS. Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. [Online]. Available: https://
[19] H. Jiang, B. Kim, M. Y. Guan, and M. R. Gupta, “To trust or not to trust www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2018.html
 a classifier,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2018, [43] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 pp. 5546–5557. “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
[20] D. Hendrycks, “A baseline for detecting misclassified and out- Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017, pp. 253–262.
 ofdistribution examples in neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. [44] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
 Represent. (ICLR), Apr. 2017, pp. 1–12. representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
[21] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K),
 filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Jul. 2020, pp. 397–405. [45] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
[22] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
 learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion pp. 633–642.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553,
 2021.
[23] M. Ester, H. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,”
 in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining (KDD), 1996,
 pp. 226–231.
 Qian Yang received the M.S. degree from Nan-
[24] A. M. Ikotun, A. E. Ezugwu, L. Abualigah, B. Abuhaija, and J. Hem- jing University of Posts and Telecommunications
 ing, “K-means clustering algorithms: A comprehensive review, variants (NJUPT) in 2021, where she is currently pursuing
 analysis, and advances in the era of big data,” Inf. Sci., vol. 622, the Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer
 pp. 178–210, Apr. 2023. Science. Her main research interests include network
[25] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “WF-transformer: security and encrypted traffic classification.
 Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification
 by using transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
 vol. 19, pp. 30–43, 2024.
[26] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), Feb. 2018, pp. 1–15.
[27] L. Yang et al., “CADE: Detecting and explaining concept drift samples
 for security applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
 Secur.), Aug. 2021, pp. 2327–2344.
[28] X. Han et al., “ContraMTD: An unsupervised malicious network traffic Wenxuan He received the B.S. degree from Nanjing
 detection method based on contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web University of Information Science and Technology,
 Conf., May 2024, pp. 1680–1689. Nanjing, China, in 2023. She is currently pursu-
[29] X. Han et al., “DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for ing the M.S. degree with the School of Computer
 fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecom-
 May 2024, Art. no. 110372. munications. Her research interests include artificial
[30] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph intelligence and encrypted traffic classification.
 neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
 ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
[31] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “ECNet:
 Robust malicious network traffic detection with multi-view feature and
 confidence mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
 pp. 6871–6885, 2024.
[32] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers
 for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
 (ICLR), May 2021, pp. 1–22. Minghao Chen received the B.S. degree from the
[33] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Southwest University of Science and Technology,
 Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 30, 2025, pp. 5998–6008. Sichuan, China, in 2024. He is currently pursuing the
[34] Y.-H. Cao, H. Yu, and J. Wu, “Training vision transformers with M.S. degree with the School of Computer Science,
 only 2040 images,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunicapp. 220–237. tions. His research interests include deep learning
[35] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- and network intrusion detection.
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
1362 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Hongyu Du received the B.S. degree from Nan- Shangdong Liu received the Ph.D. degree from
 jing University of Posts and Telecommunications Southeast University in 2019. He is currently a Lec-
 (NJUPT) in 2023, where he is currently pursuing the turer with the School of Computer Science, Nanjing
 Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer Science. University of Posts and Telecommunications. His
 His research interests include vulnerability detection main research interests include network behavior
 and cyberspace threat sensing. analysis, big data, and AI. He has published more
 than 20 high-level papers. His research interests
 include cyberspace security, big data, and artificial
 intelligence.

 Yimu Ji received the Ph.D. degree from Nanjing
 University of Posts and Telecommunications
 (NJUPT) in 2007. He is currently a Professor
 with the School of Computer Science,
 NJUPT. His main research interests include
 Sisi Shao received the master’s degree from Nan- security and applications in cloud computing,
 jing University of Posts and Telecommunications big data, the IoT, and AI. He has presided over
 (NJUPT) in 2021, where she is currently pursu- and participated in many national, provincial, and
 ing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Internet ministerial projects; obtained seven provincial and
 of Things. Her main research interests include municipal science and technology progress awards;
 cyberspace security and endogenous safety. published and employed more than 30 SCI papers;
 and obtained 15 authorized invention patents.

 Kui Ren (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Qiushi Chair
 Professor with Zhejiang University, AAAS, ACM,
 and CCF. He is also the Dean of the College of
 Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, and the Executive Deputy Director of the State
 Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security.
 His main research interests include data security
 Fei Wu received the Ph.D. degree in information and privacy protection, AI security, and security in
 and communication engineering from Nanjing Uni- intelligent devices and vehicular networks. He has
 versity of Posts and Telecommunications (NJUPT), presided over major domestic and foreign scientific
 China, in 2016. Currently, he is a Professor with the research projects, such as the Ministry of Science
 College of Automation and the College of Artificial and Technology, the National Natural Science Foundation of China, and the
 Intelligence, NJUPT. He has authored more than 40 National Science Foundation, USA. He was a recipient of the First Prize of
 scientific papers. His research interests include arti- Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Award, the First Prize in Natural Science
 ficial intelligence and cyber science and technology. of the Chinese Institute of Electronics Science and Technology Award, and the
 CISTC Technology Achievement Award of the IEEE Communications Society. He has published more than 400 peer-reviewed journals and conference
 articles, with an H-Index of 94 and more than 48 000 citations.