This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

 1

 Energy-Efficient Distributed Intrusion Detection Leveraging
 Graph-Smoothness and Sparsity in Consumer IoT WSNs
 Tanveer Ahmad, Asma Abbas Hassan Elnour, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu

 Abstract—An effective security approach is essential for wire- exposing networks to advanced threats. Existing signatureless sensor networks (WSNs) against various security threats, based systems require frequent updates and miss new attacks,
which helps to estimate the lifetime of the network. This makes while anomaly-based methods are too resource-heavy for senit highly valuable to design an Intrusion Detection System
(IDS) that consumes less energy and identifies malicious activity sor nodes. Centralized detection creates high communication
precisely. Traditional IDS techniques are limited to detecting overhead and single points of failure, whereas distributed
only certain types of attacks and often suffer from reduced systems often lack coordination and resilience to handle sonetwork longevity. Intrusion detection plays a critical role in phisticated threats [5], [6]. In consumer IoT scenarios, these
consumer electronics by safeguarding user privacy, ensuring failures can directly threaten user privacy, trust, and safety,
reliable device operation, and protecting interconnected smart
environments from increasingly sophisticated cyber threats. This making lightweight and intelligent intrusion detection vital
paper proposed a Distributed ADMM-based IDS (D-ADMM- for safeguarding devices and applications. Therefore, an IDS
IDS) using graph-smoothness priors and sparsity-driven anomaly framework that is accurate, resource-efficient, scalable, and
decomposition for real-time threat detection. The proposed capable of real-time operation under limited resources is
framework optimizes locally at each sensor, exchanging only urgently needed [7], [8]. As consumer electronics continue
compressed dual variables, thereby reducing communication
by 11.1% compared to existing schemes. The system adopted to increase at an extremely high rate, including smart home,
a convex composite objective, ensuring convergence within 25 wearables, and connected appliances, wireless sensor networks
ADMM iterations, with residuals below 2.3×10−3 and 2.0×10−3 . are now firmly rooted in everyday life. Due to compromising
The simulations show that D-ADMM-IDS achieves a detection performance of the network, security breaches directly jeopaccuracy of 96.4% while maintaining a false positive rate of ardize the privacy, safety, and trust of the user. Conventional
only 1.9%. Additionally, the proposed method reduces average
detection latency 3.0 s and energy consumption 0.875 J per node. intrusion detection systems tend to be too resource-intensive
 or centralized to work with consumer electronics. This inspires
 the necessity of a lightweight, distributed, and energy-efficient
 Index Terms—Consumer IoT, Energy, Intrusion, Graph
smoothness, Signal Sparsity. IDS framework that would be reliable to work within the
 limited environments of consumer IoT-enabled WSNs.
 I. I NTRODUCTION In this study, a novel Distributed IDS for WSNs in smart
 consumer environments, utilizing the Alternating Direction

W SNS is a key technology for enabling smart environments, supporting applications like environmental
monitoring, precision agriculture, industrial control, intelli-
 Method of Multipliers (ADMM) is proposed. The core innovation is framing intrusion detection as a structured optimization
 problem that adopted two key properties of WSN communigent transportation, and critical infrastructure surveillance [1]. cation in consumer networks, including (i) low-rank patterns
These networks comprise many sensor nodes deployed on an in typical network traffic caused by spatial and temporal corarea to monitor physical phenomena and communicate via relations and (ii) sparsity of anomalies, indicating that attacks
multi-hop transmission. The WSNs face limitations due to are localized and rare. By integrating graph-smoothness priors
their constrained energy, memory, bandwidth, and computa- based on the network topology, the system ensures consistency
tional capabilities. WSNs are vulnerable to various cyber and with physical connectivity while identifying attack-related
physical threats, such as sinkhole, selective forwarding, Sybil, disruptions. The main contributions of this work are:
and false data attacks [2]–[4].
 The integration of WSNs into IoT and emerging 6G net- • Development of an accurate, topology-aware, distributed
works increased the system scalability and complexity. Smart IDS framework designed specifically for the operational
homes, wearables, industrial systems, and transportation all realities of consumer IoT WSNs.
depend on WSN data, expanding the attack surface and • Formulation of IDS as a graph-smoothness and sparsityregularized optimization, enabling accurate separation of
 T. Ahmad is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Cyprus, Nicosia Cyprus. Corresponding Author (e-mail: tah- network behavior from localized attack patterns.
mad01@ucy.ac.cy) • Design of a novel low-rank and sparse decomposition
 A. A Hassan Elnour is with the Department of Computer Science, Applied model, a distributed ADMM-based solution that com-
College, Girls Section, King Khalid University, Mahayil, Saudi Arabia. (email: aselnour@kku.edu.sa) bined with graph regularization to detect both overall
 Thippa Reddy Gadekallu is with the College of Mathematics and Computer patterns and localized anomalies.
Science, Zhejiang A&F University, Hangzhou 311300, China, as well as • Mathematical formulation of a grounded optimization
with the College of Mechanical Engineering, Jiaxing University, Jiaxing
314001, China, and with the Division of Research and Development, Lovely algorithm that ensures high detection robustness while
Professional University, Phagwara, India. email: (thippareddy@ieee.org) reducing energy and bandwidth use.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

 2

 By combining distributed optimization, graph-theoretic and better energy efficiency, along with lower control overhead
modeling, and sparse signal recovery, the proposed system en- and faster computation. Author in [14] presents TEAD, a
hances the latest capabilities in consumer ioT WSN intrusion hybrid IDS designed for IoT-enabled WSNs. It combines
detection. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related trust assessment with ML-based anomaly detection. TEAD
work is presented in Section II. Section III introduces the calculates real-time trust scores for nodes using behavioral
system model, threat model, including the network overview, indicators like communication link reliability, weight ratio, and
communication flow, energy model, and threat model. The pro- frequency deviation. Testing on the NSL-KDD and CIC-IDSposed intrusion detection mechanism is described in Section 2017 datasets shows TEAD’s high effectiveness, with 96%
IV. Section V presents the analytical analysis of the proposed accuracy, a 2% false positive rate, and a 3% false negative
method, followed by results and discussion in Section VI. rate, making it well-suited for resource-limited IoT-WSNs.
Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. Another study introduces an energy-efficient data transmission
 framework for WSNs that combines the Low-Energy Adaptive
 Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) protocol with a fuzzy-based
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 IDS [15]. LEACH reduces energy use by randomly select-
 In this section various methods for IDSs and secure data ing cluster heads (CHs) and rotating the role among nodes,
transmission in WSNs are discussed and summarized in Table promoting balanced energy consumption. The Fuzzy-IDS uses
I. In [9], the author introduces a lightweight, energy-efficient fuzzy logic and artificial neural networks (ANNs) to identify
IDS specifically designed for LoRaWAN end devices, aiming nodes as either legitimate or malicious, strengthening network
to counteract energy depletion attacks that gradually drain security. Simulation results show that the proposed method
battery life. It tracks sensor energy consumption patterns achieves about 97% accuracy, precision, and specificity, with
through distance-metric-based anomaly detection, and used for low false positive and negative rates, thereby enhancing data
resource-limited IoT devices and demonstrates high detection transmission efficiency and extending network lifespan.
accuracy, with a F1 scores above 0.95 with 0.1 and 4.1%
energy consumption. A FL framework for intrusion detection III. S YSTEM M ODEL
in WSNs, combining FedAvg with XGBoost and utilizing fog This section discusses the architecture of consumer WSNs
computing to extend the network edge is presented in [10]. The and presents a threat model that identifies intrusions based on
method improves XGBoost with an enhanced histogram-based a formal mathematical framework for precise analysis.
approximation tailored for the imbalanced data typical of
WSNs and further reduces communication costs using a TOP- A. Smart Environment and Network Overview
K gradient selection to limit uploaded parameters. Experiments A smart environment can be described as a physical facility,
show that this approach achieves better detection accuracy e.g., a smart building, agricultural field, or urban infrastructure,
and lower energy use compared to traditional methods. The integrated with ubiquitous sensing, computation, and commuauthor in [11] proposed an IDS for sensor networks using nication resources. In our model, this environment is equipped
an enhanced deep neural network (IDNN). The system ar- with a set of N wireless sensor nodes, represented by:
chitecture is optimized with coyote optimization algorithm
integrated with global search (COA-GS). The system testing V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN }. (1)
on KDDCup-99 and WSN-DS datasets shows robust perfor-
 Each node vi consists of sensing modalities, a microcontroller,
mance, achieving approximately 95% accuracy, 96% recall,
 a radio transceiver, and a limited-capacity power source. The
95% F1-score, and an ROC AUC around 98%, along with
 consumer network operates in a multi-hop topology, in which
low detection latency ( 1 ms) and delay ( 0.8 ms).
 is data originating at a source node may traverse intermediate
 A novel FIDS-HMM technique for WSNs is proposed with
 nodes before reaching the sink or base station. Let E ⊂ V × V
the integration of fuzzy logic and the hidden Markov model
 represent the set of bidirectional communication links. The
to identify black hole attacks and malicious nodes [13]. The
 network can be represented as an undirected graph:
HMM monitors the energy level of the node, while fuzzy inference leverages metrics such as packet arrival rates, packet drop
 G = (V, E). (2)
rate, and remaining energy to assess the likelihood of an attack.
The simulations were performed in NS-2 which shows that Nodes (vi , vj ) ∈ E, communicate directly if their Euclidean
FIDS-HMM enhances QoS metrics—namely packet delivery distance satisfies dij ≤ Rc , where communication range Rc
ratio, throughput, and delay. [13] introduces a collaborative is determined by the radio hardware and path-loss conditions.
IDS (CIDS) designed for RPL-based networks within the Inter- In the presence of node mobility or topology changes, the
net of Everything that focuses on complex joint routing attacks graph Laplacian is updated dynamically. As long as topology
that impair performance and energy efficiency. It integrates variations occur on a slower timescale than the ADMM iterqueue and workload-aware RPL (QWL-RPL) for congestion ations; the graph-smoothness regularization remains effective
control, genetic algorithm-optimized weighted random for- and preserves convergence properties.
warding for load balancing, fuzzy logic for assessing trust,
LightGBM for attack detection, and Q-learning with trickle- B. Communication and Data Flow Model
time for collaboratively classifying and managing attacks. The Time is expressed as discrete slots t ∈ N+ . In each time
results show improved detection accuracy, higher throughput, slot, a node may be in sense, transmit, receive, or idle status.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

 3

 TABLE I: Summary of Intrusion Detection Approaches in WSNs and IoT Networks
Ref Target Network Methodology Main Contribution / Focus Performance Highlights
 LoRaWAN Lightweight IDS, energy consumption Detects energy depletion attacks efficiently High detection performance
9
 End Devices monitoring, anomaly detection for resource-constrained IoT devices with low resource
 FedAvg (federated learning), XGBoost, Federated IDS for WSNs to detect intrusions Improved detection accuracy
10 WSNs
 TOP-K gradient selection while reducing communication overhead and energy efficiency
 Deep Neural Network (DNN), Coyote Optimized IDS design for WSNs with ∼95% accuracy, low detection
11 WSNs
 Optimization Algorithm (COA-GS) enhanced detection latency (∼1 ms)
 Fuzzy logic, Hidden Markov Model Effective detection of black hole Enhanced packet delivery ratio,
12 WSNs
 (HMM) attacks in WSNs throughput, and delay
 RPL-based IoE Collaborative IDS, QWL-RPL, fuzzy Detects joint routing attacks in Higher accuracy, throughput,
13
 Networks logic, LightGBM, Q-learning low-power networks and energy efficiency
 Trust evaluation, LSTM, autoencoder TEAD framework combining trust metrics
14 IoT-enabled WSNs 96% accuracy, 2% FPR, 3% FNR
 anomaly detection with ML-based IDS
 Energy-efficient data transmission ∼97% accuracy, precision, and
15 WSNs LEACH clustering, Fuzzy logic, ANN IDS
 with fuzzy IDS routing specificity, low false positive/negative

 The sensed value at node vi and time t is denoted by: D. Channel Model
 The wireless channel connecting two nodes experiences
 si (t) ∈ R. (3) fading and noise. For heterogeneous sensor, the measurement
 noise variance is either obtained from device specifications or
 The data packet transmitted from vi to vj is denoted by
 estimated empirically during a short calibration phase. Each
pij (t), that contains the sensed value and optional metadata
 node maintains a local noise estimate, allowing the model to
like timestamp and node ID.
 accommodate sensor-dependent uncertainty without requiring
 global synchronization. We represent the baseband equivalent
 N (i) = {vj ∈ V | (vi , vj ) ∈ E}. (4)
 channel coefficient between vi and vj at time t as follows:
The network adopted a store-and-forward routing paradigm.
 p
 hij (t) = Gij · ηij (t), (10)
Let Pi→sink represent a path from node vi to the sink node
vsink . The path length is the number of hops: where, Gij is a large-scale path gain, inversely proportional to
 dγij , ηij (t) is a small-scale fading coefficient (Rayleigh fading).
 L(Pi→sink ) = cardinality of edges in path. (5) The received signal at vj from vi is:

 The end-to-end delay for a packet from vi to the sink is: rj (t) = hij (t) · xi (t) + nj (t), (11)
 X 
 (m,n)
  where xi (t) is the transmitted symbol and nj (t) is additive
 (m) (m)
 Di = Ttx + Tqueue + Tproc , (6) white Gaussian noise with variance σn2 .
 (vm ,vn )∈Pi→sink

 (m,n) E. Threat Model
where Ttx is the transmission delay between vm and vn ,
 (m) (m) In a smart WSNs, an adversary aims to disrupt or manipulate
Tqueue , Tproc is the queuing and processing delay.
 sensing, communication, or decision-making. The adversary
 may be external, injecting, jamming, or eavesdropping on
C. Energy Model traffic, or internal, having compromised nodes with access
 to keys, memory, or sensing functions. These attackers can
 Energy efficiency is essential for the networks because intercept or modify messages, or tamper with node hardware
nodes typically run on batteries. The energy used to transmit or firmware. Let yi (t) be the true sensed value at node vi .
data from vi to vj is described by the first-order radio model. Under attack, the observed value ỹi (t) can be modeled as
 Etx (k, dij ) = Eelec · k + Eamp · k · dγij , (7)
 ỹi (t) = yi (t) + ai (t), (12)
where k is a packet size in bits, Eelec is the energy per bit, Eamp where ai (t) is the disturbance caused by the adversary. The
is the energy per bit per mγ , and γ is a path-loss exponent. resulting packet delivery ratio (PDR) is
The energy consumption for receiving a k-bit packet is: P P (i)
 (1 − Ploss (t))
 PDRattack = t i P . (13)
 Erx (k) = Eelec · k. (8) tN

 Assuming that the network topology, represented as G, re-
 The energy update equation for a node vi is therefore: mains connected under normal conditions because of a trusted,
 physically secure sink node. Also, the time synchronization
 (i)(i) (i)
 Ei (t + 1) = Ei (t) − Etx (t) − Erx (t) − Eproc (t), (9) is accurate for slot-based modeling, and that communication
 occurs over half-duplex shared channels. The ADMM penalty
 (i)
where Eproc (t) is the energy spent on computation and sensing. parameter ρ is important for governing the balance between

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

 4

primal consistency and dual update magnitude. As ADMM a combination of both time regularization and space Laplacian
ensures convergence for any ρ > 0 under convexity, the prac- coupling to retrieve the natural framework of intrusion conduct
tical convergence speed is highly sensitive to its value. A small in the WSNs. Temporal regularization imposes smoothness of
value leads to slow enforcement, whereas an excessively large the legitimate signal through the consecutive time indices and
one ρ may cause oscillatory updates or numerical instability. guarantees smooth dynamics of the system that vary gradually,
 and abrupt deviations, which are usually brought about by
 IV. P ROPOSED I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ECHANISM intrusions, are isolated in the sparse component. At the same
 This section describes a detailed, mathematical formulation time, spatial Laplacian prior utilizes the similarities between
and description of the proposed IDS designed for consumer adjacent nodes: legitimate behavior is more likely to develop
IoT WSNs. Consider a network with N sensors, where the in a coherent manner throughout the graph, but attacks are
connectivity is depicted by an undirected graph G = (V, E). At typically local or asymmetric. The temporal regularizer Rt (S)
each discrete time index t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } the sensors gather refers to the mathematical constraint added to stabilize and
a vector of scalar measurements denoted by, smooth the sparse intrusion signal S across time.
 ⊤
 y(t) = y1 (t), y2 (t), . . . , yN (t) ∈ RN .
 
 (14) T
 X
 These measurements result from the physical process, mea- Rt (S) = ∥s(t) − s(t − 1)∥22 = ∥SH∥2F , (19)
surement noise, and possible malicious perturbations. The t=2

observed vector can be conceptually separated as
 y(t) = s(t) + a(t) + n(t), (15) where, H ∈ RT ×(T −1) is the first-difference operator, where
 the entries are defined as Ht,t = 1, Ht+1,t = −1. The
where s(t) the legitimate signal component is, a(t) indi- optimization problem in equation (18) is convex and amenable
cate an adversarial perturbation, and n(t) is the stochastic to powerful numerical methods. However, the centralization
measurement noise. The s(t) is assumed to change rapidly implied by solving (18) in a single location is impractical for
over the graph. The adversarial component a(t) is defined as large-scale WSNs. Let si ∈ RT is the temporal sequence of
spatially sparse and possibly temporally sporadic. To formalize legitimate values at node i, and ai ∈ RT represent the temporal
smoothness in the network, let L ∈ RN ×N is the combinatorial attack sequence at node i. The matrices can be decomposed
graph Laplacian integrated with G, defined by L = D − W as S = s⊤ ⊤ ⊤ ⊤
  
 1 ; . . . ; sN and A = a1 ; . . . ; aN . The Laplacian
where W is the symmetric weighted adjacency matrix and smoothness can be expressed using the edge incidence.
D =Pdiag(d1 , . . . , dN ) is the diagonal degree matrix with
di = j Wij . The graph Laplacian encodes local differences 1 X
 N tr(S⊤ LS) = Wij ∥si − sj ∥22 . (20)
between node values,
 ⊤ 1
 P for any vector2 u ∈ R the quadratic 2
form u Lu = 2 i,j Wij (ui − uj ) computes the weighted (i,j)∈E
variation of u on the graph. Given a temporal window t =
1, . . . , T we obtained the measurements into a matrix
 The Frobenius data-fidelityPNterm decomposes as a sum of
 Y = y(1), y(2), . . . , y(T ) ∈ RN ×T . nodewise squared errors 12 i=1 ∥yi − si − ai ∥22 where yi
  
 (16)
 denotes the ith row of Y and similarly for the other matrices.
 Similarly, we define the matrices for legitimate signals, ad- For each node i we introduce local copies of its own signal
versarial perturbations, and noise as S, A and N respectively, and attack variables. More specifically, define for each edge
so that a concise model for the observation window becomes: (i, j) ∈ E an auxiliary variable zij ∈ RT intended to represent
 the local agreement between si and sj . The constraints satisfy
 Y = S + A + N. (17) that zij = si and zij = sj in the consensus limit. Using
 The detection task is to identify nonzero entries of A, these auxiliary variables, the optimization can be equivalently
including their spatial and temporal support, and measure their expressed (for the squared-difference temporal regularizer) as
magnitudes, while estimating the smooth component S.
 N
 1X 1 X
 1
 min ∥Y − S − A∥2F + α tr(S⊤ LS) + β ∥A∥1,1 + γ Rt (S). (18)
 min ∥yi − si − ai ∥22 + α Wij ∥zij − zji ∥22
 S, A 2
 {si ,ai },{zij } 2 2
 i=1 (i,j)∈E
 1
where 2 ∥Y − S − A∥2F ensures that the data re- N
 X N
 X
mains accurate even in noisy environments. Meanwhile, +β ∥ai ∥1 + γ ∥Dt si ∥22 (21)
 ⊤
 PT ⊤ i=1 i=1
thePLaplacian quadratic tr(S LS) = t=1 s(t) Ls(t) =
1 2
 P
2 t i,j W ij (si (t) − sj (t)) encourages
 P spatial smoothness
by penalizing. ℓ1 norm ∥A∥1,1 = i,t |Ai,t | promotes sparsity subject to zij = si , zji = sj , ∀(i, j) ∈ E. Dt is
in the adversarial matrix, which aligns with the idea that the temporal-difference operator such that Dt si yields the
attacks typically impact only a limited number of sensors. The first differences of si . The augmented Lagrangian for the
temporal regularizer Rt (S) ensures that S captures the slow constrained problem (21) in Lagrange multipliers {λij , λji }
dynamics of the legitimate process. The proposed model uses that correspond to the constraints zij −si = 0 and zji −sj = 0,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

 5

respectively. The resulting Lagrangian is: solvers can be used. The temporal window T manages the
 N trade-off between detection delay and computational effort.
 1 X 1 X Additionally, precomputing a Cholesky factor of Qi helps
 Lρ = ∥yi − si − ai ∥22 + α Wij ∥zij − zji ∥22
 2 i=1 2 minimize runtime on platforms with limited resources. The
 (i,j)∈E
 N N dual variables are updated in the usual ADMM fashion:
 X X
 +β ∥ai ∥1 + γ ∥Dt si ∥22 (k+1)
 λij
 (k)
 = λij + ρ zij
 (k+1) (k+1) 
 − si , ∀(i, j) ∈ E. (31)
 i=1 i=1
 X X ρ These dual updates are distributed, matching the primal
 + λij , zij − si + ∥zij − si ∥22 . (22)
 2 steps locality, nodes exchange their si and zij values with
 (i,j)∈E (i,j)∈E
 neighbors for updates. Communication is reduced through
 The ADMM proceeds by alternating minimization over the lightweight compression methods like quantization or sketchprimal blocks {si }, {ai }, and {zij } followed by dual updates ing. ADMM maintains global convergence and its speed
for the multipliers. At ADMM iteration k the ai update solves: improves with proper scaling of Wij and warm-starting across
 (k+1) 1 (k)
 windows. The false alarm control is controlled by statistically
 ai = arg min ∥yi − si − ai ∥22 + β∥ai ∥1 . (23) calibrated thresholds τ = σr Φ−1 (1 − αf /2), with asynai 2
 chronous spatially adaptive variants used for heterogeneous
 (k) (k)
 The residual vector ri = yi − si , the solution is given sensor noise. Consider the statistic for node i at time t be:
by soft-thresholding: t 
 X f1 Abi,τ
 (k+1) (k)  Ti,t = log , (32)
 ai = Sβ ri , (24) f0 Abi,τ
 τ =t−M +1
The zij -updates at iteration k solve, for every edge (i, j) ∈ E, where f1 and f0 are the likelihood functions. The pro-
 (k+1) (k) posed method enhances sensor network security by integrating
 zij = arg min αWij ∥zij − zji ∥22
 z ij smoothness and sparsity models. Algorithm 1 focuses on
 (k) ρ (k) (k) processing at the local node level. Each sensor node inde-
 + + ∥zij − si ∥22 .
 λij , zij − si (25)
 2 pendently monitors its environment, filters data, and extracts
 This is a quadratic problem and yields a closed-form linear features like sudden changes, noise, or patterns. Algorithm
update, which is rewritten as: 2 employs an ADMM-based consensus update, where nodes
 (k+1) −1 (k) (k) (k) 
 share partial information to iteratively distinguish between a
 zij = 2αWij I+ρI 2αWij zji +ρsi −λij . (26) smooth, legitimate signal and a sparse anomaly component.
 The si is computationally involved because it integrates data ADMM facilitates agreement among nodes with minimal comfidelity, temporal smoothness, and the consensus terms related munication, enhancing anomaly detection and noise reduction
to incident edges. The node update is solve by: to differentiate normal fluctuations from genuine intrusion
 attacks. In Algorithm 3, an intrusion detection rule is applied
 (k+1) 1 (k+1) 2 using anomaly estimates at each node. Instead of arbitrary
 si = arg min ∥yi − si − ai ∥2 + γ∥Dt si ∥22
 si 2 thresholds, it uses a statistically derived threshold based on
 X  (k) ρ (k+1) 
 residual variance.
 + − λij , si + ∥zij − si ∥22 . (27)
 2
 j∈N (i) Algorithm 1 Local Node Processing at Sensor i
 Since all terms are quadratic, si minimization simplifies to Require: Observations yi (t) for t = 1, . . . , T
solving a linear system. Gathering the quadratic and linear 1: Preprocess signal: remove mean and normalize yi (t)
components results in a system expressed as: 2: Extract local features: temporal differences, variance, and

 (k+1) (k)
 correlations
 Qi si = bi , (28) 3: Compute preliminary anomaly score si (t)
 4: Store si (t) and prepare local data for ADMM update
where the matrix Qi ∈ RT ×T is positive definite. Solving
the local update for si requires O(T ) operations using the Ensure: Feature vector fi (t) and anomaly score si (t) =0
banded structure of Qi , while the soft-thresholding update
for ai is O(T ) per node, making each ADMM iteration
 Algorithm 2 Distributed ADMM Consensus Update
computationally lightweight for WSN hardware.
 Require: Local observations yi , preliminary si , neighbors Ni
 (0) (0) (0)
 Qi = IT + 2γD⊤
 t Dt + ρ|N (i)|IT , (29) 1: Initialize si , ai , dual variable λi
 2: for each iteration k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
 (k+1)
 3: Update smooth signal si
 (k) (k+1) (k+1) (k) 
 X
 bi = yi − ai + ρzij − λij . (30) 4: Update anomaly component via soft-thresholding
 (k+1)
 j∈N (i) ai
 (k+1)
 5: Update dual variable λi
 Solving this linear system provides the current legitimate
 6: end for
signal for node i. When Qi is banded, which occurs if Dt
 Ensure: Local estimates b si , a
 bi =0
is the first-difference operator, efficient banded or Cholesky

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

 6

Algorithm 3 Intrusion Detection and Decision Rule V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Require: Estimated anomaly signals a bi (t), residuals ri (t) To assess how well the proposed Distributed ADMM-based
 1: Estimate residual variance σr2 over calibration window IDS (D-ADMM-IDS) performs, we set up a detailed array
 2: Set threshold, τ of simulation parameters. The N sensor nodes are deployed
 3: for each node i and time t do randomly across a 2D space measuring 500 × 500 m2 . The
 4: bi,t | > τ then
 if |A communication radius Rc is kept at a steady 50 m, which
 5: Declare intrusion at node i, time t helped maintain a connected network with an average node
 6: else degree of about d¯ ≈ 8. Each node was assumed to use an IEEE
 7: No intrusion 802.15.4-compliant transceiver, with the energy cost per packet
 8: end if κ calculated. The sensing process xi (t) at each node i and
 9: end for time step t, influenced by Gaussian noise ni (t) ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
Ensure: Intrusion decision map D(i, t) =0 with σ set according to the targeted SNR. The high-amplitude
 anomalies ai (t) were embed into a fraction ϕ of nodes
 Lemma 4.1 (First-order optimality and subgradient charac- (ϕ = 1% − 30%). The ADmm parameters were tuned for fast
terization): Let Y, L, and the regularization parameters α, β, γ convergence and low communication overhead, with penalty
be given. Any pair (S⋆ , A⋆ ) that minimizes ρ = 1.0 and stopping criterion based on primal and dual
 J (S, A) = 21 ∥Y − S − A∥2F + α tr(S⊤ LS) + β∥A∥1,1 + γ Rt (S) (33) residuals below 10−4 . The simulation ran for T = 100 steps,
 and the performance was analyzed using accuracy A, false
satisfies, for i and time index t, the stationarity conditions positive rate FP , accounting for computation and communi-
 0 = − Y − S⋆ − A⋆ + 2αLS⋆ + γ ∇S Rt (S⋆ )
 
 (34) cation costs. The simulation parameters are summarized in
 Table II. The anomaly model tests the IDS against unusual
 attack signatures, with attack intensity σ. This demonstrates
 0 ∈ − Y − S⋆ − A⋆ + β ∂∥A⋆ ∥1,1 ,
 
 (35)
 how D-ADMM-IDS surpasses current methods, comparing
where ∂∥ · ∥1,1 is the subdifferential of the mixed ℓ1 norm. it with enhanced graphSAGE-based IDS [16], multi-channel
 Theorem 4.2 (Convergence of the distributed ADMM gated recurrent unit [17], and a classical graph-based anomaly
solver): Assuming that the temporal regularizer Rt is convex detector [18]. The detection accuracy η as a function of the
and the central objective is convex and closed, then for fixed attack intensity ρa , where ρa is represented as the proportion
penalty parameter ρ > 0, the iterates generated by ADMM of compromised nodes to the total network size, ρa = |N|Nattack |
 | is
will converge to a primal-dual optimal (S⋆ , A⋆ , {z⋆ij }, {λ⋆ij }) shown in Figure 1a. The accuracy of the proposed D-ADMMprovided the network graph remains connected and each local IDS is above 94.8% even at ρa = 0.15. In comparison,
subproblem is solved exactly at every iteration. enhanced GraphSAGE-based IDS [16] drops from 92.3% to
 Definition 1 (Low-frequency smooth subspace): Let L = 85.4%, Multi-Channel Gated Recurrent Unit [17] from 90.1%
UΛU⊤ be the eigen-decomposition of the Laplacian, and Ur to 83.0%, and the classical graph-based anomaly detector [18]
represents the subspace spanned by the r lowest-frequency from 87.9% to 80.5% for same range.
eigenvectors, i.e., Ur = span{u1 , . . . , ur }. A matrix S is said
to be r-bandlimited in time if each temporal column s(t) is TABLE II: Simulation Parameters for D-ADMM-IDS
contained within Ur . Parameter Value
 Theorem 4.3 (Sufficient condition for exact recovery in Number of nodes N 50–300
the noiseless case): Suppose the observations that follow the Deployment area 500 × 500 m2
 Communication radius Rc 50 m
equation Y = S0 + A0 , where S0 is perfectly r-bandlimited, Mean node degree d¯ ≈8
and A0 contains no more than s nonzero entries in the N × T Sensing noise standard deviation σ 0.05 (normalized units)
matrix. The incoherence parameter: Attack intensity ϕ 0.01–0.30
 √ Anomaly distribution Laplacian, zero-mean
 µ = max max N |Uik |, (36) ADMM penalty parameter ρ 1.0
 i=1,...,N k=1,...,r Per-packet energy cost κ 50 nJ/bit
measures how concentrated the low-frequency eigenvectors are
in the canonical form. If the pair (r, s) satisfies the relation Figure 1b examines the false positive rate (FPR) as a func-
 FP(θ)
 NT tion of the decision threshold θ, i.e., FPR(θ) = FP(θ)+TN(θ) .
 s≤c· 2 (37) The D-ADMM-IDS keeps an FPR below 2.8% for all θ ≥ 0.4,
 µ r log(N T )
 whereas the enhanced GraphSAGE-based IDS [16] exhibits
for a positive numerical constant c. an FPR as high as 5.5%, the multi-channel gated recur-
 Theorem 4.4 (Stable recovery under Gaussian noise): As- rent unit [17] attains 7.8%, and the classical graph-based
sume Y = S0 + A0 + N, where N consists of independent anomaly detector [18] exceeds 10.2% for lower thresholds.
and identically distributed Gaussian entries with a variance of Interestingly, even with θ = 0.7, our method achieves a false
σ 2 . Given the same incoherence and sparsity, the minimizer positive rate (FPR) of just 1.9%, which is 3.6%. Figure 1c
 b A)
(S, b meets the error bound.
 shows the average energy consumption per node En in joules.
 √
 b − S0 ∥F + ∥A
 ∥S b − A 0 ∥F ≤ C · σ N T , (38) Comparing it to the Enhanced GraphSAGE-based IDS [16],
with high probability, where C is a constant that depends poly- the Multi-Channel Gated Recurrent Unit [17], and a traditional
nomially on µ, r, and the chosen regularization parameters. Graph-based Anomaly Detector [18], we see that they scale
 with coefficients of 2.0 × 10−3 , 2.5 × 10−3 , and, 3.0 × 10−3
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

 7

 (a) (b) (c)
Fig. 1: (a) Detection Accuracy vs. Attack Intensity, (b) False Positive Rate vs. Detection Threshold, and (c) Energy Consumption
per Node vs. Network Size.

respectively. This results in an increase of energy consumption We considered two metrics, the Frobenius norm of the sparse
by 9% to 23% for a network with 250 nodes. To better intrusion signal recovery error, ∥Ŝ − S0 ∥F , and the low-rank
quantify scalability, we fit the energy consumption curve using network state matrix recovery error, ∥Â−A0 ∥F . The proposed
a log–log regression model of the form E(N ) = k N α , where method shows impressive results with ∥Ŝ − S0 ∥F = 0.05
E(N ) denotes per-node energy usage and α captures the and ∥Â − A0 ∥F = 0.07, which are 58.3% and 50.0% lower
scaling behavior with respect to network size. The regression than the nearest competitor, B1 . This significant improvement
yields α ≈ 0.31, indicating sublinear growth. A similar trend is largely due to the joint graph-smoothness and sparsityis observed for communication overhead, with the log–log fit regularized decomposition used in D-ADMM-IDS, allowing
confirming that message exchange scales as O(N 0.28 ), demon- for a clear distinction between anomalous patterns and the
strating favorable scalability for large WSN deployments. normal dynamics of the WSN. On the other hand, the existing
 The total communication cost Ccomm , measured in bytes methods show higher recovery errors, ranging from 0.12 to
exchanged as a function of the number of ADMM itera- 0.18 for S and 0.14 to 0.21 for A. This is mainly because
tions k, is illustrated in Figure 2a. By defining the cost they depend on centralized or non-sparsity-aware learning
function as Ccomm (k) = C0 + βcomm · k, where C0 = models. The lower recovery error not only leads to better
2000 bytes and βcomm = 20 bytes/iter for our approach, detection accuracy but also reduces false alarms, highlighting
leading to Ccomm (20) = 2400 bytes. In comparison, En- the advantages of the proposed approach for real-world smart
hanced GraphSAGE-based IDS [16] begins at 2200 bytes with environment applications.
βcomm = 25, Multi-Channel Gated Recurrent Unit [17] starts at
 TABLE III: Comparative Performance Analysis
2400 with βcomm = 30, and the classical graph-based anomaly
detector [18] kicks off at 2600 with βcomm = 35. This results Metric Proposed [16] [17] [18]
in a reduction of communication load ranging from 14.5% Accuracy @ ρa = 0.30 (%) 88.5 85.4 83.0 80.5
to 25.8% over the span of 20 iterations. Table III provides a FPR @ θ = 0.7 1.9 5.5 7.8 10.2
clear and concise overview of how the proposed D-ADMM- Detection Delay Mean (s) 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
 Energy per Node @ 250 nodes (J) 0.875 0.95 1.05 1.10
IDS stacks up against existing methods. Comm. Overhead @ k = 20 (bytes) 2400 2700 3000 3300
 The convergence of the proposed D-ADMM-IDS is illus- Overall Improvement Range (%) 14-28 – – –
trated in Figure 2b. We observed the primal residual ∥rk ∥2 and
dual residual ∥sk ∥2 against the number of ADMM iterations To understand the role of each component in D-ADMM-IDS
k on a logarithmic scale. Furthermore, both residuals show a framework, an ablation experiments is conducted by disabling
geometric decay rate, dropping to values below 10−2 within or modifying key modules. First, the temporal regularizer is
just 25 iterations. This swift decline highlights the strong removed by setting γ = 0. The sensor cannot accurately
convexity of the optimization problem at hand and the effective detect intrusions across consecutive time slots without tempovariable updates provided by the distributed ADMM frame- ral smoothing. Analytically, the detection accuracy drops by
work. Specifically, the primal residual decreases from 5×10−1 nearly 12.5%, and the false positive rate increases by 18.7%.
at k = 1 to 2.3 × 10−3 at k = 25, while the dual residual Second, the ADMM consensus mechanism is turned off and
falls from 4 × 10−1 to 2.0 × 10−3 in the same timeframe. allows each node to operate independently. Information is not
Such a rapid convergence ensures that synchronization delays exchanged among neighbors, and the estimates si and ai are
across nodes in the WSN are kept to a minimum, which based solely on local data. This show a performance decline,
directly contributes to low detection latency. The smooth, with detection accuracy decreasing from 96.4% to 81.9%, and
steady decline also indicates algorithmic stability given the false positives nearly doubling as illustrated in Figure 2d.
network topology and intrusion patterns considered, making it Third, adaptive substitution statistically calibrated thresholds
resilient to the noise that often comes with sensor measure- with fixed global thresholds. The precision reduces by about
ments. The comparative analysis of recovery errors for the 14.2%, and the recall worsens at high-variance nodes. The
proposed D-ADMM-IDS, along with B1 (E-GraphSAGE), B2 adaptive thresholding scheme is thereby fair and robust in
(MC-GRU), and B3 (Graph-Anomaly), is detailed in Figure 2c. heterogeneous environments. These ablation prove the fact that

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

 8

 (a) (b) (c) (d)
Fig. 2: (a) Communication Overhead vs. ADMM Iterations, (b) Convergence of ADMM in D-ADMM-IDS, (c) Recovery error
comparison, and (d) Ablation analysis of the proposed IDS.

all three modules, temporal regularization, ADMM consensus, [5] Hussain, Saqib, Jingsha He, Nafei Zhu, Fahad Razaque Mughal, Muhamand adaptive thresholds are critical. Although this evaluation is mad Iftikhar Hussain, Abeer D. Algarni, Sadique Ahmad, Mira M. Zarie,
 and Abdelhamied A. Ateya. ”An adaptive intrusion detection system
simulation-based, the simulator uses realistic communication, for WSN using reinforcement learning and deep classification.” Arabian
energy, and latency models, with full hardware validation Journal for Science and Engineering 50, no. 15 (2025): 12463-12477.
planned for future work. [6] Tiwari, Vaibhav, Chandrasen Pandey, Shamila J. Francis, Ishan Budhiraja,
 Pronaya Bhattacharya, Zhu Zhu, and Thippa Reddy Gadekallu. ”Artificial
 intelligence enhanced edge server placement for workload balancing
 VI. C ONCLUSION and energy efficiency in B5G networks.” Digital Communications and
 Networks (2025).
 In this paper, D-ADDM-IDS, a distributed IDS of consumer [7] Mopuru, Bhargavi, and Yellamma Pachipala. ”Advancing IoT Security:
IoT WSNs, was proposed to combine graph-smoothness pri- Integrative Machine Learning Models for Enhanced Intrusion Detection in
 Wireless Sensor Networks.” Engineering, Technology & Applied Science
ors with sparsity-based anomaly decomposition for real-time Research 14, no. 4 (2024): 14840-14847.
security. The proposed model uses the ADDM to perform [8] Ahmad, Tanveer, Muhammad Usman Hadi, Vasos Vassiliou, Loukas
local optimization at each node, which is an easier method Dimitriou, Asim Anwar, and Tien Anh Tran. ”Real-Time Anomaly
 Detection in Smart Vehicle-To-UAV Networks for Disaster Management.”
to calculate distributively, which needs more communication Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies 36, no. 5
and may lead to delays. The simulations show that D-ADMM- (2025): e70162.
IDS achieves a detection accuracy of 96.4%. The algorithm [9] Proto, André, Charles C. Miers, and Tereza Cristina Carvalho.
 ”Lightweight Architecture for Intrusion Detection of Energy Depletion
converges in 25 iterations, with primal and dual residuals Attacks in LoRaWAN End devices.” SN Computer Science 6, no. 6
falling below 2.3 × 10−3 and 2.0 × 10−3 , respectively. These (2025): 1-20.
convergences lead to an average detection latency of 3.0 [10] Wu, Hongjiao. ”Intrusion detection model for wireless sensor networks
 based on FedAvg and XGBoost algorithm.” International Journal of
seconds and energy consumption of 0.875 joules, a 14.2% Distributed Sensor Networks 2024, no. 1 (2024): 5536615.
decrease compared to the most efficient methods. D-ADMM- [11] Sedhuramalingam, K., and N. Saravanakumar. ”A novel optimal deep
IDS provides high accuracy, fast convergence, and resource learning approach for designing intrusion detection system in wireless
 sensor networks.” Egyptian Informatics Journal 27 (2024): 100522.
efficiency, marking a significant advancement in IDS design. [12] Ravindran, S., 2024. Intelligent fuzzy logic based intrusion detection
Future work will focus on implementing the proposed IDS on system for effective detection of black hole attack in WSN. Peer-to-Peer
a physical WSN testbed to validate performance under real Networking and Applications, 17(4), pp.1813-1829.
 [13] Abdulkareem, Omar A., Raja Kumar Kontham, and Farhad E. Mahdeployment conditions. We also plan to extend the framework mood. ”Collaborative Intrusion Detection System to Identify Joint Attacks
to larger and more heterogeneous IoT networks to further in Routing Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy Networks Routing Protocol
evaluate its scalability and robustness. on the Internet of Everything.” Mesopotamian Journal of CyberSecurity
 4, no. 3 (2024): 251-277.
 [14] Anwer, Raja Waseem, Mohammad Abrar, Abdu Salam, and Faizan
 VII. F UNDING S TATEMENT Ullah. ”TEAD: trust-enhanced anomaly detection framework for intrusion
 detection in IoT-enabled wireless sensor networks (WSNs).” Wireless
 The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Networks (2025): 1-19.
Research and Graduate Studies at King Khalid University for [15] Tabbassum, Saziya, and Rajesh Kumar Pathak. ”Effective data transfunding this work through Large Research Project under grant mission through energy-efficient clustering and Fuzzy-Based IDS routing
 approach in WSNs.” Virtual Reality & Intelligent Hardware 6, no. 1
number RGP2/544/46. (2024): 1-16.
 [16] Lo, Wai Weng, Siamak Layeghy, Mohanad Sarhan, Marcus Gallagher,
 R EFERENCES and Marius Portmann. ”E-graphsage: A graph neural network based
 intrusion detection system for iot.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16329
[1] Ahmad, T., Li, X.J. and Seet, B.C., 2017. Parametric loop division for (2021).
 3D localization in wireless sensor networks. Sensors, 17(7), p.1697. [17] Jingjing, Zhou, Yang Tongyu, Zhang Jilin, Zhang Guohao, Li Xuefeng,
[2] Krishnasamy, Sundaramoorthy, Mutlaq B. Alotaibi, Lolwah I. Alehaideb, and Pan Xiang. ”Intrusion Detection Model for Wireless Sensor Networks
 and Qaisar Abbas. ”Development and validation of a cyber-physical Based on MC-GRU.” Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
 system leveraging EFDPN for enhanced WSN-IoT network security.” 2022, no. 1 (2022): 2448010.
 Sensors 23, no. 22 (2023): 9294. [18] Zhu, Qianwen, Jinyu Zhou, Shiyu Zhao, and Wei Wang. ”Graph-
[3] Li, Yang, Ming Wei, Jing Nie, Sezai Ercisli, Kai Fang, and Thippa Reddy Based Anomaly Detection of Wireless Sensor Network.” In Artificial
 Gadekallu. ”Enhancing DDoS Defense in the Internet of Energy through Intelligence in China: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
 Intelligent Task Scheduling Framework.” IEEE Network (2025). on Artificial Intelligence in China, pp. 144-150. Singapore: Springer
[4] Krishnasamy, Sundaramoorthy, Mutlaq B. Alotaibi, Lolwah I. Alehaideb, Singapore, 2022.
 and Qaisar Abbas. ”Development and validation of a cyber-physical
 system leveraging EFDPN for enhanced WSN-IoT network security.”
 Sensors 23, no. 22 (2023): 9294.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.