9138 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

 Enhance UAV Network Resilience by Malicious
 Traffic Detection: A Twin Graph
 Encoder Approach
 Xuzeng Li , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Tao Zhang , Member, IEEE, Jiacheng Wang , Member, IEEE,
 Jiangtian Nie , Jian Wang , Xuangou Wu , Member, IEEE, Zhen Han , Jiqiang Liu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Dusit Niyato , Fellow, IEEE, and Dong In Kim , Life Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) networks are increas- of twin graph encoders that effectively extract intrinsic traffic
ingly exposed to widespread and various network attacks due to features from graphs constructed from raw bytes. In addition,
their fully distributed nature and the limited defensive capa- TGE-ETD employs a global attention pooling mechanism to
bilities of individual devices. Existing defense strategies rely on effectively distinguish the feature contributions of different bytes.
network connectivity and UAV status information, which overlook Finally, we conducted extensive experiments on a real UAV
information of network traffic. Malicious traffic detection offers a traffic dataset and four real-world network traffic datasets. TGEpromising solution to achieve fine-grained attack detection. How- ETD achieved an improvement of 1%-20% over the baseline
ever, the dynamic nature and complexity of UAV networks limit methods by reducing the number of parameters by 20 times.
the effectiveness of traditional traffic detection methods. Current Tested on multiple UAV hardware devices, TGE-ETD can achieve
approaches either fail to fully exploit the raw characteristics of millisecond-level traffic detection.
traffic or do not consider the timeliness requirements of UAV
networks. To address these challenges, we propose a novel twin Index Terms—UAV networks, malicious traffic detection, graph
graph encoder neural network, which can extract features of representation, graph learning.
raw traffic bytes for efficient traffic detection. First, we propose I. I NTRODUCTION
a decoupled architecture for model training and inference to
enable efficient detection of malicious traffic in UAV networks.
Second, we propose a novel modeling method that models traffic
as the co-occurrence graph and word frequency graph based on
 W ITH the rapid development of the low-altitude economy, uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) networks have
 been widely deployed in military and civilian domains [1],
raw bytes. Then, we propose TGE-ETD, a Twin Graph Encoder including applications such as battlefield surveillance and
for Encrypted Traffic Detection. TGE-ETD consists of a set disaster response [2], [3], [4], [5]. UAVs often operate
 Received 26 October 2025; revised 13 February 2026 and 31 March in swarms to perform data collection or model inference
2026; accepted 3 May 2026. Date of publication 13 May 2026; date of tasks, collaborating with ground-based or cloud servers
current version 29 May 2026. This work was supported in part by Beijing to form heterogeneous UAV networks [6]. However, the
Natural Science Foundation under Grant L251041; in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62402029; in part fully distributed nature and structural heterogeneity of such
by the Open Fund of State Key Laboratory of Internet Architecture under networks expose them to significant security threats. In addi-
Grant HLW2025MS02; in part by the Open Fund of Anhui Provincial Key tion, the limited computational resources of UAV devices
Laboratory of Digital Twin Technology in Metallurgical Industry under Grant
ADW24-01; in part by the Open Fund of State Key Laboratory of Integrated restrict their defensive capabilities, thus broadening the attack
Services Networks under Grant ISN27-22. The associate editor coordinating surface [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. These challenges
the review of this article and approving it for publication was M. J. Khabbaz. highlight the urgent need for robust and broadly appli-
(Corresponding author: Tao Zhang.)
 Xuzeng Li and Tao Zhang are with the School of Cyberspace Science cable defense strategies tailored for heterogeneous UAV
and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China, and also networks.
with the State Key Laboratory of Internet Architecture, Tsinghua University, Secure communication is a fundamental prerequisite to
Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: 22110130@bjtu.edu.cn; taozh@bjtu.edu.cn).
 Jiacheng Wang and Dusit Niyato are with the School of Computer Sci- ensure stable, reliable and safe data transmission and flight
ence and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 control in UAV networks [9]. Attacks targeting the commu-
(e-mail: jiacheng.wang@ntu.edu.sg; dniyato@ntu.edu.sg). nication infrastructure of UAV networks can severely degrade
 Jiangtian Nie is with the School of Natural and Computing Sciences, University of Aberdeen, AB24 3FX Aberdeen, U.K. (e-mail: their quality of service and overall performance [13]. Existing
jiangtian.nie@abdn.ac.uk). research on UAV network security can be broadly categorized
 Jian Wang, Zhen Han, and Jiqiang Liu are with Beijing Key Lab- into attack [7], [8], [13] and defense methods [14], [15],
oratory of Security and Privacy in Intelligent Transportation and the
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, [16], [17], [18]. Attack methods primarily aim to analyze the
Beijing 100044, China (e-mail: wangjian@bjtu.edu.cn; zhan@bjtu.edu.cn; implementation strategies and potential impacts of attacks on
jqliu@bjtu.edu.cn). UAV systems. Defense methods focus on designing detection
 Xuangou Wu is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University of Technology, Anhui 243002, China (e-mail: techniques that are tailored to specific attacks. However, many
wuxgou@ahut.edu.cn). of these approaches either rely on connectivity or behavioral
 Dong In Kim is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi- features of UAV networks, overlooking valuable information
neering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, South Korea (e-mail:
dongin@skku.edu). embedded in communication data, and thus fail to enable
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2026.3693173 diversified and fine-grained attack detection.
 0090-6778 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 9139

 Malicious encrypted traffic detection has emerged as a cloud servers and enabling collaborative inference with
critical technology in network management, playing a pivotal UAVs, the architecture addresses the computational limirole in the resolution of attack challenges [19]. It is particularly tations of UAVs while ensuring efficient attack detection.
valuable for improving the resilience and security of UAV 2) We propose TGE-ETD, a malicious traffic detection
networks. Existing approaches to encrypted traffic detection approach. It employs a modeling method that integrates
can be broadly classified into knowledge-based filtering meth- co-occurrence graphs and word frequency graphs to
ods [20], [21] and learning-based detection methods [22], represent traffic at the byte level. Furthermore, we design
[23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]. Knowledge- a twin graph encoder to extract byte-level features and
based methods, such as port-based identification and deep incorporate a global attention pooling mechanism to
packet inspection (DPI), rely on predefined rules to classify differentiate the contribution of each node in the traffic
traffic. However, as network environments become increas- graph enabling accurate attack detection.
ingly complex, with the widespread adoption of non-standard 3) We conducted comprehensive experiments based on five
interfaces and dynamic port allocation, the effectiveness of real-world datasets, including comparative and ablation
these methods has decreased significantly [30]. Furthermore, studies. The results show that TGE-ETD reduces the
encryption transforms payloads into ciphertext, rendering DPI number of model parameters by a factor of 20 compared
ineffective in the general applicability of knowledge-based to the baseline methods, while consistently achieving a
techniques [27]. To overcome these limitations, researchers 1%-20% improvement in performance.
have proposed learning-based encrypted traffic detection methods, leveraging the powerful feature extraction capabilities
 II. R ELATED W ORKS
of deep neural networks. Although these approaches have
shown impressive performance, they often suffer from two key A. Attacks Detection in UAV Networks
drawbacks, including inadequate utilization of raw encrypted UAV networks are exposed to a wide spectrum of security
traffic features and lack of consideration of the resource threats [33], including but not limited to denial of service
constraints inherent in UAV networks. As a result, the com- attacks, jamming attacks, and spoofing attacks [10], [34]. Due
plexity of these models hampers their practical deployment to their distributed nature and complex network topology, UAV
in UAV scenarios. Moreover, the highly dynamic nature of networks inherently present multiple attack surfaces. At the
UAV networks and the heterogeneity of devices increase the device level, UAVs are vulnerable to threats such as malcomplexity of encrypted traffic. As a result, traditional feature ware infections, sensor spoofing, and side-channel attacks [9].
engineering methods become ineffective as they cannot extract During communication, UAV networks face various attacks,
explicit information from encrypted packets, such as five-tuple including flooding and sybil attacks [9]. At the network
features. Meanwhile, existing deep learning–based approaches architecture level, threats such as man-in-the-middle attacks
lack systematic modeling of UAV network traffic characteris- and data falsification attacks are also prevalent [9]. Research
tics, hindering their ability to capture the latent features of on deep learning-based attack detection in UAV networks is
UAV traffic, thus constraining their detection performance. still in its early stages. Existing studies rely on UAV log data
 To address these challenges, we propose a resilience [17], [18], [35] or flight data [36], [37] for attack and anomaly
enhancement strategy for UAV networks based on malicious detection. Although these approaches can partially mitigate
encrypted traffic detection [31], which leverages encrypted security threats, they depend heavily on expert knowledge, or
traffic information within the network to enable accurate it is hard to achieve a precise identification of attacks.
attack detection. Specifically, we design a malicious encrypted
traffic detection architecture tailored for UAV networks, which
decouples the training and inference of detection models B. Malicious Traffic Detection
between UAVs and servers, thereby mitigating the impact of 1) Feature Engineering Methods: As traditional methods
limited computational resources. We further introduce TGE- are no longer applicable to complex encrypted traffic sce-
ETD, a Twin Graph Encoder for Encrypted Traffic Detection. narios [38], [39], machine learning has begun to be widely
TGE-ETD incorporates a hybrid modeling technique that fuses used to classify encrypted traffic through feature engineering.
co-occurrence graphs and term frequency graphs, along with a Taylor et al. [40], [41] designed extracts traffic features based
lightweight yet expressive twin graph encoder built upon graph on flow length and packet size information to distinguish
neural networks (GNNs), to effectively extract discriminative traffic from different mobile applications. Liu et al. [42]
features from encrypted UAV network traffic [32]. To validate used the Markov model to extract features from the packet
the effectiveness of our method, we conducted extensive length sequence and the message type sequence. Shen et al.
comparative and ablation experiments on five widely used [43] used the length of packets in bidirectional client-server
public datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that TGE- interactions as features and extracted sequence features or
ETD consistently performs better than benchmarks. The main statistical features for traffic classification. However, feature
contributions are summarized as follows. engineering methods rely on manually constructed features
 1) We propose a novel architecture to improve the to identify types of traffic, such as maximum packet length,
 resilience of UAV networks that decouples the average delay, and so on. Universality of these methods is
 training and inference phases of malicious encrypted difficult to guaranty because manually constructing features
 traffic detection models. By offloading model training to costs a lot and they rely on expert experience.
9140 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 1. Proposed resilient UAV network architecture based on malicious encrypted traffic detection. The part A of the figure illustrates the network model,
highlighting the various attacks during UAV collaborative inference. The part B in the right presents the execution workflow of the architecture.

 2) Deep Learning Methods: As deep learning shows pow- 3) Pretraining Methods: In order to make full use of the
erful feature extraction capabilities, it has been applied to original information of traffic, pre-trained models have been
traffic classification. Lotfollahi et al. [44] proposed Deep- widely used. He et al. [28] proposed PERT based on dynamic
Packet, which uses stacked autoencoders and CNN to extract word embedding, which takes the original bytes of the traffic
the features of the traffic packet. Liu et al. [25] and Wang et al. packet as input and extracts the original byte features using
[45] used a recurrent neural network to extract features of the dynamic word embedding method. Lin et al. [26] proposed
the packet length sequence. Meng et al. [46] used variational ET-BERT based on BERT [53], which converts the flow
autoencoders to detect unknown malicious traffic. Zhang et al. into word-like tags and extracts characteristics from unlabeled
[47] designed a time-cyclic attention mechanism to identify traffic in a pre-trained manner. Zhao et al. [27] converted the
the attack patterns of malicious traffic. Shen et al. [48] and packet bytes into a multi-level flow representation matrix and
Ding et al. [49] used contrastive learning and adversarial train- then pre-trained the model to extract features from unlabeled
ing to detect malicious traffic, which can effectively defend traffic. Yang et al. [54] designed a pre-trained model based
against evasion attacks. Zhang et al. [47] realized lightweight on packet length sequence to achieve stable traffic analysis.
malicious traffic detection using an innovative model-splitting Although these methods achieved inspired results, their comalgorithm and a hardware specific unsupervised decision tree. plexity and high computational resource requirements make
Xu et al. [50] took CNN and long short term memory them difficult to deploy in UAV networks.
network as teacher models to extract the structural features
of traffic to achieve lightweight malicious traffic detection. III. S YSTEM OVERVIEW
Cai et al. [51] used cycle generative adversarial networks to A. Network Model
capture traffic features. Although these methods have achieved As illustrated in part A of Fig. 1, the UAV network
high accuracy, they cannot fully capture the original traffic framework comprises multiple UAV swarms and a cloud server
information. that collaboratively execute tasks [17], [31]. Taking collabo-
 In order to extract traffic features more effectively, graph rative inference as an example, the server first distributes the
learning is widely used because of its powerful representation inference model to the UAVs, which then perform inference
ability. Shen et al. [29] constructed a traffic interaction graph to locally. During this process, individual UAVs, UAV swarms,
extract features from traffic bursts. Zhang et al. [30] proposed and the cloud server are all potential targets of attackers. Due
the idea of representing the original bytes of encrypted traffic to their operational independence and reliance on wireless
as a graph and designed a graph neural network for encrypted communication, individual UAVs are particularly vulnerable
traffic classification. Han et al. [52] combined the traffic to direct attacks. Attackers may exploit system vulnerabilities
interaction graph and the original byte graph to extract traffic to implant malicious software, thus gaining control over the
features using GNNs. However, GNNs-based methods rely on UAV or disrupting its mission [17]. The interdependent nature
a single modeling approach and fail to prioritize the detection of UAV swarms makes them especially susceptible to singleof malicious encrypted traffic. point failures, which compromise of a single node may trigger
LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 9141

Fig. 2. The architecture of TGE-ETD. (a) Byte graphs construction: Build the co-occurrence graph and frequency graph using the original bytes;
(b) The twin graph encoder and the attention feature fusion: Fuse the co-occurrence graph and word frequency graph and perform feature embedding,
then extract the original byte features using GNN and obtain the final feature representation based on the global self-attention mechanism; (c) Malicious
detection: Obtain the label of encrypted traffic.

cascading failures. In addition, they are exposed to distributed number of rounds N until the first successful detection follows
denial-of-service (DDoS) and flooding attacks. The cloud a geometric distribution P r(N = k) = (1 − pd )k−1 pd . If
server, which serves as the data processing and storage hub each detection interval lasts for ∆t, the expected detection
for the UAV system, faces threats such as malware and DDoS time can be expressed as E [Tdet ] = ∆t/pd . Higher detection
attacks, which not only jeopardize data security, but can also accuracy pd enables UAVs to effectively filter malicious traffic,
disrupt the operation of the entire UAV network. while improved detection timeliness ∆t reduces the duration
 for which the network remains exposed to attacks. It is evident
 that prolonged exposure of the network to malicious attacks
B. System Model
 leads to a lower task success rate, a higher packet loss ratio,
 The attack detection architecture based on malicious and reduced inference reliability.
encrypted traffic detection in part B of Fig. 1 that illustrates
the coordination between the cloud server and the UAVs IV. M ETHODOLOGY
[17]. The server first collects and processes encrypted traffic
from the UAV network. Then, based on the proposed byte- In this section, we first describe the malicious encrypted
level encrypted traffic modeling approach, the encrypted traffic traffic detection task, and then introduce TGE-ETD in detail.
is transformed into traffic graphs. These graphs are used as The overview of TGE-ETD is shown in Fig. 2, which mainly
input to the designed twin graph neural network for model includes byte graph construction, twin graph encoder, and
training. Once trained, the resulting attack detection model is attention-based feature fusion.
distributed to UAVs for inference. This architecture decouples
model training from detection, thus fully leveraging the com- A. Task Description
putational resources of the server while alleviating the burden The malicious encrypted traffic detection task is to use
on resource-constrained UAVs. the information from traffic packets captured by professional
 software to distinguish malicious traffic (produced by attacks)
C. Analysis of Network Resilience from normal traffic. In this paper, we perform fine-grained
 malicious encrypted traffic detection, specifically identifying
 The accuracy and timeliness of the malicious traffic detec- the specific categories of malicious traffic packets.
tion framework will impact on the resilience of the UAV
network. Taking collaborative UAVs inference scenarios as
an example, accurate detection constrains the propagation of B. Formulation
anomalous traffic among UAVs, thus mitigating packet loss We define a traffic packet as a sample and detect malicious
and improving the packet delivery ratio. Let Us denote a UAV packets, which is common practice in many encrypted traffic
swarm participating in collaborative inference, where inference methods. A session S = [p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ] (bidirectional flow)
results are exchanged through encrypted communication. The in the network consists of exchanged request and response
probability of successfully detecting malicious traffic within packets between two communicating entities in the network,
a single detection interval is denoted as pd . We assume the where n is the length of the packet sequence and pi is
9142 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

the i-th packet in the session. The packet is represented as
pi = [b1 , b2 , . . . , bm ], where m is the length of the byte
sequence and bj is the j-th byte of i-th packet. According
to the definition above, the (packet-level) malicious encrypted
traffic detection task is to identify whether an unseen traffic
packet pi is malicious and identify its specific category Ck .

C. Byte Graphs Construction
 In our detection task, we focus on network traffic packets. Fig. 3. Construct the co-occurrence graph.
Previous studies have shown that the header and payload
parts of traffic packets contain different information and contribute differently to network detection capabilities, so we
divide traffic packets into header and payload. Each packet
can be described as p = [header, payload]. We choose to
use raw bytes to represent header and payload instead of
statistical information because the raw bytes information is
more accurate and comprehensive. For feature extraction of
raw bytes, we consider three aspects including different bytes
having different meanings, different positions of specific bytes
 Fig. 4. Construct the word frequency graph.
in the context contain different information, and the frequency
of the same bytes appearing in different parts of the data
packet is different. Therefore, we construct a byte graph based 2) Word Frequency Graph Construction: The frequency of
on these three aspects of information to represent the traffic different bytes in the original bytes s of header (payload)
packet. of the encrypted traffic packet is similar to the frequency of
 In addition, to distinguish the same bytes at different words in NLP tasks, which is an important feature [32]. We
positions in the byte sequence, we treat the repeated bytes construct the word frequency graph Gf = {Vf , Ef , Xf } to
as separate nodes in the graph (the number of nodes does extract frequency characteristics. As shown in Fig. 4, each
not exceed 256 [27], [30]), which can avoid the problem of node in Vf represents a byte in s, the edge set Ef is the selfthe number of graph nodes exploding. In order to effectively loop of each node and Xf is the node feature. For the feature
pass messages between nodes and fully extract the contextual xif of node i, we use the frequency fi and the corresponding
information, we build two types of graphs for each part, byte value bi of i to represent its feature, bi ranges from 0 to
including the co-occurrence graph and the word frequency 255. We perform one-hot encoding on bi in [0, 255] to obtain
graph. According to the above description, we convert the the vector Bi1×256 , where Bi [bi ] = 1 and other elements in Bi
original bytes of header and payload into the co-occurrence are 0. We then multiply the frequency and the original byte
graph Go = {Vo , Eo , Xo }and the word frequency graph Gf = value features to get the final representation xif = fi × Bi .
{Vf , Ef , Xf } based on the correlation between the bytes.
 1) Co-Occurrence Graph Construction: For the original
 D. Twin Graph Encoder
byte representation s of the header (payload) of a traffic
packet. To extract the correlation features between differ- The information contained in different parts of the traffic
ent bytes in the packet, we use the co-occurrence matrix to packet is different because the bytes in different positions in
establish the relationship between each byte [32]. We construct the traffic packet reflect different information. The same bytes
the corresponding co-occurrence graph Go = {Vo , Eo , Xo }, in header and payload of the traffic packet reflect differwhere Vo is the set of nodes, each byte contained in s ent information. The original bytes of the encrypted traffic
corresponds to a node, and Xo is the features of the nodes. packet header that are not encrypted reflect different infor-
We process s using a sliding window of fixed size default mation from the original bytes of the encrypted payload.
to 3 (according to the ablation experiments in Fig. 11). The same bytes before and after encryption are different. If
For bytes that appear in the same window, we construct the co- we use the same feature embedding representation for the
occurrence edge Eo between these bytes. Specifically, as shown same bytes in header and payload, it will generate confusing
in Fig. 3, for s, we first use the sliding window to construct the model inputs, resulting in sub-optimal model performance.
byte co-occurrence matrix A, and A is the adjacency matrix We designed a twin graph encoder to process header and
of Go . For bytes i and j in s, we describe the edges between payload of the traffic packet and then fuse the embedding
them through the adjacency matrix as follows: vectors of header and payload through the designed attention-
 ( based feature fusion module to obtain the final embedding
 1, (i, j) in W representation.
 aij = . (1)
 0, otherwise After obtaining the co-occurrence graph and the word
 frequency graph of the header (payload), we fuse the co-
 The features of the nodes in Go are initialized to 1 and the occurrence graph Go and the word frequency graph Gf to
co-occurrence graphs are undirected. obtain a unified graph representation GF = {VF , EF , XF }.
LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 9143

 Fig. 6. Details of the network.

 dimension of the vector. Finally, the generated new target
 node embedding vector is computed by a nonlinear transformation to complete the forward propagation of GraphSAGE.
 The information transmission process of GraphSAGE can be
 formally described as follows:
Fig. 5. Fuse co-occurrence and word frequency graph.
 (l−1)
 (l)
 X xu
 MN (v) =
 |N (v)|
 u∈N (v)
Then, we update the embedding representation of the byte  
 (l)
 
node. As shown in Fig. 5, the nodes in the co-occurrence x(l)
 v =σ w(l) · CONCAT x(l−1)
 v , MN (v) , (2)
graph and the word frequency graph are all bytes. The graph where N (v) is the set of neighbor nodes of the target node v,
fusion operation is divided into two parts: edge fusion and |N (v)| is the number of neighbor nodes, w(l) is the parameter
node feature fusion. We describe the detailed process of edge on layer l, CONCAT(·) denotes the concatenation operation
fusion in the form of an adjacency matrix. The adjacency and σ(·) denotes the activation function. We use the ReLU
matrix Ao of the co-occurrence graph Go and the adjacency activation function to process the output of GraphSAGE to
matrix Af of the word frequency graph Gf are added to obtain increase the nonlinear relationship between the layers of the
the adjacency matrix AF of the fused graph. The node feature network. Lastly, we use batch normalization to normalize the
fusion processes the node embedding representation in the co- (l)
 updated feature vector xv .
occurrence graph and the word frequency graph, and obtains
 The number of GraphSAGE layers represents the number
a new node representation through multiplication operations
 of neighbor nodes that each node can aggregate. Too many
XF = Xo × Xf . The node embedding process updates the
 layers will lead to an over-smoothing issue [56]. Experimental
node representation to the fused node representation.
 verification shows that the number of layers stacked in the
 After processing, both header and payload are transformed
 GraphSAGE module does not need to be too large, and high
into unified byte-level representations using graphs. Although
 accuracy can be achieved when the number of layers is two
their original contents differ, the resulting representations are
 [55]. Therefore, we stack two layers of GraphSAGE, and use
homogeneous byte graphs with identical structural semantics.
 the output of the first GraphSAGE module as the input of
As a result, the same encoder depth and aggregation strategy
 the second block.
are sufficient to capture high-order dependencies in both components. Thus, the twin graph encoder consists of two graph
encoders with the same model structure but not shared param- E. Attention-Based Deep Feature Fusion
eters, which can process the graph structure data of header Since we constructed the graph representation of the
and payload in parallel. The structure of the graph encoder is encrypted traffic packet, the malicious packet detection task
shown in Fig. 6. In order to encode the graph composed of became a graph classification task. Therefore, after we
traffic packets into a feature vector, the graph encoder includes obtained the new node feature representation through the graph
two stacked GraphSAGE [55] modules. For each node v on encoder, we designed a feature aggregation method based
the graph G, GraphSAGE first uses the degree of the target on the attention mechanism. The global attention aggregation
node to normalize the embedding vectors of all neighbor nodes mechanism assigns different attention weights to the relation-
[30]. Then GraphSAGE concatenates the embedding vectors ships between nodes, allowing the model to pay more attention
of the target vertex and the neighbor vertex and averages each to important nodes and their features, thereby obtaining more
9144 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

accurate graph features. Thus, we use the global attention TABLE I
mechanism [57] to aggregate the node feature to obtain the L ABELED USTC-TFC2016 AND CICI OT2022 DATASETS . T HE
representation of the entire graph, and formulate as follows: TABLE I LLUSTRATES THE T YPES OF T RAFFIC W E C LASSIFY AND
 H OW D IFFERENT C ATEGORIES OF T RAFFIC A RE G ENERATED
 N
 X
 fa = αi xk , αi = σ (fg (ki )) , (3)
 k=1

where fg (·) is a neural network that computes attention scores
for each feature, we set fg (·) as a linear layer fg (xi ) = w> xi +
b, σ(·)is the sigmoid function, N is the number of nodes in the
graph, and xk is the feature of the k-th node. Then, we input
the node features into the attention-pooling function fa (·) to
get the graph representation. Subsequently, we concatenate the
head feature Fh and the payload feature Fp to obtain the final
encrypted traffic packet representation,
 F = CONCAT (Fh , Fp ) . (4)

F. Malicious Detection
 After obtaining the final feature representation of the
encrypted traffic packet, denoted F, we use a fully connected
neural network to process the features and then use softmax
to obtain the detection results of malicious encrypted traffic
packets. Subsequently, we use the cross-entropy loss function
to calculate the model loss, which is used for back-propagation
during training.
 ŷ = Softmax (W · F + b) , (5)
 Q X
 C
 X TABLE II
 Loss = − yi log ŷi , (6) L ABELED ISCX-VPN AND ISCX-T OR DATASETS . T HE TABLE I
 i=1 j=1 LLUSTRATES THE T YPES OF T RAFFIC W E C LASSIFY
 AND W HERE THE T RAFFIC C OMES F ROM
where W and b are the parameters of the full connected layer,
ŷ are the predicted values, Q is the quantity of samples, and
C is the number of traffic categories.

 V. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
 In this section, we first introduce the basic experimental
settings, including the dataset, data preprocessing, the experimental environment, and the evaluation indicators. Then we
introduce comparative experiments, including the introduction
of comparative methods, experimental parameter settings, and
comparative experimental results analysis. Next, we introduce
the ablation experiments, including experimental goal settings,
ablation experiment scheme settings, and results analysis, to
evaluate the effectiveness of TGE-ETD from the dimensions
of sensitivity, accuracy, and model complexity.
 IoT devices. ISCX-VPN [60] contains six types of traffic
A. Datasets collected in a Virtual Private Network (VPN). ISCX-Tor [61]
 contains eight types of traffic collected through The Onion
 To assess the effectiveness of our method, we use multiple
 Router (Tor). The detailed label is shown in table I and II.
public datasets, including two datasets USTC-TFC2016 [58]
and CICIoT2022 [59] for malicious encrypted traffic detection.
In addition, to verify the effectiveness of TGE-ETD, we B. Data Pre-Processing
perform experiments on two widely used datasets, ISCX-VPN The dataset provides the original encrypted traffic in the
[60] and ISCX-Tor [61]. USTC-TFC2016 [58] contains ten form of pcap files. Since there is invalid and redundant traffic
types of traffic collected from malicious programs and ten (flows with a load of 0 and flows with too many packets) in the
types of traffic collected from benign programs. CICIoT2022 original traffic, we need to pre-process the original PCAP files.
[59] contains normal traffic and attack traffic collected from The pre-processing operation includes the following steps.
LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 9145

 TABLE III metrics. We first calculate the values of True Positive, True
 H YPERPARAMETER VALUES OF TGE-ETD Negative, False Positive and False Negative. Then, based on
 the above definitions, we can calculate the evaluation metrics.

 D. Comparison Methods
 We select a packet length-based recurrent neural network
 model FS-Net [25], two pre-trained models including ET-
 BERT [26] and YaTC [27], and two graph neural network
 models including GraphDAPP [29] and TFE-GNN [30] as
 baseline methods.
 (1) FS-Net [25]: FS-Net is an end-to-end encrypted traffic
 classification model based on recurrent neural networks. It
 takes packet length sequences as input, uses bi-GRU to extract
 1) Segmentation of the Original PCAP File: To delete encrypted traffic features, introduces an autoencoder-decoder
invalid traffic, we first use the traffic segmentation tool structure, and designs a reconstruction mechanism to enhance
(Splitcap) to divide the pcap file into bi-flows based on the feature effectiveness while extracting sequence features.
traffic quintuple information. After the segmentation has been (2) ET-BERT [26]: ET-BERT converts the encrypted traffic
completed, the invalid and redundant traffic is deleted. classification task into a natural language processing task.
 2) Data Packet Selection: Our task is to identify malicious It takes the raw bytes of encrypted traffic as input, extracts
encrypted traffic packets, so after obtaining the encrypted traf- features from unlabeled encrypted traffic through pre-training.
fic flow, we need to select the data packets for model training. (3) YaTC [27]: YaTC constructs the raw packet bytes in
However, CICIoT2022 and USTC-TFC contain a large number the encrypted traffic flow into a multi-level flow representation
of bi-flows, on the amount of hundreds of thousands. Thus, we matrix, then uses a masked autoencoder to pre-train a classifier,
performed sampling on the CICIoT2022 and USTC-TFC2016 extracts features from unlabeled encrypted traffic, and then
datasets, with 1000 bi-flows in CICIoT2022 and 500 bi-flows fine-tunes the model using a small amount of labeled data.
in USTC-TFC randomly sampled from each class for the (4) GraphDAPP [29]: GraphDAPP proposes a traffic interexperiments. Then, we select a certain number of packets in action graph model. It models the flow as a graph based on the
each bi-flow to reduce redundancy. traffic interaction information and packet length information.
 3) Data Labeling: We assign labels to each sample accord- The nodes are traffic packets, the node features are the packet
ing to the official instructions and the existing method [27]. length and direction, and the interaction relationship between
In addition, we randomly map the source and destination IP packets is the edge. Then, the graph neural network is used to
addresses and ports in the traffic packets, retaining only the extract the encrypted traffic features and classify them.
relationship information without using the actual numerical (5) TFE-GNN [30]: TFE-GNN divides the encrypted traffic
value, in order to protect sensitive information and eliminate packet into two parts: header and payload. Each part is
the introduced noise. It should be noted that our algorithm constructed as a graph based on the original bytes of the traffic
can process both TCP and UDP packets, but the comparison packet. The nodes in the graph are the original bytes, the node
algorithm cannot process UDP traffic, so we removed Tinba features are the vector embeddings of the original bytes, and
traffic in USTC-TFC2016, as Tinba only contains UDP traffic. the association relationship between bytes is the edge. Finally,
Regarding the generalization of real-world UAV traffic, where the graph neural network is used to extract the features of each
UDP is widely used, the applicability of baseline methods part, and then the final feature representation of the encrypted
that can only handle TCP traffic will be significantly reduced. traffic is obtained using the designed feature fusion method.
However, since our method inherently supports UDP traffic,
its applicability to realistic UAV networks is not constrained
 E. Comparison Experiments
by this experimental setting.
 The comparative experimental results are shown in
 Table IV. From the results, we can get the following
C. Experimental Implementation Details information.
 1) Experimental Setup: Table III shows the hyperparameter 1) Overall Performance: Compared to the state-of-the-art
settings of TGE-ETD in the experiment. We use Adam opti- method, TGE-ETD has improved 0.5%-5% in four indicamizer to minimize the loss, the initial value of the learning rate tors. Compared with baseline methods, TGE-ETD improves
is set to 0.005, the mini-batch size is 128, and the learning 5%-15% in four indicators. TGE-ETD has a more obvious
decay rate is the default 0. The dataset is divided into training improvement in the malicious encrypted traffic detection task.
and test sets in a ratio of 9:1. Pytorch is used to implement The four indicators on the four datasets are higher than 99%,
our model and perform experiments on a server with NVIDIA which reflects the effectiveness of TGE-ETD.
RTX 3090 GPUs and AMD 3970X CPU. 2) Analysis of Deep Learning Methods: The fluctuation
 2) Evaluation Metrics: We refer to existing encrypted traf- of various indicators of deep learning methods based on the
fic classification research [27], [30], [52] and take accuracy packet length in four datasets is greater than 10%. These
(ACC), precision (PR), recall (RC), and F1 -score as evaluation methods have difficulty accurately identifying various types
9146 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

 TABLE IV
 T HE R ESULTS OF TGE-ETD AND BASELINE M ETHODS

 TABLE V
 T HE R ESULTS OF THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

of traffic because they only consider packet length as a model. However, TGE-ETD directly processes the encrypted
characteristic of encrypted traffic. It also shows the importance traffic packets and uses multiple graph representation methods
of original byte information as a feature of encrypted traffic. to model the original bytes, improving the accuracy of feature
 3) Analysis of Pre-Training Methods: The indicators of extraction and improving the model effect. Compared to
the pre-training method in the four datasets are all higher CICIoT2022, USTC-TFC2016 contains more attacks, making
than 89%, but there is a fluctuation of 5%-10%. ET-BERT it more difficult to detect malicious encrypted traffic, which
and YaTC achieve high ACC and F1 , because they take the affects the performance of baseline methods.
original bytes of encrypted traffic as input and can extract
more origin features. However, there is a gap between the F. Ablation Study
method based on pre-training and TGE-ETD. This is because
 In order to fully verify the effect of each component
the method based on pre-training does not distinguish the
 of TGE-ETD, we conducted ablation experiments on each
contribution of the original bytes of encrypted traffic and
 component separately. The results of the ablation experiment
cannot fully extract the original features. YaTC selects fixed
 are shown in Table V. We refer to the design principles to
header and payload bytes for arrangement, so it achieves
 analyze the results of the ablation experiment one by one and
relatively better results.
 obtain the following results.
 4) Analysis of Graph Learning Methods: GraphDAPP only 1) The Contribution of the Header and Payload Parts of
uses the length and direction as node features, so it cannot the Traffic Packet: Compared to the raw byte features of both
effectively extract encrypted traffic features. The TFE-GNN the header and the payload, we only use the raw bytes of the
method constructs the original bytes into a graph and divides header (or payload) as input, marked w/o-payload (or w/othe original bytes to distinguish the contributions of different header). When only the header part is used for detection, the
parts, achieving high values across all metrics. However, model performance drops by about 1%-2%. When only the
because of the single graph construction method, it is unable to payload part is used for detection, the model performance
fully extract features. In addition, since TFE-GNN combines drops by about 5%-30%. It shows that the header and payload
multiple encrypted traffic packets to form samples, although it parts of the traffic packet contribute to the overall encrypted
improves the recognition efficiency, the combination operation traffic detection. When both are used as input at the same
introduces additional noise, which affects the model effect. time, the model achieves the best effect. Then, through com-
 5) Comparative Analysis Between Different Datasets: The parison, we found that the header part contributes more to
traffic in ISCX-Tor is processed by Tor, and encryption and encrypted traffic detection than the payload part. It is because
obfuscation technology make it difficult to analyze the payload the header part is plain text and carries the communication
of anonymous traffic, which affects the effect of the baseline characteristics of the traffic. In addition, it is difficult to extract
LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 9147

Fig. 7. Performances of TGE-ETD on the ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor. Fig. 8. Performances of TGE-ETD on USTC-TFC2016 and CICIoT2022.

features because the payload part is ciphertext. It can be also
observed that the contribution of the payload part is higher
in the malicious encrypted traffic dataset. This is because the
payload part of the data packets sent by different attacks is
considerably different, while the data packets of the same
type of attack have similar load information, which makes the
payload features easier to distinguish. The encrypted traffic
data packets in VPN and Tor environments are obfuscated,
making the payload part more difficult to distinguish.
 2) The Contribution of the Raw Byte Modeling Method:
Compared to the co-occurrence graph and the word frequency
graph to model the raw bytes, we only use the co-occurrence
graph (or the word frequency graph) to model the encrypted
traffic packet, marked as w/o-fg (or w/o-oc). The effect of the Fig. 9. Standard deviation of the F1 -score.
model is poor (down 70%) in the absence of word frequency
graph modeling. The frequency features of bytes and the
original byte feature embedded as node features are missing. datasets, and there is no uneven classification effect of samples
The original byte graph that only retains the co-occurrence of different categories. Second, TGE-ETD is less affected by
relationship cannot effectively represent the encrypted traffic the number of categories. TGE-ETD has high accuracy on
packet. In the absence of co-occurrence graph modeling, the different numbers of categories including 6, 8 and 19. Finally,
model effect drops by about 10%. It should be noted that TGE-ETD can achieve high accuracy even when the ratio of
the model ACC drops significantly (about 50%) in the Tor the number of samples in the two malicious traffic detection
dataset, which shows that the byte co-occurrence relationship datasets reaches 1:20, which is unbalanced.
is an important feature of the encrypted traffic classification In order to verify the stability of the model, we repeated
method based on raw bytes. each experiment ten times and took the average of the ten
 3) Effectiveness Evaluation of the Feature Fusion Method experimental results as the final result. Fig. 9 shows the com-
Based on Global Attention Pooling: Compared to using global parison of the standard deviation of F1 of different methods.
self-attention to fuse node features to obtain the representation For ET-BERT and YaTC, we only repeated the fine-turning
of the graph, and then concatenating the features of the part ten times. The ten experimental results of the fine-tuning
two parts to obtain the final representation using linear layer stage of the pre-trained model are the same, so the standard
transformation (marked TGE-ETD-att), we only process node deviation is 0. From the results in the figure, the standard
features by averaging sampling to obtain the representation, deviation of TGE-ETD is smaller than those of FS-Net and
marked as TGE-ETD-mean. By comparing the results of the TFE-GNN, which means that TGE-ETD is more stable.
average pooling feature fusion and the global self-attention
feature fusion methods, the difference between the two is H. GNN Architecture Variants Study
approximately 0.5%, which verifies the effectiveness of the
 To verify the effectiveness of the GraphSAGE module in
global self-attention feature fusion method.
 extracting traffic graph features, we use classic GNN models
 including GCN [62] and GIN [63] to replace the GraphSAGE
G. Stability Analysis of TGE-ETD module as variants for comparison.
 The results of the stability analysis are shown in As shown in Fig. 10, the results show that the encrypted
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. We plot the heat maps based on the confusion traffic detection method based on GraphSAGE performs better
matrix. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the than other variants, especially in malicious encrypted trafresults shown in the figure. First, TGE-ETD achieved high fic detection tasks. This is because GraphSAGE learns the
accuracy in classifying samples of each category in the four embedded expression of the target node itself by aggregating
9148 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

 TABLE VII
 T HE C OMPARISON OF THE M ODEL FLOP S AND PARAMETERS

Fig. 10. Comparison results of GNN models. The figure shows the F1 -score TABLE VIII
results of different GNN models in the twin graph encoder stage.
 C ONSUMPTION A NALYSIS OF TGE-ETD ON UAV D EVICES

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON UAV-NIDD (%)

the feature information of the node neighbors and has better
generalization ability than GCN and GIN. At the same time, Table IV, we can conclude that TGE-ETD achieves improveall three graph neural networks can achieve a high F1 , which ment at low model complexity. Compared with traditional
reflects the effectiveness of the traffic byte graph modeling. deep learning and pretraining methods, TGE-ETD has the
 smallest number of parameters and the second lowest number
I. Effectiveness of TGE-ETD on UAV Traffic Dataset of FLOPs. Although GraphDAPP has the lowest complexity,
 TGE-ETD improves performance by 75% compared to Graph-
 The UAV-NIDD [64] dataset contains encrypted traf-
 DAPP. Although YaTC achieves comparable results on the
fic collected from real-world UAV networks. To validate
 ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor datasets, the number of parameters
the effectiveness of TGE-ETD in UAV network traffic
 of YaTC is about 27 times that of TGE-ETD. In addition, the
detection, we conducted comparative experiments on the UAVpre-training phase of YaTC is time-consuming due to the large
NIDD dataset. FNN [64] and MAML [64], which are deep
 amount of additional data and high model complexity during
learning–based approaches for UAV network traffic classifipre-training. Compared with the advanced GNN-based method
cation, were included as baseline methods for comparison.
 TFE-GNN, which reduces the number of FLOPs by 25 times
Table VI reports the mean and standard deviation of ten
 and the number of parameters by 500 times, TGE-ETD not
experiments. The experimental results demonstrate that TGEonly reduces complexity, but also achieves improvement.
ETD achieves strong performance in UAV network traffic
detection, maintaining high classification accuracy. Compared 2) Overhead Analysis on UAV Devices: To verify the
with existing UAV traffic classification approaches, TGE-ETD feasibility of deploying the model in practice, we collected the
improves accuracy by approximately 2%–20%. Compared to hardware information of six UAV devices from three different
baseline methods, TGE-ETD can effectively capture discrim- UAV manufacturers. As shown in Table VIII, most UAV
inative features of encrypted traffic. devices are equipped with Wi-Fi modules for communication,
 with maximum download speeds ranging from 10 to 80 MB/s
 (Mega Byte per second). We saved the TGE-ETD model
J. Model Complexity Analysis parameter file, which is 0.34 MB (Mega Byte). Under these
 1) Analysis of Model Parameters Count and Floating Point conditions, the latency incurred during model updating ranges
Operations: To assess the balance between model perfor- from 4.25 to 34 ms (millisecond), achieving millisecondmance and complexity, we provide floating point operations level performance. The bandwidth occupancy caused by model
(FLOPs) and parameters of different methods, as shown in updates accounts for approximately 0.43% to 3.40% of the
Table VII. Combining the results in Table VII with those in available per-second bandwidth on the UAV side.
LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 9149

Fig. 11. Model sensitivity analysis. Different window size of the
co-occurrence graph construction method on four datasets. Fig. 13. Experimental environment on realistic UAV hardware.

 TABLE X
 T ESTING R ESULTS ON R EALISTIC UAV H ARDWARE

Fig. 12. ACC and loss convergence curves of TGE-ETD.

 TABLE IX
 it can be observed that the model converges within 20 epochs.
 T RAINING T IME AND R ESOURCE C ONSUMPTION OF TGE-ETD
 In addition, we recorded GPU memory consumption and
 power usage during the training process. TGE-ETD requires
 less than 2 GB (Giga Byte) of GPU memory and consumes
 130 W (Watt) of GPU power.

 M. Testing on Realistic UAV Hardware
 We conducted inference experiments on three devices:
 Raspberry Pi 5 [68], Orange Pi AIpro [69], and Jetson AGX
 64 G [70], as shown in Fig. 13. The test dataset consists of
 1267 packets from the UAV-NIDD dataset. Table X reports
 the memory footprint and inference latency on each platform.
 The results show that our model achieves millisecond-level
K. Model Sensitivity Analysis
 per-packet inference latency on ARM-based devices, demon-
 To investigate the impact of sliding window size, we con- strating the feasibility of deployment in UAV environments.
ducted a sensitivity analysis experiment. As shown in Fig. 11,
the model performs relatively well when the sliding window
 N. Attention Visualization of Encrypted Traffic of UAV
size for constructing the co-occurrence graph is small. As
the window size increases, there are more edges in the co- To identify bytes that have a greater impact on model clasoccurrence graph, and the relationship between different bytes sification in UAV traffic, we visualized the attention weights
becomes less distinguishable, making it difficult for the model of the nodes in the constructed traffic graphs. We visualized
to learn the relationship features between the original bytes. normal traffic in the UAV-NIDD dataset, and the results are
 shown in Fig. 14. For Normal traffic in the UAV network,
 most nodes exhibit attention weights close to zero, while
L. Training Time and Energy Consumption Analysis higher attention values are mainly concentrated in the byte
 We evaluated the training efficiency of TGE-ETD by mea- index ranges of 79–88 and 240–255. The experimental results
suring its training time, convergence (recorded as Conver.) reveal a long-tail distribution of attention weights, indicating
speed, and energy consumption, with the results summarized that only a small number of nodes play a dominant role in
in Table IX. For UAV network traffic data, TGE-ETD requires the classification decision. It is shown that TGE-ETD can
only 606.1 s (second) to complete the training. The ACC and effectively capture discriminative structural features within
Loss curves of TGE-ETD are illustrated in Fig. 12, from which encrypted traffic.
9150 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

 4) Timely Encrypted Traffic Detection in Dynamic UAV
 Networks: UAV networks exhibit highly dynamic and adaptive
 characteristics, and users often have stringent requirements
 regarding the timeliness of the collected information. Consequently, the traffic data within UAV networks possess temporal
 properties, such as the age of information. In future work,
 we plan to incorporate the temporal characteristics of UAV
 network traffic and design an efficient malicious encrypted
 traffic detection method tailored for dynamic UAV networks.
 5) Adversarial Robustness in Practical UAV Networks: In
 practical UAV networks, attackers can manipulate traffic to
 conceal malicious activities. At the traffic content level, there
 exist potential adversarial risks, including adjusting padding
 fields, fragmentation boundaries, or other redundant structures
 within encrypted payloads, which may alter byte-level statistical characteristics without violating encryption integrity.
 At the network level, attackers can further evade detection
 mechanisms by manipulating packet lengths, transmission
 timing, or traffic burst patterns. Therefore, in our future work
 we will investigate encrypted traffic detection in adversarial
Fig. 14. Attention weights of normal traffic in UAV-NIDD. The nodes with UAV environments. We will explore the use of advanced learnhigher attention are concentrated in the ranges of 79-88 and 240-255. ing paradigms, including large language models, to enhance
 robustness against adaptive evasion strategies.

 VI. F UTURE W ORKS AND C ONCLUSION B. Conclusion
A. Future Works In this paper, we have proposed a novel resilient UAV
 network architecture based on malicious encrypted traffic
 1) Defense Against Network Attacks in Heterogeneous
 detection. By decoupling the training and inference processes
Large-Scale UAV Networks: With the rapid advancement of
 of the encrypted traffic detection model, the proposed architecthe low-altitude economy, UAV networks are inevitably evolvture addresses the computational limitations of UAV devices.
ing toward large-scale and heterogeneous deployments. This
 In addition, we have introduced a new end-to-end encrypted
trend introduces increasingly complex network attack surfaces
 traffic detection model, termed TGE-ETD. To effectively
and poses significant challenges for the performance and
 extract features from encrypted traffic, we have proposed a
scalability of existing defense mechanisms. To address these
 graph-based byte-level traffic modeling method. Specifically,
issues, future research can explore advanced and proactive
 two types of byte graphs, namely the frequency graph and the
defense strategies such as decentralized federated learning and
 co-occurrence graph, are constructed to represent encrypted
moving target defense to enable comprehensive protection.
 traffic. A twin graph encoder is then designed to transform
 2) Accurate Encrypted Traffic Modeling Under Massive
 the byte graphs into feature vectors. Subsequently, a global
UAV Network Traffic: As UAV networks continue to grow
 attention pooling is employed to obtain the final feature
in scale, the volume of encrypted traffic will increase, sigrepresentation of encrypted traffic. Extensive experiments connificantly complicating accurate traffic detection. Therefore,
 ducted on four public datasets and one real-world UAV dataset
there is a pressing need to develop more precise and efficient
 demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of TGE-ETD.
modeling techniques for encrypted traffic. The graph-based
modeling approach proposed in this work currently relies R EFERENCES
solely on raw byte-level information. Future efforts should
 [1] M. K. C. Shisher, A. Piaseczny, Y. Sun, and C. G. Brinton, “Computation
focus on improving this modeling framework by integrating and communication co-scheduling for timely multi-task inference at the
dynamic features such as network connectivity patterns to wireless edge,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2025,
improve detection performance. pp. 1–10.
 [2] C. Zhao et al., “Foes or friends: Embracing ground effect for edge
 3) Detection of Unknown Encrypted Traffic Attacks in Open detection on lightweight drones,” in Proc. 30th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile
UAV Networks: Most existing malicious encrypted traffic Comput. Netw., Dec. 2024, pp. 1377–1392.
detection methods, including the one proposed in this work, [3] B.-B. Zhang, D. Zhang, R. Song, B. Wang, Y. Hu, and Y. Chen, “RFsearch: Searching unconscious victim in smoke scenes with RF-enabled
rely heavily on large amounts of labeled data for training. drone,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw., Oct. 2023,
However, manual labeling is costly and time consuming, and pp. 1–15.
these methods struggle to identify previously unseen attacks. [4] E. Sie, Z. Liu, and D. Vasisht, “BatMobility: Towards flying without
 seeing for autonomous drones,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile
To overcome these limitations, future work will explore Comput. Netw., Oct. 2023, pp. 1–16.
few-shot learning and unsupervised detection techniques to [5] C. Lei, W. Feng, P. Wei, Y. Chen, N. Ge, and S. Mao, “Edge information
develop open-world detection frameworks capable of identi- hub: Orchestrating satellites, UAVs, MEC, sensing and communications
 for 6G closed-loop controls,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43,
fying unknown encrypted traffic attacks in UAV networks. no. 1, pp. 5–20, Jan. 2025.
LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 9151

[6] H. Sun et al., “All-sky autonomous computing in UAV swarm,” IEEE [29] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen-
 Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 13258–13274, Dec. 2024. tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
[7] X. Wang et al., “A survey on security of UAV swarm networks: Attacks graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 and countermeasures,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1–37, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 Mar. 2025. [30] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
[8] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, Y.-H. Nam, and M. Debbah, “A tuto- neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
 rial on UAVs for wireless networks: Applications, challenges, and open ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
 problems,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2334–2360, [31] D. Jiang et al., “Toward synthetic network traffic generating in NTN-
 3rd Quart., 2019. enabled IoT: A generative AI approach,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
[9] O. Ceviz, S. Sen, and P. Sadioglu, “A survey of security in UAVs vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 2174–2187, Jan. 2025.
 and FANETs: Issues, threats, analysis of attacks, and solutions,” IEEE [32] Y. Wang, C. Wang, J. Zhan, W. Ma, and Y. Jiang, “Text FCG: Fusing
 Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 3227–3265, Oct. 2025. contextual information via graph learning for text classification,” Expert
[10] L. Cai et al., “Secure physical layer communications for low-altitude Syst. Appl., vol. 219, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 119658.
 economy networking: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 28, [33] B. Zhao, S. Guan, M. Chen, J. Wu, C. Qiao, and Y. Xiao, “Efficient and
 pp. 2497–2530, 2026. accurate privacy-preserving task allocation for unmanned aerial vehicle-
[11] S. Tian et al., “Reasoning techniques meet GraphRAG: Advancing LLM based mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13,
 for wireless network cyber defense,” IEEE Wireless Commun., early pp. 5638–5653, 2026.
 access, Feb. 27, 2026, doi: 10.1109/MWC.2026.3659831. [34] N. Kumar and A. Chaudhary, “Secure and lightweight mechanism for
[12] X. Li et al., “Protect NTN-IoT security by malicious traffic detection: A UAV-GCS and UAV-UAV authentication based on PUF,” IEEE Internet
 multidimensional hypergraph learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things Things J., early access, Feb. 27, 2026, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2026.3669029.
 J., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 3594–3607, Feb. 2026. [35] K.-D. Lu, B.-X. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Shen, and Z.-G. Wu, “MoARNN-
[13] J. Sharma and P. S. Mehra, “Secure communication in IoT-based UAV AM: Multi-objective automated recurrent neural network with attention
 networks: A systematic survey,” Internet Things, vol. 23, Oct. 2023, Art. mechanism for cyber-attack detection of UAV,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 no. 100883. Electron., vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 1738–1749, Feb. 2026.
[14] W. Zhai, L. Liu, Y. Ding, S. Sun, and Y. Gu, “ETD: An efficient time [36] L. Xie, T. Xiao, M. Zhou, W. Nie, and X. Yang, “Robust two-layer
 delay attack detection framework for UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. UAV spoofing detection based on multi-source/multi-dimensional data
 Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 2913–2928, 2023. analysis for low-altitude networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13,
[15] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and N. Ansari, “A hierarchical detection pp. 6737–6753, 2026.
 and response system to enhance security against lethal cyber-attacks in [37] Y. Xiao et al., “RF-based identification framework against unauthorized
 UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 48, no. 9, UAV networking in low-altitude economy,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
 pp. 1594–1606, Sep. 2018. vol. 13, pp. 6538–6555, 2026.
[16] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and M.-A. Messous, “How to detect [38] Y. Qi, L. Xu, B. Yang, Y. Xue, and J. Li, “Packet classification
 cyber-attacks in unmanned aerial vehicles network?,” in Proc. IEEE algorithms: From theory to practice,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr.
 Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2016, pp. 1–6. 2009, pp. 648–656.
[17] Q. Zeng and F. Nait-Abdesselam, “Enhancing UAV network security:
 [39] P. M. Fivos Constantinou, “Identifying known and unknown peer-to-peer
 A human-in-the-loop and GAN-based approach to intrusion detection,”
 traffic,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Symp. Netw. Comput. Appl. (NCA), Jul.
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 20870–20884, Jun. 2025.
 2006, pp. 93–102.
[18] T. Li et al., “AeroGuard: Towards real-time UAV fault detection
 [40] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
 with hybrid models,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 25, no. 6,
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
 pp. 9075–9088, Jun. 2026.
 traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy (EuroS&P), Mar. 2016,
[19] Z. Wang, K. W. Fok, and V. L. L. Thing, “Machine learnpp. 439–454.
 ing for encrypted malicious traffic detection: Approaches, datasets
 [41] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartand comparative study,” Comput. Secur., vol. 113, Feb. 2022,
 phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
 Art. no. 102542.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[20] G. Aceto, A. Dainotti, W. de Donato, and A. Pescape, “PortLoad: Taking
 the best of two worlds in traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. [42] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
 Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM), San Diego, CA, USA, Mar. Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov proba-
 2010, pp. 1–5. bility fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
[21] C. Xu, S. Chen, J. Su, S. M. Yiu, and L. C. K. Hui, “A survey on (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
 regular expression matching for deep packet inspection: Applications, [43] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and N. Guizani, “Optimizing
 algorithms, and hardware platforms,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., feature selection for efficient encrypted traffic classification: A systemvol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2991–3029, 4th Quart., 2016. atic approach,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 20–27, Jul. 2020.
[22] A. S. Shekhawat, F. D. Troia, and M. Stamp, “Feature analysis of [44] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and
 encrypted malicious traffic,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 125, pp. 130–141, M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traf-
 Jul. 2019. fic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3,
[23] A. Este, F. Gringoli, and L. Salgarelli, “Support vector machines for TCP pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
 traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 53, no. 14, pp. 2476–2490, [45] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-net: A hybrid neural network for
 Sep. 2009. encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
[24] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Jul. 2020, pp. 424–429.
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural [46] Q. Meng et al., “Detection of unknown attacks through encrypted traffic:
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul. A Gaussian prototype-aided variational autoencoder framework,” IEEE
 2017, pp. 43–48. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 10652–10667, 2025.
[25] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence [47] S. Zhang, F. Yu, H. Zhou, and B. Li, “MalDetectFormer: Leveragnetwork for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Com- ing sparse SpatioTemporal information for effective malicious traffic
 put. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179. detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, vol. 39, no. 21,
[26] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A pp. 22533–22541.
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers [48] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022, of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 pp. 633–642. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.
[27] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked [49] Y. Ding, G. Zhu, D. Chen, X. Qin, M. Cao, and Z. Qin, “Adversarial
 autoencoder based traffic transformer with multi-level flow sample attack and defense method for encrypted traffic data,”
 representation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 18024–18039,
 pp. 5420–5427. Oct. 2022.
[28] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding [50] D. Xu et al., “LMT-SDNN: A lightweight malicious traffic detecrepresentation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in tion method for the Internet of Things based on multiteacher
 Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope: Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K), distillation,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 15665–15677,
 Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8. Apr. 2026.
9152 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

[51] S. Cai, Y. Zhao, W. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Wang, and B. Gu, “MD-CGM: Tao Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the joint
 Malicious traffic detection model based on CycleGAN and multi-head B.S. degree in Internet of Things engineering from
 self-attetion mechanism,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 181, Aug. Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
 2026, Art. no. 108421. (BUPT) and the Queen Mary University of London
[52] X. Han et al., “DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for in 2018 and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
 fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, and technology from BUPT in 2023. He is currently
 May 2024, Art. no. 110372. an Associate Professor and an Advisor of Ph.D.
[53] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training Candidates with the School of Cyberspace Science
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc. and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University. His
 North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2019, pp. 4171–4186. publications include ESI highly cited papers and
[54] L. Yang et al., “Robustness matters: Pre-training can enhance the well-archived international journals and proceedings,
 performance of encrypted traffic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics such as IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS, IEEE J OUR -
 Security, vol. 20, pp. 10588–10603, 2025. NAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS
[55] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. ON D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1024–1034. M OBILE C OMPUTING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NTELLIGENT T RANS -
[56] W. Cong, M. Ramezani, and M. Mahdavi, “On provable benefits of PORTATION S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS , IEEE
 depth in training graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural T RANSACTIONS ON C OGNITIVE C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKING,
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 9936–9949. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE T RANSAC -
[57] Y. Li, R. Zemel, M. Brockschmidt, and D. Tarlow, “Gated graph TIONS ON N ETWORK S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING , and IEEE T RANS -
 sequence neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2016, ACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY . His research interests include
 pp. 1–20. the IoV security, moving target defense, and federated learning. He was a
[58] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic recipient of the Best Paper Award from NaNA 2018, IWCMC 2021, DIONE
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation 2024, ICA3PP 2024, and KSEM 2025; and the Outstanding Paper Award
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717. from iThings 2023, SmartCity 2024, and Trustcom 2025. His Ph.D. thesis
[59] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong, was awarded the Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation by China Institute of
 and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidi- Communications and BUPT. He is the TPC chair and a PC member for some
 mensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, international conferences and workshops. He serves as an Associate Editor
 Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2022, pp. 1–11. for IEEE N ETWORKING L ETTERS, IEEE DATA D ESCRIPTIONS, Computer
[60] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghor- Networks, A D H OC N ETWORKS, and EURASIP Journal on Information
 bani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related Security; and a Guest Editor for Remote Sensing, Electronics, and Chinese
 features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, Journal of Network and Information Security.
 pp. 407–414.
[61] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[62] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017,
 pp. 1–14.
[63] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
 neural networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–17.
[64] H. J. Hadi, Y. Cao, M. K. Khan, N. Ahmad, Y. Hu, and C. Fu,
 “UAV-NIDD: A dynamic dataset for cybersecurity and intrusion detection in UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, Jiacheng Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 pp. 2739–2757, Jul. 2025. degree from the School of Communications and
[65] DJI.(2026). Consumer Drones Comparison. [Online]. Available: https:// Information Engineering, Chongqing University of
 www.dji.com/products/comparison-consumer-drones Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China.
[66] Parrot.(2026). Professional Drones Built for Work. [Online]. Available: He is currently a Research Fellow with the College
 https://www.parrot.com/en/drones of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Techno-
[67] Yuneec.(2026). Professional Grade Unmanned Aerial Vehicle. [Online]. logical University, Singapore. His research interests
 Available: https://yuneec.online/h520-series/ include wireless sensing security, generative AI,
[68] RaspberryPi.(2026). Raspberry PI 5. [Online]. Available: https:// semantic communications, and low-altitude wireless
 www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-5/ networks.
[69] OrangePi.(2026). OrangePi Aipro (20T) Built for AI. [Online]. Available:
 http://www.orangepi.org/html/hardWare/computerAndMicrocontrollers/
 details/Orange-Pi-AIpro(20t).html
[70] NVIDIA.(2026). NVIDIA Jetson Orin: Next-Level AI Performance
 for Next-Gen Robotics and Edge Solutions. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/autonomous-machines/embeddedsystems/jetson-orin/

 Jiangtian Nie received the B.Eng. degree in
 electronics and information engineering from the
 Xuzeng Li (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 Huazhong University of Science and Technolreceived the B.Eng. degree from Beijing Jiaotong
 ogy, Wuhan, China, in 2016, and the Ph.D.
 University, Beijing, China, in 2020, where he is
 degree from ERI@N, Interdisciplinary Graduate
 currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. His research
 School, Nanyang Technological University (NTU),
 interests include UAV networks security, traffic
 Singapore, in 2021. She was a Visiting Student with
 detection, and federated learning.
 Princeton University and the University of Waterloo.
 She is currently a Lecturer with the Computer Science Department, University of Aberdeen, U.K. Her
 research interests include edge intelligence, wireless
 communications, and the Internet of Things.
LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION 9153

 Jian Wang received the Ph.D. degree in cryp- Jiqiang Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 tography from Beijing University of Posts and B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Beijing Normal Univer-
 Telecommunications in 2008. He is currently a sity, Beijing, China, in 1994 and 1999, respectively.
 Professor with the School of Cyberspace Science He is currently a Professor with the School of
 and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China. Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Jiao-
 His current research interests include big data tong University, Beijing. He has published over
 security and analysis, cryptography application and 200 scientific papers in various journals and interauthentication technology, and computer forensics national conferences. His main research interests
 technology. include privacy-preserving, the IoT security, and
 cryptographic protocols.

 Dusit Niyato (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
 degree from the King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Thailand, in 1999, and the
 Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Manitoba, Canada, in
 2008. He is currently a Professor with the School
 of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
 Technological University, Singapore. His research
 Xuangou Wu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. interests include sustainability, edge intelligence,
 degree in computer software and theory from the decentralized machine learning, and incentive mech-
 University of Science and Technology of China anism design.
 (USTC), Hefei, China, in 2013. From September
 2018 to September 2019, he was a Visiting Scholar
 with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and
 Technology (HKUST). He is currently a Professor
 with the School of Computer Science and Technol- Dong In Kim (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the
 ogy, Anhui University of Technology, Ma’anshan, Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the
 China. His research interests include the Internet of University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
Things, network security, federated learning, and privacy protection. CA, USA, in 1990. He was a Tenured Professor
 with the School of Engineering Science, Simon
 Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada. He is currently a Distinguished Professor with the College
 of Information and Communication Engineering,
 Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea. He
 is a fellow of Korean Academy of Science and
 Technology and a Life Member of the National
 Academy of Engineering of Korea. He was a first recipient of the NRF
 of Korea Engineering Research Center in Wireless Communications for
 RF Energy Harvesting from 2014 to 2021. He received several research
 awards, including the 2023 IEEE ComSoc Best Survey Paper Award and
 the 2022 IEEE Best Land Transportation Paper Award. He was selected
 as the 2019 recipient of the IEEE ComSoc Joseph LoCicero Award for
 Zhen Han received the Ph.D. degree from China
 Exemplary Service to Publications. He has been listed as a 2020/2022 Highly
 Academy of Engineering Physics, Beijing, China, in
 Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics. He was the General Chair of IEEE
 1991. He is currently a Professor with the School
 ICC 2022, Seoul. From 2001 to 2024, he served as an Editor, the Editorof Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing
 at-Large, and an Area Editor of Wireless Communications—I for IEEE
 Jiaotong University, Beijing. He has authored or
 T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS. From 2002 to 2011, he served as an
 co-authored more than 100 papers in various journals
 Editor and a Founding Area Editor of Cross-Layer Design and Optimization
 and international conferences. His main research
 for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS. From 2008
 interests include information security architecture
 to 2011, he served as the Co-Editor-in-Chief for IEEE/KICS J OURNAL OF
 and trusted computing.
 C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKS. He served as the Founding Editor-in-
 Chief for IEEE W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS L ETTERS from 2012 to 2015.