7118 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Enhancing Intrusion Detection via Interpretable
 Inter-Flow Spatio-Temporal Graphs and
 Intra-Flow Features
 Xiaowei Zhao , Mingshu He , Liu Yang, Jianjin Zhao , and Xiaojuan Wang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The performance of network intrusion detection sys- I. INTRODUCTION
tems (IDS) critically depends on the completeness of traffic fea-
 ETWORK Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are a critical
ture representation. Existing methods predominantly focus either
on intra-flow features (e.g., packet length sequences) or singledimensional inter-flow relationships, limiting optimal classifica-
 N line of defense in cybersecurity, and their performance is
 vital for safeguarding network systems against attacks [1], [2],
tion. To address this restriction, we propose IF2 -STG to enhance [3]. The efficacy of an IDS hinges on the completeness of its
intrusion detection via interpretable inter-flow spatio-temporal
graphs and intra-flow features. The key innovation of our scheme
 feature representation [4], [5], [6]. Network traffic inherently
is the construction of an Inter-flow Spatio-Temporal relationship comprises multi-modal data with diverse features, which are
Graph (ISTG), with two-dimensional edges explicitly quantifying broadly categorized into intra-flow and inter-flow features [54].
the correlation strength between flows. On this basis, a GNN learns Intra-flow features describe the internal attributes of individual
the inter-flow context. In parallel, a CNN extracts fine-grained network flows, including statistical features (e.g., mean packet
intra-flow features from raw bytes of individual flows. Finally, the
two modal features are fused to acquire a comprehensive represenlength, flow duration) [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20],
tation. This representation can effectively capture both intrinsic [21], [22], metadata features [23], [24], [25], [26], and sequence
behavior patterns of flows and contextual inter-flow relationships, features (e.g., packet length sequences) [27], [28], [29], [30],
thereby significantly enhancing the detection performance and [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37]. In contrast, inter-flow
robustness of model. Experimental results show that the proposed features mainly refer to the relationship features among network
IF2 -STG achieves over 99% accuracy on three real-world datasets,
outperforming existing approaches. The constructed ISTG pro- flows.
vides explicit visual interpretation of flow dependencies. More im- In existing IDSs, most systems focus solely on a single type
portantly, IF2 -STG-Inter, using only inter-flow features, maintains of intra-flow feature [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19],
97.78% detection accuracy in cross-dataset tests involving time- [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30],
disparate datasets, validating superior generalization of inter-flow [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37], making them highly
spatio-temporal features. This advantage renders it particularly
promising for practical intrusion detection applications.
 sensitive to minor variations in network flow features. For
 instance, when facing attacks where adversaries tamper with
 Index Terms—Intra-flow features, inter-flow features, inter-flow packet lengths [10], [11], IDSs based on sequence features
spatio-temporal relationship graph, comprehensive representa- (e.g., packet length sequences) often struggle to maintain stable
tion, intrusion detection systems.
 performance, exhibiting poor robustness. Consequently, some
 studies have adopted multi-modal learning approaches using diverse network flow features [41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47],
 Received 29 October 2025; revised 5 January 2026; accepted 10 February [48], [49]. However, their feature selection remains confined to
2026. Date of publication 24 February 2026; date of current version 4 March intra-flow features, neglecting the inter-flow correlations [54],
2026. The work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foun- [63].
dation of China under Grant 62402053, Grant 62227805, and Grant 62502042
and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities To address the limitations of intra-flow features, researchers
under Grant 2025KYQD17(BUPT). Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Yong have attempted to utilize multiple network flows to learn inter-
Xiang. (Corresponding author: Mingshu He.) flow relationships for malicious traffic detection [41], [50],
 Xiaowei Zhao is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: [51]. Among them, CBSeq [50] treats all flows between two
xwzhao@bupt.edu.cn). hosts as an integrated entity, concatenating features like packet
 Mingshu He is with the Department of Cyberspace Security, Beijing Uni- count, time intervals, and source ports of each flow to construct
versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China, and also
with the Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service behavioral sequences for classification. Similarly, HDFEF [51]
(BUPT), Ministry of Education, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: hemingshu@ maps features of individual flows into different spaces and combupt.edu.cn). bines these multi-space features to form composite multi-flow
 Liu Yang is with the College of Robotics, Beijing Union University, Beijing
100020, China (e-mail: oyangliu@buu.edu.cn). representations. However, these methods only integrate infor-
 Jianjin Zhao and Xiaojuan Wang are with the Department of Cyberspace mation from multiple flows through feature aggregation, failing
Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, to deeply explore the underlying temporal dependencies and
China (e-mail: jianjinzhao@bupt.edu.cn; wj2718@bupt.edu.cn).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2026.3664905 spatial correlations among flows.

 2327-4697 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7119

 In fact, network attacks often exhibit distinct spatio-temporal features and defining two-dimensional edge vectors based
correlation patterns. For example, in a Distributed Denial of Ser- on the time intervals and IP sets associations, ISTG can
vice (DDoS) attack, traffic originating from multiple source IPs explicitly model the spatio-temporal dependencies becoordinates high-frequency requests temporally while forming tween flows. The proposed ISTG demonstrates good interdistributed assaults on target servers spatially [12]. To capture pretability and representational capability, particularly for
these characteristics, GAT_based model [52] and MeDF [54] attack types with significant inter-flow interaction patterns
construct graphs from temporal and spatial perspectives, respec- such as DDoS and port scanning.
tively. But they can only model inter-flow dependencies in a sin- r Our proposed IF2 -STG achieves over 99% accuracy on
gle dimension. Although recent studies such as PPT-GNN [65] three real-world datasets, validating the effectiveness of the
and CCSTGN [66] employ spatio-temporal graph networks to joint learning of intra-flow and inter-flow features. Crosscapture the spatio-temporal dynamics among flows, they can- dataset experiments further reveal that inter-flow spationot explicitly quantify the strength of inter-flow correlations, temporal features exhibit remarkable generalization across
limiting interpretability. datasets collected at different times, offering a valuable
 Furthermore, most existing studies focus solely on either solution against the evolving attacks in the real-world.
intra-flow or inter-flow features. Although some recent ap- The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
proaches have attempted to jointly learn both types of features, summarizes related work and analyzes existed methods. Secthey still have significant limitations in mining inter-flow rela- tion III explains the research motivation. Section IV introduces
tionships. For instance, MeDF [54] only constructs graphs from the detailed design of the proposed IF2 -STG. Section V presents
the spatial dimension, ignoring temporal dependencies between the experimental results and performance evaluation. Finally,
flows. IIT [63] implicitly learns inter-flow dependencies through Section VI concludes the paper.
attention mechanisms, but lacks an explicit graph structure,
failing to visually reveal the spatio-temporal correlations. II. RELATED WORK
 In light of this, this paper proposes a novel representation
 The primary objective of an IDS is to accurately classify
learning paradigm for intrusion detection (IF2 -STG),1 designed
 network traffic and discriminate malicious behavior [7], [8],
to enhance model robustness by jointly modeling fine-grained
 [9]. Feature extraction is a crucial step in this process. Existing
intra-flow content and explicit inter-flow spatio-temporal corresearch can be primarily categorized into two classes based on
relations. Its core innovation lies in an interpretable Inter-flow
 the scope of feature extraction: intra-flow feature-based methods
Spatio-Temporal relationship Graph (ISTG), which quantifies
 and inter-flow feature-based methods. To clarify the distinctions
dependencies between flows using edges defined by start time
 between existing methods and our approach, Table I provides
intervals and IP-set associations. IF2 -STG employs two parallel
 a detailed comparison in terms of the features used, features
learning branches: a CNN for capturing intra-flow features from
 extracted, models, and limitations.
raw bytes, and a GNN for modeling inter-flow relationships
via the ISTG. Their complementary representations are then
fused into a comprehensive flow representation. Compared to A. Intra-Flow Feature-Based Methods
existing methods, this work is the first to explicitly quantify IDSs based on intra-flow features identify threats by learning
and structurally model complex spatio-temporal dependencies the inherent characteristics within individual network flows.
among flows, enabling interpretable analysis of multi-flow at- These methods can be categorized into single-modal learning
tack patterns while demonstrating stronger generalization and and multi-modal learning approaches.
robustness against label noise. 1) Single-Modal Learning: Single-modal learning methods
 The main contributions of this work are summarized as utilize only one type of intra-flow feature, including statistical
follows: features, metadata features, and sequence features.
 r We propose a novel intrusion detection model that Statistical feature-based methods rely on statistical features
 integrates inter-flow spatio-temporal relationships with extracted from bidirectional flows (e.g., total packet count,
 intra-flow features. The model employs CNN and GNN packet inter-arrival time, flow duration, etc.) [13], [14], [15],
 architectures to learn intra-flow and inter-flow feature [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [80], combined with
 representations respectively, then fuses them into a machine learning algorithms to achieve traffic classification and
 comprehensive flow representation. This unified represen- recognition [15]. Yang et al. [13] introduced Principal Compotation preserves intrinsic behavioral patterns of individual nent Analysis to account for the correlations between different
 flows while incorporating contextual spatio-temporal statistical attributes, and used sliding window to achieve scalable
 dependencies among multiple flows, thereby significantly anomaly detection. Apruzzese et al. [17] utilized features such
 improving classification accuracy and robustness. as total transmitted packets, total transmitted bytes, and bytes
 r We construct an ISTG to capture the correlations among per second to propose a Random Forest (RF)-based IDS with
 flows in both temporal and spatial dimensions. Using certain defenses against adversarial attacks. Bozkır et al. [18]
 packet length sequences and statistical values as node employed the NFStream tool to compute traffic features and
 designed an encrypted traffic classification platform using GB-
 1 The source code is publicly available at https://github.com/Akap-vv/IF2- Tree, LightGBM, and XGBoost algorithms. Similarly, Wang
STG. et al. [19] extracted statistical features, including flow duration,
7120 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I
 OVERVIEW OF PRIOR RESEARCH AND THIS WORK

time intervals, and bytes per second, from encrypted traffic and ERNN [27], specifically designed for network-induced pheapplied an XGBoost model for classification. Ngo et al. [80] nomena, utilizes LSTM networks to classify packet length seconducted a comparative study of machine learning methods quences. FS-Net [28] employs a bidirectional GRU to encode
for threat detection in healthcare IoT systems based on statistical packet length sequences, incorporating a reconstruction mechfeatures. anism to ensure feature representation validity. Han et al. [30]
 Metadata feature-based methods directly extract raw fields constructed graphs based on packet length sequences using GNN
from packet headers without requiring statistical informa- to enhance detection capabilities. Raw bytes-based methods
tion [23], [24], [25], [26], which can accelerate detection speed learn from the hexadecimal byte sequences of flows, typically
and enhance real-time performance. Ma et al. [23] and Li converting byte sequences into grayscale images or textual
et al. [24] both extract frame and protocol metadata features from representations, and then extracting features through models
packets, and incorporate feature selection methods to identify the like CNN and Transformer. Studies [31], [32], [33] all transmost informative features, thereby reducing the computational formed hexadecimal bytes into grayscale images and applied
overhead. Likewise, the Lucid [26] approach extracts 11 key CNN models for classification. Meng et al. [34] employed a
metadata features from each packet and utilizes a lightweight Transformer to encode byte sequences and then use natural
CNN to achieve real-time DDoS detection. language processing (NLP) techniques for classification. Gao
 Sequence feature-based methods focus on temporal patterns et al. [35] treated discrete hexadecimal bytes as words and
in network traffic, leveraging deep learning (DL) models to integrated attention mechanisms into CNN-BiLSTM to enhance
capture the trend and periodic characteristics of sequences [27], IDS’s accuracy by focusing on key information. Zhao et al. [36]
[28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37]. The adopted a multi-level flow representation and the Traffic Transinput data for these models typically encompass packet length former model to better extract features from raw byte data. Luo
sequences, inter-arrival time sequences, and raw byte sequences. et al. [37] constructed a flow-level semantic graph from raw byte
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7121

data and aggregated it into semantic embeddings using a gated length sequences, and inter-arrival time sequences of all packets
GNN. for classification, and the latter constructs behavior sequences by
 The aforementioned approaches suffer from two major limi- combining the packet counts, intervals, and source/destination
tations. First, the features extracted solely from individual flows port of multiple flows. HDFEF [51] projects individual flow
may be incomplete, failing to provide sufficient information features into different latent spaces and forms combined features
for accurate attack prediction, especially for multi-stage at- by concatenating multi-space features. However, these methods
tacks [38], [39], [40]. Second, these methods are sensitive to simply aggregate the raw or transformed features of multiple
minor perturbations in single-flow features, making them vul- flows, without considering the temporal order or spatial toponerable to evasion attacks. For instance, as demonstrated in [10], logical correlations between flows.
an evasion strategy that modifies packet lengths in malicious 2) Inter-Flow Relationship Mining: Inter-flow relationship
traffic to mimic benign traffic characteristics can significantly mining methods learn correlation features between flows
degrade the detection accuracy of IDS relying solely on packet through either explicit graph construction or implicit depenlength sequences. dency modeling [52], [53], [54], [55], [56], [57], [58], [59], [60],
 2) Multi-Modal Learning: Multimodal learning can enhance [61], [62], [63], [64], [65], [66], [79]. Ngo et al. [79] constructed
performance by capturing patterns from multiple perspectives, graphs based on Top-K attribute similarity and adopted the
and it can alleviate the problems of insufficient representation GraphSAGE model to effectively capture node representations
and vulnerability to attacks that arise from relying solely on for IoT intrusion detection. Xu et al. [52] and Peng et al. [53]
single features [41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], segmented raw traffic into blocks, treated flows as nodes, and
[49]. Kong et al. [41] employed a sliding sampling window established edges based on temporal cross-correlations. They
to conduct real-time sampling of network conversations and employed graph attention networks (GAT) and graph convoluextracted three sequential features—bytes, lengths, and time tional networks (GCN), respectively, to extract node represenintervals—to capture the patterns of different types of traf- tations by aggregating information from adjacent nodes. Wang
fic. He et al. [42] proposed a novel multi-view solution to et al. [54] proposed a graph-based approach for inter-flow feature
reduce feature complexity and employed multimodal DL to extraction, where individual flows were represented as nodes and
construct effective feature fusion modules for learning the un- edges were established based on IP set correlations and protoderlying structure of traffic data. Yu et al. [43] designed a DL col consistency, subsequently employing GCN to learn spatial
method based on multi-view learning, utilizing an ensemble relationships among flows. Li et al. [55] proposed ProGraph, a
classifier for multi-class classification of minority attacks. Yun graph-propagation-based method. It builds a correlation graph
et al. [44] extracted three attribute sequences from TLS flows with session clusters aggregated from different networks, upon
and used DL models to capture long-term dependencies among which effective graph propagation can be implemented iteraelements in packet sequences. Wang et al. [48] proposed a tively to predict labels for test nodes. These methods lack joint
multimodal encrypted traffic classification framework, AppNet, modeling of both temporal and spatial dimensions in inter-flow
which uses a 1D CNN to extract features from the first 1014 relationships.
bytes of the initial packet and an LSTM to learn temporal Zhao et al. [58] built both attribute and temporal relation
relationships in packet length sequences, ultimately concatenat- graphs for flow sequences. But in temporal relationship exing features learned from both perspectives for classification. traction, the edge weights are determined solely by the ordinal
Lei et al. [49] proposed a multi-feature correlation analysis position differences between flows, failing to accurately capmethod to capture relationships between different feature types, ture the true time-dependent intensity. MT-FlowFormer [59]
and utilized a CNN-LSTM model for spatiotemporal feature extracts deep-level features from the flow sequence, which can
extraction. effectively distinguish the relevance and importance of differ-
 Nevertheless, the above methods remain limited to analyzing ent flows in the flow sequence. Yao et al. [60] and Vaswani
the internal features of individual flows while failing to account et al. [61] treated the stream sequence as a time sequence and
for inter-flow correlations, which is not conducive to detecting used attention-based LSTM to learn the temporal relationships
sophisticated attack patterns involving interactions among mul- among network flows. Meng et al. [63] represented flows ustiple flows. ing packet length sequences and inter-arrival time sequences,
 employing attention mechanisms to implicitly learn inter-flow
 dependencies. Nevertheless, the absence of an explicit graph
B. Inter-Flow Feature-Based Methods structure in their approach hindered intuitive visualization of
 IDSs leveraging intra-flow features discover malicious activ- flow relationships.
ities by analyzing correlations among multiple network flows, The recently proposed PPT-GNN [65] and CCSTGN [66]
which can be categorized into two types: flow-level feature methods leverage graph structures to capture spatio-temporal
aggregation and inter-flow relationship mining. dynamics of cyber attacks, achieving significant advances in
 1) Flow-Level Feature Aggregation: The essence of flow- real-time performance and generalization. However, PPT-GNN
level feature aggregation methods is the cross-flow concatena- constructs all flows within a time window into a single graph,
tion of single-flow features. For example, both iDetector [41] which may incur significant computational overhead. Moreover,
and CBSeq [50] take multiple flows between two hosts as a they fall short in showcasing explicit inter-flow spatio-temporal
whole, where the former extracts the byte sequences, packet patterns within the graph, limiting interpretability.
7122 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 1. Research motivation. Taking scan attacks as an example: it is difficult to accurately identify the attack intent relying solely on the internal features of a
single flow. Thus, inter-flow spatio-temporal relationships are combined with intra-flow features to form a comprehensive representation.

 It is worth noting that frameworks integrating intra- and contextual correlation, making it impossible to identify the coninter-features have also been explored in broader cybersecurity tinuous port probing behavior of port scanning attacks. To overcontexts, such as insider threat detection [78]. However, this come these deficiencies, apart from intra-flow features, we use
framework processes user behavior logs and models relation- graph representation learning to capture inter-flow relationships.
ships based on organizational structures. Since both the data Specifically, each graph node represents an individual flow,
objects and relational semantics differ fundamentally from those while edges denote correlations between flows. Taking f low1
in network intrusion detection, it cannot be directly adapted for and f low2 as examples, their start times are close, and both are
modeling spatio-temporal correlations in network traffic. flows from host A to host B in spatial topology. Such temporal
 To overcome the aforementioned limitations, this paper in- and spatial correlations can be quantitatively represented as t
novatively proposes the ISTG, which is designed to achieve and s respectively, forming a two-dimensional vector that serves
effective spatio-temporal joint representation for the field of net- as the edge attribute. Eventually, a spatio-temporal relationship
work intrusion detection, while providing interpretable insights. graph containing 5 flows is constructed.
Furthermore, to compensate for the potential loss of fine-grained Subsequently, the intra-flow features and inter-flow spatiodetails in inter-flow analysis, our method incorporates intra-flow temporal relationship graphs are separately learned via different
raw byte features for multi-modal fusion. By leveraging comple- networks to generate the intra-flow feature representation and
mentary information, this design strives to improve the accuracy inter-flow feature representation of f 1. These two representaand robustness of detection. tions are then fused to form the comprehensive representation
 of f 1 that captures both its internal behavior patterns and contextual relationships with other flows. This integrated represen-
 III. MOTIVATION tation offers the model a more comprehensive discriminative
 This section elucidates the research motivation and necessity basis, thereby improving the accuracy of intrusion detection.
by taking half-open port scanning attacks as an example. The
attacker sends SYN packets to target ports, determining a port as
open upon receiving SYN/ACK responses or closed upon RST IV. DESCRIPTION OF IF2 -STG
packets. As illustrated in the top-left corner of Fig. 1, attacker The proposed IF2 -STG comprises four components: data
A sequentially probes five ports on target host B. During this preprocessing module, intra-flow feature extraction module,
process, each packet sequence between host A and every probed inter-flow feature extraction module, and fusion classification
port of host B constitutes an independent bidirectional flow. The module. The data preprocessing module extracts the features
simplified diagram in the bottom-left corner represents these required by the intra-flow and inter-flow extraction modules.
flows as arrows arranged vertically in chronological order of The intra-flow and inter-flow extraction modules process their
start time. input features independently to generate flow-level feature rep-
 For f low1, relying solely on its intra-flow features (such as resentations for the fusion module and classify them. These
packet length sequences, raw bytes, statistical features, etc.) representations are then concatenated and classified in the fusion
to determine whether it belongs to malicious traffic or normal classification module to achieve comprehensive detection. The
(request) traffic has obvious defects. On the one hand, a sin- overall framework of the method is shown in Fig. 2.
gle type of feature can be easily manipulated by attackers to In terms of feature selection for network flows, the intraevade detection; on the other hand, single-flow behavior lacks flow feature extraction module adopts raw bytes to preserve
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7123

Fig. 2. The system framework of the proposed IF2 -STG, consisting of four modules: (a) Data Preprocessing provides features required for subsequent modules,
(b) Intra-flow Feature Extraction and (c) Inter-flow Feature Extraction learn the representations of two modalities, and (d) Fusion Classification combines these
representations for final intrusion detection.

fine-grained information. However, byte sequences typically flow is obtained by concatenating the raw bytes of each packet
need to be truncated into a fixed length for model input compat- in order. For a packet Pj , its raw byte sequence is denoted
ibility, inevitably resulting in information loss. In the inter-flow as bytej = [bj1 , bj2 , . . . , bjlj ], where bjlj is the last byte, and
feature extraction module, the packet length sequences and lj = len(Pj ) is the length of packet Pj . Therefore, the raw
their statistical features are used as node features to construct byte sequence of flow Fi is Bi = byte1 ||byte2 || · · · ||byten =
graphs. On the one hand, compared to using only basic triplets [b11 , b12 , . . . , b1l1 , b21 , b22 , . . . , b2l2 , . . . , bn1 , bn2 , . . . , bnln ].
(source IP, destination IP, and protocol) as node features [52], the The packet length sequence of Fi is Li = [l1 , l2 , . . . , ln ].
combination of packet length sequences and statistical features To adapt to the model input, the raw byte sequence and
provides more comprehensive behavioral patterns of the flows packet length sequence are truncated to fixed lengths q and
themselves. On the other hand, this combination also makes up p, respectively, with zero-padding applied to sequences shorter
for the information loss caused by the truncation of raw bytes. than the specified lengths. Additionally, the timestamp t0 of the
Therefore, the selection of these multi-dimensional flow features first packet in each flow is taken as the start time of the flow,
helps to improve the integrity of traffic characterization and the which will be used to compute the temporal component of edges
robustness of the model. in the spatio-temporal relationship graph within the inter-flow
 feature extraction module.
A. Data Preprocessing Module
 B. Intra-Flow Feature Extraction Module
 The raw traffic consists of a set of continuous and ordered
data packets. First, packets are divided into corresponding bidi- For intra-flow feature extraction, we perform end-to-end
rectional network flows based on their five-tuple (source IP, learning on raw byte data. Network traffic is essentially sequensource port, destination IP, destination port, protocol). Each flow tial byte data, where the hierarchical structure of bytes, packets,
contains a series of temporally ordered data packets, denoted as sessions, and entire flows closely resembles the character, word,
Fi = {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pn }, where Pj represents the j-th packet in sentence, and document structure in NLP. In recent years, the
the flow. successful applications of CNN in NLP all used 1D-CNN, for
 Subsequently, for each flow, the raw byte sequence and the example, sentiment analysis and text classification [67], [68].
packet length sequence are extracted for use in the subsequent Therefore, we adopt a 1D-CNN architecture similar to [31]. The
intra-flow feature extraction module and inter-flow feature inputs to this network comprise the first q bytes of each flow,
extraction module, respectively. The raw byte sequence of a with zero-padding for shorter sequences. The input of the last
7124 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE II
 THE KEY PARAMETERS OF 1D-CNN MODEL

 Fig. 3. An example of ISTG construction (assuming m=6), comprising three
 FCN N key steps: 1) Flow Sorting: Sorting the m flows by their start times, correspondlinear layer is taken as the flow representation hCN N ∈ R , ing to the node order in ISTG. Each flow requires features such as start time,
which is fed into the fusion classification module. Table II IP set, sequence features, and statistical features. 2) Concurrent Flow Grouping:
details the key parameters of each layer in the 1D-CNN model, Flows within each dashed box form a concurrent group, and bidirectional edges
 connect concurrent flows in ISTG. 3) Spatio-temporal Relationship Calculating:
where FCN N denotes the dimension of the CNN’s output hidden Nodes or groups in ISTG are sequentially linked with unidirectional edges
vector and C represents the number of flow categories in the weighted by 2D spatio-temporal vectors [t, s].
multi-classification task.

C. Inter-Flow Feature Extraction Module Next is the critical design of the ISTG - the edge connections
 between nodes. We employ a two-dimensional feature vector
 Multiple consecutive network flows exhibit inherent spatioas the edge attribute, with the two dimensions quantifying the
temporal correlations. Consequently, effective analysis should
 temporal correlation and spatial correlation between flow pairs
account for both the intrinsic attributes of individual flows and
 respectively. Specifically, suppose there is an edge eij = [t, s]
their inter-flow relationships. To this end, we employ GNN to
 between node i and node j. The temporal correlation component
model and learn the spatio-temporal correlations among network
 t is derived from the start time difference between the two flows.
flows.
 Theoretically, flows with smaller start time intervals demonstrate
 1) Construction of ISTG: For each network flow category,
 stronger temporal correlations. We therefore implement this
we take m consecutive network flows with adjacent start times
 logic using an exponential decay function e−x , which assigns
as a group to construct an ISTG. In the graph, each node
 higher t values to flow pairs with smaller time gaps. For the
corresponds to an individual flow, where all nodes share identical
 spatial correlation component s, we determine it by checking
labels that consequently define the graph’s label. We select the
 whether there is an intersection between the source IP and
packet length sequence and relevant statistical features as node
 destination IP sets IP = {src_ip, dst_ip} of both flows. The
features.
 value s is set to 1 if any IP intersection exists, and 0 otherwise.
 Packet length sequence feature: The packet length sequence
 This judgment method can effectively capture diverse network
has been widely used in network flow classification tasks,
 interaction patterns, such as multiple connections initiated from
particularly for encrypted traffic where available features are
 the same device, different devices accessing the same server,
limited [27], [28], [29], [30]. Since network flows are bidiand chain-style communication.
rectional, we distinguish forward and backward packets by
 Therefore, the weight of edge eij = [t, s] can be formally
assigning positive values to forward packet sizes and negative
 computed as follows:
values to backward packet sizes in the sequence. To standardize
input dimensions for the model, we select the first p packets t = e−(t0i −t0j ) , t0i ≥ t0j (1)
of each flow (padding with zeros for shorter flows), though 
this truncation may omit subsequent packets in long flows. To 1, if IPi ∩ IPj = ∅
compensate for this limitation, we supplement with statistical s= (2)
 0, else
features.
 Statistical feature: Following [52], we compute 18 statisti- In addition, considering network bandwidth fluctuations, we
cal features separately for the entire flow, forward flow, and regard flows with a time difference less than a specified threshbackward flow, including: maximum, minimum, mean, median old (10 ms) and an intersection in source/destination IPs as
absolute deviation, standard deviation, variance, skewness, kur- concurrent flows. These concurrent flows form a concurrent
tosis, and percentiles (10% to 90% ) of packet sizes, along with group, where any two nodes are connected by bidirectional
packet counts. This yields 54 statistical features per flow. To edges with weights [1.0, 1.0]. Nodes between different groups,
reduce dimensionality, we employ random forest for feature between a group and a single node, and between single nodes
importance ranking and select the top z most important features are all connected by unidirectional edges in chronological order.
as complementary to the sequence features. Additionally, in order to reduce the complexity of the ISTG,
 Thus, the node features can be expressed as h = unidirectional edges that can be derived through transitivity are
[l1 , l2 , . . . , lp , s1 , s2 , . . . , sz ], where li and si denote the packet not explicitly generated. Fig. 3 illustrates an example of ISTG
size and statistical feature values, respectively. construction. Compared with the way of simply connecting
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7125

sequentially in chronological order, this connection method through a linear layer and a softmax function, the prediction
considering concurrency demonstrates superior effectiveness, probability of graph classification is obtained. Since the main
which will be verified in Section. V-F of our experiments. purpose of this study is flow classification, the graph classifica-
 2) Graph Representation Learning: The labeled ISTG is fed tion results are expanded by m times to obtain the node-level
into a GNN for inter-flow feature extraction and graph classifi- flow classification results.
cation. The GNN model we use primarily consists of a Graph
Attention Layer (GAT) [69], a Self-Attention Graph Pooling D. Fusion Classification Module
Layer (SAGPool) [70], [71], and linear layers.
 The GAT utilizes the self-attention mechanism to enable each This module takes the flow-level representations from both
node in the graph to dynamically aggregate information from its the intra-flow and inter-flow feature extraction modules and
neighboring nodes based on their importance, thereby learning concatenates them to obtain the final representation vector
better node representations. For a given node i in the graph hf = hCN N ||hGN N . Here, hf integrates fine-grained intra-flow
with feature vector hi , its set of neighboring nodes is denoted byte features and context-aware inter-flow relational features,
as N (i). Taking neighboring node j ∈ N (i) as an example, providing a more comprehensive characterization of network
GAT calculates the importance of node j to node i through the flows. Subsequently, hf is fed into a linear layer to learn and
following formula: integrate the complex nonlinear relationships between the two
    types of features, with the final classification performed by a
 exp LeakyReLU aT [W hi  W hj  We eij ] fully-connected layer.
 αij =  T
 k∈Ni exp (LeakyReLU (a [W hi  W hk  We eik ]))
 (3) E. Loss Function
where T represents transposition and || is the concatenation
operation. W is a weight matrix that is applied to every node, In the fusion classification module, the motivation for conand We is a weight matrix that is applied to every edge. a is the catenating hCN N and hGN N is to enable the neural network
parameter of a single-layer feedforward neural network. The to combine the strengths of intra-flow and inter-flow features,
LeakyReLU function [72] is introduced for non-linearization, allowing them to complement each other. However, due to the
and the Softmax function is employed to calculate the final αij . black-box nature of neural networks, it may not learn the best
 Subsequently, the attention weights of neighboring nodes are solution for both components as expected [73]. Therefore, we
linearly accumulated to update the feature vector hi of node i. hypothesize that if the combined model’s parameters are opti-
 ⎛ ⎞ mal, then the parameters of the two feature extraction modules
  should also be individually optimal. Based on this, we adopt
 hi = σ ⎝ αij W hj ⎠ (4) multi-loss joint training to guide the model to achieve the best
 j∈Ni performance of each module. Specifically, the loss function of
 IF2 -STG incorporates classification losses from three modules,
 To stabilize the self-attention learning process, GAT employs
 evaluating not only the final classification performance but also
a multi-head attention mechanism, where K independent attenthe classification capabilities of the features learned by the two
tion mechanisms compute node features in parallel, and their
 feature extraction modules. To ensure balanced attention to both
outputs are concatenated:
 ⎛ ⎞ intra-flow and inter-flow features during model training, we
  assign equal weights to their respective loss functions.
 hi =K k=1 σ
 ⎝ k
 αij W k hj ⎠ (5)
 j∈Ni Loss = Lossintra + Lossinter + Lossf usion (6)
 k Lossintra , Lossinter , and Lossf usion represent the classifiwhere αij denotes the attention coefficient calculated by the k-th
attention head, and W k is the linear transformation matrix for cation losses of the intra-flow feature extraction module, interthe k-th attention head. flow feature extraction module, and fusion classification module,
 In this work, we use a three-head attention mechanism (K=3). respectively. The cross-entropy loss is applied to calculate the
The representations generated by each head are concatenated loss between the predicted value p and the ground truth y.
to obtain a new representation for each node (i.e., each flow), N C
incorporating both its original information and contextual infor- 1   
 lossintra = − yi log pintra
 ic (7)
mation from neighboring nodes. Consequently, we treat this as N i=1 c=1
a flow-level representation embedding inter-flow relationships N C
and output it to the subsequent fusion classification module, 1   
 lossinter = − yi log pinter
 ic (8)
denoted as hGN N = hi ∈ RFGN N . N i=1 c=1
 To capture the global structural information of the graph, this
 N C
module performs graph classification rather than node classifi- 1   
 lossfusion = − yi log pfusion
 ic (9)
cation, which only considers local neighborhood information of N i=1 c=1
nodes. Specifically, to pay more attention to important nodes and
improve training efficiency, we use a SAGPool mechanism to Here, N denotes the total number of samples, and C represents
select important nodes and simplify the graph structure. Then, the number of categories in the multi-class classification task.
7126 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

p_ic indicates the predicted probability from each module’s clas- TABLE III
 THE COMPOSITION OF THE THREE DATASET
sification layer that sample i belongs to class c. It should be noted
that in the inter-flow feature extraction module, the GNN outputs
graph-level classification results, whereas we focus on flow-level
classification. Since all nodes within a graph should share the
same class label, and considering that each graph contains m
nodes, we expand each graph’s prediction result by a factor of
m to obtain node-level predictions.
 Specifically, assuming the GNN outputs the predicted probability pk = [pk1 , pk2 , . . . , pkC ] ∈ RC for graph Gk , where pkc
represents the probability of graph Gk belonging to class c.
Replicate pk for m times to generate the node-level probability matrix Pkinter ∈ Rm×C . Finally, all node-level probability
matrices are concatenated to form the complete flow-level prediction matrix P inter ∈ RN ×C for all N samples (flows), and
pinter
 i ∈ P inter . TABLE IV
 PARAMETER SETTING
 V. EVALUATION
A. Experiment Preparation
 1) Datasets: We evaluate our method on three public datasets
to validate its applicability to both IoT and traditional networks.
Notably, these datasets were collected in 2019, 2020, and 2024
respectively, demonstrating that our approach can adapt to evolving network environments.
 r CIC-DDoS2019 [74]: Designed for DDoS attack detection, this dataset introduces a new taxonomy for DDoS attacks. It contains benign traffic and 12 up-to-date common
 DDoS attacks, such as NetBIOS, LDAP, and MSSQL.
 r MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 [75]: Focused on the MQTT protocol,
 a core IoT communication protocol, this dataset simulates (F1). The F1 Score provides a comprehensive measure of model
 real-world network environments. It covers normal opera- performance, representing the harmonic mean of PPV and TPR.
 tions and four attack scenarios, enabling validation of our To complement this assessment with insights into efficiency
 method’s detection capability in IoT environments.
 r CICIoMT2024 [76]: Targeting Medical IoT (IoMT) sce- and practicality, we also measure the model’s parameter count,
 training/inference time, memory usage, and throughput.
 narios, this dataset contains five categories of network 4) Statistical Feature Selection: Node features in the ISTG
 attacks against 40 IoMT devices, spanning Wi-Fi, MQTT, consist of packet length sequences and statistical features. The
 and Bluetooth protocols. Combining real medical devices statistical features capture the overall characteristics of the flows,
 with simulated attacks, it validates our method’s effective- serving as a supplement to the truncated sequence features. As
 ness in real-world complex IoT environments. described in Section. IV-C1, we compute 18 statistical features
 For all datasets, network flows are divided based on five- for each of the entire, forward, and backward packet length
tuples. Given the significant class imbalance in CIC-DDoS2019 sequences, resulting in a total of 54 statistical features. The
and CICIoMT2024, we balance the datasets by randomly sam- Fig. 4 shows the top 10 most important statistical features ranked
pling other major categories using benign traffic as the baseline. by their contribution using a random forest classifier, where
Each dataset is divided into training and test sets at a 4:1 ratio. f , b, and a represent the forward, backward, and entire flows,
Detailed sample distributions are shown in Table III. respectively. To reduce the model parameters while maintaining
 2) Experimental Setup: We train and evaluate the model learning accuracy, we select the six most significant statistiusing PyTorch on a server equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 3090 cal features: a_mean, f _per4, a_per7, f _per5, a_per5, and
GPU. The PyTorch Geometric Library is employed to construct a_per6. Consequently, the feature dimension of each node in
the ISTGs and implement the GNN. The relevant parameters of the graph is p + z = 26.
the model and training are listed in Table IV. To make full use of
the training data, 5-fold cross-validation is adopted during the
 B. Comparison With State-of-The-Art Methods
training process.
 3) Evaluation Metrics: To assess the classification perfor- From the perspective of feature utilization, the following commance of the model, the following four well-known metrics parative methods are selected: Fs-Net, 1D-CNN, and XGBoosts
are adopted: Accuracy (ACC), Precision (Positive Predictive employ single-modal features of packet length sequences, raw
Value, PPV), Recall (True Positive Rate, TPR), and F1 Score bytes, and statistical features, respectively, while both APPNet
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7127

 input features. Two multi-head self-attention-based encoders are leveraged to mine intra-flow and inter-flow
 relationship.
 r MeDF [54] combines intra-flow and inter-flow features: it
 constructs spectrograms of flows’ raw bytes and extracts
 statistical features, combining the two as the intra-flow
 features. MeDF also builds flow relation graph to extracts
 inter-flow features. For consistency, we similarly construct
 graphs by grouping adjacent m flows together.
 Table V compares the classification performance of each
 model across three datasets. For a fair comparison, all baseline
 methods were re-implemented and evaluated on the same
 balanced datasets under consistent experimental settings. The
 experimental results demonstrate that our proposed IF2 -STG
 achieves a classification accuracy of over 99% on all three
Fig. 4. Top 10 most important statistical features ranked using random forest.
 datasets, outperforming other comparative models, which
 indicates its good generalization capability across different
and iDetector adopt multimodal features. All these five models network environments. Particularly, its performance on the
focus exclusively on intra-flow features. In contrast, GAT-based CIC-DDoS2019 dataset confirms that IF2 -STG can not only
model, PPT-GNN, and CCSTGN explore inter-flow correlations effectively distinguish between normal and attack traffic, but
through graph construction. MeDF and IIT are conceptually sim- also precisely identify different attack subtypes.
ilar to ours, as both attempt to combine intra-flow and inter-flow Among the comparative models, Fs-Net, which utilizes packet
features. length sequences, shows the worst performance, achieving
 r Fs-Net [28] employs a bidirectional GRU to encode fea- barely over 60% accuracy on the first two datasets. This indicates
 tures from packet length sequences and introduces a re- that coarse-grained length sequence features contain insufficient
 construction mechanism in the AutoEncoder to ensure the information to effectively distinguish malicious network behaveffectiveness of the learned features. iors. Similarly, the XGBoost model based on statistical features
 r 1D-CNN [31] converts sequences of hexadecimal bytes exhibits limited generalization. In contrast, the single-modal
 from encrypted network flows into grayscale images and 1D-CNN approach, using only raw byte features, achieves better
 utilizes a 1D CNN model to classify these images. results. Notably, on the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset, all models
 r XGBoost [19] extracts statistical features related to time achieving an accuracy of over 90% incorporate byte features,
 intervals and packet sizes, and utilize the XGBoost algo- underscoring that such fine-grained data is essential for the
 rithm for classification. detailed classification of specific attack subcategories.
 r App-Net [48] extracts features from byte sequences using a The multi-modal models AppNet and iDetector demonstrate
 1D CNN and learns temporal relationships in packet length superior performance compared to the aforementioned three
 sequences using LSTM. Finally, the features learned from single-modal models, with classification accuracies both reachboth views are concatenated for classification. ing around 97% . This indicates that multi-modal approaches can
 r iDetector [41] extracts three sequence features of byte, effectively integrate diverse features to more comprehensively
 length and time interval from channel traffic, and classifies characterize network flow patterns.
 them using a lightweight deep neural network model called The GAT_based model adds edges based on the cross-
 EdgeNet. correlation between nodes, which captures only the temporal
 r GAT_based model [52] treats network flows as nodes, dependencies between flows while ignoring spatial structural
 embedding 63 statistical features including packet size, features. Both PPT-GNN and CCSTGN dynamically capture
 packet count, protocol type, and IP addresses into each spatio-temporal interactions among flows. However, as they
 node. Edges are added based on cross-correlations between rely solely on statistical features and omit fine-grained intranodes, and a GAT is applied to classify the graph. flow details, their performance shows obvious instability across
 r PPT-GNN [65] constructs a heterogeneous graph with the three datasets. By contrast, our IF2 -STG method achieves
 flows and IP addresses as nodes, and employs multiple superior and more robust detection performance through joint
 heterogeneous spatio-temporal layers to capture spatial, modeling of inter-flow spatio-temporal features and intra-flow
 temporal, intra-window, and inter-window dependencies. fine-grained features.
 r CCSTGN [66] maps flows to communication channels, The IIT method employs a complex attention mechanism
 constructing a channel-centric graph representation. It uti- to implicitly mine intra-flow and inter-flow features and has
 lizes a Temporal Graph Network for continuous-time dy- the highest parameter count. However, its classification pernamic graph learning, thereby capturing complex spatio- formance is unsatisfactory, primarily because it relies mainly
 temporal dependencies among traffic flows. on packet length sequences. Nevertheless, thanks to the incorr IIT [63] concatenates packet length sequences, time inter- poration of time interval features, its performance is slightly
 val sequences, and length cumulative sum sequences as better than Fs-Net, especially on the CICIoMT2024 dataset.
7128 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE V
 CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF ALL METHODS ON THE THREE DATASETS

 TABLE VI
 CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE ON IMBALANCED CICIOMT2024 DATASET

 Furthermore, Fig. 6 compares the time costs of all models,
 including training time, inference time, and sample construction
 time. In terms of training and inference efficiency, the proposed
 IF2 -STG model demonstrates competitive performance, achieving comparatively fast speeds. iDetector, Fs-Net, and PPT-GNN
 are the three models with the highest time overhead. For sample construction time, graph-based methods generally require
 more time than those based on individual flows. Among them,
 PPT-GNN takes the longest, as it needs to construct all traffic
 within a time window into a single large graph. For short-term
Fig. 5. Confusion matrices of IF2 -STG on three datasets. burst attacks like DDoS, even with a small time window (e.g.,
 0.5 seconds), the resulting graph may contain tens of thousands
 of nodes, leading to a slow graph-building process and further
MeDF achieves the best performance among the comparative reducing its training and inference efficiency.
methods, with an accuracy of approximately 98% on all three
datasets, verifying the effectiveness of combining intra-flow
 C. Evaluation on Imbalanced Data
and inter-flow features. However, its graph construction, which
considers only spatial correlations, is limited. Additionally, the Data imbalance is a prevalent and critical issue in real-world
processing method of converting raw bytes into time-frequency scenarios. In this section, the proposed method is trained and
spectrograms may risk information loss. Ablation experiments tested on the original, unbalanced CICIoMT2024 dataset. This
in Section. V-D will verify whether this feature transformation dataset exhibits an extreme long-tail distribution (see Table VI),
approach proves more effective than directly using raw byte where the sample ratio between the majority class (Recon) and
sequences. the minority class (Spoofing) reaches 162:1. This distribution
 Fig. 5 presents the confusion matrices of our method across realistically reflects the challenge of detecting rare attack types
the three datasets. It can be observed that most categories achieve in actual network traffic environments.
a prediction accuracy close to 1. The relatively lower accuracy in As summarized in Table VI, the proposed method demoncertain categories stems from insufficient training samples. For strates strong overall classification performance under such
instance, the WebDDoS category in the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset highly imbalanced conditions. Notably, it retains considerable
only has 968 training samples, significantly fewer than other detection accuracy for the minority class (Spoofing), indicating
categories. that the model does not exhibit significant learning bias toward
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7129

Fig. 6. Comparison of time cost of each baseline model.

the majority class. These results validate the method’s effectiveness in real-world scenarios characterized by data imbalance.

D. Ablation Experiment
 In this section, we construct three ablated models to further
validate the effectiveness of combining inter-flow and intraflow features, as well as the multi-loss joint training approach.
Additionally, to investigate whether MeDF’s Fourier transform
on raw bytes to obtain time-frequency spectrograms is more
effective, we introduce an ablation experiment MeDF-Intra that
adopts MeDF’s processing method for raw bytes and the learning network. The relevant parameters of the short-time Fourier
transform are kept consistent with the original MeDF, such as a
 Fig. 7. Ablation study results.
window length of 100, an overlap rate of 67% , and a Hanning
window function. Thus, the four sets of ablation experiments are
as follows. We perform experiments on the MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 of single-modal approaches and enabling more comprehensive
dataset. analysis of network behavior.
 r IF2 -STG-Intra: Removes the inter-flow feature extraction Furthermore, MeDF-Intra exhibits approximately 1% lower
 module from IF2 -STG, retaining only the intra-flow feature performance than IF2 -STG-Intra across four classification metextraction module. rics. This observation suggests that converting raw byte ser IF2 -STG-Inter: Removes the intra-flow feature extraction quences into time-frequency spectrograms does not enhance
 module from IF2 -STG, retaining only the inter-flow feature feature discriminability, but may instead degrade classification
 extraction module. performance. The reason lies in that the raw byte sequences
 r MeDF-Intra: Adopts MeDF’s processing method for raw completely preserve the structured characteristics of network
 bytes and the learning network. flows, such as protocol header fields, which can be directly capr IF2 -STG-loss: Uses only the single loss from the fi- tured by the classification model. In contrast, during the Fourier
 nal fusion classification module for backpropagation transform and spectrogram generation process, operations like
 optimization. window truncation may damage original features, cause infor-
 As shown in Fig. 7, the joint learning scheme integrating both mation loss, or introduce noise. These factors make it difficult
intra-flow and inter-flow features significantly enhances intru- for spectrograms to present effective discriminative features,
sion detection performance. Compared to the ablated models ultimately leading to decreased classification performance.
using only intra-flow features or only inter-flow features, the Additionally, IF2 -STG achieves better performance than IF2 -
complete IF2 -STG model achieves accuracy improvements of STG-loss, demonstrating that employing multi-loss joint train-
1.67% and 2% respectively. This demonstrates that the intra- ing can help the model better balance the relationship between
flow and inter-flow features we employ exhibit complementary intra-flow and inter-flow modal features, thereby bringing peradvantages during modal fusion, thereby enhancing overall per- formance gains.
formance. Specifically, the intra-flow features derived from raw
bytes capture fine-grained protocol semantics and packet-level
 E. Sensitivity Analysis
patterns, while the inter-flow features model spatio-temporal
correlations between flows. The two modal features comple- This section analyzes the impact of key parameters on
ment each other, overcoming the representational limitations the overall performance of the model: the intra-flow feature
7130 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE VII
 THE IMPACT OF m ON CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE AND EFFICIENCY

 TABLE VIII
 THE IMPACT OF q ON CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE AND EFFICIENCY

 Fig. 8. The Impact of Time Threshold on Classification Performance.

 when the first 300 bytes of the flow are intercepted. Further
 increasing the sequence length leads to a degradation in performance, suggesting that longer byte sequences do not contribute
 additional discriminative information and may instead introduce
 noise that interferes with the model’s decision-making.
extraction parameter q and the inter-flow feature extraction Moreover, all efficiency metrics show a strong positive correparameter m. In addition, it investigates the effect of two critical lation with q, as it directly determines the input dimension and
designs in the construction of the ISTG—the time threshold for computational complexity of the model. Particularly, the inferpartitioning concurrent groups and the edge definition rules—on ence throughput decreases sharply as q grows. It drops by 46%
the detection performance of the IF2 -STG-Inter model. when q goes from 300 to 2000. This represents a critical trade-off
 1) Number of Nodes m in ISTG: We conducted experiments in large-scale network traffic analysis scenarios. Consequently, q
with m = 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20, respectively, and the results are = 300 is selected as the default configuration to strike a balance
listed in Table VII. In terms of detection performance, both between classification accuracy and computational efficiency.
classification accuracy and the F1-score show a trend of first 3) Time Threshold: Flows with a time difference smaller than
increasing and then decreasing as m grows, reaching the optimal a specific threshold and an intersection between the destination
values at m=12. In the first phase, as m increases, each ISTG IP and source IP sets are considered concurrent. This time threshincorporates more flows, enabling the model to capture richer old directly determines the size of concurrent groups, thereby
inter-flow interaction patterns, thereby improving classification influencing the constructed graph structure and the effectiveness
accuracy. However, when m continues to grow beyond 12, of inter-flow feature learning. To evaluate its impact, we tested
the classification performance deteriorates. This phenomenon the performance of the IF2 -STG-Inter model across threshold
occurs because the total number of network flows remains values ranging from 1ms to 200ms. The results, shown in Fig. 8,
constant. Larger values of m lead to fewer graph samples, which indicate that the model performs best at a threshold of 10ms.
in turn restricts the model’s learning ability. Moreover, it is If the threshold is excessively low, concurrent groups may conclear that larger m values result in longer training times, higher tain too few flows to supply sufficient contextual information.
GPU memory usage, and greater demands for computational Conversely, an overly high threshold will incorporate temporally
resources. In light of these findings, we set m=12 as the default weakly correlated flows into the same group, thereby introducing
configuration. noise. Thus, a 10ms threshold effectively captures meaningful
 During the inference phase, the classification results for in- concurrent flow behavior, representing a balanced and robust
dividual flows can only be obtained after the entire graph has configuration.
been processed. Thus, the inference latency is determined by 4) Edge Definition Rules: This paper selects start time interthe average detection time per graph. The results show that as vals and IP-set associations as the core criteria for constructing
m increases, the processing time per graph becomes longer, spatio-temporal edges in the ISTG, primarily based on two
leading to higher system response latency. However, since each considerations: First, multi-flow coordination in network attacks
graph contains more flows, the throughput is improved instead. (e.g., DDoS) often manifests as temporally dense triggering
This reflects the trade-off between latency and throughput with and IP-level distributed associations. These dual-dimensional
respect to graph scale. In practical deployment, the value of m features can accurately characterize the spatio-temporal collabcan be chosen according to specific requirements. oration patterns of such attacks. Second, building upon existing
 2) Length of the Byte Sequence q: We conducted experiments research—notably the MeDF model [54] that uses IP-set assowith q = 100, 300, 500, 1000, and 2000, respectively, and the ciations to model spatial flow relationships—this paper further
results are summarized in Table VIII. Experimental results indi- introduces the dimension of time intervals, thereby enabling
cate that the model achieves optimal classification performance complementary modeling of spatio-temporal features. To verify
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7131

 TABLE IX
THE IMPACT OF EDGE DEFINITION RULES ON CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE

the rationality of the two selected indicators, we compared the
following six edge definition rules: Fig. 9. The Impact of ISTG Construction Scheme on Classification
 r Time Interval Only: Constructs one-dimensional Performance.

 edges based solely on time intervals, ignoring spatial
 associations. a more discriminative graph-structured input for downstream
 r IP-set Association Only: Constructs one-dimensional detection models.
 edges based solely on IP-set associations, ignoring temporal associations.
 r Time Co-occurrence + IP-set Association: Temporal as- F. Impact of ISTG Construction Scheme
 sociation follows the time co-occurrence rule of the The construction of ISTG forms the foundation and key to
 GAT_based model [52], where two flows overlapping in inter-flow feature learning. Therefore, this section analyzes the
 time are considered related and assigned a weight of 1.0. impact of two-dimensional spatio-temporal vector edges and
 r Time Interval + Source IP Match: Spatial association is concurrent groups in our proposed ISTG on the classification
 simplified to matching only whether the source IPs are performance of the inter-flow feature module, through the folidentical. lowing three comparative experiments:
 r Time Interval + Destination IP Match: Spatial association r Fully-connected Graph (FCG): All node pairs in the graph
 is simplified to matching only whether the destination IPs are connected with uniform edge weights set to 1.
 are identical. r Uniform-weight Graph (UWG): Maintaining the original
 r Time Interval + Port-set Association: Spatial association ISTG topology while replacing all edge weights from twois replaced by whether there is an intersection in the port dimensional spatio-temporal vectors with 1.
 sets. r Sequential-connection Graph (SCG): All nodes are con-
 Table IX compares the model’s performance under different nected sequentially in chronological order, disregarding
edge definition rules, leading to the following conclusions. First, concurrent flows.
the proposed “time interval + IP-set association” rule achieves As depicted in Fig. 9, the FCG performs the worst, with an F1
the best performance. Second, single-dimensional rules (time score of 66.21% . In this case, all graphs share the same topology
interval only or IP-set association only) deliver inferior perfor- and edge weights, differing solely in node features, which fails
mance to dual-dimensional rules, with the time interval con- entirely to reflect the differences in interaction patterns among
tributing more critically. Third, the “time co-occurrence + IP-set network flows of different categories. In comparison, the UWG
association” rule performs notably worse than the rule we adopt, preserves the original ISTG topology while simplifying edge
since time intervals more precisely capture concurrent patterns weights to 1, yet achieves substantially better results. This emamong multiple flows compared to time co-occurrence. Fourth, pirically validates the intrinsic discriminative ability of topolog-
IP-set association outperforms single IP matching because it can ical structures in inter-flow relationship learning. Nevertheless,
reveal complex attack topologies involving many-to-many and compared with ISTG utilizing two-dimensional spatio-temporal
chain-style communications, thereby demonstrating its stronger vectors, UWG’s F1 score drops by 1.53% . This gap highgeneralization capability in spatial modeling. Fifth, replacing lights that two-dimensional edge weights facilitate more precise
spatial association with port-set associations results in a slight spatio-temporal correlation modeling, thereby enhancing the
performance decline, reflecting that port features are less stable model’s discrimination capacity in complex traffic scenarios.
and discriminative than IP addresses. For example, in port The SCG model without concurrent flow consideration exscanning attacks, malicious flows exhibit clear correlations at hibits a notable decline in detection performance (F1=87.34%
the IP level, whereas port numbers often change randomly or ). This comparative result demonstrates the effectiveness of our
dynamically, failing to provide stable correlation signals. designed graph construction scheme that considers concurrent
 In summary, the “time interval + IP-set association” rule flows, which is better at capturing interaction frequencies beoffers considerable benefits for ISTG construction. It effectively tween network flows. Network attacks and anomalous behaviors
captures the temporal density of attack flows while enabling a frequently involve special concurrent patterns. For example, in
precise representation of their spatial logic, thereby furnishing distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks, attackers typically
7132 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE X
 DIVISION OF ATTACK TYPES FOR THE THREE DATASETS

Fig. 10. ISTG corresponding to benign traffic. Fig. 11. ISTG corresponding to DDoS/DoS traffic.

initiate massive concurrent requests from multiple source IPs
toward the target within a short period. By grouping flows
occurring within 10 ms intervals for graph construction, our
method amplifies these abnormal concurrency characteristics,
thereby allowing the model to more effectively differentiate
between normal and malicious traffic.

G. Visualization Analysis of ISTG
 To further verify the effectiveness of the ISTG construction
method, we conduct a comparative visual analysis of ISTG
generated from different categories of network flows. As shown
in the Table X, according to attack characteristics, the malicious traffic in the three datasets used in this paper can be
mainly divided into two major categories: DDoS/DoS attacks
and scanning/bruteforce attacks. Among them, those prefixed
with “MQTT-” or “Recon-” represent subcategories under the
corresponding major categories.
 We randomly select three instances from benign traffic and Fig. 12. ISTG corresponding to scanning/bruteforce traffic.
the two malicious traffic categories, with their corresponding
ISTGs visualized in Figs. 10 –12. It can be seen that the ISTGs of
different types of flows exhibit obvious differences, conclusively relatively large inter-flow time intervals, while spatial comvalidating the effectiveness of our proposed ISTG construction ponents s display both 1 and 0 values. This pattern arises
strategy. The rationality analysis of the characteristics of the because benign traffic typically involves normal network service
three ISTG types is carried out below in combination with the interactions, featuring few concurrent scenarios, gentle time
inherent characteristics of network flows. distribution, and random IP interactions without fixed patterns.
 In the ISTGs corresponding to benign traffic (Fig. 10(a)–(c)), In the ISTGs corresponding to DDoS/DoS attacks
nodes basically distributed in a chain-like manner, and there (Fig. 11(a)–(c)), there are more concurrent flows. Moreover,
are relatively few concurrent groups. The temporal components for the unidirectional edges, the time component t is nearly
t of unidirectional edges are predominantly small, indicating 1, and the spatial component s is almost all 1. This is
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7133

because such attacks require sending traffic to the target in TABLE XI
 TEST RESULTS ON CROSS-DATASET GENERALIZATION
a short time (or even concurrently) in terms of time, and the
targets are concentrated in space, showing spatial aggregation.
Additionally, the key difference between the ISTGs of the
two DoS attacks (b) and (c) mainly lies in the number of
concurrent groups, which is rooted in the attack protocols used.
The DoS_UDP attack exploits UDP’s connectionless, stateless
properties to flood random target ports with UDP packets. The
DoS-Connect_Flood belongs to TCP connection exhaustion
attacks (such as SYN Flood and HTTP Connect Flood), which
exhaust target resources by quickly establishing numerous
TCP connections. The stateful connection mechanism of TCP
compels attackers to maintain high-concurrency traffic to
enhance the degree of damage. Therefore, the latter generating
more concurrent groups than the former.
 The ISTGs corresponding to scanning/bruteforce attacks
(Fig. 12(a)–(c)) exhibit fully-connected mesh topologies. It is
noticeable that all 12 nodes in each graph are grouped into one
or two concurrent groups. This pattern emerges because both
attack types typically send probing or cracking requests within rates respectively, meaning that substantial numbers of attacks
extremely short time windows. They are highly concurrent in being misclassified as benign traffic, posing a serious risk of
terms of time, and the IP addresses of the attacking hosts or the false negatives in real-world security scenarios.
target hosts are fixed. Therefore, they meet the requirements of It is noteworthy that iDetector, despite also utilizing raw
concurrent flows. byte features, still achieves an accuracy of 78.96% . This may
 benefit from its incorporation of inter-arrival time sequences
 and packet length sequences, which more effectively capture the
H. Cross-Dataset Generalization
 temporal distribution patterns of attack behaviors. Additionally,
 In this section, we integrate three datasets at different times Fs-Net, XGBoost and IIT models perform relatively well, with
to evaluate the ability of IF2 -STG and comparative methods Fs-Net in particular attaining approximately 85% accuracy and
to identify known attacks in a cross-dataset environment. We F1-score. They employ packet length sequences and statistical
merge the CIC-DDoS2019 and MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 datasets features, which are more abstract and coarse-grained compared
to train a binary classification model, which is then tested on to raw bytes. Such features rely less on traffic details in specific
the known attacks (DDoS and Recon) from the CICIoMT2024 datasets and can, to a certain degree, better reflect the intrinsic
dataset. Furthermore, recognizing that benign traffic may exhibit characteristics of attack behaviors.
different characteristics across datasets collected at different Additionally, among the comparative methods, GAT_based
time periods and is easy to collect in real-world scenarios, we model and MeDF-Inter, although also based on inter-flow feaincorporate part of the benign traffic from the CICIoMT2024 tures, only extract temporal or spatial relationships between
dataset into the combined dataset for training. In practice, new flows without joint modeling of spatio-temporal dependencies.
normal traffic can be collected and added to update the model. This results in insufficient cross-dataset generalization ability,
 The detection results and the features used by the models are with their accuracy rates being only 61.25% and 33.33% reshown in Table XI. To explore the generalization ability of inter- spectively. Further analysis reveals the critical impact of node
flow features, we specifically tested variants of the MeDF and feature selection in graph representation learning. GAT_based
IF2 -STG models that utilize inter-flow features exclusively. The model employs length statistics and IP addresses as node feaexperimental results reveal significant differences in different tures, whereas MeDF-Inter uses only IP addresses and protofeature types under cross-dataset scenarios. Our IF2 -STG-Inter col numbers as node features. The latter’s insufficient feature
achieves 97.78% accuracy, recall, and F1-score, indicating that information leads to weaker representational ability than the
inter-flow spatio-temporal relationships effectively capture the former. PPT-GNN and CSSTGN both use statistical features
essential behavioral patterns of attacks, including communi- and model the spatio-temporal relationship among flows, so the
cation frequency, topological connections, etc. These features transferability is slightly better.
maintain remarkable stability across datasets collected at differ- In contrast, our IF2 -STG-Inter adopts packet length sequences
ent times. However, the complete IF2 -STG model incorporating and statistical features as node features. As previously anaintra-flow raw byte features attains only 42.91% accuracy, as lyzed, these two types of features demonstrate better generalraw bytes are excessively dependent on network environments, ization across different datasets. Moreover, by jointly modelprotocol versions, and encryption methods, etc., severely limit- ing both temporal and spatial relationships between flows, our
ing model transferability. Other comparative models using raw approach achieves a more comprehensive characterization of
byte features exhibit similar limitations: 1D-CNN, AppNet, and attack behaviors. Consequently, it shows significant advantages
MeDF achieve merely 33.83% , 58.08% , and 36.39% recall in cross-dataset detection, offering a highly adaptable security
7134 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE XII
 DETECTION PERFORMANCE OF THE MODEL ON MIXED TRAFFIC

detection solution for dynamically evolving attacks and network
environments.

I. Adaptability to Mixed Traffic
 The graph construction strategy in this work is based on the
assumption that m adjacent flows belong to the same category.
However, in real-world network detection environments, this
assumption cannot always be guaranteed in advance. Therefore,
this section aims to validate the detection performance of the
proposed method when facing realistic mixed traffic. Fig. 13. ISTG corresponding to mixed traffic.
 For the data selection, this study employs the CICIDS2017
dataset [77]. The original PCAP files provided in this dataset
contain unsegmented full-day traffic, which more closely reflects
real network environments. According to the official description,
on the afternoon of Friday, July 7, 2017, port scan attacks were
launched at one-minute intervals, each lasting approximately
2–3 minutes, against a background of normal communication
traffic. We intercept the traffic during this specific period to simulate a scenario where attack traffic is interleaved with normal
business traffic.
 After processing and constructing graphs from this mixed
traffic, we obtain three types of graphs: 5,626 graphs containing
only benign nodes, 13,120 graphs consisting solely of attack Fig. 14. The Impact of labeling noise on Classification Accuracy.
nodes, and 431 mixed graphs containing both benign and attack
nodes. It should be noted that due to the presence of multiple
 Furthermore, to evaluate the model’s robustness to labeling
node labels in mixed graphs, we adjust the task from graph clasnoise, we introduce random label noise into the training set. The
sification to node classification. Specifically, in the inter-flow
 classification accuracy of the two models at different noise levels
feature extraction module (Fig. 2), instead of using SAGPool
 is depicted in Fig. 14. Experimental results show that when the
for graph pooling after the GATConv layer, we directly connect
 label noise ratio is below 40% , both models experience only
a linear layer to output node-level classification results.
 slight and negligible decreases in accuracy. When the noise
 To evaluate the learning effectiveness of the spatio-temporal
 ratio increases to 50% , the accuracy of the complete model
relation graph, in addition to the complete model, we also test
 falls sharply to approximately 75% due to the vulnerability
the IF2 -STG-Inter model. The experimental results are shown in
 of intra-flow byte features to label corruption, whereas IF2 -
Table XII. In this binary classification task, the complete model
 STG-Inter model, which relies solely on inter-flow structural
achieves 100% accuracy. The IF2 -STG-Inter model also reaches
 features, maintains around 95% accuracy. This result further
an accuracy of 99.65% , strongly demonstrating the exceptional
 confirms that the decision-making mechanism of IF2 -STG-Inter
discriminative capability of our constructed ISTG even in mixed
 relies primarily on robust spatio-temporal structural features
traffic scenarios.
 rather than a strong assumption of label homogeneity, thereby
 In addition, we visualize the ISTG containing mixed-type
 demonstrating excellent adaptability to labeling noise.
nodes, as shown in Fig. 13. In the figure, the marker on the
 In summary, although our method is proposed based on the
outer ring of each node represents its corresponding label. For
 homogeneous graph assumption, its core capability—modeling
clarity, normal traffic is marked in green, and port scan attacks
 the spatio-temporal relationships of network flows—remains
are indicated in red. In subfigure (a), a single normal flow emhighly effective in real-world scenarios involving mixed traffic
bedded among multiple attack flows appears as an isolated node,
 and labeling noise. This strengthens the feasibility of deploying
while the remaining nodes form a dense concurrent cluster. In
 our approach in practical network environments.
subfigure (b), the attack flows at the beginning and the end form
their own concurrent clusters, with benign flows in the middle
 VI. CONCLUSION
connected in a linear pattern. Moreover, the spatial component
attribute of edges between adjacent benign and attack nodes has This paper presents IF2 -STG, a novel detection framework
a value of 0, indicating no spatial correlation between them. that overcomes the limitations of existing IDS by integrating
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7135

intra-flow features with inter-flow spatio-temporal relationships. [10] C. Fu et al., “Realtime robust malicious traffic detection via frequency
The fundamental contribution lies in introducing an interpretable domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
ISTG, a novel structured representation for extracting inter-flow [11] Z. Wang et al., “Themis: Ambiguity-aware network intrusion detection
features. By defining a two-dimensional edge vector based on based on symbolic model comparison,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
time intervals and IP-set associations, the ISTG transforms Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3384–3399.
 [12] J. Xia et al., “CoDDoS: Detecting and mitigating diverse DDoS
implicit inter-flow collaborative patterns into explicit and an- attacks with programmable switches,” Comput. Commun., vol. 240, 2025,
alyzable structures. The model processes intra-flow features Art. no. 108215.
and ISTG-based inter-flow features in parallel, subsequently [13] Y. Yang et al., “ASTREAM: Data-stream-driven scalable anomaly detection with accuracy guarantee in IIoT environment,” IEEE Trans.
fusing them into a unified representation. Evaluations on three Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3007–3016, Sep./Oct. 2023,
benchmark datasets show that the proposed IF2 -STG achieves doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2022.3157730.
over 99% classification accuracy. [14] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone
 app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 More importantly, the ISTG-based model exhibits several Forensics Secur., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
breakthrough advantages: first, the ISTG itself is directly visual- [15] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic
izable, providing inherent interpretability for understanding the analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 25,
 no. 1, pp. 791–824, Firstquarter 2023.
spatio-temporal collaboration patterns of attacks such as DDoS; [16] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
second, explicit structural modeling of spatio-temporal relation- fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
ships endows the learned features with stronger generalization IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021.
 [17] G. Apruzzese, M. Andreolini, M. Colajanni, and M. Marchetti, “Hardening
capability, leading to outstanding cross-dataset performance; random forest cyber detectors against adversarial attacks,” IEEE Trans.
finally, the model maintains good robustness against mixed Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 427–439, Aug. 2020,
traffic and label noise. Thus, this work not only provides an doi: 10.1109/TETCI.2019.2961157.
 [18] R. Bozkır et al., “A new platform for machine-learning-based network
effective intrusion detection method but also offers a novel tool traffic classification,” Comput. Commun., vol. 208, pp. 1–14, 2023.
for analyzing interactive behaviors between flows. [19] Z. Wang, B. Ma, Y. Zeng, X. Lin, K. Shi, and Z. Wang, “Differential
 However, the proposed method is primarily suitable for offline preserving in XGBoost model for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Netw. Netw. Appl., 2022, pp. 220–225.
detection. In real-time environments, it remains challenging to [20] F. Zaki et al., “GRAIN: Granular multi-label encrypted traffic classification
instantly acquire complete flows for accurate feature extraction using classifier chain,” Comput. Netw., vol. 213, 2022, Art. no. 109084.
and graph construction. To enable online detection, future work [21] N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “An ensemble intrusion detection technique based on proposed statistical flow features for protecting
will focus on three key challenges: First, designing a time- network traffic of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3,
window-based flow sampling mechanism to process continu- pp. 4815–4830, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2871719.
ous packet streams. Second, addressing the explosion of graph [22] C. Zhang, Z. Lian, H. Huang, and C. Su, “PCIDS: Permission
 and credibility-based intrusion detection system in IoT gateways,”
scale in high-speed networks, we plan to partition flows within IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 904–913, Jan. 2024,
each window into manageable subgraphs with a controlled doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3289206.
node count. Third, handling incomplete flows within single [23] W. Ma, X. Wang, J. Dong, M. Hu, and Q. Zhou, “A lightweight
 method for botnet detection in Internet of Things environment,” IEEE
windows by introducing a window memory module, inspired Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2458–2472, Jul./Aug. 2025,
by PPT-GNN [65], to correlate the same flow across consecu- doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3548411.
tive windows, thereby constructing more accurate continuous [24] T. Li, Z. Hong, and L. Yu, “Machine learning-based intrusion detection for IoT devices in smart home,” in Proc. IEEE
spatio-temporal graphs. 16th Int. Conf. Control Automat., Singapore, 2020, pp. 277–282,
 REFERENCES doi: 10.1109/ICCA51439.2020.9264406.
 [25] Z. Liu et al., “Fine-grained encrypted traffic classification using dual
 [1] I. Sohn, “Deep belief network based intrusion detection techniques: A embedding and graph neural networks,” Electronics, vol. 14, no. 4, 2025,
 survey,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 167, 2021, Art. no. 114170. Art. no. 778.
 [2] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “A survey on intrusion detection system: [26] R. Doriguzzi-Corin, S. Millar, S. Scott-Hayward, J. Martínez-del-Rincón,
 Feature selection, model, performance measures, application perspective, and D. Siracusa, “Lucid: A practical, lightweight deep learning solution
 challenges, and future research directions,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 55 no. 1, for DDoS attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17,
 pp. 453–563, 2022. no. 2, pp. 876–889, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2020.2971776.
 [3] B. S. Bhati and C. S. Rai, “Analysis of support vector machine-based [27] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted traffic detection
 intrusion detection techniques,” Arabian J. Sci. Eng., vol. 45 no. 4, towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
 pp. 2371–2383, 2020. Comput., early access, Feb. 03, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3242134.
 [4] M. Basak, et al., “X-GANet: An explainable graph-based framework [28] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 for robust network intrusion detection,” Appl. Sci., vol. 15 no. 9, 2025, network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Art. no. 5002. Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 [5] S. Cai et al., “DDP-DAR: Network intrusion detection based on denoising [29] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? A robust framediffusion probabilistic model and dual-attention residual network,” Neural work for detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” in Proc.
 Netw., vol. 184, 2025, Art. no. 107064. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2024,
 [6] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, and Y. Jia, “A few-shot class-incremental doi: 10.14722/ndss.2024.23081.
 learning method for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. [30] Y. Han, X. Wang, M. He, X. Wang, and S. Guo, “Intrusion detec-
 Service Manag., vol. 21 no. 2, pp. 2389–2401, Apr. 2023. tion for encrypted flows using single feature based on graph integra-
 [7] Z. Ding et al., “MF-Net: Multi-frequency intrusion detection network for tion theory,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11 no. 10, pp. 17589–17601,
 internet traffic data,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 146, 2024, Art. no. 109999. May 2024.
 [8] S. Cai et al., “MTD-FRD: Malicious traffic detection method based on [31] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end encrypted
 feature representation and conditional diffusion model,” J. Netw. Comput. traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,”
 Appl., vol. 242, 2025, Art. no. 104256. in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Inform., 2017, pp. 43–48.
 [9] E. C. P. Neto et al., “Deep learning for intrusion detection in emerging [32] C. Dong, C. Zhang, Z. Lu, B. Liu, and B. Jiang, “CETAnalytics: Comtechnologies: A comprehensive survey and new perspectives,” Artif. Intell. prehensive effective traffic information analytics for encrypted traffic
 Rev., vol. 58 no. 11, pp. 1–63, 2025. classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 176, Jul. 2020, Art. no. 107258.
7136 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[33] W. Maonan, Z. Kangfeng, X. Ning, Y. Yanqing, and W. Xiujuan, “CEN- [55] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust
 TIME: A direct comprehensive traffic features extraction for encrypted network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
 traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Syst., Netw., vol. 31 no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023.
 2021, pp. 490–498. [56] Z. Yang, W. Pei, M.-C. Chen, and C. Yue, “WTAGRAPH: Web tracking
[34] X. Meng, Y. Wang, R. Ma, H. Luo, X. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Packet repre- and advertising detection using graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE
 sentation learning for traffic classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 1540–1557.
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 3546–3554. [57] W. Cai, G. Gou, M. Jiang, C. Liu, G. Xiong, and Z. Li, “MEMG:
[35] J. Gao, Y. Lu, Y. He, M. Fan, D. Han, and Y. Qiao, “Tokenization Mobile encrypted traffic classification with Markov chains and graph
 representation and deep-learning-based intrusion detection in Internet of neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput.
 Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 23, pp. 37974–37987, Commun., 7th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Syst., 19th Int. Conf. Smart City,
 Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3441763. 7th Int. Conf. Dependability Sensor, Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl., 2021,
[36] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder based pp. 478–486.
 traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc. AAAI [58] R. Zhao et al., “Flow sequence-based anonymity network traffic identifi-
 Conf. Artif. Intell., Washington, DC, USA, 2023, pp. 1–8. cation with residual graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM
[37] Y. Luo, M. He, and X. Wang, “Analyzing the semantic structure of network 30th Int. Symp. Qual. Service, 2022, pp. 1–10.
 flow: A threat detection method with independent generalization capabili- [59] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, “MT-FlowFormer:
 ties,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 28–43, Jan./Feb. 2025, A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted traffic classification,”
 doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2024.3483216. in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Mining, 2022,
[38] T. Shawly, M. Khayat, A. Elghariani, and A. Ghafoor, “Evaluation of pp. 2576–2584.
 HMM-based network intrusion detection system for multiple multi-stage [60] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identificaattacks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 240–248, May/Jun. 2020. tion of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short
[39] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakr- term memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252,
 ishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of sus- Feb. 2022.
 picious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019, [61] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 pp. 1137–1152. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–15.
[40] X. Li, M. Xu, P. Vijayakumar, N. Kumar, and X. Liu, “Detection of low- [62] H. Fu, D. Sun, J. Wei, W. Wan, and C. Long, “Flow microelement-driven
 frequency and multi-stage attacks in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE traffic relationship analysis: Robust detection of malicious encrypted traf-
 Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 8820–8831, Aug. 2020. fic,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 10604–10619, 2025,
[41] X. Kong, Y. Zhou, Y. Xiao, X. Ye, H. Qi, and X. Liu, “iDetector: A novel doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3613971.
 real-time intrusion detection solution for IoT networks,” IEEE Internet [63] Q. Meng et al., “IIT: Accurate decentralized application identifica-
 Things J., vol. 11, no. 19, pp. 31153–31166, Oct. 2024. tion through mining intra- and inter-flow relationships,” IEEE Trans.
[42] H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, and J. Ren, “A novel multimodal- Netw. Service Manag., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 394–408, Feb. 2025,
 sequential approach based on multi-view features for network intrusion de- doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3479150.
 tection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 183207–183221, 2019, doi: 10.1109/AC- [64] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app identification
 CESS.2019.2959131. using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, 2020.
[43] L. Yu, L. Xu, and X. Jiang, “A high-performance multimodal deep learning [65] L. V. Langendonck, “PPT-GNN: A practical pre-trained temporal graph
 model for detecting minority class sample attacks,” Symmetry, vol. 16, neural network for intrusion detection,” M.S. thesis, Univ. Politècnica de
 no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 42. Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, 2024.
[44] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted TLS traffic [66] E. S. Escriche, J. Nyberg, Y. Kim, and G. Dán, “Channel-centric spatioclassification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31 no. 1, temporal graph networks for network-based intrusion detection,” in Proc.
 pp. 164–177, Feb. 2023. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., 2024, pp. 1–9.
[45] H. Elubeyd, D. Yiltas-Kaplan, and Ş. Bahtiyar, “A multi-modal deep trans- [67] Y. Kim, “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification,”
 fer learning framework for attack detection in software-defined networks,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2014,
 IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 114128–114145, 2023, doi: 10.1109/AC- pp. 1746–1751.
 CESS.2023.3324878. [68] X. Zhang and Y. LeCun, “Text understanding from scratch,” 2016,
[46] S. Ali et al., “CLDM-MMNNs: Cross-layer defense mechanisms through arXiv:1502.01710.
 multi-modal neural networks fusion for end-to-end cybersecurity— [69] P. Veličković et al., “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
 Issues, challenges, and future directions,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 122, 2025, Learn. Representations, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Apr. 30–May 3 2018.
 Art. no. 103222. [70] J. Lee, I. Lee, and J. Kang, “Self-attention graph pooling,” in Proc. 36th Int.
[47] Y. A. Farrukh et al., “XG-NID: Dual-modality network intrusion detection Conf. Mach. Learn., Long Beach, CA, USA, Jun. 2019, vol. 97, pp. 3734–
 using a heterogeneous graph neural network and large language model,” 3743.
 Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 287, 2025, Art. no. 128089. [71] B. Knyazev, G. W. Taylor, and M. R. Amer, “Understanding attention and
[48] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-Net: A hybrid neural network for generalization in graph neural networks,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Neural
 encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 4202–4212.
 Commun. Workshops, 2020, pp. 424–429. [72] B. Xu et al., “Empirical evaluation of rectified activations in convolutional
[49] S. Lei, C. Xia, Z. Li, X. Li, and T. Wang, “HNN: A novel model to study network,” 2015, arXiv:1505.00853.
 the intrusion detection based on multi-feature correlation and temporal- [73] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multispatial analysis,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 3257–3274, modal deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,”
 Oct.–Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2021.3109644. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023,
[50] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: A channel- doi: 10.1109/TNET.2022.3215507.
 level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE [74] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Developing
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025, 2023. realistic distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack dataset and taxonomy,”
[51] Y. Li et al., “HDFEF: A hierarchical and dynamic feature extraction in Proc. IEEE 53rd Int. Carnahan Conf. Secur. Technol., Chennai, India,
 framework for intrusion detection systems,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, 2019, pp. 1–8.
 2022, Art. no. 102842. [75] H. Hindy, C. Tachtatzis, R. Atkinson, E. Bayne, and X. Bellekens, “MQTT-
[52] G. Xu et al., “A mobile application-classifying method based on a graph IoT-Ids2020: MQTT Internet of Things intrusion detection dataset,” IEEE
 attention network from encrypted network traffic,” Electronics, vol. 12, Dataport, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.21227/bhxy-ep04.
 no. 10, 2023, Art. no. 2313. [76] S. Dadkhah, E. C. P. Neto, R. Ferreira, R. C. Molokwu, S. Sadeghi, and
[53] C. Peng, X. Tan, P. Xie, M. Li, H. Wang, and S. Chen, “IoT device A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoMT2024: Attack vectors in healthcare devicesidentification base on inter-flow correlation analysis using graph neural a multi-protocol dataset for assessing IoMT device security,” Internet
 network,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Big Data Comput. Commun., Hainan, Things, vol. 28, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 101351.
 China, 2023, pp. 24–31, doi: 10.1109/BIGCOM61073.2023.00012. [77] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward gen-
[54] X. Wang et al., “Combine intra- and inter-flow: A multimodal encrypted erating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic chartraffic classification model driven by diverse features,” Comput. Netw., acterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
 vol. 245, 2024, Art. no. 110403. pp. 108–116.
ZHAO et al.: ENHANCING INTRUSION DETECTION VIA INTERPRETABLE INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPHS 7137

[78] W. Hong et al., “Graph intelligence enhanced bi-channel insider threat Liu Yang received the Ph.D. degree from the Beijing
 detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Syst. Secur., 2022, pp. 86–102, University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beidoi: 10.1007/978-3-031-23020-2_5. jing, China, in 2024. She is currently a Lecturer with
[79] T. Ngo et al., “Optimizing IoT intrusion detection—A graph neural the College of Robotics, Beijing Union University,
 network approach with attribute-based graph construction,” Information, Beijing. Her research interests include the integrated
 vol. 16, no. 6, 2025, Art. no. 499, doi: 10.3390/info16060499. sensing and communication system, reinforcement
[80] T. Ngo et al., “Comparative study of machine learning algo- learning, and communication security.
 rithms for IoT cyber threat detection in healthcare information
 systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Health Inf. Sci., 2024, pp. 68–77,
 doi: 10.1007/978-981-96-5597-7_7.

 Jianjin Zhao received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees
 Xiaowei Zhao is currently working toward the Ph.D. from the Beijing University of Posts and Telecomdegree in electronic science and technology with munications, Beijing, China, in 2019 and 2024, rethe Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunica- spectively. He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher
 tions, Beijing, China. Her research interests include with the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommachine learning and network security. munications. His research interests include encrypted
 traffic analysis, audit log analysis, and network
 measurement.

 Mingshu He received the Ph.D. degree from the Xiaojuan Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, degree in electronic science and technology from
 Beijing, China, in 2022. He is currently Researcher the University of Beijing University of Posts and
 with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing Uni- Telecommunications, Beijing, China. She is currently
 versity of Posts and Telecommunications. His re- an Associate Professor with the School of Elecsearch interests include network security, anomaly tronic Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and
 detection, and machine learning. Telecommunications. Her research interests include
 deep learning, complex networks, and human gesture
 recognition.