3862 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 Enhancing Trust Management System for
 Connected Autonomous Vehicles Using
 Machine Learning Methods: A Survey
 Qian Xu , Lei Zhang , Member, IEEE, Yixiao Liu , and Zhenning Li , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Connected Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) operate in I. I NTRODUCTION
dynamic, open, and multi-domain networks, rendering them ONNECTIVITY, intelligence, electrification and sharing
vulnerable to various threats. Trust Management Systems (TMS)
systematically organize the essential steps in the trust mechanism,
identifying malicious nodes against both internal and external
 C are key trends reshaping the automotive industry. Connected Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) are products of highly
threats, while ensuring reliable decision-making for more coop- connected and autonomous levels, transforming traditional
erative tasks. Recent advances in machine learning (ML) offer transportation means into mobile agents equipped with powsignificant potential to enhance TMS, particularly for the strin- erful sensory, computational and data storage capabilities.
gent requirements of CAVs, such as CAV nodes moving at varying
speeds and exhibiting opportunistic and intermittent network
 CAVs promise to revolutionize transportation by improving
behavior. Those features distinguish ML-based TMS from social efficiency, enhancing safety, and enabling sustainable operanetworks, static IoT, and Social IoT. This survey proposes a tions. However, cyber threats have grown significantly over
novel three-layer ML-based TMS framework for CAVs in the the past decade, characterized by large-scale, high-frequency
vehicle-road-cloud integration system, comprising a trust data attacks with a high degree of invisibility [1]. In response, reglayer, a trust calculation layer, and a trust incentive layer. A sixdimensional taxonomy of objectives is proposed. Furthermore,
 ulatory frameworks such as UN R155 [2](the first mandatory
the principles of ML methods for each module in each layer are vehicle cybersecurity regulation) and ISO/SAE 21434 [3] (the
analyzed. Then, recent studies are categorized based on traffic first international vehicle cybersecurity standard) have been
scenarios that are against the proposed objectives. The survey established since 2021.
concludes by proposing future research directions that address These regulations have accelerated CAVs and Intelligent
open issues and align with current trends. An accompanying
repository of state-of-the-art works and open-source projects
 Transportation Systems (ITS) into a new era, shifting focus
is available at: https://github.com/octoberzzzzz/ML-based-TMS- from basic safety to integrated safety-security-privacy frame-
CAV-Survey works. The defense-in-depth principle has been implemented
 Index Terms—Trust management system, connected in vehicular security through a two-tier framework, where
autonomous vehicles, supervised machine learning, semi- proactive defenses against certificate-based internal threats
supervised machine learning, reinforcement learning. (Line-1) and responsive countermeasures against external
 threats (Line-2) are employed. While a rule-based Intrusion
 Detection System (IDS) detects attacks through predefined signatures or anomaly thresholds, it fails to recognize malicious
 behaviors by entities with legitimate identities. In contrast, the
 Received 25 August 2024; revised 8 May 2025 and 4 October 2025; trust mechanism serves as a cross-layer framework, facilitating
accepted 1 December 2025. Date of publication 5 January 2026; date of prevention and real-time protection. The trust mechanism is
current version 6 April 2026. This work was supported in part by the National expected to ensure CAVs evolve from basic intelligence to
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 52432012 and Grant
72474158, in part by Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Research Center for verifiable trust.
Multi-Network and Multi-Modal Rail Transit, and in part by the Fundamental Trust is defined as a set of activities and a security policy,
Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 2023-4-ZD-03. where element x trusts element y if and only if x has
The Associate Editor for this article was X. Cheng. (Corresponding author:
Lei Zhang.) confidence that y will behave in a well-defined way that does
 Qian Xu is with the Key Laboratory of Road and Traffic Engineering, not violate the given policy [4]. The Trust Management System
Ministry of Education, and the College of Transportation, Tongji University, (TMS) is a way of organizing the trust mechanism. TMS
Shanghai 201804, China, and also with the State Key Laboratory of Internet
of Things for Smart City, University of Macau, Macau 999078, China (e-mail: can be classified into trust value-based TMS, trust value-free
qianxu@um.edu.cn). TMS (i.e., cryptography-based solutions [5], [6]), and hybrid
 Lei Zhang is with the College of Electronic and Information Engineering TMS. This survey focuses on trust value-based TMS, which
and Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Tongji
University, Shanghai 201804, China (e-mail: reizhg@tongji.edu.cn). quantifies trust through a series of steps.
 Yixiao Liu is with Shanghai Research Institute for Intelligent Autonomous
Systems, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China. A. Motivations of ML-Based TMS for CAV
 Zhenning Li is with State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart
City, University of Macau, Macau 999078, China. Traditional TMS methods rely on statistical weighting,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3647284 inference modeling and graph theory. In contrast, machine
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3863

learning (ML),as a branch of artificial intelligence(AI),offers
a data-driven approach to uncovering patterns, making predictions and automating decisions. Four key factors have
driven the growing adoption of ML-based TMS for CAV
(TMS-CAV).
 • CAV intelligence and massive multi-source heterogeneous data: The generation of multi-source
 data enables ML applications across CAV perception,
 decision-making, and control. Notable advances include:
 ML-based collaborative perception, autonomous driving Fig. 1. Scope of the survey.
 decisions with deep reinforcement learning (DRL), and
 traffic prediction using Graph Neural Networks (GNN).
 • Cross-domain intelligence for TMS: ML-based TMS many applications. Surveys on TMS-CAVs (Type 3)
 solutions have succeeded in Internet of Things (IoT), examine trust methods for CAVs, but often relegate ML
 social networks and other domains. These methodologies methods to subsidiary sections. Surveys on novel ML
 provide valuable insights for adapting TMS to CAV- solutions (Type 4) summarize the ML advances with less
 specific challenges. focus on TMS or CAV. Therefore, surveys on ML-based
 • Theoretical innovations driven by CAV character- TMS for CAVs (Type 5) uniquely bridge ML-based TMS
 istics: The high dynamism, real-time demands, and and CAV-specific challenges.
 collaborative nature of CAVs require novel TMS frame- • Innovative perspectives: Unlike prior TMS-CAV surworks. Traditional methods (e.g., Bayesian Interference veys (Type-3), this survey of Type-5 distinguishes itself
 and Fuzzy Logic) struggle with inaccuracy and ineffi- through several innovative perspectives. Rather than simciency. Instead, modern ML methods, such as GNNs, can ply cataloging methods, a novel taxonomy is proposed
 better capture the dynamic topology of CAV networks. based on the hierarchical architecture of TMS. Addition-
 • Advances in ML methods: Breakthroughs in ML, such ally, we investigate how ML enhances each functional
 as Transformer, DRL, and Federated Learning, demon- module.
 strate strong potential to address TMS-CAV challenges, • Diverse CAV application scenarios: Beyond cataloging
 including privacy preservation and real-time processing. methods, this survey emphasizes practical applications of
 TMS in CAV and ITS contexts, demonstrating their realworld efficacy.
B. Scope and a Brief Comparison With Current Surveys
 Despite the increasing number of studies on ML-based
TMS-CAVs, there have been few systematic surveys of this C. Challenges of Surveying on ML-Based TMS for CAVs
critical intersection. To bridge this gap, this survey synthesizes This survey identifies four key challenges in current
existing work on ML-based TMS-CAVs and provides forward- research, spanning classification methods, theoretical foundalooking insights through innovative analytical perspectives. To tions, CAV applications, and ML techniques.
the best of our knowledge, this survey represents the first in- Challenges-1 Lack of a novel taxonomy for ML-based
depth survey of ML-based TMS-CAVs, with a particular focus TMS for CAVs: Existing surveys (Type 1-4) are tailored
on the latest advancements in both ML and TMS research. to their specific topics and research scopes. Traditional
 Given the rapid evolution of TMS, CAVs, and ML, TMS methods and ML-based TMS methods differ fundacomprehensive coverage is impractical. Consequently, this mentally in their theoretical foundations and classification
survey adopts an exploratory approach, including empha- criteria. While ML employs taxonomies like supervised or
sizing core literature, critically analyzing current studies unsupervised learning, TMS involves several processes from
and emerging challenges, and pointing out future research trust-related data collection, trust computation to trust-related
directions. Methodologically, while traditional Systematic attack defense. Thus, it poses a challenge for this survey,
Literature Reviews (SLRs) typically follow the PRISMA where existing taxonomies are insufficient to cover emerging
(Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta- ML-based TMS and CAV needs.
Analyses) framework, this survey implements a simplified Challenges-2 Lack of systematic theoretical foundation
PRISMA process to enhance transparency and standardization. and evaluation criteria: While existing TMS surveys (Type 2)
 As shown in Fig.1, prior surveys are categorized into five have established theoretical frameworks and evaluation criteria
overlapping yet distinct categories. A detailed comparison of for IoT and social networks, these prove inadequate for
representative surveys is provided in Section II; here, we ML-based TMS in CAVs. Traditional TMS methods differ
highlight key distinctions. The scope of this survey is more fundamentally from ML-based TMS, particularly in CAV connarrowly focused but offers a more in-depth exploration. texts. Moreover, the conventional criteria focusing solely on
 • Different themes: Existing surveys on security in CAVs effectiveness prove inadequate for evaluating ML-based TMS
 (Type 1) treat trust as a subset of broader security frame- for CAVs. New criteria incorporating ML-specific metrics
 works. Meanwhile, surveys on TMS for IoTs (Type 2) (precision, recall, F1-score) are needed to properly assess
 focus on generic trust solutions with CAVs as one of performance in CAV contexts.
3864 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 Challenges-3 Insufficient integration of TMS with CAV
applications: TMS methods have been employed in advanced
techniques, such as edge computing and crowdsensing. Meanwhile, these techniques are also important in ITS and CAVs.
However, existing surveys on TMS for IoTs (Type 2) and TMS
for CAVs (Type 3) mainly adopt methodological approaches
as taxonomy criteria, rather than CAV applications. This gap
highlights the urgent need to establish a novel taxonomy of
CAV application-driven TMS.
 Challenges-4 Limited coverage of advanced ML methods: ML methods continue to advance in key areas, including
privacy-preserving techniques, model interpretability, and
defense against adversarial attacks. These solutions are also
essential for ML-based TMS for CAVs. Recent surveys on
novel ML solutions (Type-4) have documented these advancements on ML, and some studies have begun to utilize them.
However, existing surveys of TMS for IoTs (Type-2) and
TM for CAVs (Type-3) have failed to sufficiently cover these
advanced ML methods.

D. Contributions
 To address the aforementioned challenges and meet the
requirements of an exploratory survey, this survey has four
key contributions:
 1) Establishing a Three-Layer ML-Based TMS Framework
for CAVs Assisting the Description of the Survey (Addressing
Challenge-1): A novel three-layer framework for ML-based
TMS in CAVs is established, comprising the trust data layer,
the trust computation layer and the trust incentive layer.
Unlike existing TMS surveys for IoTs (Type-2) and CAVs
(Type-3) that focus on methods and individual steps (mainly
ML-based trust assessment), a more systematic perspective
is provided where ML applications are considered across all
TMS components.
 2) Summarizing the Principle and Evaluation Criteria of
ML-Based TMS for CAVs (Addressing Challenge-2): The
requirements of ML-based TMS for CAVs are clarified. Suitable ML methods for each level are analyzed and compared
with traditional TMS methods. The advantages and challenges
of ML-based TMS for CAVs are analyzed. Comprehensive evaluation metrics are developed by combining standard Fig. 2. Organization framework of this survey.
ML performance metrics (e.g., F1-score) with CAV-specific
requirements like real-time processing capabilities and system
scalability. E. Organizations
 3) Evaluating the Latest ML-based TMS Methods Accord- As shown in Fig.2, the survey is organized as follows:
ing to Common CAV Scenarios (Addressing Challenge-3): Section II explains the methodology of this survey and
It is more practical to discuss under CAV scenarios. Given compares it with related surveys. Section III explains the
that it is still in its early stage, traditional methods are also concept of trust and examines both traditional methods and
referred in the same scenarios, as well as relevant advances in ML algorithms for TMS, highlighting their applications and
other areas. We summarize the commonalities and differences limitations. Section IV proposes and analyzes the three levels
of TMS for CAVs in different scenarios. of TMS for CAVs, discussing the opportunities and challenges
 4) Summarizing Work on Advanced ML (Addressing of ML and proposing evaluation metrics. Section V reviews the
Challenge-4): Beyond basic ML methods, the advanced ML latest works on TMS in various CAV scenarios, with a focus
methods are also considered, such as DRL, GNN and feder- on ML-based solutions. Section VI provides a discussion of
ated learning. Their potential applications on TMS are also the current state of research and identifies gaps. Section VII
analyzed. Open issues and future directions are subsequently outlines open issues and future directions. Section VIII makes
analyzed. a conclusion.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3865

Fig. 3. Growth trend of publication volume over time.

 Fig. 4. Distribution of included publications by journal source after screening.
 II. M ETHODOLOGY AND R ELATED S URVEYS
A. Five Steps by the PRISMA Method
 The following five key steps are used to ensure transparency TABLE I
and reproducibility. Core literature and critical analysis are C ATEGORIES AND K EYWORDS
emphasized.
 1) Formulation of the Research question (RQ): Based on
the analysis of the challenges and opportunities, this survey is
organized around the following five RQs.
 RQ1: What are the benefits and mechanics of applying
ML methods to every step of TMSs for CAV? It aligns with
Contribution 1) and Contribution 2).
 RQ2: What are the criteria for ML-based TMS for CAVs?
It aligns with Contribution 2).
 RQ3: Do the current works fulfill these criteria? It aligns
with Contribution 2).
 RQ4: How can TMS be combined with emerging ITS
applications to guarantee better services? It aligns with
Contribution 3). given. Publications of TMS for CAVs are rapidly increasing,
 RQ5: What are the future directions for improving existing inspired by TMS for IoT. Thus, surveying the ML-based TMS
ML-based TMSs in CAVs? It aligns with Contribution 4). for CAVs is significant.
 2) Search Strategy: Based on these RQs, many combi- 3) Rigorous Screening Process: References were selected
nations of keywords are proposed for the search engine. based on quality, methodological novelty, trust indicators, and
Specifically, four groups of keywords are listed: Group I proposed techniques. Specifically, the inclusion criteria are as
includes keywords about trust, trust management and TMS. follows.
Group II includes keywords related to ML. Group III includes • Language and type: Papers written in English and in the
keywords related to CAVs. Group IV includes keywords Web of Science core index.
related to the purpose of TMS, especially security. • Contents: Keywords in Table I should appear in the title,
 The following combinations are used to identify specific abstract, or keywords.
types of studies. i) Group III + Group V = Studies on Security • Range: From 2018 to the present.
in CAVs. ii) Group I + Group IV = Studies on TMS for • Topic priorities: i) ML-based TMS for CAVs. ii) ML-
IoTs. iii) Group I + Group III = Studies on TMS for CAVs. based TMS methods for IoT (due to the limited number
iv) Group II = Studies on security in novel ML solutions. v) of suitable studies currently available, though this is
Group I + Group IV + Group III + Group V= Studies on ML- increasing). iii) ML methods for ITS. iv) Traditional
based TMS for IoT. vi) Group I + Group IV + Group III + TMS methods for CAVs, which serve as a comparative
Group V= Studies on ML-based TMS for CAVs. baseline.
 After searching and distinguishing, specific publications • Manuscript Priorities: i) Highly cited regular papers (20+
have been placed in the appendix for reproduction. As shown citations) from top-tier journals (JCR Q1/Q2) from 2018
in Fig.4, the growth trend of publication volume over time is to the present. ii) Recent studies in journals from 2022 to
3866 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 the present. iii) High-quality surveys and studies on the where ML methods are briefly discussed in part of the evaluconference from 2018 to the present. ation models.
 The exclusion criteria are as follows: These surveys provide a solid understanding of the basics of
 • ML methods not related to CAV or TMS. TMS, including trust attributes, components of trust manage-
 • References to ML-based TMS lacking sufficient detail. ment, systems organizations beyond simple trust assessments,
 • Studies not peer-reviewed. and classifications of TMS. However, they lack a detailed
 • Studies with methodological flaws, unreliable data, or discussion on CAV and more advanced ML methods.
 lower citation before 2020. 3) Surveys on TMS for CAVs: The subsequent research
 • Hybrid encryption-based trust and trust value-based stud- has extended and started to specialize in TMS for CAVs. In
 ies are considered, but studies only covering encryption- 2022, Hussain et al. [16] conducted a comprehensive survey on
 based trust are excluded. TMS for VANET, detailing the features of VANETs impacting
 • Some ML-based TMS methods for OSN are considered, TMS in VANET, methods for TMS in VANET, and TMS
 but studies covering only social trust with traditional in enabling techniques. In 2022, Hbaieb et al. [17] analyzed
 methods are excluded. V2X challenges, including security issues posed by V2X
 characteristics, trust-related attacks, and security attacks for
 Due to space limitations that prevent the inclusion of all sur-
 IoV. In 2022, Zavvos et al. [18] proposed a taxonomy of
veyed publications in the reference, the number of publications
 privacy and trust for IoV at the service level.
is 172 that meet rigorous selection criteria. We investigated
 These surveys examined TMS for CAVs from a broad
their journal source. As shown in Fig.4, this distribution
 perspective, and their coverage was limited by focusing
analysis demonstrates the breadth of authoritative sources
 primarily on studies from 2014 to 2022, when ML-based
underpinning our survey and identifies dominant publication
 TMS approaches were relatively scarce. They have identified
venues in this research domain. The statistical process will be
 future research directions in ML-based TMS and trust-based
shown in our repository1 .
 services. Instead of ML-based TMS as a branch, we con-
 4) Information Extraction and Analysis: The following
 duct a specialized, in-depth examination of ML-based TMS
information on existing research is identified and summarized,
 for CAV.
i.e., date, type, strengths, weaknesses, research gaps, and
 4) Surveys on Novel ML Solutions in Security Solutions
potential research directions.
 and ITS: Macas et al. [19] surveyed the deep learning
 5) Quality Assessment and Critical Analysis: Qualitative
 applied in cybersecurity, but TMS methods were not covered.
and quantitative methods are used to answer the above
 Luo et al. [20] surveyed deep learning methods in anomaly
five RQs.
 detection for Cyber-physical Systems (CPS) but did not mention TMS. Boualouache et al. [21] proposed a taxonomy of
B. Related Surveys ML-based misbehavior detection systems for 5G and beyond
 Aligned with the five-category classification of existing vehicular networks. More ML methods are applied to ITS,
surveys outlined in Section I, we systematically examine the such as federated learning [22], [23], graph-neural networks
first four types. This survey on ML-based TMS for CAVs fills [24], and transfer learning, etc.
a critical gap as the fifth category, for which no prior survey These surveys analyzed the application of novel ML in ITS
exists. and recognized the importance of trust in open challenges.
 1) Surveys on Security in CAVs Including Trust: Tracing the However, TMS methods were not combined with the transtrajectory of CAV security research, the survey by [7] in 2019 portation scenarios.
pioneered systematic investigations of misbehavior detection 5) Surveys on ML-Based TMS: In 2020, Wang et al. surin C-ITS and laid conceptual groundwork for TMSs through veyed the ML-based trust evaluation [25]. It only discussed
its comparative analysis of node-centric versus collaborative traditional ML methods and did not consider the application
architectures. In 2019, security, privacy and trust of Vehicular of GNN, RL, and other advanced ML methods. Subsequently,
Ad-Hoc Networks (VANET) were discussed together in [8]. with the rapid development of these methods, Luo et al. [26]
Recent surveys also highlight these issues, such as security for summarized the GNN-based trust evaluation in 2025.
autonomous vehicles using ML and blockchain [9] and V2X Our survey on ML-based TMS for CAV is of this type. It
cybersecurity [10], both published in 2023. extends prior general ML-based trust assessment by focusing
 These surveys systematically summarized CAV security on CAV applications and advancing from trust evaluation to
methods and introduced TMS concepts for CAV, but they did comprehensive steps of TMS. Besides, it incorporates recent
not provide a detailed summary of TMS methods for CAV. progress across TMS, ML and CAV.
 2) Surveys on TMS for IoT: A large number of TMS on
the different types of IoT are proposed, such as edge-based III. P RELIMINARIES OF T RUST AND
IoT [11], blockchain edge-based IoT [12], social IoT [13], M ACHINE L EARNING
the general IoT [14], heterogeneous network [15]. In 2022,
a taxonomy of trust models [15] is proposed, consisting of While previous surveys have systematically discussed the
decision models, evaluation models and management models, preliminaries of trust and ML, our work emphasizes those
 concepts that are particularly relevant to CAVs and their
 1 https://github.com/octoberzzzzz/ML-TMS-CAV-Survey integration with ML methods.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3867

Fig. 5. Framework of trust preliminaries.

 TABLE II demonstrated in Table IV, trust focuses vary significantly in
 T RUST IN VARIOUS S TAKEHOLDERS IN AV S various AV types. These AVs are not necessarily CAVs. It is
 essential to recognize that distinct service scenarios and user
 demographics necessitate tailored optimization strategies.
 (5) Trust from three layers: i) At the technical layer, efforts
 should be made to enhance the reliability and transparency
 of CAVs, ensuring their safety and stability in complex environments. ii) At the policy and regulatory layer, strict testing
 standards and safety regulations need to be established to
 provide a solid legal foundation for the commercial application
A. Trust Preliminaries for CAVs of CAVs. iii) At the user layer, extensive public awareness
 campaigns, test drive experiences, and other initiatives should
 The framework for trust preliminaries, presented in Fig.5, be conducted to improve public understanding and acceptance
is structured around seven integral parts. of CAV technology. Currently, stakeholders are actively taking
 1) Current Various Trust Definitions: (1) Trust in IEC
 action in these three layers.
27036-1 [27] and GBT/25069 [28]: the relationship between
two entities and/or elements, consisting of a set of activities 2) Trust Definitions in CAV in This Survey: It is defined by
and a security policy in which element x trusts element y if referring to the current various trust definitions.
and only if x has confidence that y will behave in a well- (1) Standards and layers: The concepts are consistent with
defined way (concerning the activities) that does not violate the standards.This survey focuses on the progress and chalthe given security policy. (2) Trust in various network types: lenges at the technical level.
CPS can be seen as an advanced form of IoT. IoT focuses (2) Network types: Current studies on trust in IoV are
on the connection between “things”. Internet of Everything regarded as network-oriented trust, which concerns the IoV
(IoE) is an extension of IoT that also encompasses the full environment or the trust relationships between IoV particiconnectivity of people, processes, data and things. Automation pants, i.e., how nodes trust each other and securely exchange
of Everything (AoE) focuses on automating various processes information. As IoV evolves towards more integrated CPS,
and tasks. In physical and cyber domains of CPS, trust is IoE, and AoE frameworks, the scope of trust will likely expand
the expectation that a physical or cyber entity will complete to include the trust of the entire connected ecosystem, from
a task as intended, as shown in [29]. Trust influences an the physical environment to the digital infrastructure and the
entity’s preference for services and its decision to engage in automated processes that support them.
transactions with others. Trust studies are important in IoT, Thus, trust in CAV in this survey focuses on agent-oriented
IoE, AoE, and CPS, where the scope and complexity are trust and service-oriented trust based on network-oriented
increasing. trust, i.e., trust should serve for specific CAV scenarios, such
 (3) Trust in various stakeholders of autonomous vehicles as platoon leader vehicle selection, trustworthy edge devices
(AV): While AV focuses on the autonomous driving capabil- selection to offload computations, etc. It is from AoE and
ities of the vehicle itself, CAV emphasizes the connectivity beyond the scope of IoT and IoV. Part of the research on
and collaboration of vehicles. As shown in Table II, different trust in IoV covers how edge nodes mutually trust, but the
stakeholders of AV have different trust focuses. From a human- object of trust in CAV is centralized on vehicles.
machine trust perspective, collective trust refers to the shared (3) Stakeholders: This survey mainly analyzes trust in CAVs
confidence of all stakeholders (users, pedestrians, manufactur- from a technical perspective. Here, city authorities, policymakers, governments, etc.) in the overall trust of the autonomous ers, and law enforcement are the regulators of trust; users and
driving system [30]. This delineates the specific beneficiaries pedestrians are the beneficiaries of trust; and manufacturers
of trust mechanisms. are the builders and trustees of trust.
 (4) Trust in various AV types by application purpose: The (4) Distinguishing trust in TMS from credibility: Credibility
features of six AV types are compared in Table III. Thus, as in positioning [31] focuses on the accuracy and consistency
3868 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 TABLE III
 C LASSIFICATION OF AV BY A PPLICATION P URPOSES

 TABLE IV Vehicle(CV) penetration rate and omit explicit AV penetra-
 T RUST IN VARIOUS AV T YPES tion rate, presuming all vehicles have OBUs/RSUs capable
 of authentication, reporting, and feedback. Thus, vehicles
 are modeled as communicative nodes, with trust based on
 observed behavior—not the origin of control (human or AI).
 This simplification prioritizes a general TMS framework.
 While trust computation is similar, their evaluation sources,
 reliability, and update mechanisms differ fundamentally.
 Incorporating AV penetration introduces complexity—e.g.,
 behavioral heterogeneity and human-AI interaction—better
 suited to advanced studies once foundational models are validated. Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) and Human-on-the-Loop
 (HOTL) architectures have emerged as critical components for
 establishing trust in CAV systems. As mixed traffic research
 evolves, TMS-CAV is increasingly considering the effects of
 AV penetration.
of results and system performance in complex environments.
Instead, trust in TMS focuses on the trust of interacting entities 3) Properties of Trust in CAV: Several properties are anaand its impact on decisions and behavior. lyzed in pairs, such as direct and indirect trust. Additionally,
 (5) Smart city technologies enhance ML-based TMS trust is pseudo-asymmetry, historical relevance, context depenfor CAVs: Advanced techniques in smart cities enable dence, and dynamic, etc.
more efficient ITS. Digital twin technology, combined with (1) Direct, Indirect and Hybrid: Most TMS for CAV litera-
AI, improves CAV trust through precise decision-making. ture consider these properties. Direct trust comes from traffic
Blockchain also supports ML-based TMS for CAVs. conditions observed by on-board sensors or IoV, while indirect
 (6) Vehicle types in terms of application purpose: A gen- trust relies on recommendations from neighboring vehicles or
eralized set of ML-based TMS for CAVs with extension RSUs when direct data is insufficient. References include [32],
modules for different vehicle types in Table III should be [33], [34], [35], [36], and [37],etc.
proposed. Compared with the trust of single-vehicle intelli- (2) Objective and Subjective: Objective trust is derived
gence, the TMS of CAV is more complex because it not from measurable and quantifiable data, while subjective trust
only relies on the performance of the vehicle itself, but involves personal or collective perceptions, experiences, or
also relies on various factors such as IoV and multi-subject emotions. Objective trust is the primary focus in CAV applicacoordination. tion. This is reflected in studies such as [38], [39], [40], [41],
 (7) Vehicle types in terms of capabilities: CAVs repre- and [42],etc.
sent a higher level of Grade of Automation (GoA) and the (3) Local and Global: Local trust is evaluated over a limcooperative perception capabilities. Administrators and leading ited geographical range and short periods, making it suitable
companies are making significant progress toward achieving for real-time decision-making. Global trust spans broader
GoA-5 (full automation) and Level-3 (highest cooperative regions and longer durations, providing a more comprehenperception). As a result, the development and integration of sive but less immediate assessment. For instance, studies
advanced TMS are essential as a technical preparation to including [43] and [44].
support the efficient and reliable operation of CAVs. (4) Pseudo-asymmetry: It means one entity may trust
 (8) Vehicle types in terms of penetration rate: another without reciprocity. The pseudonyms mechanism of
 The transition toward fully AV will be gradual, result- CAV complicates trust evaluation by requiring repeated trust
ing in mixed traffic flows with varying automation levels. computations for the same entity under different identities.
Most current TMS-CAV studies assume a 100% Connected Reference include [45], etc.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3869

 TABLE V
 T YPICAL T RUST PARAMETERS AND T RUST M ETRICS
 ACROSS D IFFERENT C ATEGORIES

 (5) Historically relevant and context-dependent: Trust is
influenced by both past behavior and contextual conditions, such as traffic conditions changes. This is reflected Fig. 6. Three forms of trust.
in [32], etc.
 (6) Social: In social IoV, trust may incorporate social
attributes, such as community-based reputation. This is behavior. Based on the definition above, the typical trust
reflected in [46], [47], and [48], etc. parameters and trust metrics are analyzed in Table V.
 (7) Time-evolving: Trust is dynamic and continuously 5) Forms of Trust: They vary across methods as shown in
updated in response to new data, environmental shifts, or Fig.6. We categorize forms as follows referred by [17]:
behavioral changes. This is reflected in [32], etc.
 • Non-ML-based Trust: i) Trust facets: Represented by
 (8) Individual trust and collective trust: In the context
 tuples (e.g., (B, D, U) for Belief, Disbelief, Uncertainty in
of social IoV, more trust properties can be considered. In
 D-S evidence theory) ii) Trust logic: Expressed through
social psychology and organizational behavior, interpersonal
 probabilities or fuzzy values.
trust focuses on a specific individual, whereas collective trust
 • ML-based Trust: Trust levels are described by continuous
targets the organization and its collective membership as a
 or discrete values. i) Continuous values (Regression):
whole [49]. The latter is a group-directed willingness to accept
 [0,1] range where 1 means highest trust. ii) Binary rating
vulnerability, encompassing social exchange, shared percep-
 (ML binary classification): trust-1, distrust-0. iii) Multitions, and interpersonal trust [50]. Although a completely
 rating (ML multi-class classification): The values in [0,1]
standardized definition is lacking in the field of ICT, based
 are divided into several levels.
on a synthesis of extensive literature, we define individual
trust and collective trust as follows: individual trust refers to 6) Objects of Trust: i) Data-centric: Evaluates data trust
an entity’s trust evaluation based on individual experience or (e.g., emergency message dissemination). ii) Node-centric:
interactions. In contrast, collective trust refers to a consistent Assesses node or entity (e.g., trusted edge node selection).
and authoritative group consensus formed by aggregating and iii) Hybrid: Combines both data and node trust evaluation.
validating multiple individual trust evaluations through specific 7) TMS Differences From Other Security Methods: Unlike
mechanisms. IDS, TMS requires more data and multi-step processing. While
 TMS can enhance IDS by detecting misbehaviors [52], its trust
 4) Metrics of Trust: Properties of trust describe how
 value also supports broader decision-making applications, such
trust is established, while metrics of trust quantify and
 as edge computing offloading and platoon formation.
analyze trust through specific criteria. They are divided
into reputation-based, knowledge-based, expectation-based, 8) Components of TMS: These terms fall under trust valuenode properties-based, proximity-based and environment- based TMS, including trust-related data collection, trust
based [17]. Reputation, knowledge and proximity-based computation/assessment/evaluation, trust propagation, trust
factors are the most widely used metrics [17]. ML-based TMS aggregation, trust prediction and trust data storage [16].
methods automatically extract features from data, prioritizing
sufficiently high-quality inputs. Unlike traditional methods
 B. Traditional Methods for TMS
that require expert-designed metrics, ML models do not need
to pre-define fixed trust criteria. However, metrics remain Methods for TMS are shown in Fig.7, traditional TMS
valuable for enhancing the explainability of ML. A parameter methods are briefly introduced as the basis.
is an input variable, either set directly or observed from the 1) Statistically Weighted TMS: This most widely used
system environment or human configuration. In contrast, a approach weights multi-source information for comprehensive
metric is an output criterion, derived from an a posteriori trust evaluation. Applications include secure content delivery
assessment, that is used to evaluate system performance or [53], routing [54], cluster head selection [55].
3870 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

Fig. 7. Methods for TMS.

 2) Inference-Based TMS: i) Probability-based TMS: Trust learning. First of all, supervised learning aims to train a model
is quantified as a probability value. Applications include the f that maps inputs x to labels y by minimizing a loss function
beta-Bayesian model for malicious CAV node detection [32]. on labeled data.
 N
ii) D-S evidence-based TMS: Trust is defined by combining X
 min L(yi , f (xi )) (1)
and processing the conflicting evidence to quantify uncertainty f ∈F
 i=1
as confidence degrees [56]. It is suitable for uncertainty or
prior-knowledge-lacking scenarios. Applications include fus- • f ∈ F: Model from hypothesis space F.
ing multi-dimensional trust metrics for CAV [33]. iii) Fuzzy • xi : Input feature vector (training example i).
logic-based TMS: Rather than providing a definite value, it • yi : True label for xi .
estimates the trust degree using rules and an approximate set. • L: Loss function comparing f (xi ) and yi .
Applications include fuzzy evaluation [51], [47] and [57]; the • N: Number of training examples.
interval type-2 fuzzy logic [58]. 1) Supervised Traditional ML Methods for Classification:
 iii) Subjective logic-based TMS: Subjective logic handles These ML methods deal with linear or non-linear relationships
uncertainty and subjectivity in TMS. Applications include in data but do not involve complex hierarchical structures.
Three-valued Subjective Logic (3VSL) for CAV [38], subjec- (1) Originally designed for binary-class classification
tive logic [59]. but can be extended to multiple-class classifications. This
 3) Entropy-Based TMS: It evaluates the randomness of category includes: Naive Bayes (NB) Classifier, Supinformation, signals or events [60]. port Vector Machines (SVM), and Adaptive Boosting
 4) Graph-Based TMS: When graphs represent entities and (AdaBoost). Notably, AdaBoost-SAMME supports multi-class
their relationships, graph algorithms can be used for TMS, like classification.
OpinionWalk [38] and RandomWalk for TMS [61]. (2) Multiple-class classifications. This category includes: K
 5) Game-Based TMS: It seeks to identify and eliminate Nearest Neighbours (KNN) classifier, Random Forests classiselfish nodes through a game, such as evolutionary game fier and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost).
theory for TMS [62]. 2) Supervised Deep Neural Networks for Classification:
 (1) Classic deep learning methods. Deep learning excels at
 processing large-scale datasets with high-dimensional features.
C. ML Methods: Supervised Vs. Unsupervised Vs. For binary classification tasks, binary cross-entropy loss func-
Semi-Supervised Learning tions are typically employed, whereas standard cross-entropy
 Based on different data labeling situations and learning loss functions are used for multi-class classification problems.
objectives, ML methods are categorized by supervised learn- Classical models are Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Convoing (as Eq.1), unsupervised learning, and semi-supervised lutional Neural Network (CNN), Recurrent Neural Network
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3871

(RNN) like Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Network (GAN), Variational Autoencoder (VAE), diffusion
Recurrent Unit (GRU). models, autoregressive networks, and normalizing flows.
 (2) Emerging models. i) Hybrid Architectures: The CNN- (3) Unsupervised graph representation: a) Graph Contrastive
LSTM model integrates CNNs for spatial feature extraction Learning: These methods learn a node or graph representation
with LSTM for sequential modeling, making it particularly by maximizing the similarity of positive sample pairs in the
suitable for spatio-temporal data analysis. graph and minimizing the similarity of negative sample pairs.
 ii) Transformer: Characterized by self-attention mecha- Common methods are Deep Graph Infomax (DGI), Graph
nisms, multi-head attention, and residual connections, Trans- Contrastive Learning with Augmentations (GCA), InfoGraph,
former models efficiently capture long-range dependencies. etc. b) Graph Generative Learning: This method applies a
Their parallel processing capability enables faster training than generative model to graph data to learn the structure and
traditional RNN architectures. properties of the graph and generate new graph instances or
 iii) GNN: GNNs specialize in processing graph-structured graph elements (e.g., nodes or edges). Common methods are
data through node and edge relationships, supporting four GAE, VGAE, Graph GANs, etc.
primary classification tasks: node classification, edge classifi- 5) Semi-Supervised ML Methods: It trains a model f to
cation, and graph classification link prediction. Key supervised map inputs x to labels y by jointly leveraging labeled data
GNN variants include Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), (via supervised loss) and unlabeled data (via regularization or
Graph Attention Networks (GAT), and GraphSAGE. Spa- pseudo-labeling).
tiotemporal GNNs (STGNNs) further enhance modeling L
 X N
 X
capabilities by combining graph networks with temporal learn- min L(yi , f (xi )) +λ · R(x j , f ) (3)
ing methods, demonstrating strong performance in traffic flow f ∈F
 i=1 j=L+1
prediction and trajectory forecasting applications [63]. „ ƒ‚
 Supervised loss
 … „ ƒ‚ …
 Unlabeled data term
 3) Supervised ML Methods for Regression: These methods
can predict continuous trust values and can be categorized as: where:
 (1) Traditional ML regression: It includes Logistic Regres- • L is the number of labeled samples, N is the total number
sion (LR), Random Forest Regression, Support Vector Regres- of samples.
sion (SVR), and K-Nearest Neighbors Regression (KNN • R(·) regularizes using unlabeled data (e.g., consistency
Regression). loss, entropy minimization).
 (2) Deep learning regression: It differs from classification • λ balances the two terms.
in three key aspects: i) Output layer uses linear or constant (1) Semi-supervised Clustering: Clustering does not involve
activation (vs. softmax or sigmoid) ii) Loss functions use Mean the prediction of labels but explores the intrinsic structure of
Squared Error (MSE) or Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), the data. Semi-supervised clustering algorithms use limited
instead of cross-entropy. iii) Evaluation metrics include con- labeled data to improve clustering results. It is divided as
tinuous error measures instead of classification metrics. follows: a) Metric-based. b) Partial-labels.c) Density-based.
 4) Unsupervised ML Methods: Unsupervised learning aims d) Constraint-based. e) Hierarchical clustering. f) Outcome
to train a model f that discovers patterns or structure in variable association. g) Model-based clustering. h) Graphunlabeled data x by optimizing an objective function (e.g., based clustering.
clustering, density estimation) (2) Inductive Learning for Classification and Regression:
 These methods aim to learn models that can be generalized to
 N
 X new data, which improves the model’s ability to predict new
 min D(xi , f (xi )) (2) data by learning embedded representations of nodes or using
 f ∈F
 i=1
 neural networks to capture the global data structure.
 • D(·) denotes a dissimilarity measure (e.g., reconstruction • Wrappers: It includes self-training methods, co-training
 error, KL divergence). methods and boosting methods.
 • f (xi ) may correspond to cluster assignments, latent • Unsupervised Preprocessing: It includes a) Cluster-thenembeddings, or synthetic samples, depending on the task. label. b) Pre-training. c) Feature extraction.
 The following categorization proofs are also referred from • Intrinsic SSL: It includes a) Max-margin. b) Perturbationrecent surveys, including self-supervised learning [64], [65]; based. c) Generative model: d) Manifolds.
graph-based semi-supervised learning [66]; semi-supervised • Graph-based: It includes a) Graph-based label propalearning to cyber-security [67]; semi-supervised graph clus- gation methods. b) Sparse model. c) Low-rank model.
tering [68]. It is divided as follows: d) GNN.
 (1) Unsupervised clustering: It groups similar data points (3) Transductive Learning for Classification and Regresinto distinct clusters while maximizing dissimilarity between sion: These methods focus on predicting labels for specific
clusters. Common methods include K-means, hierarchical unlabeled nodes in the current dataset and do not emphasize
clustering, Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications the generalization capabilities of the model. These methods
with Noise (DBSCAN), spectral clustering, and Gaussian typically use local information in the graph structure to propmixture models. agate labels and are suitable for situations where the dataset is
 (2) Generative models: They learn data distributions to relatively fixed. It includes embedding-based label propagation
synthesize new instances, including Generative Adversarial and label propagation based on GNN.
3872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

D. Advanced ML Methods limited labeled data alongside abundant unlabeled data, out-
 1) RL, DRL and MADRL: RL enables agents to learn performing purely unsupervised approaches.
optimal behaviors through environmental interactions. DRL 2) Advantages of Advanced ML: While traditional ML
enhances RL with deep learning for complex tasks [69]. initially dominated TMS-CAV, modern techniques now offer
MADRL extends this to multi-agent systems. superior solutions, such as Transformers, GNNs, RL, FL,
 There are many classification criteria for RL, e.g., value- transfer learning, etc.. For example, Transfer learning shows
based RL and policy-based RL. Since trust calculation particular promise in mitigating cold-start issues, as demonmethods based on RL methods are categorized by: strated in EV charging forecasting [80], though its application
 • Discrete action space: Q-Learning, SARSA, DQN, Pol- to TMS-CAV remains rare.
 icy Gradient, Actor-Critic, Proximal Policy Optimization 3) Advantages of Appendix Methods: In order to avoid per-
 (PPO), MADQN, etc. formance degradation or failure of ML-based TMS methods,
 • Continuous action space: Deep Deterministic Policy Gra- auxiliary measures for TMS should be considered, such as
 dient (DDPG), Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic integration with IDS and cryptographic methods.
 (A3C), Trust Region Policy Optimization (TPRO),
 MADDPG, MA-Actor-Critic. Besides, the variance meth- IV. T HREE -L AYER T RUST M ANAGEMENT S YSTEM FOR
 ods of DQN are DDQN, D3QN, etc. CAV S E NHANCING BY M ACHINE L EARNING
 • Research directions: the combination of GNN and RL
 [70], offline RL or online RL [71], safe RL for safety- A. Three-Layer TMS for CAV
 critical scenarios [72], transfer learning with RL [73]. To facilitate our survey in describing the functional modules
 2) Federated Learning: In FL, edge devices or clients of the TMS and how ML can enhance the role of each module,
only send the gradients or the learnable parameters to cloud a three-layer ML-based TMS for CAV is proposed. As shown
servers rather than sending massive local datasets in a central- in Fig.8, it adapts IoT-based TMS principles to vehicle-roadized learning framework. FL is one of the edge intelligence cloud systems. The modules in each layer maintain consistency
algorithms. FL has many classification criteria, such as by with TMS in IoT from [14] while integrating ML methods for
the topology of the participating devices in the FL system, CAV environment. It offers a holistic perspective that surpasses
including centralized FL, decentralized FL, hierarchical FL prior surveys focused on isolated modules.
and clustered FL [74]. FL provides new training and testing 1) Trust Data Layer: It defines CAV what data can be
for ITS tasks, such as trajectory prediction, traffic prediction, regarded as trust-related data and the data analysis
V2X, etc [22]. FL is closely combined with blockchain [75] process. It consists of four modules: i) Trust-related
and edge computing [76]. Data Composition, ii) Trust-related Data Generation,
 3) Other Novel ML Methods: iii) Trust-related Data Management and iv) Trust-related
 • Transfer learning: It leverages knowledge from solved Data Dissemination.
 problems to address related new tasks. It can be integrated 2) Trust Computation Layer: It obtains trust values from
 with RL and FL [73]. trust-related data. It consists of four modules. i) Trust
 • Incremental learning (or continual learning): It enables Aggregation; ii) Trust Calculation; iii) Trust Update; and
 models to continuously learn from new data streams. iv) Weight Adjuster.
 Yang et al. [77] developed federated continual learning 3) Trust Incentive Layer: It solves passive and aggressive
 through knowledge fusion. behaviors to guarantee reliability and robustness. It
 • Meta learning: It enables rapid task adaptation by trans- consists of two modules. i) Incentives; ii) Trust-related
 ferring prior knowledge (meta-data), eliminating full Attacks Defense.
 retraining [78]. As illustrated in Fig.8, the initial computation of both the
 • End-to-end learning: It refers to a training approach trust data layer and the trust computation is deployed at
 where a model learns to transform inputs directly into the vehicle subsystem and the roadside subsystem. Deeper
 outputs, encompassing all processing stages. This method processing across all three layers is allocated to central
 contrasts with traditional models that require separate subsystems due to their substantial resource requirements.
 components for different tasks [79]. Additionally, the ML requirements for TMS must account for
 CAV features that differentiate them from social IoT, WSN,
E. Summary on Potential ML Methods for ML-Based and UASNs implementations, as also highlighted in the survey
TMS-CAV on TMS for VANET [16]. Specifically,
 After surveying the mechanisms, categories, and recent • Speed: CAV nodes move at varying speeds, causing
advances of ML, the following insights are obtained. Addi- the network topology to change constantly, with no pertionally, more insights should be further integrated with TMS manent neighbors. Therefore, ML-based TMS methods
functional modules and CAV-specific operational scenarios. designed for CAVs should adapt to this dynamism and
 1) Advantages of Semi-Supervised Learning: Supervised avoid ML models suited only for static networks.
ML-based TMS requires extensive labeled data, which is • Directed: CAVs must adhere to traffic regulations, which
challenging to obtain for dynamic CAV environment. Semi- limit their mobility and network topology to the road
supervised methods address this by effectively leveraging infrastructure. Therefore, ML-based TMS methods for
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3873

Fig. 8. CAV in Vehicle Road-Cloud Integration System.

 CAVs should account for whether CAV behaviors align reflect vehicle behavior. Multimodal data fusion is also gaining
 with road topology constraints. attention. ML methods excel at processing large-scale, diverse
 • Opportunistic: IoVs frequently interact with unknown datasets.
 neighbors. Therefore, ML-based TMS for CAVs should Beacon data constitutes the fundamental broadcast informabe timely and include incentives to encourage greater tion, featuring message types such as Basic Safety Messages
 node participation. (BSM), Map Data (MAP), Signal Phase and Timing (SPAT),
 • Intermittent: CAVs continuously form and disband Roadside Messages (RSM), and Personal Safety Messages
 networks. Therefore, ML-based TMS methods should (PSM). The standard format of BSM is defined in (4) defined
 accommodate this dynamic topology, for instance, by in [81] and [82].
 using dynamic GNNs that can integrate new nodes as
 BSM = {senderPseudo, S endT ime, Pos, S pd, Acl, Hed,
 they appear.
 • Resource Availability: Each CAV is equipped with PosNoise, S pdNoise, AclNoise, HedNoise, msgID} (4)
 limited computational resources. Therefore, edge and where senderPseudo denotes the pseudonym of sending
 cloud computing are essential to support ML-based TMS CAVs, Pos, S pd, Acl, Hed refers to the position, speed, accelmethods that require substantial computational resources, eration, and heading of senders, respectively. Ditto for those
 and blockchain technology is needed for reliable data terms with Noise.S endT ime and msgID are the send time and
 transmission. message IDs of BSM.
 • More motivations to build trust among vehicles: While ii) Trust-related data generation and dissemination.
 [16] noted that vehicles have less motivation to build trust It refers to data sources and collection methods. In single
 through membership due to automatic network formation autonomous vehicles, data is mainly generated by onboard
 within communication range, trust has become crucial sensors. In vehicle-road-cloud systems, data from multiple
 in more scenarios like platoon leader selection, worker sources is transmitted to edge devices and cloud servers.
 incentives in crowdsensing and choosing reliable edge iii) Trust-related data and trust value storage. In cennodes, etc. tralized systems, a central server stores all trust data, while
 in distributed models, each device stores its own. Most TMS-
B. Layer1:Trust Data Layer Enhanced by ML for CAV CAV prefer the distributed model, with distributed ML and
 i) Trust-related data composition. It refers to data struc- blockchain enhancing privacy beyond traditional cryptography.
ture and dimensions, including structured data like vehicle iv) Trust-related data dissemination. Before trust compubeacons, trajectories, sensors, detectors and maps, as well tation, ML methods must gather sufficient trust-related data.
as unstructured data like radar, LiDAR, and images. Beacon However, it can be hindered by selfish or malicious CAVs.
data is widely used for its ease of acquisition and ability to Implementing ML in the incentive layer can mitigate this issue.
3874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 non-ML TMS methods versus ML-based approaches, evaluated across six dimensions, as detailed in Table VI.
 (1) Effectiveness of TMS: Effectiveness is the primary
 requirement for a sound TMS. It is judged from the following
 four aspects.
 • Enough data collections: It ensures the system’s ability
 to gather sufficient data to support the TMS effectively.
 • Accuracy for trust computation: The accuracy metric
Fig. 9. Basic process of ML for trust calculation. serves as a representative indicator for all other metrics.
 It ensures the accuracy of the trust calculation model,
C. Layer2: Trust Computation Layer Enhanced by ML for guaranteeing that trust values accurately reflect vehicle
CAV behavior.
 • Accuracy for supporting trust-related services: It ensures
 i) Trust aggregation. Trust-related data must be filtered that the trust values produced by the TMS effectively
from raw data to create standardized input. ML methods excel support various trust-related services.
at analyzing complex, large-scale, and heterogeneous datasets. • Accuracy for incentive mechanisms on different condiii) Trust calculation. Unlike rule-based or knowledge- tions: It ensures that the TMS supports the implementabased methods, ML approaches assess CAV trust through tion of incentives or penalties based on diverse behaviors,
classification and regression by continuously analyzing and thereby fostering cooperative behavior.
adapting to behavioral characteristics. It is described in Fig.9.
 iii) Trust update: ML methods like RL enable timely Evaluation metrics for effectiveness are as follows:
updates of trust values by continuously adapting to behavioral • Trust calculation regarded as a classification task:
changes, allowing the trust model to evolve dynamically with a) Problem Formulations: The classifier receives the state
time-triggered and event-triggered changes, ensuring accurate information of the vehicle as input and outputs a direct
and relevant assessments. trust value indicating the trust value of the CAV. If
 iv) Weight adjuster:. Weights reflect the importance of this trust value is below a threshold, the CAV may be
various factors in trust calculations and must be adjusted based classified as malicious; if the trust value is above the
on user needs or environmental changes. ML algorithms can threshold, the vehicle is considered trusted. b) Evaluautomatically learn and dynamically adjust these weights using ation Metrics: Four basic metrics for classification are
user feedback or service results. Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F1-score. Besides, more
 metrics are the Matthew Correlation Coefficient (MCC),
D. Layer3: Trust Incentive Layer Enhanced by ML for CAV Cohen’s kappa, and the Receiver Operating Characteristic
 (ROC), etc.
 Incentives motivate nodes to ensure that they are willing to • Trust calculation regarded as a regression task: a) Probmaintain the security and efficiency of the network while pre- lem formulations: It is regarded as a regression task to
venting them from having negative, speculative, or malicious predict continuous trust values. b) Evaluation metrics:
motives. Common metrics are Mean Squared Error (MSE), Rooti) Incentives for negative, speculative motives: Different MSE (RMSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), R-squared.
from incentives for TMS that were classified into ex-ante
incentive, ex-post incentive in [14], learning-based incentive (2) Flexibility of TMS: Given the mobility of CAV nodes
methods are focused, such as DRL combined with traditional and the dynamic operating environments, flexibility in TMS
incentives, like auction game, contract, Stackelberg game, etc. for CAVs is more critical than in static IoT systems. Flexibility
 iv) Defend against trust-related attacks: Trust-related serves as the foundation for other objectives and can be
attacks manipulate trust values to undermine TMS accuracy. categorized into two key aspects.
For example, in a self-promotion attack (SPA), attackers • Flexibility to dynamic changes: The TMS should adapt
inflate their trust values by falsely claiming positive behav- to changes in network topology, vehicle behavior, and
ior. In a whitewashing attack (WA), attackers obscure their environmental conditions with flexibility.
negative past by displaying a series of positive behaviors. • Granularity of trust values for different services: It should
ML enhances it by improving anomaly detection capabilities, provide fine-grained trust values (e.g., continuous values)
dynamically adjusting trust calculations, complex behavioral for services that demand high precision, while coarsefeatures abstraction and fusion of multi-source data. grained trust values (e.g., binary or multi-class) for
 services that do not need detailed trust information.
E. Objectives of ML-Based TMS for CAVs Evaluation metrics for flexibility are as follows:
 A novel taxonomy for objectives in ML-based TMS for • Adaptability metrics: a) Rate of model adjustment: It
CAVs is introduced. This taxonomy, inspired by recent surveys measures the speed at which the model adapts to changes
on TMS [11], [14], uniquely integrates the specific features (e.g., in network topology, vehicle behavior). b) Converof CAVs with the requirements of TMS and ML methods. gence speed: It indicates how quickly the model re-learns
Furthermore, it provides a comparative analysis of traditional and stabilizes after a dynamic change.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3875

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF N ON -ML-BASED TMS M ETHODS AND ML-BASED TMS M ETHODS

 • Scalability metrics: It assesses the model’s ability to various situations, providing accurate and reliable services
 maintain performance as data types or volumes, node without interruption.
 density, or attacker density increase. • Interpretability of ML: As the ML theory evolves, the
 • Continuous learning metrics: a) Frequency of model decision-making process of understanding the ML-based
 updates: It evaluates how often the model is updated trust model can be enhanced.
 to reflect environmental changes. b) Online learning
 efficiency: It measures the effectiveness of continuous Reliability should be assessed using software reliability
 learning without requiring offline retraining. metrics such as availability, Mean Time to Recovery (MTTR),
 Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF), and failure rate. Inter-
 (3) Reliability of TMS: It is mainly in terms of its pretability metrics include decision boundary visualization,
 • Ability to provide stable support: i.e., the TMS should feature importance, Shapley value, etc. Besides, more metrics
 maintain consistent and stable performance across align with those used to evaluate effectiveness.
3876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 (4) Efficiency of TMS: It is crucial to ensure that TMS scenarios are categorized according to the four Cooperative
processes are responsive and resource-efficient. It encompasses Driving Automation (CDA) classifications defined in SAE
several aspects: J3216 (status-sharing, intent-sharing, agree-seeking, and pre-
 • Time complexity: The TMS should maintain low time scriptive). It is supplemented by a dedicated section on novel
 complexity to support real-time decision-making. Higher TMS advancements. Due to space limitations, results for
 time complexity is allowed for other service requirements. certain categories are presented textually and visually through
 • Computing resource complexity: Some modules are graphs and tables, while others are described textually.
 designed to operate efficiently within the limited The investigation pursues three objectives derived from
 resources of onboard modules. For complex and long- Section IV’s framework and metrics. (a) Through comterm tasks, leveraging edge devices and optimizing prehensive literature documentation within each application
 architectural design is essential. scenario, we identify the specific techniques and analyze
 • Storage resource complexity: The TMS should use effi- emerging research trends; (b) Tabular comparative analysis
 cient data storage structures to minimize storage needs facilitates systematic cross-study evaluation of methodological
 while ensuring data accessibility and integrity. approaches; (c) Critical assessment demonstrates how ML
 While model performance evaluation is related to model enhances traditional TMS approaches, while simultaneously
accuracy, runtime performance evaluation determines the per- mapping the evolutionary trajectory of this research domain.
formance of the model when deployed in C-ITS. Models that To evaluate the current studies, the metrics are against six
consume a large amount of resources in detecting misbehavior dimensions from Section IV-E.
may block resources used for normal services, leading to a) Effectiveness: A study is rated as highly effective
additional misbehavior. Evaluation metrics are: if it evaluates the accuracy of TMS, employs data fusion
 techniques to enhance TMS performance, and demonstrates
 • ML Complexity: It describes the relationship between the
 improvements through TMS.
 size of the data and the time using Big O notation.
 b) Flexibility: A study is rated as highly flexible if it
 • Communication and storage costs: It covers the network
 investigates dynamic trust update mechanisms and proposes
 latency, and execution time, throughput, packet Delivery
 incentive designs to improve system adaptability.
 Ratio (PDR), memory usage, data storage capability, etc.
 c) Reliability: A study is rated as highly reliable if it
 (5) Security of TMS: analyzes the impact of trust fluctuations on service quality
 • Defending against cyber attacks: TMS can defend against and develops countermeasures against trust-related attacks.
 various cyber attacks, such as DoS attacks, tampering d) Efficiency: A study is rated as highly efficient if it
 attacks, and Sybil attacks. measures the computational and time costs of TMS operations.
 • Defending trust-related attacks: TMS should defend e) Security: A study is rated as highly secure if it identifies
 against trust-related attacks. and analyzes at least four distinct types of trust-related attacks
 Evaluation metrics are consistent with the effectiveness. in TMS.
 (6) Privacy preserving for TMS TMS collects large f) Security: A study is rated as highly private if it focuses
amounts of data, which covers identity privacy, loca- on privacy-preserving techniques within TMS.
tion privacy and behavioral privacy, etc. Thus, privacypreserving for TMS becomes critical under strict regulations,
such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). A. TMS in Data Dissemination
Common privacy-preserving measures are anonymization, Scenario description: Data dissemination, also known as
perturbation, encryption (e.g., Homomorphic Encryption), dif- content distribution or data sharing, is essential in IoV for
ferential privacy, Secure Multiparty Computation (SMC), reducing accident risks and improving traffic management
Zero-Knowledge Proofs. Blockchain is not a method of efficiency. It can be categorized as follows: a) Motivations:
privacy-preserving, but it provides a secure, transparent and opportunistic, vehicle-assisted, and cooperative data dissemhard-to-tamper-with way of storing and transmitting data that ination; b) Event types: event or on-demand dissemination,
helps enhance privacy protection. FL is also hot research in periodic dissemination, and hybrid dissemination; c) Range
privacy preservation, and extensions such as Federated DP and distance: multi-hop or single-hop dissemination; d) Appli-
[83], Federated SMC [84] and Blockchain-based FL [85] cations: delay-sensitive safety applications and delay-tolerant
have also been proposed. In addition, TMS needs to consider comfort and infotainment. The last classification criterion
pseudonymization mechanisms for vehicles. Evaluation met- was chosen in our survey. Various TMS methods have been
rics are consistent with the effectiveness. Some methods have proposed to address their different features.
their own quantitative privacy-preserving metrics, such as the 1) TMS in Delay-Sensitive Safety Applications: These
privacy budget in Federated DP. applications require rapid and reliable data transmission to
 ensure the safety of vehicles and passengers. Examples include
 V. A PPLICATIONS S CENARIOS OF TMS FOR CAV S collaborative autonomous driving, accident event dissemina-
 Based on the analytical framework established in Sec- tion, unsignalized intersection control, messages from special
tion IV, this survey systematically examines the implementa- vehicles like ambulances and police vehicles, etc.
tion of ML-based TMS across five CAV application scenarios, Essential criteria for TMS implementation. These applicawhich is significant for more practical ITS studies. These tions are usually disseminated periodically, enabling CAVs not
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3877

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON OF TMS M ETHODS FOR D ELAY-S ENSITIVE S AFETY DATA D ISSEMINATION IN CAV

to be required to the specific location [99]. Besides, its effec- entities with similar characteristics. VEMCA [93] was a
tiveness relies on the security provided by TMS. This section clustering-based algorithm for IoV event messages, where
focuses on those works of trust in data dissemination and the message trust was the ratio of true messages to total
other sections will investigate those considering performance messages within a given time after clustering.
enhancements. The comparison is summarized in TableVII. • Classifier: The categorization of CAVs’ behaviors
 (1) Lessons from traditional TMS methods. a) TMS can enables an effective assessment of their trust. The Gausbe a hybrid data trust and entity trust. An entity-centric sianNB classifier was used to determine vehicle direct
model by [86] was proposed for collaborative autonomous trust values [94], and indirect trust was not considered.
driving. A hybrid trust model was proposed for emergency • RL: The applications of RL in data dissemination are
message dissemination [87]. b) Recent advances have seen weight adjustment for trust updating; trust as RL’s state
a growing interest in blockchain-based TMS methods for and RL indirectly impacts; TMS for some decision-
IoV. Main studies are as follows: blockchain-based TMS making problems [97], [95], [100]; and play role in
for resource integration and incentives [88], and blockchain incentive mechanisms [95], [96].
TMS framework [89], consortium blockchain-based TMS [91]. • FL: FL offers distributed training for TMS. Wang et al.
c) Some solutions were on enhancing the time efficiency of [98] proposed a personalized FL-based node TMS for
TMS. Yuan et al. [90] supported TMS by reducing network CAVs on statistical trust calculation.
congestion and avoiding the propagation of duplicate data.
 Advances and limitations of prior work are summarized
d) Some solutions were on data privacy. Shen et al. [92]
 as follows. a) Attack defense: While the trust values were
incorporated blockchain-based multi-party trust evaluations for
 optimized, VEMCA cannot resist DoS attacks [93]. b) Service
data privacy preservation.
 improvement: Trust-based information dissemination policies
 (2) Recent ML-based TMS methods. These methods can be
 were discussed in traffic guidance scenarios and accident
categorized as follows.
 warnings scenarios [95]. c) From using traditional ML to
 • Clustering: The clustering algorithm itself does not optimized ML. The RL method was traditional Q-Learning
 directly generate trust values but indirectly helps in and was not compared to many RL methods, where the
 evaluating and calculating trust values by grouping DESQN method [97] and Cooperative Hierarchical Attentional
3878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

RL (CHA) improved this. However, the trust evidence was trust-related attacks and explainability, features that were
still based on statistical approaches, though the trust-sharing absent in GainTrust.
process and path prediction were based on the RL method.
Liu et al. [100] proposed a CHA framework for hybrid cooperative driving based on V2V, including calculating factors B. TMS in Routing
against jamming attacks. Scenario description: IoV routing refers to the process and
 2) TMS for Comfort and Infotainment Applications.: Sce- methodology by which packets are transmitted from a source
nario description: These applications include personalized to a destination (another vehicle, infrastructure, or remote
Points of Interest (POI) recommendations, music, news, and server). In our survey, the source is only considered to be
more. TMS enhances the effectiveness of these services by vehicles. IoV routing can be categorized into route discovery,
preventing misinformation and improving content filtering. path selection, and route maintenance. Routing refers to the
 Essential requirements for TMS implementation. Although process of determining the optimal path for data transmission.
TMS in these applications has less strict time constraints Common criteria for routing include shortest path, minimum
like delay-sensitive safety applications, they deal with vari- number of hops, maximum bandwidth, and minimum latency.
ous unstructured data types, such as text, audio, video, and Multi-hop task routing based on MADDPG [111] was prouser interaction data. User privacy protection is crucial [48]. posed under the vehicle-assisted collaborative edge computing
Besides, trust in these applications is often associated with framework, which allows tasks to be efficiently routed and
social IoV, enabling drivers and passengers to socially interact offloaded through multiple intermediate nodes for optimal
with other vehicles sharing similar interests, backgrounds, or resource allocation and efficient task completion. But the
destinations. It is common among taxis or private cars that security problem was not considered. Therefore, by selecting
follow routine routes daily. the path with the highest trust level, it is possible to meet the
 (1) Lessons from traditional TMS methods. Traditional necessary security requirements while guaranteeing efficiency
TMS solutions have been proposed for social IoV, incorpo- and performance. The comparison of this part is summarized
rating social trust besides direct trust and indirect trust, such in TableVIII.
as subjective logic [38], fuzzy logic [47], and statistically 1) Securing and Optimizing Route Protocol and Route
weighted methods [53], [101], [102]. Besides the classification Process: (1) Lessons from traditional TMS methods. Main
methods, the trust-related data is also different. TEAD [101] studies are as follows: statistically weighted methods [54],
was designed for video sharing D2D networks, using the subjective logic [59], and graph-based methods [46].These
correctness of video content as trust evidence. Similarly, studies provide valuable insights into how trust metrics can
Mada et al. [102] proposed a trust-based framework for video be effectively integrated into the routing process. Specifically,
content delivery. TEAD [101] used D2D data while the work TGRV was proposed in [54] to select trustworthy next-hop
in [102] used video data; neither was specifically designed for nodes and restrict malicious vehicles from participating in
social IoV but for the general IoT. the routing process. As presented in [59], routing decisions
 (2) Recent ML-based TMS methods. Fewer works in were made based on a trust level determined by metrics such
social IoV currently adopt ML-based TMS features. Although as packet freshness, reliability, and path length. In [46], the
datasets and spatial-temporal features in social IoV are differ- cluster heads analyzed social characteristics like nodal degree,
ent, insights can be drawn from research in social networks centrality degree, and friendship degree and then selected the
and social IoT. These methods can be categorized as follows: most trusted node as the next hop-forwarder. Besides, a trust-
 • Clustering: Jay et al. [103] proposed a K-means cluster- based routing protocol for VANET can be assisted by RSU,
 ing algorithm to visualize trust boundaries in the feature such as RTRV [112].
 space, classifying data points with trust attributes into (2) Recent ML-based TMS methods. Although some studies
 clusters labeled as “trust” or “untrust.” were for underwater IoT and underwater acoustic sensor
 • Classifier: C-DeepTrust integrated feature abstraction networks (UASNs), the nodes also have similar features like
 using MLP and LSTM networks into a composite fea- dynamic topology, but also have differences. For example,
 ture vector [104]. Cosine similarity then converted these some measures for meeting lightweight capability may not be
 features into trust probabilities via the softmax function, in CAV.
 with higher cosine similarity corresponding to higher trust • Clustering: Fan et al. [113] proposed a routing method
 values based on social homogeneity theory. using a trust model and game-based incentives. The
 • Regression: Deng et al. [105] proposed a trust-aware trust model combines direct and indirect trust through
 recommendation approach, including pretraining with the an uncertain deductive method, and an attribute-weighted
 deep autoencoder, social trust ensemble, and regulariza- K-means clustering method is used to identify legitimate
 tion with community effect. messages.
 • GNN: Several GNN-based methods have been proposed, • Classifier: A light-weight trust-aware multicast routing
 including Guardian [106], GATrust [107], TrustGNN protocol (LTMRP) was proposed in [114], where sub-
 [108], GainTrust [109], and TrustGuard [110]. For jective trust is based on SCGM(1,1) Weighted Markov
 instance, compared to Guardian and TrustGNN, Gain- Prediction and recommendation trust assessment method
 Trust and TrustGuard optimized GNN for dynamic based on feedback mechanism. And it can establish secure
 social networks. TrustGuard included defenses against and reliable communication paths by selecting trusted
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3879

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF TMS M ETHODS IN ROUTING

 relay vehicles. In other fields, Zhu et al. [115] proposed Knowledge-Experience-Reputation [120], the interval type-2
 a routing protocol based on GMM-HMM-LSTM for the fuzzy logic [58].
 underwater IoT. (2) Recent ML-based TMS methods. ML-based TMS meth-
 • RL methods: A DQN-based TMS for software-defined ods for cluster head selection are few in CAV but can be
 VANETs was proposed in [116] for getting the opti- inspired by industrial WSNs and UASNs.
 mal selection policy of reliable communication links. • GAN: A GAN-based trust redemption model for indus-
 Li et al. [117] proposed a Q-Learning-Assisted trust trial WSN was constructed [58] to avoid the permanent
 routing scheme for SDN-Based UASNs. isolation of normal nodes due to false alarms.
 • Transformer: Li et al. [118] implemented a trust man- • Classifier: Han et al. [121] proposed an SVM-based trust
 agement framework for IoV that utilized Transformer prediction model for UASNs.
 models to assess the trust of received messages. 3) Relay Vehicle Selection: Relay vehicles can improve
 2) Cluster Head Selection: Cluster results in the dis- the coverage of communications, increase the redundancy of
tributed formation of hierarchical network structures by signals, and increase the rate of data transmission, etc. TMS
grouping vehicles together based on correlated spatial distri- helps choose reliable relay vehicles that are exposed to varying
bution and relative velocity [119]. Cluster methods can be threats. The trust values were based on performance metrics
used to improve routing scalability in IoV. Cluster headers such as the bit error rate (BER) in [122].
can act as a collection and distribution center for routing
information, helping to determine the best path for data
transmission. Trust is a critical criterion for cluster head C. TMS in Vehicular Edge Computing
selection. These methods are discussed by edge offloading entity
 (1) Lessons from traditional TMS methods. Currently, selection, VNE-based IoV and SDN-based IoV.
several TMS methods for clustering have used statistically 1) Edge Offloading Entity Selection: Scenario description:
weighted methods by direct trust and indirect trust [55], by Vehicular edge computing (VEC) is categorized into fog
3880 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

computing, MEC computing, and micro cloud computing. The Quality of Information (QoI) for IoV such as [133], VNE
equipment of VEC includes edge nodes and edge servers. algorithms also take trust values into account, such as [134].
Trust is a key factor in the edge-offloading decision-making (1) Lessons from traditional TMS methods. Some academics
process and helps to optimize resource allocation to ensure have studied trust in VNE, where identifying and selecting
that computational tasks are offloaded to well-performing and trust nodes can defend against potential attacks, reduce conreliable edge equipment, providing a better user experience. flicts and interference, and improve overall network resource
 (1) Lessons from traditional TMS methods. Traditional TMS utilization efficiency. Certain researchers have discussed the
methods have been studied in edge computing by the Bayesian trust-aware VNE for industrial IoT [135], [136]. The trust
inference-based method [123], a multi-feedback trust aggre- calculation method of [135] was information entropy TOPSIS,
gation model [35], statistically weighted average [124], dual and the trust evaluation subject was substrate nodes, which
fuzzy logic [125] and subjective logic [126]. Specifically, QoS aimed to ensure that virtual nodes can only be embedded on
trust and the social trust were aggregated into global trust substrate nodes that meet their security requirements. Neverfor the trust among RSU-CAV and RSU-RSU for securing theless, the authors did not examine any trust or security level
task offloading [124], where the weight parameters were set in the link mapping phase, making their approach a partially
manually. Ali et al. [125] proposed a zero-trust management trust-aware algorithm claimed by [136]. Rezae et al. [136]
model for MEC and trust-aware task offloading. A trust considered both the trust levels of virtual nodes and substrate
assessment based on task execution feedback was proposed, nodes, achieving efficient resource allocation and secure netadjusting the trust score with an incomplete Beta function, work performance optimization.
where a hedonic coalition game allowed vehicles to form coop- (2) Recent ML-based TMS methods.. ML-based TMS has
erative groups for task offloading and execution, considering begun to be used for VNE in CAV.
trust score, computational ability, and route matching [127]. • RL.Zhang et al. [134] evaluated the trust of sub-
Wang et al. [128] proposed a two-tier trust evaluation method strate nodes using static security and activity levels,
to obtain accurate trust values for computation offloading. where the trust calculation was not based on ML
 (2) Recent ML-based TMS methods. ML-based TMS meth- but the DRL decisions can indirectly influence the
ods have been used for CAV. trust calculation results by adjusting the weights of
 these trust metrics, which enables VNE resource allo-
 • Classifier: In [129], predicting the trust rate of a given
 cation decisions that consider both performance and
 cloud service is regarded as evaluating its QoS attributes
 security.
 and history, where several Back-Propagation Neural Networks (BPNNs) are used to form an integrated model, and 3) Trust in SDN-Based IoV: Scenario description: SDN is
 PSO is used to obtain the optimal aggregation weights. also edge computing-enabling technology. SDN separates the
 The problem of trust prediction of IoT service consumers control plane from the data plane, where centralized control
 to edge computing nodes is modeled as a distributed and programmability provide the basis for VNE implemenoptimization problem in [130], i.e., Network Lasso prob- tation. The flexibility and programmability provided by SDN
 lem and a distributed trust prediction model is proposed allow networks in edge computing environments to quickly
 based on the Stochastic Alternating Direction Method of adapt to changes, such as dynamically adjusting network
 Multipliers(S-ADMM). configurations to meet the demands of edge services. The
 • RL: In [131], the A3C DRL algorithm was utilized importance of SDN security has been stressed in the future
 to dynamically make optimal offloading and migration direction of a survey of ML applied in SDN in 2019 [137],
 decisions by combining trust calculation and resource but trust management was not covered. Additionally, SDN
 matching of vehicle nodes. applications in IoV and SDN integrated with edge computing
 • FL methods: The FEDQ-Trust method [132] was pro- in IoV have improved a lot in recent years, such as SDN-based
 posed to select a subset of IoT MEC environments emergency social IoV [138], resource management by SDN
 participating in federated learning by combining DQN integrated with fog computing [139], [140], etc. However,
 on top of FedEM and using the trained global model to security was not considered in these methods. For instance,
 predict the trust value of IoT service instances. Deng et al. [141] summarized the types of topological attacks
 in SDN/SDVN, developing new defense mechanisms as future
 2) Trust in VNE-Based IoV: Scenario description: Virtual work.
Network Embedding (VNE) is not part of edge computing Sub-scenario 1. TMS enhanced by SDN. It can be proven
but edge computing-enabling technology. VNE is a network by [116], [117], [142] and [143]. Specifically, Xie et al.
virtualization technique that allows multiple virtual networks, [142] proposed an SDN-enhanced blockchain TMS for CAV,
with virtual nodes and links, to share a physical network where the trust calculation of vehicles was still a statistically
infrastructure called the substrate network, which consists of weighted average approach. Hameed et al. [143] demonsubstrate nodes and links. VNE can flexibly allocate resources strated that SDN and blockchain technologies can significantly
to different vehicles, create virtual network slices to meet enhance the scalability of TMS. Li et al. [117] implemented
specific QoS requirements, support multiple service providers SDN-controlled trust evaluation for UASNs, while recent
and users, and dynamically remap virtual nodes and links studies have extended ML-based TMS to SDN architectures in
to achieve fault recovery and fault tolerance. In addition to CAV. Zhang et al. [116] proposed SDN controller as an agent
considering constraints like resource limitations, QoS, and and the DQN approach was used to obtain optimal routing
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3881

decisions, including the selection of trust nodes as part of the reputation-based worker selection scheme, where reputation
communication link. was an improved multi-weight subjective logic reputation
 Sub-scenario 2. Trust evaluation of SDN mechanism. calculation model.
Some works were on the trust between the SDN controller (2) Recent ML-based TMS methods. ML-based TMS has
and the network application [144] and some works were on begun to be used for crowdsensing in other fields.
the trust of SDN controllers [57]. Besides, methods were • GNN: Zhang et al. [153] proposed a GNN-based trust
subjective logic reasoning [144], fuzzy logic models [57]. assessment for worker recruitment. GNN is composed of
However, there was a lack of discussion of specific references an embedding layer of Node2Vec pre-trained model, an
for CAV and ML-based TMS solutions for SDN in a survey of augmented convolutional layer under expert knowledge,
the trust in SDN and other 5G cutting-edge techniques [145]. GCN multilayer and a fully connected layer.
 • GAN: In other fields, GALTrust [154] was a GAN and
D. TMS in Vehicle-Oriented Crowdsensing
 type-2 fuzzy logic-based trust classification model for
 Scenario description: Crowdsensing utilizes sensors carried spatial crowdsensing drone, which uses sequences of
by a large number of participants (e.g., smartphone users, historical trust values as a training dataset, and also
vehicles, etc.) to collect, analyze, and share data for real- introduces a GAN-based trust redemption model to help
time monitoring. Entities in crowdsensing are as follows: misjudged nodes recover their trust values.
task requestors, who release task demands; task perform-
 In [155], trust assessment methods covered active trust and
ers(or called workers), who use sensing entities that has
 verification trust for sensing devices as well as recommendaterminal equipment to complete the demands and submit
 tion trust and verification trust for mobile vehicles. However,
task data to obtain compensation; and the crowdsensing platthe trust value relied on counting the number of successes
form, through which task requestors can release task data
 and failures without analyzing the content of the data packets
and workers can accept task demands. In 2024, a survey
 themselves, and the weight was set manually, which limited the
of crowdsensing in smart cities was proposed [146], where
 flexibility and accuracy of trust assessments. With the growing
divided into three kinds, i.e., human-oriented, vehicle-oriented
 popularity of blockchain for IoV, several works have proposed
and infrastructure-oriented. Vehicle-oriented crowdsensing lets
 blockchain-based trust data dissemination.
vehicles act as sensing entities, including opportunistic sensing
vehicles(taxis and buses, which must follow a fixed trajectory), 2) TMS in Worker Incentives: Existing incentives are cateand participatory sensing vehicles(private vehicles). Our sur- gorized into different types based on various criteria. a) Time:
vey focuses on the trust in vehicle-oriented crowdsensing and ex-ante incentives and ex-post incentives [11]. b) Methods:
CAV as workers. Classical monetary incentive method, auction theory, game
 1) TMS in Worker Selection: Scenario description: Worker theory [146].ML-based methods should be added. c) Goals:
selection is the crucial component for crowdsensing to control privacy-preserving incentives, quality-aware incentives, reputhe quality of sensing services. Work selection methods mainly tation incentives [156]. d) Serving objects: task initiators(TIs),
aim at the optimization by the effect of vehicle trajectories, platforms, and participants [157]. e) Blockchain: Thus, the
urban road networks and traffic flow summarized by [146]. worker incentives problem is defined ex-ante, focusing on
For instance, Zhu et al. [147] proposed and greedy algorithm- ML-based methods, trust as indicators, participant-oriented
based vehicle recruitment based on trajectory prediction by and CAVs as workers.
RNN. But these methods did not consider the attacks. (1) Lessons from traditional TMS methods. TMS methods
 (1) Lessons from traditional TMS methods. Trust-based have been integrated into traditional incentives, such as auction
work selection can help filter out high-quality workers and game [158],contract [159], and Stackelberg game [160]. It also
identify and exclude potentially malicious workers against became common in various scenarios, such as participants’
attacks. Traditional methods-based TMS for CAV were incentives in mobile IoT crowdsensing [156], [161], as well as
inspired by that for IoT, and have been strongly emphasiz- mobile IoV crowdsensing [162]. Specifically, a quality-aware
ing privacy preservation from the beginning. For instance, reputation-based reward and penalty strategy was proposed
TrustWorker [148] was a trustworthy and privacy-preserving to achieve dual incentives (both money and reputation) in
worker selection scheme for blockchain-based crowdsensing. [156], while a blockchain-assisted trust-preserving mechanism
D2 MT S in [149] proposed the trust value for mobile IoT was introduced by a probabilistic multi-class trust assessusers by a weighted average approach with time weight ment model in [161]. Similarly, an incentive mechanism was
and penalty factor. Li et al. [150] evaluated the trust of proposed considering security protection and data quality
each vehicle provider and ensured that only trusted data was assurance.
for further processing and analysis, where Wasserstein GAN (2) Recent ML-based TMS methods.. Additionally, a DRLand differential privacy were used for the trajectory privacy- assisted incentives model has become a trend, leveraging DRL
preserving scheme, but its trust assessment was still weighted to address complex issues like multiple agents, continuous
averages. Zhao et al. [151] chose to use an indirect reputation actions, and privacy protection.
that is largely based on a series of historical evaluations from • RL for worker incentives without trust. A MADDPGthe CAV’s past participation experiences, rather than directly based incentive mechanism was designed for CAV
requiring movement patterns, spatio-temporal distribution and crowdsensing task allocation to maximize satisfacsensor data analysis. Fu et al. [152] proposed an attributes and tion [157]. A Q-Learning method for task allocation
3882 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 was proposed under spatiotemporal crowdsensing [163]. Traditional TMS solutions are summarized as follows.
 Zhao et al. [164] proposed a TD3-based contract design a) Truth discovery-based TMS: It was proposed in [173] and
 with complete information asymmetry in mobile crowd- [174] for leader vehicle selection in the CAV platoon. In [173],
 sourcing networks.A MA-DADDPG was used for solving pseudonym and Homomorphic encryption were proposed.In
 the equilibrium policy in the multi-leader multi-follower [174], Homomorphic encryption and data scrambling were
 Stackelberg game model defining the interaction between proposed for privacy preservation. b) Blockchain-based TMS.
 edge servers (ESs) and edge devices (EDs) [165]. Ying et al. [175] implemented a blockchain record of reputa-
 A decentralized Soft Actor-Critic algorithm grounded tion values and a multi-weighted subjective logic-based TMS
 in game theory (DSACG) was proposed for edge- model. A blockchain-based security scheme was proposed in
 cloud incentive mechanism [166]. A PPO-assisted VCG [176] for the vehicle platoon with vehicle reputation evaluated
 Auction Mechanism was proposed for long-term adap- based on its past performance, but with no specific calculation
 tive incentives in sustainable FL With periodical Client process. c) Role-based TMS. A role-adaptive trust model for
 shifting [167]. trust evaluation of platoons was proposed in [40].
 • RL for worker incentives with trust or other factors 2) Trust Consensus Speed Advisory System (CSAS) in CAV
 like trust. Wang et al. [168] proposed trust evaluation Platoon: CSAS is a special form of intelligent speed advisory
 on ITS-Users utilizing FL and task distributors utilizing system that minimizes energy consumption for a platoon
 DRL, respectively. Through reasonable and fair rewards of vehicles traveling in a specific area by recommending
 and penalties, the system encouraged all participants to a consensus speed. TMS in CSAS ensures vehicle platoon
 raise their behavioral standards. Some studies proposed security. A Blockchain-Based Speed Advisory System (BSAS)
 DRL-based incentives. A PPO-based method was pro- [177] and Eco-Friendly CSAS [172] were proposed that use
 posed for incentivizing edge nodes participating in FL cryptography to ensure service trust and data privacy. Although
 [169]. Although trust was not discussed explicitly, an belonging to non-trust-value TMS, the blockchain architecture,
 incentive mechanism based on Stackelberg game theory trust incentive mechanism, and privacy mechanism are helpful
 and MA-DDPG algorithmic approach was used for data for trust-value-based TMS. Li et al. [39] designed a reputation
 collection in platoon autonomous driving [170], where calculation based on a multi-weighted subjective logic model
 social effect and cooperative behavior were closely related for malicious node exclusion and speed recommendation.
 to trust. It can also learn from the incentives in edge
 computing and FL.
 F. Advancements on the Mechanism of TMS
 In this part, the works are summarized by novelties lying
E. TMS in CAV Platooning in TMS mechanisms but not in supporting any services men-
 Scenario description: A platoon of CAVs is defined as a tioned above.
string of CAVs driving in a coordinated way and maintaining 1) ML for Node-Centric TMS: Traditional TMS methods
extremely short inter-vehicle spacing without compromising have been used, such as statistically weighted methods [33],
safety, even at relatively high speeds. The development of [178], [179]. Besides, ML-based TMS are increasingly rich
CAV platooning aims at enhancing traffic flow efficiency, for CAV.
strengthening road safety, and reducing fuel consumption and • Clustering.Although the node trust acquisition method
emissions, thereby improving productivity for individuals and was based on Type-2 fuzzy logic, a K-means algorithm
companies [171]. Studies on TMS in CAV platooning support was proposed to take into account the distribution and
critical studies, such as cooperative control algorithms, energy pattern of trust values and to determine the trust that
saving, and attack-resistant stability. We analyzed the two distinguishes between normal and malicious nodes, no
representative aspects in TMS. While existing literature covers longer relying on a single threshold of trust values [180].
traditional TMS methods, emerging approaches leveraging ML A trust feature aggregation method based on k-means
and blockchain are still underexplored. clustering can be first performed and then classifiers are
 1) Platoon Leader Vehicle Selection: The leader vehicle used for trust management, such as using SVM [181],
plays a pivotal role by setting the platoon’s speed and tra- [182], and random forest [183].
jectory, coordinating follower vehicles, and facilitating data • Classifier and Regression. Early ML-based TMS used
exchange and decision-making. Selecting a higher-trust leader simple neural networks such as multilayer feedforward
ensures reliable coordination and mitigates risks from mali- neural networks (FNN) [184], [185], [186] and logistic
cious or faulty vehicles. regression [187]. Then some works were on deep learning
 The process is analyzed as follows, using [172] as an methods, such as LSTM [188]. Specifically, AIT [185]
example. It includes four entities: User Vehicles, Platoon were for both local trust equipped on vehicles and also
Leader, RSUs, and Service Provider (SP). After completing for global trust on RSU, which was different from nona platoon trip, user vehicles submit feedback on the platoon hierarchical trust calculation in [184]. Li et al. [186]
leader to the RSU. The platoon leader’s reputation score is proposed a feed-forward NN-based IoT trust prediction
calculated using a weighted average and filtering algorithm. method, using historical trust sequences as inputs, which
The SP then recommends platoon leaders with high reputation outperformed the traditional gray prediction model in
scores to users to ensure the reliability of the platoon. terms of prediction accuracy, resistance to malicious
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3883

 attacks, and adaptability for practical applications. Some robustness of traditional TMS. RIETD was a reputation incenstudies have been performed by defining trust metrics tive scheme, where the fairness and reliability of RIETD were
 first and then combining the trust metrics to form a trust ensured through reputation updates with freshness, reputationdataset containing the trust metric values of each node based revenue allocation, and defense against trust-related
 in the network and then utilizing ML algorithms [189]. attacks [203]. On the other hand, although some studies
 Shafi et al. [190] proposed an SVM-based trust ranking discussed the robustness of the proposed non-ML-based or
 security preserving model for B5G/6G. TMS for CPS ML-based TMS, some studies have begun to separately discuss
 has been explored, but few work is on CPS for CAV. how to use ML methods to defend against trust-related attacks.
 A survey on CPS security [191] mentions trust mecha- • ML for trust incentives. A Q-learning-based incentive
 nisms but does not address CAV CPS or ML-based TMS. was proposed to encourage vehicles to continuously sub-
 Azad et al. [192] proposed FP-Growth-based behavioral mit accurate traffic information and optimally schedule
 features analysis and the naive Bayesian classification the incentive for both platform and vehicle [42], where
 method for trust decision-making in securing industrial the trust calculation was not based on ML. Wu et al. [204]
 CPS. trained trust models using FL with differential privacy and
 • RL. RL is used to provide feedback based on the designed an incentive mechanism based on evolutionary
 behavior of the device and security events. Trust Update games. Inspiration is expected from DRL-based incen-
 Mechanism Based on Reinforcement Learning (TUMRL) tives in crowdsensing and edge computing.
 was proposed in [193] for UASNs. Basha et al. [188] • ML for defending trust-related attacks. ML-based
 also used RL for the trust update method for MTC node behaviors analysis was carried out within the trust
 communication. The higher the anomaly score, the assessment process for social IoT to limit interactions
 lower the trust value. However, these two methods did with poor service providers and with attacker nodes
 not specify which specific RL algorithm was used. [201]. An incremental SVM (iSVM) method with multi-
 Lin et al. [194] proposed DDPG-based granular trust eval- parameter evaluation was proposed in a decentralized and
 uation for IoT, as well as fine-grained TL-DDPG-based resilient TMS for social IoT, where iSVM can defend
 user trust evaluation and coarse-grained TL-DQN-based multiple trust-related attack scenarios for dynamic knowluser trust evaluation. edge learning and adapting [202]. Moving from common
 2) ML for Data-Centric TMS: Traditional methods have ML methods to GNN, TrustGuard improved the accuracy
been used in TMS methods. A data-centric trust model for and robustness of the evaluation by using similarity-
CAV consisted of mathematical formulas for expectation, risk, based robust aggregators, robust coefficients at the spatial
and confidence calculation in [195]. However, the location aggregation layer; location-aware attention mechanisms
expectation only considers if the distance between the receiver at the temporal aggregation layer; multi-head attention
and the sender is within a threshold, and the speed expectation mechanisms; and dynamic graph segmentation [110]. The
only considers if the speed and predicted speed of senders comparison of this part is summarized in TableIX.
are within a threshold, which cannot effectively handle Sybil • ML for privacy-preserving TMS. Some blockchainattacks, data tampering attacks, and similar threats. based TMS have been proposed as privacy-preserving,
 • Classifier. A blockchain-based trust model was proposed such as location privacy preserving in [37], [92], and
 [196] for vehicles deployed on RSUs, where the trust of [205]; and identity privacy in [206] and [207]. Nonthe message content was calculated using FNN. blockchain-based TMS with privacy-preserving have also
 been proposed, focusing on trajectory privacy in [150];
 3) ML for Hybrid TMS: Traditional methods for hybrid data privacy and location privacy in [208]; reputa-
TMS have been used, such as fuzzy logic [51], Genetic tion privacy and identity privacy in [209]. However,
programming (GP) [197], statistically weighted methods [36] these methods were not ML-based. ML-based privacy-
Specifically, Ahmad et al. [198] proposed that the node-centric preserving methods gain hot attention. Privacy-preserving
trust is evaluated at the transport layer, and the data-centric graph ML [210] including SMC in graph data, FL in
trust is evaluated at the application layer. graph data and computation at graph level,subgraph-level
 • Classifier. Liu et al. [199] proposed a hybrid TM for and node level. Cryptographic primitives like SMC, zero-
 VANET, where data trust evaluation is for traffic data, knowledge proofs, HE and Functional Encryption (FE)
 node trust includes functional trust and collaborative used in privacy-preserving ML were surveyed in [211],
 filtering-based recommendation trust. The study in [200] though these surveys rarely cover CAVs and TMSs. FL
 proposed a complementary vehicle-side conflict resolu- has been applied to ML-based privacy-preserving TMS,
 tion model based on LSTM to serve its TMS, although including FL-based TMS for CAV [98], FL with differthe core trust calculation was not ML-based. ential privacy-based TMS for cross-domain IoT [204].
 4) ML for Incentives for TMS: Different from the discussed Distributed ML with differential privacy, HE and SMC
TMS in worker incentives for crowdsensing in ITS, a sound are also employed to defend against privacy attacks in
TMS for any service should provide incentives for encouraging ML, including model inversion, membership inference
nodes to provide accurate and honest recommendations or and attribute inference, etc.
evidence of trust. Some non-ML-based trust incentive methods 5) ML for TMS in Mixed Traffic: The complexities of
have been proposed. Besides, several approaches analyzed the mixed traffic necessitate advanced TMS. For cooperative
3884 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 TABLE IX
 S UMMARY OF ML M ETHODS IN S OCIAL I OT AND T HEIR V ULNERABILITIES TO T RUST-R ELATED ATTACKS

 TABLE X
 C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF TMS IN M IXED AND F ULLY CAV E NVIRONMENTS

control during highway on-ramp merging, Pan et al. [212] inputs of a single front-facing camera, achieving a complete
proposed a Trust-Based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learn- driving decision system without manual rules or intermediate
ing (Trust-MARL) method, which features a dynamic trust modules [214]. In intrusion detection, Bertoli et al. [215]
mechanism that continuously evaluates and refines agent proposed a framework called AB-TRAP to build adaptive
cooperation strategies to achieve safe, efficient, and smooth solutions to the task of developing network intrusion detection
merging. Although TMS in [213] was not by ML methods, systems.Different from these two field, the research on end-to-
Bangui et al. [213] tackled the unknown-trust risks from end learning in TMS remains immature. Bahutair et al. [216]
human behavioral uncertainty by applying black-swan theory proposed an end-to-end trust management framework for
to pinpoint assessment gaps and incorporating human-emotion crowdsourced IoT services, incorporating: an MLP for modeldata into a dynamic trust framework that promotes safe human- ing services and usage against trust indicators, a clustering
automation collaboration. The integration of TMS into a mixed algorithm for detecting these indicators, and optimization
traffic environments necessitates a fundamental shift in design algorithms for multi-use trust expectation aggregation.
principles. Although studies on ML-based TMS for mixed
traffic remain limited, a systematic comparison with fully CAV VI. D ISCUSSIONS
environments is crucial to elucidate these new requirements. This discussion examines three key aspects: (i) summarizing
To this end, we present a comparative analysis, structured the answers to the research questions proposed in Section II,
according to our three-layer framework, which draws insights (ii) mapping the problems solved by recent studies in relation
from characteristic analysis and recent advancements to delin- to open directions identified in prior surveys, and (iii) analyzeate the key differences (see Table X). ing the barriers to implementing ML-based TMS for CAVs
 6) End-to-End Learning for TMS: End-to-end learning from theory to practice.
effectively eliminates manual feature engineering through its
inherent capability to autonomously derive optimal feature A. Key Insights Summary in Terms of Research Questions
representations directly from raw input data without human The former four RQs are addressed as follows.
intervention. End-to-end learning has a wide range of appli- To address RQ1, this survey examines ML advantages and
cations in various fields, such as speech recognition, image implementations in TMS for CAVs (Section IV, Parts A-D).
recognition, natural language processing, and autonomous At the data layer, ML handles heterogeneous data. At the
driving. In autonomous learning, DAVE-2 was a classical computation layer, deep learning models complex trust relaend-to-end CNN-based autonomous driving approach, which tionships. At the incentive layer, algorithms optimize trust
directly predicts vehicle steering commands from raw pixel mechanisms (e.g., RL), addressing CAV-specific challenges.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3885

 To address RQ2, a comprehensive ML-based TMS evalua- lot in recent years, current studies on TMS by them are at an
tion framework is established (Section IV, Part E), covering early stage. More efforts should be made in future work.
traditional metrics (accuracy, efficiency) and CAV-specific (2) While pointing out the importance of RL for trust
needs (real-time response, privacy, interpretability, etc.). assessment in [25] without detailed analysis, our survey
 To address RQ3, an assessment of existing work reveals comprehensively examines RL-based TMS across CAV appligaps, particularly in dynamic topology handling and real-time cations (Section V), though further research is needed.
performance, especially shown in Section V. It highlights key 6) Integrating ML Methods With Other Emerging Technoloresearch limitations. gies: In [25], methods were expected to combine into the trust
 To address RQ4, this survey explores the integration of assessment, such as knowledge fragment fusion, correlation
TMS with emerging CAV applications (e.g., trust-based pla- computation, fusion pattern learning, and relation discovery.
toon cooperative control and crowdsourced data collection In this survey, recent works for CAV that directly used
optimization). It demonstrates improved performance and these techniques were few. However, some principles and
innovative service potential. objectives are similar. More efforts should be made in future
 work.
B. Key Insights Summary in Terms of Solved Problems Beyond synthesizing solved problems from prior surveys,
 The majority of publications mentioned in this survey are ML-based TMS methods for IoT and CAV have demonfrom 2020 to 2025. Thus, key insights can be summarized that strated substantial technological advancements in both IoT
transform open directions in an ML-based trust assessment for and CAV domains since 2020. They are particularly in
IoT [25] in 2020 into solved problems. the following areas: decentralized trust data management,
 1) Fine-Grained Trust Evaluation Based on ML: (1) While computationally efficient trust modeling, adaptive update
prior work in [25] had limited integration of traditional and mechanisms, incentive structure design, and attack-resilient
ML-based trust evaluation methods, this survey identifies architectures. These developments establish a strong founthree emerging approaches: i) rule/expert-based trust labeling dation for future ML-based TMS innovations in CAV
for ML training, ii) hybrid ML-traditional prediction models applications.
using full or partial data labeling, and iii) traditional trust 7) Tailoring ML Solutions to Different Kinds of Trust and
computation enhanced with RL and FL for dynamic updating Scenarios: Individual trust, prone to local biases and attacks,
and decision-making. is efficiently handled by lightweight models (e.g., CNN,
 (2) While prior work in [25] contained limited ML-based LSTM) and enhanced with RL, meta-learning or adversarapproaches for subjective and dynamic trust, the TMS-CAV ial training. Collective trust, leveraging group dynamics for
framework in this survey addresses subjective trust shown in robustness, employs GNNs, multi-agent RL, and federated
Section III-A. At the same time, the TMS’s update module learning, with compression techniques reducing overhead.
enables dynamic trust by some ML-based studies, such as RL Consequently, real-time tasks (e.g., safety messaging) favor
methods. individual trust, while collaborative decisions (e.g., platoon
 2) Automatic Feature Selection and Algorithm Selection: leadership) rely on collective trust.
While prior work in [25] highlighted the need for automated
feature and algorithm selection, this survey demonstrates ML’s C. Addressing Implementation Challenges of ML-Based TMS
inherent advantages in this regard, particularly through deep in Real-World CAV Applications
learning and its extensions. The ML-based studies discussed Four key criteria are identified for evaluating the practical
in Section V can also support this. suitability of ML methods for TMS-CAV. a. Inherent algorith-
 3) Security and Privacy: While prior work in [25] empha- mic characteristics: Data needs, learning mechanisms, output
sized the importance of security and privacy in ML-based trust forms. b. Engineering constraints: Computational resources,
evaluation, our survey systematically addresses these concerns real-time performance, communication overhead. c. Scenarioacross all TMS modules (Section V-F). Studies on CAV are specific suitability: Safety-critical tasks, resource management,
few, but on static IoT and social IoT have become universal. privacy-sensitive operations. d. Security and privacy: Robust-
 4) A Framework for Trust Evaluation as a Service: ness against adversarial attacks, data poisoning, and privacy
(1) Prior work in [25] identified the computational and com- preservation. Table XI provides a comparative analysis of
munication demands. Although early ML-based TMS studies common ML methods for TMS-CAV. Three key challenges
overlooked this aspect, recent TMS-CAV studies address these and possible ML solutions are summarized.
constraints, as reflected in our taxonomy of TMS objectives. 1) Accuracy Vs. Real-Time Performance Trade-off: GNNs
 (2) As capabilities initially proposed in [25], recent effectively model vehicle trust dynamics but face computaadvances in RL, transfer learning, and continual learning tional challenges in meeting stringent real-time requirements.
(Section II.E) now enable automated trust evidence collection Current model distillation methods enable efficient deployment
and model optimization, though CAV implementations remain at the cost of reduced accuracy, creating a pressing need for
fewer than IoT applications. improved distillation techniques that better preserve model
 5) Different ML Methods to Evaluate Trust: (1) While prior performance.
work in [25] noted but further explored unsupervised and 2) Data Silos Vs. Collaborative Security: Although
semi-supervised learning for TMS, our survey provides their autonomous fleets can comply with GDPR through FL, crosstaxonomy (Section D). Although algorithms have improved a manufacturer data barriers hinder comprehensive global trust
3886 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 TABLE XI
 C OMPARISON OF T YPICAL ML PARADIGMS FOR TMS-CAV

evaluation. Emerging solutions combining blockchain and FL coverage, precise technology-layer alignment, and effective
may offer a breakthrough. cross-disciplinary integration.
 3) From Theory to Real-World Deployment: Existing TMS
solutions heavily rely on simulation environments like SUMO,
but real-world edge cases, such as extreme weather, expose A. Trust Data Layer
generalization flaws in these models. Potential solutions (1) High-quality data source. Data is critical in ML, but
include hybrid testing frameworks integrating SUMO sim- we found that the current TMS-CAV mostly uses datasets
ulations with physical testbeds, along with meta-learning from its own simulations, constraining the comparison of
architectures for improved generalization. TMS-CAV using different methods. On the contrary, there are
 trust datasets in social networks and online social networks,
 but the lack of location and speed information prevents the
 VII. O PEN I SSUES AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
 modeling of CAV trust well. Moreover, current research on
 The three-layer TMS-CAV framework is employed for its trust-related data primarily focuses on structured data such as
demonstrated capability in achieving comprehensive domain beacons. Further exploration is urgently needed in areas like
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3887

multi-source data fusion and multi-modal data fusion. This requires GNN models under 100 MB. b) Real-Time Demands:
future direction has been confirmed in the latest research. Critical functions like emergency braking need end-to-end
Li et al. [217] proposed an adaptive multi-granularity trust latency under 100ms. c) Scalability: The design must handle
management scheme for UAV visual sensor security under all traffic densities, from sparse to dense urban, without
adversarial attacks. performance loss.
 (2) Balancing computational complexity and real-time (3) More efforts on CAV scenarios. After the survey of
performance of TMSs. Several strategies can be employed. five scenarios, it is clear that advanced ML methods are still
(a) Data streamlining: Focus on collecting only the most rele- less used in CAVs although some studies have been widely
vant data points for CAVs, but also be sufficient to guarantee used in social networks, static IoT, and social IoT. Besides,
the accuracy of the ML, such as vehicle behavior, network TMS methods are expected to be effective in more CAV
interactions, and environmental factors. b) Data Aggregation: scenarios, such as trajectory prediction, traffic flow prediction,
Use data aggregation techniques during the data collection intersection signal control, non-signal control, etc.
phase to reduce the amount of data that needs to be transmitted (4) Detailed ML methods comparison. Most studies rely
and processed. c) Data caching: It helps frequently accessed on self-simulated simulations. The lack of public datasets for
data to reduce the computational cost of real-time queries. CAV trust poses a significant challenge, thereby limiting the
d) Data preprocessing: Cleaning, normalization, and necessary depth of comparative analysis in studies that employ advanced
transformations are performed. e) Feature Selection: It should ML methods. Future work should involve more thorough
reduce the input dimensions of the model by feature selection comparisons of ML-based TMS, such as evaluating RL-based
analysis. approaches like DQN, DDQN, and D3QN, beyond mere
 (3) Privacy Preservation. Many distributed TMSs have parameter tuning. Additionally, comparisons with traditional
used blockchain for privacy preservation. However, the trans- TMS using the same dataset are recommended. With the growparency and traceability of blockchain may pose privacy risks, ing development of security methods based on Large Language
and many blockchain applications require additional privacy- Models (LLMs), there is a need to explore LLM-based TMS,
preserving measures, such as the use of zero-knowledge especially considering the requirements for multi-source and
proofs or other cryptographic techniques to hide the identities multi-domain data fusion.
of participants, and the design of privacy-friendly address- (5) ML-based TMS for CAV-CPS. Although some studies
generation and management policies. This future direction has have started exploring TMS for CPS [191], [192], CAVs are
been confirmed in the latest research [218], [219]. often treated as CPS. However, current TMS approaches for
 CAVs typically focus on the network perspective rather than
 addressing the broader CPS system. CPS integrates compute,
B. Trust Calculation Layer network, and physical components, and TMS applied to CPS
 (1) Less on label. The majority of ML-based TMS were needs to consider the cross-domain requirements.
based on supervised learning algorithms. It relies on a large (6) Novel fields like edge intelligence, explainable ML,
number of high-quality labeled attack data samples. Mean- meta learning, and knowledge distillation. Edge Intelligence
while, due to the continuous evolution of attackers’ means and can assist in handling dynamic environments, multi-source
strategies, supervised learning methods such as CNN, RNN, data fusion, and privacy protection. Explainable ML enhances
CNN-LSTM, etc., need to constantly update the training data the interpretability of TMS models. Meta-learning optimizes
and re-train the models, which makes it difficult to respond the generalization capability of TMS. Knowledge distillation
to unknown attacks promptly. Efficient Semi-supervised TMS facilitates model lightweighting and efficiency improvement.
methods are needed to effectively analyze a majority of (7) More concerns on TMS in mixed traffic. Future
unlabeled data samples and less labeled data. TMS-CAV research should prioritize mixed traffic scenar-
 (2) Balancing computational complexity and real-time ios to improve practical relevance. A key direction involves
performance of TMS at the data level. Several strategies testing model sensitivity and robustness under varying penecan be employed. a) Algorithm optimization: Selecting or tration rates. Furthermore, there is a pressing need to develop
designing algorithms with low time complexity to reduce behavior-aware trust models that differentiate between HV and
computation time. b) Parallel computing: Utilizing multi-core AV behaviors to counter new attacks. Finally, creating public
processors or distributed systems for parallel computing to mixed-traffic datasets is critical to support model training,
increase processing speed. c) Hardware acceleration: Using testing, and benchmarking.
specialized hardware such as GPUs or FPGAs to accelerate (8) More concerns on end-to-end learning-based TMS
computationally intensive tasks evaluated with trust. d) Model End-to-end learning simplifies trust computation in TMS-CAV
simplification: Reducing computational complexity by using by directly mapping inputs to outputs, eliminating multi-stage
simpler models or reducing model parameters. e) Incremental processing and manual feature engineering - ideal for multicomputation: Using an incremental approach for trust value source data fusion and dynamic decisions. Yet challenges
updates to avoid recalculating from scratch. persist: its opaque nature conflicts with explainability needs
 To ensure TMS-CAV can be practically deployed, three key for tasks like malicious node identification; it adapts poorly to
engineering constraints must be met: a) Computational Limits: layered architectures with privacy mechanisms; and it demands
The system must match onboard processor capabilities. For large labeled datasets seldom available in dynamic TMS
example, NVIDIA Drive Xavier’s 10-30 TOPS performance environments, limiting generalization against novel attacks.
3888 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

A hybrid solution replaces traditional trust computation with and ML technologies mature, addressing these limitations will
an end-to-end sub-module whose outputs remain monitorable be pivotal to achieving trustworthy and resilient CAVs.
and overridable, balancing performance gains with localized
risk containment. R EFERENCES
 [1] (2023). Global Automotive Cybersecurity Report. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.upstreamsecurity.com/
C. Trust Incentive Layer [2] United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. (2021). Un
 Regulation, no. 155—Cyber Security and Cyber Security Manage-
 (1) Adaptive incentive mechanisms. Currently, there are ment System. [Online]. Available: https://unece.org/transport/vehicleseveral incentive studies on worker incentives in crowdsensing regulations-wp29/un-regulations
and edge computing, which are categorized as incentives [3] Road Vehicles—Cybersecurity Engineering, Standard 21434, 2021.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/72412.html
based on traditional methods (auction, contract and game), [4] Information Technology—Security Techniques—Information Security
blockchain-based incentives, DRL-based or FL-based incen- Controls—Part 1: Concepts and Models, Standard ISO/IEC 27036-1,
tives, and the combination of ML and traditional methods. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/53791.html
 [5] M. R. Asaar, M. Salmasizadeh, W. Susilo, and A. Majidi, “A secure
However, most studies focus on general mobile scenarios, with and efficient authentication technique for vehicular ad-hoc networks,”
limited attention to CAV-specific incentives, especially on trust IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 5409–5423, Jun. 2018.
incentives alone. There is an urgent need to develop adaptive [6] M. Adil et al., “Three byte-based mutual authentication scheme for
 autonomous Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
trust incentive strategies tailored to CAVs that respond dynam- vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 9358–9369, Jul. 2022.
ically to network and environmental changes. [7] R. W. van der Heijden, S. Dietzel, T. Leinmüller, and F. Kargl,
 (2) Trust-related attack for ML-based TMS. In most “Survey on misbehavior detection in cooperative intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 779–811,
current ML-based TMS studies, trust-related attacks are typ- 1st Quart., 2019.
ically discussed in the context of the overall effectiveness [8] Z. Lu, G. Qu, and Z. Liu, “A survey on recent advances in vehicular
of TMS. However, there is a lack of in-depth analysis on network security, trust, and privacy,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 760–776, Feb. 2019.
how these attacks specifically affect ML-based TMS. Given [9] G. Bendiab, A. Hameurlaine, G. Germanos, N. Kolokotronis, and
the growing importance of ML model robustness, especially S. Shiaeles, “Autonomous vehicles security: Challenges and solutions
against threats such as data poisoning and backdoor attacks, using blockchain and artificial intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
 Syst., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 3614–3637, Apr. 2023.
it’s crucial to examine the interplay between trust-related [10] R. Sedar, C. Kalalas, F. Vázquez-Gallego, L. Alonso, and J. Alonsoattacks, adversarial attacks on ML models, and cyberattacks. Zarate, “A comprehensive survey of V2X cybersecurity mechanisms
For instance, collusion attacks, a common type of trust-related and future research paths,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 4,
 pp. 325–391, 2023.
attack, are often triggered by Sybil attacks, and they can have [11] Y. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Yan, Z. Wan, and R. Jäntti, “A survey on
a similar impact on ML systems as data poisoning. blockchain-based trust management for Internet of Things,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 5898–5922, Apr. 2023.
 [12] L. Fotia, F. Delicato, and G. Fortino, “Trust in edge-based Internet of
 VIII. C ONCLUSION Things architectures: State of the art and research challenges,” ACM
 Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–34, Jan. 2023.
 Trust mechanisms are essential for secure data exchange, [13] S. Sagar, A. Mahmood, Q. Z. Sheng, W. E. Zhang, Y. Zhang,
reliable decision-making, and defense against attacks, evolving and J. K. Pabani, “Understanding the trustworthiness management in
from simple modules into comprehensive systems known as the social Internet of Things: A survey,” Comput. Netw., vol. 251,
 Sep. 2024, Art. no. 110611.
trust management systems. Traditional rule-based TMS has [14] L. Wei, Y. Yang, J. Wu, C. Long, and B. Li, “Trust management for
been significantly enhanced by ML, which brings advantages Internet of Things: A comprehensive study,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
like handling large-scale, high-dimensional data and adaptive vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 7664–7679, May 2022.
 [15] J. Wang, Z. Yan, H. Wang, T. Li, and W. Pedrycz, “A survey on trust
learning capabilities. models in heterogeneous networks,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 24,
 An innovative three-layer ML-based TMS framework no. 4, pp. 2127–2162, 4th Quart., 2022.
designed for CAVs is introduced in our survey, integrating [16] R. Hussain, J. Lee, and S. Zeadally, “Trust in VANET: A survey of
 current solutions and future research opportunities,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
the trust data layer, trust computation layer, and trust incentive Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 2553–2571, May 2021.
layer. The strengths of ML are leveraged in each layer, offering [17] A. Hbaieb, S. Ayed, and L. Chaari, “A survey of trust management in
a holistic solution for TMS in CAVs. A six-dimensional the Internet of Vehicles,” Comput. Netw., vol. 203, Feb. 2022, Art. no.
 108558.
objective framework is also proposed, aligning with the unique [18] E. Zavvos, E. H. Gerding, V. Yazdanpanah, C. Maple, S. Stein, and
characteristics and requirements of CAVs, serving as a bench- M. C. Schraefel, “Privacy and trust in the Internet of Vehicles,”
mark for evaluating and comparing various ML approaches. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 10126–10141,
 Aug. 2022.
Additionally, recent advancements shown by studies in TMS [19] M. Macas, C. Wu, and W. Fuertes, “A survey on deep learning for
across five traffic scenarios and recent advancements on TMS cybersecurity: Progress, challenges, and opportunities,” Comput. Netw.,
mechanisms are surveyed. vol. 212, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 109032.
 [20] Y. Luo, Y. Xiao, L. Cheng, G. Peng, and D. Yao, “Deep learning-
 As an exploratory survey, this survey acknowledges that based anomaly detection in cyber-physical systems: Progress and
ML techniques and CAV technologies are rapidly evolving. opportunities,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36, Jun.
While our proposed framework is designed to be scalable 2022.
 [21] A. Boualouache and T. Engel, “A survey on machine learning-based
and adaptive, ML-based TMS still faces critical challenges misbehavior detection systems for 5G and beyond vehicular networks,”
in rigorous CAV environments, including the robustness to IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1128–1172, 2nd Quart.,
dynamic conditions, the real-world validation gap, explain- 2023.
 [22] S. Zhang et al., “Federated learning in intelligent transportation sysability and safety, etc. Despite these challenges, this survey tems: Recent applications and open problems,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
provides a foundational roadmap for future research. As CAV Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 3259–3285, May 2024.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3889

[23] V. P. Chellapandi, L. Yuan, C. G. Brinton, S. H. Żak, and Z. Wang, [45] G. Liu, Z. Yan, D. Wang, H. Wang, and T. Li, “DePTVM: Decentralized
 “Federated learning for connected and automated vehicles: A survey pseudonym and trust value management for integrated networks,”
 of existing approaches and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 110–124,
 vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 119–137, Jan. 2024. Jan. 2024.
[24] H. Li et al., “Graph neural networks in intelligent transportation [46] A. M. Vegni, C. Leoni, V. Loscrı́, and A. Benslimane, “A reputationsystems: Advances, applications and trends,” 2024, arXiv:2401.00713. based trustworthiness concept for wireless networking in vehicular
[25] J. Wang, X. Jing, Z. Yan, Y. Fu, W. Pedrycz, and L. T. Yang, “A survey social networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 28–34, May
 on trust evaluation based on machine learning,” ACM Comput. Surv., 2024.
 vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1–36, Sep. 2021. [47] Y. Zhao et al., “Entity and sociality trust-aware model for content
 distribution in social Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
[26] T. Luo, J. Wang, Z. Yan, and E. Gelenbe, “Graph neural networks for
 vol. 71, no. 12, pp. 12511–12522, Dec. 2022.
 trust evaluation: Criteria, state-of-the-art, and future directions,” IEEE
 [48] X. Wang et al., “Privacy-preserving content dissemination for vehicular
 Netw., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 37–46, Jul. 2025.
 social networks: Challenges and solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut.,
[27] Information Technology—Security Techniques—Information security vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1314–1345, 2nd Quart., 2019.
 for Supplier Relationships—Part 1: Overview and concepts, Standard [49] R. M. Kramer, “Collective trust within organizations: Conceptual foun-
 ISO/IEC 27036-1:2014, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/ dations and empirical insights,” Corporate Reputation Rev., vol. 13,
 standard/59648.html no. 2, pp. 82–97, Jun. 2010.
[28] Information Security Technology Terminology, Standard GB/T 25069- [50] J. E. Sapp, D. M. Torre, K. L. Larsen, E. S. Holmboe, and S. J. Durning,
 2022, 2022. “Trust in group decisions: A scoping review,” BMC Med. Educ.,
[29] Overview of Trust Provisioning for Information and Communication vol. 19, no. 1, p. 309, Dec. 2019.
 Technology Infrastructures and Services, document ITU-t Y.3052, [51] M. M. Hasan, M. Jahan, and S. Kabir, “A trust model for edge-driven
 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Y.3052 vehicular ad hoc networks using fuzzy logic,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
[30] K. Kuru, “TrustFSDV: Framework for building and maintaining trust in Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 14037–14050, Dec. 2023.
 self-driving vehicles,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 82814–82833, 2022. [52] W. Li, W. Meng, and L. F. Kwok, “Surveying trust-based collaborative
[31] Q. Xu, Z. Gao, C. Yang, H. Yang, and L. Wang, “Credible posi- intrusion detection: State-of-the-art, challenges and future directions,”
 tioning of BDS RTK/INS integration based on multi-information IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 280–305, 1st Quart.,
 cross-validation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, 2022.
 pp. 1–13, Nov. 2024. [53] J. Li et al., “Trust based secure content delivery in vehicular networks:
[32] H. Gao, C. Liu, Y. Yin, Y. Xu, and Y. Li, “A hybrid approach to A bargaining game theoretical approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
 trust node assessment and management for VANETs cooperative data vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 3267–3279, Mar. 2020.
 communication: Historical interaction perspective,” IEEE Trans. Intell. [54] S. Shokrollahi and M. Dehghan, “TGRV: A trust-based geographic
 Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 16504–16513, Sep. 2022. routing protocol for VANETs,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 140, Mar. 2023,
 Art. no. 103062.
[33] C. Cheong, Y. Song, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, B. Cai, and Q. Ni,
 [55] M. V. Kadam, H. B. Mahajan, N. J. Uke, and P. R. Futane,
 “Multidimensional trust evidence fusion and path-backtracking mech-
 “Cybersecurity threats mitigation in Internet of Vehicles communianism for trust management in VANETs,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 cation system using reliable clustering and routing,” Microprocessors
 vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 18619–18634, May 2024.
 Microsyst., vol. 102, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 104926.
[34] V. Chunduri et al., “Blockchain-based secure trust management scheme [56] W. Zhang, H. Sun, W. Fang, C. Zhu, and G. Jia, “Trust evaluation
 for Internet of Vehicles over cyber-physical system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. and decision based on D-S evidence theory: Early models and future
 Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 14067–14076, Sep. 2025. perspectives,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 16032–16041, 2023.
[35] W. Kong, X. Li, L. Hou, J. Yuan, Y. Gao, and S. Yu, “A reliable [57] S. Shao, W. Gong, H. Yang, S. Guo, L. Chen, and A. Xiong,
 and efficient task offloading strategy based on multifeedback trust “Data trusted sharing delivery: A blockchain-assisted software-defined
 mechanism for IoT edge computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, content delivery network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 14,
 no. 15, pp. 13927–13941, Aug. 2022. pp. 11949–11959, Jul. 2023.
[36] H. El-Sayed, H. Alexander, P. Kulkarni, M. A. Khan, R. M. Noor, and [58] L. Yang, S. X. Yang, Y. Li, Y. Lu, and T. Guo, “Generative adversarial
 Z. Trabelsi, “A novel multifaceted trust management framework for learning for trusted and secure clustering in industrial wireless sensor
 vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 8377–8387,
 pp. 20084–20097, Nov. 2022. Aug. 2023.
[37] Y. Li, Y. Cao, Y. Zhuang, J. Li, G. Du, and J. Chen, “Blockchain- [59] I. Mirzadeh, M. Sayad Haghighi, and A. Jolfaei, “Filtering malienabled trust management with location privacy preservation in cious messages by trust-aware cognitive routing in vehicular ad
 vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 14, hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1,
 pp. 24659–24671, Jul. 2024. pp. 1134–1143, Jan. 2023.
[38] T. Cheng, G. Liu, Q. Yang, and J. Sun, “Trust assessment in vehicular [60] J. Guo et al., “TROVE: A context-awareness trust model for VANETs
 social network based on three-valued subjective logic,” IEEE Trans. using reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7,
 Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 652–663, Mar. 2019. pp. 6647–6662, Jul. 2020.
[39] S. Li et al., “TD-SAS: A trust-aware and decentralized speed advisory [61] S. Dhelim, N. Aung, M. T. Kechadi, H. Ning, L. Chen, and A. Lakas,
 system for energy-efficient autonomous vehicle platoons,” IEEE Trans. “Trust2Vec: Large-scale IoT trust management system based on
 Intell. Vehicles, vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 5554–5570, Sep. 2024. signed network embeddings,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 1,
 pp. 553–562, Jan. 2023.
[40] H. Chen et al., “Trust model-based consensus optimization for [62] Z. Tian, X. Gao, S. Su, J. Qiu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Evaluating
 vehicle platooning networks: A novel deep reinforcement learning reputation management schemes of Internet of Vehicles based on
 approach with GenAI,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 8, evolutionary game theory,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 6,
 pp. 1–16, Aug. 2025. pp. 5971–5980, Jun. 2019.
[41] H. Yang, L. Guo, T. Wang, and C. Lv, “A novel lightweight dynamic [63] G. Jin et al., “Spatio-temporal graph neural networks for predictive
 trust evaluation model for edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service learning in urban computing: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 Manage., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 3542–3554, Apr. 2025. Eng., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 5388–5408, Oct. 2024.
[42] W. Tong et al., “TI-BIoV: Traffic information interaction for [64] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,”
 blockchain-based IoV with trust and incentive,” IEEE Internet Things IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
 J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 21528–21543, Dec. 2023. [65] J. Gui et al., “A survey on self-supervised learning: Algorithms,
[43] K. Hidawi, B. Carminati, and E. Ferrari, “Aerotrust-5D: A five- applications, and future trends,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
 dimensional trust management system for optimizing uav cooperation Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 1–20, Dec. 2024.
 and path planning in urban areas,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, [66] Z. Song, X. Yang, Z. Xu, and I. King, “Graph-based semi-supervised
 no. 12, pp. 18369–18384, Dec. 2025. learning: A comprehensive review,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
[44] C. Cheong, Y. Song, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, and Q. Ni, Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 8174–8194, Nov. 2023.
 “DCACA: Dual-model consensus-based anti-risk confidence allocation [67] P. K. Mvula, P. Branco, G.-V. Jourdan, and H. L. Viktor, “A survey on
 trust management in IoVs,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 2, the applications of semi-supervised learning to cyber-security,” ACM
 pp. 1890–1906, Jan. 2025. Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1–41, Oct. 2024.
3890 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

[68] F. Daneshfar, S. Soleymanbaigi, P. Yamini, and M. S. Amini, “A survey [92] Z. Shen, Y. Wang, H. Wang, P. Liu, K. Liu, and J. Zhang, “Trust mechon semi-supervised graph clustering,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 133, anism privacy protection scheme combining blockchain and multi-party
 Jul. 2024, Art. no. 108215. evaluation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 3885–3894,
[69] X. Wang et al., “Deep reinforcement learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Feb. 2024.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 5064–5078, Apr. 2022. [93] N. Khatri, S. Lee, A. Mateen, and S. Y. Nam, “Event message clustering
[70] S. Munikoti, D. Agarwal, L. Das, M. Halappanavar, and B. Natarajan, algorithm for selection of majority message in VANETs,” IEEE Access,
 “Challenges and opportunities in deep reinforcement learning with vol. 11, pp. 14621–14635, 2023.
 graph neural networks: A comprehensive review of algorithms and [94] J. Zhao, F. Huang, L. Liao, and Q. Zhang, “Blockchain-based trust
 applications,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 11, management model for vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Internet
 pp. 1–21, Nov. 2024. Things J., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 8118–8132, Mar. 2024.
[71] R. Figueiredo Prudencio, M. R. O. A. Maximo, and E. L. Colombini, [95] Y. Xia, X. Liu, J. Ou, and O. Ma, “RLID-V: Reinforcement learning-
 “A survey on offline reinforcement learning: Taxonomy, review, and based information dissemination policy generation in VANETs,” IEEE
 open problems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 8, Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 14151–14161, Dec.
 pp. 10237–10257, Aug. 2024. 2023.
[72] K. Mo, P. Ye, X. Ren, S. Wang, W. Li, and J. Li, “Security and privacy [96] O. Sarker, H. Shen, and M. A. Babar, “Reinforcement learning based
 issues in deep reinforcement learning: Threats and countermeasures,” neighbour selection for VANET with adaptive trust management,” in
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1–39, Jun. 2024. Proc. IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun.
[73] Z. Zhu, K. Lin, A. K. Jain, and J. Zhou, “Transfer learning in deep (TrustCom), Nov. 2023, pp. 585–594.
 reinforcement learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
 [97] T. Jing, Y. Liu, X. Wang, and Q. Gao, “Deep echo state Q-network
 Intell., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 13344–13362, Nov. 2023.
 aided trust sharing provisioning for Internet of Vehicle,” IEEE Trans.
[74] H. Chen, H. Wang, Q. Long, D. Jin, and Y. Li, “Advancements in
 Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 3993–4004, Mar. 2024.
 federated learning: Models, methods, and privacy,” ACM Comput.
 Surv., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 1–39, Feb. 2025. [98] D. Wang, Y. Yi, S. Yan, N. Wan, and J. Zhao, “A node trust evaluation
[75] J. Zhu, J. Cao, D. Saxena, S. Jiang, and H. Ferradi, “Blockchain- method of vehicle-road-cloud collaborative system based on federated
 empowered federated learning: Challenges, solutions, and future learning,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 138, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 103013.
 directions,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 1–31, Nov. 2023. [99] H. Shahwani, S. Attique Shah, M. Ashraf, M. Akram, J. Jeong, and
[76] Q. Duan, J. Huang, S. Hu, R. Deng, Z. Lu, and S. Yu, “Combining J. Shin, “A comprehensive survey on data dissemination in vehicular
 federated learning and edge computing toward ubiquitous intelligence ad hoc networks,” Veh. Commun., vol. 34, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 100420.
 in 6G network: Challenges, recent advances, and future directions,” [100] B. Liu, W. Han, E. Wang, S. Xiong, C. Qiao, and J. Wang, “An
 IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2892–2950, 4th Quart., efficient message dissemination scheme for cooperative drivings via
 2023. cooperative hierarchical attention reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans.
[77] X. Yang, H. Yu, X. Gao, H. Wang, J. Zhang, and T. Li, “Federated Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 5527–5542, May 2024.
 continual learning via knowledge fusion: A survey,” IEEE Trans. [101] Z. Li, J. Wang, S. Long, J. Fu, M. Yang, and J. Weng, “A trust eval-
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 3832–3850, Aug. 2024. uation joint active detection method in video sharing D2D networks,”
[78] H. Gharoun, F. Momenifar, F. Chen, and A. H. Gandomi, “Meta- IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7739–7752, Jul. 2024.
 learning approaches for few-shot learning: A survey of recent [102] B. E. Mada, M. Bagaa, and T. Taleb, “Trust-based video management
 advances,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 1–41, Dec. 2024. framework for social multimedia networks,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
[79] (2024). End-to-End Learning—AI Glossary. Accessed: Jul. 30, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 603–616, Mar. 2019.
 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.allaboutai.com/ai-glossary/end- [103] U. Jayasinghe, G. M. Lee, T.-W. Um, and Q. Shi, “Machine learnto-end-learning/ ing based trust computational model for IoT services,” IEEE Trans.
[80] A. Forootani, M. Rastegar, and H. Zareipour, “Transfer learning- Sustain. Comput., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 39–52, Jan. 2019.
 based framework enhanced by deep generative model for cold-start [104] Q. Wang et al., “C-DeepTrust: A context-aware deep trust prediction
 forecasting of residential EV charging behavior,” IEEE Trans. Intell. model in online social networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 Vehicles, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 190–198, Jan. 2024. Syst., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2767–2780, Jun. 2023.
[81] V2X Communication Message Set Dictionary, Standard SAE J2735, [105] S. Deng, L. Huang, G. Xu, X. Wu, and Z. Wu, “On deep learning for
 2023. trust-aware recommendations in social networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
[82] Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1164–1177, May 2016.
 Set of Applications; Part 2: Specification of Cooperative Awareness [106] W. Lin, Z. Gao, and B. Li, “Guardian: Evaluating trust in online
 Basic Service, Standard ETSI EN 302 637-2, 2019. social networks with graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE
[83] Q. Xu, L. Zhang, D. Ou, and W. Yu, “Secure intrusion detection INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 914–923.
 by differentially private federated learning for inter-vehicle networks,”
 [107] N. Jiang, J. Wen, J. Li, X. Liu, and D. Jin, “GATrust: A multi-aspect
 Transp. Res. Rec., vol. 2677, no. 9, pp. 421–437, Sep. 2023.
 graph attention network model for trust assessment in OSNs,” IEEE
[84] L. Chen, D. Xiao, Z. Yu, and M. Zhang, “Secure and efficient federated
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5865–5878, Jun. 2023.
 learning via novel multi-party computation and compressed sensing,”
 Inf. Sci., vol. 667, May 2024, Art. no. 120481. [108] C. Huo, D. He, C. Liang, D. Jin, T. Qiu, and L. Wu, “TrustGNN: Graph
[85] K. Sameera et al., “Privacy-preserving in blockchain-based federated neural network-based trust evaluation via learnable propagative and
 learning systems,” Comput. Commun., vol. 222, pp. 38–67, Jun. 2024. composable nature,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35,
[86] Y. Wang, Z. Su, Q. Xu, T. H. Luan, and R. Lu, “Secured and coop- no. 10, pp. 1–13, Oct. 2024.
 erative publish/subscribe scheme in autonomous vehicular networks,” [109] Y. Xu et al., “Attention-based neural networks for trust evaluation in
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 2235–2252, online social networks,” Inf. Sci., vol. 630, pp. 507–522, Jun. 2023.
 Mar. 2024. [110] J. Wang, Z. Yan, J. Lan, E. Bertino, and W. Pedrycz, “TrustGuard:
[87] J. Qi, N. Zheng, M. Xu, P. Chen, and W. Li, “A hybrid-trust- GNN-based robust and explainable trust evaluation with dynamicity
 based emergency message dissemination model for vehicular ad hoc support,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 5,
 networks,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 81, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 103699. pp. 4433–4450, Sep. 2024.
[88] X. Li, X. Yin, and J. Ning, “Trustworthy announcement dissemination [111] Y. Deng, H. Zhang, X. Chen, and Y. Fang, “Multi-hop task routing
 scheme with blockchain-assisted vehicular cloud,” IEEE Trans. Intell. in vehicle-assisted collaborative edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1786–1800, Feb. 2023. Technol., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 2444–2455, Feb. 2024.
[89] Z. Yang, R. Wang, D. Wu, B. Yang, and P. Zhang, “Blockchain-enabled [112] M. Azizi and S. Shokrollahi, “RTRV: An RSU-assisted trust-based
 trust management model for the Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet routing protocol for VANETs,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 154, Mar. 2024,
 Things J., vol. 10, no. 14, pp. 12044–12054, Jul. 2023. Art. no. 103387.
[90] M. Yuan et al., “TRUCON: Blockchain-based trusted data sharing with [113] N. Fan and C. Q. Wu, “On trust models for communication security
 congestion control in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. in vehicular ad-hoc networks,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 90, Jul. 2019, Art.
 Syst., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 3489–3500, Mar. 2023. no. 101740.
[91] Q. Fan, Y. Xin, B. Jia, Y. Zhang, and P. Wang, “COBATS: A [114] H. Xia, S.-S. Zhang, Y. Li, Z.-K. Pan, X. Peng, and X.-Z. Cheng,
 novel consortium blockchain-based trust model for data sharing in “An attack-resistant trust inference model for securing routing in
 vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 11, vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 7,
 pp. 12255–12271, Nov. 2023. pp. 7108–7120, Jul. 2019.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3891

[115] R. Zhu, A. Boukerche, and Q. Yang, “An efficient secure and [136] P. Rezaeimoghaddam and I. Al-Anbagi, “Cost-efficient and trust-aware
 adaptive routing protocol based on GMM-HMM-LSTM for Inter- virtual network embedding for dense industrial IoT systems using
 net of Underwater Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 9, multiagent systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21,
 pp. 16491–16504, May 2024. no. 1, pp. 1100–1114, Feb. 2024.
[116] D. Zhang, F. R. Yu, R. Yang, and L. Zhu, “Software-defined [137] J. Xie et al., “A survey of machine learning techniques applied to
 vehicular networks with trust management: A deep reinforcement software defined networking (SDN): Research issues and challenges,”
 learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 2, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 393–430, 1st Quart.,
 pp. 1400–1414, Feb. 2022. 2019.
[117] F. Li, G. Han, C. Lin, F. Zhang, and C. Sun, “SDN-QLTR: Q- [138] A. Sachan and N. Kumar, “SDVN enabled traffic light cooperative
 learning-assisted trust routing scheme for SDN-based underwater framework for E-SIoV mobility in a smart city scenario,” IEEE Trans.
 acoustic sensor networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 6, Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 1–12, Aug. 2024.
 pp. 10682–10694, Mar. 2024.
 [139] A. Nahar, K. K. Mondal, D. Das, and R. Buyya, “Clouds on the
[118] F. Li, Y. Gong, H. Xu, Z. Lin, W. Huang, and B.-J. Hu, “A transformerroad: A software-defined fog computing framework for intelligent
 based trust management system for the Internet of Vehicles using
 resource management in vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IEEE Trans.
 blockchain technology,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., early access, Aug.
 Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 1–15, Dec. 2024.
 19, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2025.3600255.
[119] C. Cooper, D. Franklin, M. Ros, F. Safaei, and M. Abolhasan, “A [140] Y. Liu, L. Huo, X. Zhang, and J. Wu, “A multi-objective resource precomparative survey of VANET clustering techniques,” IEEE Commun. allocation scheme using SDN for intelligent transportation system,”
 Surv. Tut., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 657–681, 1st Quart., 2017. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 571–586,
[120] K. A. Awan, I. Ud Din, A. Almogren, M. Guizani, and S. Khan, Jan. 2024.
 “StabTrust—A stable and centralized trust-based clustering mechanism [141] S. Deng, X. Zhang, and X. Gao, “Poisoning topology view in softwarefor IoT enabled vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, defined vehicular network: An empirical study,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 pp. 21159–21177, 2020. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 1–12, Nov. 2024.
[121] G. Han, Y. He, J. Jiang, N. Wang, M. Guizani, and J. A. Ansere, [142] L. Xie, Y. Ding, H. Yang, and X. Wang, “Blockchain-based secure and
 “A synergetic trust model based on SVM in underwater acous- trustworthy Internet of Things in SDN-enabled 5G-VANETs,” IEEE
 tic sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 11, Access, vol. 7, pp. 56656–56666, 2019.
 pp. 11239–11247, Nov. 2019. [143] S. Hameed et al., “A scalable key and trust management solution for
[122] E. M. Ghourab, M. Azab, and N. Ezzeldin, “Blockchain-guided IoT sensors using SDN and blockchain technology,” IEEE Sensors J.,
 dynamic best-relay selection for trustworthy vehicular communication,” vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 8716–8733, Mar. 2021.
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 13678–13693, [144] A. L. Aliyu, A. Aneiba, M. Patwary, and P. Bull, “A trust management
 Aug. 2022. framework for software defined network (SDN) controller and network
[123] K. N. Qureshi, A. Iftikhar, S. N. Bhatti, F. Piccialli, F. Giampaolo, and applications,” Comput. Netw., vol. 181, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 107421.
 G. Jeon, “Trust management and evaluation for edge intelligence in the [145] J. M. Jorquera Valero, P. M. Sánchez Sánchez, M. Gil Pérez, A. Huertas
 Internet of Things,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 94, Sep. 2020, Art. Celdrán, and G. Martinez Perez, “Cutting-edge assets for trust in 5G
 no. 103756. and beyond: Requirements, state of the art, trends, and challenges,”
[124] M. Mao, T. Hu, and W. Zhao, “Reliable task offloading mechanism ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 1–36, Nov. 2023.
 based on trusted roadside unit service for Internet of Vehicles,” Ad
 Hoc Netw., vol. 139, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 103045. [146] Z. Wang et al., “When crowdsensing meets smart cities: A comprehen-
[125] B. Ali, M. Gregory, S. Li, and O. Dib, “Implementing zero trust security sive survey and new perspectives,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 27,
 with dual fuzzy methodology for trust-aware authentication and task no. 2, pp. 1101–1151, 2nd Quart., 2025.
 offloading in multi-access edge computing,” Comput. Netw., vol. 241, [147] X. Zhu, Y. Luo, A. Liu, W. Tang, and M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, “A
 Mar. 2024, Art. no. 110197. deep learning-based mobile crowdsensing scheme by predicting vehi-
[126] S. Bounaira, A. Alioua, and I. Souici, “Blockchain-enabled trust man- cle mobility,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7,
 agement for secure content caching in mobile edge computing using pp. 4648–4659, Jul. 2021.
 deep reinforcement learning,” Internet Things, vol. 25, Apr. 2024, Art. [148] S. Gao, X. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Dong, and J. Ma, “TrustWorker:
 no. 101081. A trustworthy and privacy-preserving worker selection scheme for
[127] S. Pratap, P. Dass, and S. Misra, “CoTEV: Trustworthy and cooperative blockchain-based crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput.,
 task execution in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3577–3590, Nov. 2022.
 vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2915–2926, Apr. 2024. [149] B. Luo, X. Li, X. Liu, J. Guo, Y. Ren, S. Ma, and J. Ma, “D2 MT S :
[128] J. Wang, Z. Li, H. Liu, T. Qiu, and H. Luo, “A trust-based computation Enabling dependable data collection with multiple crowdsourcers trust
 offloading framework in mobile cloud-edge computing networks,” sharing in mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 5370–5385, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 927–942, Mar. 2024.
 Jun. 2025. [150] T. Li, S. Xie, Z. Zeng, M. Dong, and A. Liu, “ATPS: An AI based
[129] C. Mao, R. Lin, D. Towey, W. Wang, J. Chen, and Q. He, trust-aware and privacy-preserving system for vehicle managements
 “Trustworthiness prediction of cloud services based on selective neural in sustainable VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
 network ensemble learning,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 168, Apr. 2021, no. 10, pp. 19837–19851, Oct. 2022.
 Art. no. 114390. [151] P. Zhao, C. Li, Y. Fu, Y. Hui, Y. Zhang, and N. Cheng, “Blockchain-
[130] P. Abeysekara, H. Dong, and A. K. Qin, “Data-driven trust prediction enabled conditional decentralized vehicular crowdsensing system,”
 in mobile edge computing-based IoT systems,” IEEE Trans. Services IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 18937–18950,
 Comput., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 246–260, Jan. 2023. Oct. 2022.
[131] Y. Ren, X. Chen, S. Guo, S. Guo, and A. Xiong, “Blockchain-based
 VEC network trust management: A DRL algorithm for vehicular [152] S. Fu, X. Huang, L. Liu, and Y. Luo, “BFCRI: A blockchain-based
 service offloading and migration,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, framework for crowdsourcing with reputation and incentive,” IEEE
 no. 8, pp. 8148–8160, Aug. 2021. Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 2158–2174, Apr. 2023.
[132] J. Bai, H. Dong, and A. Bouguettaya, “FEDQ-trust: Efficient data- [153] Z. Zhan et al., “Enhancing worker recruitment in collaborative mobile
 driven trust prediction for mobile edge-based IoT systems,” 2024, crowdsourcing: A graph neural network trust evaluation approach,”
 arXiv:2404.18356. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1–18, Oct. 2024.
[133] W. Fan et al., “Dynamic virtual network embedding of mobile cloud [154] J. Akram, A. Anaissi, R. S. Rathore, R. H. Jhaveri, and A. Akram,
 system based on global resources in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. “GALTrust: Generative adverserial learning-based framework for trust
 Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 8161–8174, Aug. 2021. management in spatial crowdsourcing drone services,” IEEE Trans.
[134] Y. Zhang, C. Jiang, and P. Zhang, “Security-aware resource allocation Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 6196–6207, Aug. 2024.
 scheme based on DRL in cloud–edge–terminal cooperative vehicu- [155] Y. Zheng, Z. Li, Z. Zeng, S. Zhang, N. N. Xiong, and A. Liu, “CITE: A
 lar network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 95–104, content based trust evaluation scheme for data collection with Internet
 Jan. 2024. of Everything,” Inf. Sci., vol. 647, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 119424.
[135] P. Zhang, C. Wang, C. Jiang, and A. Benslimane, “Security-aware [156] L. Wan et al., “Lightweight and privacy-preserving dual incentives for
 virtual network embedding algorithm based on reinforcement learning,” mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 12, no. 2,
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1095–1105, Apr. 2021. pp. 504–521, Apr. 2024.
3892 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

[157] M. Li, M. Ma, L. Wang, Z. Pei, J. Ren, and B. Yang, “Multiagent [179] T. Wang et al., “Mobile edge-enabled trust evaluation for the Internet
 deep reinforcement learning based incentive mechanism for mobile of Things,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 75, pp. 90–100, Nov. 2021.
 crowdsensing in intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Syst. J., [180] C. Wang, G. Liu, and T. Jiang, “Malicious node detection in wireless
 vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 527–538, Mar. 2024. weak-link sensor networks using dynamic trust management,” IEEE
[158] Q. Xu, Z. Su, S. Yu, and Y. Wang, “Trust based incentive scheme Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 12866–12877, Dec. 2024.
 to allocate big data tasks with mobile social cloud,” IEEE Trans. Big [181] T. Khan et al., “An efficient trust-based decision-making approach
 Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 113–124, Feb. 2022. for WSNs: Machine learning oriented approach,” Comput. Commun.,
[159] M. Dai, Z. Su, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, and N. Lu, “A trust-driven contract vol. 209, pp. 217–229, Sep. 2023.
 incentive scheme for mobile crowd-sensing networks,” IEEE Trans. [182] X. Huang, C. Chen, N. Chen, P. Li, R. Zhu, and Q. Yang, “A robust
 Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1794–1806, Feb. 2022. and machine learning-driven identification scheme for malicious nodes
[160] Y. Liu, S. Wang, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Optimal incentive in UASNs,” Comput. Commun., vol. 217, pp. 1–11, Mar. 2024.
 strategy in blockchain-based mobile crowdsensing using game theory,” [183] S. Sagar, A. Mahmood, M. Sheng, M. Zaib, and W. Zhang, “Towards
 Comput. Netw., vol. 237, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 110053. a machine learning-driven trust evaluation model for social Internet of
[161] L. Zhang, G. Feng, S. Qin, X. Li, Y. Sun, and B. Cao, “Trust-preserving Things: A time-aware approach,” in Proc. 17th EAI Int. Conf. Mobile
 mechanism for blockchain assisted mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Ubiquitous Syst., Comput., Netw. Services, Dec. 2020, pp. 283–290.
 Comput., vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 3113–3126, Nov. 2023. [184] H. El-Sayed, H. A. Ignatious, P. Kulkarni, and S. Bouktif, “Machine
[162] X. Cai et al., “An incentive mechanism for vehicular crowdsensing learning based trust management framework for vehicular networks,”
 with security protection and data quality assurance,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Veh. Commun., vol. 25, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 100256.
 Technol., vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 9984–9998, Aug. 2023.
 [185] C. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Luo, and Y. Hu, “AIT: An AI-enabled trust man-
[163] K. Jiang et al., “A reinforcement learning-based incentive mechanism
 agement system for vehicular networks using blockchain technology,”
 for task allocation under spatiotemporal crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans.
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3157–3169, Mar. 2021.
 Computat. Social Syst., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 2179–2189, Apr. 2024.
[164] N. Zhao, Y. Pei, Y.-C. Liang, and D. Niyato, “Deep-reinforcement- [186] X. Li, Q. Wang, and R. Li, “A trustworthiness sequence prediction
 learning-based contract incentive mechanism for joint sensing and scheme based on neural networks and mathematical calculations,”
 computation in mobile crowdsourcing networks,” IEEE Internet Things IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 22643–22655, Jun. 2024.
 J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12755–12767, Apr. 2024. [187] Q. Zhu, A. Jing, C. Gan, X. Guan, and Y. Qin, “HCSC: A hierarchical
[165] N. Zhao, Y. Pei, Y.-C. Liang, and D. Niyato, “Multi-agent deep certificate service chain based on reputation for VANETs,” IEEE Trans.
 reinforcement learning based incentive mechanism for multi-task fed- Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 6123–6145, Jun. 2023.
 erated edge learning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 10, [188] P. H. Basha et al., “Ai-driven multi-factor authentication and dynamic
 pp. 13530–13535, Oct. 2023. trust management for securing massive machine type communication
[166] N. He et al., “Incentive mechanism for resource trading in video in 6G networks,” Interface J. Intell. Syst. Appl. Eng., vol. 12, no. 1,
 analytic services using reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Services pp. 361–374, Sep. 2023.
 Comput., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1–14, Nov. 2024. [189] J. Du, G. Han, C. Lin, and M. Martı́nez-Garcı́a, “ITrust: An
[167] L. Wu, S. Guo, Z. Hong, Y. Liu, W. Xu, and Y. Zhan, “Long-term anomaly-resilient trust model based on isolation forest for underwater
 adaptive VCG auction mechanism for sustainable federated learning acoustic sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21, no. 5,
 with periodical client shifting,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, pp. 1684–1696, May 2022.
 no. 5, pp. 6060–6073, May 2024. [190] M. Shafi, R. K. Jha, and S. Jain, “Intelligent trust ranking security
[168] X. Wang, S. Garg, H. Lin, G. Kaddoum, J. Hu, and M. M. Hassan, preserving model for B5G/6G,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Netw. Service,
 “Heterogeneous blockchain and AI-driven hierarchical trust evaluation vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3549–3561, Sep. 2023.
 for 5G-enabled intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. [191] H. Harkat, L. M. Camarinha-Matos, J. Goês, and H. F. T. Ahmed,
 Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2074–2083, Feb. 2023. “Cyber-physical systems security: A systematic review,” Comput. Ind.
[169] Y. Zhan, P. Li, Z. Qu, D. Zeng, and S. Guo, “A learning-based incentive Eng., vol. 188, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 109891.
 mechanism for federated learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, [192] S. Azad, M. Mahmud, K. Z. Zamli, M. S. Kaiser, S. Jahan, and
 no. 7, pp. 6360–6368, Jul. 2020. M. A. Razzaque, “IBUST: An intelligent behavioural trust model
[170] B. Li, K. Xie, X. Huang, Y. Wu, and S. Xie, “Deep reinforcement for securing industrial cyber-physical systems,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
 learning based incentive mechanism design for platoon autonomous vol. 238, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 121676.
 driving with social effect,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 7, [193] Y. He, G. Han, J. Jiang, H. Wang, and M. Martı́nez-Garcı́a, “A trust
 pp. 7719–7729, Jul. 2022. update mechanism based on reinforcement learning in underwater
[171] M. Martı́nez-Dı́az, C. Al-Haddad, F. Soriguera, and C. Antoniou, acoustic sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21, no. 3,
 “Impacts of platooning of connected automated vehicles on highways,” pp. 811–821, Mar. 2022.
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 6366–6396, [194] H. Lin, S. Garg, J. Hu, X. Wang, M. J. Piran, and M. S. Hossain, “Data
 Jul. 2024. fusion and transfer learning empowered granular trust evaluation for
[172] S. Li, J. Li, J. Pei, S. Wu, S. Wang, and L. Cheng, “Eco-CSAS: A Internet of Things,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 78, pp. 149–157, Feb. 2022.
 safe and eco-friendly speed advisory system for autonomous vehicle [195] S. Zhang, R. He, Y. Xiao, and Y. Liu, “A three-factor based trust
 platoon using consortium blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. model for anonymous bacon message in VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 Syst., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 7802–7812, Jul. 2023. Technol., vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 11304–11317, Sep. 2023.
[173] C. Zhang et al., “TPPR: A trust-based and privacy-preserving platoon
 [196] S. Wang, Y. Hu, and G. Qi, “Blockchain and deep learning based trust
 recommendation scheme in VANET,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput.,
 management for Internet of Vehicles,” Simul. Model. Pract. Theory,
 vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 806–818, Mar. 2022.
 vol. 120, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 102627.
[174] H. Cheng, X. Zhang, J. Yang, and Y. Liu, “PPRT: Privacy preserving
 and reliable trust-aware platoon recommendation scheme in IoV,” IEEE [197] M. Aslan and S. Sen, “A dynamic trust management model for
 Syst. J., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 4922–4933, Sep. 2023. vehicular ad hoc networks,” Veh. Commun., vol. 41, Jun. 2023, Art.
[175] Z. Ying, M. Ma, Z. Zhao, X. Liu, and J. Ma, “A reputation-based no. 100608.
 leader election scheme for opportunistic autonomous vehicle platoon,” [198] F. Ahmad, F. Kurugollu, C. A. Kerrache, S. Sezer, and L. Liu,
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 3519–3532, Apr. 2022. “NOTRINO: A NOvel hybrid TRust management scheme for Internet-
[176] S. Chavhan, S. Kumar, P. Tiwari, X. Liang, I. H. Lee, and of-Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 9244–9257,
 K. Muhammad, “Edge-enabled blockchain-based V2X scheme for Sep. 2021.
 secure communication within the smart city development,” IEEE [199] W. Li and H. Song, “ART: An attack-resistant trust management
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 21282–21293, Dec. 2023. scheme for securing vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
[177] J. Li, S. Li, L. Cheng, Q. Liu, J. Pei, and S. Wang, “BSAS: A Transp. Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 960–969, Apr. 2016.
 blockchain-based trustworthy and privacy-preserving speed advisory [200] A. O. Philip and R. K. Saravanaguru, “Multisource traffic incident
 system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 11, pp. 11421–11430, reporting and evidence management in Internet of Vehicles using
 Nov. 2022. machine learning and blockchain,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 117,
[178] X. Liu, O. Ma, W. Chen, Y. Xia, and Y. Zhou, “HDRS: A hybrid Jan. 2023, Art. no. 105630.
 reputation system with dynamic update interval for detecting malicious [201] R. Magdich, H. Jemal, and M. B. Ayed, “A resilient trust management
 vehicles in VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, framework towards trust related attacks in the social Internet of
 pp. 12766–12777, Aug. 2022. Things,” Comput. Commun., vol. 191, pp. 92–107, Jul. 2022.
XU et al.: ENHANCING TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR CAVs USING ML METHODS: A SURVEY 3893

[202] C. Marche and M. Nitti, “Trust-related attacks and their detection: A Qian Xu received the bachelor’s and master’s
 trust management model for the social IoT,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service degrees in traffic information engineering and con-
 Manage., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 3297–3308, Sep. 2021. trol from Lanzhou Jiaotong University, in 2018
[203] Z. Zhao, S. Zhao, F. Lv, S. Si, H. Zhu, and L. Sun, “RIETD: A and 2021, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in
 reputation incentive scheme facilitates personalized edge tampering transportation engineering from Tongji University,
 detection,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 14771–14788, Shanghai, China, in 2025. She is currently a Post-
 Aug. 2024. Doctoral Fellow with the State Key Laboratory of
[204] X. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Tian, and Y. Li, “Privacy-preserving trust management Internet of Things for Smart City, University of
 method based on blockchain for cross-domain industrial IoT,” Knowl.- Macau. Her research focuses on AI techniques for
 Based Syst., vol. 283, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 111166. connected autonomous vehicles.
[205] B. Li, R. Liang, D. Zhu, W. Chen, and Q. Lin, “Blockchain-based trust
 management model for location privacy preserving in VANET,” IEEE
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3765–3775, Jun. 2021.
[206] K. Yan, W. Ma, Q. Yang, S. Sun, and W. Wang, “Info-chain:
 Reputation-based blockchain for secure information sharing in 6G
 intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 no. 5, pp. 9198–9212, Mar. 2024. Lei Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[207] B. Li et al., “Trust management strategy for digital twins in vehicular degree from Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2008
 ad hoc networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 10, and the Post-Doctoral degree from Tsinghua Unipp. 3279–3292, Oct. 2023. versity in 2010. He is currently a Professor and
[208] Z. Liu et al., “PPTM: A privacy-preserving trust management the Ph.D. Supervisor with Tongji University, Shangscheme for emergency message dissemination in space–air–ground- hai. His current research interests include intelligent
 integrated vehicular networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 8, information processing and applications for spatiopp. 5943–5956, Apr. 2022. temporal data analysis. He is one of the editorial
[209] R. Li et al., “RPPM: A reputation-based and privacy-preserving pla- board members of High-Confidence Computing.
 toon management scheme in vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 6147–6160, Jun. 2024.
[210] D. Fu, W. Bao, R. Maciejewski, H. Tong, and J. He, “Privacypreserving graph machine learning from data to computation: A
 survey,” ACM SIGKDD Explor. Newslett., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 54–72,
 Jun. 2023.
[211] H. Qin, D. He, Q. Feng, M. K. Khan, M. Luo, and K.-K.-R. Choo,
 “Cryptographic primitives in privacy-preserving machine learning: A
 survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 1919–1934, Yixiao Liu received the bachelor’s degree in
 May 2024. mechanical engineering from Tongji University in
[212] J. Pan, T. Wang, C. Claudel, and J. Shi, “Trust-MARL: Trust- 2021 and the master’s degree in data science from
 based multi-agent reinforcement learning framework for cooperative the City University of Macau in 2023. He is
 on-ramp merging control in heterogeneous traffic flow,” 2025, currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in intelligent
 arXiv:2506.12600. science and technology with Tongji University. His
[213] H. Bangui, B. Buhnova, and M. Ge, “Black swan theory for navigating research interests include spatio-temporal data analtrust in mixed-traffic environments,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Res. Challenges ysis, trustworthy connected and automated vehicles,
 Inf. Sci., 2025, pp. 87–102. and multi-agent systems.
[214] M. Bojarski et al., “End to end learning for self-driving cars,” 2016,
 arXiv:1604.07316.
[215] G. De Carvalho Bertoli et al., “An end-to-end framework for machine
 learning-based network intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access,
 vol. 9, pp. 106790–106805, 2021.
[216] M. Bahutair and A. Bouguettaya, “An end-to-end trust management
 framework for crowdsourced IoT services,” ACM Trans. Internet
 Technol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1–32, Aug. 2023. Zhenning Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[217] H. Li, X. Li, F. Dunkin, Z. Zhang, and X. Lu, “Adaptive multi- degree in civil engineering from the University of
 granularity trust management scheme for UAV visual sensor security Hawaii at Manoa, USA, in 2019. He is currently an
 under adversarial attacks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 148, Jan. 2025, Art. Assistant Professor with the State Key Laboratory of
 no. 104108. Internet of Things for Smart City, the Department
[218] Y. Liu, D. He, M. Luo, H. Wang, and Q. Liu, “ATRC: An anony- of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and the
 mous traceable and revocable credential system using blockchain for Department of Computer and Information Science,
 VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 2482–2494, University of Macau, Macau, China. Over his aca-
 Feb. 2024. demic career, he has authored or co-authored more
[219] J. Yin, Y. Xiao, J. Feng, M. Yang, Q. Pei, and X. Yi, “DidTrust: Privacy- than 80 papers. His research primarily explores the
 preserving trust management for decentralized identity,” IEEE Trans. nexus between connected autonomous vehicles and
 Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1–16, May 2025. big data applications within urban transportation.