490 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 EO-EPTC: End-to-End Original Traffic-Based
 Encrypted Proxy Traffic Classification Framework
 Yige Chen , Huajie Jia, Zhenzhou Tang, Senior Member, IEEE, Yipeng Wang , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Hui Liu

 Abstract—Machine learning-based methods for encrypted traffic classification can be effectively applied to analyze encrypted
proxy traffic generated by proxy protocols, which are intermediary protocols used to route network traffic through a
remote server. Nonetheless, different encrypted proxy protocols
generate distinct traffic patterns, even when they handle the
same network behavior. To address these distribution differences,
a straightforward approach is to collect datasets specific to
each proxy protocol. However, typical proxy protocols repackage
original traffic by encrypting it without payload padding or
compression. This leads to a definite characteristic correlation
between original and encrypted proxy traffic. We propose an Fig. 1. Proxy-based communication with encryption.
End-to-end Original traffic-based Encrypted Proxy Traffic Classification framework (EO-EPTC) to bridge the distribution gap
 TABLE I
between original traffic and proxied traffic, enabling the classification of encrypted proxy traffic using a original traffic dataset. D EGRADATION IN C LASSIFICATION D UE TO D ISTRIBUTION G APS
EO-EPTC conducts sequence feature alignment to reduce distribution bias and employs a Seq2Seq model to capture the
underlying semantics of the proxy protocol, creating a sequence
feature transformation model. We apply EO-EPTC to existing
encrypted traffic classification models, training them on original
traffic to classify proxied traffic. This achieves up to 99.70%
accuracy on encrypted proxy traffic, comparable to models
trained directly on proxied traffic.
 Index Terms—Encrypted proxy, traffic classification, distribu- traffic to the target server, restricting users from accessing
tion gap, dataset generation. it. To resolve this issue, users can redirect original traffic
 to a local proxyware using the SOCKS/HTTP protocol. The
 I. I NTRODUCTION proxyware encapsulates and encrypts the traffic according to
A. Motivation and Problem Statement the proxy protocol and forwards it to a proxy server that is not
 in the firewall’s jurisdiction. The proxy server decapsulates
P ROXY-BASED communication with encryption is a technique used to route network traffic through intermediary
servers to bypass firewalls, access restricted servers and
 and decrypts the proxy traffic and relays the original traffic
 to the target server, leaving any application-layer encryption
enhance anonymity. As shown in Figure 1, the firewall blocks (such as HTTPS) intact between the client and the target
 server.
 Received 5 December 2024; revised 11 September 2025 and 25 November In recent years, several proxy protocols have gained pop-
2025; accepted 16 December 2025. Date of publication 22 December 2025;
date of current version 2 January 2026. This work was supported in part ularity for their ability to circumvent network restrictions
by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant and protect user data, such as Shadowsocks [1], VMess [2],
LQN25F020027, in part by the Fundamental Scientific Research Project of Trojan [3], and VLESS [4]. While mature technologies such
Wenzhou City under Grant G2023005, and in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62472011. The associate editor as TOR [5] and VPN [6] have been extensively studied,
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was their design goals differ from those proxy protocols exam-
Dr. Prosanta Gope. (Corresponding author: Huajie Jia.) ined here. TOR uses multi-hop onion routing for anonymity,
 Yige Chen, Huajie Jia and Zhenzhou Tang are with the College of
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence and Wenzhou Key Laboratory whereas VPNs such as IPsec and WireGuard provide layer-3
for Intelligent Networking, Wenzhou University, Wenzhou 325000, China encrypted tunnels. This study focuses on protocols that pri-
(e-mail: ygchen@wzu.edu.cn; hjjia@stu.wzu.edu.cn; tzz@wzu.edu.cn). oritize stealthiness, low latency, and adaptability to specific
 Yipeng Wang is with the College of Computer Science and the Engineering
Research Center of Intelligent Perception and Autonomous Control, Ministry network conditions.
of Education, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China Encrypted traffic classification aims to identify the websites
(e-mail: yipeng.wang1@gmail.com). or applications associated with the traffic without the need for
 Hui Liu is with the Platform and Content Group, Tencent, Beijing 100193,
China (e-mail: pvopliu@tencent.com). decryption [7], [8], [9]. Current machine learning-based meth-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3646874 ods have achieved high accuracy in this task. The effectiveness
 1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 491

of the existing models heavily depends on the assumption that stable transformation patterns from sequence feature
the training and test traffic datasets share the same distribution. pairs.
Since encrypted proxy traffic is generated by encapsulating 2) Phase 2: Sequence Feature Transformation Modoriginal traffic according to proxy protocol specifications, there eling. This phase trains a Seq2Seq model to learn
is a distribution gap between the two types of traffic. Table I the underlying semantics of proxy protocols from the
illustrates the degradation in classification when classifiers aligned sequence feature pairs. The Seq2Seq model
trained on original traffic are applied to proxied traffic in our bridges the distribution gap between original traffic and
collected dataset. An intuitive approach to addressing this issue proxied traffic, allowing the generated sequence features
is to collect proxied traffic samples for each encrypted proxy to better simulate proxy behaviors.
protocol separately. However, this limits data collection to an 3) Phase 3: Simulated Sequence Feature Generation.
active mode and increases the cost of collection linearly with In this phase, the Seq2Seq model, trained during the
the number of protocols and classification targets. transformation phase, utilizes original traffic sequence
 features to generate simulated proxied traffic sequence
 features. These simulated features closely resemble
B. Our Insights and Proposed Approach
 real proxied traffic and serve as a low-cost alternative
 1) Key Observation to Encrypted Proxy Traffic: The encap- for training classifiers without relying on real-world
sulation mechanism of proxy protocols mainly causes the encrypted proxy traffic datasets.
distribution gap between original traffic and proxied traffic. 4) Phase 4: Proxied Traffic Classification. In this phase,
To classify traffic for a specific encrypted proxy protocol, it we use the simulated proxied traffic sequence features
is necessary to train a model on a dataset consisting of that to train existing encrypted traffic classifiers. Based on
encrypted proxy protocol’s traffic. It is a key observed fact that EO-EPTC, these classifiers can handle various proxy
encrypted proxy protocols typically do not perform payload protocols and adapt to real-world traffic patterns.
padding or compression to improve bandwidth utilization and
simplify the protocol structure. As a result, there exists a C. Key Contributions
correlation between the sequence features of the two types We briefly summarize our main contributions as follows:
of traffic. This fact makes it feasible to construct a model for • We propose an End-to-end Original traffic-based
generating proxy traffic sequence features based on a dataset Encrypted Proxy Traffic Classification framework
containing both original and proxied flows. (EO-EPTC) to bridge the distribution gap between
 2) Key Insight Into Our Approach: A key insight into our original traffic and proxy traffic, enabling the training
approach is that the proxy traffic is derived from the original of an encrypted proxy traffic classification model using
traffic, and the transformation between their sequence features only a original traffic dataset.
is primarily driven by the transmission protocol and the • EO-EPTC uses sequence alignment algorithms to preproxy protocol. While the transformations introduced by the align the sequence features of original and proxied
transmission protocol can be addressed by parsing the traffic traffic, then builds a Seq2Seq model to adaptively learn
according to the protocol specifications, the changes caused the underlying semantics of proxy protocols. EO-EPTC
by the proxy protocol, which may include both linear and enables the automatic generation of simulated sequence
nonlinear alterations, require a more sophisticated solution. To features corresponding to proxied traffic, which signifiaddress this, we can leverage a Seq2Seq model to capture and cantly reduces the cost of collecting datasets.
learn the proxy protocol’s semantic transformations from the • We conduct comprehensive evaluation experiments
original traffic. This approach is particularly effective when on EO-EPTC. The results demonstrate that existing
sufficient traffic data is available, as it enables the model to encrypted traffic classification models can achieve up
accurately learn the complex, nonlinear relationships between to 99.70% accuracy when trained on the original traffic
the original and proxy traffic sequences. dataset to classify proxied traffic.
 3) Brief Introduction to Our Approach: In this paper, The remaining sections of this paper are structured as
we propose the End-to-end Original Traffic-based Encrypted follows. In Section II, we present an overview of prior
Proxy Traffic Classification framework (EO-EPTC), which works. In Section III, we present the design of EO-EPTC,
aims to reduce the cost of dataset collection for encrypted offering insights into the system’s architecture and providing
proxy traffic classification while ensuring high classification an in-depth explanation of each phase. In Section IV, we
performance. EO-EPTC leverages two sequence feature align- elaborate on the details of our dataset collection and provide
ment algorithms and an end-to-end Seq2Seq model to learn the an overview of the datasets used in this study. Section V
transformation patterns between original and proxied traffic, presents the comparative experimental settings and provides
bridging the distribution gaps. EO-EPTC consists of four a comprehensive analysis of the evaluation results. Section VI
phases: presents the performance evaluation for EO-EPTC. Finally,
 1) Phase 1: Sequence Feature Alignment. This phase Section VII outlines the limitations and future work.
 aligns the sequence feature pairs of original traffic and
 proxied traffic to address the inconsistencies caused by II. R ELATED W ORK
 network factors and protocol handshakes. The sequence In this section, we first provide an overview of current methfeature alignment helps the subsequent model learn more ods for encrypted proxy traffic classification. Subsequently, we
492 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

discuss existing approaches for encrypted traffic classification Payload feature-based approaches [24], [25], [26], [27],
in general. Additionally, we introduce several mainstream [28], [29], [30], [31], [32] enhance classification accuracy
encrypted proxy protocols. by analyzing packet content, size, and structure. In 2021,
 Aceto et al. [24] presented a multitask multi-modal deep
A. Encrypted Proxy Traffic Classification learning model for encrypted traffic, improving performance
 The study of encrypted proxy traffic classification has on various datasets over single-modality approaches. In 2022,
gained significant attention due to the increasing use of proxy Xiao et al. [25] developed EBSNN, a neural network with
protocols to bypass firewalls and ensure privacy. Researches segmented byte encoding and attention, achieving remarkable
[10], [11], [12], [13] have proposed several methods to identify performance in application and website classification. In 2022,
proxied traffic. Lin et al. [28] introduced ET-BERT, a Transformer pre-trained
 In 2022, Zhao et al. [11] examined deep learning methods on datagram-level data, achieving strong generalization and
for identifying abnormal encrypted proxy traffic with high accuracy across tasks in encrypted traffic classification after
accuracy, specifically targeting Shadowsocks and VMess. In fine-tuning.
2023, Ma et al. [12] proposed a random flow rerouting Sequence feature-based approaches [33], [34], [35], [36],
defense to enhance the flow-context-aware WFP system by [37], [38] leverage characteristics such as packet length,
significantly reducing the accuracy of attacks, while incurring message type, and arrival timing to model encrypted traffic,
minimal bandwidth and latency overhead. In 2024, Xue et al. effectively capturing temporal dependencies and enhancing
[13] demonstrated a protocol-agnostic approach to finger- classification accuracy. In 2019, Liu et al. [33] introduced
printing obfuscated traffic, targeting Shadowsocks, VMess, FS-Net, an RNN-based network capturing flow sequences,
Trojan, and VLESS protocols by leveraging encapsulated TLS achieving high true positive rates on encrypted traffic datasets
handshakes. with an encoder-decoder design. In 2022, Xu et al. [35] devel-
 Existing studies on encrypted proxy traffic classification are oped ETC-PS, leveraging path signatures on packet sequences
often designed and evaluated under protocol-specific datasets, for robust encrypted traffic classification across various protomaking their effectiveness highly dependent on the availability cols. In 2023, Zhou et al. [38] presented WF-Transformer for
of labeled traffic for each proxy protocol. This reliance not Tor traffic classification, using temporal features to outperform
only increases the cost of data collection but also restricts CNNs in both closed-world and open-world scenarios.
the generalization of these methods when applied to hetero- Research on encrypted traffic classification has advanced
geneous proxy protocols. through statistical, payload, and sequence features, and these
 approaches demonstrate strong performance when training
B. Encrypted Traffic Classification and testing distributions are aligned. However, they provide
 Encrypted traffic classification methods can be categorized limited adaptability to asymmetric scenarios, such as when
based on the features they utilize, including statistical features, only original traffic datasets are available for training while
payload features, and sequence features. the target traffic is proxied, leaving a gap for methods that
 Statistical feature-based approaches [14], [15], [16], [17], can explicitly bridge this distribution difference.
[18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23] rely on the statistical characteristics of traffic flows to classify encrypted traffic. In
2020, Montieri et al. [14] proposed a hierarchical traffic C. Encrypted Proxy Protocols
classification framework for anonymity tools, demonstrat- Encrypted proxy protocols ensure secure, private commuing significant improvements over flat classification methods. nication between clients and servers by protecting data from
Shapira and Shavitt [20], [21] proposed FlowPic, which trans- tampering and interception. Protocols like Shadowsocks [1],
forms per-flow packet size and arrival time statistics into VMess [2], Trojan [3], and VLESS [4] are commonly used in
image-like representations and leverages a CNN to accurately proxyware to balance security, performance, and obfuscation.
classify encrypted Internet traffic into categories and applica- Shadowsocks [1] is a lightweight proxy protocol that
tions, even in the presence of VPN and Tor. Babaria et al. uses symmetric encryption algorithms like AES-256-GCM
[22] proposed FlowFormers, which first convert bidirec- to secure communication. It incorporates traffic obfuscation
tional flows into FlowPrints, i.e., time–length histograms techniques to evade detection by firewalls.
of up/down packet, byte, and average-length counters over VMess [2], the core protocol of V2Ray [39], enables
packet-size bins, and then feed these behavioural sequences encrypted communication with robust encryption and autheninto transformer-augmented CNN/LSTM for fine-grained tication mechanisms. It supports dynamic key exchange
application-type classification. In 2022, Horowicz et al. [23] alongside TLS to enhance stealth and resist traffic analysis.
proposed a few-shot traffic classification framework based on Trojan [3] disguises proxy traffic as legitimate HTTPS
mini-FlowPic representations and network-aware augmenta- traffic by enforcing strict use of TLS. By mimicking HTTPS
tions, which reduces dependency on large labeled datasets behavior, it becomes difficult for Deep Packet Inspection (DPI)
while improving accuracy and implementation efficiency. In systems to distinguish it from regular web traffic.
2024, Cerasuolo et al. [18] proposed MEMENTO, a class VLESS [4] is a streamlined variant of VMess that elimiincremental learning framework for encrypted traffic, improv- nates authentication and dynamic encryption to reduce latency.
ing new app classification and stability on old apps through It is commonly paired with TLS to maintain security and is
bi-flow augmentation and enhanced distillation. often used in scenarios where low latency is prioritized.
CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 493

 Fig. 2. Architecture of end-to-end original traffic-based encrypted proxy traffic classification framework (EO-EPTC).

 which it passes (e.g., firewalls or gateways). The attacker can
 observe IP header information and side-channel metadata but
 cannot compromise the shared secrets between communicating
 parties or decrypt the payload content of the encrypted proxy
 traffic.
 Before launching the actual attack, the attacker is assumed
 to locally access the target applications without using a proxy
 and collect their original traffic. Although this original traffic may itself be encrypted (e.g., HTTPS/TLS), it remains
Fig. 3. The threat model of encrypted proxy traffic classification based on valuable because flow-level characteristics, such as packet size
original traffic. distributions, inter-arrival times, and directional patterns, are
 observable without decryption. Using these flows, the attacker
 Mainstream encrypted proxy protocols repackage original can construct a labeled dataset at relatively low cost.
traffic by encrypting it without payload padding or compres- With this dataset, the attacker trains a multi-class classion. This preserves certain correlations such as packet length sifier to capture application-specific traffic patterns. During
patterns between original traffic and proxied traffic. These the attack phase, when encrypted proxy traffic is available
shared characteristics across different proxy protocols reveal at the observation point, the trained classifier is applied to
an opportunity to leverage original traffic for building models infer which application the intercepted traffic corresponds to.
that remain effective on encrypted proxy traffic. Crucially, the analysis relies exclusively on flow statistics and
 side-channel features, rather than any payload content.
 III. S YSTEM F RAMEWORK
 In this section, we first introduce the threat model for B. Overview
classifying encrypted proxy traffic using original traffic. Then, As shown in Figure 2, EO-EPTC consists of four main
we describe the structured design of the proposed classification phases: Sequence Feature Alignment, Sequence Feature Transframework, EO-EPTC. formation Modeling, Simulated Sequence Feature Generation,
 and Proxied Traffic Classification.
A. Threat Model Sequence Feature Alignment: This phase employs
 Figure 3 illustrates the scenario in which a client attempts sequence feature reassembly and segmentation algorithms to
to establish a secure communication channel with the target align the sequence features extracted from the unlabeled
server, using both the proxyware and the proxy server as inter- original and proxied flow pair dataset. The alignment mitimediaries. Proxy refers to the intermediate relay mechanism gates inconsistencies in sequence features caused by network
in which a client forwards original traffic to a proxy server transmission or proxy protocol standards.
using a specified protocol. The proxy server then decapsulates, Sequence Feature Transformation Modeling: This phase
transmits, and delivers the traffic on behalf of the client. uses a Seq2Seq model to capture the underlying semantic
During the proxy communication process, both the proxyware information by learning the mapping between original and
and the proxy server must adhere to a predefined proxy proxied traffic sequence features of the above unlabeled flow
protocol, such as VMess [2]. The proxyware encapsulates pair dataset. The model employs an encoder-decoder architecnetwork packets intended for the target server according to the ture, encoding the sequence features of original traffic into an
specified proxy protocol and sends them to the proxy server, intermediate representation and then decoding it to produce
which then decapsulates and forwards them to the target server. the simulated sequence feature of proxied traffic.
 This paper considers an attacker capable of sniffing Simulated Sequence Feature Generation: This phase
encrypted proxy traffic at positions in the network through takes a original traffic dataset as input and uses the Seq2Seq
494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

model, trained during the sequence feature transformation Algorithm 1 Sequence Feature Reassembly
phase, to generate simulated sequence features corresponding Require: Packet sequence P = {p1 , p2 , . . ., pn }. Each packet pi
to the proxied traffic. The original and proxied traffic datasets has attributes li (length), di (direction), and fi (push flag).
are collected from the same website targets, but neither over- Ensure: Reassembled sequence feature S.
laps with the unlabeled flow pair dataset. 1: S ← []
 Proxied Traffic Classification: In this phase, we use the 2: c2s agg ← 0, s2c agg ← 0
simulated proxied sequence features generated in the previous 3: for i = 1 to n do
phase to train classifiers for encrypted proxy traffic. These 4: if li > 0 then .Dropping unloaded packets
classifiers demonstrate comparable classification performance 5: if di = c2s then .Distinguish packet directions
to those trained directly on sequence features extracted from 6: c2s agg ← c2s agg + li
proxied traffic. 7: if fi = 1 then .Last fragmented packet
 8: S.append(−c2s agg)
C. Sequence Feature Alignment 9: c2s agg ← 0 .Reinitialize aggregation
 Uncertain factors such as proxy protocol handshakes, net- 10: end if
work transmission fluctuations, and MTU fragmentation can 11: else if di = s2c then
lead to misaligned or unalignable sequence features between 12: s2c agg ← s2c agg + li
original and proxied traffic. We first perform sequence feature 13: if fi = 1 then
extraction separately for both original and proxied traffic, 14: S.append(s2c agg)
followed by sequence feature reassembly and segmentation for 15: s2c agg ← 0
the original traffic. The alignment of sequence features helps 16: end if
simplify the learning of the mapping relationship between the 17: end if
two types of traffic, reducing errors from incidental sequence 18: end if
misalignments during subsequent Seq2Seq model training and 19: end for
prediction. 20: return S
 1) Sequence Feature Extraction: The encrypted proxy
client locally receives connections to be proxied via SOCKS
 receiver to reassemble the segmented payload and promptly
or HTTP, which is the original traffic. It then encapsulates the
 deliver it to the application layer. For both original TCP
traffic payload according to the proxy protocol specifications
 traffic and TCP-based proxied traffic, we apply Algorithm 1
before forwarding the traffic to the proxy server, thereby
 to reassemble sequence features, with the TCP push flag
resulting in the proxied traffic.
 guiding the reassembly process. Here, client-to-server (C2S)
 Therefore, for original TCP and UDP traffic, we extract the
 packets are marked with “+” and server-to-client (S2C)
sequence of traffic payload lengths as the sequence feature.
 packets with “–”. The reassembly of sequence features can
Packet directions are explicitly denoted with “+/–”, where “+”
 prevent duplicate counting of the length of packet headers.
represents client-to-server (C2S) packets and “–” represents
 For the original UDP traffic and UDP-based proxied traffic,
server-to-client (S2C) packets. For encrypted proxy traffic, the
 we directly use their sequence features without performing any
sequence features are derived based on the protocol type. For
 reassembly.
proxy protocols running over TCP or UDP, we extract the
 In TCP transmission, the occasional absence of the TCP
sequence of payload lengths from the stream, similar to the
 Push flag can lead to over-reassembly during the above
method used for original traffic. For proxy protocols operating
 sequence feature reassembly. To address this, it is necessary to
over TLS, we use the sequence of payload lengths within the
 adaptively determine an appropriate threshold for reassembly
TLS stream as the sequence feature, specifically the lengths
 payload length, as the upper limit varies with transmission
of messages carried in application data.
 configurations. In traffic datasets of statistical significance, the
 2) Sequence Feature Alignment: Sequence feature alignmost frequently occurring payload length exceeding the MTU
ment includes both reassembly and segmentation processes.
 can serve as a natural upper limit. This value is selected as
The reassembly refers to reconstructing fragmented or segthe reassembly payload length threshold, and any reassembled
mented payloads into complete data units based on protocol
 payload exceeding this limit is further segmented to mitigate
rules, ensuring the correct application-level payload boundover-reassembly caused by the missing Push flag. Algorithm 2
aries. The segmentation follows reassembly to handle any
 is applied to perform this segmentation, ensuring that the
overly long payloads by dividing them into smaller, conreassembled sequence features of original traffic align more
sistent units to correct over-reassembly caused by protocol
 closely with those of proxied traffic. This alignment facilitates
uncertainties.
 the Seq2Seq model in effectively learning and predicting these
 In the TCP/IP protocol architecture, the application layer
 two types of sequences.
handles application-specific functions, abstracting away the
details of data transmission. It hands over the payload transmission to the transport layer, which segments the payload D. Sequence Feature Transformation Modeling
according to the network link’s Maximum Transmission Unit After sequence feature alignment, we train a sequence
(MTU). According to TCP protocol specifications, the final feature transformation model to learn the intricate mapping
segment is marked with the TCP push flag, signaling the rules between original and proxied sequence features. The
CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 495

Algorithm 2 Sequence Feature Segmentation ensuring that the transformed features retain crucial clas-
Require: A set of sequence features S = {S1 , S2 , . . ., Sm }, sification information and address structural and semantic
 where each Si = {S i1 , S i2 , . . ., S in } represents a sequence inconsistencies.
 feature.
Ensure: The segmented sequence features S 0 = 1) Understanding Feature Distinction: Despite sequence
 {S01 , S02 , . . ., S0m }. feature alignment addressing discrepancies caused by trans-
 1: Step 1: Calculate Global Transmission Length Threshmission, a distribution gap persists between original and
 old proxied sequence features due to transformations introduced
 2: Initialize L ←
 S by proxy encapsulation mechanisms. Figure 4 illustrates an
 Si ∈S {|S i j | | S i j ∈ Si }
 3: τ ← mode(L) .Most frequent element in L
 example of Shadowsocks sequence feature alignment, high-
 4: T min ← max(MTU − TCP.head) .Minimum τ threshold
 lighting key differences:
 5: while τ ≤ T min do
 Boundary Discrepancies: Variations at boundary positions
 6: τ ← next valid mode(L, T min )
 include examples like -208 and + 39 in Original (indices 0 and
 7: end while
 1) compared to −32, −47, and −34 in Proxied (indices 0, 1, and
 8: Step 2: Split Sequences Based on τ
 19). These differences arise from the handshake and teardown
 9: for each sequence Si ∈ S do
 specifications of proxy protocol-specific initialization routines,
10: Initialize an empty sequence S0 i ← ∅ which introduce heterogeneity in packet structures during
11: Initialize a temporary variable T ← 0 connection establishment and termination.
12: for each element S i j ∈ Si do Fixed-Value Bias: A uniform encapsulation mechanism
13: if |S i j | > τ then .Oversize according τ introduces a fixed bias of 34 across most elements, likely
14: T ← T + S ij resulting from the consistent addition of control fields defined
15: while |T | > τ do by the proxy protocol or the inclusion of encryption parameters
16: if T > τ then .Segment according τ during transmission.
17: S0 i .append(τ) Variable-Value Bias: Instances like + 3509 and + 3575 in
18: T ←T −τ Original and Proxied at index 3 exhibit a variable bias of 67.
19: else if T < −τ then This variability often stems from additional content introduced
20: S0 i .append(−τ) during early-stage proxy transmission. Factors like dynamic
21: T ←T +τ payload adjustments further amplify divergence beyond the
22: end if fixed bias.
23: end while Merging and Misalignment: Examples such as double +
24: if T , 0 then 602 in Original (indices 8 and 10) vs. + 1272 in Proxied
25: S0 i .append(T) (index 9) demonstrate that proxies may reorganize segmented
26: T ←0 content during transmission. However, this reorganization
27: end if inherently alters the sequence feature structure, resulting in
28: else feature order deviations and structural discrepancies.
29: S0 i .append(S i j ) 2) Sequence Feature Transformation: We address the dis-
30: end if tribution gap between original and proxied traffic sequence
31: end for features by employing an encoder-decoder Seq2Seq model
32: end for with Transformer as the core sequence model.
33: return S 0 The encoder-decoder architecture consists of two components: the encoder, which encodes original traffic sequence
 features into intermediate representations capturing underlying
challenge faced by classifiers arises from the differences proxy semantics, and the decoder, which transforms these
in traffic data distributions between original and proxied representations into simulated encrypted proxy traffic sequence
sequences, which are mainly influenced by the encapsulation features. This mapping can minimize the distribution gap
mechanisms inherent to proxy protocols, rather than random between original and proxied traffic features without requiring
variations. By extracting and aligning sequence features, we prior knowledge of the target proxied traffic.
eliminate random transmission noise, improving the structural The Transformer, originally designed for natural lanand semantic comparability between original and proxied guage processing (NLP), has recently gained prominence
traffic. in encrypted traffic classification, outperforming traditional
 To address the residual differences between original and RNN-based methods. While many approaches, such as
proxied sequence features, we design the Sequence Feature ET-BERT [28] and WF-Transformer [38], utilize only the
Transformation Model using a Seq2Seq architecture. The encoder combined with a classifier, EO-EPTC adopts the full
model learns the universal mapping relationships outlined by Transformer encoder-decoder architecture. This enables the
proxy protocol specifications, enabling the transformation of effective transformation of sequence features from original to
previously unseen original sequence features into simulated proxied traffic. We employ an attention mechanism, positional
proxy-like features. This significantly enhances the classifiers’ encoding, and an order-agnostic architecture to address the
ability to generalize across various traffic scenarios, while four types of sequence feature distinctions mentioned above:
496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 4. An example of Shadowsocks sequence feature alignment (’+’ denotes client-to-server (C2S) and ’–’ denotes server-to-client (S2C)).

 • The context-sensitive nature of the attention mechanism For example, the scaled dot-product attention mechanism
 dynamically captures contextual relationships between computes relevance using the dot product of Q and K, with
 sequence features. The decoder with cross-attention the resulting scores weighting V to produce position-specific
 extracts relevant source patterns and effectively manages outputs, the calculation is as follows:
 dynamic deviations caused by variable-value bias. The
 Q = Wq X, V = Wv X
 K = Wk X,
 self-attention of the Transformer can effectively handle
 QK T
  
 boundary discrepancies by capturing global and local Attention(Q, K, V) = so f tmax √ V. (2)
 dependencies, enabling precise alignment of boundary dk
 variations caused by protocol-specific initialization. Its c) Multi-Head Attention: The multi-head attention mechmulti-head attention further enhances boundary modeling anism allows simultaneous attention to multiple subspaces
 by focusing on sequence-specific details. within the input vector. Specifically, it applies h independent
 • Along with multi-head attention capturing fixed-offset linear transformations to the query Q, key K, and value V.
 patterns and other semantic features, the positional encoding of the Transformers preserves relative positional MultiHead(Q, K, V) = Concat(head1 , . . . , headh )W O
 information. This enables the Seq2Seq model to adjust for where headi = Attention(QWiQ , KWiK , VWiV ) (3)
 the fixed-value bias introduced by proxy encapsulation.
 • The order-agnostic architecture of the Transformer facil- Each head learns its own parameters, capturing dependencies
 itates the identification and reconstruction of complex at different levels or parts of the sequence. The model then
 reordering or merging patterns within sequences. This concatenates the outputs of all heads and applies a linear transcapability ensures accurate sequence alignment, preserv- formation with W O to form the final attention representation.
 ing structural relationships even in cases of proxy-induced d) Masked Loss: Given the variable length of traffic
 misalignment or merging. feature sequences and the need to avoid introducing noise from
 padding elements during optimization, we adopt a masked
 3) Transformer Details: The core of Transformers is the
 softmax cross-entropy loss function to ensure accurate and
multi-head position encoding and self-attention mechanism.
 effective model training. This approach ensures that the model
It further combines feedforward neural networks, residual
 is trained solely on valid sequence elements, thereby focusing
connections, and layer normalization to learn contextual relathe learning process on meaningful data while disregarding
tionships. Next, this paper will elaborate on the Transformer’s
 padding-induced artifacts. Let the original sequence feature be
position encoding, self-attention, multi-head attention, and the
 denoted as x = (x1 , . . ., xT ), and the proxied sequence feature
loss function.
 as y = (y1 , . . ., yT ), where T represents the sequence length.
 a) Position Encoding: The position of elements in a
 The loss function is defined as:
sequence holds crucial fingerprint information. Unlike RNNs, PT
 i=1 wi · − log p (yi | y1 , . . ., yi−1 , x)
 
which process elements step by step, the Transformer’s self-
 L= PT (4)
attention mechanism enables simultaneous interactions across i=1 wi
all elements. To preserve positional and dependency informawhere the weight wi masks invalid positions in the sequence.
tion, the Transformer incorporates position encoding. For a
 p(yi | y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) represents the conditional probability of
sequence, the position encoding is calculated as follows:
     predicting yi , based on all previous target features y1 , . . ., yi−1 .
 i i This can be expressed as:
 pi,2 j = sin , pi,2 j+1 = cos (1)
 100002 j/d 100002 j/d exp(ŷi,yi )
 p (yi | y1 , . . ., yi−1 , x) = PV (5)
 where i is the position of the corresponding element in j=1 exp(ŷi, j )
a sequence,  d is the word embedding length, and j ∈ Here, ŷi,yi refers to the logit output for the target feature yi .
 1, 2, . . . , d2 .
 The denominator sums over all possible features in the feature
 b) Self-Attention: The self-attention mechanism calcutable, indexed by j, and V is the size of the feature table.
 lates relationships across all sequence positions, representing
 each element based on these interactions. For each input
 vector X, linear transformations produce the query Q, key K, E. Simulated Sequence Feature Generation
 and value V vectors using weight matrices Wq , Wk , and Wv , In this phase, we apply the Seq2Seq model, trained solely
 which are initialized randomly and optimized during training. on the Unlabeled Original and Proxied Flow Pair Dataset, to
CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 497

transform original sequence features into simulated proxied
sequence features. The Seq2Seq model supports sequence
feature transformation without relying on the prior knowledge
of the target proxied traffic. The datasets of original and
proxied traffic, sourced from the same website targets, can
remain distinct from the unlabeled flow pair dataset.
 The original traffic initially goes through sequence feature
alignment, as detailed in Phase 1, to resolve inconsistencies
caused by factors such as MTU fragmentation and protocol
handshakes. This process also ensures compatibility between
 Fig. 5. The topology of dataset collection platform.
the original traffic’s sequence features and the patterns learned
by the Seq2Seq model.
 TABLE II
 Following sequence feature alignment, the encoder of the
 S TATISTICAL S UMMARY OF THE TCP-BASED DATASET
Seq2Seq model trained in Phase 2 converts the sequence features of original traffic into intermediate representations. The
decoder then transforms these representations into simulated
sequence features corresponding to the target proxied traffic.
This process retains the intrinsic characteristics of original
traffic while embedding proxy protocol semantics.

F. Proxied Traffic Classification
 TABLE III
 In this phase, the simulated proxied traffic sequence features S TATISTICAL S UMMARY OF THE QUIC-BASED DATASET
generated in the previous phase are utilized to train existing
encrypted traffic classification models. The simulated proxied
traffic features produced by the Seq2Seq model closely mimic
real proxied traffic, making them compatible with the input
formats and requirements of existing methods, allowing those
models to maintain their classification capabilities and advantages. Based on our experimental results, EO-EPTC exhibits
strong generalization ability, achieving accurate classification
performance in real-world encrypted proxy traffic scenarios
while maintaining scalability and adaptability across diverse A. Dataset Collection Platform
proxy protocols. As shown in Figure 5, we set up three hosts to build
 In addition, the simulated proxied traffic features can also the dataset collection platform: the user, who accesses target
be applied to out-of-distribution (OOD) traffic detection, websites; the proxy client; and the proxy server. All of these
enabling the identification of previously unseen traffic that hosts are located within the same local area network. The user
does not belong to any learned class. Existing classifiers can accesses the Internet through an HTTP/SOCKS proxy service
be adapted by using their full classification probability vectors provided by the proxy client, generating original traffic. The
as recognition features. An additional supervised binary clas- proxy client packages the traffic received from the user and
sifier can then be applied to identify OOD traffic. To obtain forwards it to the proxy server using a proxy protocol, thereby
the training data for the OOD classifier, we require some creating proxied traffic. By controlling user access to network
samples to serve as OOD traffic so that supervised training websites, we can simultaneously capture both original traffic
can be performed. In practical scenarios, classes outside the and the corresponding proxied traffic on the proxy client. The
target recognition set can be grouped together and treated dataset collection were conducted on a Windows 10 operating
as OOD samples. By combining the proxied traffic classifier system with the Chrome browser. Since browsers disable
with the OOD classifier, OOD detection can be achieved in QUIC when a proxy is configured, we must set the Proxy
addition to recognizing proxied traffic. Compared to threshold- Client to operate in transparent proxy mode when collecting
based methods that rely solely on a minimum classification QUIC-based original and proxied traffic, ensuring that the
probability, this supervised approach makes full use of the browser functions normally.
entire probability vector, enabling more accurate and robust
decisions.
 B. Dataset Introduction
 Based on the dataset collection platform, we collected a
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS
 TCP-based dataset and a QUIC-based dataset, whose orig-
 This section introduces how we collect an experimental inal traffic consists of TCP and QUIC flows, respectively.
dataset and provides an overview of the dataset used in the Both datasets comprise original traffic and the corresponding
experiments. paired proxied traffic. Table II and Table III provide statistical
498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

summary of the two dataset, including the number of websites, sequence length of 32 offers stable and strong classification
the number of flow pairs, the number of original packets, performance across many methods [33], [35], [37], minimizing
the number of proxied packets, and the file size. The proxy computational overhead while preserving key features for
protocols include Shadowsocks [1], VMess [2], Trojan [3], and traffic classification.
VLESS [4]. For both the TCP-based and QUIC-based datasets, The first experiment focuses on the comparison of Seq2Seq
we collect original and proxied traffic pairs simultaneously by models in the sequence feature transformation modeling phase.
visiting 60 popular websites 750 times for each proxy protocol. We base our comparison on the classification performance
 achieved by the aforementioned encrypted traffic classification
 V. C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION methods. The Seq2Seq models compared include LSTM [43],
 In this section, we conduct several rigorous experiments LSTM-Att, GRU [44], GRU-Att, and Transformer [42].
to maximize the performance of EO-EPTC. We start by • LSTM [43] is a long short-term memory network
introducing the evaluation preliminaries. Then, we present the that captures long-sequence dependencies through gating
comparison of Seq2Seq models. Next, we compare various mechanisms
attention mechanisms. Finally, we provide a detailed compar- • LSTM-Att incorporates the attention mechanism to
ison of alignment features. LSTM, which enhances its ability to focus on the most
 relevant parts of the input sequence.
A. Preliminary • GRU [44] is a streamlined variant of LSTM, designed
 to reduce architectural complexity while preserving its
 1) Evaluation Schemes: We conduct three comparative
 ability to handle long-sequence dependencies effectively.
experiments on the TCP-based dataset constructed in the
 • GRU-Att incorporates the attention mechanism to GRU,
previous section, including 1) comparison of Seq2Seq models,
 which improves its ability to selectively focus on impor-
2) comparison of attention mechanisms, and 3) comparison
 tant input features.
of alignment features. We randomly select 30 websites from
 • Transformer [42] is a sequence model that uses a selfthe collected TCP-based dataset, and use their original and
 attention mechanism to capture global dependencies,
proxied traffic to form the Unlabeled Original and Proxied
 enabling parallel processing and efficient handling of long
Flow Pair Dataset, which is used to train the Seq2Seq model.
 sequences.
The remaining original traffic from the other 30 websites forms
the Original Traffic Dataset, while the corresponding proxied The second experiment is dedicated to comparing different
traffic is to be classified. The source code and the dataset of attention mechanisms for the Seq2Seq model. To maximize
EO-EPTC is publicly available at https://github.com/ygchen1/ the sequence modeling capability of the Transformer, we
eo-eptc/. conduct a comparative experiment on four representative
 To demonstrate the adaptability of EO-EPTC across various attention mechanisms: Additive Attention [45], Dot-Product
encrypted traffic classification models, we select the state-of- Attention [45], Scaled Dot-Product Attention [42], and Local
the-art sequence-based encrypted traffic classification methods Attention [46].
FS-Net [33] and ETC-PS [35], along with traditional machine The third experiment aims to compare different combilearning models Random Forest [40] and XGBoost [41], as nations of alignment features used in the Sequence Feature
well as the Transformer [42] model. Alignment phase. The optional alignment features include
 Directional Feature Encoding (D), Sequence Feature Reassem-
 • FS-Net [33] employs an end-to-end encoder-decoder
 bly (R), and Sequence Feature Segmentation (S).
 structure to extract features from the packet length
 sequence of encrypted traffic. It then performs traffic • The Directional Feature Encoding (D) employs positive
 classification on a deep neural network. and negative signs to mark the packet direction in the
 • ETC-PS [35] constructs path signature features from the sequence features, explicitly indicating the transmission
 packet length sequences of encrypted traffic. Following direction information.
 this, it utilizes traditional machine learning methods to • The Sequence Feature Reassembly (R) is to reassemclassify traffic based on the extracted features. ble packet-level sequence features into datagram-level
 • Random Forest [40] uses an ensemble of decision trees sequence features affected by MTU limitations, thereby
 to capture complex relationships between features. It eliminating distribution differences caused by varying
 aggregates the predictions from decision trees to improve MTU sizes.
 overall accuracy and reduce the risk of overfitting. • The Sequence Feature Segmentation (S), which requires
 • XGBoost [41] optimizes feature classification perfor- Sequence Feature Reassembly (R) as a prerequisite, is
 mance using the gradient-boosted tree method, which designed to segment the over-reassembled sequence feaenhances the model’s generalization ability. tures based on a statistical payload length threshold.
 • Transformer [42] is a sequence model designed to capture By combining these alignment steps, we can form six alignglobal dependencies in data through its self-attention ment feature combinations: (N), (D), (R), (DR), (RS), and
 mechanism. We leverage its encoder structure to classify (DRS), where (N) represents the baseline without any alignthe sequence features of the traffic. ment features.
We set the length of input sequence features to 32, truncat- 2) Cross-Validation: We use 5-fold cross-validation to
ing sequences longer than 32 and padding shorter ones. A ensure consistent and reliable dataset partitioning in all
CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 499

comparative experiments. We average the results across all
folds to provide a robust and comprehensive evaluation of
model performance. We conduct the experiments on a general
computing server with 2*IntelO R
 XeonOR
 Gold 6330 CPU @
2.00GHz, DDR4 2933MHz 256GB, and 2*NVIDIA RTX
3090 GPUs.
 3) Evaluation Criteria: In our evaluation, we employ
F1 Macro and Average Normalized Edit Distance (ANED)
as metrics to evaluate EO-EPTC.
 • F1 Macro: We define the precisioni of each Website
 Webi as the ratio of correctly classified encrypted flows
 belonging to Webi to the total number of encrypted flows
 classified as Webi . The recalli of each Website Webi is
 the ratio of correctly classified encrypted flows belonging
 to Webi to the total number of encrypted flows that belong
 to Webi . We calculate the F1 scorei of Webi as the
 harmonic mean of its precisioni and recalli .
 Precisioni × Recalli
 F1 S corei = 2 × (6)
 Precisioni + Recalli
 The F1 Macro is the macro average of all F1 score.
 N
 1 X
 F1 Macro = F1 S corei (7)
 N
 i=1

 • ANED: We employ Edit Distance (ED), a metric that
 quantifies the similarity between two sequences by
 calculating the minimum number of operations (insertions, deletions, substitutions) required to transform one
 sequence into the other. Given the sequence S 1 and S 2 ,
 the edit distance between the first i-th element of the Fig. 6. Comparison of Seq2Seq model performance.
 sequence S 1 and the first j-th characters of the sequence
 S 2 is
 8 B. Comparison of Seq2Seq Models
 ˆ D(i − 1, j) + 1
 ˆ
 ˆ
 <D(i, j − 1) + 1 Figure 6 illustrates the F1-Macro of classifiers using
 D(i, j) = min (8) EO-EPTC with various Seq2Seq models, including LSTM,
 ˆ
 ˆ
 ˆ D(i − 1, j − 1) + 1, S 1 [i] , S 2 [ j] LSTM-Att, GRU, GRU-Att, and Transformer, across different
 D(i − 1, j − 1), S 1 [i] = S 2 [ j]
 :
 proxy protocols: Shadowsocks, VMess, Trojan, and VLESS.
 The purple dashed line in Figure 6 represents the ANED
 Thus, the edit distance between S 1 and S 2 is of EO-EPTC, which quantifies the similarity between the
 sequence features generated by EO-EPTC and those extracted
 ED(S 1 , S 2 ) = D(|S 1 |, |S 2 |) (9) from real proxy traffic. Each subfigure corresponds to a proxy
 protocol, with the X-axis representing the Seq2Seq method,
 Since the length of the sequence features varies, we
 and different line styles are used to distinguish the results of
 propose the Normalized Edit Distance (NED) to meathe classifiers across various Seq2Seq models.
 sure the degree of difference between sequence feature
 Across all proxy protocol scenarios, the Transformer
 pairs. The NED between two sequences S 1 and S 2 is
 demonstrates consistent outperformance, exhibiting significomputed as:
 cantly higher F1-Macro and lower ANED values compared to
 ED(S 1 , S 2 ) the other Seq2Seq models. A lower ANED indicates that the
 NED(S 1 , S 2 ) = (10) Transformer is more proficient at predicting the sequence feamax(len(S 1 ), len(S 2 ))
 ture of the corresponding proxy traffic. For LSTM and GRU,
 The Average Normalized Edit Distance (ANED) is the incorporating attention mechanisms (LSTM-Att and GRU-Att)
 arithmetic mean of NED across all sequence feature pairs. generally improves both F1-Macro scores and ANED values
 The ANED across M sequence feature pairs is given by: across most proxy protocol scenarios, with minimal variation
 M
 in F1-Macro scores across different classification methods.
 1 X However, these performance gains fall short when compared
 ANED = NED(S 1i , S 2i ) (11)
 M to the Transformer. Based on the above analysis, utilizing the
 i=1
500 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 7. Comparison of attention mechanism performance.

Transformer as the Seq2Seq model proves effective in achieving notable performance in sequence feature transformation.
 Fig. 8. Evaluation of alignment feature combinations.
C. Comparison of Attention Mechanisms
 Considering the outstanding performance of the Trans-
 ANED as the only evaluation metric. The alignment features
former demonstrated in Section V-B, we further investigate
 compared include Directional Feature Encoding (D), Sequence
the impact of various Transformer attention mechanisms on
 Feature Reassembly (R), Sequence Feature Segmentation (S),
the performance of EO-EPTC. Figure 7 shows the F1-Macro
 and their combinations, such as DR, RS, and DRS. Notably,
of classifiers using the Transformer as EO-EPTC’s Seq2Seq
 Sequence Feature Segmentation (S) requires Sequence Feature
model with various attention mechanisms, including Additive
 Reassembly (R) as a prerequisite. We use (N) to represent the
[45], Dot-Product [45], Scaled Dot-Product [42], and Local
 baseline without any alignment features.
[46] attention mechanisms. Similar to Section V-B, the purple
 The (DRS) combination of all three alignment features
dashed line in Figure 7 represents the ANED of EO-EPTC.
 consistently achieves the lowest ANED values across all
Each subfigure represents a proxy protocol, where the X-axis
 protocols. The (RS) also performs well, with ANED valdepicts the attention mechanism. Different line styles are
 ues slightly higher than DRS but still lower than other
employed to differentiate the classifier results for various
 combinations. This suggests that even without Directional
attention mechanisms.
 Feature Encoding, the combination of Sequence Feature
 In all proxy protocol scenarios, the Transformer with Scaled
 Reassembly and Sequence Feature Segmentation substantially
Dot-Product Attention consistently shows the lowest ANED
 enhances sequence alignment. The (DR) configuration shows
values and allows classifiers to achieve the highest F1-Macro
 slightly weaker performance compared to RS but still outscores. Dot-Product Attention and Additive Attention perform
 performs using (D) or (R) alone. Both (D) and (R), when
slightly worse than Scaled Dot-Product Attention, while Local
 applied individually, provide slight improvements over the
Attention displayed relatively weak performance. Compared to
 baseline (N). This highlights that only the combination of
other attention mechanisms, the Scaled Dot-Product Attention
 Directional Feature Encoding and Sequence Feature Reassemoffers enhanced global context awareness by efficiently scaling
 bly can achieve a significant improvement in sequence
the dot products, which reduces the impact of large value
 alignment.
ranges and ensures a more stable and informative attention
 The results demonstrate that the combination of all three
distribution. In contrast, the Local Attention with a limited
 alignment features (DRS) can greatly improve the EO-EPTC
context window struggles to model cross-timestep dependenframework’s effectiveness in sequence feature prediction,
cies, especially in complex transmission proxy protocols like
 which in turn influences the training process for proxy traffic
VMess.
 classification.
 In summary, the Scaled Dot-Product Attention proves to be
the most effective mechanism within the EO-EPTC, excelling
in both F1-Macro scores and ANED quality. This reinforces VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION FOR E O -E PTC
the Transformer’s capability to capture complex sequence In this section, we use the optimal configuration of
features effectively. EO-EPTC demonstrated in Section V to evaluate the robustness and effectiveness of EO-EPTC. We begin by introducing
D. Comparison of Alignment Features the evaluation preliminaries, and then present a series of
 Figure 8 demonstrates the performance of different align- experiments designed to examine EO-EPTC from multiple
ment feature combinations across four proxy protocols, with perspectives.
CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 501

 Fig. 9. Comparison of the impact of dataset scale on the unlabeled flow pair dataset.

A. Preliminary overall detection and classification performance is evaluated
 We conduct three evaluation experiments to assess the on the proxied traffic samples from the known classes and the
effectiveness of the EO-EPTC configurations demonstrated real OOD classes.
in the previous section, including 1) the impact of dataset In the fifth experiment, we evaluate the impact of differscale on EO-EPTC, 2) performance improvement with ent operating systems and browsers on the performance of
EO-EPTC, 3) the compatibility to QUIC-based proxied traffic, EO-EPTC. We construct TCP-based datasets on four platform
4) the effectiveness of out-of-distribution traffic detection, combinations by considering two operating systems, Windows
5) the impact of different operating systems and browsers and Ubuntu, and two browsers, Chrome and Firefox. For each
to EO-EPTC, and 6) comparison with representative baseline platform, we collect the corresponding traffic datasets and
approaches. assess the classifiers under the same experimental settings as
 The first experiment focuses on the impact of dataset scale in the original submission.
on EO-EPTC. In previous experiments, the EO-EPTC uses In the sixth experiment, we compare EO-EPTC with three
the TCP-based Flow Pair Dataset from 30 websites to train the representative baseline VPN classification approaches. We
Seq2Seq model. In this experiment, we evaluate the F1-Macro select Flowpic [20], [21], Flowformers [22] and Minipic
and ANED of classifiers using unlabeled flow pair datasets [23] as baseline methods. We use the original traffic from
constructed with 1 to 30 websites. TCP-based dataset as the training set for the baseline models
 In the second experiment, we evaluate the performance and evaluate their performance using the proxied traffic. The
improvement achieved by the EO-EPTC. We use TCP-based results are compared with the performance of the EO-EPTCdataset to compare the encrypted traffic classifiers under three enhanced FS-Net method.
training scenarios: original traffic, real-world proxied traffic,
and original traffic combined with EO-EPTC. Subsequently, B. Impact of Dataset Scale on EO-EPTC
we assess the classifiers’ performance using real-world prox- Figure 7 presents the F1-Macro and ANED of classifiers
ied traffic to determine the enhancement brought about by as the number of websites in the unlabeled flow pair dataset
EO-EPTC. varies from 1 to 30. Similar to the previous figures, the purple
 In the third experiment, we evaluate the compatibility dashed line in Figure 7 represents the ANED of EO-EPTC.
of EO-EPTC to QUIC-based proxied traffic. Similiar to Each subfigure corresponds to a proxy protocol, with the
TCP-based traffic, we first train a seq2seq model and transform X-axis representing the number of websites in the unlabeled
original sequence features derived from QUIC traffic into flow pair dataset. We use different line styles to distinguish
simulated proxied sequence features, then train the classifier the results of the state-of-the-art classifiers.
using these simulated features. We evaluate the classifiers’ The F1-Macro exhibits a clear upward trend as the number
performance directly on the proxied traffic carrying QUIC. of websites in the dataset increases. The most significant
 In the fourth experiment, we evaluate the effectiveness improvement of F1-Macro is observed as the number of
of out-of-distribution (OOD) traffic detection. We divide the websites increases from 1 to 10. When the number of websites
labeled TCP-based dataset into three mutually exclusive sub- exceeds 26, the F1-Macro tends to stabilize at a high level.
sets: known classes, simulated OOD classes, and real OOD As the number of websites increases, the Seq2Seq model
classes. We first train a traffic classifier using the simulated gradually shifts from learning the transformation rules of
proxied sequence features generated from the original traffic sequence features for specific websites to understanding the
of the known classes. Then, we train an OOD detector, imple- implicit semantics of proxy protocols. This further enables the
mented as a random forest classifier, using the probability transformation of sequence features for the unseen websites.
vectors produced by the traffic classifier for the original traffic In terms of ANED, we observe a consistent downward
of both the known classes and the simulated OOD classes. The trend, which also implies that the capacity to predict sequence
502 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE I MPROVEMENT W ITH EO-EPTC C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE TO QUIC-BASED DATASET

 TABLE VI
 C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE TO OOD T RAFFIC

 achieved by EO-EPTC benefits not only state-of-the-art methods and Transformers but also traditional machine learning
features improves with the expansion of the unlabeled flow models, such as Random Forest and XGBoost.
pair dataset. Notably, both Trojan and VLESS exhibit more These results underscore EO-EPTC’s ability to generate
pronounced declines in ANED, highlighting that protocols simulated sequence features of proxied traffic that closely
with more complex transmission patterns derive significant resemble those of real proxied traffic. This capability allows
benefits from the enlargement of the dataset. existing classifiers to perform effective encrypted proxy traffic
 In summary, the expansion of the unlabeled flow pair dataset classification using only original traffic for training.
enhances the Seq2Seq model’s ability to learn the implicit
semantics of proxy protocols. As the dataset becomes more
 D. Compatibility to QUIC-Based Proxied Traffic
diverse, the model’s performance stabilizes, indicating that it
learns a generalizable transformation function rather than over- Table V presents the classification performance when applyfitting to specific website patterns. This enables the model to ing EO-EPTC to QUIC-based traffic. The F1-Macro score
handle out-of-distribution scenarios and establish a universal ranges from 85.77% to 93.70% when training the FS-Net
mapping for unseen websites. As a result, the model accurately on the original traffic and evaluating it on Proxied traffic.
converts original traffic features, allowing classifiers trained on While this result is slightly lower than when training directly
this simulated data to effectively classify real-world encrypted on Proxied traffic, it remains significantly higher than the
proxy traffic. performance obtained by training on original traffic without the
 use of EO-EPTC. This reduction is due to the fact that QUIC
 traffic, which is based on the UDP protocol, does not provide
C. Performance Improvement With EO-EPTC
 full flow control information, making it difficult to perform
 Table IV presents the detained classification performance of accurate flow reassembly and mitigate traffic noise caused by
five state-of-the-art classifiers across three training scenarios: network fluctuations. This issue may be partially alleviated by
1) original → proxied, 2) proxied → proxied, and 3) original + increasing the volume of data collected for training.
EO-EPTC → original.
 The classifiers trained solely on original traffic exhibit
poor classification performance when predicted on the proxied E. Detection of OOD Traffic
traffic, with F1-Macro scores ranging from 1.46% to 4.93%. Table VI presents the classification performance in scenar-
This is primarily attributed to the distribution discrepancy ios involving OOD (Out-Of-Distribution) traffic. We evenly
between original and proxied traffic, as well as the requirement divided the 30 website categories into six subsets (A, B, C,
for machine learning models to ensure consistency in the D, E, F), generating different combinations of known classes,
distribution of input data. When EO-EPTC is applied to the simulated OOD classes, and real OOD classes for evaluation.
training dataset, classifiers trained on original traffic achieve We assessed the classification performance under four different
F1-Macro scores that closely align with those of models combinations. In each result cell, the first value represents the
trained directly on proxied traffic. FS-Net’s performance on overall F1-Macro score for the 21 classes (20 categories +
Shadowsocks improved dramatically from 4.02% to 99.70% 1 OOD category), while the second value represents the
when trained with original traffic using EO-EPTC, coming F1-score for the OOD category.
within 0.23% of the 99.93% achieved by training directly on We used FS-Net as the traffic classifier and random forest
proxied traffic. Similarly, XGBoost’s performance on Trojan as the OOD traffic detection classifier. It can be observed
traffic rose significantly from 3.99% to 98.32%, closely match- that, in the OOD traffic scenario, the FS-Net enhanced with
ing the 99.53% accuracy obtained through direct training on EO-EPTC still achieves a strong overall F1-Macro score
proxied traffic. The classification performance improvement and OOD category F1-score. This indicates that EO-EPTC
CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 503

 TABLE VII TABLE IX
 S UMMARY OF THE DATASET F ROM D IFFERENT P LATFORMS C OMPARISON W ITH BASELINE A PPROACHES

 payload information to generate an image-like representation,
 and then applies CNN for classification. Flowpic claims to
 be capable of classifying VPN traffic when trained on non-
 VPN traffic, which shares some similarities with our scenario.
 Flowformers takes into account the traffic direction and different time-length statistical methods to construct multi-channel
 feature representations. mini-FlowPic is an improvement on
 Flowpic, increasing the granularity of statistics to achieve
 more efficient analysis and classification, thereby reducing the
 dependence on dataset size.
 TABLE VIII Table IX presents the comparison results with the baseline
 C ROSS -P LATFORM P ERFORMANCE OF EO-EPTC approaches. Among the three baseline methods, mini-FlowPic
 performs relatively better. However, compared to the FS-Net
 enhanced with EO-EPTC, the baseline methods show relatively lower classification performance on proxied traffic based
 on original traffic. These methods struggle to overcome the
 challenges posed by the data distribution differences.

effectively simulates the characteristics of real proxy traffic, VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
thereby supporting the identification of OOD traffic. In this work, we propose EO-EPTC, an end-to-end original
 traffic-based encrypted proxy traffic classification framework
F. Cross-Platform Performance of EO-EPTC that bridges the distribution gap via sequence feature align-
 We evaluate the classification performance of EO-EPTC ment and a Seq2Seq model, enabling models trained only
across four platform combinations: Windows 10 + Chrome, on original traffic to classify proxied traffic. Although the
Windows 10 + Firefox, Ubuntu 22.04 + Chrome, and Ubuntu proposed method demonstrates promising results, the current
22.04 + Firefox. The data collection procedures and proxy model assumes a one-to-one mapping between original flows
protocols remain consistent with the original setup to ensure and proxy flows. However, some proxy protocols, such as Hyscomparability. Table VII provides a summary of the extra teria2, employ multiplexing over QUIC-based HTTP/3, where
dataset. multiple application flows are encapsulated within a single
 Table VIII presents the cross-platform performance of proxy flow. This many-to-one mapping increases the instability
EO-EPTC. EO-EPTC achieves consistently high accuracy of length sequence features, making accurate identification
across all platforms, with performance exceeding 90% in every more challenging. In future work, we plan to expand our
case. Minor fluctuations are observed between Windows and dataset with multiplexed traffic and investigate temporal slicing
Ubuntu, primarily for the VMess protocol, which may be techniques to isolate sub-flows, thereby improving recognition
attributed to differences in TCP stack implementations that performance in such scenarios.
lead to additional instances of merging and misalignment in
sequence features. In contrast, the performance gap between R EFERENCES
Chrome and Firefox is relatively negligible. [1] (2024). Shadowsocks—A Fast Tunnel Proxy That Helps You Bypass
 Overall, these findings confirm that feature distinction is Firewalls. [Online]. Available: https://shadowsocks.org/
 [2] (2024). VMess. [Online]. Available: https://www.v2ray.com/chapter02/
primarily determined by the inherent characteristics of proxy protocols/vmess.html
protocols, while the influence of the operating system or [3] (2024). Trojan Documentation. [Online]. Available: https://trojanbrowser remains minimal. These observations highlight the gfw.github.io/trojan/
 [4] (2024). VLESS. [Online]. Available: https://www.v2fly.org/config/
robustness and effectiveness of EO-EPTC when applied to protocols/vless.html
real-world encrypted proxy traffic classification. [5] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017, pp. 253–262.
G. Comparison With Baseline Approaches [6] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
 We select three baseline approaches for comparison: Flow- in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
pic, which uses statistical analysis of packet timing and pp. 407–414.
504 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

[7] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal [29] Y. Xiao et al., “Distributed traffic synthesis and classification in edge
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM networks: A federated self-supervised learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
 Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1815–1829, Feb. 2024.
[8] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted [30] J. Yu, Y. Choi, K. Koo, and D. Moon, “A novel approach for application
 TLS traffic classification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., classification with encrypted traffic using BERT and packet headers,”
 vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 164–177, Feb. 2023. Comput. Netw., vol. 254, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 110747.
[9] Y. Wang, H. He, Y. Lai, and A. X. Liu, “A two-phase approach to fast [31] Y. Liu, X. Wang, B. Qu, and F. Zhao, “ATVITSC: A novel encrypted
 and accurate classification of encrypted traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., traffic classification method based on deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1071–1086, Jun. 2023. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 9374–9389, 2024.
[10] X. Ma et al., “Context-aware website fingerprinting over encrypted [32] X. Zhang et al., “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via
 proxies,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2021, integrating knowledge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE
 pp. 1–10. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
[11] H. Zhao, S. Zhang, Z. Qiao, X. Huang, and X. Zhang, “On the per- [33] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 formance of deep learning methods for identifying abnormal encrypted network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOMproxy traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2022, pp. 1416–1423. [34] M. Jiang et al., “Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level
[12] X. Ma et al., “Website fingerprinting on encrypted proxies: A flow- relationship with graph neural networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 217, Nov.
 context-aware approach and countermeasures,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 2022, Art. no. 109309.
 vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1904–1919, Jun. 2024. [35] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
[13] D. Xue, M. Kallitsis, A. Houmansadr, and R. Ensafi, “Fingerprinting paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE
 obfuscated proxy traffic with encapsulated TLS handshakes,” in Proc. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2024, pp. 2689–2706. [36] J. Piet, D. Nwoji, and V. Paxson, “GGFAST: Automating generation
[14] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Bovenzi, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “A of flexible network traffic classifiers,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf.,
 dive into the dark Web: Hierarchical traffic classification of anonymity 2023, pp. 850–866.
 tools,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1043–1054, Jul. [37] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework
 2020. for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
[15] Y. Li et al., “From traffic classes to content: A hierarchical approach Secur.), 2023, pp. 589–606.
 for encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 212, Jul. 2022, [38] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “WF-transformer:
 Art. no. 109017. Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification
[16] Z. Wu, Y.-N. Dong, X. Qiu, and J. Jin, “Online multimedia traffic by using transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
 classification from the QoS perspective using deep learning,” Comput. vol. 19, pp. 30–43, 2024.
 Netw., vol. 204, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108716. [39] (2024). V2ray. [Online]. Available: https://www.v2ray.com/
 [40] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
[17] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recur-
 2001.
 rent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans.
 [41] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,”
 Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
 in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 TDSC.2023.3245411.
 Aug. 2016, pp. 785–794.
[18] F. Cerasuolo et al., “MEMENTO: A novel approach for class incremental
 [42] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 learning of encrypted traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, May 2024, Art.
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
 no. 110374.
 [43] S. Hochreiter, “Long short-term memory,” in Neural Computation.
[19] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1997.
 robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on [44] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation
 heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014,
 vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024. arXiv:1412.3555.
[20] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted Internet traffic classifi- [45] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
 cation is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM-IEEE jointly learning to align and translate,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn.
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. 2019, Represent., 2014, pp. 1–11.
 pp. 680–687. [46] T. Luong, H. Pham, and C. D. Manning, “Effective approaches to
[21] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for attention-based neural machine translation,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical
 encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2015, pp. 1412–1421.
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
[22] R. Babaria, S. C. Madanapalli, H. Kumar, and V. Sivaraman,
 “FlowFormers: Transformer-based models for real-time network flow
 classification,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Mobility, Sens. Netw. (MSN), Yige Chen received the Ph.D. degree in computer
 Dec. 2021, pp. 231–238. software and theory from the Institute of Information
[23] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classifi- Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
 cation with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet China, in 2022. He is currently a Lecturer with the
 Meas. Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654. College of Computer Science and Artificial Intel-
[24] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Nascita, and A. Pescapé, ligence, Wenzhou University, China. His research
 “Encrypted multitask traffic classification via multimodal deep learning,” interests include encrypted traffic fingerprints, netin Proc. ICC-IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6. work security, and machine learning.
[25] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia,
 “EBSNN: Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic
 classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
 pp. 3521–3538, Sep. 2022.
[26] G. Xie, Q. Li, and Y. Jiang, “Self-attentive deep learning method
 for online traffic classification and its interpretability,” Comput. Netw.,
 vol. 196, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 108267. Huajie Jia received the bachelor’s degree in
 computer science and artificial intelligence from
[27] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
 Wenzhou University, China, in 2023, where he is
 A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning for
 currently pursuing the master’s degree with the Colactivity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps during
 lege of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence.
 COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 219, Dec. 2022, Art. no.
 His research interests include encrypted traffic fin-
 109452.
 gerprints, network security, and machine learning.
[28] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
 pp. 633–642.
CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 505

 Zhenzhou Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS
 the B.S. and M.S. degrees in communication engi- ON N ETWORKING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING , IEEE
 neering from Zhejiang University in 2001 and 2004, T RANSACTIONS ON C OGNITIVE C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKING,
 respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in communication IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING, and
 engineering from Dalian University of Technology IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL.
 in 2015. From February 2015 to August 2015,
 he was a Visiting Scholar with the Department
 of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Worcester
 Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA, USA. From
 November 2015 to June 2018, he was a Post-
 Doctoral Research Fellow with Zhejiang University.
He is currently a Full Professor with the College of Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou University, and the Director of Wenzhou Key
Laboratory for Intelligent Networking. His current research interests include
machine learning, intelligent systems, and wireless networks.

 Yipeng Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy
 of Sciences (CAS), China, in 2014. He is currently a Full Professor at the College of Computer
 Science, Beijing University of Technology, China.
 Hui Liu received the master’s degree in computer
 He has published more than 50 research papers
 science from the Institute of Information Engineerin refereed international journals and conferences,
 ing, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China,
 such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION
 in 2020. He is currently a Researcher with Tencent,
 F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE/ACM T RANS -
 Beijing, China. His research interests include large
 ACTIONS ON N ETWORKING , IEEE ICNP, and IEEE
 language models, natural language generation, and
T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT. His research
 machine learning.
interests include networking, network security, and machine learning. He
was a recipient of the Best Paper Award at the IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP) for his protocol format inference
technology. He serves as a Regular Reviewer for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON