6362 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 Evaluation to Integration: Hybrid Feature Selection
 Framework With Ensemble Machine Learning
 for Intrusion Detection
 Awais Bilal , Kashif Sharif , Senior Member, IEEE, Liehuang Zhu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Fan Li , Member, IEEE, Chang Xu , and Md Monjurul Karim , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—We study feature selection (FS) for flow-based intru- complex, sectors ranging from corporate environments to home
sion detection and propose a deterministic hybrid-FS that fuses IoT networks require strong security measures to safeguard
Mutual Information, Random-Forest, and XGBoost importances sensitive information, maintain financial stability, and ensure
under a simplex search with a single threshold. Using CIC-IDS-
2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018, and NF-UNSW-NB15, we evaluate ten
 privacy [2]. The dynamic nature of cyber threats, including
FS techniques paired with six ensembles under a leakage-safe sophisticated malware and social engineering tactics, demands
protocol. The hybrid-FS consistently matches or exceeds the best security strategies that are both versatile and adaptive, leveragsingle selectors while reducing feature count (e.g., 78 → 31) and ing advanced technologies like machine learning and artificial
improving runtime. Throughput rises by ∼9–10% and per-flow intelligence to stay ahead of attackers [3].
latency drops from 0.44 → 0.40 ms (p50) and 1.40 → 1.20 ms Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are crucial for network
(p99), with mean ± 95% CIs and paired tests. False-positive rate security, yet they face challenges that can compromise their ef-
(FPR) decreases by 15–19% (≈22 fewer false alarms per hour at
100k flows/h). Against representative PSO/GA hybrids, our fusion
 fectiveness. High false positive rates often lead to ‘alert fatigue’,
attains small but consistent macro-F1 gains and 15–25% FPR while traditional IDS struggle to adapt to the rapidly evolving
reductions at comparable latency. We clarify adversarial robust- cyber threat landscape due to their reliance on predefined signaness with an explicit FGSM feature-space threat model and Deep- tures [4], [5]. Addressing these issues necessitates integrating
PackGen configuration, and we diagnose cross-dataset shift with advanced, adaptable methods such as machine learning and
lightweight mitigations. A 24-hour SOC replay links FPR to analyst behavioral analysis. These techniques enhance IDS by enabling
time savings (2.5–3.7 hours/day) without sacrificing macro-F1 or them to dynamically learn from network activity and histori-
AUROC. The results position deterministic, compact FS as a practical choice for inline IDS where tail latency and alert volume matter. cal data, thereby improving detection capabilities and overall
 security [6]. Furthermore, integrating privacy-preserving mech-
 Index Terms—Intrusion detection systems (IDS), ensemble anisms, such as those employed in blockchain-based framemachine learning models, feature selection (FS) techniques, works for e-healthcare systems, can further strengthen resilience
hyperparameter tuning.
 against evolving threats [7].
 ML for Intrusion Detection: Machine learning significantly
 I. INTRODUCTION enhances intrusion detection systems by enabling them to dy-
 N TODAY’S interconnected world, robust network security namically learn from extensive datasets, effectively reducing
I is essential to protect the vast digital infrastructure critical to
various sectors [1]. As the digital landscape grows increasingly
 false positives and adapting to emerging threats. This capability
 shifts IDS from reactive to proactive security measures. A key
 aspect of this enhancement is optimized feature selection (FS),
 which improves diagnostic precision and scalability as network
 Received 29 August 2025; revised 30 January 2026; accepted 7 February 2026.
Date of publication 12 February 2026; date of current version 12 May 2026. The demands increase, reduces computational load, and minimizes
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China the risk of overfitting due to irrelevant features. For instance,
under Grant 62232002. (Corresponding author: Kashif Sharif.) Halim et al. and Amiri et al. demonstrated that optimized
 Awais Bilal, Kashif Sharif, and Fan Li are with the School of Computer feature selection could elevate IDS accuracy to 99.80% [8],
Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
(e-mail: awaisbilal@bit.edu.cn; kashif@bit.edu.cn; fli@bit.edu.cn). [9]. Similarly, Hamed et al. showed that employing Recursive
 Liehuang Zhu is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Feature Addition (RFA) and bigram techniques can increase IDS
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China, and also with the accuracy from 67% to 77.6% with smaller datasets and from 82%
Shandong Key Laboratory of Energy Industry Internet Big Data Technology,
Jinan 250003, China (e-mail: liehuangz@bit.edu.cn).
 to 92.9% with larger datasets, while also reducing the false alarm
 Chang Xu is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing rate to 1.1% [10]. Conversely, Khammassi et al. highlighted
Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: xuchang@bit.edu.cn). how the absence of feature selection could lead to increased
 Md Monjurul Karim is with the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Tech- computational demands and decreased system efficiency [11].
nology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518005, China (e-mail:
karim@siat.ac.cn). These studies underscore the pivotal role of feature selection in
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at https://doi. enhancing IDS capabilities, managing complex data effectively,
org/10.1109/TDSC.2026.3664110, provided by the authors. and maintaining operational efficiency in real-time scenarios.
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2026.3664110, provided by the authors.
 Fig. 1 illustrates the integration of advanced machine learning
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3664110 techniques within IDS across different network architectures,
 1545-5971 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
BILAL et al.: EVALUATION TO INTEGRATION: HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION FRAMEWORK WITH ENSEMBLE MACHINE LEARNING 6363

 Central to our investigation is developing a novel deterministic Hybrid Feature Selection (Hybrid-FS) technique that
 synergistically combines the strengths of multiple methods to
 refine model performance. These exploratory findings motivate
 the design of our hybrid selector, which is then formally defined and evaluated extensively across multiple datasets, threat
 models, and deployment scenarios. This approach is designed
 to increase detection accuracy, improve operational efficiency,
 and minimize false positives, thereby setting new standards for
 the adaptability and effectiveness of intrusion detection systems.
 Our goal is to enhance the operational and predictive capabilities
 of ensemble machine learning-based IDS, enabling them to
 effectively defend against a broad spectrum of cyber threats and
 thereby strengthen overall network security. This study sets the
 following specific objectives:
 r Assess and compare a wide range of feature selection
Fig. 1. Interaction map between network(s) & IDS, with machine learning
integration and deployment of feature selection techniques. methods to determine their effectiveness in optimizing
 IDS performance by balancing data reduction, accuracy,
 computational efficiency, and system responsiveness.
providing a visual map that details data flows, machine learning r Investigate the integration of feature selection with enintervention points, feature optimization, and their collective
 semble learning models, analyzing synergistic effects and
impact on security measures.
 proposing best practices that improve detection accuracy
 Problem Domain: The inclusion of irrelevant or redundant
 and reduce false positives.
features in machine learning models not only complicates their r Develop and rigorously evaluate a novel hybrid feature
structure and increases processing burdens but also exacerselection technique, incorporating a principled simplexbates the overfitting problem, complicating decision-making
 constrained joint search that optimizes macro-F1 and inprocesses and the interpretation of outcomes by security anaference time under stratified cross-validation, with datasetlysts [3], [12]. Targeted feature selection is crucial for reducspecific disclosed weights.
ing these complexities, enhancing model generalizability, and r Perform a comprehensive comparative study to establish
improving the interpretability of system decisions, which, in
 benchmarks for IDS performance, including cross-dataset
turn, aids analysts in responding more effectively to security
 generalization (e.g., CIC-IDS-2017 → NF-UNSW-NB15)
alerts [13]. By isolating only the most relevant features, feature
 and robustness against adversarial perturbations (FGSM,
selection not only simplifies the model and reduces the risk
 DeepPackGen) within a defined threat model.
of overfitting but also enhances accuracy and interpretability, r Highlight tangible improvements in IDS capabilities, such
thereby supporting the operational efficiency of IDS [14].
 as reduced response times, enhanced detection accuracy,
 Additionally, employing ensemble methods like AdaBoost,
 and resource-aware design for inline IDS deployment, sup-
Random Forest, and XGBoost leverages the strengths of mulported by latency/throughput measurements and error-rate
tiple learning algorithms to improve predictive accuracy and
 reductions.
robustness, essential for real-time threat detection [15]. These r Provide actionable insights for future IDS design and remethods, when combined with feature selection, enhance the
 search, extending the findings to guide the refinement of
adaptability and effectiveness of IDS against new and evolvadvanced security models.
ing cyber threats [16]. Similar strategies are also utilized in
 Structure of Paper: This paper is structured as follows.
privacy-preserving data sharing within blockchain-based IoT
 Section II reviews related work and technical background. Secnetworks, striking a balance between security and operational
 tion III describes the experimental setup. Section IV reports
efficiency [17], [18].
 initial ensemble results with and without feature selection.
 Objectives & Contributions: In the rapidly evolving field
 Section V presents the proposed deterministic hybrid technique.
of network security, the effectiveness of ensemble machine
 Section VI evaluates its performance, and Section VII examines
learning models heavily depends on feature selection to enhance
 scalability across datasets. Section VIII discusses findings and
accuracy, reduce complexity, and prevent overfitting [19], [20].
 limitations, and Section IX concludes the study.
Addressing this critical dependency, our study explores the
research question: How can various feature selection methods
optimize the performance of ensemble models to better detect
and mitigate cyber threats? We investigate a range of estab- II. RELATED WORK AND TECHNICAL BACKGROUND
lished techniques, including ANOVA, Boruta, Chi-Squared, L1-
based Feature Selection, Mutual Information, PCA, Random- A. IDS and Feature Selection for Flow-Based IDS
Forest Importance, RFE, RFECV, and XGBoost Importance, Traditional signature-based IDS struggle with novel attack
in conjunction with ensemble methods like AdaBoost, Random vectors and evolving traffic, while ML-based IDS can suf-
Forest, LightGBM, ExtraTrees, Bagging, and XGBoost. We first fer high false positives and overfitting to historical patterns,
conduct an exploratory empirical evaluation of these ensemble limiting generalization to new threats [21], [22], [23], [24],
models with and without existing feature selection methods to [25]. These realities motivate compact, informative feature sets
quantify their impact on IDS performance and resource usage. and evaluation protocols that emphasize robustness, not only
6364 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

aggregate accuracy but also macro-F1, rare-class behavior, and
cross-dataset stability.
 Recent representation-learning approaches, spanning transformers and attention-based deep models, learn packet/flow
embeddings and increasingly tackle recognition of previously
unseen attacks (open set) [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]. While effective, many such systems either rely on packet payloads or employ
heavyweight architectures that can be impractical in security
operations center (SOC) pipelines due to privacy/compliance
constraints and runtime budgets [31]. Our scope is deliberately
complementary, we target tabular, flow-level telemetry already
available in operational networks and pair it with ensembles and
compact feature sets, emphasizing feature economy, throughput/latency, and robustness under dataset shift and constrained
adversaries [32].
 Feature selection improves IDS by reducing dimensionality,
mitigating noise, and controlling inference cost [9], [33]. Filter
methods (e.g., mutual information) score features independently Fig. 2. Methodological Overview of Feature Selection for Ensemble Machine
of a classifier and capture non-linear dependencies useful for Learning Models: From Evaluation to Integration.
complex attacks [9]. Embedded methods expose model-driven
importance (e.g., Random Forest and XGBoost gain/split met- model choices are typically judged not only by their detection
rics) and are widely used in IDS pipelines to highlight salient capability but also by their ability to satisfy these runtime and
flow attributes [34], [35], [36]. Wrapper methods (e.g., RFE) resource budgets.
iteratively search subsets using a validation objective, often
yielding strong accuracy at higher computational cost [37], [38]. D. Gaps That Motivate Our Empirical Study
In practice, operational flow-based IDS favor FS schemes that (i)
are reproducible, (ii) yield stable selections across folds/datasets,
 r Reproducible, time-bounded fusion: Prior hybrids freand (iii) lower latency without degrading macro-F1. quently rely on stochastic, population-based search with
 variable compute budgets [39], deterministic fusion with
 explicit time bounds remains underexplored.
B. Hybrid Feature Selection in the Literature r Robustness beyond a single dataset: Many studies optimize
 Hybrid feature selection combines complementary signals within-dataset accuracy but do not assess cross-dataset
(filter + embedded + wrapper) to stabilize rankings and cope generalization or out-of-box behavior [38], [42].
with high-dimensional traffic features [33], [37]. Representative r Operational metrics: Tail latency (p99), false-positive rate,
designs include Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) and Genetic and rare-class F1, key for analyst workload and inline
Algorithms (GA) wrappers that search over subsets or fusion SLAs, are often secondary to aggregate accuracy [40], [41].
weights [39], rank-fusion schemes that aggregate multiple scor- r Adversarial considerations: FS-centric work rarely articers, and CFS-DE variants integrated with stacking classifiers ulates explicit threat models or systematically evaluates
reporting high accuracy on benchmark datasets [37]. However, performance under constrained feature- or packet-level
population-based wrappers (PSO/GA) can introduce substantial perturbations [43].
and variable runtime on 70–80 feature spaces, complicating Positioning of our approach: Against this backdrop, the redeterministic, time-bounded deployment. Existing hybrid ap- mainder of this work empirically studies ensembles with and
proaches typically emphasize single-dataset accuracy and offer without a range of existing FS methods under the above metlimited analysis of cross-dataset generalization, adversarial ro- rics and constraints. Building on these observations, we later
bustness, or tail-latency behavior, considerations that are crucial introduce a deterministic hybrid selector that fuses MI, RF, and
for inline IDS deployments. XGBoost importances through a constrained weighting scheme
 tuned to macro-F1 and latency, and evaluate it in terms of
C. Evaluation Metrics and Operational Constraints in-dataset performance, cross-dataset generalization, adversarial robustness, and p50/p99 latency and FP-rate (Sections VI
 Evaluation of IDS and associated FS pipelines must jointly and VII).
consider classification quality and operational constraints. Standard metrics such as accuracy and area under the ROC curve
 III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR BASELINE AND FS STUDIES
(AUC) summarize overall discrimination ability, while macroaveraged F1 emphasizes performance on minority attack classes This section describes the experimental setup used to evaluate
and mitigates dominance of majority benign traffic. In op- baseline ensemble models and their variants equipped with
erational settings, false-positive rate directly affects analyst individual feature-selection methods. The overall methodology,
workload and ‘alert fatigue’, and thus is often as important from evaluation to integration, is illustrated in Fig. 2. The objecas aggregate accuracy [40], [41]. Latency metrics, including tive is to establish a leakage-safe, reproducible framework that
median and tail inference time (e.g., p50/p99), constrain feasible enables fair comparison across datasets, preprocessing choices,
model complexity under service-level agreements, especially for imbalance handling procedures, ensemble learners, existing feainline or near-real-time IDS deployments. Consequently, FS and ture selection algorithms, and evaluation metrics.
BILAL et al.: EVALUATION TO INTEGRATION: HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION FRAMEWORK WITH ENSEMBLE MACHINE LEARNING 6365

 TABLE I
 DATASET SCHEMA, CLASS DISTRIBUTION, AND SPLITS BEFORE/AFTER SMOTEENN. MINOR CLASSES (< 0.1%) GROUPED AS OTHER

A. Datasets and Class Imbalance this section, ensuring that performance differences arise primar-
 Our study relies on three widely used flow- and packet- ily from the feature subsets rather than model retuning. Detailed
level intrusion detection benchmarks, CIC-IDS-2017, CSE- configurations are listed in Table II.
CIC-IDS2018, and NF-UNSW-NB15. These datasets differ substantially in traffic composition, attack diversity, and underlying D. Existing Feature Selection Algorithms
feature schemas, providing a broad testbed for assessing the To evaluate how existing feature selection methods interact
stability of feature selectors and ensemble models. For each with ensemble learners, we consider ten algorithms representing
benchmark, we distinguish between the raw dataset, consisting the main methodological families. Filter-based selectors, such as
of the unmodified feature space and original class distributions, ANOVA, Chi-Squared, and Mutual Information, score features
and the post-processed variant obtained after the preprocessing independently of the classifier and provide rapid assessments
steps described below. All three datasets exhibit pronounced of relevance. Embedded methods, including L1 regularization,
class imbalance, with several minority attack categories occur- Random Forest importance, and XGBoost importance, expose
ring at ratios exceeding 103 :1, a property that strongly influences model-driven saliency signals tied to their internal decision
how feature selection and model learning behave. mechanisms. Wrapper approaches, such as RFE, RFECV, and
 the Boruta algorithm, iteratively explore feature subsets and
B. Preprocessing and Imbalance Handling often achieve high accuracy at the cost of increased computation. PCA is included as a dimensionality-reduction baseline
 Preprocessing begins with standard cleaning operations, in- that retains variance-driven structure rather than explicit feature
cluding the normalization of column names, enforcement of nu- relevance. All selectors are trained strictly within the training
meric datatypes for flow-level attributes, and consistent handling folds, the resulting feature subsets are applied unchanged to the
of non-ASCII entries. Missing numeric values are replaced with validation and test data to avoid leakage.
column means, while categorical gaps are imputed using modal
categories. Attack-type strings are encoded into integer labels,
after which each dataset is partitioned into stratified training, E. Evaluation Metrics and Protocol
validation, and test splits, preserving class priors as defined in Evaluation focuses on several complementary metrics. Ac-
Table I. curacy and AUC provide broad measures of discrimination,
 To mitigate extreme class imbalance, we apply SMOTEENN while macro-F1 captures performance across classes of uneven
with k = 5 exclusively within the training folds. This combined prevalence and is therefore more reflective of behavior on rare
oversampling and cleaning procedure helps stabilize minority- attack types. False-positive rate is reported due to its operational
class learning and improves minority-class F1 without incurring importance in security operations centers, where excessive alerts
the heavier computational overhead of pure oversampling strate- can quickly overwhelm analysts. Latency is measured in terms
gies such as SMOTE. Crucially, neither the validation nor the of per-flow inference time, including both median and p99
test splits are resampled, they remain in their raw form to ensure statistics, to capture the responsiveness requirements of inline
that generalization is measured on realistic, imbalanced distri- IDS deployments. All models are trained and validated on stratbutions. Standardization is then performed by fitting a Stan- ified splits to preserve class proportions, and all preprocessing,
dardScaler on the training fold and applying it unchanged feature selection, and resampling steps are encapsulated within
to the validation and test sets, thereby preventing information the training fold to prevent any form of information leakage.
leakage. A small set of redundant, timestamp-derived columns Experiments are conducted on an Intel Xeon Silver 4210R
exhibiting extremely high correlation is removed to streamline CPU with 32 GB of RAM, paired with an Nvidia RTX3080
subsequent feature-selection computations. GPU (12 GB VRAM) running CUDA 11.2 and cuDNN 8.1.
 The software stack uses Python 3.8.10 and scikit-learn 1.4.2.
C. Ensemble Models and Hyperparameters This environment provides consistent measurement of latency,
 throughput, and other runtime metrics across all baseline and
 To provide strong and diverse baselines, we employ six single-feature-selection experiments.
ensemble models, Random Forest, ExtraTrees, Bagging, AdaBoost, XGBoost, and LightGBM. These ensembles collec-
 IV. EXPLORATORY RESULTS: ENSEMBLES WITH AND
tively span variance-reduction strategies and gradient-boosting
mechanisms commonly used in IDS research and offer different WITHOUT EXISTING FEATURE SELECTION
trade-offs between stability, expressiveness, and inference cost. This section presents exploratory, motivation-oriented find-
Their hyperparameters follow established configurations suit- ings from our evaluation of ensemble models on the CIC-IDSable for tabular data and remain fixed across all experiments in 2017 dataset, both with and without established feature selection
6366 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE II
 ENSEMBLE METHODS AND FEATURE SELECTION TECHNIQUES: CONFIGURATION OVERVIEW

 TABLE III
 BASELINE PERFORMANCE METRICS AND RATIONALE FOR FEATURE SELECTION TECHNIQUES ON ENSEMBLE MODELS

Fig. 3. Comparative overview of performance metrics for ensemble models.
 Fig. 4. Comparative ROC curves of ensemble models.

techniques. These experiments are not meant to provide a final attaining accuracies of 99.88% and 99.79%, respectively, along
or optimized configuration, rather, they reveal the characteristic with consistently high precision and recall. ExtraTrees also
strengths, weaknesses, and latency, performance trade-offs that performed competitively, reaching 99.79% accuracy and strong
guide the design requirements for a more principled hybrid F1 scores, making it a reliable high-capacity model. In contrast,
selector introduced later in Section V. AdaBoost and LightGBM exceeded 90% accuracy but exhibited
 lower F1 scores due to imbalanced precision and recall.
A. Baseline Ensemble Performance (No Feature Selection) ROC curves in Fig. 4 further reflected these differences.
 ExtraTrees reached the highest AUC (0.92), while AdaBoost,
 We begin by establishing reference performance for each
 RandomForest, and XGBoost clustered around 0.87, and Lightensemble using the full, preprocessed feature set, as summarised
 GBM lagged at 0.84. Operational efficiency is crucial for inline
in Table III. This baseline provides a neutral point against which
 IDS deployment, and the models exhibited clearly different
the impact of individual feature selectors can be assessed.
 latency characteristics, as shown in Fig. 5. XGBoost delivered
 As illustrated in Fig. 3, performance varied considerably
 the fastest prediction time,1 processing a batch of 1,000 flows in
across the six ensemble methods, AdaBoost, RandomForest,
 4.65 seconds. LightGBM and RandomForest also demonstrated
LightGBM, ExtraTrees, Bagging, and XGBoost, in terms of
accuracy, discriminative power, and latency. Among them, XG-
Boost and RandomForest delivered the strongest overall results, 1 Measured as wall-clock time throughout this work.
BILAL et al.: EVALUATION TO INTEGRATION: HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION FRAMEWORK WITH ENSEMBLE MACHINE LEARNING 6367

 TABLE IV
 IMPACT OF REPRESENTATIVE FEATURE SELECTORS ON ENSEMBLE
 PERFORMANCE

Fig. 5. Prediction time for 1,000 flows on RTX 3080 (CIC-IDS-2017 test set).

acceptable latency for time-sensitive applications, whereas AdaBoost and Bagging required 43.55 seconds and 54.03 seconds,
respectively, making them less suitable for real-time scenarios
in their baseline form.
 Beyond aggregate ROC and latency trends, we observed that
LightGBM showed less stable class-wise behavior than the other
ensembles, with higher FP/FN dispersion across multiple attack
categories under the same feature-selection settings. Detailed
confusion-matrix results are presented in Appendix A (Fig. A.1),
available online. Learning-curve results further support these
observations, AdaBoost shows a persistent generalization gap
as sample size increases (suggesting overfitting), whereas XG-
Boost improves steadily with a tighter train-validation gap.
RandomForest and ExtraTrees remain stable across data scales,
while LightGBM retains the largest train–validation gap. The
learning-curves of all six ensembles is provided in Appendix A
(Fig. A.2), available online.
 Collectively, the baseline evaluations highlight three patterns, (i) high-capacity ensembles such as RandomForest and
ExtraTrees risk overfitting when trained on wide feature sets,
(ii) AdaBoost and LightGBM require more informative feature subsets to stabilize precision–recall behavior, and (iii)
latency differences across models imply the need for feature
sets that reduce inference cost without degrading predictive
performance.

B. Effect of Existing Feature Selection Methods
 To understand how established feature selectors modify
ensemble performance, we evaluated ten methods, ANOVA,
 Fig. 6. Performance overview of feature selectors and ensembles.
Boruta, Chi-Squared, L1-based selection, Mutual Information,
PCA, RandomForest Importance, RFECV, RFE, and XGBoost
Importance, applied uniformly across all six ensembles, with the penalties. RandomForest responded well to RFECV, Boruta,
main results summarised in Table IV, while the full results are and L1-based selection, achieving accuracies near 99.72% with
provided in Appendix B (Table B.1), available online. sustained efficiency. XGBoost demonstrated both high accuracy
 The results, shown in Fig. 6, reveal substantial model-specific and low prediction time when combined with RFECV or Boruta,
variation. For AdaBoost, both Boruta and L1-based selection solidifying its suitability for real-time detection.
improved accuracy from 95.71% to approximately 97.6%, with ROC-AUC analysis, shown in Fig. 7, reinforced these trends.
corresponding F1 gains, but at the cost of increased latency. Most selectors achieved near-perfect AUC values for well-
Bagging benefited strongly from RFECV and Boruta, achieving aligned model–selector combinations. However, Chi-Squared
accuracies as high as 99.49% and F1 scores exceeding 99.4%, produced consistently lower AUC values (≈0.93–0.95) across
though these combinations also produced some of the slowest several models and showed recurring misclassifications in a
prediction times. ExtraTrees reached near-perfect scores, often subset of classes, particularly 0, 4, and 10. The corresponding
above 0.998 in accuracy and F1, when paired with Boruta or confusion-matrix results are provided in Appendix C (Fig. C.1),
L1-based selection. LightGBM benefited primarily from Mutual available online. Learning-curves are also provided in Ap-
Information and RandomForest Importance, which produced pendix C (Fig. C.2), available online. These curves indicate that
moderate accuracy improvements without significant latency Boruta and L1-based selection allowed Bagging and ExtraTrees
6368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 that motivate the design of a more balanced feature-selection
 strategy.
 First, different selectors capture complementary forms of signal. Mutual Information is efficient and improves precision for
 models such as LightGBM, RandomForest Importance is particularly effective for tree-based ensembles, and XGBoost Importance provides highly discriminative rankings with exceptional
 inference efficiency. These complementary behaviors suggest
 that no single selector fully captures the diversity of predictive
 structure present in flow-level IDS data. Second, several selectors with strong predictive performance, most notably Boruta,
 L1-based selection, and RFECV, incur substantial latency penalties, particularly when paired with high-capacity ensembles.
 This makes them unsuitable for inline IDS deployments despite
 their accuracy benefits. Third, many baseline models, especially
 RandomForest, ExtraTrees, and LightGBM, exhibit signs of
 overfitting that are mitigated when informative subsets are used.
 This highlights the need for feature-selection mechanisms that
 enhance generalization rather than merely boosting in-dataset
 accuracy.
 These observations motivate the development of a hybrid
 feature selector that (i) combines complementary scoring mechanisms drawn from filter and embedded methods, (ii) imposes
 time-bounded inference constraints, and (iii) improves robust-
Fig. 7. ROC curves of feature selectors and each ensemble model. ness while avoiding the computational overhead of wrapperbased approaches. We define such a selector formally in Section V and evaluate it extensively in subsequent sections.

 V. PROPOSED DETERMINISTIC HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION
 TECHNIQUE
 Building on the exploratory results of Section IV, we propose
 a deterministic hybrid feature selection technique designed to
 exploit the complementary strengths of Mutual Information
 (MI), RandomForest Importance (RFI), and XGBoost Impor-
Fig. 8. Prediction time per 1,000 flows (RTX 3080) for six ensembles and ten tance (XGI). The goal is to construct a single, operationally effiselectors. cient feature subset that preserves, or improves, detection quality
 while respecting latency constraints in inline IDS settings.
to converge rapidly to high accuracy, while RFECV-based approaches introduced greater variability but ultimately stabilised A. Problem Formulation
at strong validation performance.
 Prediction latency varied significantly, as reflected in Fig. 8. The exploratory study in Section IV revealed that (i) wide
XGBoost Importance consistently yielded the fastest inference feature sets encourage overfitting in high-capacity ensembles,
times, with XGBoost processing 1,000 flows in approximately (ii) individual FS methods exhibit distinct strengths and weak-
1.77 seconds. Conversely, Bagging combined with RFE required nesses, and (iii) wrapper-based hybrids can be accurate but often
more than 17 seconds. Several lightweight selectors, Mutual incur prohibitive inference costs. We therefore seek a principled
Information and PCA most notably, improved model way to fuse three base selectors, MI, RFI, and XGI, into a single,
performance with minimal increases in inference time, making consensus ranking from which a compact subset can be derived.
them attractive for cost-sensitive deployments. Formally, let D denote the preprocessed training data (Sec-
 These results demonstrate that while many selectors improve tion III) and let si (f ) ∈ [0, 1] be the normalised importance
predictive performance, they present divergent computational score assigned to feature f by selector i ∈ {1, . . . , M }, with
characteristics. Wrapper-based selectors (e.g., Boruta, RFECV, M = 3 for MI, RFI, and XGI. For any non-negative weight
RFE) often deliver high accuracy but incur undesirable latency vector w = [w1 , . . . , wM ] on the simplex,
overhead. Filter and embedded methods such as Mutual Infor- 
 M
mation, RandomForest Importance, and XGBoost Importance, wi = 1, wi ≥ 0, (1)
however, offer more favorable accuracy–latency trade-offs. i=1

 we define the combined importance score
C. Empirical Observations and Design Requirements
 
 M
 The exploratory results across baseline and established fea- σ(f, w) = wi si (f ). (2)
ture selector experiments reveal a number of recurring patterns i=1
BILAL et al.: EVALUATION TO INTEGRATION: HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION FRAMEWORK WITH ENSEMBLE MACHINE LEARNING 6369

 TABLE V
 NOTATION SUMMARY
 Algorithm 1: Hybrid Feature Selection.
 Require:Dataset D with labels L
 Ensure:Selected feature set F (w , θ )
 1: D̄ ← Preprocess(D)  clean, encode, balance
 2: Obtain raw importance scores (all features at once)
 3: SM ← M(D̄)  MI
 4: SR ← R(D̄)  RFI
Given a percentile threshold θ, this induces a feature subset 5: SX ← X (D̄)  XGI
 F (w, θ) = {f | σ(f, w) > θ} . (3) 6: Normalize scores to [0,1]
 7: for each feature f do
 Our aim is to choose (w, θ) such that a downstream classifier 8: ŜM [f ] ← SM [f ]/ max(SM )
hF (w,θ) achieves strong macro-F1 while satisfying practical 9: ŜR [f ] ← SR [f ]/ max(SR )
latency constraints. We express this via a validation loss on an
 10: ŜX [f ] ← SX [f ]/ max(SX )
outer cross-validation fold Dval :
 11: end for
 1   
 minimise Lval (w, θ) :=  y, hF (w,θ) (x) 12: Grid-search weight vector w on the simplex
 w,θ |Dval |  w = (w1 , w2 , w3 ) in SIMPLEXGRID(δ) do
 13: for 
 (x,y)∈Dval
 i wi =1
 
 M
   14: Sc [f ] ← w1 ŜM [f ] + w2 ŜR [f ] + w3 ŜX [f ] for all f
 subject to wi = 1, wi ≥ 0, latency hF (w,θ) ≤ τ,(4)  hybrid score σ(f, w)
 i=1 15: for k ∈ {60, 65, . . . , 90} do  percentile sweep for θ
where  is a macro-F1–aligned loss and τ encodes an application- 16: θ ← percentile(Sc , k)
specific latency budget. In this work, we solve (4) determinis- 17: F (w, θ) ← { f | Sc [f ] > θ }  feature subset
tically via a simplex-constrained grid search, as detailed below. 18: evaluate F (w, θ) via cross-val (macro-F1 , FPR,
The notation used throughout this subsection is summarised in latency), update best (w , θ )  minimize validation
Table V. loss under latency
 19: end for
B. Hybrid Score Formulation 20: end for
 21: return F (w , θ ), θ
 Let f ∈ {1, . . . , d} index the original features. For each feature we obtain three normalised importance scores,
 C. Simplex-Based Fusion of MI, RFI, and XGI
 sMI RFI XGI
 f , sf , sf ∈ [0, 1],
 The proposed fusion mechanism proceeds in three steps, (i)
computed respectively from mutual information with the la- compute base importance scores for MI, RFI, and XGI, (ii)
bel, RandomForest impurity decrease, and XGBoost gain, each normalise these scores, and (iii) perform a simplex-constrained
rescaled to [0,1] across features as described in Section V-C. grid search over w and percentile thresholds to select the best
 We collect these base scores into a vector combination. The overall procedure is summarised in Algo-
  
 XGI 
 s(f ) = sMI RFI
 f , sf , sf ∈ [0, 1]3 , rithm 1.
 First, for each cross-validation training fold we compute:
and define a fusion weight vector r MI scores M(D) for each feature, measuring mutual de-
   pendence with the label.
 w = wMI , wRFI , wXGI ∈ Δ2 , r RFI scores R(D) via decrease in tree impurity across a
 
where Δ2 = { w ∈ R3≥0 : k wk = 1 } is the 2-simplex. The RandomForest ensemble.
corresponding hybrid importance score for feature f is r XGI scores X (D) via cumulative gain in an XGBoost
 model.
 σ(f, w) = w s(f ) = wMI sMI
 f + wRFI sf + wXGI sf , (5)
 RFI XGI
 These raw score vectors are then min–max normalised into
which is consistent with the general formulation in (4). [0,1] to yield s1 , s2 , s3 . For any candidate weight vector w on
 Given a candidate weight vector w, we obtain a feature subset the simplex, we form the combined score
by applying a percentile-based threshold θ to the hybrid scores:
   sc = w1 s1 + w2 s2 + w3 s3 . (7)
 F (w, θ) = f : σ(f, w) > θ , (6)
 To avoid stochasticity associated with population-based optiwhere θ is chosen as a quantile of the empirical score distribution misers, we perform a deterministic grid search on the simplex
{σ(f, w)}df =1 . This percentile view is equivalent to selecting the with step δ = 0.05. For each w, we sweep a set of percentile
top-k features for a suitable k, but offers a more direct handle thresholds and evaluate the resulting feature set F (w, θ) using
on the resulting sparsity level. stratified cross-validation. The pair (w , θ ) that minimises
 In the optimisation problem of Section V-A, we therefore the validation loss in (4) is retained. The optimisation is fully
seek an operating point (w, θ) that maximises macro-F  1 onthe deterministic, given a fixed dataset, cross-validation protocol,
validation folds under the latency constraint latency hF (w,θ) ≤ and grid resolution, the same weight vector and threshold are
τ . False-positive rate is monitored as a secondary criterion when recovered across runs, avoiding the variance and budget sensicomparing candidate solutions. tivity characteristic of stochastic wrappers.
6370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 9. Data preprocessing and feature selection pipeline.

D. Hybrid Feature Subset Construction selectors and replacing stochastic, budget-sensitive wrappers
 The outcome of Algorithm 1 is a hybrid feature subset F = hyb with a deterministic, time-bounded simplex optimisation.
F (w , θ ), which we subsequently use in ablation and robustness experiments. The key design element is the percentile-based F. Leakage-Safe Integration in the Pipeline
thresholding of the combined scores. To ensure that the hybrid selector does not introduce infor-
 Let Sc denote the combined importance scores under w . We mation leakage, we integrate it into the training pipeline in
define a strictly fold-local manner, as depicted in Fig. 9. For each
 θ = Qk = quantile(Sc , k  /100), (8) cross-validation fold, the procedure is,
for some k ∈ {60, 65, . . . , 90} selected during the grid search.
  1) Split data into training and validation partitions (stratified).
The final hybrid subset is then 2) Apply preprocessing and imbalance handling (SMO-
 TEENN) only on the training partition, as described in
 F hyb = {f ∈ D | Sc (f ) > θ }. (9) Section III.
 This construction enforces a controllable sparsity level, higher 3) Compute MI, RFI, and XGI scores on the training partition
percentiles yield smaller, faster subsets, while lower percentiles and run Algorithm 1 to obtain F hyb for that fold.
retain more features and potentially capture subtler patterns. In 4) Train the downstream classifier using only the features in
our experiments, the learned thresholds typically select between F hyb .
20% and 40% of the original feature space, striking a balance 5) Evaluate on the corresponding validation (or test) data,
between accuracy and inference cost. All later references to “our which are never used in score computation or threshold
hybrid subset” or “hybrid selector” refer to F hyb and the scoring tuning.
procedure defined in Sections V-A–V-C. The final hybrid subset used in our ablation and robustness experiments is derived from the full training data using
E. Relation to PSO/GA-Based Hybrid Selectors the same deterministic fusion procedure and hyperparameters
 selected during cross-validation. Test folds remain untouched
 Hybrid feature selection has often been implemented via throughout, ensuring that all reported performance metrics repopulation-based wrappers, notably, PSO and GA that search flect genuine generalisation rather than artefacts of leakage. We
either over feature subsets or over fusion weights for multiple evaluate the operational impact of Hybrid-FS on false positives
selectors. These methods can achieve high accuracy but typically and analyst workload in Section VII-E.
require many fitness evaluations, leading to long and variable
runtimes, and their stochastic nature can produce different subsets across runs for the same dataset and budget. VI. EVALUATION OF THE HYBRID FS FRAMEWORK
 To place our approach in context, we reproduced two rep- This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of the
resentative hybrids under the same preprocessing and cross- proposed deterministic Hybrid-FS framework. Building on the
validation protocol as used for our method, a PSO wrapper exploratory insights in Section IV and the method introduced
over RandomForest, and a GA-based rank fusion over MI, RFI, in Section V, we examine whether the hybrid subset improves
and XGI. While detailed numerical comparisons appear in later classification performance, false-positive behavior, runtime efresults sections, we summarise the qualitative observations as ficiency, and robustness across datasets, models, and deployfollows. ment scales. In contrast to Section IV, which was explicitly
 First, PSO/GA wrappers explore the combinatorial space exploratory, this section constitutes our conclusive evaluation
of feature subsets directly, whereas our method operates in a of the framework under realistic deployment conditions.
low-dimensional, simplex-constrained weight space and uses a
percentile threshold to derive the subset. This shifts the optimisation burden from discrete subset search to continuous weight A. Ablation: Does Feature Selection Matter?
tuning, which is more amenable to deterministic grid search. We quantify the effect of the proposed Hybrid-FS by retrain-
Second, we observed that the deterministic simplex fusion yields ing the three strongest baseline classifiers, XGBoost, ExtraTrees,
accuracy and macro-F1 that are competitive with, and in some and RandomForest, using both the full feature set and the hybrid
cases slightly better than, PSO/GA hybrids, while reducing subset defined in Section V. As summarised in Table VI, the
false-positive rates and avoiding the heavy and unstable search hybrid subset consistently improves accuracy and macro-F1 by
overhead of stochastic wrappers. Importantly, the inference la- 0.4–0.7 pp while reducing inference latency by 12–15%. These
tency of the resulting models remains comparable, as our opti- gains confirm that Hybrid-FS eliminates distracting, low-yield
misation explicitly accounts for runtime alongside macro-F1. dimensions without harming decision boundaries. The improve-
Thus, our contribution builds on the strengths of hybrid FS ments are especially notable in tail-latency behavior. The p99
methods by maintaining the complementary use of multiple reductions reported later in Table X show that the hybrid subset
BILAL et al.: EVALUATION TO INTEGRATION: HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION FRAMEWORK WITH ENSEMBLE MACHINE LEARNING 6371

 TABLE VI TABLE VIII
 ABLATION STUDY ON CIC-IDS-2017: FULL FEATURE SET VERSUS HYBRID FALSE POSITIVES BEFORE (E0) VERSUS AFTER (E4, HYBRID-FS). ASSUMES
 SUBSET. Δ IS THE DIFFERENCE HYBRID − FULL 100 K FLOWS/H, 95% BENIGN

 TABLE VII TABLE IX
 ISOLATION FOREST PERFORMANCE WITH/WITHOUT HYBRID-FS PER-ATTACK PRECISION(P) AND RECALL(R) ON CIC-IDS-2017

meaningfully tightens worst-case inference time, addressing an TABLE X
operational bottleneck for inline IDS pipelines. These findings PER-FLOW INFERENCE LATENCY (MS) WITH 95% CIS OVER 20 RUNS.
 SIGNIFICANT GAINS (p < 0.05) MARKED WITH •
reinforce the exploratory trends observed in Section IV, where
individual selectors (MI, RFI, XGBI) already suggested substantial redundancy in the raw feature space.

B. Cross-Model Validation
 To assess whether Hybrid-FS generalises beyond tree-based
learners, we evaluate a heterogeneous majority-vote ensemble
combining logistic regression, RBF-SVM, and RandomForest.
Using all raw features, this ensemble achieves 98.4% accuracy
and a macro-F1 of 0.978 on CIC-IDS-2017. When trained on
the Hybrid-FS subset, accuracy rises to 99.1% and macro-F1 to
0.985, an improvement of 0.7 pp. Although the ensemble still
trails the best tree-based model (XGBoost + Hybrid-FS, which
reaches 0.992 macro-F1), this experiment shows that the hybrid
subset benefits classifiers with substantially different inductive
biases. The gains stem from removing noisy or redundant attributes rather than exploiting idiosyncrasies of any particular Fig. 10. IDS scaling: (a) throughput versus batch size, (b) inference time (10 k
learning architecture. flows) versus feature count. Mean±95% CI over 20 runs, Tables XVI–X.
 Unsupervised sanity check: To further test the generalisability of the hybrid subset, we trained an Isolation Forest on the approximately 9% and p99 by 14%. Although the absolute difsame balanced CIC-IDS-2017 split. Table VII shows that using ferences are modest (e.g., 0.44 ms to 0.40 ms at p50), tail-latency
the 31-feature hybrid subset increases the AUC from 0.881 to improvements are operationally important because they govern
0.902 while reducing inference time by 11%, indicating that the burst handling and queue stability in inline deployments. End-tobenefits persist even in unsupervised anomaly detection. end throughput gains (summarized in Table XVI), range from
 9–10% and are statistically significant (5×2 CV paired t-test,
C. Trade-Offs: Accuracy, False Positives, and Latency p < 0.05). These results show that Hybrid-FS simultaneously
 enhances predictive performance and computational efficiency.
 A central requirement for practical IDS deployment is balancing detection quality with runtime efficiency and a low
false-positive rate. We therefore analyze all three dimensions D. Comparison With PSO/GA-Based Hybrid Baselines
jointly, accuracy and macro-F1, false-positive rate, and latency To contextualize Hybrid-FS against prior stochastic hybrid
and throughput. Across all ensemble models and datasets, as selectors, we reproduce two representative baselines under the
shown in Tables III, IV, and XIV, Hybrid-FS improves macro-F1 same leakage-safe preprocessing and evaluation pipeline as
by 0.4–0.7 pp on CIC-IDS-2017, 0.3–0.6 pp on CSE-CIC- our method (Section III), (i) a PSO wrapper over a Random-
IDS2018, and 0.4–0.8 pp on NF-UNSW-NB15, with the largest Forest base learner, and (ii) a GA-based rank-fusion hybrid
gains observed for XGBoost and ExtraTrees, which benefit most over MI, RandomForest-importance, and XGBoost-importance
from reduced feature redundancy. In terms of false-positive (Section V-E). In both cases, the search is executed on the trainrate, Hybrid-FS reduces false positives by 15–20% relative ing fold only and model selection uses stratified cross-validation
to full-feature baselines, consistent with the improvements in within the training fold, search time is excluded so that we
Table VIII, per-attack precision/recall in Table IX further indi- compare only per-flow inference cost.
cate that this reduction in noise does not compromise detection Table XI summarizes macro-F1 , false-positive rate, and p50
of rare attack types, which retain recall ≥ 0.93. inference latency across CIC-IDS-2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018,
 For latency and throughput, Table X and Fig. 10 show and NF-UNSW-NB15. Across datasets, Hybrid-FS is competistatistically significant latency reductions, p50 improves by tive in macro-F1 while consistently lowering FPR by 0.02–0.04
6372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE XI
 HYBRID-FS VERSUS REPRESENTATIVE PSO/GA HYBRIDS (MACRO-F1 ↑,
 FP-RATE ↓ , LATENCY P50IN MS ↓)

 Fig. 11. Hybrid-FS ensemble performance across datasets.

 higher emphasis on XGBI while retaining non-negligible con-
 TABLE XII tributions from MI and RFI. Cross-validation and held-out test
 COMPARISON WITH RECENT IDS FEATURE-SELECTION STUDIES scores remain exceptionally high (>0.998) across all datasets,
 indicating that a single, low-variance fusion scheme can accommodate substantially different traffic profiles. Below we
 highlight how each dataset responds to the selected subsets, with
 detailed curves and metrics shown in Figs. 11, 12, and Table XIV.
 Performance on CIC-IDS-2017: On CIC-IDS-2017,
 Hybrid-FS preserves the relative ranking of ensemble models
percentage points (approximately 15–25% relative) compared while shifting the operating point toward higher efficiency. As
to the PSO/GA hybrids, with essentially unchanged p50 latency detailed in Table XIV, tree-based ensembles (RandomForest,
(within 0.01 ms). Full PSO/GA search hyperparameters and ExtraTrees, XGBoost) achieve accuracies above 99.6%, with
objective definitions are provided in Appendix D (Table D.1), XGBoost attaining the best accuracy and F1 at the lowest predicavailable online. tion time. The remaining models (e.g., AdaBoost, LightGBM)
 benefit less uniformly, reflecting their sensitivity to feature se-
E. SOTA Analysis lection, but do not exhibit catastrophic degradation. Overall, the
 subset supports both strong performance and fast inference on
 Table XII positions Hybrid-FS against recent hybrid featurethis canonical benchmark.
selection methods for intrusion detection. This comparison is
 Per-Attack Performance: Table IX provides precision
intended for contextual positioning, as datasets, selection strateand recall for the ten attack types present in CIC-IDS-2017
gies, and evaluation protocols may differ across studies, and
 using the Hybrid-FS XGBoost model. Even the rarest classes
reported values may not be directly comparable without repro-
 (WEB-XSS at 0.15%) are detected with recall ≥ 0.93. High
ducing the full pipeline. On CIC-IDS2017, we achieve a macrorecall on low-prevalence attack classes confirms that balancing
F1 of 0.998 using 31 features, within 0.08 pp of the PSO-driven
 via SMOTEENN, combined with the focused feature subset,
ensemble of Louk & Tama [39], while requiring roughly half
 mitigates “silent failures” on uncommon exploits.
the inference time, indicating that strong predictive performance
 Performance on CSE-CIC-IDS2018: On CSE-CICcan be obtained without substantial runtime cost. On CSE-CIC-
 IDS2018, the Hybrid-FS subsets continue to deliver consistent
IDS2018, Hybrid-FS improves macro-F1 by 0.6 pp over the
 improvements across ensembles, as summarised in Table XIV.
CFS–DE stacking approach of Zhao et al. [37]. Beyond peak
 XGBoost remains the strongest overall model, combining the
scores, prior work also shows sensitivity under dataset shifts
 highest accuracy and F1 with the fastest prediction time, while
(NEU-ICS-2023 in Fang et al. [44]), whereas our cross-dataset
 RandomForest and ExtraTrees provide slightly lower but still
results in Section VI-F show that Hybrid-FS remains effective
 competitive scores. The fact that the same 31-feature subset
when traffic distributions change. Additional discussion and an
 supports high performance on both CIC-IDS-2017 and CSEextended comparison are provided in Appendix E (Table E.1),
 CIC-IDS2018 underscores that the fusion mechanism is not
available online.
 overfitted to a single capture.
 Performance on NF-UNSW-NB15: The NF-UNSW-
F. Cross-Dataset Evaluation NB15 results probe generalisation to a dataset with different
 We evaluated the proposed Hybrid-FS technique on the three traffic and attack characteristics. Hybrid-FS selects only 16 out
datasets used in this work, CIC-IDS-2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018, of 43 features yet maintains strong performance. RandomForand NF-UNSW-NB15, using the same hardware setup described est, ExtraTrees, and XGBoost all reach accuracies above 95%,
in Section III. As summarized in Table XIII, Hybrid-FS con- with XGBoost again delivering the best accuracy/F1 and the
sistently reduces the feature dimensionality while preserving lowest prediction time (Table XIV). This compressed subset
the accuracy, macro-F1, and latency trade-offs documented in demonstrates that the fusion strategy adapts to a smaller fea-
Section VI-C. Specifically, the selected subsets contain 31 of ture space without sacrificing detection quality, reinforcing the
78 features for CIC-IDS-2017, 31 of 80 for CSE-CIC-IDS2018, cross-dataset robustness claims.
and 16 of 43 for NF-UNSW-NB15. Inference Latency & Significance: Building on the trade-off
 The fusion hyperparameters optimised via grid search, analysis in Section VI-C, we quantify inference speed on the
namely threshold_percentile and the selector weights CIC-IDS-2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 test splits using the hard-
(wMI , wRFI , wXGBI ), exhibit stable patterns across datasets, as ware in Section III. Fig. 10 shows throughput with mean±95%
shown in Table XV. In all three cases, the optimal threshold bootstrap confidence intervals over 20 runs (1,000 resamples),
converges to θ = 60%, and the learned weights place slightly and Table X summarises per-flow latency via p50 and p99
BILAL et al.: EVALUATION TO INTEGRATION: HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION FRAMEWORK WITH ENSEMBLE MACHINE LEARNING 6373

 TABLE XIII
 IMPACT OF HYBRID-FS TECHNIQUE ON CIC-IDS-2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018, AND NF-UNSW-NB15

Fig. 12. ROC curves for ensemble models with Hybrid-FS.

 TABLE XIV VII. CROSS-DATASET SCALABILITY AND ROBUSTNESS
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF HYBRID-FS ENSEMBLES
 ANALYSIS
 Having established in Section VI-F that Hybrid-FS preserves accuracy and latency trade-offs across CIC-IDS-2017,
 CSE-CIC-IDS2018, and NF-UNSW-NB15, we now examine its
 behaviour under scalability and robustness conditions. The three
 datasets differ substantially in scale and threat composition,
 CIC-IDS-2017 comprises approximately 2.83 million flows
 spanning 14 attack types, CSE-CIC-IDS2018 contains 16.21
 million flows and 7 attack categories, and NF-UNSW-NB15
 includes 2.39 million flows distributed across 9 attack classes.
 These disparities in volume and behavioural diversity provide a
 natural stress test for Hybrid-FS as a candidate for deployment
 in heterogeneous networks.
 Accuracy and Discrimination: Under the Hybrid-FS subsets described in Section VI-F, XGBoost, ExtraTrees, and Ran-
 TABLE XV domForest achieve accuracies of 99.85%, 99.70%, and 99.60%
 FUSION SETTINGS AND SCORES FOR HYBRID-FS
 on CIC-IDS-2017, and sustain accuracy levels above 97% on
 the considerably larger CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset. The mean
 ROC-AUC across all ten CIC attack classes is 0.991, with the
 lowest per-class AUC (Web-XSS) still at 0.958, underscoring
 the ability of the hybrid subset to support strong discrimination
 even for low-prevalence exploits.
 Precision–Recall Balance: Across datasets, the hybrid
 feature subset delivers a 0.4–0.7 pp improvement in macro-F1
(ms). Statistically significant differences are identified using a compared to the full feature set. These gains arise from two
5×2 CV paired t-test (p < 0.05). complementary effects, (i) a 4–7% increase in recall for stealthy
 Across both datasets, Hybrid-FS reduces feature counts attack types such as infiltration and port scans, and (ii) a 15–20%
(CIC: 78→31, CSE: 80→31) and yields consistent latency and reduction in false positives, effectively mitigating unnecessary
throughput improvements relative to the all-features baseline, SOC alerts. The operational impact of this improved precision–
mirroring the trends in Section VI-C. In particular, p50 and recall balance is reflected in the detailed per-class analysis in
p99 latency decrease in tandem while accuracy and macro-F1 Table VIII.
remain unchanged within statistical uncertainty, indicating that Operational Scalability: Fig. 13 shows that XGBoost,
the observed runtime benefits arise from reduced feature di- when using the 31-feature Hybrid-FS subset, processes up to
mensionality rather than a shift to a weaker operating point. one million flows at a rate of approximately 5.5 × 102 flows/s.
The alignment of these effects across two independent traces Doubling the feature count to 62 incurs only an 8% overhead, insuggests that the latency gains are a systematic property of the dicating that inference time scales sub-linearly with dimension-
Hybrid-FS pipeline rather than an artefact of a single dataset. ality. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 10, throughput decreases
6374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE XVIII
 CROSS-DATASET CIC → NF-UNSW: BEFORE/AFTER LIGHTWEIGHT
 CALIBRATION

 the operating point toward predictable low-latency inference
 through lower p99 latency and higher sustained rate on CPU.
Fig. 13. Prediction time per 1,000 flows (RTX 3080) for Hybrid-FS. These properties are essential for resource-constrained inline
 deployment under bursty traffic.
 TABLE XVI Threat-Model Robustness: To assess resilience under un-
THROUGHPUT (FLOWS/S) AT BATCH SIZE 104 WITH 95% CIS OVER 20 RUNS.
 SIGNIFICANT GAINS (p < 0.05) MARKED WITH •
 seen attack conditions, a model trained exclusively on CIC-
 IDS-2017 was evaluated on NF-UNSW-NB15, which contains
 entirely unseen attack types. The model still achieves 75.8%
 accuracy and an AUC of 0.744 without retraining. Under FGSMbased adversarial perturbations ( = 0.05), macro-F1 decreases
 by only 1.5%, providing additional evidence that Hybrid-FS contributes to robustness rather than merely improving performance
 TABLE XVII
 EDGE INFERENCE PROFILING: XGBOOST LATENCY/THROUGHPUT WITH ALL under closed-world assumptions.
 FEATURES VERSUS HYBRID-FS Distribution Shift, Mitigation, and Outcome: Feature
 distribution profiling reveals substantial shifts between CIC-
 IDS-2017 and NF-UNSW-NB15 for key attributes such as
 dst_bytes, flow_iat_std, and pkt_len_var (twosample KS tests yield p 0.01 for 6 of the top-10 ranked
 features). These shifts concentrate errors in attack classes with
 altered byte semantics and inter-arrival-time statistics, and in
 NF-UNSW attack families absent from CIC. Without altering
 the core model architecture, we explored three lightweight mitigation strategies, (i) recalibrating scalers on a 5% NF-UNSW
by less than 10% when scaling from 2.8 M flows (CIC) to 16 M seed, (ii) employing class-specific decision thresholds, and
flows (CSE), reaffirming the near-linear scalability required for (iii) applying stability screening to retain features consistently
carrier-grade IDS deployments. ranked in the top-k across datasets. As reported in Table XVIII,
 Edge deployment feasibility: To assess feasibility edge, these adjustments improve macro-F1 by approximately +0.05
we profile the deployed XGBoost + Hybrid-FS pipeline in a on NF-UNSW, incur negligible latency overhead, and further
CPU-only, single-thread setting using the workstation described reduce false positives.
in Section III. Table XVII provides per-flow latency (p50/p99 Across three datasets, 26 attack categories, and a 6× range in
with 95% bootstrap CIs over 20 runs) and sustained throughput traffic volume, the hybrid feature selector consistently improves
at a fixed batch size of 104 flows. Hybrid-FS reduces dimension- accuracy, recall, and inference speed. These results validate
ality from 78/80 to 31 features and yields consistent tail-latency its scalability and robustness for real-time, heterogeneous IDS
improvements on CIC-IDS-2017, p50 decreases from 0.44 to deployments.
0.40 ms and p99 from 1.40 to 1.20 ms on CSE-CIC-IDS2018,
p50 decreases from 0.46 to 0.41 ms and p99 from 1.48 to
1.25 ms. These p99 values correspond to an implied single- A. Robustness to Adversarial & Out-of-Box Traffic
thread service capacity of ≈833 flows/s (CIC) and ≈800 flows/s We evaluate adversarial robustness of the Hybrid-FS detec-
(CSE), indicating sufficient burst-handling margin for inline tors (XGBoost, ExtraTrees, RandomForest) under two stresoperation. Consistently, throughput increases by about 9-10% sors, (i) feature-space perturbations (FGSM) and (ii) protocol-
(520→556 flows/s on CIC, 505→542 flows/s on CSE), matching conformant packet synthesis (DeepPackGen). In all settings,
the sub-linear scaling behaviour observed in Fig. 10 and support- models are frozen (no retraining), the operating threshold is fixed
ing the near-linear dataset-scale results discussed above. In the at 0.5, and we report macro-F 1 and the absolute change Δ F1
time-ordered 24-hour SOC replay (Section VII-B), the target versus clean performance.
load of 100,000 flows/hour (≈27.8 flows/s) is sustained without Threat model: For FGSM [45], we apply L∞ -bounded
batching, while maintaining the same p50/p99 latency profile, perturbations with  ∈ {0.02, 0.05, 0.10} to malicious flows
indicating substantial processing margin for burst handling in only in normalized feature space, while preserving categorical
inline operation. encodings and clipping perturbed values to a feasible range. For
 The edge pipeline benefits directly from the compact 31- DeepPackGen [46], we use 5 independent seeds and generate
feature set. Fewer attributes must be populated per flow and 5000 flows per budget (2,000 and 4,000 steps) under protocolconsumed by the classifier, which reduces per-flow processing validity constraints. Table XIX shows that degradation is modest
work and improves tail stability. Consequently, Hybrid-FS shifts and scales with attack strength, at =0.05, macro-F 1 drops by
BILAL et al.: EVALUATION TO INTEGRATION: HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION FRAMEWORK WITH ENSEMBLE MACHINE LEARNING 6375

 TABLE XIX TABLE XX
 CIC-IDS-2017 ADVERSARIAL TEST: MACRO-F1 AND ΔF1 (HYBRID-FS) REPRESENTATIVE FP/FN PATTERNS AND MITIGATIONS

 alert rates, and observe tail latency metrics. When cross-dataset
 drift emerges, as discussed in Section VI-F, light recalibration,
 such as scaler realignment or the application of class-specific
1.45–2.00 pp across models, and even at =0.10 residual macro- thresholds, typically restores approximately +0.05 macro-F1
F1 remains > 0.96. DeepPackGen reduces macro-F1 by 2.2–3.5 without requiring architectural modifications. Overall, Hybridpp at 2k–4k budgets. Importantly, per-flow inference latency FS reduces false-positive rates by 15–19% and recovers 2.5–3.7
remains unchanged from Section VII-B (Hybrid-FS p50/p99: analyst-hours per day at a 100k-flow scale, while maintaining
0.40/1.20 ms), so robustness does not come at a runtime cost. the detection performance established in our main results.
Out-of-box transfer under dataset shift (CIC→ NF-UNSW)
and lightweight mitigation are analyzed in Section VI-F and C. Failure Analysis: Representative FP/FN Patterns
Table XVIII.
 Full protocol details for the adversarial robustness tests To improve operational interpretability, we inspected repre-
(FGSM surrogate construction, clipping bounds, DeepPackGen sentative false positives/negatives and summarized recurring
seed/budget settings, and data-fold usage) are provided in Ap- error regimes together with mitigations that do not require
pendix F, available online. architectural changes. We select high-impact cases from the
 hold-out split and identify salient Hybrid-FS features using local
 one-at-a-time sensitivity.
B. Operational Case Study: 24-Hour SOC Replay Patterns observed: Across datasets, three patterns recur,
 We conduct a 24-hour, time-ordered SOC replay at a sus- (i) feature overlap between high-throughput benign bursts and
tained rate of 100,000 flows per hour, with 95% benign traffic, volumetric DoS along byte/packet and inter-arrival statistics (ii)
following the methodology described in Section III and using low-signal short flows (e.g., Web-XSS) yielding near-boundary
the Hybrid-FS configurations shown in Table XV. The deployed scores; and (iii) dataset shift (NF-UNSW) compressing bedetector combines XGBoost with Hybrid-FS, using 31 features nign/attack margins for byte- and timing-related features.
for CIC/CSE and 16 for NF-UNSW, a default decision threshold Actionable mitigations: In practice, these errors are mitof 0.5, and frozen model weights. All inference runs on the igated by (i) class-specific thresholds for boundary classes
workstation detailed in Section III. (DoS/Web-XSS), (ii) light calibration when moving across data
 Across the replay, per-flow runtime remained comfortably (training-fold only), and (iii) stability-screened features that
within inline operational budgets. Median and p99 latencies remain top-ranked across datasets. Representative cases are
were 0.40 ms and 1.20 ms, as summarised in Table X, and summarized in Table XX, the full case table is provided in
represent statistically significant gains over the corresponding Appendix G (Table G.1), available online.
all-features baselines. Throughput sustained 100 k flows per
hour without requiring batching, and the p99 latency improved D. Scalability: Flows and Dimensionality
by approximately 14%, as illustrated in Fig. 10.
 We stress-tested the hybrid-FS XGBoost by (i) feeding pro-
 These runtime efficiencies directly translate into measurable
 gressively larger flow batches (10k → 1M) and (ii) synthetically
operational benefits. Using 95,000 benign flows per hour to
 injecting duplicate, noise-decorrelated features to raise the input
project false alarms, Hybrid-FS reduces the false-positive rate
 dimensionality from 31 → 200. Fig. 10(a) shows throughput
from 0.11–0.16% to 0.09–0.13%. Table VIII shows that this
 in flows/s as batch size increases, and the Fig. 10(b) depicts
reduction corresponds to 19–28 fewer false positives per hour,
 inference time per 10 k-flow batch versus feature count. With
averaging 22 alerts avoided. At a conservative triage rate of 20 s
 the 31 “essential” attributes in place, the hybrid-FS XGBoost
per alert, this reduction yields between 2.5 and 3.7 analyst-hours
 sustains a throughput of roughly 5.5 × 102 flows/s. Expanding
saved each day. Importantly, these efficiency gains are achieved
 the feature set to 62 raises inference time for the standard 10,000
without degrading macro-F1 or AUROC, as demonstrated in
 -flow batch from 18s to 19.5s, only about 8% overhead, demon-
Sections VI–VII, and without incurring any latency penalties
 strating ample margin for future feature enrichments without
noted in Table X.
 jeopardizing real-time performance.
 For deployment, we recommend a two-phase roll-out strategy.
 Note: XGBoost’s prediction time grows primarily with tree
The first phase operates in shadow mode using SPAN or mirrored
 depth, unused columns add only memory-copy overhead, hence
traffic to validate precision and recall and to ensure that the
 the modest +8% latency at double the feature count.
p99 latency remains at or below 2 ms. Once the false-positive
rate remains within the range captured in Table VIII for seven
consecutive days, the system can transition to an inline allow-log E. False Positives and Analyst Workload
configuration. During production, operators should track feature We now quantify the impact of Hybrid-FS on false alarms and
population shifts (for example, using PSI), monitor class-wise translate it into analyst time. Since post–Hybrid-FS confusion
6376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

matrices are not explicitly plotted in this section, we obtain the The following key limitations arise from these design choices.
false-positive rate at the default operating point directly from (L1) Feature modality and encrypted traffic: The framework
the ROC curves, with “Before” denoting E0 (all features) and relies on tabular, flow-level features with supervised ensembles.
“After” denoting E4 (Hybrid-FS). While such summaries remain usable under encryption, we do
 Provenance and computation: E0 values are taken from the not exploit payload-derived signals, deep representations, or
baseline ROC/metric overview (Fig. 6), and E4 values are taken self-/semi-supervised encoders, claims are therefore limited to
from the Hybrid-FS ROC curves (Fig. 12). For each dataset, FPR patterns captured by the evaluated benchmarks.
is the false-positive axis value at the default decision threshold (L2) Online dynamics and drift: Models and decision thresh-
0.5 on the plotted ROC operating point.2 To convey operational olds are tuned offline and fixed at test time. The framework
impact, we compute false alarms per hour (FP/h) using the does not include explicit online adaptation or drift mitigation
relation FP/h = FPR × 95,000, assuming a conservative traffic beyond cross-dataset validation and lightweight CIC → NFprofile of 100,000 flows/hour with 95% benign traffic (as in our UNSW threshold transfer, operational deployments may require
scalability setup). periodic retuning.
 E. Analyst-time implications: With a conservative triage (L3) Dataset representativeness: Evaluation is restricted to esrate of 20 s per alert, CIC and CSE each save 19 × 24 = 456 tablished research benchmarks. Industrial control, IoT-specific,
alerts/day, i.e., 456 × (20/3600) = 2.53 analyst-hours/day, and organisation-level traces are not included, limiting external
while NF-UNSW saves 28 × 24 = 672 alerts/day, i.e., 3.73 validity under different protocol mixes and noise conditions.
hours/day. These reductions are achieved without degrading (L4) Deployment tier and runtime budgets: Hybrid-FS remacro-F1 or AUROC and without introducing additional infer- duces inference cost, but not all model-selector combinations
ence latency, as detailed in Sections VI and VII. satisfy strict inline latency constraints. XGBoost+Hybrid-FS of-
 Across datasets, Hybrid-FS yields a 15–19% reduction in fers the best accuracy-latency trade-off, while heavier ensembles
false positives (Table VIII), averaging 22 fewer false alarms are more appropriate for nearline or higher-resource settings.
per hour under the stated traffic profile, with no degradation in (L5) Threat-model boundary: Robustness is assessed under
detection quality or runtime. two evasion stressors, feature-space perturbations and protocolvalid crafted traffic, using frozen models. Stronger adversaries,
 VIII. DISCUSSION, LIMITATIONS, AND FUTURE WORK including poisoning, backdoors, endpoint compromise, and
 flow-extractor manipulation, are out of scope.
 Our results show that deterministic hybrid feature selection
 These limitations motivate several directions. Hybrid-FS can
improves the operational profile of flow-based IDS without
 be combined with richer modalities (payload-derived signals or
sacrificing detection performance. Across three benchmarks and
 learned embeddings where permissible) and with lightweight
multiple ensembles, Hybrid-FS matches or exceeds full-feature
 drift monitoring and periodic configuration under changeaccuracy and macro-F1 while using fewer features and reducing
 control. It also remains to add per-instance explanations and to
inference time. The gains persist across selectors, suggesting
 validate on industrial/IoT and long-duration operational traces.
that fusing Mutual Information, Random Forest importance, and
 Finally, transfer learning and embedding-based IDS pipelines
XGBoost gain into a fixed subset is more robust than any single
 are promising settings in which Hybrid-FS operates on learned
criterion. Compared with PSO/GA-based hybrids, the simplexrepresentations rather than raw flow attributes.
based fusion attains comparable or slightly better macro-F1 and
false-positive rates with a smaller, fully reproducible parameter
surface.
 Practically, Hybrid-FS shifts the operating point to-
 IX. CONCLUSION
ward predictable low-latency CPU inference. The deployed
XGBoost+Hybrid-FS configuration reduces dimensionality This work examined how deterministic hybrid feature selec-
(78/80→31), tightens tail latency (p99), and improves through- tion can enhance ensemble-based IDS by improving operational
put under the CPU-only single-thread profile, while sustain- efficiency without compromising detection quality. We introing the same p50/p99 profile during the 24-hour SOC replay duced Hybrid-FS, a simplex-based fusion of Mutual Informaat 100,000 flows/hour. This aligns with edge gateways/RSUs tion, Random Forest importance, and XGBoost gain, integrated
where queue stability and burst handling are governed by tail within a leakage-safe pipeline and optimized directly for macrolatency rather than mean cost. F1, false-positive rate, and latency. Across three flow-based
 While the reported performance is strong, the near-perfect datasets, Hybrid-FS preserves high accuracy while reducing discores observed across several settings, require careful interpre- mensionality, improving throughput by about 9–10%, lowering
tation. We avoid leakage by fitting preprocessing, resampling, p50/p99 latency (0.44→0.40 ms, 1.40→1.20 ms), and cutting
and selection strictly on training folds and leaving validation false positives by 15–19%. It also matches or exceeds PSO/GA
and test distributions untouched. Cross-dataset and adversarial hybrids in F1 while avoiding stochastic overhead and instability.
evaluations provide partial robustness checks, but the study re- Our evaluation includes explicit cross-dataset and adversarial
mains limited to controlled flow-level benchmarks and bounded robustness analysis, demonstrating stable performance under
threat models. Thus, the results should be viewed as leakage-safe distribution shift and mild perturbations. Limitations include our
upper bounds on these datasets, not guarantees for arbitrary exclusive focus on tabular, flow-level features and the use of a
environments. single global operating point per model and dataset, selected
 via percentile-based thresholding on validation folds rather than
 2 FPR is FP/(FP + TN) for the benign class, on ROC plots it is the x- online calibration. Future work will extend the framework with
coordinate at the chosen operating threshold. adaptive thresholding and drift-aware calibration mechanisms,
BILAL et al.: EVALUATION TO INTEGRATION: HYBRID FEATURE SELECTION FRAMEWORK WITH ENSEMBLE MACHINE LEARNING 6377

and explore integrating payload-aware or self-supervised repre- [23] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey of
sentations in settings where privacy policies and runtime budgets intrusion detection systems: Techniques, datasets and challenges,” Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2019.
permit. [24] I. Alam et al., “A survey of network virtualization techniques for Internet of
 Things using SDN and NFV,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 1–40,
 REFERENCES 2020.
 [25] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
 [1] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
 application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph neural
 security systems at the edge: Network ton_IoT datasets,” Sustain. Cities
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 Soc., vol. 72, 2021, Art. no. 102994.
 [26] W. J. Scheirer, A. de Rezende Rocha, A. Sapkota, and T. E. Boult, “Toward
 [2] A. Boukerche and R. W. Coutinho, “Design guidelines for machine
 open set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 35,
 learning-based cybersecurity in Internet of Things,” IEEE Netw., vol. 35,
 no. 7, pp. 1757–1772, Jul. 2013.
 no. 1, pp. 393–399, Jan./Feb. 2021.
 [27] W. J. Scheirer, L. P. Jain, and T. E. Boult, “Probability models for open
 [3] G. Rjoub et al., “A survey on explainable artificial intelligence for cyberseset recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 36, no. 11,
 curity,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 5115–5140,
 pp. 2317–2324, Nov. 2014.
 Dec. 2023.
 [28] L. D. Manocchio, S. Layeghy, W. W. Lo, G. K. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan,
 [4] A. Oseni et al., “An explainable deep learning framework for resilient
 and M. Portmann, “Flowtransformer: A transformer framework for flowintrusion detection in IoT-enabled transportation networks,” IEEE Trans.
 based network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 241,
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1000–1014, Jan. 2023.
 p. 122564, 2024.
 [5] T. Saha, N. Aaraj, N. Ajjarapu, and N. K. Jha, “SHARKS: Smart hacking
 [29] T. E. T. Djaidja, B. Brik, S. M. Senouci, A. Boualouache, and Y.
 approaches for risk scanning in Internet-of-Things and cyber-physical
 Ghamri-Doudane, “Early network intrusion detection enabled by attensystems based on machine learning,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.,
 tion mechanisms and RNNs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
 vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 870–885, Second Quarter, 2022.
 pp. 7783–7793, 2024.
 [6] M. A. Khatun, S. F. Memon, C. Eising, and L. L. Dhirani, “Machine
 [30] W. Wang, S. Jian, Y. Tan, Q. Wu, and C. Huang, “Robust unsupervised
 learning for healthcare-IoT security: A review and risk mitigation,” IEEE
 network intrusion detection with self-supervised masked context recon-
 Access, vol. 11, pp. 145869–145896, 2023.
 struction,” Comput. Secur., vol. 128, 2023, Art. no. 103131.
 [7] C. Xu, N. Wang, L. Zhu, K. Sharif, and C. Zhang, “Achieving search-
 [31] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic
 able and privacy-preserving data sharing for cloud-assisted E-healthcare
 analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 25,
 system,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8345–8356, Oct. 2019.
 no. 1, pp. 791–824, First Quarter, 2023.
 [8] Z. Halim et al., “An effective genetic algorithm-based feature selection
 [32] Z. Jiang, J. Li, Q. Hu, W. Meng, W. Pedrycz, and Z. Su, “Scalable graphmethod for intrusion detection systems,” Comput. Secur., vol. 110, 2021,
 aware edge representation learning for wireless IoT intrusion detection,”
 Art. no. 102448.
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 16, pp. 26955–26969, Aug. 2024.
 [9] F. Amiri, M. R. Yousefi, C. Lucas, A. Shakery, and N. Yazdani, “Mutual
 [33] S. Mohammadi, H. Mirvaziri, M. Ghazizadeh-Ahsaee, and H. Karimipour,
 information-based feature selection for intrusion detection systems,” J.
 “Cyber intrusion detection by combined feature selection algorithm,” J.
 Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1184–1199, 2011.
 Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 44, pp. 80–88, 2019.
[10] T. Hamed, R. Dara, and S. C. Kremer, “Network intrusion detection system
 [34] H. Wu and W. Wang, “A game theory based collaborative security detection
 based on recursive feature addition and bigram technique,” Comput. Secur.,
 method for Internet of Things systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.,
 vol. 73, pp. 137–155, 2018.
 vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1432–1445, Jun. 2018.
[11] C. Khammassi and S. Krichen, “A GA-LR wrapper approach for fea-
 [35] A. Nazir, Z. Memon, T. Sadiq, H. Rahman, and I. U. Khan, “A novel
 ture selection in network intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 70,
 feature-selection algorithm in IoT networks for intrusion detection,” Senpp. 255–277, 2017.
 sors, vol. 23, no. 19, 2023, Art. no. 8153.
[12] S. M. Kasongo, “An advanced intrusion detection system for IIoT based on
 [36] M. Bakro et al., “An improved design for a cloud intrusion detection system
 GA and tree based algorithms,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 113199–113212,
 using hybrid features selection approach with ML classifier,” IEEE Access,
 2021.
 vol. 11, no. 2023, pp. 64228–64247, 2023.
[13] P. Nimbalkar and D. Kshirsagar, “Feature selection for intrusion detection
 [37] R. Zhao, Y. Mu, L. Zou, and X. Wen, “A hybrid intrusion detection system
 system in Internet-of-Things (IoT),” ICT Exp., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 177–181,
 based on feature selection and weighted stacking classifier,” IEEE Access,
 2021.
 vol. 10, pp. 71414–71426, 2022.
[14] J. Zhao, R. Masood, and S. Seneviratne, “A review of computer vision
 [38] A. J. Rabash, M. Z. A. Nazri, A. Shapii, and M. K. Hasan, “Nonmethods in network security,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 23, no. 3,
 dominated sorting genetic algorithm-based dynamic feature selection for
 pp. 1838–1878, Third Quarter, 2021.
 intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 125080–125093,
[15] A. Sivanathan, H. H. Gharakheili, and V. Sivaraman, “Managing IoT
 2023.
 cyber-security using programmable telemetry and machine learning,”
 [39] M. H. L. Louk and B. A. Tama, “PSO-driven feature selection and hybrid
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 60–74, Mar. 2020.
 ensemble for network anomaly detection,” Big Data Cogn. Comput., vol. 6,
[16] M. Elsisi, M.-Q. Tran, K. Mahmoud, D.-E. A. Mansour, M. Lehtonen, and
 no. 4, 2022, Art. no. 137.
 M. M. Darwish, “Towards secured online monitoring for digitalized GIS
 [40] M. S. Noori, R. K. Sahbudin, A. Sali, and F. Hashim, “Feature drift
 against cyber-attacks based on IoT and machine learning,” IEEE Access,
 aware for intrusion detection system using developed variable length
 vol. 9, pp. 78415–78427, 2021.
 particle swarm optimization in data stream,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
[17] X. Shen, L. Zhu, C. Xu, K. Sharif, and R. Lu, “A privacy-preserving
 pp. 128596–128617, 2023.
 data aggregation scheme for dynamic groups in fog computing,” Inf. Sci.,
 [41] D. Stiawan et al., “An approach for optimizing ensemble intrusion detecvol. 514, pp. 118–130, 2020.
 tion systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 6930–6947, 2020.
[18] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, B. Nour, and Y. Wang, “A scalable blockchain
 [42] C. Wu and W. Li, “Enhancing intrusion detection with feature selection
 framework for secure transactions in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6,
 and neural network,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 3087–3105,
 no. 3, pp. 4650–4659, Jun. 2019.
 2021.
[19] S. M. Kasongo and Y. Sun, “A deep learning method with wrapper based
 [43] A. Dahou et al., “Intrusion detection system for IoT based on deep
 feature extraction for wireless intrusion detection system,” Comput. Secur.,
 learning and modified reptile search algorithm,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci.,
 vol. 92, 2020, Art. no. 101752.
 vol. 2022, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 6473507.
[20] T. Tu, Y. Su, Y. Tang, W. Tan, and S. Ren, “A more flexible and robust
 [44] Y. Fang, Y. Yao, X. Lin, J. Wang, and H. Zhai, “A feature selection based
 feature selection algorithm,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 141512–141522,
 on genetic algorithm for intrusion detection of industrial control systems,”
 2023.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 139, 2024, Art. no. 103675.
[21] F. Deldar and M. Abadi, “Deep learning for zero-day malware detection
 [45] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
 and classification: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 1–37,
 adversarial examples,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6572.
 2023.
 [46] S. Hore, J. Ghadermazi, D. Paudel, A. Shah, T. Das, and N. Bastian,
[22] P. Mishra, V. Varadharajan, U. Tupakula, and E. S. Pilli, “A detailed inves-
 “Deep packGen: A deep reinforcement learning framework for adversarial
 tigation and analysis of using machine learning techniques for intrusion
 network packet generation,” ACM Trans. Privacy Secur., vol. 28, no. 2,
 detection,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 686–728, First
 pp. 1–33, 2025.
 Quarter, 2019.