IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026 1205

 Explainable Anomaly Detection in Network Traffic
 Using Normalizing Flows
 Lior Shafir , Raja Giryes , and Avishai Wool

 Abstract—Anomaly detection in network traffic is critical for Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDSs) detect
identifying deviations from normal behavior—including sophis- attacks via signature- or anomaly-based inspection of network
ticated cyber threats and previously unseen attacks—especially traffic [2], [3]. Recent progress in machine learning (ML)
when anomalous examples are absent from the training data. The
escalating complexity of cyber-attacks necessitates developing has opened new opportunities for improving the accuracy of
methods that not only identify low-likelihood traffic but also traffic classification tasks, including the detection of anomaprovide insights into its anomalous nature and deviations from lous or malicious activity. However, ML-based NIDS still face
normal behavior, enabling effective response and troubleshooting. substantial challenges due to the complexity of modern ML
In this work, we leverage the unique capabilities of normalizing models and the need to process high-dimensional or timeflows (NF), a state-of-the-art reversible generative model for exact
density estimation, to detect anomalies using only normal traffic. series network data [4].
Our approach fundamentally differs from previous methods by Supervised ML approaches, in particular, face several limutilizing NF’s exact likelihood computation for unsupervised itations in this context: Firstly, they require large amounts of
detection and combining it with Shapley values to introduce a labeled anomalous data for training, which is often unavailnovel feature selection framework for guiding the selection of able. Secondly, they encounter challenges with extreme class
discriminative features in anomaly detection, while also providing
statistically grounded enhanced explanations for detected anoma- imbalance, which further degrades detection accuracy, skewing
lies, pinpointing potential root causes. Through experiments on model learning towards majority classes and hindering the
CICIoT-2023, ISCXTor2016, and CICIDS2017, we demonstrate identification of minority traffic classes. Lastly, collecting
that our NF-based approach outperforms existing state-of-the- anomalous traffic data is a costly and time-consuming task
art methods for unsupervised anomaly detection. Notably, on due to its elusive and sporadic nature.
the CICIoT-2023 dataset, we achieve an accuracy of 0.9951,
comparable or higher than supervised methods, despite being To address the lack of anomalous data for training, some
trained solely on normal data. approaches have explored the use of deep generative models,
 such as Generative Adversarial Networks [5] (GANs), to
 Index Terms—DDoS attacks, intrusion detection system, flowbased network intrusion detection, network flow. synthetically create anomaly samples [6]. However, while
 generative neural methods like GANs and Variational Autoen-
 I. I NTRODUCTION coders [7] (VAEs) have demonstrated prominent performance
 results on tasks like learning the distribution of natural images,
W ITH the exponential growth of connected devices,
 particularly in the Internet of Things (IoT) domain,
the cyber threat landscape has evolved significantly. According
 neither of them allows for exact computation of the probability
 density of new data points.
to Cisco [1], the proliferation of IoT devices is expected to In this work, we propose a novel approach leveraging
reach hundreds of billions by 2030. This surge in connectivity Normalizing Flows (NF) [8] for anomaly detection. NF is a
presents a vast attack surface, increasing the complexity and reversible generative model framework that produces tractable
frequency of potential cyber threats. Consequently, the number distributions, where both sampling and density-estimation
of types of anomalous network traffic that threaten the internet directions (i.e., the generative and normalizing directions,
is larger than ever before. Hence, with such a broad spectrum respectively) can be efficient and exact.
of low-likelihood network traffic, anomaly detection remains NF learn an invertible mapping between a simple base
a critical challenge. distribution and a complex data distribution, enabling exact
 Anomalous traffic may refer to malicious attacks but it can likelihood computation. By training the flow solely on
also include benign deviations—such as infrequent legitimate normal network traffic data, anomalies can be detected
variations in traffic or undesired behaviors stemming from as low-likelihood samples under the learned distribution,
regulatory compliance, privacy constraints, or capacity limi- eliminating the need for labeled anomaly examples during
tations. training.
 While NF have generative abilities, we leverage its density
 Received 16 January 2025; revised 10 August 2025; accepted 8 Septem- estimation capability rather than its generative direction. Our
ber 2025; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor
E. Bertino. Date of publication 13 October 2025; date of current version approach fundamentally differs from other anomaly detection
5 January 2026. (Corresponding author: Lior Shafir.) works that employ generative methods such as GANs, AEs,
 The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel (e-mail: lior.shafir@gmail.com).
 and even NF in that we do not generate synthetic anomalies
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3617580 followed by training a supervised classifier.
 2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1206 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 Such models are inherently sensitive to the proportion and or higher than supervised methods, despite being trained
authenticity of anomalies present in the training set. Firstly, solely on normal data.
the generated synthetic anomalies do not overlap well with
real anomaly samples [9], which may lead to suboptimal II. R ELATED W ORK
training, and reduce the model’s detection effectiveness in Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection. Anomaly detection
real-world scenarios. Secondly, according to [9], the model’s in network traffic has been extensively studied over the past
performance decreases when the anomaly-to-normal sample few decades, cf. [14], [15]. In recent years, deep learningratio is modified. This indicates that the model’s efficacy based methods have gained significant traction, offering
is closely tied to specific sample ratios, which may not be improved accuracy and robustness. Proposed methods include
feasible to predict in real-world scenarios where the rate of Support Vector Machines (SVM), Convolutional or Recurrent
anomalies can be unpredictable. Neural Networks (CNN/RNN), and more, cf. [16].
 Feature selection is a critical challenge in anomaly detec- More recently, the application of generative models such
tion, particularly in unsupervised settings, where including as VAEs and GANs for anomaly-based detection has been
irrelevant or redundant features can obscure the essential thoroughly investigated. Zavrak and Iskefiyeli [17] employ
characteristics of normal traffic and degrade the model’s both Autoencoders (AEs) and VAEs in a semi-supervised
performance. To address this, we propose a novel Shapley- learning framework to identify unknown attacks based on
based [10] feature selection framework that leverages NF’s flow features extracted from network traffic. Another work
probability-based evaluation function. This approach enables by Min et al. [18] explores the use of a memory-augmented
us to identify and rank discriminative features effectively, over- deep autoencoder for network anomaly detection. It focuses on
coming the limitations of traditional feature selection methods leveraging deep learning techniques, specifically AE, enhanced
that often struggle in unsupervised contexts. Additionally, our with memory components to improve anomaly detection accuuse of Shapley values enhances the interpretability of detection racy in network traffic data. Azmin and Islam [19] combine a
results, providing statistically grounded explanations for why variational Laplace AE (VLAE) with a deep neural network
a particular traffic sample is anomalous and how it deviates (DNN) to enhance intrusion detection accuracy.
from normal patterns. GANs [5] have also been used for adversarial traffic gen-
 We evaluate our method on three benchmarks: CICIoT- eration and anomaly-based intrusion detection. E.g., NetShare
2023 [11], ISCXTor2016 [12], and CICIDS2017 [13]. While [20] is a GAN-based framework for generating synthetic IP
two of these datasets contain comprehensive and diverse sets header traces, Gadot [21] is a GAN-based framework aimed at
of attack scenarios, we also extend our evaluation to the enhancing the detection of DDoS attacks, and NIDSGAN [22]
ISCXTor2016 dataset, which focuses on encrypted network is a GAN-based framework for generating realistic adversarial
traffic and includes both Non-Tor and Tor network traffic network traffic flows.
across seven different application categories. Notably, the Wang et al. [23] present Def-IDS, an ensemble-based
recent CICIoT-2023 dataset encompasses 33 distinct attacks defense mechanism designed to protect deep learning-based
across seven attack categories. To the best of our knowledge, network intrusion detection systems from adversarial attacks.
our work is the first study to evaluate this dataset using only Peng et al. [24] also propose a framework where a GAN is
normal traffic. used to generate adversarial network traffic, which is then used
 Our contributions may be summarized as follows: to train the NIDS. The GAN-generated adversarial examples
 • We introduce a novel anomaly detection method that help the NIDS to better identify and mitigate potential threats.
 leverages NF’s exact density estimation capabilities to While various studies employed VAEs and GANs for
 model normal network traffic and identify anomalies as anomaly detection, they face challenges like intractable
 low-likelihood samples. marginal likelihoods and mode collapse. Additionally, GANs
 • We integrate the NF probability-based evaluation function require a large amount of training data to generate network
 with Shapley values [10] to propose a novel wrapper fea- traffic samples. Thus, the acquisition of malicious samples is
 ture selection method tailored for unsupervised learning, still a challenging task.
 demonstrating its efficacy through extensive experiments. Another category of unsupervised learning approaches
 Additionally, through simulations and real attack exam- includes classical algorithms such as Isolation Forest (IF)
 ples, we demonstrate the explainability benefits of using and more recent self-supervised methods based on contrastive
 Shapley values with NF to provide statistically grounded learning. These techniques are trained without access to labels
 explanations for detected anomalies. and aim to identify structural irregularities in the data. For
 • We evaluate our method on three publicly available example, Zhang et al. [25] propose an online IF-based model
 datasets: two from the DDoS and IDS cyber-attacks for malicious traffic detection in SD-WAN environments,
 domain, and one from the encrypted traffic classification where the model is trained on a mixture of benign and attack
 domain. We show that our flow-based approach outper- traffic without using labels. Similarly, Li et al. [26] present
 forms existing state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods a self-supervised contrastive learning framework that learns
 for binary classification tasks. Perhaps most strikingly, representations for intrusion detection using data augmentaon the recent CICIoT-2023 dataset, which contains 33 tions and contrastive loss, without label supervision during
 attacks across 7 different categories, we demonstrate that the pretraining stage. However, unlike our approach, these
 our method achieves a detection accuracy comparable methods are typically trained on a mixture of normal and
SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS 1207

anomalous samples, relying on their presence in the training
data to identify structural irregularities. In contrast, our model
is trained exclusively on clean benign traffic.
 Normalizing Flows for Anomaly Detection. NF have
received attention in the field of anomaly detection, particularly due to their capability to model complex probability
distributions. Various studies in fields other than network
traffic detection have utilized NF for anomaly detection, producing promising outcomes. Gudovskiy et al. [27] proposed Fig. 1. NF Key Idea Illustration. The left figure is the density function of the
CFLOW-AD, which employs conditional NF for anomaly source pZ (z). The right figure is the density function of the target distribution
 pX (x).
detection with localization. CFLOW-AD characterizes the
distribution of normal network-based features and calculates
precise data likelihoods of the examined features, demonstrat- are a powerful framework in ML for constructing flexible
ing faster and more compact performance compared to earlier probability distributions by transforming a simple base dismodels. Yet, it requires a specialized design that is distinct tribution through a series of invertible mappings.
from standard conditional NF models. While in the past, flow-based generative models have gained
 Yu et al. [28] introduced FastFlow, a detection technique that less attention in the research community compared to GANs
extends conventional NF to two-dimensional space. Initially, a and VAEs, they have become popular recently [32], and have
feature extractor gathers visual features from normal samples, been used in various applications such as speech processing
which are then input into a 2D flow model to estimate the prob- (e.g., NVIDIA WaveGlow [33]), image generation (e.g., Opeability distribution. FastFlow shows enhanced accuracy and nAI Glow [34]), and reinforcement learning [35].
efficiency over previous methods. Dias et al. [29] developed The key idea is to represent a complex target distribution
an unsupervised density estimation approach for trajectory pX (x) as the result of applying a series of invertible transforanomaly detection using NF. They applied RealNVP and mations to a simple base distribution pZ (z), such as a standard
Masked Autoregressive Flow (MAF) to model trajectory data normal distribution (see Figure 1).
and identify anomalies, with their experimental results show- Consider a random variable x ∈ RD with a complex
ing that NF outperform traditional density-based methods such distribution pX (x) that we aim to model. NF construct a
as Local Outlier Factor (LOF) and Gaussian Mixture Models mapping f such that x = f (z), where z is a latent variable
(GMM). Ryzhikov et al. [30] proposed a model-agnostic with a known and simple distribution pZ (z). The mapping f
anomaly detection process based on NF, addressing class- is chosen to be invertible, with an inverse f −1 , allowing us to
imbalanced classification by integrating existing anomalous express z as z = f −1 (x). To compute the density pX (x) under
samples during training and reconfiguring one-class classifi- the transformation f , we use the change of variables formula.
cation as two-class classification. The experimental findings Thus, we get
indicated that NFAD surpassed existing anomaly detection  −1 
methods. ∂f (x)
 pX (x) = pZ (z) det . (1)
 Concurrently to us, Dang et al. [9] proposed a three-stage ∂x
framework that uses only normal traffic data to generate
pseudo-anomaly samples. Their approach also involves the use Since z = f −1 (x), we can rewrite this as:
of NF to generate synthetic anomalous samples, and training 
 ∂f (z)
  −1
a supervised classifier to distinguish between normal and pX (x) = pZ (f −1 (x)) det . (2)
 ∂z
pseudo-anomaly samples. They show state-of-the-art performance on several datasets. However, calculating the Jacobian determinant of f −1 directly
 Our work differs from [9] in several key aspects. Firstly, can be challenging. Thus, we use the fact that:
while their research addresses encrypted traffic binary classifi-  −1    −1
cation, our work addresses network intrusion detection of more ∂f (x) ∂f (z)
 det = det . (3)
than 35 different attacks across two IDS and DDoS datasets. ∂x ∂z
Secondly, their method uses full packet information, including To facilitate computation, especially in a ML context, it is
payload data, whereas we rely solely on flow header statistics. common to work with the natural logarithm of the densities,
Thirdly, their approach incorporates a supervised classifier for which transforms the products into sums, simplifying the
detecting anomalies, whereas we utilize the log probability of gradients computation. Thus, the log-density is given by:
NF to identify anomalous traffic. For a fair comparison we  
also employed the Tor dataset used by [9] and we provide a −1 ∂f (z)
 log pX (x) = log pZ (f (x)) − log det . (4)
comparative analysis of the results. ∂z
 NF are typically constructed by composing multiple simple
 III. P RELIMINARIES
 invertible transformations, each contributing to the overall
 Normalizing flows, which gained prominence through the flexibility of the model. Let
work of Rezende and Mohamed [8] in variational inference,
and Dinh et al. [31] for their application in density estimation, f = fK ◦ fK−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 (5)
1208 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

be a composition of K invertible transformations fk . The log- local explanations to understand why certain anomalies deviate
density transformation through a sequence of flows is then from normal traffic patterns. By focusing on local Shapley
given by: values, we can pinpoint the specific features that contribute
 K   most significantly to an anomaly, enhancing our ability to
 X ∂fk (zk−1 ) diagnose and respond to unusual network behaviors.
 log pX (x) = log pZ (z0 ) − log det , (6)
 ∂zk−1 IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
 k=1
 −1
where zk = fk (zk−1 ) for k = 1, . . . , K and z0 = f (x). We propose a novel approach using bidirectional NF to
 In practice, the choice of transformations fk is critical for learn the distribution of normal network traffic, and then use
ensuring that the flow is both expressive and computationally its normalizing direction, which is essentially a probability
efficient. Common choices include affine coupling layers, density function, to distinguish between traffic anomalies and
autoregressive flows, and more complex neural network-based normal behavior.
transformations. Each transformation must be designed to A. Data Processing and Formulation
allow efficient computation of the determinant of the Jacobian For all input network traffic data, we consider only the
and its inverse. header information at the flow level. The features we use
 By leveraging these transformations, NF can model highly are aggregated flow statistics such as duration, packet size
complex data distributions while maintaining tractable density statistics, inter-arrival times (IAT), and network and transport
estimation and sampling capabilities. This makes them partic- layers characteristics (e.g., flag counts and window size) for
ularly well-suited to tasks such as anomaly detection, where each direction of the flow traffic. The data is then represented
exact likelihood evaluation is crucial. as a two-dimensional matrix X with N rows and D columns,
 Shapley values. Based on cooperative game theory, Shapley X = (x1 , x2 , . . ., xN )> , where each row xi ∈ RD is a vector
values [10] provide a way to fairly distribute the “payout” (in of D features representing a flow sample. Each sample has a
our context, feature importance) among the features of a model label yi where yi ∈ {0, . . . , C}, with 0 representing a normal
based on their contribution to the model’s predictions. They traffic label, and yi representing an anomaly class (e.g., attack
are used to interpret complex ML models by assigning an vector or traffic category depending on the classification task).
importance value to each feature reflecting its contribution to Since our model relies only on normal traffic to estimate the
the prediction. likelihood function, our classifier is trained only with samples
 The Shapley value for a feature is calculated as the average where yi = 0. Thus, class imbalance issues, which exist in all
marginal contribution of that feature across all possible subsets datasets that we evaluate, do not impact our proposed model’s
of features. This ensures a fair distribution of importance, operation. We later show how we handle the class imbalance
adhering to properties such as efficiency (the total importance in the testing phase. We also remove any features related to
is distributed among features), symmetry (features that con- ports, IP addresses, or absolute timestamps, as they might be
tribute equally receive equal values) and additivity (the sum dependent on the setup on which the dataset was created or
of the individual contributions equals the total contribution of might have artifacts with the flow label.
the features) [36]. Feature Normalization. NF require feature normalization.
 Formally, the Shapley value for a feature i in a model with We use z-score normalization, where the features are norn features is defined as the weighted average of the marginal malized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
contributions of i across all possible subsets of features. Let one. It is given by zi = (xi − µ)/σ where µ and σ are the
S be a subset of features not including i, and v(S) represent mean and standard deviation of the features, respectively. This
the value function (e.g., model output) for the subset S. The normalization method is chosen over alternatives such as min-
Shapley value φi for feature i is given by: max scaling or max-abs scaling due to its effectiveness in
 X |S|!(n − |S| − 1)! handling outliers and its common use in statistical modeling.
 φi = [v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S)] ,
 n!
 S⊆N \{i}
 B. Using NF for Anomaly Detection
where N is the set of all features, n = |N |, and v(S ∪ {i}) − Training Phase. During the training phase, the input data
v(S) quantifies the contribution of i when added to subset S. is the matrix X that contains a set of normal network traffic
This formulation ensures fairness by adhering to the properties samples only. The NF framework optimizes and learns the
mentioned above. Due to the exponential complexity of calcu- parameters of the transformation that suit the normal traffic
lating Shapley values for all subsets, efficient approximations data distribution we are trying to model, with the objective
are often employed in practice. of maximizing the log-likelihood of the input X, as given by
 Shapley values can provide both global and local explana- Equation (6).
tions. Global explanations offer an overall importance ranking Loss Function. The equivalent minimization problem to
of features for the entire dataset, helping to understand which maximizing the log-likelihood can be formulated as minimizfeatures are generally most influential. Local explanations, on ing the negative log-likelihood. Therefore, the loss function
the other hand, provide feature importance for individual pre- for training our NF model is defined as:
dictions, offering insights into why a specific prediction was N
made by highlighting which features had the most influence X
 L=− log pX (xi ), (7)
on that particular outcome. We are particularly interested in
 i=1
SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS 1209

Algorithm 1 Anomaly Detection Using NF been found to be unsuitable and, in certain cases, even
 counterproductive.
 Our aim is not to provide an exhaustive theoretical or empirical study on the use of Shapley values in feature selection.
 Instead, we propose an approach that leverages Shapley values
 to guide feature selection while avoiding the computational
 burden of an exhaustive search through the entire model space
 of 2F subsets.
 Feature Selection Approaches. Our technique focuses on
 local feature Shapley values, computed using small subsets of
 samples, rather than relying on global Shapley values across
 the entire model. We explore two distinct feature selection
 approaches tailored to different settings:
 Few-Shots: This semi-supervised method for feature selection leverages a limited set of labeled anomalies. Using this
 set, we compute the Shapley values for each sample prediction
 on a trained NF model. The marginal contribution of a feature
 is evaluated based on its impact on the detection score (log
 probability) for anomaly samples compared to normal samples.
 Intuitively, an effective discriminative feature should exhibit a
 negative marginal contribution to anomaly detection scores and
 a positive marginal contribution to normal detection scores.
 We employ the following forward feature selection procedure to evaluate features in the dataset:
 1) Initialize a base set of features S.
 2) For each feature f ∈ F \ S:
 • Train a Normalizing Flow detection model N Ff =
 N F (S ∪ {f }) using the training set.
 • Compute Cf = contribution(f, N Ff , aset , nset ).
 3) Select the top k features based on their Cf scores.
 Here, aset refers to the limited set of anomalies, and nset
 is a similarly sized set of normal samples. We experimented
where N is the number of samples in X, and xi is the with various initial sets S and contribution metrics to evaluate
feature vector of the i-th sample. This loss function encourages the distribution of Shapley values across aset and nset . To
the model to increase the probability of observing the given determine the most appropriate S and contribution metric, we
samples under the modeled distribution, effectively fitting the analyzed the correlation between Shapley-based contribution
normal traffic profile, as outlined in the T RAIN F LOW function scores and the NF model’s detection performance on a valiof Algorithm 1. dation set, measured using the AUROC metric.
 As detailed in Section V, selecting S with one or more
C. Feature Selection discriminative features hindered comparisons of marginal con-
 Feature selection techniques can be categorized into two tributions for tested features. The primary issue is that the
main groups: Shapley values of tested features are obscured by interactions
 • Wrapper Methods: These evaluate subsets of features by with existing features in S. In such cases, each trained NF
 training and validating models on different combinations, model effectively represents a different “game” with unique
 optimizing performance metrics. characteristics, in which the Shapley values are not necessarily
 • Filter Methods: These rely on statistical properties, such comparable. Consequently, Shapley values vary significantly
 as correlation or mutual information, to rank and select across normal and anomaly samples and across trained models.
 features. To address this, we tested S containing a single “dummy”
 We have developed and examined several novel wrapper feature with controlled distributions. As demonstrated in our
feature selection techniques that integrate Shapley values with results, using a random noise feature in S and training NF
the log-likelihood function, which serves as the evaluation models with the noise feature alongside the tested feature
metric for our NF model. While Shapley values have become provides a method that clearly distinguishes good and poor
a cornerstone in the field of explainable artificial intelligence discriminative features.
(XAI), their typical application is to attribute feature impor- Transductive: In this approach, we take an untagged samtance for a given model or to explain individual predictions, pling of both normal and anomaly samples, without their
rather than being explicitly used as a tool for feature selection. labels. By combining the log-likelihood function with Shap-
Furthermore, as discussed in some studies [36], the use of ley values, we identify features that exhibit high variance
Shapley-based attribution methods for feature selection has in Shapley value distributions. A discriminative feature will
1210 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE I
 L IST OF ATTACKS AND N UMBER OF S AMPLES IN CICI OT-2023 DATASETS

typically show both relatively high and low Shapley values, TABLE II
indicating significant impacts on the likelihood computations L IST OF ATTACKS AND N UMBER OF F LOW I NSTANCES IN THE
for anomalies compared to normal traffic. For each feature, CICIDS2017 DATASET
we compute the mean absolute Shapley value for all samples
in the set. This overall score, termed the Transductive Shapley
Value, is expected to be relatively high for features that can
effectively separate normal samples from anomalies:
 N
 1 X
 Transductive Shapley Valuei = |φi,j |,
 N j=1

where φi,j is the Shapley value of the i-th feature for the j-th
sample and N is the total number of samples. Feature selec- TABLE III
tion experiments results for both Few-Shots and Transductive S UMMARY OF T OR VS N ON -T OR IN ISCXT OR 2016
approaches are provided in Section V.

D. Likelihood-Based Detection
 Once the NF model is trained using normal network traffic,
we utilize the corresponding likelihood function to distinguish
between unseen anomalies and normal samples. The key idea
 sification.1 This diverse selection allows us to compare our
is that normal samples should have high likelihoods under
 work with a broader set of state-of-the-art anomaly detection
the learned distribution, while anomalies should have low
 methods including various generative models.
likelihoods.
 CICIoT-2023: The CICIoT-2023 [11] dataset is designed
 During the detection phase, we calculate the log-likelihood
 to evaluate intrusion detection systems (IDS) within IoT enviof each incoming network traffic sample using the trained
 ronments. The dataset provides more than 45 million attack
model. The decision to classify a sample as normal or anomaflows and more than one million normal traffic flows, capturing
lous is based on a predefined threshold. The detection function
 a wide variety of attacks categorized into seven classes:
f is defined as:
 ( Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), Denial of Service
 Normal log pX (x) > threshold (DoS), Reconnaissance, Web-based, Brute Force, Spoofing,
 f (x) = and Mirai. More details about the specific attacks included
 Anomalous log pX (x) ≤ threshold
 in the dataset can be found in Table I. All state-of-the-art
The threshold value is an important parameter that determines classification methods evaluated on this dataset in the literature
the sensitivity of the detection system. It can be selected are supervised.
based on the desired trade-off between false positive and false
negative rates, often determined through empirical analysis or 1 Throughout this paper, we refer to anomalous samples that are labeled
validation on a labeled dataset. as malicious in the dataset as “attacks.” Our anomaly detector is trained
 exclusively on traffic deemed “normal” — typically the benign or majority
 V. E VALUATION class — and flags deviations from this distribution. In the CICIDS2017
 and CICIoT-2023 datasets, the training set consists of benign traffic, and
A. Datasets anomalous samples correspond to labeled attacks. In the ISCXTor2016 dataset,
 the model is trained on Non-Tor traffic, and Tor traffic is treated as anomalous.
 We incorporate two datasets focused on intrusion detection, While some anomalies may be benign in practice (e.g., rare but legitimate
along with an additional dataset for encrypted traffic clas- activity), our terminology reflects dataset-specific labeling conventions.
SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS 1211

 ISCXTor2016: The ISCXTor2016 [12] dataset focuses on In these considerations, we follow similar balancing and
the classification of encrypted traffic, particularly Tor network sampling schemes used for testing by other works that evaluate
traffic. This dataset includes both Tor and non-Tor traffic their binary classification models using CICIoT-2023 [11],
(see Table III), capturing various internet activities such as [37], CICIDS2017 [18], and ISCXTor2016 [9]. This approach
browsing, streaming, and file transfers. It contains detailed ensures proper baselines for comparing the performance and
labels indicating the type of application, allowing for the accuracy results of our method to these state-of-the-art classievaluation of traffic classification methods in an encrypted fication models.
context. The dataset emphasizes the challenge of identifying We conducted experiments five times using different random
and classifying traffic when encryption is used to obfuscate seeds and reported the mean Area Under the Receiver Operthe data. ating Characteristic Curve (AUROC). Additionally, for the
 Using time-based features such as flow duration and inter- CICIoT-2023 dataset, we compared our method to supervised
arrival times, ISCXTor2016 aids in distinguishing between methods. Therefore, we also reported the F1 score, Recall,
different types of traffic. This focus on temporal character- Precision, and Accuracy, using a threshold that maximizes
istics is crucial for the effective analysis and classification of the True Positive Rate (TPR) minus the False Positive Rate
encrypted traffic, where traditional packet inspection methods (FPR).
are not feasible. For AUROC-based evaluations, no threshold tuning is
 CICIDS2017: The CICIDS2017 [13] dataset is a compre- required. However, when reporting threshold-dependent methensive benchmark for evaluating intrusion detection systems. rics such as Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Accuracy, we
This dataset captures a wide range of attack scenarios, includ- select the decision threshold using a separate validation set.
ing DoS, DDoS, brute force, XSS, SQL injection, infiltration, This validation set is completely disjoint from both the
port scans, and botnet attacks as detailed in Table II. Collected training and test sets and contains 1,000 normal and 1,000
over five days, the dataset includes detailed labels and meta- anomaly samples—–amounting to 10% of the test set size.
data for each instance, facilitating a thorough evaluation of The final metrics are then computed on the fully held-
IDS techniques. out test set comprising 10,000 normal and 10,000 anomaly
 The dataset contains both raw network traffic and extracted flows.
features, facilitating different levels of analysis. Flow-based We also validated that performance metrics remained confeatures include metrics such as duration, packet sizes, and sistent when evaluated on the full datasets. However, for
various counts of flags and protocol-specific characteristics. consistency and comparability with prior works, we report
This extensive set of features, combined with the variety performance on downsampled test sets as described.
of attack types, makes CICIDS2017 a valuable resource for Implementation Details. We train our NF model using
developing and testing advanced intrusion detection systems. PZFlow [38]. The models are trained for 100 epochs with
While the CICIDS2017 dataset has been extensively evaluated a batch size of 1024. XGBoost [39] classifiers which we
and studied, there are limited results evaluating this dataset use as benchmarks (See Section V-D), are trained with
using a binary classifier trained solely on normal traffic. To learning rate of 0.1, using 10 trees, each has a 10 depth
compare our method with state-of-the-art techniques, we eval- limit. To estimate Shapley values for any model, we make
uate DoS/DDoS attacks (Wednesday traffic, i.e., DoS Hulk, use of the open-source code provided by the authors of
DoS Goldeneye, Slowloris, and Slowhttptest) similar to the [10].
evaluation in [18] which utilized a semi-supervised, memory- We release an implementation of our proposed method. The
augmented auto-encoder approach for anomaly detection on code is available at: https://github.com/lshafir/NF-anomaly-
CICIDS2017, and we compare our results to their approach. detection

B. Testing Methodology
 We consider a binary classification model that classifies C. Feature Selection Experiments Results
each input flow as Normal or Anomalous. The datasets we Here we present experimental results for the two Shapley
use are highly imbalanced. In CICIoT-2023, there are signifi- based feature selection approaches introduced in Section IV-C.
cantly more attack flow instances than benign flows, while in Few Shots (Semi-Supervised) Approach. Given a dataset
ISCXTor2016 and CICIDS2017, there are significantly more and an input set of features, the Few Shots feature selection
Non-Tor and benign flow instances than Tor and attack flows, technique leverages a limited number of anomaly samples and
respectively. Shapley value distributions to identify features with strong
 While class imbalance does not impact the training phase, discriminative power.
it does affect testing. For each dataset, we combine all normal We experimented with the wrapper forward feature selection
traffic together and all malicious traffic together (in the case of procedure using different combinations of base features S and
attack datasets; for the Tor dataset, we combine all Tor traffic various Shapley distribution contribution metrics.
applications), then shuffle them. For each dataset, we randomly To evaluate this procedure, we analyzed the correlation
sampled 20,000 normal flows and 10,000 anomalous flows. We between Shapley value contributions on anomaly and normal
then split the normal flows into training (10,000 samples) and samples with the detection performance of the trained models.
testing (10,000 samples) sets. For each experiment, we followed these steps:
1212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 1) Select a base set of features S. TABLE IV
 2) For each feature not in S, train a NF model N Ff using S PEARMAN C ORRELATION B ETWEEN THE AUROC S CORE AND THE
 S ∪ {f }. 90 TH P ERCENTILE OF SHAP VALUE D ISTRIBUTIONS ACROSS T ESTED
 F EATURES IN CICIDS2017. T HE R ESULTS C OMPARE T WO
 3) Compute Shapley value distributions on small sample BASE F EATURE C ONFIGURATIONS : A S YNTHETIC R ANDOM
 sets of k anomaly samples and k normal samples. N OISE F EATURE V ERSUS A D ISCRIMINATIVE F EATURE
 4) Evaluate the detection performance of N Ff on the full (P acket Length V ariance) U SED AS THE BASE S ET S
 testing set to obtain an AUROC score.
 5) Compare the observed Shapley value distributions with
 the detection AUROC scores of the models.
 We set k = 20 in the following experiments. This
choice reflects the few-shot learning approach, which typically
involves learning or making inferences from a very limited
number of examples (commonly 1 to 100 samples per class).
The goal is to evaluate whether a model or interpretability method can extract meaningful information from scarce
labeled data. This value is supported by an ablation study we
conducted, evaluating the impact of different few-shot sample
sizes, as described later in §V-E.3. notably different results. For this experiment, we selected S
 Note that the NF models are trained solely on normal as a single random noise feature sampled uniformly between
samples and use a probability (likelihood) score during detec- −1 and 1, adding it to the training/testing sets and the
tion. A feature’s Shapley value for an individual prediction limited sets of 20 anomaly (attack) and normal (benign)
represents the impact of that feature on the output detection samples.
score. Thus, an effective discriminative feature should exhibit Figures 2 and 4 present the results of this experiment using
a negative marginal contribution to anomaly sample detections the 20 anomaly and 20 normal samples, respectively. Similar
and a positive marginal contribution to normal sample detec- to the earlier setup, we tested over 50 features and provide
tion scores. results for the 10 features with the highest AUROC detection
 While we explored various initial subsets of features, our scores (rightmost) and the 10 features with the lowest AUROC
results revealed that including both strong and weak discrim- detection scores (leftmost). As shown in Figure 2, features
inative features in the base set S caused varying interactions with relatively high AUROC results exhibit significantly negwith tested features, obscuring their individual contributions. ative Shapley value distributions (on the 20 anomaly samples),
We experimented with several absolute and relative metrics for with negative median values. In contrast, features associated
evaluating Shapley distributions but observed that interactions with relatively low AUROC results either displayed positive
among features in S significantly affected the interpretability Shapley value distributions for anomaly samples (indicating
of results. insufficient discrimination) or exhibited no significant contri-
 As an example, Figure 3 shows results from an experiment bution compared to the random noise feature. This suggests
where we selected a single feature, Packet Length Variance, that these features have minimal negative or positive impact on
as the base set S. We tested over 50 other features from the detection.
CICIDS2017 dataset, each trained alongside the base feature. Importantly, the random noise feature maintained an
The box plot illustrates the 10 features with the highest insignificant Shapley value distribution (centered around zero
AUROC scores (rightmost) and the 10 features with the lowest with low standard deviation), enabling meaningful compar-
AUROC scores (leftmost). For each feature, the AUROC score isons between the Shapley value distributions of the tested
of the corresponding model is presented above the feature features.
name. The Shapley value distributions for the base feature and To quantify this observation, we computed the Spearman
the tested feature are displayed in the top and bottom areas of correlation between the AUROC score of models trained
the plot, respectively. with each feature and the 90th percentile of its SHAP value
 From the results, we observed two key findings: (i) the distribution, across sets of k = 20 samples. We performed
Shapley value distribution of the base feature varied signifi- this analysis on both normal and anomaly samples from the
cantly across trained models, even when evaluated on the same CICIDS2017 dataset.
set of anomaly (attack) samples, and (ii) no clear correlation Table IV summarizes the correlation results for using the
was observed between the Shapley value distributions of the random noise as the base feature versus using a discriminative
tested features and the model detection performance. feature such as Packet Length Variance as the base feature.
 Given these results, we sought a “neutral” feature to serve As shown, there is a significant positive correlation between
as a baseline for evaluating the Shapley value contributions SHAP distributions and classifier performance when using the
of other features. We experimented with a single “dummy” random noise baseline.
feature with controlled distributions. While a random feature We observed similar results when performing the same
with a normal distribution exhibited similar behavior to the experiment on the ISCXTor2016 dataset, with the random
earlier experiments, using a random noise feature produced noise feature as the base feature (see Figure 5).
SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS 1213

Fig. 2. The box plot visualizes the distribution of marginal Shapley values computed on 20 anomaly samples for various features from the CICIDS2017
dataset, each trained alongside a random noise feature. The plot demonstrates a clear correlation between features with predominantly negative Shapley value
distributions and detection performance on the full testing set. The rightmost ten features have the highest AUROC scores, while the leftmost ten features
have the lowest AUROC scores. In total, over 50 different features were evaluated.

Fig. 3. The box plot visualizes the distribution of marginal Shapley values computed on 20 anomaly samples for various features from the CICIDS2017
dataset, each trained alongside the ‘Packet Length Variance’ feature. The plot illustrates how the marginal Shapley values of ‘Packet Length Variance’ interact
differently with the tested features across various trained models.

Fig. 4. The box plot visualizes the distribution of marginal Shapley values computed on 20 benign samples for various features from the CICIDS2017 dataset,
each trained alongside a random noise feature. The plot illustrates how well each feature aligns with and represents the benign traffic characteristics in the
trained models.

 These results support the use of summary statistics of anomaly and normal samples—as a practical criterion for
SHAP value distributions—computed on a small number of ranking features. For example, we found that the 90th quantile
1214 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 5. The box plot visualizes the distribution of marginal Shapley values
computed on 20 anomaly samples for various features from the ISCXTor2016
dataset, each trained alongside a random noise feature. The plot demonstrates a
clear correlation between features with predominantly negative Shapley value
distributions and AUROC score on the full testing set.

of SHAP values for anomaly and benign samples correlates Fig. 6. AUROC value of the ROC curve of each NF model that was trained
 on a pair of features using the ISCXTor2016. The ROC curve of the ‘Bwd
strongly with the AUROC scores of corresponding models. IAT Std’ and ‘Active Max’ features achieves the best AUROC score of 0.85.
This enables effective identification of discriminative features
for anomaly detection, and facilitates the exclusion of features TABLE V
that exhibit minimal or misleading contributions to the detec- O UR S HAPLEY S CORES FOR D IFFERENT F EATURES
tion task.
 Transductive Approach. In the second approach, we have
a mixed set of random samples without their labels. Since
we do not know their labels, we cannot compare Shapley
values of anomalies and normal samples across this set. For
each feature, we compute the mean absolute Shapley value
for all samples in the set. This overall score, termed the
Transductive Shapley Value, is expected to be relatively high
for features that can effectively separate normal samples from capturing the underlying characteristics of the data, even
anomalies: without labeled anomalies.
 N
 Figure 6 illustrates the ROC curves for various pairs of
 1 X features. The AUROC values for each pair are annotated
 Transductive Shapley Valuei = |φi,j |
 N j=1 in the legend. Notably, the pair (‘Bwd IAT Std’, ‘Active
 Max’) achieves the highest AUROC score of 0.85. This
where: aligns with our Shapley score analysis, further validating
 • φi,j is the Shapley value of the i-th feature for the j-th the effectiveness of these features in distinguishing norsample. mal traffic from Tor traffic. Other pairs, such as (‘Flow
 • N is the total number of samples. Packets/s’, ‘Bwd IAT Std’) and (‘Idle Min’, ‘Bwd IAT
 Std’), also show strong performance with AUROC scores of
 Here, we demonstrate the performance of our feature
 0.80.
selection approach on the ISCXTor2016 dataset. We selected
 Our analysis using the Transductive approach suggests that
a set of five features: ‘Bwd IAT Std’, ‘Active Max’,
 some features (e.g., ‘Bwd IAT Std’ and ‘Active Max’) have the
‘Flow Packets/s’, ‘Idle Min’, ‘Flow IAT Max’ which are
 potential to contribute significantly to effective anomaly detecnot highly correlated, and tested the AUROC results of
 tion in the ISCXTor2016 dataset. The ROC curves strengthen
training a normalizing flow model using combinations of
 these findings, demonstrating high AUROC scores for pairs of
two features out of this set. The results are shown in
 features that include ‘Bwd IAT Std’.
Figure 6.
 Additionally, we trained a NF model using these five features, and calculated both Transductive Shapley scores, with a D. Performance Evaluation Results
random sampling of 100 Tor samples and 100 non-Tor samples ISCXTor2016: In Table VI, we compare the AUROC
out of the testing sets. of our method with various state-of-the-art methods on the
 The Transductive Shapley Scores are presented in Table V. ISCXTor2016 dataset. We compare our results against state-
The feature ‘Bwd IAT Std’ stands out with the highest score of-the-art anomaly detection methods, including distribution
of 1.44, followed by ‘Flow IAT Max’ with a score of 1.04. learning-based methods [43], [44], [45], reconstruction-based
This approach confirms the importance of these features in methods [40], [44], knowledge distillation-based methods [41],
SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS 1215

Fig. 7. Our NF detection method results in histograms showing the distribution of normal and anomaly samples in the testing sets of the three datasets we
evaluated.

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
AUROC C OMPARISON AGAINST S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A NOMALY D ETEC - AUROC P ERFORMANCE OF O UR M ETHOD AGAINST S TATE - OF - THE -A RT
 TION M ETHODS [9] ON THE ISCX T OR AND N ON -T OR DATASETS M ETHODS ON CICIDS2017 DATASET

 an ensemble of two NF models. The first model is trained
 using the ‘Flow IAT Std’ and ‘Flow Bytes/s’ features, while
 the second model is trained using the ‘Flow Packets/s’ and
 ‘Bwd IAT Max’ features. When using an ensemble of more
 than one NF-based classifier, a flow is classified as an anomaly
[47], normalization flow-based methods [27], [28], and mem- only if all classifiers in the ensemble detect it as an anomaly.
ory matching-based methods [42] as reported by Dang et To calculate the joint ROC and the corresponding AUROC,
al. [9]. In addition, we compare our results with Kitsune we normalize the detection thresholds and select the minimum
[48] by replicating their method using the publicly available score for each sample. It is noteworthy that the best AUROC
implementation provided by the authors. result for a single NF classifier is 0.851, achieved using only
 As shown in Table VI, our method achieves the highest the ‘Bwd IAT Std’ and ‘Active Mean’ features.
AUROC of 0.8731, significantly outperforming the state-of- CICIDS2017: To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach
the-art methods. Specifically, our method outperforms the on the CICIDS2017 dataset, we compare our results against
recent work by Dang et al. [9], which also utilizes NF for several competitive methods, including OCSVM (one-class
the generation of synthetic anomalies. Note that both flow- SVM), AE (autoencoder), MemAE [18] (memory-augmented
based methods of [9] and our method exceed the highest autoencoder), SparseMemAE [18], and Kitsune [48] (ensemresult among the other state-of-the-art methods by 8.12% and ble of AEs). It is important to note that OCSVM, AE
11.6%, respectively. A visual representation of the anomaly and Kitsune are trained using only normal samples, while
score distribution of our method on ISCXTor2016 appears MemAE and SparseMemAE utilize a limited number of
in Figure 7b. Here, the non-Tor and Tor classes are less attack samples, employing a semi-supervised approach. The
separated than the normal and attack traffic on CICIoT-2023 comparison results are presented in Table VII. As shown,
(see Figure 7a). However, these results are still better than the OCSVM model exhibits low AUROC performance against
those achieved by other methods. DDoS attacks, while the AE-based models demonstrate overall
 Our method’s best results are even higher, with an AUROC high performance. Our proposed method outperforms the AEof 0.932, when using only two features, one of which is the based methods, achieving an AUROC of 0.93 for DDoS attack
‘Protocol Type’ field of the flow. However, since we found this detection on the CICIDS2017 dataset.
feature as highly correlated with the Tor class, we focused on Our best results were obtained using a NF model trained
experiments excluding the ‘Protocol Type’ feature to ensure on a set of five features: ‘Bwd Packet Length Mean’, ‘Fwd
unbiased evaluation. The best reported results are achieved by Packets/s’, ‘ACK Flag Count’, ‘Total Length of Bwd Packets’,
1216 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE VIII TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE OF O UR M ETHOD AGAINST S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETH - D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE W HEN T RAINING AND T ESTING ON D IFFER -
 ODS ON CICI OT-2023 DATASET. O UR M ETHOD I S U NSUPERVISED , ENT C OMBINATIONS OF CICIDS2017 (B ENIGN AND C YBERATTACKS
 T RAINED U SING N ORMAL T RAFFIC O NLY, W HILE THE C OMPARED T RAFFIC DATASET ) AND CICDD O S2019 (B ENIGN AND DD O S
 M ETHODS A RE S UPERVISED M ETHODS ATTACKS ) DATASETS

 While the CICIoT-2023 and CICIDS2017 datasets both
 include benign samples, their underlying feature sets differ
 significantly. Therefore, we conduct cross-dataset generalizaand ‘Flow Duration’. These features encompass TCP flag tion experiments using two datasets with comparable feature
counts, packet length distribution in the downstream direction, sets: CICIDS2017 — one of the three datasets evaluated in
and attack packets’ rate in the upstream direction. this work — and CICDDoS2019, an additional dataset with
 CICIoT-2023: In Table VIII, we present the performance a comparable feature set. Specifically, we train the model on
of our method compared to various state-of-the-art methods the benign traffic of one dataset and evaluate it on the benign
on the CICIoT-2023 dataset. To the best of our knowledge, traffic of the other, ensuring that the testing benign samples
our method is the first to evaluate the CICIoT-2023 dataset are entirely unseen during training.
using only normal traffic data for training. Thus, all compared Table IX presents the results across different combinabaseline methods are supervised. tions of training and testing datasets. As shown, performance
 Ghorbani et al. [11] applied several ML methods to eval- slightly degrades when generalizing across datasets compared
uate the CICIoT-2023 dataset. Their results indicated that to within-dataset evaluation. However, the detection results
supervised methods like Adaboost, Random Forest (RF), and remain consistently high, demonstrating that our method is
Deep Neural Network (DNN) achieved high performance, robust in distinguishing between attacks and previously unseen
with accuracy metrics exceeding 98%. Additionally, Khan et benign traffic.
al. [37] reported high detection performance using Logistic 2) Using Additional XAI Methods: To evaluate the gener-
Regression (LR). However, it is important to note that our NF ality of our proposed XAI-based feature selection framework,
model, despite being unsupervised, achieves comparable or we investigate whether the few-shot approach—–originally
higher results than these supervised methods. Furthermore, we formulated with SHAPLEY-based explainer—–can be applied
implemented an XGBoost [39] classifier and trained it on two with other explanation methods.
random sets of 10,000 benign samples (the same training set as In this experiment, we replace Shapley values
our method) and 10,000 attack samples (supervised method). with LIME [49] (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic
We then evaluated its performance using the same testing sets Explanations)—another widely used XAI method—and
used in our experiments. repeat the few-shot feature selection procedure. Specifically,
 In addition to the quantitative results, we also provide a we compute the importance scores of features for each
visual representation of our method’s performance. As shown anomaly sample and analyze their relationship with classifier
in Figure 7a, the histogram of the detection results illustrates performance. As in our original SHAPLEY-based method,
the excellent capability of our NF model in distinguishing each feature is tested by training NF model on it alongside
between normal and anomaly traffic on the CICIoT-2023 a neutral baseline feature (random noise), and the 90th
dataset. percentile of its marginal importance values over a small set
 Our NF model stands out as a highly effective unsupervised of 20 attack or normal samples is recorded. We then measure
anomaly detection method. The results demonstrate that it the correlation between these values and the AUROC of the
can achieve or exceed the performance of leading supervised classifier trained using each feature.
methods, making it a valuable tool for intrusion detection in As shown in Table X, both SHAP and LIME yield sta-
IoT environments. tistically significant positive correlations between importance
 values and detection performance when the baseline is a
 random noise feature. Conversely, when using a discriminative
E. Ablation Study feature such as Packet Length Variance as the baseline, the
 1) Generalizing Across Datasets: In realistic network correlations become insignificant, indicating the impact of
deployments, anomaly detection models are likely to encounter feature interactions on XAI-based comparisons. These results
benign traffic patterns that were not present during training. To are consistent with the SHAPLEY analysis in §V-C.
assess the robustness of our approach in such scenarios, we In addition, Figure 8 visually demonstrates that LIME yields
evaluate its ability to distinguish malicious anomalies from similar explanation patterns to SHAP: features associated with
previously unseen or rare benign traffic. high AUROC scores tend to have negative importance values
SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS 1217

 TABLE X
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN F EW-S HOTS F EATURE S ELECTION A PPROACH
 U SING THE SHAP AND LIME XAI I MPORTANCE ATTRIBUTION
 M ETHODS . W E C ALCULATE THE S PEARMAN C ORRELATION
 B ETWEEN THE 90 TH Q UANTILE D ISTRIBUTIONS OF M ARGINAL
 SHAP/LIME VALUES C OMPUTED ON 20 ATTACK S AMPLES
 FOR E ACH F EATURE AND THE AUROC S CORE OF THE
 C LASSIFIER U SING T HAT F EATURE

 Fig. 9. Stability of few-shots feature selection results across varying sample
 sizes.

 Table XI and Figure 9 present the correlation results across
 the different sample sizes. As shown, all evaluated values
 of k, including the smallest sizes (e.g., k = 10), yield
 consistently high and statistically significant correlations when
 the base feature is a random noise feature. Conversely, when
 using a strong discriminative feature such as Packet Length
 Variance as the baseline, the correlations become negligible
 or insignificant, regardless of sample size.
 These findings confirm that our few-shots feature selection
 framework remains effective even when applied to small sets
 of labeled examples.

 VI. E XPLAINABILITY
 In this work, we are interested not only in enhancing
 detection performance, but also in understanding what makes
 a low likelihood sample an anomaly and how it deviates from
Fig. 8. The box plot shows the distribution of marginal LIME values for 20 normal behavior. Thus, we combine the NF classifier with
anomaly samples from CICIDS2017, each trained alongside a random noise
feature. As in Fig. 2 (SHAP-based), features with predominantly negative
 Shapley values, to provide statistically grounded explanations
LIME value distributions correlate with high AUROC scores. for detected anomalies, potentially improving the root-cause
 analysis of anomalous traffic.
 While Shapley values can be used with a variety of methods,
across the anomaly samples, while weak features exhibit such as Random Forests, Gradient Boosting Machines, and
dispersed or positive distributions. This behavior supports our Neural Networks, treating them as models with unknown
hypothesis that discriminative features produce more consis- internal logic, it attributes to each feature the change in the
tent and interpretable attribution patterns when evaluated in expected model prediction when conditioning on that feature.
isolation with a controlled baseline. This means that Shapley values essentially explain the model
 3) Ablating Few-Shots Sample Size: The Few-Shots feature prediction but not necessarily why a sample deviates from a
selection technique leverages a limited number of anomaly set of samples statistically. Furthermore, the Shapley values
samples and their corresponding SHAPLEY value distribu- are influenced by the internal mechanisms and nature of the
tions to identify features with strong discriminative power. In model, meaning that the explanations may reflect the model’s
this subsection, we ablate the size of the anomaly and normal complexity rather than the true cause of the deviation.
sample sets used in this procedure to evaluate the impact of Here, we leverage the statistical nature of the NF likelihood
different few-shot sample sizes on the stability and reliability predictions with Shapley values. This approach provides a staof the feature selection results. tistical importance measure to the Shapley values, producing
 To this end, we repeat the procedure described in §V-C explanations that elucidate why a particular traffic sample is
using varying sample sizes k ∈ {10, 20, 50, 100, 200} for both anomalous and how it deviates from normal patterns.
anomaly and normal samples, drawn from the CICIDS2017 Simulation. We start with a comparison of using Shapdataset. For each value of k, we compute the Spearman and ley values with NF and two other methods: one supervised
Pearson correlations (along with their associated p-values) (XGBoost) and another unsupervised (OCSVM). We create a
between the AUROC score of each feature and the 90th simple simulation of normal and anomaly samples with two
percentile of the marginal XAI values computed using SHAP. features: F1 and F2 .
In addition, we replicate the same experiment using the LIME Figure 10 illustrates a set of normal samples (blue points)
method as described in §V-E.2. and anomaly samples (red points). For a comparison, we
1218 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE XI
C ORRELATION VALUES AND P -VALUES B ETWEEN THE 90 TH P ERCENTILE OF THE I MPORTANCE VALUE D ISTRIBUTIONS (F ROM SHAP AND LIME)
 AND AUROC C LASSIFICATION S CORE , FOR T WO N EUTRAL F EATURES (R ANDOM N OISE AND PACKET L ENGTH VARIANCE ) ACROSS VARYING
 S AMPLE S IZES

 TABLE XII
 C OMPARISON OF S HAPLEY VALUES ACROSS T HREE D IFFERENT M ETH -
 ODS : XGB OOST, OCSVM, AND NF. T HE S HAPLEY VALUES I NDICATE
 THE C ONTRIBUTION OF E ACH F EATURE TO THE P REDICTION OF
 T HREE S AMPLES : P1 , P2 , AND P3 (S EE F IGURE 10), E ACH
 W ITH T WO F EATURES , F1 AND F2 . P OSITIVE S HAPLEY
 VALUES I NDICATE T HAT THE F EATURE C ONTRIBUTES
 P OSITIVELY TO THE P REDICTION (N ORMAL ), W HILE
 N EGATIVE VALUES I NDICATE A N EGATIVE C ON -
 TRIBUTION (A NOMALY )

Fig. 10. A simulation of normal and anomaly samples with two features.

 this particular example, also affects the Shapley values of
train two unsupervised classifiers (NF and OCSVM) on the anomalous samples.
blue samples only, and an additional XGBoost classifier is On the other hand, the Shapley values computed by the
trained on both blue and red samples (supervised). Then, XGBoost model do not attribute any contribution to F2 for
we select three points: P1 , P2 , and P3 and compute their any of the points, failing to recognize the significance of F2 in
corresponding Shapley values using the three methods. Note differentiating between normal and anomalous samples (indithat P1 , P2 deviate from the majority of normal samples more cating that XGBoost operates solely on F1 ). This highlights
pronouncedly in F2 than in F1 . Additionally, P1 has an F1 the limitations of using XGBoost for this particular anomaly
value lower than the minimum F1 value of all normal samples. detection task. NF, however, offers a more nuanced explanation
P3 deviates mostly in F1 . by assigning different Shapley values to F1 and F2 for each
 For a binary classifier, Shapley values represent the con- point, which reflects the true nature of their deviations.
tribution of each feature to the model’s output. The sign of Using Real-World Attack Samples. Next, we analyze
the Shapley value indicates whether the feature’s presence Shapley values with NF on attack samples from CICIoT-2023.
increases or decreases the likelihood of the sample being Two classifiers were trained using five features: ‘HTTPS’,
classified as an anomaly. ‘Protocol Type’, ‘Magnitude’, ‘Variance’, and ‘fin count’. Our
 Table XII presents the Shapley values for points P1 , P2 , and NF model was trained on 10,000 normal samples, while the
P3 as computed by the three different models: NF, OCSVM, XGBoost baseline used the same 10,000 normal samples plus
and XGBoost. It is evident from the table that while OCSVM 10,000 attack samples (supervised).
was trained on the same data as NF, its corresponding Shapley To obtain test anomalies with expected explanations serving
values do not provide any useful explanation for P1 and P2 . as ground truth, we constructed subsets of attack samples
Specifically, both features F1 and F2 have the same Shapley termed X-Feature Deviant Attack Samples. In each subset,
value of −0.89 for these points. While OCSVM is designed four features follow the distribution of normal samples, while
to find a boundary that encloses the majority of the data one feature (‘X’) takes values unlikely under the normal
points of the learned class, a few points within the training distribution. To quantify this deviation, we compute the mean
data might affect the placement of the boundary, which in likelihood of each feature using the normal training set (10,000
SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS 1219

 nant feature for all ground-truth samples. In the ‘fin count’
 ground-truth subset, the XGBoost mean Shapley value even
 has a positive sign, indicating that this feature increases the
 likelihood of being detected as normal despite the very low
 likelihood of this feature across the normal samples (0.002).
 On the other hand, the NF Shapley values clearly highlight
 the “deviant” feature as the one causing the test sample
 to be detected as an anomaly, underscoring the significant
 improvement in explainability when using our method.
 Our analysis demonstrates the potential of combining NF
 with Shapley values to enhance network traffic anomaly
Fig. 11. CICIoT-2023 ‘fin count’ feature deviant attack samples illustration.
We plot the normalized distributions of five features over 10,000 normal detection explainability. While our findings include anecdosamples. The points represent the feature values of the attack samples. tal evidence and specific case studies, the promising results
 indicate a significant opportunity for future work to further
 TABLE XIII validate and expand upon this approach in broader contexts.
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN S HAPLEY VALUES U SING O UR NF M ODEL V S .
 XGB OOST ON R EAL -W ORLD CICI OT-2023 ATTACK S AMPLES . A S VII. C ONCLUSION
 A G ROUND -T RUTH W E U SE S UBSETS OF ATTACK S AMPLES , IN
 W HICH O NLY O NE F EATURE E XHIBITS VALUES T HAT A RE In this study, we demonstrated the efficacy of NF for
 U NLIKELY TO B E P RESENT IN THE N ORMAL D ISTRIBUTION . anomaly detection in network traffic. By leveraging the den-
 N OTE T HAT L OW NF S HAPLEY VALUES C ORRELATE
 W ITH THE D EVIANT F EATURES sity estimation capabilities of NF, our approach effectively
 identifies low-likelihood samples, marking them as potential
 anomalies. This method avoids the need for labeled anomaly
 data during training, which is a significant advantage in realworld scenarios where such data is often unavailable.
 Our experiments on the CICIoT-2023, ISCXTor2016, and
 CICIDS2017 datasets show that our model achieves high
 accuracy, outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods for
 unsupervised anomaly detection, and, when combined with
 Shapley values, supports feature selection and provides valuable explanations for detected anomalies. While our method
 effectively models the distribution of normal traffic within
 each dataset, we note that performance slightly degrades when
 training on one dataset and evaluating on another, reflecting
 distribution shifts between environments. Addressing such
 generalization challenges is an important direction for future
 work, for example through self-supervised pretraining techniques. Overall, our results indicate that NF offer a powerful
samples). Likelihoods are estimated with Gaussian Kernel and interpretable solution for anomaly detection in network
Density Estimation (Gaussian KDE), a non-parametric method traffic.
for probability density estimation.
 As an example, Figure 11 shows the distribution of each
 R EFERENCES
feature in the normal training set (10,000 samples). For each
attack sample in the ‘fin count’ deviant subset, the normalized [1] E. Bout, V. Loscri, and A. Gallais, “How machine learning changes
 the nature of cyberattacks on IoT networks: A survey,” IEEE Commun.
feature value is placed on the corresponding distribution curve. Surveys Tuts., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 248–279, 1st Quart., 2021.
The ‘fin count’ values exhibit very low likelihood, whereas the [2] A. Sperotto, G. Schaffrath, R. Sadre, C. Morariu, A. Pras, and B. Stiller,
other four features remain relatively likely. “An overview of IP flow-based intrusion detection,” IEEE Commun.
 Surveys Tuts., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 343–356, 3rd Quart., 2010.
 We then examine the Shapley values obtained from these [3] Z. Ahmad, A. Shahid Khan, C. Wai Shiang, J. Abdullah, and F. Ahmad,
two classifiers. For each such ground-truth sample, we expect “Network intrusion detection system: A systematic study of machine
that the Shapley value will attribute a relatively high value learning and deep learning approaches,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun.
 Technol., vol. 32, no. 1, p. 4150, Jan. 2021.
to the feature that deviates from the normal distribution, [4] S. Gopalakrishnan, N. Tuptuk, and S. Hailes, “Machine learningwith a negative sign indicating that this feature decreases the based intrusion detection systems: Deployment guidelines for industry,”
likelihood of the sample being detected as normal. Table XIII PETRAS National Centre of Excellence for IoT Systems Cybersecurity, London, U.K., Tech. Rep., 2023, doi: 10.14324/000.rp.10190465.
shows the results on two subsets of feature deviant attacks (i.e., [Online]. Available: https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10190465/
‘Variance’ with 91 samples and ‘fin count’ with 10 samples), [5] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. NIPS, 2014,
together with the computed likelihood which is used as a pp. 2672–2680.
 [6] A. S. Dina, A. B. Siddique, and D. Manivannan, “Effect of balancing
ground-truth measure. data using synthetic data on the performance of machine learning
 As shown in Table XIII, the XGBoost Shapley values classifiers for intrusion detection in computer networks,” IEEE Access,
always attribute the ‘Magnitude’ feature as the most domi- vol. 10, pp. 96731–96747, 2022.
1220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

[7] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013, [28] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
 arXiv:1312.6114. via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
[8] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing [29] M. L. D. Dias, C. L. C. Mattos, T. L. C. da Silva, J. A. F. de Macêdo, and
 flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 1530–1538. W. C. P. Silva, “Anomaly detection in trajectory data with normalizing
[9] Z. Dang, Y. Zheng, X. Lin, C. Peng, Q. Chen, and X. Gao, “Semi- flows,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2020,
 supervised learning for anomaly traffic detection via bidirectional pp. 1–8.
 normalizing flows,” 2024, arXiv:2403.10550. [30] A. Ryzhikov, M. Borisyak, A. Ustyuzhanin, and D. Derkach,
[10] S. M. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting “Normalizing flows for deep anomaly detection,” 2019,
 model predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. arXiv:1912.09323.
 (NeurIPS), I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, [31] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio, “Density estimation using
 S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2017, pp. 4765–4774. real NVP,” 2016, arXiv:1605.08803.
[11] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and [32] S. Zhai et al., “Normalizing flows are capable generative models,” 2024,
 A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark arXiv:2412.06329.
 for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13, [33] R. Prenger, R. Valle, and B. Catanzaro, “Waveglow: A flowp. 5941, Jun. 2023. based generative network for speech synthesis,” in Proc. IEEE
[12] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2019,
 “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd pp. 3617–3621.
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262. [34] OpenAI. (Jul. 2018). Glow: Better Reversible Generative Models.
[13] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/glow
 generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic [35] P. N. Ward, A. Smofsky, and A. J. Bose, “Improving exploration in softcharacterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, actor-critic with normalizing flows policies,” 2019, arXiv:1906.02771.
 pp. 108–116. [36] D. Fryer, I. Strumke, and H. Nguyen, “Shapley values for feature
[14] L. Feinstein, D. Schnackenberg, R. Balupari, and D. Kindred, “Statistical selection: The good, the bad, and the axioms,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 approaches to DDoS attack detection and response,” in Proc. DARPA pp. 144352–144360, 2021.
 Inf. Survivability Conf. Expo., Apr. 2003, pp. 303–314. [37] M. M. Khan and M. Alkhathami, “Anomaly detection in IoT-based
[15] P. D. Bojović, I. Bašičević, S. Ocovaj, and M. Popović, “A practical healthcare: Machine learning for enhanced security,” Sci. Rep., vol. 14,
 approach to detection of distributed denial-of-service attacks using a no. 1, p. 5872, Mar. 2024.
 hybrid detection method,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 73, pp. 84–96, Jan. [38] J. F. Crenshaw, Z. Yan, and V. Doster, “jfcrenshaw/pzflow:
 2019. V3.1.2 (v3.1.2),” Zenodo, CERN, Tech. Rep., 2024, doi: 10.5281/
[16] S. Naseer et al., “Enhanced network anomaly detection based on deep zenodo.10636848.
 neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 48231–48246, 2018. [39] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,”
[17] S. Zavrak and M. Iskefiyeli, “Anomaly-based intrusion detection from in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 network flow features using variational autoencoder,” IEEE Access, Aug. 2016, pp. 785–794.
 vol. 8, pp. 108346–108358, 2020. [40] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon,
[18] B. Min, J. Yoo, S. Kim, D. Shin, and D. Shin, “Network anomaly “GANomaly: Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial
 detection using memory-augmented deep autoencoder,” IEEE Access, training,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2018,
 vol. 9, pp. 104695–104706, 2021. pp. 622–637.
[19] S. Azmin and A. M. A. A. Islam, “Network intrusion detection system [41] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature
 based on conditional variational Laplace autoencoder,” in Proc. 7th Int. pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257.
 Conf. Netw. Syst. Security, 2020, pp. 82–88. [42] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
[20] Y. Yin, Z. Lin, M. Jin, G. Fanti, and V. Sekar, “Practical GAN-based “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 synthetic IP header trace generation using NetShare,” in Proc. ACM IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
 SIGCOMM Conf., Aug. 2022, pp. 458–472. pp. 14298–14308.
[21] M. Abdelaty, S. Scott-Hayward, R. Doriguzzi-Corin, and D. Siracusa, [43] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM:
 “GADoT: GAN-based adversarial training for robust DDoS attack A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur. (CNS), Oct. 2021, and localization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2020,
 pp. 119–127. pp. 475–489.
[22] B.-E. Zolbayar et al., “Generating practical adversarial network traffic [44] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Draem—A discrimflows using NIDSGAN,” 2022, arXiv:2203.06694. inatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly
[23] J. Wang, J. Pan, I. AlQerm, and Y. Liu, “Def-IDS: An ensemble detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021,
 defense mechanism against adversarial attacks for deep learning-based pp. 8330–8339.
 network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. [45] N. A. Ahuja, I. Ndiour, T. Kalyanpur, and O. Tickoo, “Probabilistic mod-
 Netw. (ICCCN), Jul. 2021, pp. 1–9. eling of deep features for out-of-distribution and adversarial detection,”
[24] Y. Peng, G. Fu, Y. Luo, J. Hu, B. Li, and Q. Yan, “Detecting adversarial 2019, arXiv:1909.11786.
 examples for network intrusion detection system with GAN,” in Proc. [46] S. Akcay, D. Ameln, A. Vaidya, B. Lakshmanan, N. Ahuja, and U. Genc,
 IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Service Sci. (ICSESS), Oct. 2020, “Anomalib: A deep learning library for anomaly detection,” 2022,
 pp. 6–10. arXiv:2202.08341.
[25] P. Zhang et al., “Real-time malicious traffic detection with online [47] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
 isolation forest over SD-WAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 vol. 18, pp. 2076–2090, 2023. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[26] L. Li, Y. Lu, G. Yang, and X. Yan, “End-to-end network intrusion detec- [48] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
 tion based on contrastive learning,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 7, p. 2122, ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018,
 Mar. 2024. arXiv:1802.09089.
[27] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time [49] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should i trust you?’:
 unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional nor- Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM
 malizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining (KDD), 2016,
 (WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107. pp. 1135–1144.