210 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

 Explainable Graph Ensemble Learning for
 Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
 in Cloud Microservice Architectures
 Kevin O’Shea , Sen Yan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Ming Yu, Xianjuan Chen, Stefano Mauceri ,
 Bhaskar Dhariyal , Lei Xu, Noel O’Connor , Member, IEEE, and Mingming Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The increasing adoption of cloud microservice ar- GNN Graph Neural Network.
chitectures demands robust multivariate time series anomaly de- GPD Generalised Pareto Distribution.
tection algorithms to ensure a reliable computing infrastructure. GT Ground Truth.
Although countless of these algorithms are readily available in the HITS Hyperlink-Induced Topic Search.
literature, significant concerns remain about their interpretability, LIME Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations.
particularly in cases where it is required to consider both the
temporal and topological aspects of the explanation. Our proposed
 LSTM Long Short-Term Memory.
framework leverages attention-based spatial-temporal graph con- ML Machine Learning.
volutional networks and ensemble learning to capture complex MLP Multi-Layer Perceptron.
spatial-temporal dependencies across time series. Our approach MSE Mean Squared Error.
achieves an averaged event-wise F1 score of 0.94 on two proprietary MTSAD Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection.
datasets. After the detection phase, an analysis of the network PatchTST Patch Time Series Transformer.
attention weights, at carefully selected layers, provides useful ex- POT Peaks Over Threshold.
planations of the anomalous events to cloud operators. RF Random Forest.
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, microservice architecture, SHAP Shapley Additive Explanation.
deep learning, graph neural networks, explainability. SOFTS Series-Core Fused Time Series Forecaster.
 STAD Star Aggregate Dispatch.
 STGCN Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Network.
 NOMENCLATURE VAE Variational Autoencoder.
List of Abbreviations & Acronyms XAI Explainable Artificial Intelligence.
AE Autoencoder. xLSTM Extended Long Short-Term Memory.
ALSTM Attention-Based Long Short-Term Memory.
ASTGCN Attention-Based Spatial-Temporal Graph Convolutional Network. I. INTRODUCTION
BiLSTM Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory.
 LOUD microservice architectures are rapidly replacing
DAM
DL
GAT
 Dynamic Attention Model.
 Deep Learning.
 Graph Attention Network.
 C conventional monolithic systems due to their scalability,
 flexibility and maintainability [1]. Recent research has been con-
GCN Graph Convolutional Network. ducted in areas involving fault isolation, performance prediction,
 and anomaly detection [2], [3], [4], [5]. Among these, effective
 monitoring and timely anomaly detection are the most important
 Received 18 November 2024; revised 28 July 2025; accepted 14 November
2025. Date of publication 19 November 2025; date of current version 10 March
 tasks to ensure reliable, uninterrupted cloud services [6]. Several
2026. This work was supported by the Huawei Ireland Research Centre for traditional algorithms have been applied to multivariate time
the multivariate time series anomaly detection project and Taighde Éireann — series anomaly detection in cloud systems, such as rule-based
Research Ireland under Grant SFI/12/RC/2289_P2, in part by the European approaches [7], statistical process control [8], and principal
Regional Development Fund in collaboration with the Research Ireland Insight component analysis-based methods [9]. These techniques usu-
Centre for Data Analytics at Dublin City University. Recommended for acceptance by K. Djemame. (Kevin O’Shea, Sen Yan, and Ming Yu contributed equally
 ally detect anomalies by first analysing individual (univariate)
to this work.) (Corresponding author: Mingming Liu.) time series using statistical thresholds, and then aggregating
 Kevin O’Shea, Ming Yu, and Xianjuan Chen are with the Insight Re- the results to infer multivariate anomalies [10], [11]. While
search Ireland Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City University, Dublin such methods can be effective in well-defined environments,
9, Ireland (e-mail: kevin.oshea@dcu.ie; ming.yu@insight-centre.org; xian- they often struggle to capture the complex inter-variable depenjuan.chen@insight-centre.org).
 Sen Yan, Noel O’Connor, and Mingming Liu are with the School of Electronic dencies of microservice systems, frequently resulting in alert
Engineering and Insight Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City storms [12].
University, Dublin 9, Ireland (e-mail: sen.yan@dcu.ie; noel.oconnor@dcu.ie; To address these challenges, Machine Learning (ML) apmingming.liu@dcu.ie). proaches, particularly Deep Learning (DL) models, have been
 Stefano Mauceri, Bhaskar Dhariyal, and Lei Xu are with Huawei Ireland
Research Centre, Dublin 2, Ireland (e-mail: stefano.mauceri@huawei.com;
 employed to capture complex dependencies and adapt to changbhaskar.dhariyal@huawei.com; xulei139@huawei.com). ing service behaviours, and have been shown to achieve better
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCC.2025.3634737 performance than threshold-based methods [13], [14], [15].

 © 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 211

Unsupervised ML models are predominantly employed to per- II. LITERATURE REVIEW
form anomaly detection as they require no labelled training In this section, we provide a summary of existing studies on
data [16]. These models tend to focus on detecting deviations
 multivariate time series anomaly detection, especially in the
from expected patterns, which may not always correspond to context of microservice applications. We then explore graphmeaningful anomalies from a domain perspective, e.g., mi- based ML approaches and discuss their applications in detail,
croservice architectures. Moreover, unsupervised models are
 especially in MTSAD. Finally, we review the tools and methods
often less capable of effectively capturing the subtle, dynamic, commonly used to enhance the explainability of ML models,
and nonlinear relationships between variables in multivariate which are essential to interpreting the predictions of complex
data. Supervised learning, on the other hand, offers notable
 models in cloud environments. These three aspects, i.e., anomaly
advantages when high-quality labelled datasets are available. detection, graph-based approaches, and model explainability,
These methods can learn direct relationships between features jointly form the foundation of our work.
and outcomes, enabling better detection of subtle changes in the
system that unsupervised methods may miss. Furthermore, supervised approaches provide greater explainability, as they allow A. Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
practitioners to understand why specific inputs are considered In multivariate time series analysis, especially in microservice
anomalous. However, a key limitation of supervised learning applications, classical ML methods such as k-means clustering,
is its reliance on labelled data, which can be costly to obtain, support vector machines, and RF have been widely applied
and this is also why unsupervised methods are prevalent in for anomaly detection [13], [14], [15]. While these techniques
current Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection (MTSAD) offer strong explainability, they often fall short when dealing
research. with high-dimensional data and complex temporal dependen-
 In our previous work [17], we introduced two high-quality cies [23]. To overcome these challenges, DL models have
labelled multivariate time series datasets generated from a emerged as more powerful alternatives, with particular effecsimulated sock shop microservice application. These datasets tiveness in anomaly detection for high-dimensional datasets.
are specifically designed to capture realistic anomalies in a One popular DL approach is the Autoencoder (AE), which
microservice-based cloud system. To model the complex rela- detects anomalies by reconstructing input data and calculating
tionships present in the datasets, graph-based methods such as reconstruction errors as anomaly scores [24]. Based on this, an
Graph Neural Network (GNN) models can offer benefits [18]. Variational Autoencoder (VAE)-based approach was proposed
While most existing graph-based approaches are unsupervised in [25], which captures robust local features in short temporal
in the literature [19], [20], [21], the availability of high-quality windows and combines them with Long Short-Term Memory
labelled datasets enables the exploration of supervised methods (LSTM) networks for long-term correlations. Another class of
for MTSAD, offering insight which cannot be easily obtained methods focuses on prediction-based anomaly detection, where
from the unsupervised approaches. These insights include ex- models predict future data based on historical patterns and complainability, allowing cloud providers to effectively interpret pare these predictions with actual values to identify deviations.
results for their customers and improve user experiences [16]. A notable example is the Dynamic Attention Model (DAM) [26],
 In this work, we extend the Attention-Based Spatial-Temporal which enhances the prediction power of LSTM models by
Graph Convolutional Network (ASTGCN) model from [22] via incorporating an attention mechanism. This mechanism allows
an ensemble of three graph-view variants with a learnable atten- the model to selectively focus on both temporal and interdition fusion, and we evaluate its performance and explainability mensional dependencies across multimodal data, improving the
on two proprietary datasets [17] against 12 benchmarks. Our key accuracy of future value predictions [21]. Additionally, DAM
contributions are: integrates a dynamic threshold selection algorithm based on
 r We propose a novel ensemble-based spatiotemporal Peaks Over Threshold (POT) [27], ensuring precise anomaly
 anomaly detection architecture that extends ASTGCN by detection without requiring expert knowledge.
 integrating decisions made from 3 different graph views Beyond prediction-based methods, researchers have introand a learnable attention-based fusion module. Its effec- duced state-of-the-art models for time series prediction, includtiveness is evaluated against 12 benchmark models across ing LSTM, Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), and Transformer
 2 datasets based on event-wise F1 scores. architectures [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34]. These modr We apply model-specific explanation techniques, Tree- els excel in capturing complex temporal relationships within
 SHAP for Random Forest (RF), GNNExplainer for Graph multivariate datasets, especially in microservice applications,
 Attention Network (GAT), and attention-based Hyperlink- enhancing their capabilities in anomaly detection [35].
 Induced Topic Search (HITS) analysis for ASTGCN, to However, most existing works either focus on flat time-series
 identify the most influential features, timestamps, and ser- modelling or assume fixed input structures, and few are designed
 vices in anomalous events, providing actionable explana- to handle both the dynamic inter-service dependencies and
 tions in cloud microservice contexts. asynchronous behaviours common in cloud-native microservice
 The rest of the paper is organised as follows: In Section II, we architectures. This motivates our use of graph-based models for
provide a review of existing anomaly detection solutions and more structured and adaptive representations.
their associated explainability methods. We define the problem statement in Section III. The methodology is detailed in
 B. Graph Neural Network
Section IV, followed by the experimental setup in Section V.
Next, we present the experimental results of graph methods Recent advancements in GNN methods have expanded their
in Section VI and a comparative study of anomaly detection applicability to tasks involving graph-structured data, such as
models in Section VII. We discuss our findings on explainability node classification [36] and edge prediction [37]. Among variin Section VIII. Finally, we draw our conclusions in Section IX. ous GNNs, Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) models have
212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

gained considerable attention due to their ability to leverage management in cloud-native microservices, using feature conspectral domain transformations [38]. GCNs extend the con- tributions to guide targeted resource reallocation for vertical
volution operations to graph structures by incorporating the scaling and enhance microservice performance. Additionally,
Laplacian graph matrix, which facilitates efficient message dif- several variants of SHAP have been introduced, including Treefusion across nodes. However, traditional GCNs often depend SHAP, which is specifically designed for tree-based models, and
on predefined graph structures, limiting their adaptability in KernelSHAP, a model-agnostic method that, although flexible,
dynamic environments. To address this limit, GAT [39] was can be computationally intensive [67].
proposed based on GNN methods, using attention mechanisms In the field of GNNs, several methods have been developed to
to dynamically establish relationships between nodes by assign- enhance explainability for graph-related tasks and demonstrate
ing learnable coefficients to each edge. This evolution enables strong performance [68], such as GNNExplainer [69], GNN-
GATs to capture dependencies more flexibly and enhances their LRP [70], and SubgraphX [71]. GNNExplainer is designed to
applicability to various fields, such as microservice systems [35]. identify compact subgraphs and critical features influencing
 Microservice systems operate in dynamic environments, predictions, which is widely used among these methods, with
where anomaly detection requires considering both temporal applications in social network privacy leakage [72] and brain
factors in metrics data and spatial connections between inter- activity analysis [73]. Furthermore, attention weights serve as
connected microservices [40]. Recent models, such as Spatio- a means of improving the explainability for attention-based
Temporal Graph Convolutional Network (STGCN) [41] and models [58], [74]. Specifically, a deep multi-instance contrastive
ASTGCN [22], have shown success in addressing such complex learning method was introduced in [75] by using dual attention to
spatiotemporal tasks, e.g., road traffic prediction. A recent pa- detect abnormal precursors, clarifying both temporal dynamics
per [35] applied spatiotemporal GNN-based methods for metric and spatial variables. Their work is the first to address the “when”
prediction in microservices, which is the first use of such archi- and “where” aspects of anomaly precursor detection, inspiring
tectures in microservice environments, providing a foundation our work on explainability with spatiotemporal attention-based
for anomaly detection in our work. Additionally, recent studies models like ASTGCN.
introduced ensemble learning approaches to further enhance However, few existing works integrate multiple explainability
the performance of GNNs. For instance, GNN-Ensemble [42] methods across different model types or explicitly target cloud
presents a framework combining multiple GNN models trained microservice environments. Our work fills this gap by comon randomly selected substructures and features and achieving bining model-specific explanation techniques, e.g., TreeSHAP,
improved classification performance. Another [43] used a hier- GNNExplainer, attention-based analysis, to offer both global
archical ensemble of GNNs to learn relationships between traffic and local interpretability in anomaly detection.
flows at various granularity levels.
 Inspired by these approaches, we applied ensemble learning to
ASTGCN models in this study, to address MTSAD in microser- III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
vice environments, capturing diverse spatiotemporal views and This study focuses on identifying, predicting, and explaining
improving robustness in different service topologies. multimodal anomalies in multivariate datasets, so we use a cloud
 platform scenario as a case study where anomalies can significantly impact system performance and quality. We built a cloud
C. Explainability platform and generated data with manually injected multimodal
 As discussed above, ML or DL models are efficient and widely anomalies, following the design in [17]. To address the challenge
adopted for anomaly detection in microservices, but their com- of detecting and predicting these anomalies, we explored various
plexity often makes them characterised as “black boxes” [44], ML models with different experimental setups and architectures,
[45], [46] and leads to user concerns related to model reliability including supervised, unsupervised, and hybrid algorithms. Fiand accountability [47]. Thus, explainability is essential for nally, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the explainability
increasing transparency and user confidence, as it provides a of the models from both data feature and temporal perspectives.
clearer understanding of detected anomalies and supports more The ML problem is introduced in detail below.
informed decision-making [48]. The ML problem is formally defined as follows: we con-
 Explainability in complex models can be achieved through sider the multi-variable time-series anomaly detection task as
post-hoc Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) tech- a classification problem. The input is a sequence of vectors
niques [49], [50], of which some provide insights at both {X1 , X2 , . . . , XT }, where each vector Xt represents d feaglobal and local levels, where the former helps reveal a model’s tures at time step t. Using a sliding window approach with
overall decision logic and the latter clarifies individual pre- a window size w, we define a window starting at time t as
dictions [45], [48]. Common XAI techniques include Shap- Wt = {Xt , Xt−1 , . . . , Xt−w+1 }. Our model, parameterised by
ley Additive Explanation (SHAP) [51], Local Interpretable θ, predicts a probability ŷt = P (yt | Wt ; θ) for each window
Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) [52], Layer-wise Rele- Wt . By convention, the labels are typically 0 for normal samples
vance Propagation (LRP) [53], causal inference [54], accelerated and 1 for anomalies for this binary classification problem, and
model-agnostic explanations [55], Gradient-weighted Cam [56], the appropriate objective function is the binary cross-entropy
and Saliency Maps [57]. Among these, SHAP is widely used function, which measures the difference between the predicted
because of its cooperative game theory foundation, allowing it probabilities and the actual labels. The objective is to find the
to compute Shapley values to assess feature contributions to optimal set of parameters θ that minimises the binary crossmodel predictions. This model-agnostic method provides both entropy loss function over all windows. The loss function L(θ)
global and local explanations [58], so it has been applied in is defined as:
many domains, such as feature selection [59], disease predic- T
tion [60], [61], and anomaly detection [50], [62], [63], [64], [yt log(ŷt ) + (1 − yt ) log(1 − ŷt )]
 L(θ) = − t=w (1)
[65]. For instance, SHAP has been applied in [66] for resource T −w+1
O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 213

 r RF [15]: RF is a traditional ML technique that operates by
 constructing multiple decision trees during training and
 outputting the classes or the average prediction of the
 individual trees.
 r ALSTM [26]: LSTM network is a type of recurrent neural
 network aiming to address the vanishing gradient problem,
 which employs memory cells and gates to capture temporal
 features. ALSTM uses attention mechanisms to focus on
 the most relevant parts of the input.
 r BiLSTM [28]: BiLSTM extends standard LSTMs by pro-
Fig. 1. Overview of workflow architecture. cessing data in both forward and backward directions,
 capturing dependencies before and after each time step.
 r GAT [21]: GAT is a type of GNN model designed
where yt ∈ {0, 1} is the actual label for the window starting at to enhance the modelling of relationships using attenposition t. The optimisation problem is thus expressed as: tion mechanisms, which dynamically weighs the importance of neighbouring nodes during aggregation, making
 θ∗ = arg min L(θ) (2) the model focus on the most relevant sections of the
 θ
 graph.
 In summary, the ML problem in this study involves detecting 2) Unsupervised Algorithms:
and classifying anomalies within the current windowed data up r AE [24]: AEs are designed for data compression and
to time t. This is formulated as an optimisation task for binary unsupervised classification. Their primary objective is to
classification aiming to minimise the binary cross-entropy loss minimise the difference between the original input and its
function to accurately distinguish between normal samples and reconstruction, using an encoder-decoder structure.
anomalies. r VAE [25]: VAEs extend traditional AEs by introducing
 a probabilistic approach. Specifically, Kullback-Leibler
 IV. METHODOLOGY divergence is included in the loss function, which measures
 The workflow architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. Building on how much the learnt latent distribution deviates from the
the two datasets generated from a cloud microservice application prior distribution.
as detailed in [17], this study focuses on two primary goals: (1) 3) Hybrid Models With POT:
developing ML models for multivariate anomaly detection in
 r xLSTM [29]: Extended Long Short-Term Memory (xLcloud microservices, and (2) enhancing model interpretability STM) uses mechanisms such as memory mixing and exthrough detailed analysis with various explainability techniques. ponential gating, enabling more complex computations and
In this section, we focus on the ML model implemented and better handling of long-term dependencies.
compared in our work. Specifically, we introduced the benchr TimesNet [30]: TimesNet converts time series data into
mark models in terms of supervised, unsupervised, and hybrid frequency components. This approach enhances long-term
methods, and then we detailed the ASTGCN-based ensemble forecasting by analysing the frequency domain, capturing
learning framework designed for anomaly detection in a mi- features both within and between these periods.
croservice environment.
 r SOFTS [31]: Series-Core Fused Time Series Forecaster
 (SOFTS) is a multivariate prediction model designed based
 on MLP. It embeds multivariate time series temporally for
A. Benchmark Models
 each channel, captures channel correlations with multiple
 Handling non-stationary, multi-dimensional time series data Star Aggregate Dispatch (STAD) modules, and aggregates
with classical tools is challenging, as discussed in Section II. In series representations into a global core using a centralised
contrast, DL models with their non-linear activation functions STAD structure.
to extract non-linear relationships in data, are well-suited for r iTransformer [33]: iTransformer is a variant of the transtime series predictions. To evaluate the performance of our former model designed for time series forecasting. This
ensemble learning approach, we compare it against 12 DL meth- method uses the attention layer to learn multivariate correods from three categories: supervised algorithms, unsupervised lations effectively and the feed-forward network to encode
approaches, and hybrid models. representations of the input sequence to capture temporal
 These models were selected based on their effectiveness, features and improve prediction accuracy.
frequency, and novelty in recent studies on MTSAD. Specif- r DLinear [32]: DLinear is an MLP-based model used
ically, supervised models such as RF, Attention-Based Long in long-term time series forecasting. DLinear employs a
Short-Term Memory (ALSTM), Bidirectional Long Short-Term decomposition approach combined with linear layers. It
Memory (BiLSTM), and GAT have been widely used in both separates the input into trend and seasonal components,
classic ML and graph-based learning; unsupervised methods processes each with a single-layer linear model, and aglike AE and VAE are frequently applied in anomaly detection gregates the results for prediction.
due to their reconstruction-based strategies; and hybrid models r PatchTST [34]: Based on transformer models, Patch Time
with POT, including recent Transformer-based and MLP-based Series Transformer (PatchTST) is designed to enhance
architectures, such as TimesNet, iTransformer, PatchTST, rep- forecasting accuracy by using local semantic information
resent the current state-of-the-art in time series forecasting and and longer look-back windows, improving the effectiveare increasingly applied to anomaly detection with dynamic ness of transformers in this domain.
thresholding. All these hybrid models introduced above predict features
 1) Supervised Algorithms: at each timestamp, and these predictions are compared with
214 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

the observed values to identify anomalies. The anomaly score
is computed using the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between
the predicted and actual values. To set the anomaly detection
threshold, we apply the POT method, which models the upper
tail of the anomaly score distribution using a Generalised Pareto
Distribution (GPD). The tail is defined as the portion of scores
above a high quantile, serving as the initial threshold th. The
parameters of the GPD, γ (shape) and β (scale), are estimated
using maximum likelihood estimation. The final threshold T h
is calculated using the following formula:
   
 −γ
 β nq
 T h = th + −1 (3)
 γ Nt

where q is the desired probability of observing X > th, which
corresponds to the acceptable false positive rate. γ and β are
the GPD parameters, the shape and scale. n represents the total
number of observations, and Nt is the number of peaks, where
Xt > th. If an anomaly score exceeds the final threshold T h, it Fig. 2. Structure of the ASTGCN-based ensemble framework.
is labelled as 1 (anomaly); otherwise, it is labelled as 0 (normal).

 
B. ASTGCN-Based Ensemble Learning Framework where Ws ∈ RF,F represents the spatial convolutional weights,
 The ASTGCN is designed to capture both spatial and tem- transforming the input feature Xj to the new feature space. F
poral dependencies within graph-structured time series data. and F  stand for the dimensions of the original and new feature
Mathematically, we define the microservice data structure as spaces, respectively, and zi is the representation of node vi after
a weighted graph G = (V, E, A) with N nodes, where V is the spatial aggregation; (iii) after that, the Temporal Conv Layer is
set of nodes, E is the set of edges, describing the connections applied to capture dependencies across time steps using temporal
between nodes, and A ∈ RN ×N is a predefined adjacency matrix convolutional weights:
used to model spatial dependencies in G, where Aij indicates k−1
the weight of the relationship between nodes vi and vj . For each  (τ )
 zi,t = Wt · xi,t−τ + bt (6)
node vi , the graph convolution operation aggregates information
 τ =0
from its neighbours based on A, which is critical in guiding the
model to learn from spatially correlated nodes. (τ )
 where Wt denotes the temporal convolutional weights, con-
 The input data is represented by a feature matrix X ∈ trolling the impact of the first k time steps, and bt is a bias term,
RN ×F ×T , where N is the number of nodes, F is the feature ensuring the smoothness of the output; (iv) the Temporal Att
dimension, and T represents the time steps. Temporal depen- Layer then assigns different levels of importance to each time
dencies are captured using a sliding window approach, where step through temporal attention weights:
sequences of previous time steps are used to predict future
behaviour. To further enhance this process, a temporal attention T
 
mechanism dynamically weighs the importance of different time xi = Tit · xi,t (7)
steps. The temporal attention weights Ti ∈ RT for node vi help t=1
the model focuses on pivotal moments that are more predictive
 where Tit denotes the temporal attention weights of node vi at
of the target variable, improving its capability to model the
 time step t, and xi is the weighted sum of features for node vi
temporal evolution of anomalies.
 over time, capturing the temporal dependencies most relevant
 As shown in Fig. 2, each ASTGCN block processes the input
 for anomaly detection.
data in a specific sequence of layers: (i) the Spatial Att Layer
 The final ensemble model combines predictions from each
first applies spatial attention weights to emphasise important re-
 ASTGCN block representing different graphs. Using a soft votlationships within the adjacency matrix A. The spatial attention
 ing mechanism with weighted aggregation, predictions across
weights could be obtained by:
 these distinct views are integrated, achieving a comprehensive
 Sij = softmax(αij ) (4) perspective of the system.
  M
 
where S ∈ RN ×N denotes the spatial attention weights, N is 1 
 ŷ = σ Wm ŷm + b (8)
the number of nodes, αij represents the similarity score between M m=1
nodes vi and vj ; (ii) then spatial convolutional weights are employed in the Spatial Conv Layer to aggregate the information where M = 3, indicating node, pod, and service graphs, ŷm
from the neighbouring nodes for each node as: (m ∈ {1, 2, 3}) represents the output of each graph, Wm is their
 unique weights, and σ is the sigmoid activation function. This
 N
  ensemble approach leverages spatial and temporal dependencies
 zi = Sij · (Ws Xj ) (5) from all graphs to improve anomaly detection accuracy across
 j=1 various types of anomalies.
O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 215

 TABLE I TABLE II
 ANOMALY RATIO (% ) PER ANOMALY TYPE FOR 70/30 AND 80/20 SPLITS OVERVIEW OF DL MODEL HYPERPARAMETERS

 “node-reboot”, respectively. Importantly, the bolded 0.00 indi-
 V. EXPERIMENTS cates that anomaly type 8 (node reboot) is absent from the test set
 under the 80/20 split. This is caused by using chronological data
 In the experimental section, we present a detailed overview
 split, as this type of anomaly was relatively rare and occurred
of the datasets, the model configurations, the specific topoloonly in the earlier part of the time series. Consequently, it does
gies implemented for the GAT and ASTGCN models, and the
 not appear in the final 20% used for testing and results in a slight
evaluation metrics utilised to assess model performance.
 inconsistency in their performance results in Table I.
A. Datasets
 Our experiments are conducted using the Sock Shop Bench- B. Model Setup
mark Microservice System, deployed on Kubernetes1 to manage We perform all experiments on an Intel Xeon CPU with
container orchestration. The data generation pipeline has been 13 GB of RAM and a Tesla T4 GPU with 16 GB of memory.
discussed in the previous work [17]. Specifically, we deployed The implementation relies on Python, PyTorch, CUDA, and
a microservice application on Kubernetes on the Cloud for PyTorch-Geometric, with versions selected according to the
managed scaling and container orchestration. The Kubernetes model requirements. We summarise the generic hyperparamcluster, running on virtual machines, hosts an e-commerce eters for each DL model in Table II where T. Epochs, LR,
application, Sock Shop,2 to simulate a realistic microservice and Loss F. represent training epochs, learning rate, and loss
environment, with Istio3 capturing service metrics. function, respectively. The remaining specific hyperparameters
 To evaluate the proposed ASTGCN model, two types of for each model are detailed in the sections below.
anomalies, i.e., overload and fault injections, are introduced. 1) ASTGCN: In our experiments, we evaluate the perfor-
Overload anomalies are simulated using Locust,4 which gen- mance of the proposed ASTGCN model with two setups: (1)
erates dynamic user traffic based on parameters such as user individual graphs; and (2) an ensemble learning method integratcount and spawn rate. Fault injections are introduced via a fault ing these graphs. Specifically, three graphs were created from
injection simulator and applied at both pod and node levels. Pod- the entire dataset, corresponding to the pods (14 × 18 features),
level anomalies include pod deletion, CPU and memory stress, nodes (5 × 25 features) and services (10 × 9 features), a total of
network latency, packet loss, and I/O stress, while node-level 467 features. Each graph requires an adjacency matrix which is
anomalies involve CPU and memory stress, network latency, of size (number of nodes × number of nodes). Each of the three
packet loss, I/O stress, and instance reboots. Istio manages traffic graphs is independently processed by an ASTGCN block conflows and captures key metrics, while the cloud monitoring sisting of spatial and temporal attention layers, spatial and temtool gathers fault injection metrics and logs, with Prometheus poral convolution layers, and batch normalisation. The attended
scraping additional Istio metrics. features from each ASTGCN block are passed through a fully
 This setup generated two datasets for time series anomaly connected layer with a sigmoid activation function, producing a
detection, corresponding to the periods 13-05-2024 and 20- binary output for anomaly detection. After training each AST-
05-2024. Each dataset contains 10,080 time points (minutes) GCN model independently, we combine predicted values from
and 467 features, which include metrics from nodes, pods, all three graphs through soft voting with weighted aggregation.
and services. Specifically, the dataset consists of 125 metrics 2) Supervised Models: RF, ALSTM, BiLSTM, and GAT
from 5 nodes, 252 metrics from 14 pods, and 90 metrics from models are employed at this stage and introduced below.
10 services. We employed two data split settings for training RF: The RF model is trained on bootstrap samples with
and testing: (1) a 70/30 split; and (2) an 80/20 split. Table I random feature selection to reduce inter-tree correlation. Prepresents detailed information about the anomaly types and selection techniques, e.g., recursive feature elimination is apcorresponding anomaly ratios (% ) across training and testing plied to the RF model to enhance predictive performance.
datasets for both data splits, where A.T., TR. and TE. represent ALSTM: The ALSTM model consists of three LSTM layers
anomaly type, train, and test. Specifically, anomaly types 1 with batch normalisation to capture temporal dependencies. An
to 8 represent “overload”, “cpu-stress”, “io-stress”, “memory- attention mechanism follows the LSTM layers to emphasise
stress”, “network-latency”, “packet-loss”, “pod-deletion” and relevant time steps, and a sigmoid activation function is applied
 at the output layer for binary classification.
 1 https://kubernetes.io/docs/home/ BiLSTM: The BiLSTM model includes three Bidirectional
 2 https://github.com/ocp-power-demos/sock-shop-demo LSTM layers with batch normalisation to capture both past and
 3 https://istio.io/latest/docs/ future dependencies. Followed by the output layer, which uses
 4 https://docs.locust.io/en/stable/ a sigmoid function to generate binary outputs.
216 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

 GAT: The GAT model employs a 3-graph structure for pods,
nodes, and services, with predictions made independently on
each graph and combined by soft voting. Different from AST-
GCN, each graph is trained without temporal patterns. The
architecture includes two GATConv layers with multi-headed
attention (3 heads) to weigh the importance of neighbouring
nodes, followed by batch normalisation and ReLU activation
after each layer. The output is flattened and processed through a
fully connected layer with a sigmoid function.
 3) Unsupervised Models: We apply AE and VAE unsupervised models for comparison and introduce them below.
 AE: The AE model consists of an encoder and a decoder.
The encoder compresses the input data using a linear layer
and ReLU activation. The decoder reconstructs the input via
linear layers, applying a sigmoid activation to ensure output
values between 0 and 1. Anomaly scores are computed using
 Fig. 3. Topology of the sock shop microservice architecture.
MSE between the original input and its reconstruction, with the
threshold optimised to maximise the F1 score.
 VAE: The VAE model includes an encoder that maps input Recall)/(Precision + Recall) are widely used as evaluation metdata to a latent space via a linear layer, generating the mean and rics, where TP, FP, and FN refer to true positive, false positive,
log variance of the latent distribution. A reparametrisation step and false negative, respectively.
facilitates sampling from this distribution. The decoder recon- However, in practical applications, maintenance engineers
structs the input from the latent representation by multiple linear typically prioritise event detection over point-wise metrics, as
layers with sigmoid activation. Anomaly scores and thresholds timely identification of fault events is more important than
are determined as in the AE model. detecting every anomalous point. To address this, we adopt an
 4) Hybrid Models: For the hybrid models, including iTrans- event-wise F1 evaluation protocol, a recently proposed metric
former, TimesNet, SOFTS, DLinear, and PatchTST, we retained introduced in [76] and further discussed in recent studies [77],
their original architectures and modified specific hyperparame- [78], where TP and FP are computed at the event level, while
ters. In particular, we set the feature parameter to “M” for multi- FN remains as the count of false negatives at the point level.
variate time series prediction, with encoder, decoder, and output Additionally, incorporating the False Alarm Rate (FAR) ensures
dimensions configured to 467. An early stopping mechanism that precision is not inflated by algorithms that trigger alarms too
with a patience of 3 is applied to prevent overfitting. For xLSTM, frequently. Given the context above, the event-wise recall Re is
we used “sLSTM” memory cells followed by “xLSTM” blocks still calculated by the same formula with event-level TP and FN,
to predict 467 metric values. but the event-wise precision Pe needs to be computed by:
 All hybrid models are trained with a batch size of 32. To
optimise the F1 score, we experimented with various window T Pe
 Pe = × (1 − FAR) (9)
sizes, starting from 3 to 10 with increments of 1, and 10 to 70 with T Pe + F Pe
increments of 10. These ranges were selected to capture both
short- and long-term temporal dependencies, reflecting various where T Pe refers to the number of Ground Truth (GT) events
durations of anomaly events observed in our dataset. The (3) overlapping with detected segments, F Pe is the number of deis used to determine the threshold, where th is set as the 95th tected segments that do not overlap with any GT event, and FAR
percentile and we fine-tune the q values between 0.01 and 0.06 is calculated as the ratio of false positives to the total number
in steps of 1 × e−3 for optimal performance. of normal points. Specifically, “segments” represent contiguous
 points the algorithm deems anomalous, whereas “events” refer to
 GT anomalous events. The event-wise F1 score F 1e is computed
 using Pe and Re at the event level.
C. Implementation of Graph Topology
 We implement two settings for the GAT and ASTGCN mod- VI. GRAPH-BASED RESULTS
els: (1) with topology; and (2) without topology. The topology
of the pods deployed in our cluster was obtained from an ob- This section analyses the results of graph-based methods,
servability tool within the service mesh, as shown in Fig. 3. This focusing on the role of temporal dependencies in the GAT and
topology serves as the basis for constructing the graph-based ASTGCN models, the impact of varying topologies, and the
models. Using adjacency matrices derived from it, we built a effectiveness of ensemble learning techniques.
directional graph for pods and a bidirectional graph for services,
while applying a fully connected graph for cloud nodes. To A. Temporal Dependencies in Graph Methods
assess the impact of topology, we compared these models to
configurations with fully connected graphs across nodes, pods, In this section, we compare the performance of ASTGCN and
and services. GAT at different levels of the microservice architecture, specifically the pod and node levels. As shown in Table III, ASTGCN
 consistently outperformed the GAT model, particularly at the
 pod level (ASTGCN-P), achieving F1 scores of 0.82 and 0.77
D. Evaluation Metrics
 across the two datasets. In contrast, GAT models, which focus on
 In general anomaly detection tasks, Precision = TP/(TP + spatial relationships through attention mechanisms, performed
FP), Recall = TP/(TP + FN), and F1 score = 2 · (Precision · optimally at the pod level (GAT-P), with F1 scores of 0.77 and
O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 217

 TABLE III TABLE V
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF GAT AND ASTGCN (70/30 SPLIT) PERFORMANCE OF GAT AND ASTGCN WITHOUT TOPOLOGY

 TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF GAT AND ASTGCN (80/20 SPLIT)

 relationships within a level. However, when combined through
 ensemble learning, GAT’s capability at each level contributes to
 an overall view of the system’s operation.
 The consistent improvement observed in ensemble models
 across both split ratios shows the advantages of integrating
 multi-level information in anomaly detection. In a microservice
 architecture, this ensemble approach is especially effective. Each
0.73, slightly lower than those of ASTGCN. At the node level,
 level (node, pod, and service) represents a unique aspect of the
the ASTGCN variant (ASTGCN-N) also demonstrated strong
 system, capturing information ranging from individual nodes to
performance. Meanwhile, GAT’s performance at the node level
 more aggregated service-level interactions. Ensemble learning
(GAT-N) declined significantly, with F1 scores dropping to 0.35.
 allows the model to account for these distinct perspectives
 Our experiments indicate that incorporating temporal depensimultaneously, which is helpful in detecting various anomadencies into spatial graphs significantly improved anomaly delies that arise due to interactions between services in complex
tection performance in multivariate time series data, especially
 microservice environments.
in a microservice environment where temporal and spatial interactions are both critical. Through temporal convolutional layers,
ASTGCN models can effectively capture sequential patterns C. Impact of Graph Topology
within microservice pods and nodes. However, in scenarios
requiring the detection of time-dependent anomalies, such as at As presented in Table V, we summarise the results for the GAT
the node level, GAT falls short in capturing the temporal patterns and ASTGCN models utilising fully connected pod and service
that ASTGCN achieves, resulting in lower detection accuracy. graphs, representing an unknown topology in the microservice
 architecture. The fully connected cloud node structure combined
 with these graphs yields the aggregated outcomes for both mod-
B. Ensemble Learning Method els. Across both the 70/30 and 80/20 data split settings, models
 As presented in Table III, the individual graph-based models with topology consistently outperformed their fully connected
were evaluated against their ensemble counterparts, specifically counterparts. Specifically in topology-based configurations, the
examining the ASTGCN and GAT architectures. The ASTGCN- directional pod and bidirectional service graphs, e.g., GAT-P and
E, which incorporates ensemble learning across node, pod, and ASTGCN-S, demonstrate significant improvements in F1 scores
service levels with a higher weight on the pod-level graph, over fully connected variants, i.e., GAT-FP, GAT-FS, ASTGCNachieved the highest average F1 score of 0.89 across both FP, and ASTGCN-FS. The ensemble methods, i.e., GAT-E and
datasets. Its precision and recall are notable, with values of 0.90 ASTGCN-E, which integrate topological information, achieve
and 0.97 for the 13-05-2024 dataset and 0.87 and 0.81 for the 20- the highest average F1 scores, with the latter reaching 0.94 and
05-2024 dataset, respectively. The GAT-E ensemble variant also 0.89 for the 80/20 and 70/30 splits, respectively. In contrast,
shows an improvement, achieving an average F1 score of 0.79. models incorporating fully connected graphs across all nodes,
Table IV reinforces the advantage of ensemble learning under an pods, and services, i.e., GAT-FE and ASTGCN-FE, showed
80/20 split. The ASTGCN-E model achieved even higher per- reduced performance, with the latter achieving F1 scores of 0.84
formance metrics, with a precision of 0.98, recall of 0.98, and an and 0.85 for the respective data splits.
F1 score of 0.96 on the 13-05-2024 dataset. On the 20-05-2024 These results suggest that incorporating structured connecdataset, it reached a precision of 0.93, a recall of 0.89, and an F1 tions based on service and pod interactions enables models
score of 0.91. The GAT-E model also demonstrated improved to better generalise across diverse anomaly scenarios, whereas
performance over its individual-level counterparts, due to an the absence of defined topology introduces noise, reducing the
average F1 score of 0.76. Unlike the ASTGCN models, GAT model performance in anomaly detection, especially within
relies primarily on attention mechanisms, which improve spatial cloud microservice architectures.
218 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

Fig. 4. Feature contribution from TreeSHAP in 13-05-2024 dataset.

 TABLE VI
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF METHODS ON 13-05-2024 AND 20-05-2024 DATASETS. (70/30 SPLIT)

 VII. COMPARATIVE STUDY The performance of benchmark models is summarised below:
 In this section, we provide a comparative study of model (1) ALSTM achieved the strongest performance against other
performance, including overall evaluation under different data supervised models, i.e., RF, BiLSTM, and GAT, although it still
 underperformed ASTGCN-E; (2) unsupervised models, i.e., AE
split ratios, and a discussion of the model performance.
 and VAE, had higher precision but significantly lower recall,
 resulting in the lowest F1 scores; and (3) the overall performance
 (F1 score) of hybrid models, e.g., iTransformer, TimesNet, and
A. Overall Evaluation DLinear, locates between supervised and unsupervised methods.
 Tables VI and VII present a detailed evaluation of various
anomaly detection models across the 13-05-2024 and 20-05-
2024 datasets, considering event-wise precision, recall, F1 score, B. Discussion
and accuracy under two different data split ratios: 70/30 and The performance evaluation of supervised, hybrid, and un-
80/20. Under the 70/30 split, BiLSTM and our framework, supervised models provides valuable insights into their capa-
ASTGCN-E, achieved the highest F1 scores of 0.85 and 0.89, bilities and limitations for multivariate time series anomaly
respectively, while unsupervised models like AE and VAE detection. Supervised models, including spatial-temporal graphshowed lower performance, averaging F1 scores of 0.53 and based techniques as well as machine learning methods like RF
0.52. Shifting to the 80/20 split resulted in better performance for and deep learning approaches such as LSTM variants, demonsupervised models, with BiLSTM and ASTGCN-E achieving strate superior anomaly detection performance by effectively
average F1 scores of 0.93 and 0.94, while unsupervised models utilising labelled data to capture complex spatial and temporal
kept underperforming, with only marginal improvements in their relationships. However, their reliance on high-quality labelled
F1 scores to 0.53 and 0.54. datasets limits their applicability in real-world scenarios where
O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 219

 TABLE VII
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF METHODS ON 13-05-2024 AND 20-05-2024 DATASETS. (80/20 SPLIT)

such labels are scarce or costly to obtain. Hybrid models, which
integrate unsupervised learning with the threshold selection
technique, provide a practical alternative. These models are
particularly effective when labelled data is limited, leveraging
unsupervised methods to identify potential anomalies and using
thresholding techniques to fine-tune detection. Nevertheless,
further optimisation of thresholding mechanisms could significantly improve their effectiveness and reliability. By contrast, unsupervised models struggled to match the accuracy of
supervised and hybrid approaches, particularly in identifying
complex and subtle anomalies in multivariate data. Despite their
limitations, they remain valuable in settings where labelled data
is unavailable or impractical to obtain.

 VIII. EXPLAINABILITY Fig. 5. Feature importance from GNNExplainer.
 While Sections VI and VII established the strong detection
performance of key models, this section focuses on explaining
the reason for their effectiveness. Through model-specific while those on the left (SHAP value < 0) indicate negative
explainability techniques, i.e., SHAP, GNNExplainer, and contributions. Dot colours range from blue (low feature valattention weights, we interpret how models like RF, GAT, ues) to red (high feature values), reflecting the original feaand ASTGCN-E made their decisions on the datasets from ture values. Features are ranked by their mean SHAP val-
Section V. This analysis validates our architectural choices ues to show their importance. For instance, an increase in
and fulfils this study’s core objective of providing actionable, node_cpu_utilization, node_cpu_usage_total, and services reinterpretable results. sponse time correlates with a higher likelihood of anomalies,
 while node_network_total_bytes has a lower probability.
 In addition to SHAP, GNNExplainer is applied to analyse
A. Feature Importance feature importance in GAT under a binary classification setting
 TreeSHAP is used with default setting to analyse feature at the graph level. The learning rate and epochs are set to 0.01
contributions at a global level for the tree-based model RF. and 500, with other parameters at default values. Although
The SHAP value analysis shows that the top 50 features ac- GNNExplainer is primarily aimed at generating local explanacount for approximately 75% of the total feature contributions, tions, aggregating these local insights still enables us to identify
highlighting their influence on model predictions. Furthermore, the impactful features for model predictions. According to the
metrics from front-end, followed by order, cart, user, and cata- feature importance for the pod-level graph visualised in Fig. 5,
logue, have a greater predictive impact than those from other we observed a strong correlation between the most influential
sources. Our experimental results revealed several dominant features identified by GNNExplainer and those highlighted by
features across both datasets, such as pod_network_tx_bytes, SHAP. However, we also found some differences between them,
pod_cpu_utilization, node_cpu_utilization, and _rt (response e.g., pod_memory_utilisation, showing a higher impact on GAT
time), but features like pod_number_of_running_containers ex- model than on RF, which is related to the different characteristics
hibit greater influence in only one of the datasets, underscoring of the models.
dataset-specific variations in feature importance. Additionally, the spatial attention weights from ASTGCN at
 In Fig. 4, the beeswarm plots of SHAP values illustrate the pod level, along with HITS scores [79], reveal the five most
each feature’s influence on model predictions, with dots rep- influential services: orders, carts, user, front-end, and shipping,
resenting individual test instances. Dots on the right (SHAP as shown in Fig. 6. These findings closely align with those from
value > 0) indicate positive contributions to anomaly detection, the SHAP analysis of the RF model.
220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

 B. Time Slice Contribution
 The temporal attention weight plots from ASTGCN for correctly predicted anomalies, shown in Fig. 7, reveal distinct timestamp contributions across the two datasets. Key observations
 from this figure include: (1) in the 13-05-2024 dataset, Type
 7: delete-pod is uniquely predicted correctly, with timestamp
 “t-1” as the only contributor; (2) across all anomaly types in
 both datasets, the current timestamp “t” generally serves as the
 dominant contributor, with other timestamps having a minimal
 impact. More specifically, timestamp “t” shows higher temporal
 attention weights in the 20-05-2024 dataset than 13-05-2024
 for most anomaly types; (3) contributions from historical timestamps, ranging from “t-8” to “t-1”, also support the anomaly detection process. For instance, in Type 6: packet-loss, timestamp
 “t” holds a similar level of influence as previous timestamps
 in dataset 13-05-2024, indicating a balanced impact from both
 recent and past data.

 IX. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
Fig. 6. Pod spatial weights.
 In this paper, we present a novel application of the ASTGCNbased ensemble framework for multivariate time-series anomaly
 detection in cloud-based microservice architectures. By leveraging spatial and temporal dependencies, our framework consistently achieves superior event-wise F1 scores compared to 12
 benchmark models across supervised, unsupervised, and hybrid
 approaches. Our experiments demonstrate that larger training
 sets significantly enhance the performance of complex models
 like BiLSTM and ASTGCN, while graph-based models such as
 GAT and ASTGCN outperform non-graph models by effectively
 capturing structured spatial relationships. Temporal modelling
 further improves detection accuracy, with ASTGCN excelling
 at capturing sequential patterns. Additionally, ensemble learning across nodes, pods, and services enhances performance by
 incorporating multi-level system interactions. When topology is
 unknown, fully connected graphs maintain strong performance,
 although predefined structures yield higher accuracy.
 To enhance model explainability, we apply TreeSHAP for RF,
 GNNExplainer for GAT, and attention weights with HITS for
 ASTGCN. TreeSHAP highlights the top 50 features, primarily
 from the front-end, order, cart, user, and catalogue pods, with key
 metrics such as pod_network_tx_bytes, pod_cpu_utilization,
 and node_cpu_utilization. GNNExplainer yields similar results
 to SHAP but also emphasises pod_memory_utilization. Temporal attention highlights recent timestamps as most influential,
 with earlier ones impacting specific anomalies like overload and
 packet loss.
 Nevertheless, this study has several limitations. First, our
 evaluation is based on two datasets derived from the same
Fig. 7. Temporal dependencies (%) of different anomaly types. microservice environment, which may limit generalisability
 to other domains or real-world scenarios. Second, while the
 ASTGCN-based architecture demonstrates strong performance,
 its complexity and training cost may hinder deployment in
 Furthermore, the explainability techniques provide local in- resource-constrained settings. Finally, although we incorporate
terpretability by highlighting the specific influence of individual explainability techniques, fully interpretable graph-based modfeature values on model predictions, suggesting whether they els for MTSAD remain a challenging direction.
have a positive or negative effect, and quantifying their contribu- As part of our future work, we will focus on several directions
tion to the anomaly score. This capability is particularly valuable aligned with the limitations of this work. Firstly, we aim to generfor analysing specific instances at particular time steps, enabling alise our framework across diverse microservice environments
a deeper understanding of the model behaviour in targeted cases. and different workloads, possibly through transfer learning or
For example, when examining anomaly types related to network domain adaptation techniques. Secondly, we plan to improve
latency, local explainability reveals that service-level metrics, model scalability by reducing computational overhead through
such as response time, are the major contributors to the anomaly. model compression or sparsity-aware techniques. Furthermore,
O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 221

the explainability of graph-based models still needs to be further [21] Z. Liu, X. Huang, J. Zhang, Z. Hao, L. Sun, and H. Peng, “Multivariate
explored, particularly in extracting human-understandable root time-series anomaly detection based on enhancing graph attention netcauses from detected anomalies. Finally, as our data collection works with topological analysis,” in Proc. 33 rd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 Manage., Oct. 2024, pp. 1555–1564.
infrastructure evolves, we also plan to explore causal inference [22] S. Guo, Y. Lin, N. Feng, C. Song, and H. Wan, “Attention based spatialmethods for explainability, especially those tailored to graph- temporal graph convolutional networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in
based architectures. These techniques could help reveal deeper Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 922–929.
causal dependencies among system components, going beyond [23] C. Wang and G. Liu, “From anomaly detection to classification with graph
 attention and transformer for multivariate time series,” Adv. Eng. Informat.,
attribution-based insights. vol. 60, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 102357.
 [24] H. Torabi, S. L. Mirtaheri, and S. Greco, “Practical autoencoder based
 REFERENCES anomaly detection by using vector reconstruction error,” Cybersecurity,
 vol. 6, no. 1, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 1.
 [1] P. D. Francesco, I. Malavolta, and P. Lago, “Research on architecting [25] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schonborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
 microservices: Trends, focus, and potential for industrial adoption,” in “Anomaly detection for time series using vae-LSM hybrid model,”
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Archit., 2017, pp. 21–30. in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2020,
 [2] B. Żurkowski and K. Zieliński, “Root cause analysis for cloud-native pp. 4322–4326.
 applications,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 232–250, [26] Y. Chen, M. Yan, D. Yang, X. Zhang, and Z. Wang, “Deep attentive
 Jan. 2024. anomaly detection for microservice systems with multimodal time-series
 [3] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause analysis data,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv., 2022, pp. 373–378.
 in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM Comput. [27] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection
 Surv., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, Feb. 2022. in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23 rd ACM SIGKDD Int.
 [4] P. Liu et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice trace anomalies Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
 through service-level deep bayesian networks,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int. [28] M. Pirani, P. Thakkar, P. Jivrani, M. H. Bohara, and D. Garg, “A com-
 Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 48–58. parative analysis of ARIMA, GRU, LSTM and biLSTM on financial time
 [5] Y. Yang and Y. Jiang, “Microservice indicator prediction method based series forecasting,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Elect.
 on STE and CNN-BiLSTM,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Circuits Electron., 2022, pp. 1–6.
 Intell. Syst., 2023, pp. 511–515. [29] M. Beck et al., “xLSTM: Extended long short-term memory,” Adv. Neural
 [6] S. Garg and A. Misra, “Service level agreements for cloud infrastructures,” Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 37, pp. 107547–107603, 2024.
 in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Comput. Sustain. Glob. Develop., 2019, pp. 276–279. [30] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Timesnet: Temporal
 [7] D. Ma, B. Ding, D. Feng, and H. Liu, “EAD: An efficient anomaly detection 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 algorithm for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 33 rd Int. Conf. Tools Learn. Representations, 2023.
 Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 609–613. [31] L. Han, X.-Y. Chen, H.-J. Ye, and D.-C. Zhan, “Softs: Efficient multivariate
 [8] W. Sha, Y. Zhu, M. Chen, and T. Huang, “Statistical learning for anomaly time series forecasting with series-core fusion,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 detection in cloud server systems: A multi-order markov chain frame- Syst., vol. 37, pp. 64145–64175, 2024.
 work,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 401–413, Second [32] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective
 Quarter 2018. for time series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
 [9] B. Agrawal, T. Wiktorski, and C. Rong, “Adaptive real-time anomaly pp. 11121–11128.
 detection in cloud infrastructures,” Concurrency Computation: Pract. [33] Y. Liu et al., “itransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
 Experience, vol. 29, no. 24, Aug. 2017, Art. no. e4193. series forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2310.06625.
[10] X. Zhang et al., “Cross-dataset time series anomaly detection for cloud [34] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series is
 systems,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., 2019, pp. 1063–1076. worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. Int.
[11] M. Ma et al., “Jump-starting multivariate time series anomaly detection Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
 for online service systems,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., 2021, pp. [35] A. Golovkina, D. Mogilnikov, and V. Ruzhnikov, Graph Neural Networks
 413–426. for Metrics Prediction in Microservice Architecture. Cham, Switzerland:
[12] Y. Chen et al., “Identifying linked incidents in large-scale online service Springer, 2024, pp. 343–357.
 systems,” in Proc. 28th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. [36] S. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Dai, and W. Guo, “Graph neural networks in node
 Foundations Softw. Eng., 2020, pp. 304–314. classification: Survey and evaluation,” Mach. Vis. Appl., Springer, vol. 33,
[13] S. Gadal, R. Mokhtar, M. Abdelhaq, R. Alsaqour, E. S. Ali, and R. no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 4.
 Saeed, “Machine learning-based anomaly detection using K-mean array [37] M. Chen and Y. Zhang, Link Prediction Based on Graph Neural Networks.
 and sequential minimal optimization,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 14, pp. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, Inc., 2018, pp. 5165–5175.
 2158, Jul. 2022. [38] M. Defferrard et al., “Convolutional neural networks on graphs with fast
[14] J. Lesouple, C. Baudoin, M. Spigai, and J.-Y. Tourneret, “How localized spectral filtering,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
 to introduce expert feedback in one-class support vector machines Systems, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, Eds.
 for anomaly detection?,” Signal Process., vol. 188, Nov. 2021, Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.
 Art. no. 108197. [39] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio,
[15] I. A. Khan, H. Birkhofer, D. Kunz, D. Lukas, and V. Ploshikhin, “A random “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
 forest classifier for anomaly detection in laser-powder bed fusion using [40] L. Chen, “Microservices: Architecting for continuous delivery and Deoptical monitoring,” Materials, vol. 16, no. 19, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 6470. vOps,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Archit., 2018, pp. 39–39.
[16] M. A. Belay, S. S. Blakseth, A. Rasheed, and P. S. Rossi, “Unsupervised [41] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks:
 anomaly detection for IoT-based multivariate time series: Existing solu- A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Twentytions, performance analysis and future directions,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 5, Seventh Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3634–3640.
 Mar. 2023, Art. no. 2844. [42] W. Wei, M. Qiao, and D. Jadav, “Gnn-ensemble: Towards random decision
[17] M. Allam, N. Boujnah, N. E. O’Connor, and M. Liu, “Synthetic time graph neural networks,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Dec. 2023,
 series for anomaly detection in cloud microservices,” in Machine Learn- pp. 956–965.
 ing, Optimization, and Data Science. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, [43] R. Abu Bakar, L. De Marinis, F. Cugini, and F. Paolucci, “FTG-net-E: A
 2024. hierarchical ensemble graph neural network for DDoS attack detection,”
[18] H. X. Nguyen, S. Zhu, and M. Liu, “A survey on graph neural networks Comput. Netw., vol. 250, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 110508.
 for microservice-based cloud applications,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 23, [44] E. Dağlarli, Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) Approaches and Deep
 Dec. 2022, Art. no. 9492. Meta-Learning Models. London, UK: IntechOpen, Dec. 2020.
[19] Y. Sun et al., “Interpretable failure localization for microservice systems [45] A. Verdone, S. Scardapane, and M. Panella, “Explainable spatio-temporal
 based on graph autoencoder,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 34, graph neural networks for multi-site photovoltaic energy production,”
 Sep. 2024, Art. no. 52. Appl. Energy, vol. 353, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 122151.
[20] Z. He et al., “A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised [46] E. S. Ortigossa, T. Gonçalves, and L. G. Nonato, “Explainable artificial
 anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. intelligence (XAI)—from theory to methods and applications,” IEEE
 Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1705–1719, Apr. 2023. Access, vol. 12, pp. 80799–80846, 2024.
222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

[47] D. Branley-Bell, R. Whitworth, and L. Coventry, User Trust and Under- [70] T. Schnake et al., “Higher-order explanations of graph neural networks via
 standing of Explainable AI: Exploring Algorithm Visualisations and User relevant walks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 11,
 Biases. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2020, pp. 382–399. pp. 7581–7596, Nov. 2022.
[48] Z. Li, Y. Zhu, and M. Van Leeuwen, “A survey on explainable anomaly [71] H. Yuan, H. Yu, J. Wang, K. Li, and S. Ji, “On explainability of graph
 detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–54, neural networks via subgraph explorations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 Sep. 2023. Learn., PMLR, 2021, pp. 12241–12252.
[49] U. Schlegel, H. Arnout, M. El-Assady, D. Oelke, and D. A. Keim, “Towards [72] L.-J. Huang and C.-T. Li, “Partial data, potential exposure: Evaluating
 a rigorous evaluation of XAI methods on time series,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF privacy leakage via gnnexplainer on social networks,” in Proc. 2024 Int.
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshop, 2019, pp. 4197–4201. Conf. Consum. Electron., 2024, pp. 355–356.
[50] U. Do, L. Lahesoo, R. M. Carnier, and K. Fukuda, “Evaluation of XAI [73] M. Zhdanov, S. Steinmann, and N. Hoffmann, “Investigating brain conalgorithms in IoT traffic anomaly detection,” in Proc. 2024 Int. Conf. Artif. nectivity with graph neural networks and gnnexplainer,” in Proc. 26th Int.
 Intell. Inf. Commun., 2024, pp. 669–674. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 5155–5161.
[51] S. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model [74] W. Samek, G. Montavon, S. Lapuschkin, C. J. Anders, and K.-R.
 predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. Muller, “Explaining deep neural networks and beyond: A review of
 4768–4777. methods and applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 3, pp. 247–278,
[52] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should i trust you?”: Mar. 2021.
 Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD [75] D. Xu et al., “Deep multi-instance contrastive learning with dual atten-
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144. tion for anomaly precursor detection,” Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., Jan. 2021,
[53] S. Bach, A. Binder, G. Montavon, F. Klauschen, K.-R. Müller, and W. pp. 91–99.
 Samek, “On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by [76] M. El Amine Sehili and Z. Zhang, “Multivariate time series anomaly
 layer-wise relevance propagation,” PLoS One, vol. 10, no. 7, Jul. 2015, detection: Fancy algorithms and flawed evaluation methodology,” in Per-
 Art. no. e0130140. formance Evaluation and Benchmarking, N. Raghunath, P. Meikel, Eds.,
[54] D. Janzing, D. Balduzzi, M. Grosse-Wentrup, and B. Schölkopf, “Quan- Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 1–17.
 tifying causal influences,” Ann. Statist., vol. 41, no. 5, Oct. 2013, [77] H. Si et al., “Timeseriesbench: An industrial-grade benchmark for time
 pp. 2324–2358. series anomaly detection models,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Int. Symp. Softw.
[55] D. Dandolo, C. Masiero, M. Carletti, D. Dalle Pezze, and G. A. Susto, Rel. Eng., 2024, pp. 61–72.
 “Acme—accelerated model-agnostic explanations: Fast whitening of the [78] Q. Tang, C. Dai, Y. Wu, and H. Zhou, “Mlp-mixer based masked autoenmachine-learning black box,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 214, Mar. 2023, Art. coders are effective, explainable and robust for time series anomaly detecno. 119115. tion,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 798–811, Nov. 2024.
[56] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and D. [79] J. M. Kleinberg, “Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment,” J.
 Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient- ACM, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 604–632, Sep. 1999.
 based localization,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 128, no. 2, pp. 336–359,
 Oct. 2019.
[57] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside convolutional
 networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps,” in Kevin O’Shea received the MSc degree from the
 Workshop Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014. Technological University of the Shannon, Ireland,
[58] L. Cummins et al., “Explainable predictive maintenance: A survey of in 2023, and works as a research assistant with the
 current methods, challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. Insight Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics.
 57574–57602, 2024. His research interests include graph neural networks,
[59] K. Roshan and A. Zafar, “Using kernel shap XAI method to optimize large language models and generative adversarial netthe network anomaly detection model,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Comput. works, particularly in the area of music, audio, and
 Sustain. Glob. Develop., 2022, pp. 74–80. cloud computing.
[60] S. S. Haneesha Samudrala, J. Thambi, S. R. Vadluri, A. Mahalingam, and P.
 B. Pati, “Enhancing parkinson’s disease diagnosis using speech analysis:a
 feature subset selection approach with lime and shap,” in Proc. 3rd Int.
 Conf. Innov. Technol., 2024, pp. 1–5.
[61] C.-H. Lin and C.-L. Liu, “Prediction of blood glucose concentration
 based on optiscanner and XGBoost in ICU,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
 pp. 116524–116533, 2023.
[62] R. R. Karn, P. Kudva, H. Huang, S. Suneja, and I. M. Elfadel, “Crypto- Sen Yan (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received
 mining detection in container clouds using system calls and explainable the BEng (1st Hons) degree in Internet of Things
 machine learning,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. engineering from Shandong University, in 2018, and
 674–691, Mar. 2021. the MSc (1st Hons) degree in computer science from
[63] C. Hwang and T. Lee, “E-SFD: Explainable sensor fault detection in the the Trinity College Dublin, University of Dublin, in
 ics anomaly detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 140470–140486, 2020. He is currently working toward the PhD degree
 2021. in intelligent transportation systems with the School
[64] H. Choi, D. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “Explainable anomaly de- of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City University. He
 tection framework for predictive maintenance in manufacturing systems,” is working in the areas of data-driven methods used
 Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 125, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 109147. in intelligent transportation systems.
[65] N. Aslam et al., “Interpretable machine learning models for malicious
 domains detection using explainable artificial intelligence (XAI),” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 12, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 7375.
[66] M. Mekki, B. Brik, A. Ksentini, and C. Verikoukis, “XAI-enabled fine
 Ming Yu received the 1st-Class Honours bachelor’s
 granular vertical resources autoscaler,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. Netw. degree in data science and the 1st-Class Honours mas-
 Softwarization, 2023, pp. 161–169.
 ter’s degree in computer science from DCU, Ireland.
[67] H. Manthena, J. C. Kimmel, M. Abdelsalam, and M. Gupta, “Analyzing
 She is a research assistant working with the Insight
 and explaining black-box models for online malware detection,” IEEE
 Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin
 Access, vol. 11, pp. 25237–25252, 2023. City University (DCU). Her research focuses on De-
[68] H. Yuan, H. Yu, S. Gui, and S. Ji, “Explainability in graph neural networks:
 vOps and machine learning applications in cloud
 A taxonomic survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no.
 computing. As a certified Cloud Practitioner, she
 5, pp. 5782–5799, May 2023.
 possesses expertise in cloud network troubleshoot-
[69] Z. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Žitnik, and J. Leskovec, GNNEXing, Linux, and Site Reliability Engineering (SRE)
 PLAINER: Generating Explanations for Graph Neural Networks. Red
 operations.
 Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2019.
O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 223

 Xianjuan Chen received the master’s degree with Noel E. O’Connor (Member, IEEE) was the acafirst-class honours in computing, data analytics from demic director of DCU’s Research and Enterprise
 Dublin City University, in 2024. Her research inter- Hub on Information Technology and the Digital Soests include machine learning and data analysis for ciety, with the responsibility of coordinating multiapplications in smart energy and cloud computing. disciplinary ICT-related research across the univer-
 She is dedicated to leveraging data-driven solutions sity. He is currently a full professor with the School
 to solve real-world challenges. Throughout her career, of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City University
 she has actively contributed to research projects and (DCU), Ireland. He is also CEO of the Insight Retechnical workshops, gaining hands-on experience search Ireland Centre for Data Analytics, Ireland’s
 in deploying machine learning to address practical largest publicly funded research centre. Since 1999,
 problems. he has published more than 400 peer-reviewed publications, made 11 standard submissions, and filed 7 patents. The focus of his
 research is on multimedia content analysis using machine learning and AI, for
 applications in security/safety, autonomous vehicles, medical imaging, ambient
 assisted living, multimedia content-based retrieval, smart cities, precision agriculture, and environmental monitoring. He is a member of the ACM, an Area
 Editor of Signal Processing: Image Communication (Elsevier) and an associate
 editor of the Journal of Image and Video Processing (Springer).
 Stefano Mauceri received the PhD degree from University College Dublin (UCD), Dublin, Ireland, in
 2021. His PhD thesis explored one-class time series Mingming Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 classification. He is currently a senior research engi- BEng (1st Hons) degree in electronic engineering
 neer with Huawei Ireland Research Center, Dublin. from the National University of Ireland Maynooth,
 In general, he has contributed to several projects in 2011, and the PhD degree in control engineering
 to enable data-driven analysis and decision-making. and decision science from the Hamilton Institute,
 His current research interest includes enhancing the National University of Ireland Maynooth, in 2015. He
 observability of complex software systems to ensure is an assistant professor with the School of Electronic
 reliable software infrastructures. Engineering, Dublin City University (DCU). He is
 also affiliated with the Insight Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics as a Funded Investigator. Prior
 to DCU, he worked with University College Dublin
 and IBM Ireland Lab as an applied Researcher and EU H2020 project lead. He
 has published more than 60 papers to date including journals “IEEE Transactions
 on Smart Grid”, “IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems”,
 “IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering”, “IEEE Systems
 Bhaskar Dhariyal received the PhD degree from Journal”, “IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification”, “IEEE Trans-
 University College Dublin, in 2024, where the key fo- actions on Artificial Intelligence”, “Sustainable Cities and Society”, “Pattern
 cus was study of the scalable methods for multivariate Recognition”, “Applied Energy”, and “Automatica”. He acts as an academic
 time-series classification method. He is a time-series editor for PLOS One and an associate editor for the Journal of Information
 researcher with Huawei Ireland Research Centre. His Systems and Operational Research (INFOR). His research interests include
 daily work focusses on time-series methods on cloud control, optimisation and machine learning with applications to IoT, cloud
 applications. computing, electric vehicles, smart grids, smart transportation, and smart cities.

 Lei Xu has served as an AIOps Architect and Analytics lead with the Huawei Ireland Research Center
 since 2019. His work focuses on researching and
 applying AI and data analytics solutions to address
 challenges in system operations, maintenance, and
 architecture within the cloud domain. Before joining
 Huawei, he was an experienced and dedicated applied
 scientist with years of experience in the banking and
 IT industries, specializing in AI, machine learning,
 and cloud computing.