This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 1

Falcon: Federated Incremental Learning Framework
 for Intrusion Detection in Heterogeneous
 Consumer-Centric Internet of Things
 Pengyi Yang1 , Xinyao Gu1 , Xiao Cai1 , Wenhai He2 , Mianjie Li3 , Bowen Zhao4 , and Cheng Qiao1
 1 Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University
 2 School of Information Technology and Engineering, Guangzhou College of Commerce
 3 Electronics and Information, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University
 4 Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University

 yangpengyi.sec@gmail.com, guxy@e.gzhu.edu.cn, caixiao327327@163.com,
 hewenhai@gcc.edu.cn, mianjieli@gpnu.edu.cn, bwinzhao@gmail.com, mcheng.qiao@gmail.com

 Abstract—The growing heterogeneity of consumer-centric IoT aggregated across vendors, service providers, or user domains.
and the continuous evolution of cyber threats are increasingly This results in fragmented data silos and limited coverage at
rendering traditional intrusion detection systems insufficient. each participant, making it difficult to build globally consistent
Such systems suffer from data silos, severe class imbalance,
and limited adaptability to novel attacks. To address these detectors under privacy-preserving constraints [4].
challenges, we propose Falcon, a federated incremental learning Federated learning (FL) provides a promising paradigm for
framework for intrusion detection in heterogeneous consumer- privacy-preserving collaboration [5]. Participants (e.g., device
centric IoT traffic. Falcon enables collaborative training across cohorts, smartphone proxies, and edge sites) keep raw data
multiple clients and remains effective under non-IID client data locally and only exchange model updates during collaborative
distributions and concept drift. It combines a hybrid databalancing scheme with a CNN–BiLSTM–Attention backbone training. In this manner, statistical knowledge from heterogefor learning rich, class-balanced representations, and a drift- neous multi-source device traffic can be aggregated without
triggered incremental module that integrates KL-based drift directly violating data-sharing restrictions, alleviating siloed
detection with a dual-head classifier, memory replay, and multi- learning and improving generalization of the resulting global
teacher distillation to learn emerging attacks without catastrophic model.
forgetting. Experiments on three benchmark datasets show that
Falcon achieves absolute Precision gains of up to 20.76% over Nevertheless, deploying IDS within an FL pipeline does
strong centralized and federated baselines in both binary and not automatically resolve the core learning challenges in
multi-class tasks. consumer-centric IoT ecosystems. First, local data are typi-
 Index Terms—Federated learning, Incremental learning, Intru- cally severely imbalanced: benign synchronization and routine
sion detection, Consumer-centric internet of things, Imbalanced service traffic dominate, while intrusions are rare, diverse,
classification, Knowledge distillation, Memory replay, Distribu- and often long-tailed [6]. Such skewed local distributions
tion drift. can bias federated aggregation toward the majority benign
 behavior, causing poor sensitivity to minority intrusions [7].
 I. I NTRODUCTION Second, consumer-centric IoT traffic is high-dimensional, tem-
 MART wearables and consumer electronics (e.g., smart- porally dependent, and structurally complex. A single deep
S watches, AR/VR headsets, home gateways, and healthcare
devices) are increasingly pervasive and continuously interact
 architecture often struggles to simultaneously capture shortterm burst patterns (e.g., repeated pairing attempts), longwith smartphones, residential networks, and cloud services. range temporal dependencies (e.g., slow-moving compromise),
Such connectivity enlarges the attack surface and makes intru- and fine-grained anomaly cues. Third, real-world CIoT is
sion detection essential. Deep learning-based IDS has therefore inherently dynamic: shifting user behavior, device mobility,
become an important solution due to its ability to learn high- and the continuous emergence of novel attack variants induce
dimensional traffic representations [1], [2], [3]. However, prac- distribution drift, degrading the effectiveness of static global
tical deployment is constrained by privacy requirements that models even under privacy-preserving training.
prevent raw traffic from being centrally aggregated, resulting These observations indicate that simply porting a centralized
in fragmented data silos and limited local coverage [4]. IDS into an FL setting is insufficient. A practical FL-based IDS
 However, practical IDS deployment for consumer devices for CIoT should satisfy three requirements: (i) re-balancing
is constrained by strict privacy and compliance require- highly skewed local datasets to avoid collapsing into benignments (e.g., health-related data and fine-grained user-behavior dominated decision boundaries, (ii) learning rich and stable
traces), which typically prohibit raw data from being centrally representations that capture both local patterns and long-range
 temporal dependencies under heterogeneous clients, and (iii)
 Corresponding authors: Wenhai He and Cheng Qiao. enabling incremental adaptation to distribution drift and novel

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 2

intrusions without catastrophic forgetting. BiLSTM–Attention model, KL-based drift detection, and fed-
 Motivated by these requirements, we propose Falcon—a erated incremental learning with multi-teacher distillation and
Federated incrementAL framework for intrusion deteCtiOn memory replay. Section IV reports experimental results on
in heterOgeneous coNsumer-centric IoT. Falcon advances three benchmark datasets, including comparisons with statealong three lines: data rebalancing, representation modeling, of-the-art baselines, cross-dataset incremental learning, and
and incremental adaptation. In the federated stage, Falcon ablation studies. Section V concludes the paper and discusses
jointly employs data-layer rebalancing and Focal Loss to future directions.
increase both the effective sampling frequency and gradient
contribution of minority intrusion classes, mitigating benign- II. RELATED WORK
dominant bias. A hybrid CNN–BiLSTM–Attention backbone is This section reviews representative studies related to intruconstructed to capture local patterns, temporal dependencies, sion detection in CIoT, with an emphasis on three threads:
and salient segments in traffic sequences. To handle evolving (i) deep-learning and federated-learning-based intrusion deenvironments, a sliding window with KL divergence detects tection, (ii) imbalanced and long-tailed learning for intrusion
distribution drift and triggers incremental updates. During detection, and (iii) incremental learning under evolving threats.
incremental adaptation, Falcon integrates a dual-head classi- We highlight the limitations of existing works in heterofier, memory replay, and multi-teacher knowledge distillation geneous and dynamic deployments and position our Falcon
to balance stability and plasticity, absorbing new intrusion framework accordingly.
behaviors while preserving performance on previously learned
classes. Compared with existing federated intrusion detection
and incremental learning approaches, Falcon introduces sev- A. Deep Learning and Federated Learning for Intrusion Deeral key novelties. First, it provides a unified framework that tection
jointly addresses class imbalance, representation learning, and Centralized intrusion detection has evolved from signaincremental adaptation under heterogeneous IoT environments. ture/statistical approaches to machine learning and deep rep-
Second, it incorporates a drift-triggered incremental learning resentation learning. Early signature-based methods can effimechanism, enabling the model to dynamically adapt to evolv- ciently identify known patterns and remain useful in stable ening attack patterns. Third, it integrates multi-teacher knowl- vironments. For example, Roughan et al. proposed a statisticaledge distillation with memory replay, effectively balancing signature-based scheme for IP traffic classification [8]. Howstability and plasticity during incremental updates. The main ever, such approaches rely on relatively fixed signatures or
contributions of this work are summarized as follows: features and tend to degrade under encrypted traffic, dynamic
 ports, or rapidly evolving behaviors.
 • We propose a federated rebalancing strategy that com-
 To reduce reliance on plaintext payloads, traditional mabines balanced sampling and Focal Loss, jointly reshapchine learning methods extract flow-level statistics and obing the effective sample distribution and the gradient
 servable side-channel features and train classical classifiers.
 contributions of minority classes. This strategy improves
 Recent work shows that even under TLS 1.3, encrypted
 F1-Score by up to 97.96% and Recall by up to 89.32%
 traffic in malware detection settings can be passively charover vanilla federated learning on imbalanced intrusion
 acterized using metadata-derived representations (e.g., TLS
 datasets.
 record-length and direction patterns) together with protocol-
 • We design a CNN–BiLSTM–Attention feature extracaware preprocessing [9]. This enables feature-based classifiers
 tor to capture local patterns, bidirectional temporal dewithout decrypting payloads. Although such methods improve
 pendencies, and salient segments, enabling more dispracticality under encryption, they typically require non-trivial
 criminative representations under heterogeneous clients.
 feature engineering and often generalize poorly across do-
 Compared to a vanilla LSTM baseline, this architecture
 mains due to dataset bias and distribution shift.
 achieves an 88.37% improvement in Accuracy and a
 Deep learning further enables end-to-end representation
 95.80% improvement in F1-Score on severely imballearning and has become a dominant paradigm in NIDS/IDS.
 anced multi-class tasks.
 Recent advances also leverage pretraining to enhance repre-
 • We develop a drift-triggered incremental adaptation
 sentation robustness. For instance, Trafficformer adopts a premechanism that integrates sliding-window KL-based drift
 trained model for traffic data modeling [10]. In consumerdetection with a dual-head classifier, memory replay, and
 electronics scenarios, deep IDS models have been explored
 multi-teacher distillation. This mechanism enables crossfor healthcare/IoMT electronics and medical traffic monitordataset incremental learning with up to 90% relative
 ing [11], [12], as well as vehicular electronics (e.g., VANETimprovement in adaptation performance while maintainoriented detection) [13]. Despite their strong detection perforing over 96% knowledge retention on previously learned
 mance in controlled settings, centralized deep IDS generally
 classes.
 struggles in real deployments due to privacy constraints and
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. the difficulty of collecting sufficiently labeled and representa-
Section II reviews related work on intrusion detection for tive data, where labeling itself is a persistent bottleneck [4].
consumer devices, federated IDS, imbalanced learning, and Federated learning (FL) provides a privacy-preserving colincremental learning. Section III presents the proposed Falcon laborative training paradigm where network traffic data reframework, including rebalancing with Focal Loss, the CNN– main local and only model updates are exchanged. This

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 3

paradigm is particularly relevant for CIoT, where sensitive intrusion detection approaches have combined imbalanceuser behaviors and privacy-sensitive traffic traces cannot be aware sampling, feature embedding, and classifier design to
easily centralized. Hendaoui et al. proposed FLADEN, a mitigate the adverse effect of skewed data distributions [26].
federated learning framework for anomaly detection in IoT However, such methods may still be sensitive to optimization
networks [14]. Olanrewaju-George and Pranggono developed settings and training stability under highly heterogeneous
a federated intrusion detection system for IoT using both attack scenarios. More generally, class-imbalance learning in
unsupervised and supervised deep learning models [15], while FL has been recognized as a key challenge, as skewed client
Beuran et al. introduced FedMSE, a semi-supervised federated distributions can bias global updates [7]. Recent FL methlearning approach for IoT network intrusion detection to ods explicitly target imbalanced intrusion detection, such as
further reduce dependence on labeled data [16]. To improve undersampling-aware learning and aggregation strategies [27],
robustness under non-IID data, Yan et al. studied personalized yet they often do not jointly address representation modeling
FL for IoT intrusion detection [17], and Ding et al. explored and incremental adaptation under drift.
meta-learning-based federated detection for large-scale IoT Ensemble methods combine multiple learners to imsettings [18]. Recent works in consumer-electronics contexts prove robustness under imbalance. Evolutionary and geneticfurther investigated federated deep IDS for consumer-centric programming-based classifiers have also been explored for
IoT [19], privacy-preserving designs (e.g., quantum FL) [20], imbalanced data classification, including recent distance-based
and SDN-assisted federated hybrid IDS frameworks [21]. genetic programming approaches designed specifically for
 However, existing FL-based IDS studies still face three imbalanced binary settings [28]. For example, boosting-based
fundamental gaps in consumer-centric IoT. First, client data are IDS systems [29] and recent SMOTE-style imbalance-aware
often severely imbalanced and long-tailed, amplifying the bias IDS designs [30] can enhance stability but may incur higher
of global aggregation. Second, heterogeneous device behaviors training cost and be less suitable for dynamic deployment
and dynamic participation intensify representation instability environments.
and distribution drift. Third, many FL-IDS solutions are de- Overall, although imbalance mitigation has been widely
signed as static training pipelines and lack systematic mech- studied, existing solutions are often applied as isolated comanisms for drift-triggered incremental adaptation. Moreover, ponents. In consumer-centric IoT, imbalance learning must
while long-tailed heterogeneous learning has been studied be coupled with strong temporal representation modeling and
in consumer electronics (e.g., FedHLC) [22], such advances drift-aware adaptation to maintain sustained effectiveness.
are not yet fully integrated into an end-to-end federated IDS
pipeline that simultaneously handles imbalance, rich temporal C. Incremental Intrusion Detection under Evolving Threats
representation, and drift-driven incremental updates. Real-world CIoT evolves rapidly due to shifting user behavior, device mobility, and changing device participation. These
 factors induce concept drift and are often accompanied by the
B. Learning with Imbalanced and Long-Tailed Intrusion Data
 emergence of novel attacks. A common industrial practice is
 Class imbalance is ubiquitous in intrusion detection: benign periodic full retraining using historical repositories [31], but
traffic dominates while attacks are rare, diverse, and often this is computationally expensive and often impractical due
long-tailed [6]. Imbalance learning approaches are typically to high computation/communication costs, privacy constraints,
categorized into data-level, algorithm-level, and ensemble- and limited storage. Moreover, the continuous emergence of
level methods. novel attacks has motivated intelligent cybersecurity frame-
 Data-level methods rebalance the training distribution via works for adaptive defense [32].
over-/under-sampling. Recent synthetic over-sampling meth- Incremental learning aims to update models with newly
ods generate minority-class samples for imbalanced classifi- arriving data (e.g., emerging attack types or shifted traffic
cation by jointly considering minority and majority class dis- distributions) while preserving previously learned knowledge,
tributions [23], and SMOTE-style resampling has been further which is essential for intrusion detection under concept drift.
tailored to intrusion detection in IoT and sensor networks. Sun et al. proposed temporal-incremental learning for Android
Recent work on WSN intrusion detection integrates SMOTE malware detection to handle evolving families and drift [33],
with Tomek links (SMOTE-Tomek), which synthesizes minor- yet catastrophic forgetting remains a central challenge withity instances while removing borderline/overlapping samples, out principled stability–plasticity control. In traffic modelyielding a cleaner and more balanced training set for classical ing, representation advances (e.g., transformer-style multimachine-learning detectors [24]. Recent studies have further level representations) highlight the potential of richer sequence
integrated synthetic sample generation with deep representa- modeling under evolving behaviors [34]. In federated settings,
tion learning to improve intrusion detection under severe class incremental IDS pipelines have also been explored [35], but
imbalance [25]. Despite their effectiveness, oversampling- many studies either lack robust drift triggering or do not
based methods may still introduce redundant synthetic samples explicitly address long-tail imbalance together with incremenand increase the risk of overfitting, while undersampling may tal updates. Recent generative few-shot IDS methods further
discard informative majority-class samples, both of which can attempt to mitigate data scarcity during adaptation and improve
be detrimental under complex attack mixtures. trustworthiness via explainability [36], but integrating such
 Algorithm-level methods improve the learning process to ideas into an FL pipeline still requires careful design to avoid
better emphasize minority classes. Recent optimization-aware instability and privacy leakage.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 4

Fig. 1. Overall architecture of the proposed Falcon framework. Clients perform data balancing and feature extraction, train local models, and collaboratively
contribute to the global model through federated aggregation, while a drift detector monitors incoming traffic and triggers incremental learning to adapt to
emerging attacks.

 III. M ETHOD At the optimization level, we adopt the Focal Loss function
 In this section, we present the overall design of Fal- instead of the standard cross-entropy loss to further enhance
con, which consists of four stages: (1) local data balancing the model’s learning capability for hard-to-classify minority
on each client’s network traffic; (2) local training of the samples. For a given sample i belonging to class yi , let
CNN–BiLSTM–Attention model on the balanced data; (3) the model’s predicted probability for that class be pt,i . The
sliding-window drift detection for emerging attack patterns; traditional cross-entropy loss is defined as:
and (4) incremental global model updating at the central server. LCE = − log pt,i . (3)
Among these, stages (1)–(2) correspond to the federated local
training process, while stages (3)–(4) represent the incremental The Focal Loss, on the other hand, introduces a classadaptation mechanism. The overall workflow is illustrated in balancing factor αyi and a focusing parameter γ, defined as:
Fig. 1. γ
 Lfocal (xi , yi ) = −αyi (1 − pt,i ) log (pt,i ) , (4)

A. Balanced Sampler and Focal Loss Function where αyi ∈ (0, 1) is the class weight (usually larger for
 minority classes), γ ≥ 0 controls the focusing strength, and
 To address severe class imbalance, we combine a bal- pt,i is the model’s predicted probability for the true class of
anced sampler and Focal Loss to jointly mitigate sample sample i.
and gradient imbalance. The sampler increases minority-class The total batch loss is then computed as:
frequency, while Focal Loss emphasizes hard samples. The
 B
overall training procedure is shown in Algorithm 1, and 1 X
experimental results demonstrate significant improvements in Lbatch = Lfocal (xi , yi ). (5)
 B i=1
minority-class detection.
 First, at the sampling level, suppose the dataset contains K By jointly applying the balanced sampler and Focal Loss
classes, denoted as C = {1, 2, . . . , K}, and each class k has (as detailed in Algorithm 1), each training iteration ensures
nk samples. The objective of the oversampling balancer is to that the model sufficiently learns from minority-class samples
ensure that the number of samples per class in each training while concentrating optimization on difficult or misclassified
batch remains balanced. Specifically, given a batch size B, the instances. This dual strategy not only alleviates the bias
number of samples drawn from each class k is defined as caused by class imbalance but also mitigates overfitting risks
 introduced by oversampling, thereby enhancing the model’s
 B
 Bk ≈
 . (1) generalization ability and detection performance in highly
 K imbalanced network intrusion detection scenarios.
If the number of available samples in a particular class is
insufficient, sampling with replacement is applied to that class
to ensure that the batch composition satisfies: B. Deep Model Integrating CNN-BiLSTM and Attention
 Mechanism
 K
 X
 Bk = B, and Bk ≥ 1, ∀k. (2) To effectively identify evolving and fine-grained attack
 k=1
 behaviors in network traffic, it is crucial to capture both spatial

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 5

 Algorithm 1: Balanced Sampler + Focal Loss Training of length T , denoted as
 (BS-FL)
 X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xT ] , (6)
 Input: Dataset D = {(xi , yi )}N
 i=1 , batch size B, epochs
 E, model fθ , optimizer O, Focal Loss params where each time-step input xt ∈ RF , and F represents the
 (α, γ), grad clip c; sampler option: either feature dimension.
 BalancedBatchSampler (per-class balanced First, in the local feature extraction stage, a one-dimensional
 mini-batches) or WeightedRandomSampler convolutional layer is applied to slide along the temporal
 (inverse-frequency weights). dimension. Suppose there are D convolutional kernels, with
 Output: Trained parameters θ⋆ . weights
 1Build label indices: group sample indices by class to W (k) ∈ RK×F (7)
 obtain {Ik }K k=1 ; and kernel width K. The output of the k-th kernel at position
2 if BalancedBatchSampler then
 t is given by:
3 Compute per-class quota qk ← ⌊B/K⌋; distribute the !
 remainder B mod K to the first classes; K−1
 (k)
 X (k)
 (k)
4 Initialize sampler that yields batches with ct = σ Wj · xt+j + b , (8)
 P j=0
 q
 k k = B (with replacement if a class is scarce);
 5 else // WeightedRandomSampler where σ(·) denotes the activation function and b(k) is the bias
 6 nk ← |Ik |; set per-sample weight wi ∝ 1/nyi ; term. After concatenating all kernel outputs, the feature map
 7 Initialize sampler with weights {wi }N
 i=1 to draw B sequence is obtained as
 i.i.d. indices per step;
 8 C = [c1 , c2 , . . . , cT ′ ], (9)
 9 for e ← 1 to E do
 where ct ∈ RD and T ′ = T − K + 1.
10 foreach batch indices B yielded by the sampler do
 Next, the feature map sequence is fed into a bidirectional
11 Load mini-batch (XB , yB );
 LSTM (BiLSTM) layer to model long-range temporal depen-
12 z ← fθ (XB ) ; // logits
 dencies. For each time step t, the forward LSTM recursively
 /* Focal Loss */ computes the hidden state:
13 ℓCE ← CrossEntropy(z, yB ) ; // per-sample
14 pt ← exp(−ℓCE ); ⃗ht , ⃗ct = LSTMf (xt , ht−1 , ct−1 ), (10)
15 ℓFocal ← α · (1 − pt )γ · ℓCE ;
16 L ← mean(ℓFocal ); and the backward LSTM recursively computes the backward
17 O.zero grad(); backprop L; hidden state:
 clip grad norm(θ, c) ; // e.g., c = 2.0 − −
 ←
 h t, ←
18
 c t = LSTMb (xt , ht+1 , ct+1 ). (11)
19 O.step();
 The forward and backward hidden states are concatenated to
20 return θ⋆ ← θ;
 obtain the comprehensive output at time t:
 −(b) i
 (f ) ←
 h
 ht = ⃗ht ; h t , (12)

and temporal dependencies embedded in packet sequences. where ht ∈ R2H and H is the number of hidden units in a
Convolutional neural networks excel at extracting local spatial single-direction LSTM.
patterns, such as statistical and structural features within On this basis, a self-attention mechanism is introduced to
packets, but lack the ability to model long-range temporal adaptively focus on key time steps. Specifically, each BiLSTM
relationships. In contrast, bidirectional long short-term mem- output ht is linearly transformed into query, key, and value
ory networks (BiLSTMs) are capable of learning sequential vectors:
dependencies and contextual transitions over time, yet they
often treat all temporal features with equal importance. The qt = Wq ht , kt = Wk ht , vt = Wv ht , (13)
attention mechanism further complements these models by where Wq , Wk , and Wv are trainable parameter matrices.
adaptively assigning higher weights to critical traffic features,
 The similarity between each query qt and all keys kj is
thereby enhancing the interpretability and focusing capacomputed to obtain unnormalized attention scores:
bility of the model. Therefore, combining CNN, BiLSTM,
and attention allows the model to jointly learn hierarchical qt⊤ kj
 stj = √ , (14)
representations—spatial features through convolution, tempo- dk
ral dependencies through recurrent connections, and feature
 where dk is the dimension of the key vector for scaling.
saliency through attention—resulting in a more comprehensive
 The attention weights are obtained by applying the softmax
understanding of dynamic network behaviors, as illustrated in
 function:
Fig. 2. exp(stj )
 αtj = PT ′ . (15)
 Specifically, the model input is a temporal feature sequence
 l=1 exp(stl )

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 6

Fig. 2. Pipeline of the proposed CNN-BiLSTM-Attention model for network traffic classification. Raw traffic is converted into multivariate temporal sequences
and fed to a 1D-CNN to extract local patterns, followed by a BiLSTM to capture bidirectional temporal dependencies and a self-attention module to aggregate
salient features before final classification.

Each query’s aggregated representation zt is obtained as a Algorithm 2: Sliding-Window Data Drift Detection Based
weighted sum of the value vectors: on KL Divergence
 T ′ Input: Traffic stream S ordered by time, window size
 W , step size s, threshold τ , bin size B.
 X
 zt = αtj vj . (16)
 j=1 Output: Drift decisions {Driftt } for each window.

 To obtain a global representation vector of the sequence, all 1 Initialize reference window:
zt are pooled: 2 Extract the first W samples from S to form Dref ;
 T′ 3 Extract packet-length and direction sequences (Lref , Dref )
 1 X from Dref ;
 z= ′ zt . (17)
 T t=1 L D
 4 Build histograms href , href with B bins and apply
 L D
 Laplace smoothing to obtain Pref , Pref ;
Finally, the aggregated global feature vector z is fed into a
fully connected layer to output multi-class prediction proba- 5 Divergence computation:
bilities: P L PL
 6
 KLlen ← i Pref,i log Qref,i
 L ;
 ŷ = softmax(Wo z + bo ), (18) cur,i
 D
 P D P
 7
 KLdir ← i Pref,i log Qref,i
 D ;
where Wo and bo are the output layer parameters. 1
 cur,i
 8 KLtot ← 2 KLlen + KLdir ;
 Through this architecture, the model first extracts local
short-term features via CNN, captures global temporal depen- 9 (Optional) Robustness check:
dencies via BiLSTM, and then adaptively integrates informa- 10 M L ← 12 (Pref
 L
 + QL
 cur ), M
 D
 ← 12 (Pref
 D
 + QD
 cur );
 1 L L L L
tion across different time steps via the self-attention mech- 11 JS ← 2 KL(Pref ∥M ) + KL(Qcur ∥M )
 + 12 KL(Pref
  D
 
anism. This significantly enhances the model’s capability to ∥M D ) + KL(QD D
 cur ∥M ) ; // backup
recognize and classify critical behavioral segments in complex divergence
and imbalanced network traffic scenarios. if KLtot > τ then 12
 Driftt ← True; 13

C. Data Drift Detection 14 D ref ← Dcur ; ; // update reference window
 L D
 15 Pref , Pref ← QL D
 cur , Qcur ;
 To enable the recognition of novel attacks and support 16 else
incremental learning of network traffic, we introduce a sliding 17 Driftt ← False;
window-based data drift detection mechanism, as described in
Algorithm 2. This mechanism continuously monitors whether
data drift occurs within the current window of network traffic,
providing a foundation for subsequent federated incremental To quantify changes in the data distribution, we employ the
learning. Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence:
 Specifically, the system maintains a sliding window con-
 B
taining network traffic samples over several time slices. For X P (i)
this window, we extract the packet length sequences and D KL (P ∥ Q) = P (i) log , (19)
 i=1
 Q(i)
direction sequences of all flows, concatenate these features into
one-dimensional vectors, and then compute the normalized where P and Q represent the normalized probability distriprobability distributions for each feature type. butions of the reference window and the current window,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 7

Fig. 3. Federated incremental learning with knowledge distillation for new attack adaptation. When novel attacks are detected, each client locally trains on
new traffic and maintains an instance queue Di of representative samples, while the global server aggregates client updates and applies distillation to adapt
the global model without catastrophic forgetting.

respectively. To improve numerical stability, all distributions student model to learn jointly from historical knowledge and
are smoothed using Laplace smoothing: newly emerging class semantics, thereby improving adaptabil-
 Pi + ϵ Qi + ϵ ity and stability during incremental updates. Furthermore, to
 Pi′ = , Q′i = . (20) reinforce the retention of previously learned representations,
 1 + ϵB 1 + ϵB
 a memory replay mechanism is incorporated, which period-
 The KL divergence is computed separately for the packet ically reuses a small subset of representative samples from
length sequences and direction sequences, and their mean is earlier classes during training. For each batch of samples,
taken as the overall drift measure: let the outputs of the historical model, the new-class model,
 1 ′ and the student model be denoted by zold , znew , and zs ,
 total
 DKL = (DKL (Plen ′
 ∥ Q′len ) + DKL (Pdir ∥ Q′dir )) . (21)
 2 respectively. The knowledge distillation loss is divided into
 The system periodically slides the window forward and two parts, corresponding to old-class and new-class data:
recomputes the feature distributions. When the difference
  
 Lold = T 2 KL σ(zold /T ) ∥ σ(zs /T ) , (22)
between the current window’s feature distribution and the
reference distribution exceeds a predefined threshold, a sig-  
 Lnew = T 2 KL σ(znew /T ) ∥ σ(zs /T ) , (23)
nificant data drift is detected, which triggers the incremental
learning process. where T is the temperature parameter and σ(·) denotes the
 softmax function.
D. Federated Incremental Learning The overall loss function combines cross-entropy supervi-
 When data drift occurs, the federated incremental learning sion with the two knowledge distillation terms:
mechanism is triggered, as illustrated in Fig. 3. New samples L = α LCE (zs , y) + β Lold + γ Lnew , (24)
of traffic classes are collected, and a unified label mapping is
applied. In the model’s output layer, a dual-classification head where LCE is the standard cross-entropy loss, and α, β, γ are
structure is adopted: the original classifier handles historical balancing coefficients. This design ensures that the student
classes, while an additional classifier handles new classes. The model acquires discriminative capability for new classes while
outputs of both heads are concatenated for unified multi-class inheriting knowledge from the historical model and mimicking
prediction. the new teacher model’s performance on new classes.
 To effectively maintain previously acquired knowledge The memory replay mechanism mixes a portion of originalwhile continuously learning new attack types, the model class samples with new-class samples during training for joint
must overcome catastrophic forgetting, a common issue in optimization. Let Dnew and Dold denote the new-class and
incremental learning scenarios. Conventional single-teacher original-class sample sets, respectively, and let δ be the replay
knowledge distillation mitigates this problem by transferring ratio. Then the training set can be expressed as:
soft-label information from the previous model to the current D = Dnew ∪ replay(Dold , δ). (25)
one, but it struggles to balance old and new knowledge when
data distributions shift significantly. To address this limitation, In summary, the proposed federated incremental learning
we design a multi-teacher knowledge distillation mechanism method, combining multi-teacher knowledge distillation and
that integrates both the historical model and a new-class memory replay, leverages dual distillation supervision from
teacher model. The new-class teacher is trained independently historical and new-class models. This approach effectively
on traffic samples identified by the data drift detection enhances the model’s adaptability to new classes, mitigates
module (Algorithm 2), which continuously monitors recent catastrophic forgetting, and enables incremental multi-class
network flows and detects emerging attack types that deviate learning in a federated environment, allowing the model to
from previously seen distributions. This strategy enables the continuously recognize new attacks.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 8

 TABLE I channels and kernel size 3, a two-layer BiLSTM with hidden
 DATASET I NFORMATION size 64 and dropout 0.2, an attention module with projection
 Dataset Label Class Training Samples IR dimension 64, and a classification head (128→32→number of
 0 Benign 309,887 – classes) with ReLU and dropout 0.3.
 USTC-TFC2016
 1 Htbot 6,341 48.87 Baseline and Comparison: For both binary and multi-
 2 Nsis-ay 6,165 50.26 class classification tasks, the proposed Falcon framework
 3 Shifu 9,634 32.16 was compared with five state-of-the-art baseline methods,
 0 Benign 923,281 –
 including Fed-ANIDS, FELIDS, FL-IIDS, FedUGI, and FeCo-
 1 DDoS 14,039 65.79
 CICIDS2017
 2 FTP-Patator 3,973 232.45
 Graph [37], [38], [35], [27], [39]. In addition, we compared
 3 SSH-Patator 2,979 310.01 the performance of Falcon with TMG-GAN, which was trained
 0 Benign 296,245 – locally without a federated learning framework [40].
 CICIDS2018
 1 Botnet Ares 50,946 5.82 Evaluation Metrics: Since the datasets are highly im-
 2 Infiltration 106,397 2.78 balanced, accuracy alone is insufficient. We therefore report
 3 Web Attack 19 15,591.84 Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score. Precision reflects
 false-positive control, Recall measures attack detection ca-
 Note: “Label” represents the label assigned to each class of data;
 “Class” represents the class contained in the dataset; “Training Sam- pability, and F1-Score balances both, making it particularly
 ples” indicates the number of samples of each class in the training set; suitable for imbalanced intrusion detection.
 “IR” represents the imbalance ratio with respect to the Benign class.

 B. Experimental Results
 IV. E XPERIMENTS
 In this section, we present the empirical results of extensive
 In this section, we validate the effectiveness of Falcon validation experiments conducted on the USTC-TFC2016, CIthrough empirical experiments. First, we provide detailed CIDS2017, and CICIDS2018 datasets, covering binary classiexperimental settings, including model parameters, evaluation fication, multi-class classification, robustness evaluation under
metrics, and an overview of the datasets. Next, we conduct client dropout and adversarial attacks, hyperparameter sena series of experiments on the proposed Falcon framework, sitivity analysis, non-IID heterogeneity analysis, incremental
comparing it with several state-of-the-art (SOTA) models and learning, and ablation studies.
verifying the effectiveness of incremental learning. Finally, Binary Classification Experiments: In the binary setting,
ablation studies are designed to demonstrate the effectiveness we compare three families of methods: the centralized nonof each improvement. FL detector TMG-GAN, five representative FL-based NIDS
 (Fed-ANIDS, FELIDS, FL-IIDS, FedUGI and FeCoGraph),
A. Experimental Settings and the proposed Falcon framework (denoted as “Ours” in the
 Datasets: Unlike prior works that directly use CSV files, figures). As shown in Fig. 4, Falcon consistently achieves the
we extract flow features (e.g., packet-length sequences and best performance on all three datasets and on all four metrics
timestamp sequences) from raw PCAP traces based on 5-tuple (Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F1-Score), with its curves reaggregation rules. Furthermore, class selection is applied to maining at the very top of each plot. The superior performance
the processed datasets. The final experimental datasets include of Falcon can be attributed to its class-rebalancing mechanism.
the following classes: USTC-TFC2016 (Benign, Htbot, Nsis- As defined in Eq. (4), the Focal Loss introduces the modulation
ay, Shifu), CICIDS2017 (Benign, DDos, FTP-Patator, SSH- term (1 − pt )γ , which suppresses the contribution of easy
Patator), and CICIDS2018 (Benign, Botnet Ares, Infiltration, majority-class samples and amplifies the gradients of hard and
Web Attack). Table I summarizes the detailed information of minority-class samples. Combined with the balanced sampler
the datasets used in this paper. in Eqs. (1)–(2), Falcon effectively reshapes both the sample
 Implementation Details: We implemented Falcon using distribution and the optimization dynamics. As a result, the
PyTorch and Ray. Focal Loss was adopted with α = 1.0 and model maintains consistently high Precision, Recall, and F1-
γ = 2.0. The number of communication rounds was set to Score on imbalanced intrusion traffic.
R = 100. The server used SGD with momentum, an initial On USTC-TFC2016, TMG-GAN and FedUGI obtain relaglobal learning rate of 0.01, and weight decay 1 × 10−4 . Each tively high recalls of 95.03% and 94.89%, respectively, but
client performed E = 5 local epochs with batch size 128 their precisions (91.76% and 95.88%) and F1-Scores (93.36%
using AdamW (learning rate 0.01, weight decay 1×10−2 ), and and 95.36%) are clearly lower than those of Falcon. Falcon
gradient clipping with a maximum norm of 2.0 was applied reaches 99.72% Accuracy, 99.70% Precision, 99.70% Recall
for stability. and 99.70% F1-Score, forming an almost flat line near 100%
 To simulate heterogeneous federated scenarios, we gener- in Fig. 4. A salient observation is Fed-ANIDS: despite its
ated non-IID client partitions using a Dirichlet-based alloca- very high accuracy of 99.64%, its Precision, Recall, and F1-
tion strategy, where smaller αdir indicates stronger heterogene- Score decline to 49.82%, 50.00%, and 49.91%, respectively,
ity. We also allowed different clients to have different sample indicating that it is heavily biased toward the majority class.
volumes to reflect realistic data imbalance across participants. In contrast, Falcon maintains both high accuracy and well-
 Both global and local models used a CNN–BiLSTM– balanced error rates, outperforming all FL-based methods and
Attention backbone, including 1D convolutional layers with 64 even the centralized TMG-GAN.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 9

Fig. 4. Overall binary (top) and multi-class (bottom) classification performance (Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-Score) of different methods on CICIDS2017,
CICIDS2018, and USTC-TFC2016.

 On CICIDS2017, TMG-GAN serves as a strong centralized TFC2016, Falcon achieves 99.82% Accuracy, 99.62% Preciupper bound with 99.63% Accuracy and 99.72% F1-Score. sion, 99.72% Recall and 99.67% F1-Score, clearly surpassing
Falcon still slightly improves upon this baseline, achieving the centralized TMG-GAN (97.15% Accuracy and 96.23%
99.77% Accuracy, 99.67% Precision, 99.85% Recall and F1-Score). In contrast, Fed-ANIDS, FELIDS, FL-IIDS and
99.79% F1-Score. Other FL baselines suffer from either low FedUGI obtain F1-Scores of 76.01%, 71.81%, 73.74% and
precision or low recall: for example, FELIDS degrades to 70.56%, respectively, and FeCoGraph reaches 81.77% F1-
about 50% on all three metrics (Precision, Recall and F1- Score. The pronounced declines of their curves from Accu-
Score), and FeCoGraph reaches only 67.42% F1-Score al- racy to Recall/F1-Score in Fig. 4 show that these FL-based
though its accuracy is 96.00%. This behavior is reflected by baselines struggle with the imbalanced multi-class malware
the steep declines from the Accuracy point to the Recall and traffic, while Falcon maintains almost perfectly horizontal
F1-Score points in Fig. 4, whereas Falcon remains close to the performance curves close to 100%.
upper boundary on every metric. On CICIDS2017, TMG-GAN again constitutes a strong
 On CICIDS2018, Falcon attains 95.59% Accuracy, 94.37% non-federated baseline, with 96.73% Accuracy and 93.66%
Precision, 95.59% Recall and 95.26% F1-Score, preserving a F1-Score. Falcon attains 99.66% Accuracy and 99.07% Precigood balance between Precision and Recall. FedUGI is the sion, with 91.32% Recall and an F1-Score of 94.90%, thereby
strongest competitor in this case with 93.84% Accuracy and outperforming TMG-GAN on all four metrics. Among the FL
93.23% F1-Score, while TMG-GAN yields 88.43% F1-Score. baselines, FeCoGraph is the best, but its F1-Score is only
Several baselines again exhibit strong metric imbalance: Fed- 73.31%, and the remaining FL methods stay below 69%. Thus,
ANIDS achieves 91.30% Accuracy but only 78.27% F1-Score, even in the more challenging multi-class scenario, Falcon
and FeCoGraph attains 94.52% Accuracy yet only 81.38% substantially narrows and in fact reverses the performance gap
F1-Score. Overall, across the three datasets, Falcon not only between federated and centralized paradigms.
eliminates the performance gap between privacy-preserving On CICIDS2018, Falcon maintains robust performance with
FL and centralized training, but also yields strictly higher F1- 95.50% Accuracy, 97.38% Precision, 95.50% Recall and
Scores than TMG-GAN on all datasets. 96.43% F1-Score. By comparison, TMG-GAN attains 81.62%
 Multi-class Classification Experiments: We further evalu- Accuracy and 75.59% F1-Score, and the strongest FL baseline,
ate all methods in the multi-class setting. The results in Fig. 4 Fed-ANIDS, reaches 78.47% Accuracy and 80.96% F1-Score.
lead to similar conclusions: Falcon again provides the most Several FL methods show severe degradation on minority
stable and superior performance on all datasets, and its curves classes: for instance, FeCoGraph still reports 87.22% Accuexhibit the smallest decline from Accuracy to F1-Score. This racy, but its Precision, Recall and F1-Score decline to 31.63%,
effect becomes more pronounced in the multi-class setting, 45.22% and 37.22%, respectively, which is visualized as a
where class imbalance is more severe. The combination of sharp decline of its curve in Fig. 4. Falcon, on the other
balanced sampling and the loss reweighting mechanism in hand, preserves both high Recall and high Precision across all
Eq. (4) prevents the classifier from being dominated by ma- classes, resulting in the highest F1-Score among all methods.
jority classes, thereby improving the discriminative capability In summary, TMG-GAN is included as a strong centralized
for minority and long-tailed attack categories. On USTC- NIDS baseline that assumes full access to globally aggregated

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 10

Fig. 5. Robustness evaluation under client dropout scenarios across three datasets (USTC-TFC2016, CICIDS2017, CICIDS2018) under varying dropout rates.

Fig. 6. Robustness evaluation under adversarial attacks across three datasets (USTC-TFC2016, CICIDS2017, CICIDS2018) under FGSM attacks with varying
perturbation magnitudes.

traffic at a single site. This baseline allows us to directly strongest attacks. On CICIDS2017, performance degradation
examine whether a privacy-preserving federated design must is less than 0.05% across all perturbation magnitudes. On
compromise detection performance compared with a central- CICIDS2018, despite more complex traffic patterns, the maxiized NIDS. Across all three datasets and in both binary and mum degradation remains within 0.2%. These results validate
multi-class settings, Falcon consistently achieves higher F1- that Falcon’s architecture provides inherent defense against
Scores and comparable or better accuracy than this centralized gradient-based attacks, maintaining reliable intrusion detection
baseline, while keeping raw traffic data on each client and even when facing adversarially crafted malicious traffic.
exchanging only model updates. These results show that the Focal Loss Parameter Sensitivity: To validate the robustproposed federated framework not only outperforms existing ness of hyperparameter configuration, we conduct sensitivity
FL-based NIDS, but also surpasses a state-of-the-art central- analysis on Focal Loss parameters: gamma (γ), alpha (α), and
ized NIDS, indicating that competitive or superior intrusion- tau (τ ), as illustrated in Fig. 7.
detection performance can be attained without centralized Across all datasets, the model demonstrates stable perfortraining on raw network flows. mance under varying parameter settings. Performance remains
 Client Dropout Experiments: In real-world federated consistent for gamma values from 0 to 5, alpha values between
learning deployments, client availability is often unstable due 0.1 and 0.75, and tau values from 0.01 to 0.2. These results
to network interruptions, device failures, or resource con- confirm that Falcon maintains reliable detection performance
straints. To evaluate the robustness of Falcon under such across a wide range of hyperparameter configurations.
conditions, we conduct systematic experiments with client Non-IID Heterogeneity Analysis: To evaluate Falcon’s
dropout rates ranging from 0.2 to 0.8, as illustrated in Fig. 5. robustness under heterogeneous data distributions, we con-
 On USTC-TFC2016, Falcon demonstrates exceptional sta- duct systematic experiments using Dirichlet-based non-IID
bility across all dropout rates, with performance metrics re- partitioning with varying concentration parameter α ∈
maining consistently above 99.6%. On CICIDS2017, similar {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, as illustrated in Fig. 8. Lower α values indicate
robustness is observed with only 0.03% degradation from rate stronger statistical heterogeneity across clients.
0.2 to 0.8. On CICIDS2018, despite more complex traffic On USTC-TFC2016, even under severe heterogeneity (α =
patterns, performance degradation remains within 0.2% across 1), Falcon maintains over 97.4% performance across all
all metrics. These results validate that Falcon maintains robust metrics, with only 2.3% degradation compared to the IID
intrusion detection performance under realistic federated sce- baseline. As α increases to 5, performance converges to within
narios where client participation is unstable. 0.14% of the IID setting. On CICIDS2017, similar trends are
 Adversarial Attack Experiments: To assess the secu- observed with 2.2% maximum degradation at α = 1 and nearrity robustness of Falcon against adversarial perturbations, IID performance at α = 5. On CICIDS2018, despite more
we conduct systematic evaluations using the Fast Gradient complex traffic patterns, Falcon achieves over 90.5% F1-Score
Sign Method (FGSM) with perturbation magnitudes ϵ ∈ even under α = 1, demonstrating strong resilience to data
{0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2}, as illustrated in Fig. 6. heterogeneity. These results validate that Falcon’s federated
 On USTC-TFC2016, Falcon exhibits strong resilience with rebalancing strategy and robust feature extraction effectively
performance metrics remaining above 99.64% even under the mitigate the adverse impact of non-IID data distributions in

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 11

Fig. 7. Parameter sensitivity analysis for Focal Loss hyperparameters across three datasets.

Fig. 8. Impact of data heterogeneity on model performance under varying Dirichlet α values. Lower α indicates stronger non-IID conditions. The horizontal
dashed lines represent IID baseline performance. As α increases, performance converges toward the IID baseline, demonstrating Falcon’s robustness under
heterogeneous federated settings.

real-world federated intrusion detection scenarios. From a batch as described in Eqs. (1)–(2), while the Focal Loss in
theoretical perspective, this robustness can be explained by Eq. (4) further increases the contribution of hard samples
the joint optimization design of Falcon. The balanced sampler during training. As a result, local model updates are less biased
ensures a more uniform class distribution within each mini- toward client-specific majority classes, leading to improved

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 12

Fig. 9. Experimental results of incremental learning under cross-dataset drift scenarios. The figure illustrates the performance of the proposed framework before
and after incremental learning across different dataset combinations. Each subfigure represents a specific transfer pair, where the ”Original” dataset serves
as the base model training set and the ”New” dataset represents novel traffic introduced after drift. The results include binary and multi-class classification
tasks, evaluated in terms of Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-score. It can be observed that after the incremental update, the model effectively adapts to
new traffic distributions while maintaining stable detection accuracy on previously learned datasets.

global aggregation under heterogeneous data distributions.
 Incremental Learning Experiments: As illustrated in
Fig. 9, the model exhibits clear and consistent improvements
after adapting to new datasets across both binary and multiclass classification tasks. When using USTC-TFC2016 as the
original dataset and CICIDS2017 as the new dataset, the binary
classification metrics—Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-
Score—are initially low before transfer, but all approach or
exceed 0.97 after incremental training, demonstrating strong
adaptability and generalization. Similarly, in the multi-class
task, performance rises dramatically from near-random levels (around 0.49) to approximately 0.97, indicating that the Fig. 10. Knowledge retention after incremental learning. Retention rates of
proposed incremental learning strategy effectively mitigates binary and multi-class models on previously learned data under different incatastrophic forgetting. When extended to other dataset com- cremental learning orders (2017→2016, 2016→2017, etc.), compared against
 an ideal perfect-retention baseline.
binations, such as those involving CICIDS2018, the model
continues to maintain high Accuracy and Recall, with F1-
Score consistently within the 0.96–0.98 range, demonstrating
its stability under complex distribution shifts. The effective- knowledge. For multi-class classification, although minor flucness of the incremental adaptation can be explained by the tuations are observed, retention remains stable within 96%–
KL-based drift detection mechanism. As defined in Eq. (19), 98%, with only slight declines in isolated cases. Overall,
the KL divergence quantifies the discrepancy between the these results confirm that the proposed method achieves robust
reference distribution and the current data distribution. Once and scalable cross-domain incremental learning, effectively
the divergence exceeds a predefined threshold, the model absorbing new knowledge while preserving prior information.
is updated accordingly, enabling Falcon to adapt to newly Ablation Study: This section evaluates the contribution
emerging attack patterns in a timely manner. Furthermore, the of each module via ablation experiments: we use a vanilla
strong knowledge retention can be explained by the multi- LSTM as the baseline, our proposed model as the improved
teacher distillation framework in Eqs. (22)–(24). By constrain- architecture, and then progressively introduce class-imbalance
ing the student model to align with both historical and new- handling (denoted as Balance). As shown in Table II, the
class teacher outputs, and combining this with memory replay, standalone LSTM is unstable under imbalanced settings—for
Falcon effectively balances stability and plasticity, thereby example, on USTC-TFC2016 (binary) it yields only 11.35%
mitigating catastrophic forgetting during incremental updates. Accuracy with an F1-Score of 3.90%; the multi-class results
 on CICIDS2018 are likewise low. Adding Balance on top of
 Furthermore, knowledge retention is evaluated during cross- the baseline alleviates missed detections and improves Recall
dataset incremental learning, as illustrated in Fig. 10. For substantially, but often leads to a skewed “high-precision, lowbinary classification, retention typically remains around 99%, recall” trade-off, so the overall F1-Score remains limited.
and in some cases even exceeds 100%, suggesting that the Replacing LSTM with our proposed model, even withmodel not only preserves but also reinforces previously learned out Balance, produces markedly more stable decision

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 13

 TABLE II
 A BLATION R ESULTS ON B INARY AND M ULTI - CLASS C LASSIFICATION

 Model Binary Metrics Multi Metrics
 Datasets Combination Balance
 Ours LSTM ACC PRE REC F1 ACC PRE REC F1
 1 ✓ 62.96 49.70 98.26 66.03 77.36 44.00 27.00 27.00
 2 ✓ 11.35 3.10 13.30 3.90 36.67 18.33 50.00 26.84
USTC-TFC2016
 3 ✓ ✓ 63.65 99.99 0.88 1.74 63.43 8.90 9.24 7.34
 4 ✓ ✓ 99.72 99.70 99.70 99.70 99.82 99.62 99.72 99.67
 1 ✓ 97.41 0 0 0 97.57 19.51 20.00 19.75
 2 ✓ 92.02 28.55 58.38 32.57 97.57 0 0 0
 CICIDS2017
 3 ✓ ✓ 95.98 38.73 80.23 24.88 89.20 13.20 61.90 21.80
 4 ✓ ✓ 99.77 99.67 99.85 99.79 99.66 99.07 91.32 94.90
 1 ✓ 35.01 34.76 99.68 51.55 65.31 20.00 20.00 20.00
 2 ✓ 34.69 34.69 99.99 51.51 25.33 20.44 20.44 19.42
 CICIDS2018
 3 ✓ ✓ 61.50 73.42 70.43 61.21 23.46 21.42 40.00 7.93
 4 ✓ ✓ 95.59 94.37 95.59 95.26 95.50 97.38 95.50 96.43

boundaries and tangible gains in F1-Score for both bi- ablation study further verifies that each component contributes
nary and multi-class tasks. When our model operates with substantially to the final performance.
Balance, it achieves the global optimum. For example, Future Work: Future work will explore three promising
on USTC-TFC2016 (binary), Accuracy/Precision/Recall/F1- directions to further enhance Falcon’s robustness and appli-
Score reach 99.72/99.70/99.70/99.70; on CICIDS2017 (multi- cability. First, we plan to integrate lightweight noise declass), Accuracy is 99.66% with an F1-Score of 94.90%; tection mechanisms by combining uncertainty quantification
and on CICIDS2018 (multi-class), the results further improve (e.g., Monte Carlo dropout or ensemble-based confidence
to 95.50% Accuracy and 96.43% F1-Score. These findings estimation) with client-side data quality scoring, enabling the
indicate that the vanilla LSTM provides only basic temporal server to adaptively down-weight noisy client updates during
modeling, Balance mainly recovers Recall, while our model aggregation without violating privacy constraints. Second, we
supplies stable and interpretable discriminative features. No will investigate hard-example mining strategies that leverage
single component alone can simultaneously optimize Precision attention-weighted sample selection and curriculum learning
and Recall. Only the complete configuration—our model plus to prioritize challenging minority-class instances during lo-
Balance—consistently delivers the highest and most balanced cal training, thereby improving the model’s discriminative
metrics across datasets and across both binary and multi-class capability on rare and evolving attack patterns. Third, we
tasks, demonstrating that our improvements are both necessary aim to develop communication-efficient incremental adapand complementary. These observations are consistent with the tation by exploring gradient compression techniques (e.g.,
mathematical design of Falcon. The balanced sampling mech- top-k sparsification and quantization) combined with selective
anism modifies the effective training distribution, while the model broadcasting, reducing the communication overhead of
Focal Loss in Eq. (4) adjusts the gradient contribution across frequent incremental updates in resource-constrained CIoT enclasses. Meanwhile, the CNN–BiLSTM–Attention architecture vironments. These directions are motivated by recent surveys
enhances feature representation as defined in Eqs. (8)–(18). highlighting the necessity of lightweight data quality control
Only the combination of these components leads to consistent and efficient communication for sustaining robustness under
improvements across all evaluation metrics. heterogeneous and evolving environments [41].

 V. C ONCLUSION R EFERENCES
 [1] V. Kumar, K. Kumar, M. Singh, and N. Kumar, “Nids-da: Detecting
 This paper proposed Falcon, an imbalance-aware federated functionally preserved adversarial examples for network intrusion detecintrusion detection framework for heterogeneous consumer- tion system using deep autoencoders,” Expert Systems with Applications,
 vol. 270, p. 126513, 2025.
centric IoT. By integrating data balancing, multi-level feature [2] A. Sarıkaya, B. G. Kılıç, and M. Demirci, “Raids: Robust autoencoderextraction, and robust federated training, Falcon effectively based intrusion detection system model against adversarial attacks,”
addresses privacy constraints, class imbalance, and non-IID Computers & Security, vol. 135, p. 103483, 2023.
 [3] B. Sharma, L. Sharma, C. Lal, and S. Roy, “Explainable artificial
client heterogeneity. intelligence for intrusion detection in iot networks: A deep learning
 Experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that based approach,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 238, p. 121751,
Falcon consistently improves F1-Score, Recall, and overall 2024.
 [4] P. Goldschmidt and D. Chudá, “Network intrusion datasets: A survey,
detection stability over strong baselines, while remaining ro- limitations, and recommendations,” Computers & Security, vol. 156, p.
bust under non-IID data distributions and client dropout. The 104510, 2025.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3690484

 14

 [5] X. Hao, C. Lin, W. Dong, X. Huang, and H. Xiong, “Robust and secure [24] M. A. Talukder, S. Sharmin, M. A. Uddin, M. M. Islam, and S. Aryal,
 federated learning against hybrid attacks: A generic architecture,” IEEE “Mlstl-wsn: machine learning-based intrusion detection using smote-
 Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 19, pp. 1576– tomek in wsns,” International Journal of Information Security, vol. 23,
 1588, 2023. no. 3, pp. 2139–2158, 2024.
 [6] V. Shanmugam, R. Razavi-Far, and E. Hallaji, “Addressing class im- [25] M. Arafah, I. Phillips, A. Adnane, W. Hadi, M. Alauthman, and
 balance in intrusion detection: a comprehensive evaluation of machine A.-K. Al-Banna, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection using
 learning approaches,” Electronics, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 69, 2024. denoising autoencoder and wasserstein gan synthetic attacks,” Applied
 [7] G. Zhu, X. Liu, J. Niu, Y. Wei, S. Tang, and J. Zhang, “Learning by Soft Computing, vol. 168, p. 112455, 2025.
 imitating the classics: Mitigating class imbalance in federated learning [26] M. A. Talukder, M. M. Islam, M. A. Uddin, K. F. Hasan, S. Sharmin,
 via simulated centralized learning,” Expert Systems with Applications, S. A. Alyami, and M. A. Moni, “Machine learning-based network
 vol. 255, p. 124755, 2024. intrusion detection for big and imbalanced data using oversampling,
 [8] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service stacking feature embedding and feature extraction,” Journal of big data,
 mapping for qos: a statistical signature-based approach to ip traffic vol. 11, no. 1, p. 33, 2024.
 classification,” in Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGCOMM conference [27] M. Zheng, X. Hu, Y. Hu, X. Zheng, and Y. Luo, “Fed-ugi: Federated
 on Internet measurement, 2004, pp. 135–148. undersampling learning framework with gini impurity for imbalanced
 [9] D. Barradas, C. Novo, B. Portela, S. Romeiro, and N. Santos, “Extending network intrusion detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forenc2 traffic detection methodologies: From tls 1.2 to tls 1.3-enabled sics and Security, vol. 20, pp. 1262–1277, 2025.
 malware,” in Proceedings of the 27th International Symposium on [28] W. Meng, Y. Li, F. Zhang, X. Gao, and J. Ma, “Developing distance-
 Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses, 2024, pp. 181–196. based genetic programming classifiers by reconstructing datasets for
[10] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Trafficformer: an imbalanced binary classification,” Pattern Recognition, p. 112825, 2025.
 efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in 2025 IEEE Symposium [29] Reddy, C Kishor Kumar and Reddy, Pulakurthi Anaghaa and Reddy,
 on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2025, pp. 1844–1860. Pulakurthi Satyanarayana and Shuaib, Mohammed and Alam, Shadab
[11] A. Alferaidi, K. Yadav, Y. Alharbi, E. J. Alreshidi, A. Alreshidi, B. W. and Ahmad, Sadaf and Rajaram, A, “Twined ensemble framework for
 Aboshosha, R. Sharma, A. Alkhayyat, and D. G. Aray, “A novel hybrid, network security: integrating Random Forest, AdaBoost, and Gradient
 bert and deep learning model network intrusion detection system for Boosting for enhanced intrusion detection,” Discover Internet of Things,
 healthcare electronics,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 107, 2025.
 vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1322–1331, 2025. [30] G. Zhao, L. Li, H. He, and J. Ren, “Lgsmote-ids: Line graph based
[12] T. Sun, X. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Zhuang, and Z. He, “Traffic intrusion weighted-distance smote for imbalanced network traffic detection,”
 detection of medical consumption electronics in the field of medical Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 281, p. 127645, 2025.
 management based on integrated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Con- [31] F. Jemili, K. Jouini, and O. Korbaa, “Intrusion detection based on
 sumer Electronics, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1334–1341, 2024. concept drift detection and online incremental learning,” International
[13] P. Suman, S. Padhy, N. Kumar, A. Suman, A. Singh, K. Kant Singh, Journal of Pervasive Computing and Communications, vol. 21, no. 1,
 Kuc Castilla, and T. S. S. AL-Zahrani, “An improved deep learning- pp. 81–115, 10 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1108/
 IJPCC-12-2023-0358
 based intrusion detection for reliable communication in vanet,” IEEE
 Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 209–217, [32] A. H. Salem, S. M. Azzam, O. E. Emam, and A. A. Abohany,
 2025. “Advancing cybersecurity: a comprehensive review of ai-driven detection
 techniques,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 105, 2024.
[14] F. Hendaoui, R. Meddeb, L. Trabelsi, A. Ferchichi, and R. Ahmed,
 [33] T. Sun, N. Daoudi, W. Pian, K. Kim, K. Allix, T. F. Bissyande, and
 “Fladen: federated learning for anomaly detection in iot networks,”
 J. Klein, “Temporal-incremental learning for android malware detec-
 Computers & Security, vol. 155, p. 104446, 2025.
 tion,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology,
[15] B. Olanrewaju-George and B. Pranggono, “Federated learning-based vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1–30, 2025.
 intrusion detection system for the internet of things using unsupervised [34] R. Zhao, M. Zhan, X. Deng, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, G. Gui, and
 and supervised deep learning models,” Cyber Security and Applications, Z. Xue, “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder based
 vol. 3, p. 100068, 2025. traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” Proceedings
[16] V. T. Nguyen and R. Beuran, “Fedmse: Semi-supervised federated of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 4, pp.
 learning approach for iot network intrusion detection,” Computers 5420–5427, Jun. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.
 Security, vol. 151, p. 104337, 2025. [Online]. Available: https: php/AAAI/article/view/25674
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404825000264 [35] Z. Jin, J. Zhou, B. Li, X. Wu, and C. Duan, “Fl-iids: A novel
[17] H. Yan, X. Lin, S. Li, H. Peng, and B. Zhang, “Global or local federated learning-based incremental intrusion detection system,” Future
 adaptation? client-sampled federated meta-learning for personalized iot Generation Computer Systems, vol. 151, pp. 57–70, 2024.
 intrusion detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and [36] Z. Zhang, P. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Liu, and X. Zhou, “Trustworthy
 Security, vol. 20, pp. 279–293, 2025. generative few-shot learning-based intrusion detection method in internet
[18] H. Ding, L. Chen, S. Li, Y. Bai, P. Zhou, and Z. Qu, “Divide, of things,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 71, no. 1,
 conquer, and coalesce: Meta parallel graph neural network for iot pp. 1992–2002, 2025.
 intrusion detection at scale,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web [37] M. J. Idrissi, H. Alami, A. El Mahdaouy, A. El Mekki, S. Oualil,
 Conference 2024, ser. WWW ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association Z. Yartaoui, and I. Berrada, “Fed-anids: Federated learning for anomalyfor Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 1656–1667. [Online]. Available: based network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Systems with Applihttps://doi.org/10.1145/3589334.3645457 cations, vol. 234, p. 121000, 2023.
[19] S. I. Popoola, A. L. Imoize, M. Hammoudeh, B. Adebisi, O. Jogunola, [38] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, K.-K. R. Choo, and
 and A. M. Aibinu, “Federated deep learning for intrusion detection in M. Nafaa, “Felids: Federated learning-based intrusion detection system
 consumer-centric internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer for agricultural internet of things,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed
 Electronics, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1610–1622, 2024. Computing, vol. 165, pp. 17–31, 2022.
[20] Z. Abou El Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and M. Adil, “A privacy- [39] Q. Mao, X. Lin, W. Xu, Y. Qi, X. Su, G. Li, and J. Li, “Fecograph:
 preserving framework for efficient network intrusion detection in con- Label-aware federated graph contrastive learning for few-shot network
 sumer network using quantum federated learning,” IEEE Transactions intrusion detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
 on Consumer Electronics, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 7121–7128, 2024. Security, vol. 20, pp. 2266–2280, 2025.
[21] H. Babbar and S. Rani, “Frhids: Federated learning recommender [40] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “Tmg-gan: Generative
 hybrid intrusion detection system model in software-defined networking adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for network intrusion
 for consumer devices,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2492–2499, 2024. vol. 19, pp. 1156–1167, 2023.
[22] Z. Qu and Z. Liang, “Fedhlc: A novel federated learning algorithm [41] C. Qiao, M. Li, Y. Liu, and Z. Tian, “Transitioning from federated learntargeting heterogeneous and long-tailed data for efficient image clas- ing to quantum federated learning in internet of things: A comprehensive
 sification in consumer electronics,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 27, no. 1, pp.
 Electronics, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 7266–7278, 2024. 509–545, 2024.
[23] H. A. Khorshidi and U. Aickelin, “A synthetic over-sampling method
 with minority and majority classes for imbalance problems,” Knowledge
 and Information Systems, vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 5965–5998, 2025.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.