IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026 4213

 FedScope—Federated Host Embeddings From
 Telescope Traffic: Design and Implementation
 Kai Huang , Andrea Sordello , Rodolfo Vieira Valentim , Luca Vassio , Idilio Drago ,
 and Marco Mellia , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—A network telescope is a range of IP addresses their size (number of IP addresses) and geolocation. Intuitively,
that host no services. Millions of bots and scanners contact merging information from multiple telescopes could increase
it to look for vulnerable systems, and the traffic it exposes is visibility and uncover unseen malicious activities. However,
fundamental to understanding malicious activities. The visibility
a telescope offers depends on its size and geolocation, and merging sharing raw telescope data is usually complex due to volume
the information from multiple telescopes could help increase constraints and organisational policies.
visibility and uncover more malicious activities. However, sharing To extract actionable knowledge from telescopes, several
raw telescope data is complicated, calling for solutions that works started employing Machine Learning (ML) pipelines.
allow one to directly share the knowledge rather than the data Recently, the ML two-stage pipeline [3], [4], [5], [6] has
obtained from multiple deployments. In this paper, we explore the
application of Federated Learning (FL) to create and share such demonstrated particularly appealing. In the first stage, a selfglobal knowledge from the malicious activities seen in distributed supervised upstream task generates embeddings–compressed
telescopes. For that, we introduce FedScope, an FL-based solution representations of input data in latent space that act as generic
for generating host embeddings in a distributed way. We compare features, learned without the need to have labels. In the second
FedScope to local and distributed alternatives in downstream stage, one can use these vectors in downstream tasks for, e.g.,
tasks, such as sender classification or coordinated activities
detection. We show that FedScope 1) produces embeddings sender classification, clustering or anomaly detection [5], [7],
of equal or higher quality than those of a single telescope; [8], [9]. Here, from raw telescope packets, we create host
2) increases coverage, allowing the global model to monitor more embeddings to summarise the activity of each host contacting
malicious actors; 3) avoids the sharing of the raw data, limiting the telescope (a sender), i.e., each sender gets represented as
exchanged data. a vector in the embedding space. The automatic learning of
 Index Terms—Federated learning, network telescope, traffic embeddings avoids the need to define the features the model
analysis, host embeddings. has to use for the final task.
 Joining host embeddings that summarise the telescope traf-
 I. I NTRODUCTION fic sounds appealing since they could allow the sharing of

N ETWORK telescopes are IP address ranges that do
 not host any services [1]. They are primary tools for
collecting information about the activity of malicious hosts
 generic features instead of raw data, in a Federated Learning (FL) approach [10], [11]. However, telescopes observe
 traffic coming from different sets of IP addresses, and the
in early attack stages. They receive only unsolicited packets amount of traffic that each telescope observes depends on its
that include routine scans from benign actors, botnet activities, characteristics. Because of that, even the activity of the same
packets coming from misconfigured services, and backscatter- senders may significantly differ when observed from different
ing, i.e., victims’ responses to attacks performed using spoofed telescopes. In sum, the consolidation of embeddings built by
addresses. several independent telescope operators requires ingenuity. In
 While providing a rich and effective source for cybersecu- this work, we answer the following research questions to
rity, a single telescope offers only a partial view of malicious address these challenges:
scan activities [2]. Their visibility is limited by factors such as • RQ1: What are the benefits of sharing telescope information to learn host activity patterns?
 Received 1 April 2025; revised 30 December 2025 and 13 March 2026;
accepted 14 April 2026. Date of publication 20 April 2026; date of current • RQ2: What are the tradeoffs in learning such patterns?
version 24 April 2026. This work was partially supported by project SERICS Who benefits the most?
(PE00000014) under the MUR National Recovery and Resilience Plan funded • RQ3: What are the challenges to learn host representation
by the European Union–NextGenerationEU and the PRIN Projects xInternet (eXplainable Internet–20225CETN9–PRIN 2022) and ACRE (AI-Based in an FL approach?
Causality and Reasoning for Deceptive Assets–2022EP2L7H). The associate We here introduce FedScope, a system to perform federated
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was L. Qu. (Corresponding author: Kai Huang.) learning of host embeddings from multiple telescopes.1 We
 Kai Huang, Andrea Sordello, Luca Vassio, and Marco Mellia are with first assess to what extent combining multiple telescope data
Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Torino, Italy (e-mail: kai.huang@polito.it; can improve the learning of host embeddings, assuming a
andrea.sordello@polito.it; luca.vassio@polito.it; marco.mellia@polito.it).
 Rodolfo Vieira Valentim and Idilio Drago are with Università di Torino,
10124 Torino, Italy (e-mail: rodolfo.valentim@unito.it; idilio.drago@unito.it). 1 A preliminary version of this work has appeared in [12], where we perform
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3685756 an initial assessment of distributed learning of host embeddings.

 © 2026 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
4214 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

global view of the raw traffic. We evaluate the quality of
the globally produced embeddings via host classification and
clustering problems across multiple scenarios by varying both
the number of operators and the size of the telescopes. This
allows us to assess the benefits of data sharing.
 After confirming the advantages of combining multiple
telescopes, we design and engineer FedScope to perform the
learning in a fully distributed way, showing that FL is a
practical solution that allows the sharing of knowledge across
different parties without requiring the sharing of raw data [11].
We address the challenges posed by varying resources and
constraints across domains, as well as the heterogeneity of
data each telescope observes.
 Our results demonstrate that collaboration among multiple
operators improves the quality of embeddings compared to
local approaches in both classification and clustering tasks. Fig. 1. Scenario: Centralised vs federated approaches for host representation
 learning.
Sharing knowledge using an FL approach, as in FedScope
achieves performance comparable to a centralised learning
approach (which shares raw data), while reducing the shared
 • Centralised learning (Figure 1a): We assume that operdata. To increase the impact of FedScope we contribute it as
 ators share data without restrictions. Here, a central
open source to the community.2
 entity collects all telescope data and trains the global
 We summarise our key contributions as follows:
 model f considering all observed traffic. This represents
 • We introduce FedScope, the first self-supervised federated a theoretical best-case scenario with complete visibility.
 framework for learning host embeddings from network • Federated learning (Figure 1b): We design FedScope to
 telescope traffic without sharing raw traces. build a global model without exchanging raw data. Each
 • We design a novel vocabulary synchronisation and evic- operator s trains a local model f s , and shares it with the
 tion mechanism that enables federated Word2Vec-style aggregator, which consolidates them in a global model f
 models with dynamically changing input spaces. before redistributing it back.
 • We provide an extensive evaluation on real-world
 We assume that the goal of telescope operators is to build
 datasets, showing that FedScope achieves performance
 host embeddings that are employed in downstream machine
 comparable to centralised learning, enabling efficient
 learning tasks. In the first stage, the operator adopts a selfknowledge sharing.
 supervised representation learning step, uses raw traffic traces
 Section II presents our scenario and provides some back- collected by the telescope as input, to build its embeddings.
ground on host embedding learning. In Section III we describe Such compact numerical vectors can later serve as input to
the federated learning approach we adopt. We introduce different ML tasks based on the requirements of different
the design and implementation of FedScope in Section IV. operators. In the following, we introduce some background on
We then validate it by answering our research questions in self-supervised representation learning for readers not familiar
Section V, Section VI and Section VII, considering supervised with the approach, followed by a description of the algorithm
and unsupervised learning downstream tasks as well as run- we select for testing the federated learning approach.
time performance. Section VIII discusses previous work, while
Section IX concludes the paper.
 A. Self-Supervised Representation Learning
 II. S CENARIO AND H OST E MBEDDINGS
 Supervised machine learning is inadequate for telescope
 Figure 1 summarizes the scenario we consider. Each oper- data analysis since ground truth labels are scarce in this
ator deploys a telescope s ∈ S in its network to monitor scenario. Self-supervised representation learning offers a valid
unsolicited traffic. Each telescope builds what we formally alternative because it formulates the learning problem without
define as a corpus C s , i.e., the ordered list of senders (identified external supervised signals, i.e., using the same input data
by their IP address) that reach the telescope services (identified as labels. For example, the prediction of the next word in
by the ports). We use such a corpus to build a self-supervised a sentence or, as in our case, the prediction of the next
model f , using an ML pipeline borrowed from NLP. We sender IP address reaching the telescope. This self-supervised
consider three alternative approaches: formulation allows the model to learn compact numerical fea-
 • Local learning: This is our baseline, where each telescope tures that capture underlying behaviour from the data without
 learns its model f s independently as in previous works [5], explicit labels. This approach is at the root of the success of
 [6], [13]. This baseline allows us to quantify the benefits NLP solutions, such as the Generative Pre-trained Transformer
 of sharing telescope data among operators. (GPT) models. These models pass a pre-training stage where
 they learn to map words to the latent space to maximise the
 2 https://github.com/SmartData-Polito/fedscope accuracy of predicting missing parts in texts.
HUANG et al.: FEDERATED HOST EMBEDDINGS FROM TELESCOPE TRAFFIC: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 4215

 ports aggregated over fixed time windows. The model does not
 rely on payloads, destination IP addresses, or protocol-level
 fields, and learns host embeddings solely from sender–port cooccurrence patterns and coarse traffic volume, thus minimising
 the information shared among participants.
 Formally, given a vocabulary of senders V = {v1 , v2 , v3 , . . .}
 and the sequences of packets they send, i.e., the corpus C, we
 map each entity v ∈ V → u ∈ RE where u is the embedding of
 v in the E dimensional latent space. The function e : V → RE
 is the embedding function (e.g., Word2Vec) that we train in a
 self-supervised manner using the masked language technique.
 Finally, given the function e, let X := [e(v)]v∈V ∈ R|V|×E be the
 matrix of embeddings for all senders in V.4 The model f will
 include the embedding function e and all the other weights in
 the neural network autoencoder.
Fig. 2. Model aggregation among 2 operators; yellow neurons represent the These embeddings can then be used to solve supervised and
intersection of two vocabularies. unsupervised downstream tasks, e.g., assigning hosts a known
 label or finding clusters of similar hosts.
 For the analysis of telescope traffic, the host embeddings
map host activity in a latent space, where hosts with similar III. L EARNING F EDERATED R EPRESENTATION
behaviours should be positioned closer together. Researchers We propose a collaborative approach to learn embeddings
proposed multiple algorithms for learning the embeddings, of telescope traffic as shown in Figure 1b. In the following,
each capturing different factors from the data, such as temporal we detail each required step.
traffic patterns [5], [6], similarities in traffic features [13] and
structural traffic properties, such as typical sender/receiver
patterns [6]. Here, we rely on our previous approach called A. Federated Learning at Large
i-DarkVec [5], which we summarise next. Federated learning is a decentralized machine learning
 approach where multiple parties train a shared model col-
B. Learning Host Embeddings–i-DarkVec laboratively without exchanging raw data. The architecture
 typically consists of a central server coordinating model
 i-DarkVec relies on Word2Vec [14], a well-known natural updates from distributed clients, which perform local training
language processing technique that learns a vector representa- on their private datasets. At each round, the server collects the
tion for each word in a vocabulary.3 The goal of i-DarkVec is local models f s from clients, aggregates them into a global
to represent senders of packets identified by their IP addresses, model f according to a weighting function, and returns the
considering their traffic patterns. The algorithm maps each global model f to each client. The primary goal of FL is to
IP address in a meaningful latent space that can be used train the model while preserving data privacy and reducing
to uncover coordinated host activities, such as attacks from communication costs.
botnets, or scanning activities performed by a pool of senders. FL assumes all clients share the same model architecture,
For this, i-DarkVec extracts the sequences of packets destined so they have to exchange the model weights only. In our
to the same TCP/UDP ports. Analogously to NLP, IP addresses setup, this is not true and calls for additional ingenuity. In
of senders represent “words” and the sequence in which they fact, not all telescopes will observe the same set of senders,
reach the telescope represents “sentences”. i-DarkVec feeds the and each has a different vocabulary. We thus need to define the
generated sequences as input to Word2Vec, a simple neural common superset, i.e., a common vocabulary. For instance, in
network autoencoder in which each input/output neuron is Figure 2 we have two telescopes, one observing traffic from
associated with a given word present in the given vocabulary hosts V1 = {v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 , v5 }, the other from V2 = {v4 , v5 , v6 , v7 }.
(see Fig. 2). The model learns to predict which words would When aggregating their data, the global vocabulary becomes
likely appear in a sentence given a word in input. Notice that V = V1 ∪ V2 . This implies a change in the model archithe autoencoder architecture is fixed, given the vocabulary. tecture, because the number of input and output neurons is
The resulting embeddings capture the semantic and syntactic now different–with new connections to/from the hidden layer
relationships between words so that words that often co-occur neurons. Notice that E, the size of the hidden layer (E = 3 in
in the same sentence are mapped closer in the latent space [14]. the example) can be the same for all models.
As Word2Vec produces word embedding, i-DarkVec produces
host embeddings: senders that co-occur in time and target
similar services are mapped closer in the latent space. B. Federated Learning Host Embedding
 In practice, the representation learning stage operates on To build a common model from multiple networks using
sequences derived from source IP addresses and destination FL, we rely on the FedAvg [11] algorithm. It allows distributed
 3 We assume that readers are familiar with Word2Vec and only provide a 4 In Word2Vec, the produced embeddings are the learnable weight matrix
brief overview of i-DarkVec. Details are presented in [5]. between the input and the hidden layer.
4216 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

training among a large number of clients with a simple weighting function. We provide an overview of the FL approach in
Figure 1b.
 We adopt FedAvg because it introduces no additional
assumptions and allows us to isolate the core challenges
addressed by FedScope, namely federated self-supervised
representation learning with non-aligned and evolving
vocabularies.
 Given a set of telescope operators S , each operator s ∈ S
(i) generates the corpus C s according to the traffic it observes;
(ii) trains or updates its local model f s (including its embedding function e s ); (iii) generates the local embedding matrix
X s ∈ R|Vs |×E , where V s is the local vocabulary. The central
server receives the local models f s and vocabularies V s . It
aggregates the local models into a federated model that can be
applied to senders observed in at least one of the vocabularies.
As said, each client may have a different vocabulary S V s and the
server must compute the global vocabulary V = s V s . Notice Fig. 3. Federated design of FedScope.
that, in practical cases, the model size might be constrained in
size (|V| < M), hence also the final vocabulary size might not
exceed M elements. A host eviction policy is needed in these IV. F ED S COPE
cases. Deploying i-DarkVec with the distributed FL training setup
 The serverSaggregates the embedders e1 , . . ., e|S | into a new in realistic environments introduces challenges. Most existing
function e : s V s → RE , where e = a e1 , . . ., e|S | . Similarly, FL frameworks operate with a pre-defined model architecthe server aggregates the rest of the models { f s } s∈S . Finally, ture and overlook our scenario where the model architecture
the server sends back f and V to each client. Notice that now, changes over time. In our setup, it is essential to change and,
for each client s, f s = f , e s = e and V s = V. We can repeat at the same time, limit the model size to prevent it from
this update procedure for multiple rounds. overwhelming client resources.
 We use as aggregation function a() the weighted average
between the local embeddings produced by each client. We
show an example of aggregation of 2 operators in Figure 2. A. FedScope Design
Notice that some local embeddings might not be defined for As in i-DarkVec, we consider slotted time and process all
some operators, e.g., only {v4 , v5 } appear in both vocabularies. traffic in a time window, denoted by the index t. For each
The weighted average is only performed among the param- packet, we extract the source IP address, the destination port
eters related to common words, highlighted in yellow in the and the number of packets that source address has produced
example. in that timeslot. At the beginning of each period, the server
 Formally,
 S we define the final federated embedding for a host instructs the clients to start a new training period with all
v ∈ s V s as: packets collected in that interval.
 P To address the challenges of our scenario, we propose an
 |V s | · e s (v) FL pipeline for FedScope and introduce a novel interaction
 s:v∈V s
 e(v) = P between the FL clients and the FL server before the traditional
 |V s |
 s:v∈V s FL model aggregation phase.
 This new phase enables building and updating the global
where |V s | ∈ R is the weight referred to the local embeddings model architecture by exchanging local vocabularies {V s } s∈S .
of sender v observed in client s. With these, we compute the global vocabulary V and use it to
 We use vocabulary size as a simple and robust weighting update the model f . This interaction occurs before the standard
choice. Intuitively, observing more senders means acquiring FL client/server interaction for the local model training and
more information. As shown in Appendix, alternative aggre- the global model aggregation. Figure 3 presents the details of
gation schemes yield comparable downstream performance. FedScope pipeline. It consists of two phases.
Notice that in this case, the weight is the same for each host 1) Vocabulary Synchronisation: In this novel phase, the
v ∈ Vs . server aggregates client vocabularies V s .
 In addition, note that only model parameters and • Client: Each client processes the raw traffic observed
sender identifiers are exchanged during aggregation; no in the period t, builds the local corpus C s , i.e. extracts
raw traffic records, payloads, or protocol-level features are the features required by i-DarkVec, builds the local
shared. vocabulary V s and computes senders’ interest metrics–see
 At last, the aggregation procedure tolerates heterogeneous Section IV-B for details.
client update frequencies and temporary client dropout, as only • Server: After receiving all clients’ vocabularies and interthe models received in a given round are aggregated. est metrics, the server updates the global vocabulary V
HUANG et al.: FEDERATED HOST EMBEDDINGS FROM TELESCOPE TRAFFIC: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 4217

 with new senders appearing in the local vocabularies. local #pktv,s (t) and #dst portv,s (t). Given the typical heavy-
 In this phase, the clients only share with the server the tailed distribution of the number of packets per sender [2], we
 presence of sender vi and the sender’s interest metrics. We rescale both #pktv (t) and #dst portv (t) using the logarithm
 do not share any other information, i.e., no destination IP function to prevent one from dominating the other.
 address, no port contacted by v, no payload, etc. We enforce the upper bound M on vocabulary size |V| and,
 If |V| > M, the server retains only the top-M most inter- at each time slot t, we keep senders with a higher interest
 esting senders. The model embeddings are then initialised score to limit the model’s size and fit resource constraints for
 or pruned according to the sender present in V. real-world deployment. We perform this eviction policy on the
 At the end of this phase, all clients agree on a common central server when computing V(t) such that |V(t)| ≤ M.
vocabulary and global model with aligned architecture. Notice
that clients may need to update the corpus C s if the server
 C. FedScope Implementation
filtered out any sender which is present in C s .
 2) Model Training: In this phase, we conduct the standard Several frameworks and libraries provide off-the-shelf
FL training round following the FedAvg framework: Each implementations of FL. We identify the most suitable one
client trains the model f s with the local corpus C s ; The server to use as a starting point and adapt it to accommodate our
receives all local models f s and aggregates them into the global new vocabulary synchronisation phase. Given the support and
model f and sends it back to all clients. Since the model and popularity among the scientific community, we select the
vocabulary are already synchronised, we can repeat the FL Flower framework [15], a lightweight open-source Python
training phase for multiple rounds without repeating the first framework that provides a well-suited FL implementation for
phase. real-world deployment.
 The library enables the definition of clients, which locally
 train the models, and a server, which orchestrates the entire
B. IP Eviction Policy
 FL training process. Clients and the server communicate via
 Because each telescope keeps observing new senders [2], the Google high-performance Remote Procedure Call (gRPC)
the dimensionality of the vocabulary V grows. Sharing infor- framework for seamless integration on different machines and
mation between multiple operators will make these numbers operating systems. We adapt the design presented in Figure 3
grow even faster, increasing the model size and calling for to integrate it within Flower. We add the Vocabulary Synadditional computational resources. Conversely, some senders chronisation phase, during which the server sends the newly
will disappear over time, thus making the information captured computed vocabulary V and the global model architecture to
by the model stale and likely noisy. To address these issues and the clients. Each client then aligns the local model e s and
make the solution scalable, we introduce an eviction policy to vocabulary V s , updates the corpus C s , and starts the traditional
limit the global vocabulary V size to M and model embedding Model Training phase, which can repeat for several rounds.
matrix X. Armed with the updated Flower framework, we implement
 The objective is to prioritise senders. To achieve this, we FedScope as a Python application capable of fully supporting
define the interest score It (v) for each sender v ∈ V at time t the FL implementation of i-DarkVec5 in real-world scenarios.6
based on the following intuitions: We containerise both the server and client components to
 • We consider recent senders that generate a large volume simplify the distribution and deployment in remote telescopes.
 of traffic more significant than those sending a few We make FedScope freely available to the community.
 packets.
 • The behavioural patterns of senders targeting a broad
 V. S UPERVISED L EARNING E XPERIMENTS
 range of destination ports or protocols are inherently more
 interesting and important. To investigate our research questions, we design specific
 Formally, given the global vocabulary V(t) at time window experiments to compare the performance of the distributed
t, for each sending host v, we define the interest score It (v) i-DarkVec solutions in a controlled and ideal environment
as: in which we do not need to consider constraints for system
 ( implementation. Our goal is to investigate which benefits
 βIt−1 (v) + (1 − β)it (v) if v ∈ V(t − 1)
 It (v) = (1) brought by the collaboration among different telescopes. For
 it (v) if v < V(t − 1) this, we compare the performance of embeddings trained
 i) locally, ii) centralised, and iii) via federated learning in
where:
 supervised downstream tasks.
 it (v) = log(#pktv (t)) + log(#dst portv (t)). We compare the performance of the alternative solutions on
 the same dataset that we process in an offline manner. This in
 β ∈ (0, 1) is the parameter for the exponentially moving
average between the current host activity it (v) and the host’s 5 Original i-Darkvec implementation is based on the Gensim [16] implemenpast interest. #pktv (t) and #dst portv (t) are the numbers of tation of Word2Vec. Here, we migrate it to a pure PyTorch implementation
packets and destination ports of sender v observed globally in for compatibility with the existing Flower frameworks.
 6 While the current Flower-based prototype naturally tolerates temporary
time window t. These are obtained by aggregating for each client dropout, dynamic client joining is constrained by the orchestration
sender the interest metrics from different clients, that are the model of the framework and is left for future engineering extensions.
4218 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

vitro scenario allows us to control and repeat the experiments TABLE I
using the same dataset over and over.7 N UMBER OF S ENDERS P RESENT IN THE G ROUND T RUTH
 We set all the hyper-parameters consistent with the original
i-DarkVec algorithm [5]: We partition our telescope traffic
dataset into daily batches. For each batch, we train and update
the models for 1 epoch with embedding size E = 200. At last,
we disable the eviction policy setting M = ∞.

A. Dataset
 We rely on real-world network traffic collected from several
telescopes at different times, and we use, for the classification
task, a ground truth retrieved from publicly available lists.
 1) Telescopes: The first dataset, called dataset , is composed of a /24 telescope s1 located within our campus network,
and a /19 telescope s2 operated in Brazil. We collected
2 months of traffic in 2021, from May 1 to June 30, during
which the /24 telescope observed more than 64 million packets
sent by 532 thousand senders, while the /19 telescope recorded
over 1.5 billion packets from more than 3 million senders.8
We filter out senders transmitting fewer than 5 packets per
day [5], retaining 15% of the senders in the /24 telescope
 institutions that perform internet-wide scans. They publicly
and 30% in the /19 telescope. To investigate the potential
 state the set of IP addresses they use for their goal, and their
of different telescope sizes, we partition the /19 Brazilian
 activity is constant over time.
telescope s2 into smaller telescopes with sizes ranging from
 The classification task is highly unbalanced, with thousands
/20 to /28. When not specified, the size of the telescope s2
 of senders in the Mirai-like class, while only hundreds or
used in our experiment is a /24 network (same size as s1 ),
 dozens belong to classes of other acknowledged scanners.
which is sampled from the /19 address range. For all analyses
 The remaining senders are Unknown. We build two different
related to embedding performance, we used the first month of
 ground truths with the same classes, just with different senders,
data (i.e., from May 1 to May 31), as this period is sufficient
 with senders that were active in 2021 or 2025, respectively.
for evaluation. For the resource benchmark of FedScope
 Table I details the classes present in the ground truth.
(Section VI-C), we instead used the full two months of data
to have a longer analysis period.
 We introduce a second dataset, called dataset , to evaluate B. Classification Task Methodology
the impact of collaboration among more telescopes. This Motivated by the assumption that high-quality embeddings
dataset includes the traffic from 7 network telescopes that can project senders of the same class (i.e., belonging to one
we collected using distributed network telescopes [17] during of the coordinated groups of the ground truth) into adjacent
October 2025. This dataset is composed of traffic coming regions of the latent space, we perform our downstream
from the same two telescopes that generated , and five classification task relying on a simple k-Nearest-Neighbours
new telescopes belonging to several Italian and Brazilian (k-NN) classifier. It assigns each sender to the most frequent
universities. label through majority voting among the classes within the k
 2) Ground Truth—Senders Identification: We consider a nearest neighbours in the embedding space. Thus, the more
supervised downstream task to compare the representativeness homogeneous the senders engaged in similar activities in the
of the embeddings. Specifically, we perform host classification embedding space, the better the classification performance. We
by assigning senders to known classes characterised by well- use cosine distance to measure distance among embeddings
known coordinated behaviours. We construct the ground truth and report the performance of the k-NN classifier considering
based on classes of senders whose coordination is known a the F1-score.
priori, leveraging two data sources: (i) the presence of fin- We adopt a Leave-One-Out validation approach considering
gerprints of Mirai-like malware observed in received packets all the labelled senders in our collection. For each sender, we
[18], and (ii) publicly available information retrieved from compare the label produced by the k-NN classifier with the one
online repositories of acknowledged internet scanners,9 i.e., in the ground truth. Since we cannot verify the characteristics
non-hostile senders performing scanning activities. The final of the Unknown class, we consider them only when computing
ground truth comprises 13 classes of senders that we observe the k-NN, without reporting classification metrics for the class.
in the s1 and s2 telescopes. These senders are well-known We set k = 7 for the k-NN classifier as in [5].

 7 It uses the original i-DarkVec code based on the Gensim library that we
 C. Results: Two Telescopes of the Same Size
run considering the local, centralised, and FL learning approaches.
 8 We make our data available upon request. In Table II we report the per-class F1-Score for the senders
 9 https://gitlab.com/mcollins at isi/acknowledged scanners active in our dataset . We consider a scenario where there are
HUANG et al.: FEDERATED HOST EMBEDDINGS FROM TELESCOPE TRAFFIC: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 4219

 Fig. 5. Coverage in the FL approach with a /24 telescope s1 and a varying
Fig. 4. Classification performance of traffic observed by the /24 telescope s1 size telescope s2 (dataset ). Note the different y-axis scale. The percentage
(a) and by telescope s2 (b) using dataset . Telescope s2 varies in size. shows the increase for FL.

 When focusing on the full set of observed senders (s1 ∪
 s2 ), the centralised results are comparable with the FL ones,
2 operators, each with a /24 telescope. We report the metrics resulting in an average F1-Score of 0.89.
for Coverage benefit. As i-DarkVec requires a sufficient
 • Only the senders active in each considered telescope (s1 amount of traffic to generate an embedding for a sender, all
 and s2 ) when the embeddings are generated locally. senders that send less than 5 packets are not updated for that
 • Only the senders active in each considered telescope batch. However, since scanners and botnets target multiple
 when the embeddings are generated with the centralised telescopes in the same observation period with different intenapproach. sity [2], some of those may result as inactive in a telescope
 • Only the senders active in each considered telescope when and as active in another one. Thus, building a single global
 the embeddings are generated with the FL approach. model will extend the embeddings to model more senders
 • The whole set of senders observed in both the networks independently of which telescope they are active. To gauge
 (s1 ∪ s2 ) when collaborating with centralised or FL this, compare the Support figures in Table II. Clearly, the
 approaches. collaborative s1 ∪ s2 setup allows both telescopes to build an
 embedding for more than 2k additional Mirai senders com-
 Classification performance benefit. Firstly, focus on the
 pared to the ones locally observed. In total, the collaborative
senders of the two telescopes separately. Both the Centralised
 approaches extend the set of covered senders by 14.77% in
and FL approaches achieve good performance (≥ 0.89 of
 s1 and 12.25% in s2 , i.e., 11.7k and 11.0k respectively (see
average F1-Score in both operators), improving the local
 Figure 5).
embeddings generation (F1-Score of 0.86 in s1 and 0.83
 Answer to RQ1: The collaborative setup allows the particin s2 ).
 ipating telescopes to both improve the quality of the sender
 For classes with large support (>250 senders), the local
 representation (F1-score improves by 3-6%) and to create
approach suffices to obtain an excellent F1-Score except for
 embeddings for more senders (14% more senders can be
the Driftnet class, for which the Centralised (FL) approach
 classified), improving the visibility on downstream tasks.
results in +0.29 (+0.24) average F1-Score. Classes with small
support like Shodan or Internap, benefit from the collaborative
approaches gained in both telescopes, up to +0.33 F1-Score D. Results: Two Telescopes of Different Sizes
for Internap with the Centralised approach in s2 , confirming In Figure 4a we consider the scenario where the two
the usefulness of sharing the knowledge between operators. telescopes have different sizes. We keep s1 fixed and vary
4220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE II
F1-S CORE AND C OVERED S ENDERS FOR THE 7-N EAREST-N EIGHBOURS C LASSIFIER A PPLIED ON THE H OST E MBEDDINGS G ENERATED T HROUGH
 D IFFERENT A PPROACHES U SING DATASET . T HE B EST R ESULTS FOR E ACH TASK A RE IN B OLD . F OR THE S AKE OF C OMPLETENESS ,
 W E R EPORT THE S UPPORT OF THE U NKNOWN C LASS . M INOR D IFFERENCES B ETWEEN C ENTRALISED AND F EDERATED R ESULTS A RE
 E XPECTED D UE TO R EGULARISATION E FFECTS I NDUCED BY M ODEL AVERAGING U NDER H ETEROGENEOUS DATA D ISTRIBUTIONS

s2 size from /20 to /28. The vertical dashed line represents the
case of Table II where the two telescopes have equal size.
 Classification performance benefit. Figure 4a shows the
result for the fixed-size telescope s1 , while Figure 4b for the
variable size telescope s2 . When s2 is larger than s1 (leftmost
part of Figure 4a), the F1-score improves by 3-5% w.r.t the
Local embeddings. The same occurs for s2 when it is smaller
than s1 (rightmost part of Figure 4b). In this second case,
the performance gain is more evident given the visibility of
s2 becomes severely limited when it is smaller than a /25 or
/26 subnet. Notice that when the s2 telescope is extremely
small (e.g.,/27 or /28), the additional knowledge brought by
the s1 allows s2 to obtain high-quality embeddings (F1-Score
gain >30% for s2 ). Conversely, the contribution of s2 to the
knowledge of s1 offers marginal benefits. Fig. 6. Average F1-Score when embeddings are generated through the FL
 At last, comparing the results obtained by the Centralised collaborative between an increasing number of operators using dataset .
and FL approaches, we notice that the FL approach obtains
slightly lower performance than the Centralised solution. This
is due to the sharing of the filtered corpora C = C1 ∪C2 rather
than building the centralised corpus C directly from the raw and report the resulting F1-Score in Figure 6. Look at
data. the first column, which corresponds to the Local scenario.
 Coverage benefit. In Figure 5 we report the extended When each operator observes a sufficient amount of traffic to
coverage due to the collaborative approaches. Overall, the generate meaningful embeddings locally (e.g.,/24 telescopes),
sharing of information creates embeddings for more senders the local approach results in good-quality embeddings (average
than the local approach. Figure 5a highlights that integrating F1-Score of 0.77). Conversely, with telescopes smaller than
the knowledge of the small telescope provides a limited /24 the telescope lacks sufficient data to produce robust
increase of the coverage –i.e., +15% when collaborating with a embeddings.
telescope of the same size, down to +0.5% when collaborating Consider now the collaboration scenario. When /24 or /25
with a /28 telescope. telescopes federate themselves into a large telescope, the
 Conversely, in Figure 5b we see that the small telescopes F1-score improve significantly (bottom two rows). Even /26
strongly benefit from the collaborative setting. Thanks to the telescope can improve their models by collaborating, going
broader point of view of the /24 telescope, the coverage from 0.64 to 0.77 F1-score.
increases by 34% up to 123% when s2 is a /25 or /28 telescope. Instead, very small telescopes (e.g.,/28) cannot contribute
 to building a performing model, regardless of the number
E. Multiple Telescopes involved (F1-Score do not improve).
 Next, we evaluate the performance of the FL approach with Answer to RQ2: The collaboration is always beneficial.
multiple telescopes. For this evaluation, we use the dataset Benefits are asymmetric: smaller telescopes gain substantially,
HUANG et al.: FEDERATED HOST EMBEDDINGS FROM TELESCOPE TRAFFIC: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 4221

 TABLE III
M ACRO F1-S CORE AND C OVERED S ENDERS FOR THE 7-N EAREST-
 N EIGHBOURS C LASSIFIER A PPLIED ON THE S ENDERS E MBEDDINGS
 G ENERATED IN V ITRO AND BY F ED S COPE

while larger ones mainly improve coverage because the traffic
they observe suffices to build the embeddings.

 VI. F ED S COPE B ENCHMARK
 In this section, we run FedScope and compare its performance with that obtained in the simulated environment based
on the Gensim implementation of iDarkVec. Next, we present
the impact of our eviction model on performance. Finally, we
benchmark the computational resources required by FedScope.

A. FedScope Classification Performance Fig. 7. Performance of the 7-Nearest-Neighbours classifier applied to sender
 embeddings of the dataset applying the eviction policy.
 Table III compares the results of the 7-NN classifier applied
to the host embeddings generated by FedScope with those
computed in vitro in the previous section using dataset . The
 C. Resource Benchmark
results indicate that the embeddings produced by FedScope are
similar to those from the in vitro environment. The difference Our primary concern is the memory required to execute
in the F1-score can be attributed to the different libraries used FedScope as, in actual deployment, some clients may have
to implement i-DarkVec in the two scenarios (the Gensim and this resource limited e.g., they are edge devices. Since the
PyTorch implementations of Word2Vec). model and the vocabulary continuously grow over time as new
 senders are added, this leads to an increasing memory usage,
B. Impact of IP Eviction which may exhaust the client’s availability. For this reason, we
 Here we compare the quality of the embedding when we assess that the eviction mechanism introduced by FedScope is
apply our eviction policy using dataset . We set different sufficient to cap the memory usage.
values of M (from 40 000 to 100 000 and different values of A second important resource to monitor is the cost of
β in the interest score computation (from 0.01 to 0.99). For communication exchange. A key advantage of FL in general
this analysis, we leverage controlled experiments, ignoring the is its reduced data transmission compared to centralized ML,
overhead due to the setup and maintenance of the distributed i.e., exchanging model weights is lighter than exchanging
platform required by FedScope. Figure 7a shows the impact the raw dataset. It is important to verify if this still holds
of the eviction: using different values of M and β. We observe for FedScope since its modified FL pipeline includes the
little changes in the macro average F1-Score as it is always additional vocabulary synchronization, which implies more
in the range 0.87 to 0.90. data exchange.
 Figure 7b shows how many senders we can classify using To conduct our RAM and network benchmark, we collected
the k-NN. As expected, M strongly influences this number: the FedScope’s statistics using its containerized version executed
larger M is, the more senders we can consider. Conversely, the using Docker Compose with two clients and a central server.
impact of β is rather limited, especially on large values of M. This choice allows us to simulate a real distributed system
Reducing the impact of recent senders (larger β) lets the model without the challenges of deploying a fully distributed system.
focus on stable senders. Given our ground truth is mostly made Each client gets the same trace as those used in the previous
by scanners that are always active and stable, this allows us experiments by preloading traces on the client disks. We then
to consider a larger fraction of ground truth senders. let the system run, during which the clients and the server
4222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 Fig. 9. Overhead of the data exchanged by FedScope compared to standard
 FL data exchange.

 impact of the eviction policy: in the scenario without limitation, the client’s memory continues to grow steadily, reaching
 up to 4 GB on the last day. In contrast, with M = 100 000,
 the memory usage stabilises, with memory usage that remains
 below 3GB.
 2) Server’s Memory Usage: Figure 8 illustrates the effect
 on FedScope server’s memory usage. In this case, the memory
 peaks correspond to moments when the server receives the
 local models e s at the end of each Model Training Phase.
 As before, in the first [0, 22] days we observe the same
Fig. 8. Memory usage of FedScope execution. pattern in both scenarios. When the eviction policy becomes
 effective, the eviction policy limits the server memory that
 never exceeds 4 GB. In contrast, with no eviction policy, the
execute the FedScope synchronization and model training memory continues to grow as the dictionary and model size
phases. All communications occur in the virtual network keep growing.
offered by the virtualisation environment. 3) Network Impact: The communication cost during Fed-
 We run the scenario for two months to clearly show the Scope training scales linearly with the model size, as the
impact on the resources over a longer period of time. We run Model Training phase exchanges model embeddings that are
FedScope in two scenarios, which differ only by setting M = in the order of megabytes. In contrast, the vocabulary V and
∞ (unlimited case) or M = 100 000 (constrained cases). We the interest scores it (v) account for only a negligible portion
choose M = 100 000 as it is roughly half of the total number of of the exchanged data, remaining on the order of kilobytes.
senders observed. With dataset , the model grows between Figure 9 illustrates the overhead introduced by Vocabulary
4 and 9 MB per day, depending on the number of unseen IP Synchronization, normalized to the cost of traditional FedAvg
addresses that now must be added at the input and output layer. Model Training.
In the first scenario, with M = 100,000, the model reaches a Overall, the results indicate that the additional Vocabulary
maximum size of 160 MB. In contrast, in the M = ∞ scenario, Synchronization impact is minimal (smaller than 1.4%). This
the model grows up to 340 MB. confirms that sharing the local models e s causes the largest
 1) Client’s Memory Usage: Figure 8a illustrates the mem- data exchange. Being the model smaller during the first
ory usage of one of the two FedScope client instances. days, the relative network overhead due to the Vocabulary
 We observe periodic fluctuations in memory usage that Synchronization is larger. It gets amortised when the model
correspond to the client’s Model Training Phase and Idle size grows. Here, limiting the model size makes the additional
Periods: during training, the memory usage grows due to the overhead constant (while the unlimited case would artificially
processing of the daily dataset. During the idle state, the clients keep it reducing).
just wait for server update messages.10 Additionally, memory 4) Timing: In our virtualized setup, each training round
consumption during model training is strongly influenced by lasts from a few minutes up to one hour, depending on the
the dataset size for the given day. size of the daily dataset. The vast majority of this time, i.e.,
 In the first [0, 22] days, the eviction policy is inactive as 98%, is spent in the Model Training phase. In contrast, the
the total number of servers is smaller than M. Both scenarios additional Vocabulary Synchronization phase requires less than
exhibit similar trends. Starting from day 22 we observe the one minute per round, resulting in a negligible impact on the
 overall execution time.
 10 In these experiments, time is emulated. Each training phase lasts several
 Answer to RQ3: The FL approach is feasible. The evicminutes, while the idle phase ends as soon as the aggregation phase is
completed and clients can start processing the data, which is readily available tion policy lets FedScope effectively control the amount of
on disk. resources the clients and the server consume and prevents
HUANG et al.: FEDERATED HOST EMBEDDINGS FROM TELESCOPE TRAFFIC: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 4223

 TABLE IV
 N OTABLE E XAMPLES OF FL C LUSTERS Q UALITY I MPROVEMENT. B EST
 S ILHOUETTE R ESULTS ARE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

Fig. 10. Silhouette values of senders grouped by cluster ID. Wide horizontal
steps indicate large cluster size. Clusters detected from local (s1 ) and FL
embeddings.

the model from growing very large. Focusing on the most
recently active senders allows FedScope to control resource
usage without degrading embedding quality, while maintaining
comparable coverage.

 VII. U NSUPERVISED C LUSTERING TASK
 We now explore if the benefits brought by the FL setup In Table IV we provide some notable examples of cluster
observed in the supervised task are also present when facing improvement via FL. Despite being an unsupervised task, we
unsupervised problems, using dataset . Previous works have rely on the same ground truth of Section V to partially explain
shown that clustering hosts in the embedding space allows some clusters. We match two clusters across the approaches
identifying groups of coordinated senders [5], [9] and novel by maximising the Jaccard index on their members.
activities [19]. Here, we apply the same clustering algorithms Firstly, some clusters reflect the prior knowledge on the
on top of the embeddings, and we evaluate if the collaborative ground truth, i.e., cluster with ShadowServer (C[1−6] ) and
approach improves the quality of the extracted clusters. Censys (C[7−13] ) senders. These clusters exhibit regular activity
 patterns containing the same senders in both the local and FL
A. Methodology scenario with high quality (S h ≥ 0.39). With FL embeddings,
 We adopt the same methodology of [9]: we build a these clusters generally demonstrate higher silhouette values
k-nearest-neighbours graph [20], where the vertices represent compared to the local scenario (+8% of average improvement
the senders and an edge exists between two vertices if the for ShadowServer clusters and 13% for Censys clusters).
senders are k-nearest-neighbours in the embedding space. Notably, with local embeddings, cluster C7 contains one
Then, we cluster senders applying on such a graph the “unknown” sender in addition to the 16 senders of Censys.
widely known Louvain community detection algorithm [21]. Cooperating through FL allows us to refine such a cluster (S h
It iteratively detects clusters of nodes by maximising the of 0.40 locally compared to 0.71 of FL) and to exclude the
graph tendency of forming communities of well-isolated and “unknown” sample, which was wrongly assigned to it.
compact clusters of nodes. Finally, we assess the clustering Clusters containing mostly “unknown” senders (C[14−19] )
quality by means of the Silhouette (S h) [22], a measure of the exhibit remarkable changes across scenarios. For example,
clusters’ separation in the embedding space. Values close to 1 C14 results in an enhanced compactness with FL, i.e., it
indicate a perfect separation of clusters; values lower than 0 includes 57 more samples resulting in +39% of silhouette.
indicate overlap. Conversely, for C15 and C16 , FL refines the clusters removing
 We cluster senders active on the last day of our collection >50 senders included with local embeddings. This causes
and rely on the same experimental setting of Section V-B ≈ 30% of silhouette improvement.
where two /24 telescopes s1 and s2 collaborate. We compare The clustering task results help both to identify sub-groups
clusters obtained from embeddings generated locally on s1 of senders in well-known scanners and to highlight unknown
with those obtained from the FL approach s1 ∪ s2 . coordinated scanning activities. By manually analysing some
 of these clusters, we confirm the same groups of senders are
 involved in the same malicious activities that we found in our
B. Experimental Results previous work [19].
 Figure 10 reports the silhouette and size of the detected All in all, building a general knowledge of observing hosts’
clusters. Results show that the FL approach often refines the behaviours in multiple vantage points allows for enhancing the
embedding space, leading to more compact or better separated quality of the embeddings. FL embeddings of hosts engaged
clusters in many cases. in similar activities are better isolated in the latent space,
4224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

allowing for refining the detected clusters and consequently C. Applications of Federated Learning in Cybersecurity
increasing the silhouette. This property is important to support Federated learning enables model building without sharing
the identification of novel or evolving coordinated activities in raw data, making it well-suited for cybersecurity applications.
future analyses. Telescope data may include payload information, raising both
 operational security concerns (e.g., exposing telescope infras-
 VIII. R ELATED W ORK tructure) and potential privacy implications. Federated learning
A. Telescopes for Security Monitoring addresses these concerns by sharing only model parameters
 Individual telescopes offer a limited view of attacks [2]. rather than raw traffic traces.
Previous work has shown that distributed and heterogeneous Many works apply federated learning solutions to cybertelescopes significantly increase visibility and understanding security applications. Examples include intrusion detection
of attacks [23], [24], [25]. Some studies have used such models [36], risk intelligence systems [37], IoT network monisources to analyse the increase in scanning activities [26], [27], toring [38], [39], and DDoS attack detection and classification
while others explored various telescope designs, including [40], [41]. These approaches typically focus on single-stage
in-cloud deployments [28] and augmented telescopes with pipelines or end-to-end models tailored to specific problems, as
honeypot capabilities [24], [29], [30]. opposed to our focus on integrating a representation learning
 While collaboration among operators and the deployment pipeline.
of diverse telescopes bring benefits, previous works have Only a few recent studies aim to learn federated representaprimarily adopted ad-hoc methods to achieve data sharing tions in a self-supervised manner to build general knowledge
among operators. Data anonymisation approaches are typically that can serve multiple purposes [42], [43]. Among these, the
applied to hide privacy-sensitive information, such as the work in [44] is closest to ours, as the authors also consider
IP addresses of hosts reaching the telescopes and payload activities observable in telescopes. This work focuses on
information in packets [31]. While effective in protecting creating representations for a limited set of malware traffic. In
information, these steps reduce the value of shared data. contrast, our work aims to learn comprehensive representations
 Unlike these approaches, we first quantify the gains of shar- applicable to multiple tasks, providing a broader solution for
ing information among operators. Then, we present FedScope, knowledge exchange among telescope operators.
which allows the learning of shareable host embeddings in a
federated manner, enabling knowledge transfer without raw D. Different Federated Learning Paradigms for
data exchange. Cybersecurity
 Federated learning constitutes not a single paradigm but
B. Representation Learning for Cybersecurity a family of related approaches that vary in architecture and
 Representation learning has become a valuable approach aggregation strategy, privacy objectives, and communication
in cybersecurity, particularly for analysing network traffic patterns [45]. In cybersecurity, researchers most commonly
patterns, including telescope data. adopt Horizontal Federated Learning (HFL) [46], [47], where
 Different works have developed techniques to systematically participating clients share similar feature spaces but differ in
classify and characterise telescope traffic. The literature [32], their sample sets, such as network packet header fields [48]
[33] has progressed from classic algorithms such as k-means and application metadata [37].
(e.g., for clustering traffic based on features) to pipelines To construct a global model from locally trained models,
composed of a first stage of representation learning followed researchers have proposed various aggregation approaches.
by downstream ML tasks. Examples include our methods These approaches differ in how they combine local weight
DarkVec [9] and i-DarkVec [5], which associate IP addresses updates, address data heterogeneity, and mitigate communicawith specific activity types and identify both known and novel tion or computational constraints [45]. Among them, Federated
attack patterns. These approaches draw inspiration from NLP Averaging (FedAvg) remains the most adopted algorithm; it
techniques, leveraging models like Word2Vec [14] to learn iteratively aggregates local model parameters by computing a
numerical representations of network-related events. weighted average of client updates. As a result, many federated
 Several other methods exist, including graph-based learning studies use FedAvg as the de facto baseline [37], [40],
approaches [6] and autoencoders [13], [34], [35]. Alternative [41]. We adopt FedAvg for simplicity, while acknowledging
proposals focusing on telescope data, such as IP2Vec [7] and that other aggregation strategies could improve the quality of
DANTE [8], create embeddings for IP addresses by analysing the learned embeddings.
packet sequences and temporal co-occurrence patterns. These
representation learning techniques have shown useful results IX. C ONCLUSION
in extracting patterns from unlabelled datasets. This paper evaluated the aggregation of data from multiple
 We advocate the use of federated learning for the exchange telescopes for learning host embeddings. We showed that the
of models among telescope operators. While we have validated collaboration among telescopes (i) increases the F1-Score in
our proposal using i-DarkVec [5], the approach applies to downstream classification tasks (e.g., up to 6%), and (ii) allows
other representation learning alternatives. However, applying the construction of embeddings for a larger number of hosts,
FedScope with other methods requires adaptations to how thereby increasing coverage in downstream tasks. In unsupermodels used to learn embeddings are consolidated. vised downstream tasks, combining multiple telescopes helps
HUANG et al.: FEDERATED HOST EMBEDDINGS FROM TELESCOPE TRAFFIC: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 4225

 1) Host Volume-Based Weights: Embeddings are updated at
 different frequencies during training based on how often each
 IP address appears in the corpus. Following this intuition, we
 assign each host a different weight proportional to its activity
 level. Formally,
 S we define the final federated embedding for a
 host v ∈ s V s as:
 P
 #pktv,s · e s (v)
 s:v∈V s
 e(v) = P
 #pktv,s
 s:v∈V s

 where #pktv,s ∈ R is the number of packets that v sends to
 telescope s.
 2) Uniform Weight: For comparison, we test averaging
 the embeddings with uniform weights.S We define the final
 federated embedding for a host v ∈ s V s as:
 P
 e s (v)
 s:v∈V s
 e(v) =
 |{ s | v ∈ V s }|
 where |{ s | v ∈ V s }| denotes the number of telescopes
 contacted by v.
 3) Impact of Weighting Schemes: Figure 11 explores the
 impact of different weighting schemes in the FL approach
 when two providers are involved. Telescope s1 is a /24, while
 s2 size varies.
 The weighting scheme shows minimal effects on embed-
Fig. 11. Classification performance of traffic observed by the /24 darknet d1 ding quality in terms of classification performance. When
and a varying size darknet d2 , with different weighting schemes. both providers make substantial contributions (size ≥/25),
 aggregating the models without weighting yields comparable
 performance (average F1-Score> 0.85). While differences are
to uncover more clusters of potentially malicious hosts. The observable when aggregating telescopes with highly unbalbenefits from aggregating data from multiple telescopes are anced sizes, the overall impact on downstream performance
particularly relevant for smaller telescopes, which otherwise remains limited across all tested schemes.
would miss less active hosts. Overall, the weighting scheme is not a critical
 Considering the challenges for sharing raw telescope data, component–any scheme that approximately reflects the
we introduced and evaluated FedScope. We showed that the relative sizes of different telescopes proves adequate.
FL-based approach to learn host embeddings enables similar
performance in downstream ML tasks as those obtained with ACKNOWLEDGMENT
centralised alternatives. However, a carefully designed policy
 This manuscript reflects only the authors’ views and opinto evict inactive hosts is needed to control the resources
 ions and the Ministry cannot be considered responsible for
of providers contributing to the learning of models as more
 them.
telescopes aggregate data. We contribute the source code of
FedScope in the hope that it will foster collaboration among
different telescope providers. R EFERENCES
 Future directions include the deployment of FedScope in [1] C. Fachkha and M. Debbabi, “Darknet as a source of cyber intelligence:
 Survey, taxonomy, and characterization,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
practice and its extension to other scenarios, e.g., to learn host vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1197–1227, 2nd Quart., 2016.
embeddings from production networks and other sources. Such [2] F. Soro, I. Drago, M. Trevisan, M. Mellia, J. Ceron, and J. J. Sandeployments would enable more comprehensive threat moni- tanna, “Are darknets all the same? On darknet visibility for security
 monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Local Metrop. Area Netw.
toring across diverse networks. However, they will require an (LANMAN), Jul. 2019, pp. 1–6.
analysis of possible data leakage via learned models, as well [3] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
as establishing appropriate privacy-preserving mechanisms to Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023.
 [4] Z. B. Houidi, R. Azorin, M. Gallo, A. Finamore, and D. Rossi, “Towards
protect sensitive information. a systematic multi-modal representation learning for network data,” in
 Proc. 21st ACM Workshop Hot Topics Netw., Nov. 2022, pp. 181–187.
 [5] L. Gioacchini, L. Vassio, M. Mellia, I. Drago, Z. B. Houidi, and
 A PPENDIX D. Rossi, “I-DarkVec: Incremental embeddings for darknet traffic
 analysis,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1–28, Aug.
A. Alternative Weighting Schemes 2023.
 [6] L. Gioacchini, A. Cavallo, M. Mellia, and L. Vassio, “Exploring tempo-
 For completeness, we test two alternative weighting ral GNN embeddings for darknet traffic analysis,” in Proc. 2nd Graph
schemes beyond the vocabulary-based approach. Neural Netw. Workshop, Dec. 2023, pp. 31–36.
4226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[7] M. Ring, A. Dallmann, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “IP2 Vec: Learning [33] M. Jonker, A. King, J. Krupp, C. Rossow, A. Sperotto, and A. Dainotti,
 similarities between IP addresses,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining “Millions of targets under attack: A macroscopic characterization of the
 Workshops (ICDMW), Nov. 2017, pp. 657–666. DoS ecosystem,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., Nov. 2017, pp. 100–113.
[8] D. Cohen et al., “DANTE: A framework for mining and monitoring dark- [34] L. Gioacchini, I. Drago, M. Mellia, Z. Ben Houidi, and D. Rossi,
 net traffic,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res. Comput. Secur., 2020, pp. 88–109. “Generic multi-modal representation learning for network traffic
[9] L. Gioacchini, L. Vassio, M. Mellia, I. Drago, Z. B. Houidi, and analysis,” 2024, arXiv:2405.02649.
 D. Rossi, “DarkVec: Automatic analysis of darknet traffic with word [35] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
 embeddings,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol., Dec. based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
 2021, pp. 76–89. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
[10] M. Alazab, S. R. M. Priya, M. Parimala, P. K. R. Maddikunta, [36] Z. Chen, N. Lv, P. Liu, Y. Fang, K. Chen, and W. Pan, “Intrusion
 T. R. Gadekallu, and Q.-V. Pham, “Federated learning for cybersecurity: detection for wireless edge networks based on federated learning,” IEEE
 Concepts, challenges, and future directions,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., Access, vol. 8, pp. 217463–217472, 2020.
 vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3501–3509, May 2022. [37] H. Fereidooni, A. Dmitrienko, P. Rieger, M. Miettinen, A.-R. Sadeghi,
[11] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas, and F. Madlener, “FedCRI: Federated mobile cyber-risk intelligence,”
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2022.
 data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2016, pp. 1273–1282. [38] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li,
[12] K. Huang, L. Gioacchini, M. Mellia, and L. Vassio, “Incremental and H. Vincent Poor, “Federated learning for Internet of Things: A
 federated host embeddings for network telescopes traffic analysis,” in comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 3,
 Proc. IEEE 44th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. Workshops (ICDCSW), pp. 1622–1658, 3rd Quart., 2021.
 Jul. 2024, pp. 41–46. [39] B. Ghimire and D. B. Rawat, “Recent advances on federated learning
[13] M. Kallitsis, R. Prajapati, V. Honavar, D. Wu, and J. Yen, “Detecting and for cybersecurity and cybersecurity for federated learning for Internet of
 interpreting changes in scanning behavior in large network telescopes,” Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8229–8249, Jun.
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3611–3625, 2022. 2022.
[14] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of [40] Q. Tian, C. Guang, C. Wenchao, and W. Si, “A lightweight residual
 word representations in vector space,” 2013, arXiv:1301.3781. networks framework for DDoS attack classification based on federated
[15] D. J. Beutel et al., “Flower: A friendly federated learning research learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOframework,” 2020, arXiv:2007.14390. COM WKSHPS), May 2021, pp. 1–6.
[16] R. Rehurek and P. Sojka, “Gensim–Python framework for vector space [41] V. Pourahmadi, H. A. Alameddine, M. A. Salahuddin, and R. Boutaba,
 modelling,” NLP Centre, Fac. Inform.,Masaryk Univ., Brno, Czech “Spotting anomalies at the edge: Outlier exposure-based cross-silo
 Republic, Tech. Rep., 2011, vol. 3, no. 2. federated learning for DDoS detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
[17] A. Sordello et al., “Holoscope: Open and lightweight distributed tele- Comput., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 4002–4015, Sep. 2023.
 scope & honeypot platform,” 2025, arXiv:2512.19842. [42] T. Ongun, S. Boboila, A. Oprea, T. Eliassi-Rad, J. Hiser, and J. David-
[18] J. M. Ceron, K. Steding-Jessen, C. Hoepers, L. Z. Granville, and son, “CELEST: Federated learning for globally coordinated threat
 C. B. Margi, “Improving IoT botnet investigation using an adaptive detection,” 2022, arXiv:2205.11459.
 network layer,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 3, p. 727, Feb. 2019. [43] B. van Berlo, A. Saeed, and T. Ozcelebi, “Towards federated unsuper-
[19] K. Huang, L. Gioacchini, M. Mellia, and L. Vassio, “Dynamic cluster vised representation learning,” in Proc. 3rd ACM Int. Workshop Edge
 analysis to detect and track novelty in network telescopes,” in Proc. Syst., Analytics Netw., Apr. 2020, pp. 31–36.
 IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy Workshops, Jul. 2024, pp. 287–296. [44] Y.-W. Chang, H.-Y. Chen, C. Han, T. Morikawa, T. Takahashi, and T.-
[20] D. Eppstein, M. S. Paterson, and F. F. Yao, “On nearest-neighbor N. Lin, “FINISH: Efficient and scalable NMF-based federated learning
 graphs,” Discrete Comput. Geometry, vol. 17, pp. 263–282, Apr. 1997. for detecting malware activities,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.,
[21] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 934–949, Oct. 2023.
 unfolding of communities in large networks,” J. Stat. Mechanics, Theory [45] B. S. Guendouzi, S. Ouchani, H. E. Assaad, and M. E. Zaher, “A system-
 Exp., vol. 2008, no. 10, Oct. 2008, Art. no. P10008. atic review of federated learning: Challenges, aggregation methods, and
[22] P. J. Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation development tools,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 220, Nov. 2023, Art.
 and validation of cluster analysis,” J. Comput. Appl. Math., vol. 20, no. 103714. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
 pp. 53–65, Nov. 1987. article/pii/S1084804523001339
[23] C. Munteanu, S. J. Saidi, O. Gasser, G. Smaragdakis, and A. Feldmann, [46] H. Zhang, J. Ye, W. Huang, X. Liu, and J. Gu, “Survey of fed-
 “Fifteen months in the life of a honeyfarm,” in Proc. ACM Internet erated learning in intrusion detection,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput.,
 Meas. Conf., Oct. 2023, pp. 282–296. vol. 195, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 104976. [Online]. Available: https://
[24] L. Izhikevich, M. Tran, M. Kallitsis, A. Fass, and Z. Durumeric, “Cloud www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743731524001400
 watching: Understanding attacks against cloud-hosted services,” in Proc. [47] J. L. Hernandez-Ramos et al., “Intrusion detection based on federated
 ACM Internet Meas. Conf., Oct. 2023, pp. 313–327. learning: A systematic review,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 57, no. 12,
[25] P. Richter and A. Berger, “Scanning the scanners: Sensing the internet pp. 1–65, Jul. 2025, doi: 10.1145/3731596.
 from a massively distributed network telescope,” in Proc. Internet Meas. [48] H. Mun and Y. Lee, “Internet traffic classification with federated
 Conf., Oct. 2019, pp. 144–157. learning,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 27, Dec. 2020. [Online]. Avail-
[26] Z. Durumeric, M. Bailey, and J. A. Halderman, “An internet-wide view able: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/1/27
 of internet-wide scanning,” in Proc. 23rd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2014,
 pp. 65–78.
[27] H. Griffioen, G. Koursiounis, G. Smaragdakis, and C. Doerr, “Have you
 SYN me? Characterizing ten years of internet scanning,” in Proc. ACM
 Internet Meas. Conf., Nov. 2024, pp. 149–164.
[28] E. Pauley, P. Barford, and P. McDaniel, “DScope: A Cloud-Native
 internet telescope,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., Aug. 2023,
 pp. 5989–6006.
[29] R. Hiesgen, M. Nawrocki, A. King, A. Dainotti, C. T. Schmidt, and
 M. Wählisch, “Spoki: Unveiling a new wave of scanners through a
 reactive network telescope,” in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022,
 pp. 431–448. Kai Huang received the M.Sc. degree in ICT
[30] F. Soro et al., “Enlightening the darknets: Augmenting darknet visibility for smart societies. He is currently pursuing the
 with active probes,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 4, Ph.D. degree in computer and control engineering
 pp. 5012–5025, Dec. 2023. with Politecnico di Torino. His research interests
[31] C. Han, J. Takeuchi, T. Takahashi, and D. Inoue, “Dark-TRACER: include the intersection of data science and network
 Early detection framework for malware activity based on anomalous measurements.
 spatiotemporal patterns,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 13038–13058, 2022.
[32] C. Fachkha, E. Bou-Harb, and M. Debbabi, “Inferring distributed
 reflection denial of service attacks from darknet,” Comput. Commun.,
 vol. 62, pp. 59–71, May 2015.
HUANG et al.: FEDERATED HOST EMBEDDINGS FROM TELESCOPE TRAFFIC: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 4227

 Andrea Sordello received the master’s degree in Idilio Drago received the Ph.D. degree from the
 computer engineering from Politecnico di Torino University of Twente, The Netherlands. He is curin 2024, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. rently an Associate Professor with the University of
 degree in computer and control engineering with the Turin, Italy. His research interests include network
 SmartData@PoliTO Research Center. His current security, machine learning, and internet measureresearch interests include network traffic analysis. ments. He is particularly interested in how machine
 learning can help extract knowledge from network
 data and secure the networks. He was awarded the
 IETF/IRTF Applied Networking Research Prize.

 Rodolfo Vieira Valentim is currently a Research
 Assistant with the University of Turin (UniTo),
 specializing in machine learning and cybersecurity.
 His research interests include leveraging data-driven
 models to enhance security analysis and threat
 detection.

 Luca Vassio received the M.Sc. degree (cum laude) Marco Mellia (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Full
 in mathematical modeling and the Ph.D. degree Professor with PoliTO, Italy. He coordinates the
 (cum laude) in telecommunication engineering. He SmartData@PoliTO Centre, an interdisciplinary labis currently an Associate Professor with Politec- oratory focusing on machine learning, data science,
 nico di Torino. His research interests include big and applications to network management and cyberdata analytics to machine learning and optimization security. He has co-authored over 250 papers
 approaches, including GNNs. He applies them to published in international journals and leading coninternet measurements, social networks, and mobil- ferences. He won the IRTF ANR Prize at IETF-88
 ity. He collaborated, among others, with MIT, Bell and many best paper awards. He is the EiC of
 Laboratories, and GE Aviation. Proceedings of the ACM on Networking.

 Open Access funding provided by ‘Politecnico di Torino’ within the CRUI CARE Agreement