This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 1

 Fine-grained Detection and Analysis of Unknown
 Encrypted Malicious Traffic from Mixed Noisy
 Labels
 Qianwei Meng, Qingjun Yuan*, Meng Shen, Member, IEEE, Siqi Lu, Guangsong Li, Jing Tao,
 Yong Yu, Fellow, IEEE, Yongjuan Wang

 Training set Classifier Open Environment
 Abstract—The efficacy of deep learning-based Network Intru- (a)

sion Detection Systems (NIDS) is critically constrained by the ... KNN
 CNN
 Known
 Classes

availability of high-quality labeled data. In real-world environ- Clean samples RNN
 APT
 Unk nown
 Labeled as Google Traffic ... Class
ments, datasets often suffer from mixed label noise—consisting of
both closed-set and open-set noise—which significantly distorts (b)

decision boundaries and leads to critical security misses for ... ... KNN
 CNN
 Known
 Classes

previously unknown attacks. Achieving robust classification of Clean samples Closed-set noise RNN
 APT
 Unk nown
 Labeled as Google Traffic ... Class
known traffic while accurately detecting unknown threats in
the presence of such mixed noise remains a key challenge. In (c)

this paper, we introduce Sieve, a robust framework designed for ... ... ... APT KNN
 CNN
 Known
 Classes

the fine-grained detection and analysis of unknown encrypted Clean samples Closed-set noise Open-set noise RNN
 APT
 Unk nown
 Labeled as Google Traffic ... Class
malicious traffic in mixed noise conditions. Sieve consists of
three collaborative modules: (i) a noise-resilient label correction
module that filters out mixed noise using neighbor consistency Fig. 1. Detection methods for unknown malicious traffic in three different
metrics and confidence-based subset expansion; (ii) a post-hoc scenarios: (a) All samples in the training set are clean. (b) Some samples in the
detection module that employs Mahalanobis distance in a puri- training set are incorrectly labeled as other known classes. (c) Some samples
fied, compact feature space to identify unknown traffic; and (iii) of unknown categories are mixed into the training set, and these samples are
an unknown traffic labeling module that utilizes semi-supervised incorrectly labeled as other known classes.
clustering to facilitate efficient updates of the dataset. Empirical
evaluations across four public datasets demonstrate that Sieve I. I NTRODUCTION
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both knownclass classification and unknown-threat detection. Notably, on
the Mal TLS2023 dataset under 50% noise conditions, Sieve
maintains robust performance, with accuracy and F1 scores
exceeding 94%. Further theoretical analyses corroborate the
 W HILE machine learning and deep learning have become the mainstream solutions for encrypted traffic
 analysis, their success is heavily predicated on the availability
superiority of the Sieve framework. The code is available at: of large-scale, high-quality labeled data [1]–[4]. However, in
https://github.com/niebikong/Sieve. practical network environments, acquiring pure and accurately
 Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, noisy label, deep labeled datasets faces severe challenges, as the pervasive
learning, unknown attack. presence of label noise—characterized by mislabeling or
 inconsistencies—significantly degrades model classification
 performance and reliability [5].
 This work is supported by the National Key Research and Development Label noise in encrypted traffic datasets arises from inherent
Program of China, No.2023YFB2705000, and the Natural Science Foundation
of Henan, No.252300420992. limitations in automated labeling methods [6] and subjective
 Qianwei Meng, Siqi Lu, Guangsong Li and Yongjuan Wang are errors during manual annotation [7]. In practice, this noise typwith the Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technol- ically manifests in a mixed form, comprising both closed-set
ogy, Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001, China (email: mengqw20@163.com; 080lusiqi@sina.com; lgsok@163.com; pinky- noise (where a sample is mislabeled as another known class)
wyj@163.com). and open-set noise (where a sample from an unknown class
 Meng Shen is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technol- is incorrectly assigned a known label) [8], [9], as illustrated
ogy, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: shenmeng@bit.edu.cn). in Fig. 1. This degradation in label quality severely constrains
 Jing Tao is with the MoE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks and Net- the practical deployment of malicious traffic classifiers.
work Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China (e-mail: These two types of noise harm models differently: closedjtao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).
 Yong Yu is with the School of Computer Science, Shaanxi Normal set noise leads to blurred decision boundaries between known
University, Shaanxi 710062, China (e-mail: yuyong@snnu.edu.cn). categories, while open-set noise misleads the model into iden-
 Qingjun Yuan is with the MoE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks and tifying potential unknown attacks as normal traffic or known
Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, as well as the Henan Key
Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering malware, causing serious security misses. Furthermore, current
University and the Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of research on malicious traffic classification mainly focuses on
Education. the closed-world assumption, making it difficult to cope with
 Corresponding author: Qingjun Yuan, gcxyuan@outlook.com, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China. the endless stream of unknown threats in open environments
 [10]–[12]. Therefore, achieving precise classification of known

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 2

malicious traffic and acute detection of unknown malicious the generation of stable feature representations for the
traffic simultaneously under mixed noise conditions is a critical accurate classification of known traffic and the precise
problem. capture of unknown threats.
 To address the label noise problem, existing mainstream • We verify the comprehensive performance of Sieve across
methods typically employ sample selection strategies [5], four public datasets. Experimental results demonstrate
[13]–[17], designing screening algorithms to filter noise or that Sieve outperforms existing state-of-the-art (SOTA)
correct labels to construct a purer training subset. However, methods in both known-class classification and unknownmost existing denoising methods ignore the existence of open- class detection tasks; notably, it exhibits superior robustset noise and lack targeted filtering mechanisms. On the other ness in high-noise scenarios, significantly improving the
hand, to detect unknown malicious traffic, existing studies model’s accuracy and F1 score.
mostly integrate detection modules into the model training The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
process [18]–[20], which often requires complex model archi- reviews the related literature, and Section III formally defines
tectures or specific loss function designs. More importantly, in the problem. Section IV details the design of the proposed
the context of label noise, coupling the detection mechanism Sieve framework, while Section V provides the supporting
directly within the training process makes it highly susceptible theoretical justification. The approach is empirically evaluated
to interference from noisy samples, leading to a significant in Section VI, and Section VIII presents the concluding
increase in the misclassification rate of unknown traffic. remarks.
 To overcome the aforementioned challenges, we observe
that in the feature space, the label consistency between clean II. R ELATED W ORK
samples and their neighbors is significantly higher than that In this section, we will review some works related to
of noisy samples. Based on this intuition, we propose a robust unknown malicious traffic detection and noise label handling.
detection framework named Sieve. Sieve consists of three Table I provides a summary of the related works.
collaborative modules: noisy label correction, unknown traffic
detection, and unknown traffic labeling. First, the noisy label A. Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection
correction module utilizes neighbor consistency metrics and FOSS [18] employs the concept of isolation forests by
prediction confidence to effectively screen and distinguish partitioning the data distribution hyperplane to achieve fineclean samples, closed-set noise, and open-set noise. It corrects grained detection of unknown attacks. At the same time, the
the labels of closed-set noise samples, thereby constructing a model also has the capability for automatic updates. The
pure and class-balanced training set. Second, to avoid noise core idea of RoNeTC [19] is that classification results for
interference with detection performance, the unknown traffic known traffic should have high confidence (low uncertainty).
detection module adopts a “Post-hoc Detection” mechanism. In contrast, unknown traffic should show high uncertainty due
This mechanism identifies unknown traffic using a metric to a lack of prior knowledge. RoNeTC dynamically integrates
based on the Mahalanobis Distance on top of a model trained classification decisions from multiple views and evaluates
on purified data. Finally, addressing the complex composition decision uncertainty to classify unknown traffic. TrafficLLM
of detected unknown traffic, the unknown traffic labeling [21] converts raw traffic into rich semantic embeddings and
module implements efficient labeling of new attack types and leverages the traffic understanding capabilities of large landataset updates by estimating the number of categories and guage models (LLMs) to detect unknown traffic using the
performing cluster analysis, combined with expert interven- classification output head of the LLM. RFG-HELAD [22]
tion. utilizes heterogeneous ensemble learning, combining DNNs,
 Sieve is a novel framework for unknown malicious traffic contrastive learning, GANs, and deep kNN to detect unknown
detection that explicitly handles mixed label noise, i.e., the traffic. Its core concept is based on uncertainty quantification
coexistence of closed-set and open-set noise in the training and using generative adversarial networks to learn the disdata. In contrast to prior works that consider unknown traffic tribution of unknown traffic dynamically. In addition, there
detection together with closed-set noise handling, Sieve further are some post-hoc out-of-distribution detection algorithms
addresses open-set noise by correcting closed-set noisy labels [23]–[25] that are generally model-agnostic and distributionwhile rejecting open-set noisy samples. The main contributions agnostic, capable of assessing whether a sample belongs
of this paper are summarized as follows: to the original distribution during inference with very low
 • We propose a novel fine-grained detection framework computational cost.
 tailored for low-quality labeled data, named Sieve. This FlowLens [26] introduces the Flow Marker Accumulator
 framework exhibits high model compatibility and sig- data structure, which efficiently collects compact flow distrinificantly enhances the encrypted traffic classification bution features in the data plane of programmable switches
 and detection capabilities of various supervised learning through quantization and truncation operations, supporting the
 models within noisy environments. control plane for machine learning classification. nPrintML
 • We design a noise-resilient feature learning and collab- [27] designs a unified aligned binary packet representation,
 orative detection mechanism. By leveraging innovative nPrint, and combines AutoML to automatically perform feasample screening and label correction strategies along- ture selection, model search, and hyperparameter tuning, sigside a decoupled post-hoc detection mechanism, Sieve nificantly reducing the manual engineering cost of traffic analeffectively mitigates mixed noise interference, ensuring ysis tasks. NetBeacon [28] first deploys a decision tree model

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 3

efficiently in the data plane of programmable switches under a learning, rather than addressing existing label errors. This
multi-stage sequential model architecture, enabling line-speed fundamentally differs from the label noise problem studied
flow-level feature computation and intelligent traffic analysis. in this paper. Label noise originates from inherent errors in
HyperVision [29] constructs a flow interaction graph to model the data collection and annotation process, contaminating the
the interaction patterns between flows, using unsupervised supervision signal during training. This paper focuses on how
graph clustering to detect unknown encrypted malicious traffic to achieve reliable model training and detection of unknown
in real-time without labeled data. threats under this more pervasive type of data imperfection.
 However, the unknown traffic detection mechanisms in
the above works often participate in model training. In the TABLE I
presence of label noise, these detection mechanisms perform C OMPARISON WITH PRIOR APPROACHES .
poorly and are relatively complex in design [30]–[32].
 Prior Works Unknown Closed-set Noise Open-set Noise Code
B. Noisy-Label Handling for Traffic Classification
 FOSS [18] " % % "
 Current mainstream approaches for handling traffic noise RoNeTC [19] " % % %
label problems primarily focus on designing label correction TrafficLLM [21] " % % "
algorithms to correct noisy sample labels. FlowRefiner [13] RFG-HELAD [22] " % % "
clusters each type of traffic into multiple subclusters, defining HyperVision [29] " % % "
a majority label for each subcluster. Labels of samples whose AEGIS-Net [5] " " % "
annotations do not align with the majority label are deemed FlowRefiner [13] % " % %
noisy. It then uses maximum confidence to expand the training DSDIR [14] % " % "
subset to complete label correction for noisy samples. DSDIR MCRe [15] % " % "
[14] designs a sample relabeling strategy based on confidence RAPIER [16] " " % "
and uncertainty metrics, addressing both noise labels and long- CoLD [33] % " % %
tail distribution issues. MCRe [15] focuses on both label Sieve " " " "
correction and model robust training, designing three different
 Unknown: Unknown Traffic Detection; Closed-set Noise: Closed-set Noise
levels of attribute constraints based on traffic distribution Label Handling; Open-set Noise: Open-set Noise Label Handling.
in the decision space. RAPIER [16] observes that normal
traffic is tightly distributed within a certain region. In contrast,
 D. In summary
malicious traffic is spread across the feature space, indicating a
density difference between normal and malicious traffic, which Current methods typically address noise correction and
is used for label noise correction. AEGIS-Net [5] notes the unknown detection separately. More critically, they rest on
density difference between clean and noisy samples, selecting different philosophical foundations. Most prior works on label
multiple prototypes for each type of sample to infer the true correction operate under a closed-world assumption, aiming
labels of noisy samples. CoLD [33] analyzes the impact of to correct all noisy labels into the known set. In contrast,
label noise from a causal relationship perspective, using three by acknowledging the reality of mixed noise, our philosophy
components: feature reordering, local joint learning, and causal shifts toward differentiating and treating them distinctly: it
collaborative denoising, to effectively identify and filter noisy corrects closed-set noise while actively rejecting open-set
labels. noise, thereby purifying the training basis for unknown threat
 However, the above works often only consider the existence detection.
of closed-set noisy samples, while open-set noise also exists In the presence of label noise, particularly when open-set
in real scenarios. Existing methods do not adequately handle noise samples are mixed into the training set, the performance
this, as the true labels of open-set noise are always incorrect, of unknown traffic detection can be significantly affected. How
regardless of how label correction is performed [34]. to design appropriate label correction strategies for closedset noisy samples, as well as screening strategies for open-set
 noisy samples to minimize the impact of noisy samples on
C. Adversarial Noise
 unknown traffic detection, is the problem that this paper aims
 Research on adversarial noise focuses on attackers adding to address.
carefully designed perturbations to input samples during the
inference stage to deceive detection models. For example, III. T HREAT MODEL & P ROBLEM STATEMENT
Whisper [35] extracts robust features through frequencydomain analysis to resist adversarial packet injections, while A. Threat model
Wedjat [36] uses causal networks to model protocol interac- Fig. 2 illustrates the threat model of this work. The NIDS
tions and identify adversarial patterns that violate semantics. is deployed at the boundary of a trusted internal network,
The core goal of such work is to improve model robustness monitoring encrypted traffic passing through the gateway [38]–
against adversarial examples, under the assumption that the [40]. Its purpose is to defend against various types of encrypted
training data has accurate labels. Another related line of malicious traffic originating from the untrusted Internet, such
work, such as tFusion [37], focuses on reducing labeling as C2 communications, DDoS attacks, and so on. During the
costs through cross-modal feature fusion and self-supervised NIDS training process (right-hand side), the system is subject

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 4

 Pipeline of NIDS TABLE II
 S YMBOLS AND DEFINITIONS USED IN THIS PAPER .

 Router Detection
 Internet Notation Definition
 Ṽ = {(xi , yi )}N
 i=1 Noisy training dataset.
 Feature (X , Y) Samples and labels in Ṽ .
 Model
 Extractor
 (Xc , Yc ) Selected clean subset, where ci ≥ ξ.
 (Xn , Yn ) Unselected subset: (X , Y) \ (Xc , Yc ).
 Internal
 Network (Xe , Ye ) Expanded subset from (Xn , Yn ), where max pi ≥ ζ.
 Labeling Training
 (Xt , Yt ) Final training set: Rebalancing((Xc , Yc ) ∪
Gateway NIDS (Xe , Ye )).
 DU Detected unknown traffic set.
 Label Noise
 DL Labeled reference set, i.e., (Xt , Yt ).
 Dl Known-class subset in DU .
Fig. 2. Threat model: The impact of label noise on the NIDS training process. Dn Novel-class subset in DU , with DU = Dl ∪ Dn and
Figure inspired by [33]. Dl ∩ Dn = ∅.

to non-adversarial label noise, meaning that the noise arises
from labeling errors rather than from deliberate data poisoning strategy to meticulously filter clean samples from mixed noise.
by an attacker. It specifically corrects mislabeled closed-set samples while
 A concrete instance of such harmful open-set noise would discarding open-set noise, thereby constructing a refined and
be the traffic of a novel, previously unseen ransomware variant class-balanced training set. Building upon the feature represenbeing mistakenly labeled as benign during data annotation. tations learned from this purified data, the Unknown Traffic
This single noisy sample teaches the model to associate the Detection module implements a post-hoc anomaly detection
features of this new threat with normal behavior. Consequently, mechanism based on the Mahalanobis distance to accurately
when the actual ransomware attack occurs in deployment, the identify unknown malicious traffic without interference from
model will likely misclassify it as benign traffic with high noisy samples. Finally, the Unknown Traffic Labeling module
confidence, resulting in a critical security miss. estimates the number of novel categories within the detected
 unknown traffic. It performs semi-supervised clustering, facilitating efficient manual annotation by security experts to update
B. Problem statement
 the dataset.
 Formally, let Ṽ = {(xi , yi )}N i=1 be a training set with N The Sieve framework is designed under the philosophy
samples, where xi ∈ Rd is a flow sample and yi ∈ {0, 1}M is of integrating and optimizing established robust learning
its one-hot label for M classes. The true label of xi , denoted paradigms to address the specific challenges of mixed label
as yi∗ , is unobservable. For convenience, we define the logit noise in encrypted traffic. We adapt and build upon several key
label li ∈ C l = {1, 2, . . . , M } as the index where yi (j) = 1. ideas from prior research: the neighbor consistency principle
We categorize label noise into two types: closed-set noise, for sample selection [41], contrastive learning for obtaining
where yi∗ 6= yi but yi∗ still belongs to the known classes, and compact representations [22], Mahalanobis distance for postopen-set noise, where yi∗ 6= yi and yi∗ falls outside the M hoc out-of-distribution detection [42] and semi-supervised
classes. clustering for exploring unknown categories [43]. However, a
 Using the noisy dataset Ṽ = (X , Y), we aim to train a straightforward application of these components is insufficient
model parameterized by θ. This model consists of an encoder for our target setting. The core of Sieve’s contribution lies in
F : x → z for feature extraction and a classifier Gp : z → y how these components are tailored, combined, and augmented
for classification. Additionally, we use a non-parametric KNN to specifically cope with both closed-set and open-set noise
classifier Gq to help select samples. For simplicity, let Fi be while enabling accurate unknown traffic detection.
the feature of xi , pi be the output of Gp , and qi be the output of
Gq . The presence of mixed noise (both closed-set and open-set)
significantly limits the model’s ability to classify known traffic B. Noisy Label Correction
and detect unknown threats. The symbols and definitions used In the context of a training set that contains both closedin this paper are shown in Table II. set noise and open-set noise, a natural idea is to select
 clean samples (i.e., samples whose annotated labels are the
 IV. O UR A PPROACH correct labels) for training the model. Formally, we treat the
 entire training set (X , Y) as the input for a sample selection
A. Design Philosophy and Overview algorithm, aiming to obtain a clean sample subset (Xc , Yc ),
 Our proposed Sieve framework, as shown in Fig. 3, operates where the subscript c denotes clean.
as a robust pipeline designed to mitigate the adverse effects 1) Sample Selection Algorithm: Our sample selection apof mixed label noise while enabling the discovery of novel proach is based on the idea that clean samples often share the
threats. It consists of three integrated modules: Noisy Label same labels as their neighbors [41]. For example, in balanced
Correction, Unknown Traffic Detection, and Unknown Traffic binary classification, a sample x labeled 0 is considered correct
Labeling. Specifically, the Noisy Label Correction module if more than half of its K-nearest neighbors also have the label
employs a neighbor consistency metric and a subset expansion 0. To quantify this, we use a neighbor consistency metric ci

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 5

Fig. 3. The architecture of Sieve consists of three components. The noisy label correction module is responsible for filtering out two types of noisy samples and
clean samples from the training set, and for correcting the labels of closed-set noisy samples. The unknown traffic detection module builds on the previously
trained model to detect unknown malicious traffic. The unknown traffic labeling module first estimates the number of categories in the identified unknown
malicious traffic, then performs clustering of the traffic. Finally, experts label the new categories of traffic.

that measures how well the noisy label yi matches the KNN as clean if its neighbor’s voting label distribution qi equals its
prediction qi . Samples with high ci scores are identified as current annotated label yi .
clean and selected for further training.
 Specifically, we first define the similarity sij between any
two samples xi and xj , where Fi ≡ F (xi ) and we use
cosine similarity, leading to sij = cos(Fi , Fj ). Let Ni be
the index set of the K most similar samples to xi based
on sample similarity within the set X , with Ni ⊆ [N ] and
|Ni | = K. Then, for each sample xi , we can calculate
 P from KNN voting in its neighborhood,
the label distribution
denoted as qi0 = K1
 n∈Ni yn . Considering the potential class
imbalance in the training set, we firstP compute the overall label
 N
distribution of the dataset as χ = i=1 yi , which allows us
to derive a balanced label distribution qi = χ−1 qi0 , where χ−1
denotes a new vector obtained by taking the reciprocal of each
element in χ. In this way, we can mitigate the effects brought
by class imbalance.
 We let the vector qi represent the output of the KNN
classifier Gq . The neighbor consistency metric ci is then Fig. 4. In the Mal TLS2023 dataset, under the conditions of 50% symmetric
 noise rate and 50% open-set noisy samples, the Sieve model was trained for
calculated using the logit label li and the KNN prediction qi 10 epochs. The distribution of the neighbor consistency metric c scores for
as follows: clean samples and noisy samples (including closed-set noise and open-set
 qi (li ) noise) showed that the mean of the neighbor consistency metric for clean
 ci = , (1) samples was 0.9777, the mean for closed-set noise was 0.1561, and the mean
 maxj qi (j)
 for open-set noise was 0.6212.
where ci shows the ratio of the KNN prediction at label li to
the maximum value across all classes. 2) Subset Expansion: Relying only on the clean subset
 We validated this intuition in Fig. 4, where we observed that (Xc , Yc ) is often suboptimal because it ignores a large portion
both closed-set noise and open-set noise exhibited a lower of the data and may still contain residual noise. Furthermore,
neighbor consistency metric compared to clean samples. A the model must be robust against class imbalance and various
higher neighbor consistency metric ci indicates that the sample noise patterns. To leverage the unselected samples (Xn , Yn ) =
xi has more consistent labels with its neighboring samples, (X , Y) \ (Xc , Yc ), we propose a subset expansion mechanism
which means that the annotated label yi is more likely to be consisting of (a) initial expansion and (b) class rebalancing.
correct, and the sample xi is more likely to be clean. Based on
 a) Initial Expansion. This step focuses on samples in Xn
this, by setting a threshold ξ, the clean sample subset (Xc , Yc )
 where the predicted probability pi from classifier Gp exceeds
can be obtained through the following filtering strategy:
 a threshold ζ. These high-confidence samples fall into two
 Xc , Yc = {(xi , yi ) | ci ≥ ξ} , (2) groups: (1) samples where the annotated label matches the
 prediction, likely representing missed clean samples; and (2)
 In the experiments of this paper, we set ξ = 1 to obtain a samples with label-prediction mismatches, which we consider
purer sample, meaning that we only consider the sample xi mislabeled. For the latter, the correct labels are inferred using

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 6

the model’s predictions. The expanded subset (Xe , Ye ) is
defined as:
 n o
 (Xe , Ye ) = (xi , yi0 ) | max pi ≥ ζ , (3)

where yi0 is the predicted label for sample xi .
 The efficacy of the high-confidence threshold ζ in filtering out open-set noise stems from a fundamental difference
between closed-set and open-set noise. For a sample whose
true category is outside the known label space C l (i.e., openset noise), the classifier Gp , trained exclusively on known
categories, cannot assign a high prediction probability to any
single known class. Its predictions tend to be distributed with
low confidence across multiple known classes because the
sample’s feature representation does not align well with any (a)
learned class centroid. In contrast, a closed-set noisy sample
or a missed clean sample, whose true label resides within C l ,
can eventually be recognized by a well-trained model, leading
to a high prediction confidence for its true class.
 Experimental validation indicates that by setting a high
threshold ζ, we can ensure that the initial expanded subset
contains samples with high-accuracy labels. Moreover, as
illustrated in Fig. 5a, this mechanism can effectively avoid
selecting open-set noisy samples, as these typically lack highconfidence predictions and thus have lower max pi values.
Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 5b, as the number of training
epochs increases, the Sieve model becomes increasingly “confident” in its predictions for clean samples; the Clean curve
consistently exceeds the Noisy curve. This indicates that the
Sieve model can distinguish between clean and noisy samples. (b)
 b) Class Rebalancing. By adding the expanded subset Fig. 5. In the Mal TLS2023 dataset with 50% symmetric noise and 50%
(Xe , Ye ) to the clean subset (Xc , Yc ), we can mitigate the open-set noise: (a) Prediction confidence distribution for clean, closed-set
sample imbalance issue to some extent. However, the above noisy, and open-set noisy samples at epoch 20. The mean confidence values
 are 0.8421, 0.7746, and 0.3829, respectively. In this paper, we set the value of
measures do not completely resolve the class imbalance prob- ζ to 0.93. (b) Evolution of maximum confidence over 100 epochs. The blue
lem. The causes of class imbalance are diverse: (1) the initial and red solid lines denote the per-epoch mean confidence for clean and noisy
noisy flow dataset Ṽ might be class-imbalanced, and (2) even samples (including closed-set and open-set noise samples), respectively. The
 shaded areas represent the interquartile range (IQR, Q1–Q3) for each group,
if Ṽ is class-balanced, the subsets obtained after applying the indicating the spread of the central 50% of samples.
sample selection algorithm and the initial expansion mechanism, (Xc , Yc ) and (Xe , Ye ), might still be class-imbalanced. loss function and self-supervised contrastive loss function to
For instance, the class A samples in (Xc , Yc ) might number update the model F and the parameterized classifier Gp .
1000, while class B samples could only be 50, or, in extreme Let l ∼ Beta(α, α), l0 = max(l, 1 − l) ≥ 0.5. We concases, there may be no samples from class B in (Xc , Yc ) at catenate two perspectives from the labeled dataset (obtained
all. by swapping different feature columns) to get the sequence
 2B
 To fix class imbalance, we apply two post-hoc steps without {(Xk , Yk )}k=1 , where B is the batch size and 2B is the total
changing the selection algorithm. First, we check the sample number of samples after concatenation. We apply a random
count for each class in the union (Xc , Yc ) ∪ (Xe , Ye ). For permutation π to reorder the sequence, and then perform linear
classes with few or no samples, we add extra samples in interpolation for the inputs and labels:
descending order of their neighbor consistency ci . This process
continues until the count reaches (1/M ) · Nc , where Nc is the x̃k = l0 xk + (1 − l0 ) xπ(k) , (5)
original size of that class in the noisy dataset and M is the total
number of classes. Finally, we oversample minority classes ỹk = l0 yk + (1 − l0 ) yπ(k) . (6)
to create a fully balanced set. In summary, there are various
strategies to keep the training set balanced [44]; however, we Here, x̃k and ỹk are the mixed samples and labels.
will not elaborate on them further here. The resulting training Based on the samples x̃k generated from MixUp [45], we
set (Xt , Yt ) is defined as: calculate the supervised loss to optimize the classifier. First,
 we obtain the predicted probability distribution through the
 (Xt , Yt ) = Rebalancing ((Xc , Yc ) ∪ (Xe , Ye )) . (4)
 encoder F and classifier head Gp :
 3) Model Training: During the training phase, based on
the training set (Xt , Yt ) and (X , Y), we use the cross-entropy pk = softmax (Gp (F (x̃k ))) ∈ RM , (7)

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 7

where M is the number of classes and pk is a probability vec- Thus, the overall contrastive loss is given by:
tor. Then, we calculate the cross-entropy loss, which measures 1 
the difference between the predicted probabilities pk and the Lself = loss(v→w) + loss(w→v) , (15)
 2
mixed labels ỹk :
 indicating that the contrastive loss is bidirectional, and the
 2B M
 1 XX final symmetric loss is obtained by averaging loss(v→w) and
 Lce = − ỹk,c log pk,c . (8)
 loss(w→v) .
 2B c=1k=1
 Finally, the total loss L is a weighted sum of the supervised
This loss is the average cross-entropy of all samples in the cross-entropy loss and the self-supervised contrastive learning
batch, where ỹk,c is the c-th component of the soft labels. loss:
 Considering that the original training set (X , Y) contains
not only clean samples but also noisy samples, we ignore the L = Lce + λLself , (16)
labels and consider using self-supervised contrastive loss to
optimize the feature space. Contrastive learning is employed where λ is a hyperparameter that controls the balance between
to train the Sieve model to learn an embedding space where the supervised cross-entropy loss Lce and the self-supervised
similar samples are close together, while dissimilar samples contrastive loss Lself .
are far apart.
 Let C. Unknown Traffic Detection
 (1) (2)
 H(F(ui )) H(F(ui )) After the training phase is completed, we hope that the Sieve
vi = , wi = , i = 1, . . . , B,
 (1)
 kH(F(ui ))k2
 (2)
 kH(F(ui ))k2 model not only has the ability to classify known class traffic
 (9) but also possesses the capability to detect unknown malicious
 traffic. Without changing the training mechanism of the Sieve
 (1) (2)
where ui and ui represent the two views (or augmented model, we employ a non-parametric detection mechanism to
views) of the i-th sample, processed by the neural network F accomplish the detection of unknown malicious traffic [46].
to generate feature representations. H(z) ∈ Rs , s = 128, is a This is a plug-and-play module that can be applied to any
function to further process the features. other closed-world traffic classification model [42].
 Let us define: Specifically, when the Sieve model finishes training, under
 viT wi viT wj viT vj the optimal model parameters, the filtered clean training set
 s+
 i = , svw
 ij = , svv
 ij = , is denoted as (Xt , Yt ). We obtain the normalized feature set
 τ τ τ (10) |X |
 T
 w i vj T
 wi wj {F(xi )/F(xi )k2 }i=1t and construct an index set based on this
 swv
 ij = , s ww
 ij = , foundation. For the traffic sample to be detected x0 ∈ Rd , we
 τ τ
 first compute z 0 = F(x0 ), and then calculate the minimum
where these are measures of similarity between samples and distance d from z 0 to the known class index set. If d is less than
τ is the temperature parameter. s+ i is the positive similarity the threshold τ , the sample is classified as known class traffic;
between the same sample in different views, while sij denotes otherwise, it is classified as unknown class traffic. Formally,
the negative similarities between different samples. the anomaly score function can be expressed as:
 The objective of contrastive learning is to maximize the similarity between positive sample pairs (vi , wi ) while minimizing
the similarity between negative sample pairs (vi , wj , i 6= j). score(z 0 ) = min D(z 0 , ZM ), (17)
 M
 Let
 (1) + X vw X vv where D(·, ·) is a distance metric in the feature space, and
 Di = esi + esij + esij , (11) ZM represents the M clusters formed by the known classes.
 j6=i j6=i
 The threshold τ is set to the 95th percentile of the anomaly
 # "
 1
 B
 X +
 esi scores from the filtered clean training set. This strategy ensures
 loss(v→w) = − log (1) . (12) that 95% of known class samples will not produce false
 B i=1 D i positives, thus effectively controlling the misclassification of
Here, loss(v→w) represents the similarity between positive and known traffic while maintaining high recall.
 (1) It should be noted that we use the Mahalanobis distance to
negative samples, and Di is the normalization factor for the
positive sample and all negative samples. compute the outlier score. Specifically,
 Similarly, we define score(z 0 ) = min(z 0 − µM )T Σ−1 0
 M (z − µM ), (18)
 + X wv X ww M
 (2)
 Di = esi + esij + esij , (13)
 j6=i j6=i
 where µM and ΣM denote the sample mean and sample
 " # covariance of the features (z) from the known class clean
 B +
 1 X esi training data. Through the eigendecomposition of the sample
 loss(w→v) = − log (2) . (14) covariance, we have ΣM = QM ΛM Q−1
 B i=1 D M , and thus:
 i
 T
 score(z 0 ) = min QTM (z 0 − µM ) Λ−1 T 0
 
The loss for the w → v direction is calculated similarly to M QM (z − µM ) ,
 M
loss(v→w) . (19)

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 8

 l
which is equivalent to using the Euclidean distance scaled by into the new category set DU . Network security engineers
the eigenvalues in the feature space. need to identify these “fake new class” instances and remove
 l
 In the case of Euclidean distance, that is, in the absence of them from DU as much as possible to avoid label noise in
scaling, components with higher eigenvalues receive greater subsequent learning.
weight but provide minimal discriminability. The scaling of If the estimated number of new categories |Cˆn | does not
eigenvalues eliminates this bias, making the Mahalanobis match the reality:
distance effective for detecting isolated points in the feature • If the true number of categories is greater |C | > |Cˆn |,
 n
space. new clusters need to be manually created to split the
 categories that have not been properly separated.
D. Unknown Traffic Labeling
 • If the true number is less |C | < |Cˆn |, several clusters
 n
 The detected unknown samples are defined as DU = that should belong together must be merged.
 |D |
{xui }i=1U . The labels of the samples in DL = (Xt , Yt ) are
 Finally, a true Ground-Truth label is assigned to each
as pure as possible but not completely correct. Our goal is
 corrected and semantically clear cluster, resulting in a final
to use automatic filtering and clustering of the samples in
 labeled dataset for incremental learning of new categories.
DU to assist in the manual annotation of new samples. It is
 This step significantly reduces the cost and workload of manimportant to note that our unknown malicious traffic detection
 ual labeling. Labelers only need to perform efficient quality
mechanism cannot ensure that all detected unknown traffic
 checks and fine-tuning, rather than starting from scratch with
samples are from unknown categories. Hence, the labels yiu
 tedious organization work, hence greatly reducing labor costs.
of the samples xui in DU either belong to known classes
C l = {1, 2, . . . , M } or come from new classes C n ∈ N + . 2) Class Number Estimation: The purpose of estimating
Therefore, our objective is to reassign misclassified samples the number of categories is to determine the parameter k for
back to C l and cluster the remaining samples in DU . the semi-supervised K-means++ algorithm, i.e., |C|.
 1) Unknown Traffic Clustering: The samples in DU can be Inspired by [47]–[49], we do not know the exact number of
divided into two parts: |C|, but we have a labeled sample set DL = (Xt , Yt ). We can
 |D | partition DL into a probe set and a validate set.
 DU = {xui }i=1U = Dl ∪ Dn Specifically, we first divide DL = (Xt , Yt ) into a probe set
 (20)
 = {xli | yil ∈ C l } ∪ {xnj | yjn ∈ C n }, DLprobe
 with Clprobe categories and a validate set DL val
 with Clval
 probe val l probe
where Dl ∩ Dn = ∅. All categories are denoted as C = C l ∪ categories, where Cl ∪ Cl = C , and |Cl | : |Clval | =
 probe val probe val
C n with C l ∩ C n = ∅. However, we do not know the exact 2 : 1, and Cl ∩ Cl = ∅. Thus, DL = DL ∪ DL .
number |C n |. In this paper, we first estimate the value of |C n | We then launch the Brent algorithm [50] over the range
as |Cˆn |, and then use the samples and labels in DL = (Xt , Yt ) (|Clprobe |, |Clmax |] and use the semi-supervised K-means++
 probe val
as known information together with the semi-supervised K- algorithm on DL ∪ DL ∪ DU until convergence. Here,
 max
means++ algorithm [43] to filter and cluster the samples in |Cl | is the expected maximum total number of categories,
DU . The semi-supervised K-means++ algorithm first utilizes which can be set to a larger value. During semi-supervised
 probe
DL to determine the cluster centers for |C l | known classes, and learning, samples in DL are forced to comply with the
 val
selects the remaining |Cˆn | = |C|ˆ − C l cluster centers based true labels, while samples in DL are treated as additional
 val
on the distance from features to the nearest cluster center. In “unlabeled” data. The clustering performance on DL and
each iteration, we enforce that the data in DL maps to the true DU is assessed using average clustering accuracy (ACC) and
labels. the Davies-Bouldin index (DB index) [51] as follows. At the
 |D | same time, Brent’s algorithm optimizes to maximize the ACC-
 Finally, let the labels assigned to DU = {xui }i=1U by the
  u |DU | DB objective. Finally, Brent’s algorithm terminates with the
semi-supervised K-means++ algorithm be yˆi i=1 , where ˆ The class number estimation process
 optimal estimation |C|.
yˆiu ∈ C l ∪Ncentroids , and Ncentroids denotes the new centroids
 of DU is shown in Algorithm 1
for Cˆn clusters. Samples in DU belonging to clusters from Average Clustering Accuracy (ACC): ACC is applicable to
 l
Ncentroids and their corresponding predicted labels form DU . labeled classes in the validate set DL val
 and is given by the
 l
 l l ˆl |DU | l ˆl
 Let DU = {(xi , yi )}i=1 , where xi ∈ DU and yi ∈ formula:
Ncentroids . The goal of manual annotation is to correct and  
 |DXL |
 val
label each cluster.  1
 n 
 ˆ
 o
 ACC = max  val 1 yival = σ yival ,
 
 At this point, network security engineers begin to inter- DL
 σ∈S (Clval ) i=1
vene in the cluster labeling process. They will inspect the
original traffic samples corresponding to each cluster (not (21)
just the abstract feature vectors) and identify and remove
any obvious “anomalous” or “discordant” instances from each ˆ represent the true labels and the cluster
 where yival and yival 
cluster. These discordant instances are manually moved to their labels assigned to feature xval
 i , respectively. S Cl
 val
 reprerightful belonging clusters. sents the permutation group of elements in Clval . The ACC
 Since the unknown traffic detection model Sieve is not metric focuses on evaluating the clustering accuracy of labeled
perfect, some instances that originally belong to known cate- known data by solving the label matching problem to quantify
gories C l may be misidentified as unknown traffic and mixed clustering quality fairly.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 9

 Davies-Bouldin Index (DB): DB is an unsupervised cluster- Sieve prevents information collapse, avoids label blindness,
ing evaluation metric that does not require true labels, relying and optimizes intra-class compactness for effective unknown
only on the data itself and the clustering results. The core idea traffic detection1 .
of the DB index is to measure the compactness (similarity
of samples within a cluster) and separability (differences Theorem 1. (Proof in Appendix A): Let Zce be the feature
between clusters). A smaller value indicates better clustering representation learned by minimizing only the cross-entropy
performance (tighter clusters, better separation between them), loss, and Zsieve be the representation learned by Sieve with
while a larger value indicates poorer clustering performance. a self-supervised contrastive loss weight λ > 0. Under the
It is defined as: idealized Information Bottleneck framework, as the compres-
 |Ĉ|   sion coefficient β → ∞, Zce converges to a minimal sufficient
 1 X si + sj statistic of Y , resulting in the asymptotic loss of detection-
 DB = max , (22)
 ˆ
 |C| j6=i dij relevant information, i.e., I(Zce ; T |Y ) = 0. Conversely, under
 i=1
 the assumption of non-vanishing structural information, the
where the number of clusters is C,ˆ denoted as C1 , C2 , . . . , C ˆ , optimization objective of Sieve provides a theoretical basis for
 |C|
and for each cluster Ci , we define: a strictly positive lower bound for detection information, i.e.,
 1 X I(Zsieve ; T |Y ) > 0.
 si = kx − µi k, (23)
 |C | i
 x∈Ci Theorem 2. (Proof in Appendix B): Let Ys be the proxy target
where µi is the centroid of cluster Ci . The distance between for self-supervised learning. Assuming the Label Blindness
clusters is measured as dij = kµi − µj k, where k · k typically Condition I(Ys ; Y ) = 0 holds, the unsupervised feature
denotes the Euclidean distance. Zssl satisfies I(Zssl ; Y ) = 0. Sieve aims to overcome this
 blindness condition by introducing the neighbor-consistency
Algorithm 1 Class Number Estimation corrected label Yc . Under the Manifold Smoothness Assump-
 Input: Labeled dataset DL = (Xt , Yt ) with |C l | known tion and the condition of high-purity filtering, I(Zsieve ; Y )
 |D |
classes; unknown sample set DU = {xui }i=1U ; maximum asymptotically approaches the label entropy H(Y ), thus enmax abling the detection of adjacent unknown samples.
expected number of classes |Cl |
Output: Estimated total number of classes |C| ˆ
 Theorem 3. (Proof in Appendix C): Let Z follow a class-
 1: Extract features of DL and DU using F
 conditional distribution with covariance matrix Σk . The self-
 2: Step 1: Split labeled dataset
 probe supervised optimization objective of Sieve (Lself ) is mathe-
 3: Partition DL by class into probe set DL and validate
 val matically equivalent to minimizing the trace of the intra-class
 set DL such that:
 probe val covariance matrix Σk , i.e., Tr(Σk ) → 0. Under the assumption
 4: 1) DL = DL ∪ DL
 probe val of a class-conditional Gaussian distribution, this implies that
 5: 2) |Cl | : |Cl | = 2 : 1
 the determinant det(Σk ) → 0. In the asymptotic limit, this
 6: 3) Clprobe ∩ Clval = ∅ compactness causes the eigenvalue amplification factor of the
 7: Step 2: Define evaluation function f (k)
 Mahalanobis distance metric to tend towards infinity, thereby
 8: function f (k)
 minimizing the theoretical bound of the Open Set Risk.
 9: 1. Apply semi-supervised K-means++ on dataset D =
 probe val
 DL ∪ DL ∪ DU with k clusters: The empirical findings presented in Section VI provide
 probe
10: - Constrain DL samples to their true labels robust validation for the information-theoretic foundations of
 val
11: - Treat DL and DU as unlabeled the Sieve framework. Consistent with Theorem 1, ROC anal-
12: 2. After convergence, compute: ysis demonstrates that Sieve achieves AUC values reaching
 val
13: - ACC: Average clustering accuracy on DL 99.92%, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art methods
14: - DB: Davies-Bouldin index on D in unknown threat detection scenarios. Furthermore, the ex-
15: 3. return f (k) = −(ACC − DB) perimental results substantiate Theorem 2 as the framework
16: end function successfully overcomes label blindness; this is evidenced by
17: Step 3: Find optimal k using Brent’s algorithm the direct positive correlation between label accuracy and
 probe
18: Run Brent’s algorithm on interval (|Cl |, |Clmax |] to model generalization, combined with a robust capability to
 minimize f (k) reject open-set noise. Finally, the intra-class compactness
19: Let k ∗ be the k that minimizes f (k) predicted by Theorem 3 is visually confirmed by t-SNE
20: Set optimal estimate |C| ˆ = k∗
 visualizations where known categories form well-defined and
21: return |C| ˆ
 compact clusters; this geometric refinement results in the
 distinct gap observed in anomaly score distributions, allowing
 Mahalanobis-based detection to minimize open-set risk more
 V. T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATION effectively than variants like Sieve-MSP or Sieve-Energy.
 In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis of the proposed Sieve framework from an information-theoretic perspective. Specifically, we prove three theorems to elucidate how 1 See repository https://github.com/niebikong/Sieve/tree/master/theory

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 10

 VI. E VALUATION external datasets are incorrectly assigned labels from the
 In this section, we conducted comprehensive experiments current set. We define the total noise ratio as the overall
on multiple publicly available traffic datasets to demonstrate proportion of noisy samples in the dataset, while the openthe superiority and effectiveness of our proposed Sieve model. set noise ratio refers to the portion of open-set samples
Specifically, these experiments aim to address the following within the noisy subset. For brevity, experimental settings are
questions: denoted by their ratios and types : for instance, “0.3Sym” and
 “0.4Asym” represent 30% symmetric and 40% asymmetric
 • RQ1. How does the Sieve model perform in detecting
 noise , respectively, while “0.3Sym 0.5Open” indicates a 30%
 known malicious traffic compared to SOTA methods
 total noise ratio with a 50% open-set component.
 under different noise conditions?
 3) Experimental Settings: The experimental setup is sum-
 • RQ2. How does the Sieve model perform in detecting
 marized in Table III. For the Mal TLS2023 dataset, we use
 unknown malicious traffic compared to SOTA methods
 three randomly selected types of traffic from CipherSpectrum
 under different noise conditions?
 as open-set noise samples, and all categories in CipherSpec-
 • RQ3. What is the effectiveness of the analysis of detected
 trum as unknown traffic. For the DDoS2019 dataset, we use
 unknown traffic samples?
 benign traffic from IDS2018 as open-set noise samples and all
 traffic from IDS2018 as unknown traffic.
A. Setup
 TABLE III
 1) Dataset: The experiments are based on four public E XPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT SETUP.
datasets.
 Mal TLS2023 [52]: This dataset contains TLS 1.2 en- Characteristics Mal TLS2023 DDoS2019
crypted traffic generated by 23 malware families. We segment # Attack types 23 DDoS variants
raw packet traces into flows using the standard five-tuple and # Normal samples 0 106,626
extract one-dimensional statistical features from each TLS
 # Attack samples 92,034 523,831
flow. The feature extraction code is available in our reposi-
 Task Multi-class Binary
tory2 . After processing, the dataset contains 92,034 flows.
 Open-set noise classes Randomly select 3 classes Benign
 CipherSpectrum [53]: This dataset contains TLS 1.3
 Unknown classes CipherSpectrum IDS2018
encrypted web traffic using three mandatory/recommended
cipher suites: AES-128-GCM, AES-256-GCM, and 4) Compared Methods: To comprehensively evaluate Sieve,
CHACHA20-POLY1305. Each traffic type contains 2,010 we compare it with state-of-the-art methods from two closely
flows, resulting in 82,410 flows in total. Since it is also related but distinct research lines, since there is no published
TLS encrypted traffic, we apply the same feature extraction baseline specifically designed for the joint setting of mixed
pipeline as Mal TLS2023. label noise and unknown traffic detection.
 DDoS2019 [54]: This dataset includes various reflective
 • Noise-Robust Learning Methods (e.g., DSDIR [14],
DDoS attacks, such as PortMap, NetBIOS, LDAP, MSSQL,
 MCRe [15], and RAPIER [16]) are designed to learn
and SNMP. We treat all attack traffic as malicious and real
 from training sets corrupted by closed-set label noise,
background traffic as benign. We use CICFlowMeter3 to
 and are mainly evaluated on known-class classification
extract flow-level statistical features. After processing, it conperformance. Comparing Sieve with them verifies its
tains 523,831 attack flows and 106,626 benign flows, totaling
 robustness to noisy labels in known traffic classification.
630,457 flows.
 • Unknown Attack Detection Methods (e.g., AEGIS-Net
 IDS2018 [55]: We use traffic from two days, i.e.,
 [5], FOSS [18], and RFG-HELAD [22]) aim to identify
3.2 and 2.16, and select DoS attacks-Hulk, DoS attackssamples from unseen classes, but usually assume a clean
SlowHTTPTest, and Bot as malicious traffic, while treating
 training set. Comparing Sieve with them evaluates its
the remaining benign traffic as normal. Following DDoS2019,
 ability to detect unknown malicious traffic in the presence
we use CICFlowMeter to extract the same statistical features.
 of label noise.
The processed dataset contains 1,074,342 benign flows and
290,089 malicious flows, totaling 1,364,431 flows. For a fair comparison, all baseline methods are evaluated
 2) Noise Settings: To simulate realistic data corruption, under the same experimental protocol as Sieve, using the same
we include three noise types: symmetric, asymmetric, and flow-level feature vectors, preprocessing pipeline, train/test
open-set. Symmetric noise is created by randomly replacing split, and noise injection settings. Although some baselines
labels across all classes using a uniform distribution. In were originally designed with different feature extraction procontrast, asymmetric noise models semantic confusion by cedures, their inputs can be represented as one-dimensional
swapping labels between similar categories. For example, in feature vectors; thus, we use the unified feature representation
the CipherSpectrum dataset, traffic from googleapis.com for all compared methods to avoid biases caused by inconsisor googletagmanager.com is randomly relabeled as tent inputs or data partitions. We follow the original papers or
google.com. Open-set noise occurs when samples from publicly available implementations of the baselines as closely
 as possible and retain their default parameter settings. In Sieve,
 2 https://github.com/niebikong/Sieve the CNN-based deep residual network is used as the feature
 3 https://github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter encoder to learn compact and robust representations.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 11

 TABLE IV
 T HE CLOSED - WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE M AL TLS2023 DATASET.

 0.1Sym 0.5Open 0.3Sym 0.5Open 0.5Sym 0.5Open 0.1Asym 0.5Open 0.3Asym 0.5Open 0.5Asym 0.5Open
 Methods
 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1

 RAPIER 86.54 85.66 83.26 83.78 81.43 81.32 85.73 85.56 84.10 84.57 80.74 80.39
 MCRe 85.23 83.66 69.72 67.24 54.53 49.73 88.00 86.98 81.09 79.12 74.25 72.28
 DSDIR 94.52 93.75 94.17 92.86 93.53 92.23 94.82 93.65 94.08 92.51 93.73 92.40
 FOSS 70.45 63.14 74.11 69.39 71.19 64.85 84.26 82.09 76.17 71.05 69.72 63.57
 RFG-HELAD 91.04 89.19 91.37 89.60 91.23 89.65 91.79 90.61 91.88 90.54 92.60 91.82
 CNN 93.94 93.82 91.38 91.13 90.91 90.67 93.29 93.16 91.99 91.89 89.36 89.34

 Sieve 95.45 95.19 95.40 95.12 94.96 94.75 94.85 94.59 95.20 94.95 95.25 95.01
 Note: The CNN model represents the model without the noise correction module in the Sieve, trained only with the cross-entropy loss function.
 The noise setting format is [total noise ratio][noise type] [open-set noise ratio]Open.
 TABLE V
 T HE CLOSED - WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE DD O S2019 DATASET.

 0.1Sym 0.5Open 0.3Sym 0.5Open 0.5Sym 0.5Open 0.1Asym 0.5Open 0.3Asym 0.5Open 0.5Asym 0.5Open
 Methods
 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1

 RAPIER 76.66 84.73 78.87 86.48 72.42 82.02 70.86 80.24 67.06 77.71 68.06 78.03
 MCRe 96.59 96.49 89.91 89.09 74.87 64.12 94.95 94.69 85.16 83.31 74.76 70.60
 DSDIR 87.33 65.81 84.97 54.75 83.35 45.52 91.60 87.27 88.75 83.75 89.45 84.59
 FOSS 82.93 75.19 82.93 83.90 77.42 75.19 84.54 78.79 83.86 77.33 84.72 79.19
 RFG-HELAD 97.93 97.93 97.93 97.93 97.72 97.72 97.93 97.93 97.93 97.93 97.89 97.89
 CNN 94.74 94.78 89.94 89.84 86.77 86.12 95.75 95.86 88.87 88.90 86.82 86.23

 Sieve 98.48 98.48 98.51 98.51 98.58 98.58 99.12 99.12 99.07 99.07 99.05 99.06
 The noise setting format is [total noise ratio][noise type] [open-set noise ratio]Open.

 5) Training Details: The Sieve model utilizes a CNN-based in handling mixed noise. As shown in Table IV, the Sieve
deep residual neural network for feature extraction, with a model achieved optimal performance under all noise settings
standard SGD optimizer featuring a momentum of 0.9 and (both symmetric and asymmetric), with average Accuracy and
a weight decay of 5e-4. The learning rate is set to 0.001 F1 scores exceeding 94%. Notably, even under extremely high
with a cosine learning rate schedule, and the total training noise rates—such as the 0.5Sym 0.5Open scenario, where
epoch is 100. The batch size is 256. The parameters ξ and ζ 50% of labels are incorrectly flipped, and 50% of unknown
are selected from {0.91, 0.92, . . . , 1.0}. The parameters K in class samples are mixed in—Sieve’s performance experienced
KNN voting and the λ are chosen via grid search on a held- only a minor decline. This proves that its neighbor conout validation set, with K ∈ {10, 20, . . . , 100, 150, 200} and sistency selection mechanism and subset expansion strategy
λ ∈ {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}. The optimal values, determined by can effectively isolate high-confidence clean samples within
maximizing validation performance, are ξ = 1.0, ζ = 0.93, the feature space. Regarding the standard CNN, it shows a
K = 100, and λ = 1.0. All reported results are averaged certain degree of resistance to label noise. Among the noise
over experiments conducted with five different random seeds label handling methods, DSDIR performs best because it
to ensure robustness. is a two-stage method where each stage promotes a purer
 training subset. Conversely, the MCRe method gradually loses
B. Known Malware Traffic Classification Experiments (RQ1) effectiveness in high-noise scenarios. FOSS and RFG-HELAD
 To comprehensively evaluate the classification performance perform relatively poorly as they lack noise label processing
of the Sieve model on known malware traffic in a closed-world modules; however, RFG-HELAD outperforms FOSS because
scenario, especially in a complex environment characterized it incorporates frequency domain features and adversarial
by the simultaneous presence of closed-set noise and open-set training mechanisms, which enhance the robustness of feature
noise, we compared Sieve with current SOTA methods. The expression.
comparison methods include: noise label handling methods (2) Binary Classification Performance Analysis. In the
(RAPIER, MCRe, DSDIR); unknown traffic detection methods DDoS2019 binary classification task, the data distribution
(FOSS, RFG-HELAD); and a baseline model (standard CNN imbalance and the characteristics of attack traffic make the task
neural network without a noise processing module). Through unique. As shown in Table V, Sieve’s accuracy remains stable
the analysis of Table IV and Table V, we arrived at the above 98.4% across all scenarios, and even reached 99.06%
following in-depth conclusions: under the 0.5Asym extreme asymmetric noise setting. This
 (1) Multiclass Classification Performance Analysis. Ex- indicates that Sieve’s sample screening mechanism is not only
perimental results on the Mal TLS2023 multi-classification suitable for multi-classification but is also extremely precise in
dataset demonstrate that Sieve possesses significant advantages binary boundary determination, remaining unaffected by open-

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 12

set background traffic interference. A significant finding is
that while DSDIR performs excellently in multi-classification,
its performance collapses severely in binary classification
under high noise scenarios. RFG-HELAD demonstrates strong
stability in this task, second only to Sieve. This is attributed
to its heterogeneous ensemble learning architecture, which
effectively captures the inherent patterns of attack flows when
processing large-scale DDoS traffic, maintaining good discriminability even in the presence of label noise. (a) MAL_TLS2023 0.3Sym_0.5Open (b) MAL_TLS2023 0.3Asym_0.5Open

 (3) Label Correction Capability Analysis. The core advantage of Sieve lies in its powerful noise label correction
and screening capabilities, which directly determine the performance of the subsequent classifier. Fig. 6 illustrates the
dynamic screening of the training subset by Sieve during the
training process on the Mal TLS2023 dataset. In the initial
stage of training, the model mainly relies on initial features; as
the Epoch increases, the proportion of the purple area (closed- (c) DDoS2019 0.3Sym_0.5Open (d) DDoS2019 0.3Asym_0.5Open

set noise samples) decreases significantly and continuously.
For example, in the 0.3Sym 0.5Open scenario, the proportion Fig. 7. The changes in label accuracy and model test accuracy across different
of closed-set noise drops substantially, while the corresponding scenarios with respect to the number of training epochs.
blue area (clean samples) increases significantly. This indicates
that Sieve successfully identified and corrected the mislabeled accuracy across most categories. Despite the presence of
known-class samples. It is worth noting that the proportion 50% open-set noise and 10% label flipping, Sieve effectively
of the red area (open-set noise samples) remains almost extracts core features of malicious traffic without significant
constant throughout the entire training cycle and is never category confusion. Notably, minor mutual misclassification
incorrectly “corrected” into clean samples. This proves that between Class 6 and Class 7 arises from their inherent
Sieve possesses an extremely strong rejection capability—it semantic similarity in TLS-encrypted traffic features rather
not only corrects wrong labels but also identifies open-set than noise-induced chaos. This localized confusion confirms
noise that does not belong to any known category and excludes that Sieve’s feature learning preserves the clustering structure
it from model updates, thereby preventing open-set data from and maintains robust discriminability, with misclassifications
polluting the decision boundary. limited to edge samples with highly similar characteristics.
 Fig. 7 displays the synchronous trend of Label Accuracy and
Testing Accuracy. As training progresses, the label correction
module continuously improves the purity of the training data,
directly driving the performance improvement of the model
on the test set. This positive correlation strongly proves
that Sieve’s label correction module is a key component for
enhancing the model’s generalization ability.

 (a) Mal_TLS2023 0.1Sym_0.5Open

 (b) Mal_TLS2023 0.3Sym_0.5Open

 (c) Mal_TLS2023 0.5Sym_0.5Open

 Fig. 8. The confusion matrix of the Sieve model in the 0.1Sym 0.5Open
 scenario on the Mal TLS2023 dataset.

Fig. 6. The changes in the proportions of three types of samples during the
training process of the Sieve model on the Mal TLS2023 dataset. C. Unknown Malware Traffic Detection Experiments (RQ2)
 (4) Confusion Matrix Analysis. The confusion matrix To evaluate the capability of the Sieve model in detecting
for the 0.1Sym 0.5Open scenario (Fig. 8) exhibits a dis- unknown malicious traffic, we conducted a series of experitinct diagonal-dominant pattern, reflecting high classification ments. The following performance analysis regarding Sieve’s

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 13

 TABLE VI
 T HE OPEN - WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON M AL TLS2023 AND DD O S2019 DATASET.

 0.1Sym 0.5Open 0.3Sym 0.5Open 0.5Sym 0.5Open 0.1Asym 0.5Open 0.3Asym 0.5Open 0.5Asym 0.5Open
 Dataset Methods
 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1

 FOSS 97.02 95.38 52.40 56.36 40.21 50.71 98.36 97.40 74.33 70.55 49.73 54.98
 RFG-HELAD 85.93 87.69 88.13 89.41 88.08 89.37 80.44 83.67 84.79 86.82 87.29 88.75
 Mal TLS2023

 AEGIS-Net 96.64 94.52 97.07 96.73 85.25 80.79 95.60 92.70 97.80 96.48 98.19 97.13
 Sieve-MSP 77.50 74.06 90.20 86.78 72.02 69.68 61.99 62.85 73.22 70.58 83.47 79.57
 Sieve-Energy 82.83 78.19 87.46 83.13 81.93 77.77 73.58 68.52 82.07 77.99 86.62 81.86
 Sieve-Cosine 84.38 76.40 82.73 76.35 81.03 73.14 82.78 76.83 84.15 83.52 76.89 79.57
 Sieve 97.57 96.10 98.05 96.89 98.19 97.12 97.20 95.48 97.87 96.60 98.12 97.00

 FOSS 97.68 96.09 92.75 88.72 53.41 55.02 85.87 80.13 67.56 63.75 33.47 46.14
 RFG-HELAD 61.66 71.25 60.98 70.89 61.37 71.09 60.30 70.53 60.23 70.49 61.00 70.90
 DDoS2019

 AEGIS-Net 52.28 53.98 36.44 47.00 33.50 45.94 49.97 53.32 37.13 47.72 33.16 46.01
 Sieve-MSP 95.11 92.09 94.16 90.85 94.49 91.31 91.37 86.74 94.53 91.28 95.06 92.23
 Sieve-Energy 90.55 82.95 89.97 83.42 85.69 77.12 90.85 84.42 89.15 80.83 86.25 73.71
 Sieve-Cosine 74.65 60.49 77.34 58.68 74.29 57.51 72.55 61.10 72.08 59.01 73.10 55.18
 Sieve 98.81 97.98 99.23 99.62 99.54 99.92 99.15 98.57 98.61 98.44 98.12 98.12
 Note: Acc and F1 are calculated after determining the detection threshold τ . Sieve-MSP, Sieve-Energy, and Sieve-Cosine are variants of Sieve that
 replace the Mahalanobis distance metric with different OOD scoring mechanisms.
 Sieve-MSP: Uses the Maximum Softmax Probability of the classifier’s logits to measure detection confidence [56].
 Sieve-Energy: Calculates the Energy score based on the LogSumExp of the output logits [57].
 Sieve-Cosine: Measures the maximum cosine similarity between the normalized test sample feature and the training feature bank [58].

unknown traffic detection capabilities is derived from the morphology of the ROC curves indicates that Sieve can attain
results: a very high True Positive Rate (TPR) while maintaining an
 (1) Comparative Analysis of Unknown Traffic Detection extremely low False Positive Rate (FPR). This implies that
Performance. Table VI presents the performance of various Sieve can accurately identify the vast majority of unknown
models in open-world scenarios under different noise set- attacks without frequently misclassifying normal traffic or
tings on the Mal TLS2023 and DDoS2019 datasets. Across known attacks. In contrast, the detection capabilities of RFGall tested noise scenarios, Sieve consistently achieved the HELAD and AEGIS-Net in novel attack intrusion detection
highest Accuracy and F1 scores. Notably, under high noise scenarios approach random guessing.
ratios, Sieve maintained F1 scores above 97% (Mal TLS2023)
and 98% (DDoS2019), demonstrating exceptional robustness.
Although FOSS is specifically designed for unknown traffic
detection, it performed poorly on training sets containing label
noise. Its performance degraded significantly as the noise
ratio increased; for instance, on Mal TLS2023, the F1 score
dropped from 97% to approximately 50%. This indicates that
FOSS lacks an effective noise filtering mechanism, causing
the boundaries of “known classes” to be severely distorted
by noise. AEGIS-Net and RFG-HELAD performed acceptably under low noise conditions but struggled to effectively (a) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Sym_0.5Open (b) DDoS2019 0.1Sym_0.5Open

distinguish between known and unknown classes under high or
asymmetric noise, resulting in a decline in detection rates. Furthermore, Sieve outperformed its variants—Sieve-MSP, Sieve-
Energy, and Sieve-Cosine. This substantiates that utilizing the
Mahalanobis distance for anomaly detection, following the
compaction of the feature space, is the most effective strategy.
 (2) Analysis of ROC Curves and AUC Metrics. Fig. 9
illustrates the ROC curves for unknown traffic detection by
various models under different datasets and noise settings. The (c) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Asym_0.5Open (d) DDoS2019 0.1Asym_0.5Open
ROC curve of Sieve (solid red line) is consistently positioned
in the upper-left corner, encompassing the largest area (AUC
 Fig. 9. ROC curves for the unknown malware traffic detection in Mal TLS
value). For example, under the 0.1Sym 0.5Open setting of 2023 and DDoS2019 dataset.
Mal TLS2023, Sieve achieved an AUC of 99.92%, surpassing (3) Analysis of Anomaly Score Distribution and Threshcomparative methods such as FOSS and RFG-HELAD. The olds. Fig. 10 visually presents the distribution of anomaly

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 14

scores calculated by Sieve for known and unknown traffic. TABLE VII
It is clearly observable that the anomaly scores for known FPR U NDER D IFFERENT N OISE S CENARIOS WITH T UNABLE TPR
 T HRESHOLD .
traffic are concentrated in the lower numerical range (left
blue region) with a highly compact distribution, whereas the TPR
 Datasets Scenarios
anomaly scores for unknown traffic are distributed in the 0.95 0.97 0.99 1.0
higher numerical range (right orange region). There is a 0.1Sym 0.5Open 3.56 2.80 2.52 0.58
distinct “gap” or minimal overlap between the two. The dashed 0.3Sym 0.5Open 3.35 2.32 1.03 0.18
line in the figure represents the detection threshold, which 0.5Sym 0.5Open 3.78 3.11 3.00 2.09
 Mal TLS2023
successfully isolates the vast majority of unknown traffic to 0.1Asym 0.5Open 3.57 2.72 2.34 1.25
the right. For instance, in the 0.1Sym 0.5Open scenario of 0.3Asym 0.5Open 3.37 2.83 2.48 1.16
Mal TLS2023, the threshold effectively distinguishes most 0.5Asym 0.5Open 3.15 2.90 2.96 0.35
unknown traffic. This demonstrates that Sieve, by optimizing 0.1Sym 0.5Open 9.35 6.76 3.89 0.56
intra-class compactness, causes known classes to be extremely 0.3Sym 0.5Open 8.64 6.07 3.35 0.39
convergent in the feature space, thereby enabling the easy DDoS2019
 0.5Sym 0.5Open 6.95 4.77 2.35 0.08
detection of unknown classes as anomalies via a distance 0.1Asym 0.5Open 6.15 4.12 1.62 0.06
threshold. 0.3Asym 0.5Open 6.12 3.89 1.40 0.01
 0.5Asym 0.5Open 6.49 4.09 1.53 0.00

 each known category (clusters of different colors) clusters
 very tightly in the feature space, forming distinct, well-defined
 clusters. This is attributed to the compression of intra-class
 distances by the contrastive learning loss function. Unknown
 traffic is effectively pushed away from the distribution regions
 (a) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Sym_0.5Open (b) DDoS2019 0.1Sym_0.5Open
 of known classes and scattered in low-density areas of the
 feature space. Compared to models without Sieve optimization, Sieve maintains a clear structure of the feature space
 even under high noise interference, avoiding the blurring of
 category boundaries caused by noisy samples. This provides
 a solid feature foundation for distance-based unknown traffic
 detection.
 (c) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Asym_0.5Open (d) DDoS2019 0.1Asym_0.5Open

Fig. 10. Distribution of anomaly scores.
 (4) False Positive Analysis. Table VII shows the impact
of the TPR parameter in the Sieve framework on controlling
the false positive rate (FPR). Increasing the TPR can systematically and significantly reduce the FPR. For example,
in the 0.1Sym 0.5Open noise scenario of the MalTLS2023
dataset, raising the TPR from 0.95 to 1.0 reduces the FPR
dramatically from 3.56% to 0.58%. This pattern holds consistently across all tested noise configurations. This occurs (a) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Sym_0.5Open (b) DDoS2019 0.1Sym_0.5Open

because the TPR directly determines the strictness of the
model’s decision threshold for distinguishing known classes
from unknown classes. Increasing the TPR implies adopting a
stricter threshold, thereby more effectively protecting knownclass samples from being misclassified as unknown threats,
which in turn directly reduces false positives. This design
provides crucial operational value for practical deployment:
in production environments where alert-handling resources are
limited and tolerance for false positives is low, operators can
 (c) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Asym_0.5Open (d) DDoS2019 0.1Asym_0.5Open
proactively set a high TPR to suppress the FPR to an extremely
low level, ensuring the manageability of alert volume [59],
[60]. Fig. 11. Comparison of t-SNE.
 (5) t-SNE Visualization Analysis of Feature Space. Fig.
11 visualizes the distribution of known and unknown classes D. Class Number Estimation and Clustering Analysis (RQ3)
in the feature space by mapping high-dimensional features To validate the efficacy of the Sieve framework during the
onto a two-dimensional plane using the t-SNE algorithm [61], unknown traffic labeling phase, we conducted class number
[62]. The visualization results show that after Sieve training, estimation and clustering experiments on the IDS2018 dataset.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 15

The unknown traffic detector is trained in the DDoS2019 NMI (Normalized Mutual Information) is used to measure
dataset under the 0.1Sym 0.5Open scenario. the correlation between clustering results and ground truth
 labels. The Overall NMI (0.704) is at a relatively high level,
 TABLE VIII
 indicating that the clustering results are highly consistent with
D ESCRIPTION OF THE UNKNOWN TRAFFIC SELECTED FROM THE IDS2018 the true distribution. The Novel NMI (0.215) is relatively
 DATASET. lower, which is similarly constrained by the cluster splitting
 resulting from the overestimation of the class number. The
 ARI (Adjusted Rand Index) measures the difference between
 Attack Name Date Attack Start Time Attack Finish Time
 the clustering results and a random partition. A score of
 DoS-Hulk Fri-16-02-2018 13:45 14:19 0.656 indicates that Sieve’s clustering results are significantly
DoS-SlowHTTPTest Fri-16-02-2018 10:12 11:08 superior to random guessing and effectively aggregate similar
 Bot Fri-02-03-2018 10:11 11:34 flows.
 Bot Fri-02-03-2018 14:24 15:55

 (1) Analysis of Class Number Estimation Accuracy. In
this experiment, the DDoS2019 dataset was employed as the
known traffic, while traffic from two specific days—February
16, 2018 (Friday) and March 2, 2018 (Friday)—within the
IDS2018 dataset was selected as the unknown traffic. As
indicated in the Table VIII, the attack traffic on these two
days primarily consists of DoS-Hulk, DoS-SlowHTTPTest,
and Bot. According to the official dataset documentation, the
Bot traffic comprises two distinct botnet variants: Zeus and Fig. 12. Performance evaluation of unknown traffic clustering on the IDS2018
 Dataset in terms of accuracy and quality Metrics.
Ares. Consequently, including the background benign traffic,
the total number of Ground Truth classes in this experimental (3) t-SNE Visualization Analysis. To intuitively demonscenario is 5 (4 attack classes + 1 benign class). strate the feature learning and clustering effectiveness of
 In the experiment, we set the upper bound of the search Sieve for unknown traffic, we generated t-SNE visualization
to |Clmax | = 10. The Prior-Guided Class Number Estimation plots. Fig. 13(a) displays the distribution of raw traffic in
module of Sieve utilizes the Brent algorithm to optimize the dimensionality-reduced feature space prior to clustering.
the ACC-DB objective function, ultimately estimating the The blue points (representing known malicious and benign
number of unknown traffic classes to be 6. Although there samples from the training set) form well-defined and exis a deviation of one class compared to the ground truth (5 tremely compact clusters in the space. This is attributed to
classes), this indicates that Sieve tends towards a finer-grained the compression of intra-class distances achieved by the Sieve
division (over-segmentation). In the field of cybersecurity, the contrastive learning module. The red points (representing the
cost of misclassifying variants of the same attack into two detected unknown traffic) are not mixed with known classes;
classes is significantly lower than that of confusing two distinct instead, they form multiple independent, high-density clusters.
attacks into a single class (under-segmentation). Therefore, this This visually demonstrates that the features extracted by
estimation result is acceptable in practical applications and Sieve possess strong discriminative power, capable of naturally
facilitates subsequent manual merging. separating semantically distinct unknown attacks within the
 feature space.
 (2) In-depth Analysis of Clustering Performance Metrics. Based on the estimated class number k = 6, we
employed the semi-supervised K-means++ algorithm to cluster
the unknown traffic encoded by the encoder. Fig. 12 presents
the detailed quantitative evaluation metrics. The clustering
accuracy of the Sieve model for known categories approaches
100%. This demonstrates that while exploring unknown categories, Sieve avoids catastrophic forgetting and perfectly
retains its discriminative capability for known traffic. The
Novel Acc is 0.418; the primary reason for this relatively low
metric is that the estimated number of classes (6) exceeds
 (a) Before clustering (b) After clustering
the ground truth (5). This results in a specific class of real
attack traffic being split into two clusters, thereby incurring a
 Fig. 13. t-SNE visualization of feature distributions on the IDS2018 Dataset:
penalty during the purity calculation. The harmonic mean of (a) Ground truth distribution of known and detected unknown traffic, and (b)
the accuracy for known and unknown classes is 0.589. This Clustering results of unknown traffic.
metric comprehensively reflects the clustering performance of Fig. 13(b) illustrates the clustering results after applying
the model across the entire feature space, indicating that the the estimated class number (k = 6), where different colors
model achieves a balance between maintaining performance represent different clusters. It can be clearly observed that the
on known classes and discovering new ones. unknown traffic is partitioned into 6 distinct clusters. Although

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 16

there are only 5 ground truth classes, causing one type of
attack to be split into two clusters of similar colors (i.e., oversegmentation), distinct margins are still maintained between
the clusters. These visualization results indicate that, despite
the minor deviation in class number estimation, Sieve successfully decouples different attack behaviors within the semantic
space. Security analysts need only review the centroid samples
of these 6 clusters to quickly merge the two clusters belonging
to the same attack type, thereby efficiently completing the
labeling of new attacks.

E. Sensitivity Analysis
 In this subsection, we perform sensitivity analysis on the
 Fig. 15. Impact of hyperparameters K on Sieve performance.
critical hyperparameters in Sieve.
 TABLE IX
 T HE ABLATION STUDY OF KEY COMPONENTS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE
 SCENARIOS .

 Method
 Datasets Scenarios
 w/o LC w/o SE w/o CL Full
 0.1Sym 0.5Open 93.94 95.18 94.72 95.45
 0.3Sym 0.5Open 93.38 94.89 94.78 95.40
 0.5Sym 0.5Open 90.91 94.56 93.88 94.96
 Mal TLS2023
 0.1Asym 0.5Open 93.29 94.88 93.82 94.85
 0.3Asym 0.5Open 91.99 94.20 94.03 95.20
 0.5Asym 0.5Open 89.36 94.18 94.67 95.25
 0.1Sym 0.5Open 94.74 98.06 99.14 98.48
 0.3Sym 0.5Open 89.94 98.08 97.90 98.51
 0.5Sym 0.5Open 86.77 98.06 97.12 98.58
 DDoS2019
 0.1Asym 0.5Open 95.75 98.10 98.97 99.12
Fig. 14. Impact of hyperparameters ξ and ζ on Sieve performance.
 0.3Asym 0.5Open 88.87 98.02 98.22 99.07
 (1) Effect of ξ and ζ. 0.5Asym 0.5Open 86.82 98.09 97.87 99.05
 Fig. 14 shows the impact of ξ and ζ on unknown traffic detection. Fixing ξ = 1.0 and varying ζ yields better
 F. Ablation Study
performance than fixing ζ and varying ξ, indicating that the
purity of the initially selected subset is more important than To verify the individual contribution of each component
sample quantity. This high-purity subset provides reliable class within the Sieve framework, we conduct a comprehensive
centroids for subsequent expansion and detection. ablation study. We evaluate four configurations: (1) Full, the
 The best performance is obtained when ζ = 0.93, which complete Sieve framework; (2) w/o LC, which removes the
balances sample recall and noise rejection. A lower ζ may noisy label correction module; (3) w/o SE, which excludes the
admit ambiguous open-set noise, while a higher ζ may dis- subset expansion mechanism; and (4) w/o CL, which omits the
card useful clean samples. In practice, when different classes self-supervised contrastive loss. These experiments are carried
exhibit strong feature overlap, ξ can be slightly relaxed while out across various noise ratios and types on the Mal TLS2023
ζ should be increased accordingly to maintain the purity of and DDoS2019 datasets to assess how each module influences
the expanded subset. the model’s classification accuracy.
 (2) Effect of K. Fig. 15 illustrates the impact of neighbor The experimental results, summarized in Table IX,
count K on classification performance. While known class clearly demonstrate that every designed component is viaccuracy remains stable at approximately 95.5% across the tal for maintaining robustness under mixed noise conditesting range, unknown detection accuracy oscillates (97.1%– tions. The Full model consistently achieves the highest ac-
97.4%) for K < 100 before peaking at 97.6% at K = 100 and curacy across all scenarios, particularly in extreme cases
plateauing. This performance surge suggests that K = 100 like 0.5Asym 0.5Open. We observe that removing the laoptimally aligns with the feature space’s geometric density, bel correction module results in the most significant perforproviding a receptive field large enough to smooth noise mance collapse—dropping by over 12% in the DDoS2019
and establish a robust consensus without inducing cross- 0.5Asym 0.5Open scenario—which underscores its foundacategory confusion. This alignment enables more precise intra- tional role in purifying the training set. Furthermore, the
class compactness calculation, directly enhancing Mahalanobis performance declines in the w/o SE and w/o CL variants
distance-based unknown traffic detection. indicate that subset expansion successfully recaptures valuable

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 17

samples, while contrastive loss is essential for learning the R EFERENCES
compact, noise-resistant feature representations necessary for
 [1] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust
precise detection. detection of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE
 Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2025.
 [2] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A universal
 framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic de-
 VII. L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS tection,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, 2024, pp.
 1608–1619.
 Over-Segmentation in Unknown-Traffic Labeling. The [3] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting
reliability of the unknown-traffic labeling module depends on website fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in
 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), 2023, pp.
the purity of the detection output. As observed in the ex- 607–624.
periments, imperfect detection can lead to over-segmentation [4] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “Cbseq: A
(e.g., one true attack class being split into two clusters) and channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 18,
increases the need for manual cluster merging. To reduce this pp. 5011–5025, 2023.
reliance on expert intervention, future work could explore: [5] Q. Meng, Q. Yuan, J. Tao, P. Wang, S. Lu, G. Li, Y. Wang, and X. Guan,
(1) automated post-processing heuristics that merge clusters “When unknown threat meets label noise: A self-correcting framework,”
 IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2025.
based on centroid distance or distribution similarity metrics, [6] M. Kim and I. Lee, “Human-guided auto-labeling for network traffic
and (2) semi-automated validation workflows that present data: The gelm approach,” Neural networks, vol. 152, pp. 510–526,
only the most uncertain candidate merges to security experts, 2022.
 [7] J. L. Guerra, C. Catania, and E. Veas, “Datasets are not enough:
thereby focusing human effort on the most critical decisions. Challenges in labeling network traffic,” Computers & Security, vol. 120,
 Limitations of Synthetic Unknown-Traffic. This study p. 102810, 2022.
evaluates unknown traffic by treating classes from external [8] R. Sachdeva, F. R. Cordeiro, V. Belagiannis, I. Reid, and G. Carneiro,
 “Evidentialmix: Learning with combined open-set and closed-set noisy
datasets as unknown. While this controlled strategy enables labels,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applicareproducible benchmarking, it has inherent limitations com- tions of computer vision, 2021, pp. 3607–3615.
pared to real-world operations: (1) real unknown attacks may [9] B. Van Rooyen and R. C. Williamson, “A theory of learning with
 corrupted labels,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 18, no.
not form coherent, well-separated semantic clusters and may 228, pp. 1–50, 2018.
exhibit more scattered or anomalous feature patterns; (2) in [10] T. Dahanayaka, Y. Ginige, Y. Huang, G. Jourjon, and S. Seneviratne,
practice, open-set noise samples are likely intertwined with “Robust open-set classification for encrypted traffic fingerprinting,”
 Computer Networks, vol. 236, p. 109991, 2023.
closed-set noise in a far more complex manner than the clean [11] Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Gou, C. Liu, and G. Xiong, “Not afraid of the
batch-wise injection simulated here; and (3) the static protocol unseen: a siamese network based scheme for unknown traffic discovery,”
cannot assess model adaptation to gradual concept drift over in 2020 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC).
 IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.
time. Therefore, generalizing to the more chaotic, real-world
 [12] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
unknown threats remains an important direction for future filtering and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier update,” in IEEE INresearch. FOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE,
 2020, pp. 397–405.
 [13] M. Zhan, R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Xue, Q. Li, Z. Liu, G. Cheng, and K. Xu,
 “Flowrefiner: A robust traffic classification framework against label
 VIII. C ONCLUSION noise,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems.
 [14] G. Li, R. Zhang, Z. Sun, L. Xing, and Y. Zhang, “Dsdir: A two-stage
 In this paper, we propose the Sieve model, which effec- method for addressing noisy long-tailed problems in malicious traffic
tively addresses the challenges of known traffic classification detection,” in ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on
and unknown threat detection in scenarios with mixed label Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2025, pp.
 1–5.
noise through a threefold collaborative mechanism. The Sieve [15] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, and Y. Wang, “Mcre: A
framework consists of three closely cooperating modules: the unified framework for handling malicious traffic with noise labels based
noise label correction module utilizes neighborhood consis- on multidimensional constraint representation,” IEEE Transactions on
 Information Forensics and Security, vol. 19, pp. 133–147, 2023.
tency metrics and prediction confidence analysis to accurately [16] Y. Qing, Q. Yin, X. Deng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, K. Sun, K. Xu, J. Zhang, and
distinguish noisy samples and build a clean training set; the un- Q. Li, “Low-quality training data only? a robust framework for detecting
known traffic detection module employs Mahalanobis distance encrypted malicious network traffic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04798,
 2023.
metrics to achieve accurate identification of unknown traffic in [17] X. Luo, C. Liu, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, L. Guo, and
an optimized feature space; the traffic labeling module com- B. Fang, “Baptism: A robust framework for encrypted malicious traffic
bines semi-supervised clustering with expert verification to identification with low-quality training data,” IEEE Transactions on
 Information Forensics and Security, vol. 21, pp. 960–975, 2025.
support dynamic updates of the dataset. These three modules
 [18] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, X. Xie, J. Yu, F. Zhang, R. Zhang, B. Chen, X. Luo,
form a complete technical loop, ensuring the stability and M. Hu, and W. Ma, “Foss: Towards fine-grained unknown class detection
adaptability of the framework in noisy environments. Com- against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate traffic,”
prehensive tests on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 2024.
 [19] X. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Lai, Z. Hao, and A. X. Liu, “Reliable open-
Sieve maintains outstanding performance even under various set network traffic classification,” IEEE Transactions on Information
noise conditions. Theoretical analysis further confirms that the Forensics and Security, 2025.
framework effectively prevents information loss, eliminates [20] Q. Yang, W. He, M. Chen, H. Du, S. Shao, F. Wu, S. Liu, Y. Ji,
 and K. Ren, “End-to-end open-set semi-supervised learning for finelabel blind spots, and minimizes open set risks by optimizing grained encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Transactions on Informathe intra-class feature distribution to the greatest extent. tion Forensics and Security, 2026.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES 18

[21] Y. Ginige, B. Silva, T. Dahanayaka, and S. Seneviratne, “Trafficllm: [43] J. Yoder and C. E. Priebe, “Semi-supervised k-means++,” Journal of
 Llms for improved open-set encrypted traffic analysis,” Available at Statistical Computation and Simulation, vol. 87, no. 13, pp. 2597–2608,
 SSRN 5074974. 2017.
[22] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “Rfg-helad: A robust fine- [44] J. M. Johnson and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “Survey on deep learning with
 grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on heterogeneous class imbalance,” Journal of big data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–54, 2019.
 ensemble learning,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and [45] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “mixup: Beyond
 Security, 2024. empirical risk minimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
[23] M. Salehi, H. Mirzaei, D. Hendrycks, Y. Li, M. H. Rohban, and [46] B. Liu, L. Zhan, Z. Lu, Y. Feng, L. Xue, and X.-M. Wu, “How good are
 M. Sabokrou, “A unified survey on anomaly, novelty, open-set, and llms at out-of-distribution detection?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10261,
 out-of-distribution detection: Solutions and future challenges,” arXiv 2023.
 preprint arXiv:2110.14051, 2021. [47] K. Han, S.-A. Rebuffi, S. Ehrhardt, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman,
[24] W. J. Scheirer, A. de Rezende Rocha, A. Sapkota, and T. E. Boult, “Autonovel: Automatically discovering and learning novel visual cat-
 “Toward open set recognition,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis egories,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelliand machine intelligence, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1757–1772, 2012. gence, vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 6767–6781, 2021.
[25] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in [48] F. Gao, W. Zhong, Z. Cao, X. Peng, and Z. Li, “Opengcd: Assisting open
 Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern world recognition with generalized category discovery,” arXiv preprint
 recognition, 2016, pp. 1563–1572. arXiv:2308.06926, 2023.
[26] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. Ramos, and [49] S. Vaze, K. Han, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Generalized category
 A. Madeira, “Flowlens: Enabling efficient flow classification for ml- discovery,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
 based network security applications.” in NDSS, 2021. vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 7492–7501.
[27] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions in [50] K. R. Gegenfurtner, “Praxis: Brent’s algorithm for function minimizaautomated traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC tion,” Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, vol. 24,
 conference on computer and communications security, 2021, pp. 3366– no. 4, pp. 560–564, 1992.
 3383. [51] D. L. Davies and D. W. Bouldin, “A cluster separation measure,” IEEE
[28] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, no. 2, pp.
 intelligent network data plane,” in 32nd USENIX Security Symposium 224–227, 2009.
 (USENIX Security 23), 2023, pp. 6203–6220. [52] Q. Yuan, C. Liu, W. Yu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, Y. Wang, and G. Gou,
[29] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown “Boau: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels based on boundary
 encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Net- augmentation,” Computers & Security, vol. 131, p. 103300, 2023.
 working, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, 2024. [53] N. Wickramasinghe, A. Shaghaghi, G. Tsudik, and S. Jha, “Sok:
[30] Q. Meng, J. Tao, Q. Yuan, G. Li, Y. Wang, B. Gao, and S. Lu, Decoding the enigma of encrypted network traffic classifiers,” in 2025
 “Detection of unknown attacks through encrypted traffic: A gaussian IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2025, pp. 1825–
 prototype-aided variational autoencoder framework,” IEEE Transactions 1843.
 on Information Forensics and Security, 2025. [54] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Developing realistic distributed denial of service (ddos) attack dataset
[31] Q. Yuan, Q. Meng, J. Tao, G. Li, J. Fei, B. Lu, and Y. Wang, “Multiand taxonomy,” in 2019 international carnahan conference on security
 agent for network security monitoring and warning: a generative ai
 technology (ICCST). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.
 solution,” IEEE Network, 2025.
 [55] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, A. A. Ghorbani et al., “Toward generating
[32] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization.”
 fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
 ICISSP, vol. 1, no. 2018, pp. 108–116, 2018.
 IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 16, pp.
 [56] K. Lee, K. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Shin, “A simple unified framework for
 2046–2059, 2020.
 detecting out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks,” Advances
[33] S. Yang, X. Zheng, J. Li, J. Xu, and E. C. Ngai, “Cold: Collaborative in neural information processing systems, vol. 31, 2018.
 label denoising framework for network intrusion detection,” 2026. [57] W. Liu, X. Wang, J. Owens, and Y. Li, “Energy-based out-of-distribution
[34] X. Xia, B. Han, N. Wang, J. Deng, J. Li, Y. Mao, and T. Liu, “Extended detection,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33,
 t t: Learning with mixed closed-set and open-set noisy labels,” IEEE pp. 21 464–21 475, 2020.
 Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 45, [58] W. Zhou, F. Liu, and M. Chen, “Contrastive out-of-distribution detection
 no. 3, pp. 3047–3058, 2022. for pretrained transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08812, 2021.
[35] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic [59] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Detecting tunneled flooding traffic
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021 via deep semantic analysis of packet length patterns,” in Proceedings of
 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communica-
 2021, pp. 3431–3446. tions Security, 2024, pp. 3659–3673.
[36] L. Gao, C. Fu, X. Deng, K. Xu, and Q. Li, “Wedjat: Detecting sophis- [60] C. Fu, Q. Li, K. Xu, and J. Wu, “Point cloud analysis for ml-based
 ticated evasion attacks via real-time causal analysis,” in Proceedings of malicious traffic detection: Reducing majorities of false positive alarms,”
 the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
 Mining V. 1, 2025, pp. 342–353. Communications Security, 2023, pp. 1005–1019.
[37] C. Fu, Q. Li, E. Bertino, and K. Xu, “Training with only 1.0‰ [61] Y. Yan, Q. Yuan, W. Niu, X. Wang, Y. Zhu, and Y. Wang, “Fcal: An
 samples: Malicious traffic detection via cross-modality feature fusion,” asynchronous federated contrastive semi-supervised learning approach
 in Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and for network traffic classification,” in International Conference on Infor-
 Communications Security, 2025, pp. 3930–3944. mation and Communications Security. Springer, 2025, pp. 419–437.
[38] M. Shen, J. Wu, J. Ai, Q. Li, C. Ren, K. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Swallow: [62] K. Chen, Q. Yuan, Q. Meng, D. Li, Y. Zhu, G. Yu, X. Wang, and
 a transfer-robust website fingerprinting attack via consistent feature Y. Wang, “Robust intrusion detection in cps: A pre-training-based multilearning,” in Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on view feature collaboration and correlation analysis method,” Computer
 Computer and Communications Security, 2025, pp. 1574–1588. Networks, p. 112129, 2026.
[39] M. Shen, K. Ji, J. Wu, Q. Li, X. Kong, K. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Realtime website fingerprinting defense via traffic cluster anonymization,”
 in 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2024,
 pp. 3238–3256.
[40] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
 application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph
 neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
 Security, vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[41] C. Feng, G. Tzimiropoulos, and I. Patras, “Ssr: An efficient and robust
 framework for learning with unknown label noise,” arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2111.11288, 2021.
[42] V. Sehwag, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal, “Ssd: A unified framework for selfsupervised outlier detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12051, 2021.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.