IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026 9315

 FlowXpert: Context-Aware Flow Embedding for
 Enhanced Traffic Detection in IoT Network
 Chao Zha , Haolin Pan , Bing Bai , Jiangxing Wu, and Ruyun Zhang

 Abstract—In the Internet of Things (IoT) environment, continu- continuously generating and exchanging data over the netous interaction among a large number of devices generates complex work [1], [2]. This ubiquitous connectivity has significantly
and dynamic network traffic, which poses significant challenges expanded the attack surface, making IoT networks a prime target
to rule-based detection approaches. Machine learning (ML)-based
traffic detection technology, capable of identifying anomalous pat- for various cyber threats. Moreover, the resource-constrained
terns and potential threats within this traffic, serves as a critical nature of many IoT devices, along with the increasing use of encomponent in ensuring network security. This study first identifies cryption in IoT traffic, poses serious challenges to traditional neta significant issue with widely adopted feature extraction tools work security mechanisms. Traditional traffic detection methods
(e.g., CICFlowMeter): the extensive use of time- and length-related that rely on predefined rules or signature-based matching are offeatures leads to high sparsity, which adversely affects model
convergence. Furthermore, existing traffic detection methods gen- ten ineffective in identifying novel or sophisticated attacks in IoT
erally lack an embedding mechanism capable of efficiently and environments [3], [4], [5]. As a result, there has been a growing
comprehensively capturing the semantic characteristics of network research interest in using machine learning and deep learning
traffic. To address these challenges, we propose a novel feature (DL) techniques to develop more adaptive and intelligent traffic
extraction tool that eliminates traditional time and length features analysis systems customized for IoT networks [6], [7], [8], [9],
in favor of context-aware semantic features related to the source
host, thus improving the generalizability of the model. In addition, [10], [11].
we design an embedding training framework that integrates the Specifically, traditional machine learning algorithms, such as
unsupervised DBSCAN clustering algorithm with a contrastive decision trees, random forests, and support vector machines,
learning strategy to effectively capture fine-grained semantic rep- have been widely applied to network traffic detection tasks, parresentations of traffic. Extensive empirical evaluations are con- ticularly within the paradigm of supervised learning [12], [13],
ducted on the real-world dataset (Mawi) and two simulated datasets
(CICIDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15) to validate the proposed method [14]. In parallel, unsupervised clustering algorithms have also
in terms of detection accuracy, robustness, and generalization. been utilized to uncover latent patterns in traffic data [15], [16],
Comparative experiments against several state-of-the-art (SOTA) [17], [18]. Building on these foundations, extensive research has
models demonstrate the superior performance of our approach. been conducted to further enhance detection performance. At the
Furthermore, we confirm its applicability and deployability in same time, deep learning models, including multilayer percepreal-time scenarios.
 trons, autoencoders, and conditional probabilistic models, have
 Index Terms—Traffic detection, sparsity, context-aware,
DBScan, contrastive learning, real-time. been introduced into this domain [6], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23],
 [24]. These models enable the automatic extraction of salient
 I. INTRODUCTION features, which improves the efficiency and accuracy of traffic
 ITH the rapid proliferation of the IoT has resulted classification.
W in a huge number of interconnected devices that are However, existing research efforts remain largely focused
 on achieving idealized performance metrics in benchmark or
 Received 5 June 2025; revised 28 December 2025; accepted 3 January 2026. simulated datasets [25], with limited emphasis on conducting
Date of publication 12 January 2026; date of current version 7 May 2026. This systematic analyzes of the intrusion detection task itself. Many
work was supported by the Key Research and Development Program of Zhejiang
Province under Grant 2024SSYS0001. Recommended for acceptance by X. studies tend to apply artificial intelligence techniques directly to
Yuan. (Corresponding author: Ruyun Zhang.) network traffic detection without adequately incorporating the
 Chao Zha is with the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy practical characteristics and contextual nuances of real-world
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China, also with the Research Center for High
Efficiency Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311100, China, network environments. As a result, truly effective and efficient
and also with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, detection capabilities have yet to be fully realized. Despite
China (e-mail: zhachao21@mails.ucas.ac.cn). significant progress in the field, network traffic detection still
 Haolin Pan is with the School of Intelligent Science and Technology,
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, UCAS, Hangzhou 311100, China, and faces numerous critical challenges that warrant further in-depth
also with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China investigation and innovation.
(e-mail: panhaolin21@mails.ucas.ac.cn). a) Challenge 1. Limitations of Flow-Based Features in Model
 Bing Bai and Ruyun Zhang are with the Research Center for High Efficiency
Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311100, China (e-mail: Convergence: A network flow is typically defined as a set of
baibing@zhejianglab.org; zcor2021@gmail.com). packets that share the same five-tuple: source IP, destination
 Jiangxing Wu is with the National Digital Switching System Engineering IP, source port, destination port, and transport-layer protocol
and Technological R&D Center, Zhengzhou 450003, China (e-mail: ndscwjx@
126.com). within a specific time window [21]. Flow features are structured
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMC.2026.3651574 statistical attributes extracted from these packet sets and serve

 1536-1233 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
9316 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 a result, convergence slows, and training may stagnate. Fundamentally, sparsity weakens the information flow and narrows the
 scope of gradient updates, ultimately affecting overall training
 performance.
 b) Challenge 2. Lack of an Efficient and Comprehensive
 Semantic Embedding: Most existing traffic detection methods
 mainly follow two paradigms: unsupervised approaches [16],
 [17], [18], such as clustering algorithms that model the underlying structure of the data, and supervised approaches [6], [21],
 [22], [23] that rely on cross-entropy loss as the optimization
 objective and require manually labeled data for training. These
 methods can achieve satisfactory performance under ideal conditions with sufficient labeled data. However, these methods
 exhibit significant limitations in capturing the complex semantic
 structure of network traffic. Specifically, benign traffic does
 not constitute a single semantic category but rather comprises
 multiple subclasses characterized by diverse behavioral patterns.
 Relying solely on coarse-grained labeling with a generic benign tag neglects the inherent semantic heterogeneity, leading
 to learned representations that lack fine-grained discriminative
 power. The same issue applies to anomalous traffic: different
 attack types exhibit distinct behavioral signatures, and using a
 unified anomalous label fails to capture their intrinsic differences. Furthermore, even when fine-grained labels are available
 to better express semantic characteristics, the embedding representation must still preserve intraclass diversity to enhance
 the model’s generalization capacity. Maintaining such structural
 diversity not only prevents overfitting to specific feature patterns
 but also improves the robustness and adaptability of the model.
 Our work: We propose a novel traffic detection method named
 FlowXpert to solve the above issues. Firstly, we design a novel
 feature extraction scheme that constructs contextual feature
 vectors for model training by associating the destination node
 of a network flow with its source host node. This approach
 eliminates many features of the sparse problems commonly
Fig. 1. The density distribution of NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15 datasets. The found in traditional methods, thus avoiding their negative impact
x-axis represents the feature value, while the y-axis indicates the density, and on model convergence. In addition, contextual characteristics
darker colors correspond to higher density.
 demonstrate superior generalization performance, enhancing
 the practicality of the model in real-world applications. Secas the main input for model training in benchmark datasets such ondly, we incorporate the unsupervised DBSCAN clustering
as NSL-KDD [26], CICIDS-2017 [27], CICIDS-2018 [28], and algorithm [33] and employ contrastive learning [34], [35] to
UNSW-NB-15 [29]. These features are generally categorized train the embedding space, which collectively improves the
into temporal, packet length-related, and protocol-related types. overall performance of the model in traffic detection while also
Empirical evidence shows that the value distributions are often enhancing its generalization ability and adaptability. This prohighly skewed and sparse, with most values concentrated near cess can be performed efficiently on downsampled data. Finally,
zero, as shown in Fig. 1. Most flows are short-lived, and most we conduct experiments on the MAWI real-world dataset [36],
packets are small, while long-duration flows and large packets [37] and two commonly adopted synthetic datasets, namely
are rare. This asymmetry deviates from a standard Gaussian UNSW-NB15 [29] and CICIDS-2017 [27], to better approxidistribution and results in a highly sparse feature space after mate real-world deployment scenarios and validate the effectivenormalization. ness of FlowXpert. We perform a comprehensive evaluation of
 Feature sparsification can hinder model convergence and re- FlowXpert from multiple dimensions, including cross-tests, genstrict gradient propagation [30], [31], [32]. Deep learning relies eralization tests, encrypted traffic identification, ablation studies,
on backpropagation to update parameters, but sparse inputs comparative experiments, and real-time performance tests, all of
often cause many neurons to remain inactive (i.e., output zero), which confirm the effectiveness and progress of the method. In
yielding zero gradients and blocking parameter updates. These addition, we rigorously control the experimental setup to avoid
silent neurons reduce the expressive capacity of the network, potential label leakage issues often found in previous studies.
limiting its ability to model data distributions effectively. As Contributions: This study makes the following contributions:
ZHA et al.: FLOWXPERT: CONTEXT-AWARE FLOW EMBEDDING FOR ENHANCED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN IOT NETWORK 9317

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF RECENT INTRUSION DETECTION TECHNIQUES

 r We propose a novel feature extraction tool that not only extracted network traffic features, thereby allowing the detection
 incorporates selected traditional flow-related features but of anomalous behaviors, as noted by Wang et al. [38] proposed a
 also integrates contextual semantic information associated cloud intrusion detection method based on a stacked contractive
 with the source host. This approach effectively mitigates autoencoder combined with a Support Vector Machine. Yang
 the issue of sparsity inherent in existing flow features. et al. [21] proposed a two-stage learning approach that inter We propose an unsupervised traffic embedding method grates conditional variational autoencoders with extreme value
 designed to enhance the model’s ability to represent and theory to construct a hierarchical intrusion detection system.
 interpret traffic features, thereby improving the overall per- Moreover, by incorporating the clustering of benign traffic,
 formance of intrusion detection. Furthermore, we provide the approach significantly reduces the false-positive rate. Fu
 a rigorous theoretical proof of the convergence properties et al. [15] presented a method that uses features in the frequency
 of the proposed embedding approach. domain to capture the temporal characteristics of attack traffic
 r We perform cross-tests, ablation studies, and comparative without losing contextual information and integrates clustering
 experiments on the multi-dataset to thoroughly test the algorithms to achieve intrusion detection. Furthermore, Zha
 effectiveness of the proposed FlowXpert. The experimental et al. [22] proposed an intrusion detection method that combines
 results demonstrate that it achieves outstanding perfor- flow-based features and payload-based features through bilinear
 mance in various evaluation metrics, even when handling fusion to enhance the accuracy and robustness of network inencrypted traffic. trusion detection. Du et al. [19] proposed using long short-term
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II memory neural networks to treat system logs as natural language
reviews the related work. Section III describes the design of sequences, learning the patterns of log sequences under normal
FlowXpert. Section IV presents the details of Feature Extraction, execution to detect anomalies effectively.
and Section V introduces the training process of Embedding. In Traditional ML-based approaches are mostly trained on flow-
Section VI, we experimentally evaluate the performance of our level features, and while they often achieve impressive results
method. Section VII discusses some problems related to traffic on synthetic benchmark datasets, this focus on benchmark perclassification and our future work. Finally, we conclude this formance may overlook real-world practicalities [25]. In realpaper in Section VIII. istic network environments, the sparsity of flow features can
 significantly hinder model convergence, ultimately rendering
 II. RELATED WORK such methods ineffective. Moreover, conventional ML meth-
 In this section, we provide a discussion and summary of recent ods typically do not incorporate contextual information, which
significant studies on ML-based algorithms and graph-based can lead to poor generalization and limit their applicability. In
methods for traffic detection tasks. These comparisons are fur- contrast, our proposed FlowXpert leverages novel context-aware
ther illustrated in Table I. features as model input, deliberately discarding most traditional
 a) ML based Traffic Detection: Traditional ML algorithms flow features. In addition, it integrates an unsupervised embedhave been widely applied to network traffic detection tasks. ding training strategy to further enhance detection performance,
For example, Mirsky et al. [20] introduced an unsupervised offering a more robust and practical solution for real-world
online network intrusion detection method, whose core com- deployment.
ponent, KitNET, employs an ensemble architecture of small b) Graph based Traffic Detection: In recent years, graphautoencoders to perform reconstruction error analysis on based algorithms have increasingly been applied to traffic
9318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

detection. For example, Eshete et al. [39] constructed HTTP Origin Direction Flow (SODF), the model captures contextual,
interaction graphs to detect malicious static resources, and In- directional, and sequential patterns in network traffic. During
vernizzi et al. [40] used graphs derived from plaintext traffic to fine-tuning, they introduced RIFA, a protocol field–based augidentify malicious infrastructure associated with malware. Fu mentation method, to enhance the model’s generalization ability
et al. [16] introduced the construction of an in-memory flow in traffic classification and protocol understanding tasks.
interaction graph combined with unsupervised graph learning Pretraining methods offer the advantage of unsupervised
to detect encrypted malicious traffic. King et al. [41] proposed learning, which can greatly reduce the need for manual labeling.
EdgeTorrent, which enables the embedding of streaming in real However, they typically rely on the inclusion of payload content.
time and anomaly detection for temporal provenance graphs. When facing encrypted traffic, the actual performance of these
Wu et al. [43] proposed a self-supervised temporal graph neural methods has not been clearly demonstrated, even though the
network for intrusion detection. Furthermore, Zhang et al. [42] cited studies claim to address encrypted traffic classification.
proposed a byte-level encrypted traffic classification framework, Since the payload becomes completely inaccessible after enwhere traffic graphs are constructed using point-wise mutual cryption, the detection task becomes significantly more chalinformation (PMI). The model adopts a dual embedding struc- lenging. In contrast, the design philosophy of our FlowXpert
ture and a cross-gated fusion mechanism to efficiently integrate model deliberately avoids reliance on payload data. It utilizes
header and payload representations. It constructs sequential the statistical features of network flows and requires only header
temporal attributed graphs and applies temporal, asymmetric, information for effective detection. Moreover, pre-training apand masked contrastive strategies to learn robust node represen- proaches often suffer from efficiency drawbacks, such as latency
tations, thereby enabling the detection of unknown attacks. and throughput issues, which may hinder their deployment in
 Traffic detection algorithms based on graph features can real-time scenarios.
improve robustness, generalization, and overall performance.
However, constructing such graphs is often complex and may III. DESIGN OF FLOWXPERT
hinder the practical deployment of these approaches. For example, when IP addresses are used as graph nodes, the memory In this section, we present the overall architecture of FlowXgraph can grow rapidly with an increasing number of IPs, leading pert, as shown in Fig. 2. FlowXpert consists of three important
to a sharp increase in the number of subconnected compo- components: Feature Extraction, Embedding, and Classification
nents [16]. Given the large number of IPs in real-world scenarios, Model.
this challenge is almost unavoidable and significantly limits a) Feature Extraction: As highlighted in Challenge 1, the
the scalability of graph-based methods. In contrast, FlowXpert widely used flow-based sparse features impede both model
adopts a more practical approach by considering only the con- convergence and detection accuracy. To solve this issue, we
textual information of the source host and using unsupervised propose a context-aware feature extraction tool named FlowVilearning to train the model. This design not only improves the sion, which discards all highly sparse flow features, retaining
generalizability of the model but also enhances its practicality only nine essential flow attributes and supplementing them with
for real-world deployment. four context-related host features. Detailed specifications are
 c) Pretraining based Traffic Detection: With the emergence of provided in Section IV.
large-scale pre-trained models in natural language processing, b) Embedding: As discussed in Challenge 2, using supervised
pre-trained models for encrypted traffic analysis have also been cross-entropy loss as the optimization objective tends to cause
widely developed [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], [49], [50]. For overfitting and fails to efficiently and comprehensively capture
instance, Lin et al. [44] segmented traffic into directional and the traffic semantics. To address these issues, we propose an emtemporally continuous BURSTs, encoding each as a language bedding training method that leverages pseudo-labels generated
model-like token sequence. They designed two self-supervised via DBSCAN [33] and incorporates contrastive learning [34],
tasks: Masked BURST Model (MBM) and Same-origin BURST operating effectively with only down-sampled data. Detailed
Prediction (SBP) to learn generalizable representations from methodology is presented in Section V, and the model structure
unlabeled traffic data. Wang et al. [45] proposed replacing the of the embedding layer is as follows:
Transformer with a Unidirectional Mamba to achieve linear- ⎧
 ⎪
 ⎪ h1 = Linear|X|→128 (X),
time modeling. They also designed a stride-based representa- ⎨ B
 h1 = BatchNorm(h1 ),
tion scheme that incorporates both header and payload infor- Embedding : (1)
 ⎪
 ⎪ h R
 = LeakyReLU(hB 1 ),
mation, forming the NetMamba framework, which integrates ⎩ 1
 XE = Linear128→16 (h1 ),R
self-supervised pre-training with fine-tuning. Zhao et al. [46]
proposed a masked autoencoder (MAE)-based traffic trans- where X, Linear(·), BatchNorm(·) and LeakyReLU(·) denote
former that constructs a hierarchical flow representation ma- input vector, fully connected layer, batch normalization and
trix and employs packet-level and flow-level attention mecha- activation function.
nisms to extract traffic features efficiently, leveraging MAE pre- c) Classification Model: To accomplish the traffic detectraining to reduce reliance on labeled data. Furthermore, Zhou tion task and further extract traffic semantics, we designed a
et al. [47] developed a BERT-based encoder architecture that fully connected classification model consisting of an encoder
integrates bigram representations processed via byte pair encod- and a classification head. Together with FlowVision and the
ing (BPE). By designing two pre-training tasks, MBM and Same Embedding, these components form the complete FlowXpert
ZHA et al.: FLOWXPERT: CONTEXT-AWARE FLOW EMBEDDING FOR ENHANCED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN IOT NETWORK 9319

Fig. 2. The framework of FlowXpert.

framework. The model architecture is as follows: A. Impact of Sparse Features on Model Optimization
 ⎧
 ⎪
 ⎪ Xcat = Concat(X, XE ), The presence of numerous time- and length-related features
 ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪ h1 = Linear|X|+16→512 (Xcat ), often results in sparse input flow vectors. To better characterize
 ⎨ R
 h1 = LeakyReLU(h1 ), their impact on model optimization, we provide the following
 Encoder : (2)
 ⎪
 ⎪ h2 = Linear512→256 (hR 1 ), two definitions.
 ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪ h R
 2 = LeakyReLU(h 2 ),
 ⎩ Definition 1: Let the input vector X = [x1 , x2 , . . ., xd ]T
 XEnc = Linear256→128 (hR 2 ),
 denote a feature vector, where d is the dimension. The input
 Classif ier : Logits = Linear128→2 (XEnc ), (3) is called sparse if the majority of the components of x are
 close to zero, i.e.,
where Concat(·) denotes the concatenation operation.
 To summarize concisely, the operational pipeline of FlowX- ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., d}, |xi |  1 for most i. (5)
pert can be described as follows. Firstly, network traffic is processed by FlowVision to extract context-aware feature vectors,
which are then preprocessed through min–max normalization Definition 2: Consider a neural network layer where the
to obtain X. Next, X is downsampled and combined with DB- output a is computed as the activation of the weighted sum
SCAN and contrastive learning to train a more comprehensive of the input vector X, i.e.,
and robust traffic embedding, resulting in the output XE . After
 z = WT X + b, a = Φ(z), (6)
completing the training of the Embedding layer, its parameters
are frozen, and both X and XE are passed through a residual where W is the weight vector, b is the bias term, and Φ(·) is
structure into the classification model to train FlowXpert. The an activation function (e.g., ReLU or Sigmoid).
training process adopts the cross-entropy loss as the optimization
objective. The formulation is as follows: Under the settings of Definition 1 and Definition 2, the following theorem holds.
 XE = Embedding(X),
 XEnc = Encoder(XConcat ), Theorem 1: Let X be a sparse vector, then the norm of the
 gradient  ∂W
 ∂L
  is bounded above by a small constant, leading
 Logits = Classif ier(XEnc ), to a slower convergence rate of the optimization algorithm.
 Lce = CELoss(Logits, Y ), (4)
 Corollary 1: Consider the gradient of the loss function
where Enc(·), and CELoss(·) denote the encoder, and the cross L(a, y) with respect to the weights:
entropy loss, respectively.
 ∂L ∂L ∂a ∂z
 = · · = δ · X. (7)
 ∂W ∂a ∂z ∂W
 IV. FEATURE EXTRACTION
 If X is sparse (by Definition 1), most elements of X are close
 In this section, we systematically analyze the limitations of to zero, so the gradient:
widely used flow features in public data sets to optimize traffic
detection models [27], [28]. Based on this analysis, we propose ∂L
 ≈ 0. (8)
a context-aware alternative network traffic feature extraction ∂W
framework that enhances feature representation and improves This leads to a small update of the weights during training.
model generalization. As a result, the convergence rate of the model is slowed down
9320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 final network traffic features, which are used as input for the
 traffic detection task.
 r Packet Parsing: FlowVision sequentially parses each
 packet layer by layer, extracting field information from
 the data link layer, network layer, and transport layer.
 This information is subsequently used by the following
 computation modules.
 r FlowBlock Statistics: After extracting the parsing results
 of each packet, FlowVision uses the five-tuple as a key
 to locate an existing flow node. If the corresponding flow
 node is found, the flow information is updated based on
 the parsed packet data. If no such node exists, a new flow
 node is initialized. During the flow information aggregation
 process, FlowVision assesses whether a flow has terminated
Fig. 3. The data structure of FlowVision.
 by examining conditions such as flow timeout, the number
 of FIN packets, and the presence of RST packets. Once a
because the parameter updates are minimal. In deep neural flow is determined to have ended, the flow information and
networks, the gradient at each layer depends on the gradient its associated context are exported, and a new flow node is
propagated from the previous layer. When the input is sparse, the created accordingly.
gradients in each layer will be small. Specifically, the gradient r IPBlock Statistics: After completing the flow information
at the k-th layer is computed as follows: aggregation, FlowVision further locates the associated IP
 ∂L node based on the source IP. If the corresponding IP node
 = δ (k) · X (k) , (9) does not exist, a new node is created. Once the associated
 ∂W(k)
 IP node is identified, contextual information is aggregated
where δ (k) is the error term for the k-th layer and X (k) is the input on the basis of packet data. It is important to note that
to the k-th layer. If X (k) is sparse, the gradient ∂W ∂L
 (k) will be contextual information is typically accumulated within
small, and this effect will propagate through all layers, causing a specified time window, the duration of which can be
the gradient to disappear. customized according to the specific network environment
 Therefore, during gradient descent optimization, the step size and application scenarios. Data that fall outside the time
for weight updates is also small: window are discarded. Moreover, contextual information is
 ∂L computed on all data within the window in a label-agnostic
 W(t+1) = W(t) − η · , (10) manner, as a label-dependent manner could lead to the risk
 ∂W
 of label leakage.
 ∂L
where η is the learning rate. Since ∂W is small, the weight update r Output Module: When a flow node times out or receives end
step becomes smaller, leading to slower convergence. packets, such as FIN or RST, the current flow is completed.
 Meanwhile, the statistical features are constructed and
B. Flowvision output based on the aggregated information from the flow
 As discussed in Section IV-A, the widely adopted flow-based node and its associated IP node.
features commonly used in existing approaches have shown FlowVision is primarily composed of the aforementioned
significant adverse effects on model convergence in practical modules and is designed to support a multi-threaded architecture
scenarios. Based on this observation, we discard the most highly that accelerates the entire feature extraction process, thereby
sparse flow features and propose a novel feature extraction tool reducing processing latency and improving throughput. Ultinamed FlowVision.1 Unlike existing tools such as CICFlowMe- mately, FlowVision extracts a total of 13 key features for model
ter [51], [52], FlowVision not only retains a subset of fundamen- training and intrusion detection, encompassing both flow-level
tal statistical flow features, but also places greater emphasis on and contextual semantic information, as detailed in Table II. The
the contextual semantic information of the flows. The general flow-level features include protocol type, flow duration, interdata structure of FlowVision is illustrated in Fig. 3, which uses arrival time (IAT), the number of SYN/RST/FIN packets, and
five tuples as keys to segment and aggregate the pcap packets packet rate. Contextual features capture higher-level semantics,
into distinct flows. Additionally, each flow node is enriched with such as the total number of source ports initiated by a given
contextual semantic attributes related to its source IP, forming a source IP, the number of destination IPs and ports accessed, and
lightweight semantic structure that is more concise and efficient the rate at which the source IP establishes connections over time.
compared to directly constructing a full graph structure.
 Specifically, FlowVision first captures packets from the net- C. Analysis of Features Extracted by FlowVision
work environment and reads them in the form of pcap files. Then
it undergoes the following processes to gradually compute the To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed FlowVision,
 we visualized the distribution of extracted features, as shown
 in Fig. 4. Compared with the data distribution presented in
 1 FlowVision is open-sourced at https://github.com/ids-sec-hub/FlowVision Fig. 1 (shown in Section I), where most feature values are
ZHA et al.: FLOWXPERT: CONTEXT-AWARE FLOW EMBEDDING FOR ENHANCED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN IOT NETWORK 9321

 TABLE II by extreme values or high-variance attributes, resulting in a more
 FEATURES USED IN FLOWVISION
 informative and robust representation of network traffic.

 V. EMBEDDING TRAINING
 To comprehensively and efficiently capture the semantic information of traffic characteristics, we propose an unsupervised
 Embedding training method, mainly composed of a DBSCAN
 clustering component [33] and a contrastive learning strategy [34], [35].

 A. Clustering (DBSCAN)
 As described in Challenge 2, due to the nature of traffic
 detection tasks, a single label often fails to accurately and
 comprehensively represent all subtypes within a given traffic
 class. In other words, traffic samples belonging to the same class
 may exhibit internal structural differences, necessitating finergrained labeling to distinguish between subtypes. This objective
 can be effectively achieved using unsupervised algorithms, such
 as clustering methods [33], [53], [54].
 Common clustering algorithms include KMeans and DB-
 SCAN. KMeans [54] is a distance-based method that requires
 the number of clusters to be specified and assigns each sample deterministically to a cluster. In contrast, DBSCAN [33]
 does not require a predefined number of clusters, can identify
 clusters of arbitrary shapes, and allows certain samples to remain unclustered, and these are treated as noise or outliers.
 During the embedding learning process, it is inadvisable to
 assign fine-grained pseudolabels to all samples indiscriminately,
 especially to those with atypical characteristics. Aggressive
 pseudo-labeling of such samples may lead to an inaccurate representation. The clustering mechanism of DBSCAN is well-suited
 to this requirement, as it naturally accommodates noise points.
 In addition, numerous studies have shown that density-based
 clustering methods, such as DBSCAN, can achieve strong or
 even superior performance in traffic detection tasks, particularly
Fig. 4. The density distribution of Mawi datasets extracted by FlowVision. when dealing with noisy or unevenly distributed data [55], [56],
The x-axis represents the feature value, while the y-axis indicates the density, [57]. This procedure is formulated as follows:
and darker colors correspond to higher density.
 P = DBSCAN (X), (11)
concentrated around zero with significant sparsity, the features where P denotes that the pseudolabels correspond to X.
extracted by FlowVision exhibit a more balanced distribution,
with the density peak no longer overly concentrated near zero. B. Embedding Layer
This result indicates that FlowVision effectively alleviates the
issue of highly sparse feature distributions, allowing the data To obtain more fine-grained semantic representations of netto form a more reasonable and discriminative representation in work traffic data, we leverage the pseudolabels generated by (11)
the feature space, thereby providing a stronger foundation for to train the embedding layer. Let Xi and Xj denote two traffic
subsequent feature learning and classification tasks. samples. Based on the pseudo-labels derived from (11), a new
 Traditional feature extraction tools, such as CICFlowMeter, binary label B can be constructed: B = 0 if the sample Xi and
primarily extract time-related and length-related features. How- Xj belong to the same sample cluster, and B = 1 otherwise.
 j
ever, most flows typically terminate within a short duration, with Furthermore, let E(XE i
 , XE ) indicate the Euclidean distance
 i j
only a few lasting for an extended period. Similarly, the majority between the corresponding semantic vectors XE and XE of the
of packets within these flows have short lengths, while only two samples in the embedding space. This can be formulated as
a small portion contains long payloads. These characteristics follows:
inherently lead to feature sparsity. In contrast, FlowVision aban- j j
 i
 E(XE , XE ) = ||XE
 i
 − XE ||. (12)
dons these sparse features and focuses on extracting contextaware interaction features. Such features establish correlations We aim to ensure that the following condition is satisfied and
across flows and effectively mitigate the sparsity problem caused that the embedding layer training is conducted accordingly.
9322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 Condition 1: ∃ m > 0, such that Epos + m < Eneg , where  
 ∗ ∗ ∂H ∂H −1
Epos = E(XE i j
 , XE ), where B = 0; and Eneg = E(XE
 i j
 , XE ), = H(Epos , Epos +m)+ , + O(2 ).
 ∂Epos Eneg 1
where B = 1.
 (18)
C. Contrastive Loss By Condition 2, it follows that:
  
 Inspired by [34], we introduce contrastive learning to imple- ∂H ∂H −1
ment the aforementioned idea. Assuming that the loss function , < 0. (19)
 ∂Epos Eneg 1
depends only on the input X, the weight matrix WE of the
embedding layer, and the binary label B, the loss function can For sufficiently small  (we set  = m in this paper),
be formulated as follows: ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗
 H(Epos − , Epos +  + m) ≤ H(Epos , Epos + m). (20)
 
 N
 L(WE ) = L(WE , B, (Xi , Xj )), Thus, there exists a data point in the region where Epos + m <
 i,j Eneg such that the value of the loss function is always lower than
 that of any data point in the region where Epos + m > Eneg .
 L(WE , B, (Xi , Xj )) = (1 − B) · Lpos (E(Xi , Xj )) This completes the proof.
 + B · Lneg (E(Xi , Xj )). (13)
 D. Practical Solution
 Then, the total contrastive loss function can be defined as
 Building on (16) and (20), there exists a sufficiently small 
follows:
 such that minimizing the loss function in (14) yields a weight ma-
 H(Epos , Eneg ) = Lpos (WE , Epos ) + Lneg (WE , Eneg ). trix WE satisfying Condition 1, thus guaranteeing convergence.
 (14) When  is sufficiently small, the minimization of the objective
 ∗
 H drives Epos → 0, that is, the semantic distance between sam-
 Assume that H(Epos , Eneg ) is convex in its two arguments ples sharing the same pseudo-label approaches zero, while the
(do not assume that it is convex with respect to WE ). distance between samples with different pseudo-labels exceeds
 Due to the use of the gradient descent algorithm, the following the margin m.
condition holds. However, our goal is not to force intra-label distances to
 Condition 2: The negative gradient of H(Epos , Eneg ) on the vanish. Instead, we keep these distances within a reasonable
margin line Epos + m = Eneg has a positive dot product with threshold to preserve semantic diversity and, consequently, endirection [−1, 1]. hance model generalization. In this study, we set  = m. Under
 To formalize the above idea and clarify our reasoning, the this choice, the contrastive learning strategy for positive and
following theorem and its proof are presented. negative sample pairs is formulated as follows:
 Theorem 2: Let H(Epos , Eneg ) have its minimum at infin- r If X i , X j belongs to the same pseudo label, then ||X i −
 E E E
 j
ity and assume that there exists a weight vector w satisfying XE || ≤ m;
Condition 1. If Condition 2 holds, then the minimization of r If X i , X j does not belong to the same pseudo label, then
 E E
H(Epos , Eneg ) with respect to w will produce a solution w that ||XE i
 − XEj
 || ≥ 2 m.
satisfies Condition 1. More specifically, the loss function Lcontrastive is defined as
 ∗
 Proof: Let Epos denote the data point located on the margin follows:
line Epos + m = Eneg , for which H(Epos , Eneg ) is minimum, j
 i,j I(Bi = Bj ) · max(0, E(XE , XE ) − m)
 i
that is,
 LContrastive =
 ∗ i,j I(Bi = Bj )
 Epos = argmin{H(Epos , Epos + m)}. (15)
 j
 i,j I(Bi = Bj ) · max(0, 2m−E(XE , XE ))
 i
 Since Condition 2 holds and the H(Epos , Eneg ) is convex, it + ,
follows that: i,j I(Bi = Bj )
 (21)
 ∗ ∗
 H(Epos , Epos + m) ≤ H(Epos , Eneg ), (16)
 where I(·) == 1 if condition · is true.
when Epos + m > Eneg . To improve training efficiency, the embedding model is
 ∗ ∗ trained using a subset of downsampling from the entire dataset,
 Consider a data point at a distance  from (Epos , Epos + m)
and satisfying Epos + m < Eneg , that is, which represents approximately 2% of the total data.
 ∗ ∗
 (Epos − , Epos +  + m). (17) VI. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
 By the first-order Taylor expansion, it follows that: A. Experiment Setup
 ∗ ∗ a) Implementation: Our prototype is implemented in Python
 H(Epos − , Epos +  + m)
 (3.8.12) and C++ (g++ 10.5.0), the FlowVision is built using
 ∗ ∗ ∂H ∂H C++, and the other modules are built using scikit-learn [58] and
 = H(Epos , Epos + m) −  + + O(2 )
 ∂Epos Eneg PyTorch (2.0.1+cu117) [59].
ZHA et al.: FLOWXPERT: CONTEXT-AWARE FLOW EMBEDDING FOR ENHANCED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN IOT NETWORK 9323

 TABLE III r Features such as IPs and ports, which can potentially
 THE NUMBER OF TRAINING AND TEST SET
 reveal label information, were excluded from the training.
 In addition, potential associated cheating behaviors were
 explicitly avoided. For example, most samples in the data
 set are concentrated on a limited set of IPs and ports.
 r Due to the inherent class imbalance between benign and
 malicious traffic, a metric such as accuracy was not utilized.
 Instead, detection performance metrics were evaluated separately for benign and malicious traffic to provide a more
 comprehensive and fair assessment.
 c) Baselines: We selected six methods for comparative experiments to demonstrate the correctness and improvement effects
 of our method. The details are as follows:
 r Kitsune (K.S): Mirsky et al. [20] proposed an unsupervised
 b) Datasets: All experiments in this study were conducted on network intrusion detection method centered on KitNET,
the real-world and publicly available MAWI dataset [36], [37], which uses a lightweight ensemble of autoencoders to
as well as two simulated datasets, namely UNSW-NB15 [29] and detect anomalies through the analysis of reconstruction
CICIDS-2017 [27], [52], to evaluate their practical applicability errors in network traffic features.
in real-world scenarios. r CVAE-EVT (C.E): Yang et al. [21] proposed a two-stage
 The MAWI dataset provides raw traffic data in PCAP for- learning method that combines conditional variational aumat, encompassing a wide range of attack types, including toencoders and extreme value theory to build a hierarchical
DoS, port scanning, flooding attacks, and brute-force attacks, intrusion detection system.
as well as imbalanced distributions of benign and malicious r HyperVision (H.V): Fu et al. [16] proposed using an intraffic. It also includes various network protocols, such as HTTP, memory flow interaction graph with unsupervised graph
SMTP, FTP, SSH, and encrypted traffic, such as HTTPS. For learning to detect encrypted malicious traffic.
our experiments, we selected traffic data from two different r TFE-GNN (T.G): Zhang et al. [42] proposed a byte-level
time periods: March 2021 and June 2023. The UNSW-NB15 encrypted traffic classification model that builds PMIdataset contains modern synthetic network traffic, including both based traffic graphs and integrates header and payload
normal and malicious activities, with attacks such as Fuzzers, features through dual-inclusion and cross-gated fusion.
Analysis, Backdoors, DoS, Exploits, Generic, Reconnaissance, r ETBert (E.B): Lin et al. [44] represented traffic as di-
Shellcode, and Worms. It provides a balanced mix of benign rectional temporal BURSTs encoded into language-like
and attack traffic across various protocols and services. The tokens, and pre-trained the model using MBM and SBP
CICIDS-2017 dataset captures realistic network traffic in a tasks to learn generalizable representations.
simulated environment, covering benign behavior alongside a r TrafficFormer (T.F): Zhou et al. [47] developed a BERTwide range of contemporary attacks, including DoS, DDoS, based encoder that integrates BPE-processed bigrams. Usbrute-force attacks, infiltration, and web-based attacks. It also ing pre-training tasks, MBM and SODF, to capture traffic
includes detailed flow-based features, making it suitable for patterns, and a fine-tuning augmentation method, RIFA,
evaluating intrusion detection methods. the model achieves enhanced generalization.
 Specifically, data from all datasets were used for model train- All comparative methods were evaluated using the same
ing with a 3-fold cross-test (2:1 split), along with the number of source data and official implementations from their GitHub
training and test sets illustrated in Table III (numbers in brackets repositories. Only minor modifications were made, primarily for
within the Test column denote the count of encrypted flows). To compatibility purposes, such as adapting data loading interfaces.
evaluate the generalization performance of the model, that is, its For HyperVision and TFE-GNN, processing datasets with many
effectiveness when applied to data collected at later time periods, unique IP addresses led to excessive memory usage, exhausting a
we selected data from the Mawi dataset on March 8, 15, and 22 of 256 GB DRAM server. Consequently, we adopted data sampling
2021, as well as June 10, 18, and 25 of 2023, each approximately to complete the experiments.
one week apart. In addition, we used data from the UNSW-NB15 d) Metrics: We use five metrics to evaluate the performance of
dataset on February 17, 2015, for testing. Correspondingly, the FlowXpert, including three commonly used metrics in machine
training data for the three experiments were taken from March learning algorithms: Precision, Recall, and F1-Score [60]. Fur-
1, 2021, June 6, 2023, and January 22, 2015, respectively. thermore, we include two metrics that are crucial for practical
 To ensure the applicability of the proposed method in real- deployment: Latency and Throughput.
world scenarios, both the data set and the evaluation methodology were designed to meet the following conditions.
 r The MAWI data set used in our experiments was utilized B. Cross Evaluation of Traffic Classification
 without removing any data. Random sampling was applied To comprehensively evaluate the detection performance of
 during the embedding training phase, classification training FlowXpert in real-world network environments, we performed
 and generalization evaluation were performed on the full 3-fold cross-testing experiments on the MAWI, CICIDS-17 and
 dataset. UNSW-NB15 datasets. Specifically, the original data set was
9324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 TABLE IV practicality and reliability of the model in real-world traffic sce-
 CROSS EVALUATION ON THE MAWI DATASET
 narios. Similarly, in the three experiments conducted on June 3,
 2023, FlowXpert maintained a recall rate above 99% for Benign
 traffic, with precision and F1 scores reaching approximately
 99% and 96%, respectively, closely aligned with the results of
 2021.
 As shown in Table V, FlowXpert also demonstrated consistently strong performance on the CICIDS-2017 dataset across
 all three folds. For benign traffic, the model achieved a recall
 rate above 99.85% in all folds, with precision and F1 scores
 around 99.4% and 99.6%, respectively, indicating an excellent
 capability in accurately identifying benign traffic while keeping
 the false positive rate (FPR) to a minimum. For malicious traffic,
 recall values ranged from 93.18% to 93.65%, while precision
 remained high between 98.27% and 98.77%, resulting in F1
 scores between 95.74% and 96.06%. These results highlight
 TABLE V that FlowXpert maintains robust detection performance for ma-
 CROSS EVALUATION ON THE CICIDS-2017 DATASET licious traffic while ensuring a low FPR.
 As shown in Table VI, FlowXpert still exhibited strong detection performance on the UNSW-NB15 dataset across all three
 folds. For benign traffic, recall rates ranged from 99.07% to
 99.20%, with precision and F1 scores consistently around 99.5%
 and 99.34%, respectively, demonstrating accurate identification
 of normal traffic with minimal false positives. For malicious
 traffic, recall values varied between 98.67% and 99.01%, while
 precision remained high, ranging from 97.64% to 97.93%, resulting in F1 scores around 98.3%. These results indicate that
 TABLE VI
 CROSS EVALUATION ON THE UNSW_NB15 DATASET
 FlowXpert maintains a strong balance between precision and
 recall for all network traffic.
 Across four experiments, the 3-fold cross-test results exhibit
 remarkable consistency and robustness, with standard deviations below 0.2% for all metrics. Specifically, the mean F1-
 scores for malicious traffic detection are 96.57% on MAWI
 (2021/3/1), 96.12% on MAWI (2023/6/3), 95.90% on CICIDS-
 2017, and 98.31% on UNSW-NB15. The corresponding 95%
 confidence intervals are [96.29, 96.85], [95.84, 96.40], [95.57,
 96.23], and [98.28, 98.34], respectively. These narrow confidence ranges and low deviations demonstrate that the proposed
randomly divided into three mutually exclusive subsets. In each model achieves stable and reliable detection performance across
iteration, two subsets were used for training, while the remaining different folds and temporal segments.
subset served as the test set. This process was repeated three
times to ensure the stability and generalizability of the model on
different data partitions. The results are presented in Table IV, C. Evaluation of Ablation Experiments
Table V and Table VI. To further validate the effectiveness of the embedding layer
 As shown in Table IV, on March 1, 2021, FlowXpert achieved in enhancing model detection performance, we designed and
a recall rate that exceeded 99.5% for benign traffic and a recall conducted an ablation study using the Mawi dataset from March
rate consistently higher than 94% for malicious traffic, indicating 1, 2021 and the CICIDS-17 dataset. Specifically, we constructed
a strong capability in identifying both types of traffic. In terms a baseline model, referred to as Enc-Cls, by removing the
of precision, both Benign and Malicious traffic achieved values embedding layer and the residual structure from the original
close to 99%, further demonstrating the effectiveness of the architecture, retaining only the encoder module and the subsemodel in controlling false positives. Regarding the F1 score, quent fully connected classifier. Keeping in mind that the input
the model achieved approximately 99.5% for benign traffic and data remain consistent, we compared the detection performance
around 96.5% for malicious traffic, reflecting a high level of of the two models on the same dataset to assess the contribution
overall detection performance, with a good balance between of the embedding layer. The results are presented in Table VII
precision and recall. In particular, the false positive rate for and Table VIII.
benign traffic was kept below 0.5%, while the detection per- As shown in Table VII, on the MAWI dataset, the baseline
formance for malicious traffic remained robust, validating the achieved a recall rate of 99.55% for benign traffic and 90.22% for
ZHA et al.: FLOWXPERT: CONTEXT-AWARE FLOW EMBEDDING FOR ENHANCED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN IOT NETWORK 9325

Fig. 5. Visualization of embedded representations using t-SNE on the MAWI dataset, illustrating the evolution of the proposed method during training (the
different colors in the figure represent different pseudo labels).

 TABLE VII TABLE IX
 EVALUATION OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON THE MAWI DATASET EVALUATION OF ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON THE MAWI DATASET

 TABLE VIII
 EVALUATION OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON THE CICIDS-2017 DATASET

 Fig. 5(a) shows the t-SNE visualization of the original data
 space, where the results appear relatively disordered with no
 clear boundaries between classes. After one epoch of contrastive
 learning training, as shown in Fig. 5(b), the data points begin to
 cluster gradually, with discernible separation between classes.
 By the 50th training epoch, as shown in Fig. 5(c), intra-class
malicious traffic, and the corresponding F1 scores were 98.89% features become more tightly clustered (e.g., the deep red refor benign traffic and 93.63% for malicious traffic. The full gion), while inter-class distances remain distinct. Following 150
FlowXpert model increased the recall for malicious traffic to epochs of training, as shown in Fig. 5(d), the overall clustering is
94.34% and achieved F1 scores of 99.41% for benign traffic and further enhanced, with classes exhibiting more compact distri-
96.67% for malicious traffic. This demonstrates that the addi- butions (e.g., light blue and light red regions) and clearer intertional modules enhance detection performance, particularly for class boundaries. This visualization demonstrates that the two
malicious traffic. As shown in Table VIII, on the CICIDS-2017 components of the contrastive loss employed in the Embedding
dataset, the baseline obtained F1 scores of 99.54% for benign layer training, namely, enforcing intra-class distances to be less
traffic and 94.81% for malicious traffic. The full FlowXpert than the threshold m and inter-class distances to exceed 2 m,
model improved these results to 99.63% for benign traffic and effectively fulfill their intended roles.
95.90% for malicious traffic. These results still demonstrate that
the additional components in FlowXpert contribute to better E. Evaluation of Encrypted Traffic Classification
overall detection while maintaining high precision for benign
 With the increasing adoption and widespread use of encryptraffic and improving the detection performance of malicious
 tion technologies, the invisibility of payload content has posed
traffic.
 greater challenges to traffic classification tasks, making the
 evaluation of detection performance on encrypted traffic increas-
D. Visualization of Embedded Representation
 ingly important. We extracted SSL-encrypted traffic from the
 t-SNE visualization provides an intuitive representation of the Mawi dataset collected on March 1, 2021 and the CICIDS-2017
characteristics of the sample distribution in the vector space, fa- dataset, and carried out experiments on three folds. The results
cilitating the exploration of clustering patterns, relative distances are presented in Table IX and Table X.
and latent structural relationships between different classes. In The experimental results in Table IX show that FlowXpert
this study, we used t-SNE to perform a comparative analysis achieves recall rates of 98.91%, 98.19% and 98.69% for Benign
of the Embedding layer feature representations during the con- traffic in the three folds, which are comparable to the recall
trastive learning training process. Specifically, we recorded the rates observed in the general evaluation. This demonstrates the
feature embeddings of the original input data, as well as those robustness and reliability of FlowXpert in practical applications.
output by the Embedding layer after the 1st, 50th, and 150th On the other hand, the recall rates for malicious traffic across the
training epochs. The experimental results are illustrated in Fig. 5. three folds are 88.56%, 88.00% and 86.45%. Although slightly
9326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 TABLE X TABLE XI
EVALUATION OF ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON THE CICIDS-2017 GENERALIZATION EVALUATION ON THE MAWI DATASET (MARCH, 2021)
 DATASET

lower than the overall results, it still represents a high level
 TABLE XII
of performance considering the inherent challenges posed by GENERALIZATION EVALUATION ON THE MAWI DATASET (JUNE, 2023)
encrypted traffic. The results in Table X show that FlowXpert
maintains excellent performance in Benign traffic, achieving recall rates of 99.96%, 99.98%, and 99.93% three times. However,
for Malicious traffic, the recall rates drop to 59.11%, 57.96%
and 54.51%, respectively. This may be due to the relatively low
proportion of encrypted traffic in the data set, which accounts
for only about 4% to 5%, leading to inadequate performance in
encrypted attack traffic. Despite this, the high precision values
indicate that FlowXpert can still reliably detect malicious traffic
when positive predictions are made. We attribute FlowXpert’s
superior performance in detecting encrypted traffic to its feature extraction approach, which effectively integrates contextual TABLE XIII
information. This integration preserves the deep semantic fea- GENERALIZATION EVALUATION ON THE UNSW_NB15 DATASET
tures of network flows, thereby enhancing detection capabilities
across multiple dimensions, even in complex encrypted network
traffic scenarios.

F. Evaluation of Model Generalization
 The generalization capability of traffic detection models is
critical for real-world deployment, as the feature distribution
of network traffic changes over time. Overfitted models may decreased significantly, indicating insufficient generalization for
suffer significant performance drops in evolving environments, long-term deployment and the need for model retraining. This
limiting their effectiveness. Given the high sensitivity and strin- degradation over time reflects a common limitation of current
gent reliability requirements of network security, ensuring the AI models. Similarly, as shown in Table XII, the model trained
accurate detection of benign traffic is essential. Even a 1% per- on June 3, 2023, achieved 89.00% benign and 69.30% maliformance drop can lead to substantial misclassification and dis- cious recall on June 10, maintaining strong utility. On June 18,
ruption of normal services. To assess generalization, we trained 2023, benign recall improved to 92.83%, while malicious recall
models on two baseline dates, March 1, 2021 and June 3, 2023, decreased to 54.00%, indicating some generalization capacity.
and evaluated them at three subsequent weekly intervals. The However, by June 25, 2023, malicious recall dropped to 9.00%,
2021 model was tested on data from March 8, 15, and 22, while signaling an urgent need for model updates.
the 2023 model was tested on June 10, 18, and 25. In addition, As shown in Table XIII, the results demonstrate that our
a third experiment was conducted on the UNSW-NB15 data set, method exhibits a strong generalization capability across differwhere the training set corresponds to January 22, 2015, and the ent time periods in the UNSW-NB15 dataset. When evaluated on
testing set corresponds to February 17, 2015. The experimental the training date (January 22, 2015), both benign and malicious
results are presented in Table XI, Table XII and Table XIII. traffic achieved F1 scores of 99.35% and 98.32%, respectively,
 As shown in Table XI, on March 1, 2021, the recall rate for indicating highly stable detection performance. When tested in
benign traffic on March 8 dropped slightly to 96.21%, remaining the temporally shifted dataset (February 17, 2015), the F1 scores
within an acceptable range and ensuring operational stability, decreased slightly to 94.17% for benign samples and 93.37%
and the recall for malicious traffic fell to 43.65%, indicating a for malicious samples, which still represent robust detection
noticeable decline but retaining some practical value. On March performance despite the temporal gap of nearly a month. These
15, 2021, benign recall decreased to 87. 19%, and the mali- results suggest that our model captures relatively stable behavcious recall increased slightly to 47.09%, suggesting moderate ioral patterns of network flows, which contributes to improved
robustness for malicious detection. On March 22, benign recall robustness under short- to mid-term temporal distribution shifts.
ZHA et al.: FLOWXPERT: CONTEXT-AWARE FLOW EMBEDDING FOR ENHANCED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN IOT NETWORK 9327

Fig. 6. Comparative experiments with SOTA methods on the MAWI dataset (2021/3/1).

Fig. 7. Comparative experiments with SOTA methods on the MAWI dataset (2023/6/3).

Fig. 8. Comparative experiments with SOTA methods on the CICIDS-2017 dataset.

 TABLE XIV
 FINE GRAINED ATTACK DETECTION (RECALL) OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE CICIDS-2017 DATASET

 In general, FlowXpert demonstrates promising generalization CVAE-EVT (C.E) [21], two new graph-based methods named
to future data. Despite moderate drops in malicious recall within HyperVision (H.V) [16] and TFE-GNN (T.G) [42], and two
2 weeks, its performance is notable given the limited training pretraining-based methods named ETBert (E.B) [44] and
data (approximately 2 hours in Mawi dataset). Increasing the TrafficFormer (T.F) [47]. These methods were chosen for their
training samples is expected to further enhance the temporal ro- representative status, rigorous theoretical underpinnings, and
bustness. Importantly, FlowXpert consistently maintains a high comprehensive analyzes. The comparative results based on
benign recall, minimizing false alarms and ensuring sustained binary classification are presented in Fig. 6, Fig. 7 and Fig. 8,
usability in real-world deployment. where B and M in parentheses denote Benign and Malicious,
 respectively. Furthermore, the comparative result based on
 multiclass classification is shown in Table XIV.
G. Comparison With the SOTA Methods 1) Comparisons Based on Binary Classification: Firstly, as
 To highlight the contribution of FlowXpert in traffic illustrated in Fig. 6(b), in the data set corresponding to March
detection, we compared it with several recent SOTA methods. 1, 2021, Kitsune, CVAE-EVT, and our proposed FlowXpert all
Specifically, we selected a classic ML-based approach named demonstrate strong performance in terms of recall for benign
Kitsune (K.S) [20], a probabilistic classification method named traffic detection, with CVAE-EVT and FlowXpert both achieving
9328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

over 99%, while HyperVision shows a relatively poor recall of TABLE XV
 CONFIGURATION DETAILS OF THE VIRTUAL MACHINE
58.78%. For malicious traffic detection, performance disparities
have become more pronounced. FlowXpert achieves a recall of
94.34%, significantly outperforming all baseline methods. The
best-performing baseline, HyperVision, reaches only 50.52%,
while Kitsune and CVAE-EVT both hover around 20%, indicating a substantial gap. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 6(a) and
Fig. 6(c), FlowXpert also excels in terms of precision and F1
score, consistently outperforming the other compared methods.
 classes, without severe weaknesses, underscores the robustness
Secondly, as shown in Fig. 7(b), in the data set corresponding
 and generalizability of the proposed FlowXpert method.
to June 3, 2023, FlowXpert also achieves a recall of 99.32%
 In summary, most baseline methods exhibit strong perforfor benign traffic, closely followed by CVAE-EVT (97.84%)
 mance in detecting benign traffic, with results comparable to
and Kitsune (92.29%). The difference is relatively small among
 those of FlowXpert. However, their malicious traffic detection
these three methods. HyperVision lags significantly, with a
 performance is significantly inferior. This can be attributed to
recall of only 57.66% for benign traffic. For malicious traffic
 their reliance on traditional flow-level features as model inputs
detection, FlowXpert again shows a clear advantage, achieving
 during training and inference. As discussed in Section IV-A,
a recall of 96.07%, substantially outperforming HyperVision
 the inherent sparsity of flow features negatively affects model
(77.68%), CVAE-EVT (22.11%), and Kitsune (14.36%). This
 convergence, ultimately leading to degraded performance in
highlights FlowXpert’s superior ability to detect anomalous
 real-world scenarios. Although HyperVision incorporates graphbehavior in challenging real-world settings. Furthermore, as
 based interaction features, it constructs interaction graphs using
shown in Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 7(c), FlowXpert also outperforms all
 IP addresses as nodes. This design becomes problematic in
baselines in terms of precision and F1 score, further confirming
 practice, where the number of unique IPs is often large. In such
its overall effectiveness and robustness in both benign and macases, clustering algorithms may not be suitable for detection
licious traffic scenarios. Finally, as shown in Fig. 8, FlowXpert
 tasks. More importantly, the memory required to maintain the
demonstrates the most outstanding performance in benign traffic
 interaction graph grows rapidly, posing significant challenges
detection, with near-perfect precision, recall, and F1-score of
 for practical deployment. FlowXpert addresses both of these
99.41%, 99.85%, and 99.63%, respectively, ranking first in overcritical issues. Firstly, it mitigates the convergence challenges
all performance. CVAE-EVT and ETBert also exhibit excellent
 of flow-based features by selecting only a small subset of flow
and highly competitive results, closely following FlowXpert.
 features and incorporating contextual features related to the
In contrast, HyperVision performs considerably poorly in this
 source host, which results in reduced memory consumption
task, with all metrics lagging significantly behind. In the more
 and improved detection capabilities. Second, by integrating
challenging task of malicious traffic detection, the advantages
 contrastive learning with the DBSCAN unsupervised clusterof FlowXpert become even more pronounced. It achieves a preing algorithm, FlowXpert constructs robust traffic embeddings,
cision of 98.27%, substantially surpassing other baselines while
 further enhancing detection performance.
maintaining the highest recall (93.65%) and F1-score (95.90%).
This indicates an optimal balance between accurately identifying
malicious activities and minimizing false alarms. In comparison, H. Evaluation of Real-Time Performance
other methods reveal notable weaknesses in detecting malicious Given the stringent real-time requirements and limited comtraffic. Kitsune and HyperVision exhibit extremely low recall putational resources in IoT scenarios, we configured a virtual
rates of 38.09% and 4.80%, respectively, suggesting a high machine (VMware Workstation) to emulate typical IoT device
rate of missed detections of real attacks. Although CVAE-EVT environments, in order to evaluate the practicality of our method.
achieves relatively high precision (94.76%), its recall (76.54%) The hardware configuration is summarized in Table XV, and the
remains limited, reflecting certain constraints in its detection results are presented in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10.
capability. Firstly, we evaluated the two key time-consuming steps in
 2) Comparisons Based on Multiclass Classification: As FlowVision: packet parsing and flow statistics analysis. As
presented in Table XIV, FlowXpert demonstrates substantial shown in Fig. 9(a) and Fig. 9(b), the average latency for packet
and consistent superiority over all baseline methods across parsing is approximately 18 microseconds per packet, with an
the vast majority of attack categories in the CICIDS-2017 instantaneous throughput of 50,000 packets per second (PPS).
dataset. FlowXpert consistently attains the highest or a Additionally, as illustrated in Fig. 9(c) and Fig. 9(d), the average
highly competitive recall on the majority of attack types. It latency for flow statistics is around 60 microseconds per packet,
establishes significant leads in detecting several key attacks, with an average instantaneous throughput of approximately
such as FTP-Patator (94.30%) and Web-Attacks (95.62%), 10,000 PPS. Based on these results, the time overhead introoutperforming the best baselines by a clear margin. More duced by FlowVision during feature extraction is relatively low.
importantly, FlowXpert demonstrates exceptional stability It is worth noting that these evaluations were conducted on a
where other methods fail. It completely avoids the catastrophic low-spec virtual machine, and the performance is expected to
failures seen in models like HyperVision and Kitsune, improve further on a physical machine.
which exhibit near-zero recall on specific attacks (e.g., Secondly, as shown in Fig. 10(a) and Fig. 10(b), FlowXpert
DoS-Goldeneye). This consistent high performance across all achieves an average latency of approximately 10 microseconds
ZHA et al.: FLOWXPERT: CONTEXT-AWARE FLOW EMBEDDING FOR ENHANCED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN IOT NETWORK 9329

 real-time inference performance even in resource-limited environments. It is also important to note that the current prototype is
 implemented in Python, which facilitates rapid development and
 flexibility but may introduce overhead in computation-intensive
 operations. Transitioning the implementation to a compiled language such as C++ could significantly reduce detection latency,
 thereby enhancing both the system’s runtime efficiency and its
 feasibility for real-time deployment in practical environments.
 Furthermore, we note that the detection and feature extraction
 tasks can be parallelized to further improve throughput and
 concurrency. For instance, a multithreaded architecture can be
 adopted to process incoming data streams more efficiently, enabling the system to better handle high-traffic scenarios.
 Finally, to quantify the computational footprint of the proposed model, we analyze the number of parameters and the
 corresponding memory consumption (see (1), (2), and (3)). The
 Embedding module comprises approximately 4.4 K parameters,
 while the Encoder module contains around 180 K parameters.
Fig. 9. Performance test of FlowVision on the MAWI dataset. The final Classifier adds another 258 parameters. In total, the
 model contains 185,234 parameters. Assuming that each parameter is stored using 32-bit floating point precision (float32), the
 total memory consumption amounts to approximately 724 KB.
 This lightweight design ensures that the model is suitable for
 deployment in resource-constrained environments, such as edge
 devices or IoT devices.

 VII. DISCUSSION
 Although the development of DL has brought significant
 opportunities for traffic detection tasks, such as improving generalization to unknown attacks and improving adaptability to
 data drift, DL-based traffic detection still faces several pressing
 challenges that require further investigation.
 Firstly, deep learning models are inherently black-box in
 nature, making it difficult for security administrators and system developers to interpret and justify their decisions, thereby
 limiting their trustworthiness in security-critical environments.
 Although recent advances in explainability techniques, such
 as SHAP [61], have enabled structural-level interpretability
 to some extent, these methods are generally insufficient to
 provide high-level insights, such as revealing the underlying
 attack mechanisms. Recently, the integration of large language
 models (LLMs) into traffic detection pipelines [62] has been
 explored as a promising approach to enhance interpretability
 and provide more context-aware explanations.
Fig. 10. Performance test of FlowXpert on the MAWI dataset. Secondly, the sheer volume of network traffic data renders
 both the labeling process and model training extremely
on the embedding layer, with an average throughput of 100,000 labor-intensive and time-consuming, often making the entire
queries per second (QPS). In Fig. 10(c) and Fig. 10(d), the en- training pipeline nearly infeasible in practice. Although
coder exhibits an average latency of around 20 microseconds and pretraining techniques [44], [47] that employ unsupervised
an average throughput of 150,000 QPS. Fig. 10(e) and Fig. 10(f) learning can effectively alleviate the burden of manual labeling,
present the overall performance, with the average end-to-end the presence of massive redundant data within large-scale traffic
latency remaining below 30 microseconds and the throughput datasets still results in excessive computational overhead. This
averaging around 30,000 QPS. Notably, these real-time results highlights the need for efficient data sampling strategies that
are obtained under the constrained virtual machine configura- can significantly reduce the volume of data while preserving
tion described above, demonstrating that FlowXpert can deliver essential information.
9330 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 Finally, as presented in Section VI-E, the detection perfor- [8] Y. Xiao et al., “Distributed traffic synthesis and classification in edge
mance on encrypted traffic is inferior to that achieved on the networks: A federated self-supervised learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
 Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1815–1829, Feb. 2024.
full dataset, which includes plaintext traffic. This observation [9] R. Li et al., “IoTGemini: Modeling IoT network behaviors for synindicates that encrypted traffic detection still faces several criti- thetic traffic generation,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 12,
cal challenges. In particular, how to more effectively model the pp. 13240–13257, Dec. 2024.
 [10] S. Troia, F. Sapienza, L. Varé, and G. Maier, “On deep reinforcement
behavioral characteristics of encrypted traffic without relying on learning for traffic engineering in SD-WAN,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
plaintext information, remain open problems that require further vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 2198–2212, Jul. 2021.
investigation. In addition, as shown in Section VI-F, model [11] X. Yan, Y. Xu, X. Xing, B. Cui, Z. Guo, and T. Guo, “Trustworthy network
 anomaly detection based on an adaptive learning rate and momentum
performance continues to degrade over time. This degradation is in IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 6182–6192,
primarily caused by the emergence of out-of-distribution (OOD) Sep. 2021.
data, or more generally, data drift, which leads to insufficient [12] M. H. L. Louk and B. A. Tama, “Dual-IDs: A bagging-based gradient
 boosting decision tree model for network anomaly intrusion detection
model generalization. This issue represents a fundamental chal- system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 213, 2023, Art. no. 119030.
lenge in traffic detection and necessitates the development of [13] Q. Ma, C. Sun, B. Cui, and X. Jin, “A novel model for anomaly detection in
dedicated model update strategies to address it. network traffic based on kernel support vector machine,” Comput. Secur.,
 vol. 104, 2021, Art. no. 102215.
 Therefore, advancing research on decision interpretability, [14] P. A. A. Resende and A. C. Drummond, “A survey of random forest based
data sampling, encrypted traffic and data drift will be key com- methods for intrusion detection systems,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 51,
ponents of our future work, as these directions are expected no. 3, pp. 1–36, 2018.
 [15] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
to further enhance the practicality and effectiveness of deep detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
learning in traffic detection tasks. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 [16] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
 in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.
 VIII. CONCLUSION Symp., ISOC, 2023.
 [17] Y. Wang, Y. Xiang, J. Zhang, W. Zhou, G. Wei, and L. T. Yang, “Internet
 We propose a novel traffic detection method for IoT envi- traffic classification using constrained clustering,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
ronments, named FlowXpert. First, we identify the theoretical Distrib. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2932–2943, Nov. 2014.
 [18] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and J. Wu, “Robust network traffic
limitations in the widely adopted flow-based features used in ex- classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1257–1270,
isting detection methods, which can severely hinder model con- Aug. 2015.
vergence. To address this, we introduce a new context-aware fea- [19] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
ture extraction method termed FlowVision. Second, to improve SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
generalization capability, we design an unsupervised embedding [20] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemapproach that integrates DBSCAN and contrastive learning for ble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Netw.
 Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018.
effective representation learning. Finally, we conduct extensive [21] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional variational
experiments on the real-world dataset (Mawi) and two sim- auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage learning approach
ulated datasets (CICIDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15) to evaluate for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion detection,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553, 2021.
the detection performance, generalizability, and improvements [22] C. Zha et al., “DM-IDS–A network intrusion detection method based on
over SOTA methods. Considering the real-time requirements of dual-modal fusion,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 22, no. 4,
IoT scenarios, our model is lightweight and achieves ultralow pp. 3646–3661, Aug. 2025.
 [23] C. Zha et al., “SKT-IDS: Unknown attack detection method based on sigdetection latency, with per-sample inference time as low as 30 moid kernel transformation and encoder–decoder architecture,” Comput.
microseconds on a low-resource virtual machine. Secur., vol. 146, 2024, Art. no. 104056.
 [24] C. Lin et al., “Convolutions are competitive with transformers for encrypted traffic classification with pre-training,” 2025, arXiv:2508.02001.
 REFERENCES [25] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
 learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 [1] I. Ahmad, S. Shahabuddin, T. Kumar, J. Okwuibe, A. Gurtov, and M. Privacy, 2010, pp. 305–316.
 Ylianttila, “Security for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., [26] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed analysis
 vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3682–3722, 4th Quart. 2019. of the KDD cup 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Secur.
 [2] S. Painuly, P. Kohli, P. Matta, and S. Sharma, “Advance applications and Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6.
 future challenges of 5G IoT,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Intell. Sustain. Syst., [27] C. I. for Cybersecurity, “CICIDs 2017 dataset,” 2017. [Online]. Available:
 2020, pp. 1381–1384. https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html
 [3] G. Costa, A. Forestiero, and R. Ortale, “Rule-based detection of anomalous [28] C. I. for Cybersecurity (CIC), “CICIDs 2018 dataset,” 2018. [Online].
 patterns in device behavior for explainable IoT security,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2018.html
 Comput., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4514–4525, Nov./Dec. 2023. [29] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 [4] K. Ilgun, R. A. Kemmerer, and P. A. Porras, “State transition analysis: A network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
 rule-based intrusion detection approach,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 21, Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
 no. 3, pp. 181–199, Mar. 1995. [30] U. Evci, F. Pedregosa, A. Gomez, and E. Elsen, “The difficulty of training
 [5] M. Masdari and H. Khezri, “A survey and taxonomy of the fuzzy signature- sparse neural networks,” in Proc. ICML Workshop Identifying Understandbased intrusion detection systems,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 92, 2020, ing Deep Learn. Phenomena, 2019.
 Art. no. 106301. [31] Y. Ma and T. Zheng, “Stabilized sparse online learning for sparse data,” J.
 [6] C. Zha et al., “A-NIDS: Adaptive network intrusion detection system based Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 131, pp. 1–36, 2017.
 on clustering and stacked CTGAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., [32] J. Yi, J. Lee, K. J. Kim, S. J. Hwang, and E. Yang, “Why not to use zero
 vol. 20, pp. 3204–3219, 2025. imputation? Correcting sparsity bias in training neural networks,” in Proc.
 [7] S. Shi, Y. Guo, D. Wang, Y. Zhu, and Z. Han, “Distributionally ro- 8th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020.
 bust federated learning for network traffic classification with noisy la- [33] E. Schubert, J. Sander, M. Ester, H. P. Kriegel, and X. Xu, “DBScan
 bels,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 6212–6226, revisited, revisited: Why and how you should (STILL) use DBScan,” ACM
 May 2024. Trans. Database Syst., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 1–21, 2017.
ZHA et al.: FLOWXPERT: CONTEXT-AWARE FLOW EMBEDDING FOR ENHANCED TRAFFIC DETECTION IN IOT NETWORK 9331

[34] S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, and Y. LeCun, “Learning a similarity metric dis- [59] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
 criminatively, with application to face verification,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. learning library,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
 Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., vol. 1, 2005, pp. 539–546. pp. 8026–8037.
[35] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural [60] N. Japkowicz and M. Shah, Evaluating Learning Algorithms: A Classifi-
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 18661–18673. cation Perspective. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011.
[36] MAWI Working Group, “MAWI working group traffic archive,” 2000. [61] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
 Accessed: May 22, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://mawi.wide.ad.jp/ predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
 mawi/ pp. 4768–4777.
[37] R. Fontugne, P. Borgnat, P. Abry, and K. Fukuda, “MAWILab: Combining [62] Y. A. Farrukh, S. Wali, I. Khan, and N. D. Bastian, “XG-NID: Dualdiverse anomaly detectors for automated anomaly labeling and perfor- modality network intrusion detection using a heterogeneous graph neural
 mance benchmarking,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf., 2010, pp. 1–12. network and large language model,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 283, 2025,
[38] W. Wang, X. Du, D. Shan, R. Qin, and N. Wang, “Cloud intrusion detection Art. no. 128089.
 method based on stacked contractive auto-encoder and support vector
 machine,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1634–1646, Chao Zha has been working toward the PhD in
 Jul.–Sep. 2022. computer science and technology through a combined
[39] B. Eshete and V. Venkatakrishnan, “DynaMiner: Leveraging offline in- MS-PhD program with the Institute of Computing
 fection analytics for on-the-wire malware detection,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
 IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., 2017, pp. 463–474. China, since 2021. He has authored or coauthored
[40] L. Invernizzi et al., “NAZCA: Detecting malware distribution in large- some papers in peer-reviewed journals, including
 scale networks,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2014, vol. 14, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
 pp. 23–26. Security (TIFS), Computers & Security, and IEEE
[41] I. J. King, X. Shu, J. Jang, K. Eykholt, T. Lee, and H. H. Huang, Transactions on Network and Service Management
 “EdgeTorrent: Real-time temporal graph representations for intrusion (TNSM). His research interests include network sedetection,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Defenses, 2023, curity, with particular interests in network intrusion
 pp. 77–91. detection systems (NIDS), encrypted traffic detection, malware analysis, and
[42] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph neural intelligent defense systems. He is also a reviewer of journals and conferences,
 networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM such as IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing (TDSC), IEEE
 Web Conf., 2023, pp. 2066–2075. Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, and The Web Conference
[43] C. Wu, J. Sun, J. Chen, M. Alazab, Y. Liu, and Y. Xiang, “TCG-IDS: Robust 2026.
 network intrusion detection via temporal contrastive graph learning,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 1475–1486, 2025.
[44] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A contextual- Haolin Pan received the BS degree with the School
 ized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted of Software from Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
 traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf.2022, 2022, pp. 633–642. China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the
[45] T. Wang, X. Xie, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “Net- PhD degree with the Institute of Software, Chinese
 Mamba: Efficient network traffic classification via pre-training unidi- Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. His research
 rectional mamba,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Netw. Protoc., 2024, interests include compiler auto-tuning and SIMD
 pp. 1–11. library tuning.
[46] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked
 autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
 no. 3, pp. 2012–2025, Jun. 2024.
[47] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An
 efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Bing Bai received the MS degree in computer science
 Privacy, 2025, pp. 1844–1860. and technology from the National University of De-
[48] X. Meng, C. Lin, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “NetGPT: Generative pretrained fense Technology. He is currently an associate investransformer for network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2304.09513. tigator with the Research Center for High-Efficiency
[49] Z. Hang, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, and Y. Xie, “Flow-MAE: Leveraging masked Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab. His research
 autoencoder for accurate, efficient and robust malicious traffic classifica- focuses on communication networks and security.
 tion,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Defenses, 2023,
 pp. 297–314.
[50] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder based
 traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc. AAAI
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427. Jiangxing Wu received the BS degree from the Insti-
[51] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Char- tute of Engineering and Technology of the People’s
 acterization of TOR traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Liberation Army, in 1982. He is an academician with
 Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, vol. 2, pp. 253–262. the China Academy of Engineering and CEO of the
[52] I. Sharafaldin et al., “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset National Digital Switching System Engineering and
 and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Technological R&D Center, Zhengzhou, China. He is
 Privacy, 2018, vol. 1, pp. 108–116. also the chairperson of the main dedicated supervision
[53] H. Pan, Y. Wei, M. Xing, Y. Wu, and C. Zhao, “Towards efficient com- group for China’s 863 high-tech research program.
 piler auto-tuning: Leveraging synergistic search spaces,” in Proc. 23rd
 ACM/IEEE Int. Symp. Code Gener. Optim., 2025, pp. 614–627.
[54] Z. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Wang, R. Wang, W. Song, and F. Nie, “Structured multi-view k-means clustering,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 160, 2025, Ruyun Zhang received the PhD degree in commu-
 Art. no. 111113. nications and information systems, in 2011. He was
[55] B. Bohara, J. Bhuyan, F. Wu, and J. Ding, “A survey on the use of data a researcher and PhD supervisor for years. He is curclustering for intrusion detection system in cybersecurity,” Int. J. Netw. rently the deputy director of the Research Center for
 Secur. Appl., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2020. High-Efficiency Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang
[56] M. Monshizadeh, V. Khatri, R. Kantola, and Z. Yan, “A deep density Lab. He has authored or coauthored some papers in
 based and self-determining clustering approach to label unknown traffic,” peer-reviewed journals, including IEEE Transactions
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 207, 2022, Art. no. 103513. on Information Forensics and Security, IEEE Trans-
[57] A. S. Alfoudi et al., “Hyper clustering model for dynamic network intrusion actions on Dependable and Secure Computing, Comdetection,” IET Commun., vol. 19, no. 1, 2025, Art. no. e12523. puters & Security, and IEEE Transactions on Network
[58] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-Learn: Machine learning in Python,” J. Mach. and Service Management. His research focuses on
 Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011. communication networks and security.