This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 1

 FORM-IDS: A Lightweight yet High-Fidelity Intrusion Detection
 Framework via Formal Verification and Knowledge Distillation
 Huale Li, Yanwei Chen, Dingzhong Cai, Zhaobin Wang, Hualong Wu, Arun Kumar Sangaiah

 Abstract—In practical IoT and IIoT deployments, intrusion constraints, building effective network-side intrusion detection
detection faces significant challenges due to overlapping feature mechanisms is essential for maintaining system security.
distributions of mixed attack vectors and the scarcity of computational resources on edge devices. Conventional deep learning- Early Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) mainly relied on
based detectors often struggle with instability across diverse signature-based or rule-based detection. While these methenvironments and high false alarm rates. To address these issues, ods are easy to interpret, they struggle to detect novel or
this paper proposes FORM-IDS, a lightweight yet high-fidelity evolving attacks, such as those employing obfuscation or
intrusion detection framework tailored for resource-constrained
edge scenarios. By integrating multi-teacher relational knowledge multi-stage strategies [5]. To overcome these limitations, deep
distillation, our approach effectively transfers complex decision learning-based approaches, particularly Convolutional Neural
patterns from large-scale ensembles into a compact student Networks, have become a dominant direction in IoT security
network, ensuring high detection capability without the computa- research [6]–[9]. Deep learning models can automatically
tional burden. Furthermore, a novel runtime formal verification extract discriminative patterns from high-dimensional traffic
module is introduced to enforce logical safety constraints, rigorously filtering spurious alerts and enhancing decision reliability. data, reducing reliance on handcrafted features. Despite their
Extensive experiments on multiple heterogeneous datasets show potential, deploying deep learning-based IDS in practical IoT
that FORM-IDS achieves competitive classification performance environments faces three major obstacles. First, network traffic
and robust temporal generalization against both the DTL- often contains mixed attack vectors and rare benign behaviors.
IDS lineage baselines and two additional recent IDS baselines. This causes feature distributions to overlap, leading to unstable
Crucially, the framework significantly suppresses false positives
while maintaining low inference latency, making it a promising performance and reduced class separability across different enoption for real-time edge security. vironments. Second, a critical trade-off exists between model
 performance and computational cost. High-capacity models
 Index Terms—IoT, intrusion detection system, knowledge distillation, formal verification. require significant resources that are unavailable on edge
 devices, whereas lightweight models often lack the structural
 I. I NTRODUCTION depth to capture complex attack patterns. Third, deep neural
 networks typically operate as black boxes. They lack log-

I N recent years, the rapid development of the Internet of
 Things (IoT) and Industrial IoT (IIoT) has enabled largescale deployment of heterogeneous devices in critical sectors.
 ical constraints on their decision-making process. In highassurance scenarios like industrial control, relying solely on
 probabilistic outputs is risky, as even a low false positive rate
These devices support real-time connectivity and cross-domain can trigger disruptive defensive actions.
collaboration, improving operational efficiency in scenarios
such as smart transportation, energy management, and public Although knowledge distillation (KD) and rule-based veriinfrastructure [1]–[3]. However, this trend introduces signif- fication are individually known methods, existing KD-based
icant security challenges. IoT devices typically operate with IDS frameworks focus exclusively on model compression
limited computing and storage resources, often running sim- through logit-level transfer, without addressing the trustworplified communication stacks. Consequently, they are highly thiness of detection decisions. Meanwhile, formal verification
exposed to malicious scanning, botnet enrollment, and dis- in security remains confined to offline, design-time analysis,
tributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks [4]. Given these disconnected from runtime detection. To the best of our
 knowledge, no prior work has systematically bridged these
 This work were funded by the National Natural Science Founda- paradigms. FORM-IDS fills this gap by introducing Relation of China (No.62406251), Natural Science Foundation of Gansu
(No.26JRRA256). tional Knowledge Distillation (RKD) into the multi-teacher
 Huale Li and Zhaobin Wang are with the School of Information Science IDS distillation pipeline, preserving inter-sample structural
and Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. (e-mail: li- relationships in the feature space rather than merely transhuale@lzu.edu.cn; wangzhb@lzu.edu.cn)
 Yanwei Chen is with the Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy ferring individual prediction distributions, and by compiling
of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China. (e-mail: chenyanwei@impcas.ac.cn) formally verified Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) properties into
 Dingzhong Cai is with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical a lightweight runtime monitor that acts as a post-hoc decision
University, Xi’an 710000, China. (e-mail: caidz@mail.nwpu.edu.cn)
 Hualong Wu is with School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin filter. This integration yields a lightweight and trustworthy
Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China.(Corresponding author, e- framework in which the distilled student model ensures high
mail: wuhl@stu.hit.edu.cn) detection sensitivity, while the verification module enforces
 Arun Kumar Sangaiah is with the International Graduate Institute of
Artificial Intelligence, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, logical safety constraints to suppress false alarms. These ca-
Yunlin, Taiwan.(e-mail: aksangaiah@ieee.org) pabilities cannot be achieved by either component in isolation.
 0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2021 IEEE

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 2

 To address these issues, this paper proposes FORM-IDS, including Differential Privacy, Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange,
an enhanced intrusion detection framework evolved from the and Homomorphic Encryption, to secure sensitive data dur-
DTL-IDS architecture and tailored for resource-constrained ing training. Extensive evaluation across seven public IoT
IoT and IIoT networks [10]. The framework utilizes a multi- datasets, such as TON-IoT, IoT-23, and Edge-IIoT, confirmed
teacher relational knowledge distillation strategy. This ap- the framework’s robustness, delivering an average accuracy of
proach allows a compact student model to inherit not only 97.31% and an F1-score of 92.69%. Similarly, in the context of
the prediction accuracy but also the structural feature rela- wireless sensor networks, Yesodha et al. [14] optimized a CNN
tionships from a high-capacity teacher ensemble. Furthermore, classifier using Fuzzy Temporal rules and an Artificial Bee
we integrate a lightweight formal verification module into the Colony algorithm (FT-ABC-CNN). When compared against
detection pipeline. Unlike traditional offline verification, this traditional CNN, LSTM, and RNN classifiers, the FT-ABCmodule performs runtime logical checks on detection out- CNN model demonstrated a significant reduction in false
comes, effectively filtering false alarms and enforcing safety positive rates, highlighting the importance of domain-specific
constraints without compromising inference speed. optimization in noisy wireless environments.
 The main contributions of this paper are summarized as Despite these architectural advances, relying on manual
follows: model design often limits scalability and robustness. Conse-
 • We propose FORM-IDS, utilizing multi-teacher RKD to quently, recent studies have pivoted toward automated Hycompress complex decision patterns into a compact CNN, perparameter Optimization (HPO) and Neural Architecture
 balancing high accuracy with minimal computational Search (NAS) to enhance deployment efficiency. Latif et al.
 overhead. [10] proposed DTL-IDS, a framework that employs Genetic
 • We integrate a logical verification module to enforce Algorithms (GA) to fine-tune transfer learning models, folsafety constraints on model predictions, effectively filter- lowed by ensemble aggregation to improve generalization
 ing transient false alarms and ensuring decision reliability. across heterogeneous IIoT scenarios. In a similar vein, Ahmad
 • Extensive evaluations across four heterogeneous datasets et al. [15] utilized Random Search-based HPO to optimize
 and multiple IDS baselines demonstrate that FORM- multiple CNNs on the Edge-IIoT dataset. By combining the
 IDS maintains strong generalization and stability under best-performing models via ensemble learning and applying
 diverse IoT/IIoT network environments. quantization, they achieved a balance between improved accuracy and reduced inference costs. Moving beyond simple
 II. R ELATED WORKS parameter tuning, Lu et al. [16] proposed BPSO-AHDL-IDS,
 which jointly optimizes hyperparameters and hybrid CNN–
 This section reviews the literature on IDS for IoT environ-
 RNN structures using Binary Particle Swarm Optimization.
ments, focusing on the specific technologies integrated into
 This approach enables fully automated IDS design without
our proposed framework.
 expert intervention. Extending this work, Lu et al. [17] further
 introduced a multi-objective framework based on discrete
A. CNN-based Architectures and Automated Optimization extremal optimization. This method automatically constructs
 Recent research has increasingly prioritized Convolutional lightweight CNNs, explicitly addressing the trade-off between
Neural Networks (CNN) and hybrid architectures to address detection performance and computational complexity in IIoT
the complexity of modern network environments. To leverage networks.
both spatial and temporal feature extraction, Bamber et al. [11]
proposed a hybrid CNN–LSTM system. They evaluated this
approach against a range of deep learning models, including B. Knowledge Distillation
ANN, LSTM, BiLSTM, GRU, and BiGRU, using the NSL- Complementing HPO and automated model design, Knowl-
KDD dataset after applying Recursive Feature Elimination. edge Distillation (KD) has emerged as a pivotal strategy for
Their comparative analysis demonstrated that the CNN–LSTM deploying IDS on resource-constrained IoT and IIoT devices.
architecture yields superior performance, achieving 95% ac- By focusing on reducing model complexity, KD enables highcuracy, 0.89 recall, and a 0.94 F1-score. Shifting the focus fidelity detection on hardware with limited computational
toward operational efficiency in IIOT, Arsalan et al. [12] capacity. Wang et al. [18] addressed the efficiency challenge by
introduced a lightweight one-dimensional CNN. This model proposing a lightweight CNN-based IDS that leverages selfwas specifically tailored to classify nine types of cyber- adaptive temperature scaling. Their approach facilitates the
attacks with minimal computational overhead. It achieved an transfer of discriminative representations from a deep teacher
accuracy of 99.90%, effectively validating the capability of to a shallow student, significantly reducing the parameter count
streamlined CNN architectures to maintain high fidelity in without compromising detection accuracy.
resource-constrained industrial settings. Umair et al. [19] showed that KD can support both
 Beyond standard detection tasks, CNN-based frameworks lightweight deployment and model interpretability in resourcehave evolved to tackle emerging challenges such as data constrained consumer devices. Using teacher–student training
privacy and wireless security. Torre et al. [13] addressed on the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 datasets, their framework
the privacy concerns in distributed networks by proposing retained near-teacher detection performance while reducing
a federated learning IDS built upon a 1D-CNN backbone. parameter count, model size, and inference latency. With
Their approach integrates robust cryptographic techniques, SHAP-based analysis, they also showed that a distilled IDS

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 3

can preserve useful feature-level explanations while remaining or offline analysis tool, remaining largely decoupled from
efficient. the dynamic operation of data-driven IDS. The systematic
 To further enhance the stability of this knowledge transfer, integration of formal methods, specifically using verified in-
Xie et al. [20] introduced DTKD-IDS, a dual-teacher frame- variants or model-checked properties to constrain learningwork that combines prototype and complementary distillation. based models, remains an underexplored frontier. Bridging this
This mechanism allows the student model to selectively absorb gap by embedding formal logic into the runtime decision loop
structurally aligned knowledge, ensuring robust performance is essential for providing safety guarantees and defining strict
even under complex attack scenarios. Moving beyond central- decision boundaries for otherwise opaque detection models.
ized training paradigms, Shen et al. [21] integrated ensemble
knowledge distillation within a federated learning framework. III. T HE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
By distilling locally trained models into a global student, As illustrated in Fig. 1, the proposed FORM-IDS framework
their strategy effectively mitigates data heterogeneity across systematically transforms raw network traffic into reliable
distributed clients while preserving user privacy. detection outcomes through a structured, three-stage pipeline:
 KD has also been adapted for graph-based anomaly de- 1) Data Preprocessing: Raw consecutive packet streams are
tection. Zhou et al. [22] designed a reconstructed graph first organized into sliding windows and synthesized into
neural network utilizing global–local distillation to transfer 2D color images, capturing spatial-temporal traffic features
both structural and traffic-level representations. This design while balancing the distribution of rare attack classes. 2)
achieves lightweight anomaly detection by minimizing compu- Model Training and Distillation: In the offline phase, a diverse
tational overhead. Liu et al. [23] proposed a Dynamic Gradient ensemble of large-scale teacher CNNs is trained. Their derived
Distillation method for graph neural networks, where gradient relational knowledge (inter-sample structural features) and
mapping and fusion let the student inherit part of the teacher’s logit-level probabilities are then distilled into an ultra-compact
learning dynamics rather than only its final outputs. Although Student CNN. The teacher-model candidates are optimized
their work targets node classification rather than intrusion with a Genetic Algorithm during teacher selection, while the
detection, it reflects a broader shift from simple logit imitation student distillation hyperparameters remain fixed. 3) Runtime
toward richer structural and process-aware knowledge transfer. Formal Verification: During the online deployment phase, the
This perspective is relevant to IDS, where preserving inter- standalone Student CNN performs initial feature extraction
sample relationships helps model heterogeneous attack behav- and classification. Its probabilistic outputs are immediately
iors. These advancements indicate that KD now serves pur- intercepted by a lightweight, NuSMV-verified runtime monposes far beyond mere model compression, increasingly sup- itor. This module enforces deterministic LTL safety equations
porting explainability, heterogeneity mitigation, and structure- (e.g., timeliness, confidence guards) on the decision logic,
aware knowledge transfer across lightweight security models. effectively filtering out transient false alarms before finalizing
 the block/monitor action.
C. Formal Verification in Security Systems
 Formal verification and model checking have become indis- A. Data Preprocessing and Augmentation
pensable in safety-critical domains, including IoT, automotive In the FORM-IDS framework, we inherited the data preprosystems, and programmable networks, where they are primar- cessing workflow from DTL-IDS and enhanced the image synily used to rigorously analyze system behaviors and uncover thesis process to tackle the issue of uneven data distribution. In
design-time vulnerabilities. In the context of IoT and cyber- DTL-IDS, 285 consecutive samples are combined into a single
physical systems, Toman et al. [24] applied formal methods image. While this approach works well for most datasets, when
such as Event-B modeling to reason about physical-layer dealing with imbalanced sample sizes, certain attack types may
vulnerabilities. Their work enabled the construction of security be scarce, hindering the model’s ability to effectively learn
proofs for specific threats, such as jamming and spoofing, their characteristics during training. To address this challenge,
under strict system assumptions. Similarly, in the automotive we incorporated a sliding window technique during the data
sector, Krichen et al. [25] demonstrated the integration of preprocessing stage. By increasing the number of samples for
model checking and theorem proving across the development rare attack types, we bolstered the model’s learning capacity
lifecycle, verifying security properties and system resilience for these specific attacks.
against both faults and attacks. Specifically, we maintain the window size of 285 samples
 At the network control level, formal verification has been for image synthesis. However, by reducing the sliding step
leveraged to model protocol behaviors in SDN controllers. size to 90, we generate a significantly larger number of image
This approach facilitates the automatic discovery of feasible samples from the original data. This method generates approxattack paths, revealing previously unknown vulnerabilities imately three times the original sample size. Consequently, it
within the control logic [26]. Addressing the complexity of greatly enhances the model’s ability to identify rare attacks.
large-scale ecosystems, Krichen et al. [27] further explored However, adopting the sliding window method introduces
abstraction and modularization techniques to improve the scal- certain trade-offs. With a step size of 90, successive windows
ability of model-based testing for smart city infrastructures. have a significant overlap. This means that generated images
 Despite these advances, a critical disconnect remains: for- share a large portion of their underlying data with adjacent
mal verification is predominantly treated as a design-time samples. Although this approach increases the size of dataset,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 4

Fig. 1. The overall framework of FORM-IDS. The pipeline integrates sliding-window data preprocessing, genetic algorithm-optimized multi-teacher relational
distillation for lightweight model training, and a runtime formal verification module to filter transient false alarms.

the generated instances are created via offsets of existing traffic We consider several widely used CNN architectures as
records rather than capturing new behaviors. Consequently, candidates. They include Generic CNN, Xception, VGG16,
they may lack the diversity found in independently collected VGG19, Inception, InceptionResNetV2, EfficientNetB7, and
samples. EfficientNetV2L. These models differ in depth, feature ex-
 To preserve the temporal integrity of the evaluation, the traction style, and parameter size. This architectural diverdataset is first partitioned according to the original occurrence sity ensures that discriminative traffic patterns are captured
timeline. The sliding-window augmentation is then applied from varying receptive fields and abstraction levels. For each
exclusively to the training subset to amplify rare attack sig- architecture, we use a Genetic Algorithm to optimize key
natures. Meanwhile, the test set remains unaugmented and hyperparameters. This reduces reliance on manual tuning. It
contains only temporally subsequent, non-overlapping streams, also improves the stability of model performance.
ensuring that the model is evaluated under realistic conditions After optimization, each model is first pre-trained on the
without data leakage. source-domain data. It is then fine-tuned on the target dataset
 with transfer learning. This step adapts the model to the IoT
 intrusion detection task. In addition, we train a Generic CNN
B. Teacher Models from scratch on the target dataset. This model serves as a
 baseline without transfer learning. Finally, we compare all
 To support the knowledge distillation stage in FORM-IDS,
 candidates on the validation set. We select the top 5 models
we first train and select a set of high-quality teacher models.
 to construct the teacher ensemble for multi-teacher relational
We train and evaluate multiple CNN models with different
 knowledge distillation.
architectures, then select the best models to form a teacher
ensemble. This ensemble provides supervision for the later
distillation stage. The teacher ensemble is utilized exclusively C. Student CNN
during the offline training phase on high-performance servers. In the FORM-IDS framework, Student CNN serves as the
Since these heavy models do not participate in runtime in- core detection model for the final deployment and inference
ference, they impose no computational burden on the target stage. Its design necessitates a reasonable balance between
hardware, allowing only the lightweight student CNN to be model complexity and detection performance. Specifically,
deployed on resource-constrained edge devices. the Student CNN must meet the following requirements: 1)

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 5

Efficiency: Its computational overhead and parameter count TABLE I
must be significantly lower than the baseline models in DTL- A RCHITECTURAL D ETAILS OF THE G ENERIC CNN (T EACHER )
IDS. This ensures adaptability to resource-constrained IoT Structure Configuration
and edge computing scenarios. 2) Baseline Performance: Even Block 1 Conv2D(32, 5 × 5)
without auxiliary mechanisms like distillation, its standalone Block 2 Conv2D(32, 5 × 5) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
 Block 3 Conv2D(128, 5 × 5)
detection capability should not degrade significantly. This Block 4 Conv2D(128, 5 × 5)
provides a stable performance lower bound for subsequent Pooling GlobalAvgPool2D
optimization. 3) Distillation Compatibility: The architecture Feature Layer Dense(256) + Dropout(p = 0.1)
 Logits Output Dense(C)
must support explicit access to intermediate feature maps and
output logits. This capability is essential for implementing
knowledge distillation and enforcing relational constraints TABLE II
during the training phase. A RCHITECTURAL D ETAILS OF THE S TUDENT CNN (P ROPOSED )
 The aforementioned requirements dictate that the design
 Structure Configuration
of Student CNN cannot be achieved simply by reducing Block 1 Conv2D(32, 3 × 3) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
network depth or pruning channel numbers. Although an Block 2 Conv2D(32, 3 × 3) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
overly simplified model can significantly reduce the number of Block 3 Conv2D(32, 3 × 3) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
 Block 4 Conv2D(64, 3 × 3) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
parameters, it often weakens the ability to represent complex Block 5 Conv2D(128, 3 × 3)
attack patterns, thereby limiting overall detection performance. Pooling GlobalAvgPool2D
Therefore, in terms of model structure design, we have adopted Feature Layer Dense(128) + Dropout(p = 0.1)
 Logits Output Dense(C)
a compromise approach that maintains necessary feature abstraction capabilities while controlling the scale of parameters.
 Specifically, the Student CNN employs a progressively
deeper hierarchy with stacked convolutional and pooling lay- attack patterns. Relying solely on its own supervision sigers. This structure enables the extraction of multi-level feature nals is frequently insufficient for capturing these intricacies.
representations from input traffic images. At the same time, Knowledge distillation offers an effective approach to enhance
by maintaining a small channel size in the early layers and detection performance while controlling model size by transgradually increasing the channel count only in the higher ferring knowledge from high-performance teacher models to
layers, the overall growth of model parameters is effectively structurally constrained student models. Compared to training
limited. Additionally, the model uniformly adopts 3x3 convo- methods based solely on hard labels, the distillation approach
lutional kernels. This design ensures layer-wise expansion of leverages soft-label information from teacher model outputs
the receptive field while controlling computational complexity to guide the student model in learning relative relationships
and enhancing structural stability. between categories, thereby achieving smoother and more
 At the end of the network, the Student CNN explicitly discriminative decision boundaries.
incorporates a feature representation layer and a logits output In the context of IoT malicious traffic detection, different
layer. This design enables the model to make final clas- model architectures often exhibit distinct perception prefsification decisions while providing necessary intermediate erences toward attack signatures, making it difficult for a
representations for distillation loss and relationship constraints single teacher model to comprehensively characterize comduring training. This structural design lays the foundation for plex and diverse attack behaviors. Based on this observation,
the subsequent multi-teacher knowledge distillation process, FORM-IDS adopts a multi-teacher-single-student distillation
while the Student CNN itself merely serves as a base model framework, integrating multiple performance-complementary
for carrying distilled knowledge. The mechanism behind its teacher models to provide the student model with more
performance improvement will be further explored in the next stable and information-rich supervision signals. Additionally,
section. to constrain the student’s representation structure in the fea-
 To provide a clear understanding of the network’s com- ture space, we introduce Relational Knowledge Distillation
pactness and design rationale, Tables I and II present the alongside output-layer distillation, as outlined in Algorithm 1.
architectural details for the baseline Generic CNN (included This mechanism enables the student model to inherit not only
in the teacher ensemble) and our proposed lightweight Student the prediction distributions of individual samples but also the
CNN, respectively. By reducing the convolutional kernel size relative structural relationships between samples modeled by
from 5 × 5 to 3 × 3 and streamlining the repetitive block the teachers.
structures into a progressively deeper but narrower hierarchy, 1) Multi-Teacher Distillation: Let the training sample be
the student model drastically minimizes computational load x, and assume there are K teacher models {T1 , T2 , . . . , TK }.
and memory requirements. This optimized configuration is The k-th teacher produces the corresponding logits z Tk (x).
designed to reduce inference cost and support low-latency To reduce the impact of prediction bias from a single teacher,
operation in resource-constrained IoT edge settings. FORM-IDS fuses the outputs of multiple teachers using mean
 ensembling. The ensemble logits are defined as:
D. Multi-Teacher Relational Knowledge Distillation
 K
 Under strict lightweight constraints, the student model often 1 X Tk
 z T (x) = z (x) (1)
struggles to extract discriminative information from complex K
 k=1

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 6

Algorithm 1 Multi-Teacher Relational Knowledge Distillation training, rather than relying only on the hard constraints
Training provided by ground-truth labels.
Input: Training dataset D, Teacher ensemble T = 2) Relational Knowledge Distillation: Although logit-level
 {T1 , . . . , TK }, Student model S, Total epochs N , Tem- distillation can effectively transfer class-level discriminative
 perature τ , RKD weight γ, Dynamic weight bounds information, it still ignores the structural relationships among
 αstart , αend . samples in the feature space. To further constrain feature learn-
Output: Optimized Student Model parameters θS . ing, FORM-IDS incorporates a relational knowledge distilla-
 1: Initialization: Randomly initialize student parameters θS . tion mechanism. This ensures that the student preserves inter-
 2: for epoch t = 1 to N do sample relations in the feature space, maintaining structural
 3: Calculate dynamic distillation weight: consistency with the teacher models.
 4: α(t) ← αstart − (αstart −α
 N
 end )·t
 Let the feature representations of the teacher and the stu-
 5: for each mini-batch (x, y) in D do dent for a mini-batch be E T ∈ RB×d and E S ∈ RB×d ,
 6: Get logits z Tk and feature maps E Tk from each respectively, where B is the batch size and d is the feature
 teacher Tk ∈ T PK dimension. For any sample pair (i, j), the Euclidean distances
 1
 7: Compute ensemble logits: z T ← K k=1 z
 Tk
 are defined as:
 T
 8: Compute teacher soft labels q using softmax with T
 τ (Eq. 2) Dij = EiT − EjT 2
 , S
 Dij = EiS − EjS 2 (5)
 9: Get logits z S and feature maps E S from student To mitigate the effect of scale differences, the distance
 S(x; θS ) matrices are normalized by their mean values:
10: Compute student soft probabilities q S using softmax
 with τ (Eq. 3) eT = DT eS = DS
 D , D (6)
11: Lstudent ← CrossEntropy(z S
 , y) ▷ Hard label loss µ(DT ) µ(DS )
 2
 Ldistill ← τ · q log(q /q S )
 P T T
12: ▷ KL Divergence where µ(·) denotes the mean of all matrix entries. The relaloss tional distillation loss is computed using the Huber function:
13: Calculate normalized distance matrices D e T and D eS  
 (Eq. 5 6) LRKD = Huber D eS
 eT , D (7)
14: LRKD ← Huber(D e S ) ▷ Structural relational loss
 eT , D
15: Compute total loss: The Huber loss formulation enforces global structural con-
16: Ltotal ← Lstudent + α(t)Ldistill + γLRKD sistency while being more robust to abnormal distances, which
17: Update θS via backpropagation: θS ← θS − η∇Ltotal helps stabilize the training process of the student model.
18: end for 3) Overall Training Objective: By jointly considering su-
19: end for
 pervision from ground-truth labels, logit-level distillation, and
20: return θS
 relational distillation, the overall training loss of FORM-IDS
 is defined as:
 Ltotal = Lstudent + α(t)Ldistill + γLRKD (8)
Given a temperature parameter τ , the soft-label distribution of
the teacher is defined as: where Lstudent is the cross-entropy loss based on ground-truth
  labels, and γ is the fixed weighting coefficient for the relational
 T exp ziT (x)/τ distillation loss. The term α(t) denotes the dynamic distillation
 qi (x) = PC  (2)
 T weight, which balances the contribution of teacher supervision.
 j=1 exp zj (x)/τ
 To facilitate effective knowledge transfer, we adopt a linear
where C denotes the total number of attack classes. Corre- decay strategy defined as:
spondingly, let the logits produced by the student model be
z S (x), and its soft-label distribution is: (αstart − αend ) · t
 α(t) = αstart − (9)
  T
 exp ziS (x)/τ
 S
 qi (x) = PC  (3) where αstart and αend represent the initial and final weight
 S
 j=1 exp zj (x)/τ values, respectively, t is the current epoch index, and T is the
 total number of training epochs. This strategy encourages the
 Based on the above soft-label distributions, the distillation
 student model to prioritize teacher guidance during the early
loss is measured by the KL divergence:
 stages of optimization while gradually shifting focus towards
 Ldistill = τ 2 · KL q T (x) ∥ q S (x)
 
 ground-truth labels as the training converges.
 C
 X qiT (x) (4)
 = τ2 qiT (x) log E. Lightweight Formal Verification
 i=1
 qiS (x)
 Although deep learning-based detection models show strong
where the squared temperature term τ 2 is used to compensate capabilities in recognizing complex attack patterns, their
for the change in gradient scale. Minimizing the divergence decision-making process is essentially a data-driven black-
Ldistill enables the student model to learn the class-similarity box inference. Consequently, they are vulnerable to noisy
information implicitly captured by the teacher models during samples, distribution shifts, and model uncertainty in practical

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 7

deployments. This issue is particularly evident in IoT and IIoT Algorithm 2 Runtime Formal Verification and Decision Logic
scenarios, where frequent false alarms not only increase the Input: Real-time traffic sample xt , Trained Student Model S,
burden on operation and maintenance but may also trigger High-assurance threshold θ, Persistence limit ∆t.
unnecessary defensive actions that disrupt normal business Output: Final Decision Action At ∈ {Pass, Monitor, Block}.
processes. Therefore, relying solely on classification confi- 1: Initialization: System State Q ← Normal, Attack Counter
dence is often insufficient to meet practical requirements for c ← 0.
reliability and safety. 2: while System is Active do
 To mitigate these issues, FORM-IDS introduces a 3: Receive new packet xt at time step t
lightweight formal verification module following the deep 4: Get prediction ŷ and confidence score σ from S(xt )
detection model. This module checks logical consistency 5: if ŷ = Benign then
and enforces safety-property constraints on suspected attack 6: Q ← Normal
events. It does not aim to verify the internal weights of 7: c←0
the neural network. Instead, it abstracts detection outcomes 8: At ← Pass
into finite-state behaviors and enforces runtime constraints 9: else
through formal logic rules, as detailed in Algorithm 2. In this 10: if σ < θ then
way, potential false alarms can be filtered effectively while 11: Q ← Suspect ▷ Low confidence, hold alert
maintaining low system overhead. 12: c←c+1
 Rather than statically proving the mathematical properties 13: if c > ∆t then
of internal neural network weights, which often leads to 14: Q ← Flagged ▷ Check Property 1: Timeliness
severe state-explosion problems on high-dimensional data, our 15: else
framework performs runtime verification of the decision logic. 16: At ← Monitor
By abstracting the continuous stream of deep learning outputs 17: end if
into a sequence of discrete events within a finite-state machine, 18: else
formally verified properties can be used to dynamically filter 19: Q ← Flagged ▷ High confidence triggers
the neural network’s decisions. immediate flag
 1) Security Property Modeling: The core of the formal 20: end if
verification module is an explicit specification of behavioral 21: end if
constraints for the IDS. Considering practical intrusion detec- 22: if Q == Flagged then
tion requirements, we define key safety properties covering 23: Logic Check: flagged → ¬control granted
timeliness, access control, and false-alarm suppression. These 24: Revoke Control Privileges()
properties are formally described using Linear Temporal Logic 25: Q ← Blocked
(LTL). 26: At ← Block
 First, to ensure a timely response, once an attack is con- 27: end if
firmed, the system must complete the flagging operation within 28: Execute Action At
a bounded time window: 29: end while

 G(attack → F≤∆t flagged) (10)
where ∆t denotes the maximum acceptable response delay in rates. A higher θ establishes a conservative decision boundary
logical steps. requiring strong neural network certainty before transitioning a
 Second, to prevent further propagation, the system must re- sample to the flagged state, effectively suppressing false alarms
voke control privileges immediately after an attack is flagged: but potentially delaying the detection of stealthy attacks.
 Conversely, a lower θ promotes agility at the risk of allowing
 G(flagged → ¬ control granted) (11) transient noise to trigger unwarranted defensive actions. In
 our experiments, θ is selected by validation-set grid search
 Finally, to suppress misclassification of benign traffic (false
 to match the dataset-specific confidence distribution.
positives), we introduce a constraint based on detection con-
 2) State-machine Abstraction and Verification Workflow:
fidence. Unlike standard formulations that rely on asymptotic
 To make formal verification executable, FORM-IDS abstracts
probabilities, we enforce a deterministic guard on the decision
 the detection process as a finite-state machine with the followboundary:
 ing state set: {normal, suspect, flagged, blocked}.
G((model output = attack ∧ confidence < θ) → ¬ flagged) The workflow operates as follows: The model output first
 (12) triggers the transition from normal to suspect. To prevent
where θ is a strict confidence threshold. This property ensures transient noise from causing false alarms, the system enters
that uncertain predictions remain in the suspect state rather the flagged state only if the attack pattern persists or the conthan triggering an immediate alarm. Together, these properties fidence score exceeds the high-assurance threshold θ. Finally,
provide a rigorous logical basis for constraining detection after control constraints are satisfied, the system moves to the
outcomes. blocked state to execute defensive actions.
 The choice of the confidence threshold θ essentially governs This abstraction simplifies the handling of complex model
the trade-off between system sensitivity and false positive outputs and provides clear semantics for verification. At

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 8

the implementation level, FORM-IDS utilizes the NuSMV environments and attack scenarios, this paper conducts expermodel-checking tool. We define a comprehensive SMV model iments on four representative public datasets: Edge-IIoTset,
that captures the aforementioned state machine alongside the UNSW-NB15, TON-IoT, and PowerDuck. Specifically, Edgethree core LTL properties as LTLSPEC declarations. Run- IIoTset targets edge-computing and IoT settings and covers
ning NuSMV performs offline consistency verification of the multiple typical IoT attack types [28]. UNSW-NB15 provides
state machine against these specific properties. During our a rich and well-structured collection of network attack samples
evaluation, all three LTL specifications were verified as true, and is widely used to assess the multi-class classification capaconfirming that the rule set is free of logical conflicts or bility of IDS models [29]–[33]. TON-IoT focuses on integrated
deadlocks. Once theoretically sound, the verified behavioral IoT and industrial-system scenarios and thus reflects higher
rules are compiled into a lightweight runtime monitor. This environmental complexity [34]–[41]. PowerDuck characterizes
monitor is embedded directly into the detection pipeline. It anomalies and attack behaviors in power systems and is used to
acts as a deterministic filter, applying real-time, step-by-step validate model applicability in critical-infrastructure contexts
checks and constraint enforcement on the incoming sequence [42]. By performing evaluations across multiple datasets with
of neural network outputs. different scales, domains, and distribution characteristics, we
 It should be emphasized that the formal verification module aim to verify the stability and robustness of the proposed
does not replace the deep detection model. Instead, it serves framework under cross-scenario conditions.
as a post hoc logical filtering and constraint layer. By formally For comparison, we consider two groups of baselines. First,
constraining the output behaviors, FORM-IDS effectively re- DTL-IDS is selected as the primary lineage baseline [10].
duces the false alarm rate with negligible additional computa- Since FORM-IDS is built upon the DTL-IDS framework, both
tional cost, exhibiting stable detection behavior across multiple methods share the same preprocessing pipeline, ensuring a
datasets. This design allows the overall framework to retain controlled environment for comparison. DTL-IDS integrates
the sensitivity of deep models while significantly improving multiple large-scale CNN models and therefore serves as a
trustworthiness in high-security scenarios. high-accuracy but high-cost reference point.
 Given that DTL-IDS has a parameter size several orders of
 IV. E XPERIMENTS magnitude larger than FORM-IDS, we additionally include the
 Generic CNN from the DTL-IDS suite as a compact lineage
 This section evaluates the performance of FORM-IDS
 baseline. This model follows the same input representation and
across four heterogeneous datasets. We first outline the expertraining procedure. With a model size closer to our proposed
imental setup and baselines, followed by a detailed analysis
 student network, the Generic CNN provides a more equitable
of detection accuracy. Finally, we validate the effectiveness of
 baseline for evaluating detection capability under constrained
the relational knowledge distillation strategy and the formal
 model capacity.
verification module in reducing false alarms and computational
 Second, we include two recent IDS baselines, Fed PCA
overhead.
 [43] and DIDS-MFL [44], to broaden the comparison beyond the DTL-IDS family. Whereas DTL-IDS and Generic
A. Implementation Platform CNN provide a controlled comparison within the same design
 All experiments in this study were conducted on a cloud lineage, Fed PCA and DIDS-MFL offer additional reference
computing infrastructure. The experimental environment was points from different methodological directions. Their results
configured with Python 3.10 running on Ubuntu 22.04, and are incorporated into the main performance plot in Fig. 2.
CUDA 11.8 was used to enable GPU acceleration. The hardware configuration includes a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU C. Evaluation Metrics
(24 GB) and a 16-vCPU Intel Xeon Platinum 8352V processor To comprehensively evaluate the classification capability
clocked at 2.10 GHz. This setup ensures efficient training and and security-related behavior of FORM-IDS in attack detection
evaluation for all deep learning models. tasks, this paper assesses the model from two perspectives,
 Unless otherwise specified, the data preprocessing pipeline namely classification performance metrics and security-related
and training procedures strictly follow those adopted in DTL- metrics. All metrics are computed based on the confusion
IDS, ensuring fair and consistent comparisons. All models matrix entries: true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false
were trained for a fixed number of 25 epochs under the same positives (FP), and false negatives (FN).
experimental settings. After training, model performance was Accuracy measures the overall correctness of the model
evaluated on the corresponding test sets for each dataset. This across all samples and reflects its overall predictive perforunified implementation platform and configuration guarantee mance. It is defined as:
that the observed performance differences are attributable to TP + TN
the proposed framework rather than variations in the experi- Accuracy = (13)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
mental environment.
 Precision measures the proportion of true attack samples
 among the samples predicted as attacks, and it reflects the
B. Datasets and Baselines credibility of detection results. It is defined as:
 To comprehensively evaluate the detection performance and TP
generalization capability of FORM-IDS under diverse network Precision = (14)
 TP + FP

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

 JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 9

  $ F F X U D F \  3 U H F L V L R Q  5 H F D O O  )   6 F R U H  $ F F X U D F \  3 U H F L V L R Q  5 H F D O O  )   6 F R U H
            
            
            
 3 H U I R U P D Q F H  6 F R U H

  3 H U I R U P D Q F H  6 F R U H
            
            
            
            
            
       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       
        ) 2 5 0  , ' 6  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  0 L Q L  & 1 1  * H Q H U L F  & 1 1  ' 7 /  , ' 6  ) H G  3 & $  ' , ' 6  0 ) /        ) 2 5 0  , ' 6  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  0 L Q L  & 1 1  * H Q H U L F  & 1 1  ' 7 /  , ' 6  ) H G  3 & $  ' , ' 6  0 ) /

   D 
  ( G J H  , , R 7 V H W   E 
  8 1 6 :  1 %  

  $ F F X U D F \  3 U H F L V L R Q  5 H F D O O  )   6 F R U H  $ F F X U D F \  3 U H F L V L R Q  5 H F D O O  )   6 F R U H
           

           

           
  3 H U I R U P D Q F H  6 F R U H

  3 H U I R U P D Q F H  6 F R U H
           

           

           

           
       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       
       
       

       
       

       
       
       
       
       
       
       ) 2 5 0  , ' 6  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  0 L Q L  & 1 1  * H Q H U L F  & 1 1  ' 7 /  , ' 6  ) H G  3 & $  ' , ' 6  0 ) /        ) 2 5 0  , ' 6  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  0 L Q L  & 1 1  * H Q H U L F  & 1 1  ' 7 /  , ' 6  ) H G  3 & $  ' , ' 6  0 ) /

   F 
  7 2 1  , R 7   G 
  3 R Z H U ' X F N

 Fig. 2. Performance comparison of the evaluated models across the four datasets.

 Recall evaluates the coverage of real attack samples, i.e.,
 the proportion of attacks that are successfully detected. It is
 computed as:     
 TP  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  ) 2 5 0  , ' 6
 Recall = (15)
 TP + FN     

 F1-score is the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall, and     
 it balances the two metrics. It is defined as:
     
 2 · Precision · Recall
 F1 = (16)     
 Precision + Recall
  ) 3 5

 For security-related evaluation, the False Positive Rate     
 (FPR) measures the proportion of benign traffic that is in-     
 correctly classified as attacks. It is a key indicator of practical
 deployability for IDS. It is defined as:     

 FP     
 (17) FPR =
 FP + TN     
 By jointly considering the above metrics, we conduct a
       7 2 1  , R 7  3 R Z H U ' X F N
 systematic evaluation of FORM-IDS and baseline methods
 from both classification performance and security practicality.
 Fig. 3. FPR Comparison on TON-IoT and PowerDuck.

 D. Results and Discussion
 In this section, we present a comprehensive empirical evaluation of the proposed FORM-IDS framework. The analysis is

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

 JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 10

 strictly designed to validate the system’s effectiveness, robustness, and operational efficiency within resource-constrained
  * H Q H U L F  & 1 1  ) 2 5 0  , ' 6
      IoT environments. To provide a structured and in-depth dis-
  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  ' 7 /  , ' 6
      cussion, we organize our evaluation to systematically address
     the following four key research questions (RQs):
 • RQ1 (Detection Performance): Does FORM-IDS achieve
 strong detection accuracy and generalization capability
  0 R G H O  6 L ] H   0 % 

    
 compared to the selected baselines across heterogeneous
    datasets?
 • RQ2 (Ablation Study): What are the contributions of
    the knowledge distillation strategy to the student model’s
   performance?
 • RQ3 (Verification Effectiveness): Can the lightweight for-
  
 mal verification module effectively suppress false alarms
   and enforce safety constraints without compromising
   detection sensitivity?
  ( G J H  , , R 7 V H W  8 1 6 :  1 %    7 2 1  , 2 7  3 R Z H U ' X F N • RQ4 (Operational Efficiency): Is the proposed framework
 computationally efficient enough to support real-time
 Fig. 4. Model Size (MB) Comparison Across Datasets. deployment on resource-constrained edge devices?
 1) Classification Performance: As illustrated in Fig. 2,
 FORM-IDS demonstrates consistently robust classification
 performance across all four datasets. Beyond the DTL-IDS
 family, the comparisons with Fed PCA and DIDS-MFL further show that the proposed framework remains competitive
  * H Q H U L F  & 1 1  ) 2 5 0  , ' 6 under a broader benchmark setting. FORM-IDS consistently
      0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  ' 7 /  , ' 6 surpasses Fed PCA across all four datasets. Compared with
 DIDS-MFL, FORM-IDS achieves higher accuracy on every
    
 , Q I H U H Q F H  7 L P H   P V  V D P S O H 

 dataset and higher F1-scores on Edge-IIoTset, UNSW-NB15,
    and TON-IoT, while remaining essentially tied on PowerDuck
 (0.9888 vs. 0.9890). In both Edge-IIoTset and UNSW-NB15
    (Fig. 2a, b), our framework achieves perfect metrics (1.0000)
 across all indicators, mirroring the performance of the heavy-
    weight DTL-IDS baseline. This confirms that the proposed
 lightweight distillation strategy successfully preserves the de-
  
 tection capability of large-scale ensembles in standard scenarios.
   On the more complex TON-IoT (Fig. 2c) and Power-
   Duck (Fig. 2d) datasets, FORM-IDS maintains high fidelity,
  ( G J H  , , R 7 V H W  8 1 6 :  1 %    7 2 1  , 2 7  3 R Z H U ' X F N achieving accuracies of 99.56% and 99.02%, respectively.
 While DTL-IDS exhibits a marginal advantage in PowerDuck
 Fig. 5. Inference Time (ms/sample) Comparison Across Datasets. (99.78%), this comes at the cost of massive computational
 overhead. In contrast, FORM-IDS delivers comparable precision with significantly reduced complexity, highlighting its
 efficiency advantage in resource-constrained edge scenarios.
 2) Effectiveness of Knowledge Distillation: To isolate the
 specific contribution of our distillation strategy, we benchmark
  ( G J H  , , R 7 V H W the Multi-RKD CNN against a baseline Mini CNN trained
 from scratch. As evident in Fig. 2, eliminating the distillation
  8 1 6 :  1 %  
 process results in sharp performance degradation on complex
  7 2 1  , 2 7 datasets. Most notably on UNSW-NB15, the standalone Mini
 CNN struggles to generalize, with accuracy plummeting to
  3 R Z H U ' X F N
 87.27% and the F1-score dropping to 84.94%. Similarly, on
  1 1        R Q 9   W L R Q  W 9   H W %   H W 9 
  /
  U L F  &  9 * *  9 * *  , Q F H S
  W L  ; F H S  H V 1 H  L H Q W 1  L H Q W 1 TON-IoT, its accuracy falls to 96.53%.
  * H Q H  W L R Q 5  ( I I L F  ( I I L F
  , Q F H S
 In stark contrast, the Multi-RKD CNN effectively recovers
 Fig. 6. Selected Backbone Models for Each Dataset.
 this capability. It restores accuracy to a perfect 100% on
 UNSW-NB15 and boosts TON-IoT performance to 98.04%.
 Even on the Edge-IIoTset, the distilled model maintains a
 clear advantage over its scratch-trained counterpart (99.92%

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 11

 TABLE III
 R EPRESENTATIVE O NE -FACTOR S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS OF D ISTILLATION H YPERPARAMETERS ON TON-I OT (M ULTI -RKD CNN)

 Setting Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score
 Default (τ = 8, αstart = 0.5, αend = 0.2, γ = 0.15) 0.9804 0.9816 0.9804 0.9808
 γ=0 0.9689 0.9734 0.9689 0.9705
 τ =4 0.9760 0.9789 0.9760 0.9769
 τ = 12 0.9671 0.9702 0.9671 0.9681
 αstart = 0.3 0.9742 0.9769 0.9742 0.9751
 αstart = 0.7 0.9751 0.9758 0.9751 0.9753
 αend = 0 0.9724 0.9722 0.9724 0.9721
 αend = 0.1 0.9787 0.9796 0.9787 0.9790
 * Each row changes one parameter at a time around the default setting while keeping the remaining settings fixed.

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 TABULAR DATA C ORRESPONDING TO F IG . 3. TABULAR DATA C ORRESPONDING TO F IG . 4.

 Model TON-IoT PowerDuck Dataset Generic CNN Multi-RKD CNN FORM-IDS DTL-IDS
 Multi-RKD CNN 0.017 0.074 Edge-IIoTset 2.20 0.50 0.50 670.22
 FORM-IDS 0.003 0.041 UNSW-NB15 2.20 0.50 0.50 1041.60
 TON-IOT 2.20 0.50 0.50 793.07
 PowerDuck 2.20 0.50 0.50 507.86

vs. 99.32%). Crucially, these results demonstrate that the TABLE VI
lightweight network inherently possesses sufficient represen- TABULAR DATA C ORRESPONDING TO F IG . 5.
tational capacity; however, it requires the rich, structural Dataset Generic CNN Multi-RKD CNN FORM-IDS DTL-IDS
supervision provided by the teacher ensemble to successfully Edge-IIoTset 3.54 2.57 2.58 22.69
 UNSW-NB15 11.38 5.68 5.68 134.07
navigate the complex decision boundary. TON-IOT 3.84 1.67 1.68 21.11
 Together, the Mini CNN, Multi-RKD CNN, and full FORM- PowerDuck 1.96 1.26 1.27 9.72
IDS form a three-stage ablation that isolates the contributions of distillation and formal verification. The Mini CNN
establishes the lower-capacity baseline, the Multi-RKD CNN constraints results in a substantial suppression of false alarms:
captures the benefit of relational distillation, and the complete on TON-IoT, the FPR is slashed from 0.017 to a mere 0.003,
FORM-IDS reflects the additional suppression of false alarms while on PowerDuck, it decreases from 0.074 to 0.041. For
brought by verification. Following the DTL-IDS setting, the completeness, the exact numerical values corresponding to
teacher ensemble size is uniformly set to K = 5. To keep Fig. 3 are also reported in Table IV. This sharp reduction
the training objective consistent across datasets, the distillation empirically confirms the module’s capability to filter out
hyperparameters are fixed at τ = 8, αstart = 0.5, αend = 0.2, spurious, transient noise in dynamic environments.
and γ = 0.15. The verification threshold θ is selected by 4) Computational Efficiency: Crucially, this rigorous filtervalidation-set grid search for each dataset, yielding θ = 0.9 ing enhances overall decision reliability without sacrificing
for Edge-IIoTset and UNSW-NB15, θ = 0.8 for TON-IoT, sensitivity. As corroborated by Fig. 2(c), FORM-IDS achieves
and θ = 0.85 for PowerDuck. superior Precision and F1-scores compared to the unverified
 To further examine the robustness of the distillation phase, a Multi-RKD model. Notably, on TON-IoT, the F1-score imone-factor sensitivity analysis was conducted on the challeng- proves from 0.9808 to 0.9942. These findings affirmatively
ing TON-IoT dataset using the Multi-RKD CNN (excluding answer RQ3, demonstrating that the formal verification modthe formal verification module to isolate distillation effects). ule successfully purifies the decision boundary, eliminates
By varying one parameter at a time around the aforementioned inconsistent predictions, and enforces safety constraints while
default settings, the sensitivity metrics reported in Table III preserving the system’s acute ability to detect genuine attacks.
confirm that the default configuration yields the optimal F1- Finally, we assess the computational advantage of FORMscore of 0.9808. Notably, setting γ = 0 or increasing the tem- IDS. As summarized in Fig. 4, DTL-IDS requires storage
perature to τ = 12 results in the most pronounced degradation, ranging from 507 MB to 1041 MB depending on the datasetvalidating the necessity of relational distillation and moderate specific ensemble. The specific composition of these ensemtemperature scaling. Meanwhile, the student model remains bles is visualized in Fig. 6, where dark cells denote the
highly stable against minor tuning variations in the dynamic five backbone architectures selected for each dataset, while
weight bounds (αstart and αend ). light cells indicate excluded models. This reliance on multiple
 3) Impact of Formal Verification: To address RQ3, we heavy backbones results in substantial overhead. In contrast,
explicitly evaluate the impact of the formal verification module FORM-IDS maintains a fixed, ultra-compact size of 0.50 MB
by contrasting the full FORM-IDS framework against the across all scenarios, corresponding to a reduction of three orstandalone Multi-RKD CNN. Fig. 3 visualizes the FPR on ders of magnitude. The exact numerical values corresponding
the two most complex datasets. The integration of logical to Fig. 4 are summarized in Table V.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 12

 This compactness translates directly to inference speed (Fig.
5). On UNSW-NB15, FORM-IDS reduces the inference time
per sample from 134.07 ms (DTL-IDS) to just 5.68 ms.
Even compared to the Generic CNN (11.38 ms), FORM-IDS
achieves a 2x speedup due to its optimized architecture. The
exact numerical values corresponding to Fig. 5 are summarized
in Table VI. These results show that FORM-IDS balances
strong security performance with the efficiency needed for
edge-oriented IoT deployment.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 In this paper, we proposed FORM-IDS, a lightweight intrusion detection framework tailored for resource-constrained
IoT environments. By synergizing multi-teacher relational
distillation with runtime formal verification, our approach reconciled the inherent trade-off between detection performance
and deployment cost. Experimental evaluations confirmed that
FORM-IDS achieved competitive classification performance
against both the DTL-IDS lineage baselines and the broader
IDS baselines considered in our experiments, while significantly reducing computational overhead and inference latency.
Beyond this specific task, the integration of data-driven learning and symbolic reasoning offers a promising direction for
building trustworthy and verifiable AI at the network edge.
Future research will explore adaptive thresholding mechanisms
to dynamically calibrate formal verification bounds against
real-time concept drift. Additionally, we aim to deploy the
FORM-IDS pipeline on varied physical edge hardware to
profile energy constraints, and to investigate adaptive feature
alignment for seamless cross-dataset transfer learning across
disparate IoT traffic structures.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 13

 R EFERENCES [21] J. Shen, W. Yang, Z. Chu, J. Fan, D. Niyato, and K.-Y. Lam, “Effective
 intrusion detection in heterogeneous internet-of-things networks via
 ensemble knowledge distillation-based federated learning,” in ICC 2024
 [1] H. Son, J. Jang, J. Park, A. Balog, P. Ballantyne, H. R. Kwon,
 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2024, pp. 2034–
 A. Singleton, and J. Hwang, “Leveraging advanced technologies for
 2039.
 (smart) transportation planning: A systematic review,” Sustainability,
 [22] X. Zhou, J. Wu, W. Liang, K. I.-K. Wang, Z. Yan, L. T. Yang, and Q. Jin,
 vol. 17, no. 5, p. 2245, 2025.
 “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge distillation for
 [2] P. J. Ganesh, B. M. Sundaram, P. K. Balachandran, and G. B. Mo- lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
 hammad, “Intdem: an intelligent deep optimized energy management and Learning Systems, vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11 817–11 828, 2024.
 system for iot-enabled smart grid applications,” Electrical Engineering, [23] K. Liu, S. Yang, C.-D. Wang, Y. Chen, and Z. Huang, “A novel
 vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 1925–1947, 2025. knowledge distillation method for graph neural networks with gradient
 [3] B. O. Sanusi, “Smart infrastructure: Leveraging iot and ai for predictive mapping and fusion,” Information Fusion, p. 104163, 2026.
 maintenance in urban facilities,” SAMRIDDHI: A Journal of Physical [24] Z. H. Toman, L. Hamel, S. H. Toman, M. Graiet, and D. C. G. Valadares,
 Sciences, Engineering and Technology, vol. 17, no. 02, pp. 26–37, 2025. “Formal verification for security and attacks in iot physical layer,”
 [4] M. Driss, D. Hasan, W. Boulila, and J. Ahmad, “Microservices in iot Journal of Reliable Intelligent Environments, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 73–91,
 security: current solutions, research challenges, and future directions,” 2024.
 Procedia Computer Science, vol. 192, pp. 2385–2395, 2021. [25] M. Krichen, “Formal methods and validation techniques for ensuring
 [5] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “A survey on intrusion detection system: automotive systems security,” Information, vol. 14, no. 12, p. 666, 2023.
 feature selection, model, performance measures, application perspective, [26] B. Yuan, C. Zhang, J. Ren, Q. Chen, B. Xu, Q. Zhang, Z. Li, D. Zou,
 challenges, and future research directions,” Artificial Intelligence Review, F. Zhang, and H. Jin, “Toward automated attack discovery in sdn
 vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 453–563, 2022. controllers through formal verification,” IEEE Transactions on Network
 [6] H. Dong and I. Kotenko, “Cybersecurity in the ai era: analyzing the and Service Management, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3636–3655, 2024.
 impact of machine learning on intrusion detection,” Knowledge and [27] M. Krichen, “Improving formal verification and testing techniques for
 Information Systems, pp. 1–52, 2025. internet of things and smart cities,” Mobile networks and applications,
 [7] I. Rakine, A. Oukaira, K. El Guemmat, I. Atouf, S. Ouahabi, M. Talea, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 732–743, 2023.
 and T. Bouragba, “Comprehensive review of intrusion detection tech- [28] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
 niques: Ml and dl in different networks,” IEEE Access, 2025. “Edge-iiotset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of
 [8] A. K. Desta, S. Ohira, I. Arai, and K. Fujikawa, “Rec-cnn: In-vehicle iot and iiot applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEe
 networks intrusion detection using convolutional neural networks trained Access, vol. 10, pp. 40 281–40 306, 2022.
 on recurrence plots,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 35, p. 100470, [29] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for
 2022. network intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data set),”
 [9] M. A. Haq, M. A. Rahim Khan, and T. AL-Harbi, “Development of in 2015 military communications and information systems conference
 pccnn-based network intrusion detection system for edge computing.” (MilCIS). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
 Computers, Materials & Continua, vol. 71, no. 1, 2022. [30] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “The evaluation of network anomaly detection
[10] S. Latif, W. Boulila, A. Koubaa, Z. Zou, and J. Ahmad, “Dtl-ids: An systems: Statistical analysis of the unsw-nb15 data set and the comparoptimized intrusion detection framework using deep transfer learning ison with the kdd99 data set,” Information Security Journal: A Global
 and genetic algorithm,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Perspective, vol. 25, no. 1-3, pp. 18–31, 2016.
 vol. 221, p. 103784, 2024. [31] N. Moustafa, G. Creech, and J. Slay, “Big data analytics for intrusion
[11] S. S. Bamber, A. V. R. Katkuri, S. Sharma, and M. Angurala, “A hybrid detection system: Statistical decision-making using finite dirichlet mixcnn-lstm approach for intelligent cyber intrusion detection system,” ture models,” in Data Analytics and Decision Support for Cybersecurity:
 Computers & Security, vol. 148, p. 104146, 2025. Trends, Methodologies and Applications. Springer, 2017, pp. 127–156.
[12] M. Arsalan, M. Mubeen, M. Bilal, and S. F. Abbasi, “1d-cnn-ids: 1d [32] N. Moustafa, J. Slay, and G. Creech, “Novel geometric area analysis
 cnn-based intrusion detection system for iiot,” in 2024 29th International technique for anomaly detection using trapezoidal area estimation on
 Conference on Automation and Computing (ICAC), 2024, pp. 1–4. large-scale networks,” IEEE transactions on big data, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
 481–494, 2017.
[13] D. Torre, A. Chennamaneni, J. Jo, G. Vyas, and B. Sabrsula, “Toward
 [33] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Netflow
 enhancing privacy preservation of a federated learning cnn intrusion
 datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection sysdetection system in iot: Method and empirical study,” ACM Trans.
 tems,” in International Conference on Big Data Technologies and
 Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 34, no. 2, Jan. 2025. [Online]. Available:
 Applications. Springer, 2020, pp. 117–135.
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3695998
 [34] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T.
[14] K. Yesodha, M. Krishnamurthy, M. Selvi, and A. Kannan, “Intrusion
 Den Hartog, “Ton iot: The role of heterogeneity and the need for
 detection system extended cnn and artificial bee colony optimization in
 standardization of features and attack types in iot network intrusion data
 wireless sensor networks,” Peer-to-peer Networking and Applications,
 sets,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, 2021.
 vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1237–1262, 2024.
 [35] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar, “Ton iot
[15] B. Ahmad, Z. Wu, Y. Huang, and S. U. Rehman, “Enhancing the security telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of iot and iiot for data-driven
 in iot and iiot networks: An intrusion detection scheme leveraging deep intrusion detection systems,” Ieee Access, vol. 8, pp. 165 130–165 150,
 transfer learning,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 305, p. 112614, 2024. 2020.
[16] K.-D. Lu, Y.-W. Yang, G.-Q. Zeng, C. Peng, G.-G. Geng, and J. Weng, [36] J. Ashraf, M. Keshk, N. Moustafa, M. Abdel-Basset, H. Khurshid, A. D.
 “Bpso-ahdl-ids: Binary particle swarm optimization-based automated Bakhshi, and R. R. Mostafa, “Iotbot-ids: A novel statistical learninghybrid deep learning model for intrusion detection of internet of things,” enabled botnet detection framework for protecting networks of smart
 IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 22, pp. cities,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 72, p. 103041, 2021.
 15 859–15 877, 2025. [37] N. Moustafa, “A systemic iot–fog–cloud architecture for big-data ana-
[17] K.-D. Lu, J.-C. Huang, G.-Q. Zeng, M.-R. Chen, G.-G. Geng, and lytics and cyber security systems: A review of fog computing,” Secure
 J. Weng, “Multi-objective discrete extremal optimization of variable- Edge Computing, pp. 41–50, 2021.
 length blocks-based cnn by joint nas and hpo for intrusion detection in [38] N. Moustafa, “New generations of internet of things datasets for
 iiot,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 22, cybersecurity applications based machine learning: Ton iot datasets,”
 no. 4, pp. 4266–4283, 2025. in Proceedings of the eResearch Australasia Conference, Brisbane,
[18] L.-H. Wang, Q. Dai, T. Du, and L.-f. Chen, “Lightweight intrusion Australia, 2019, pp. 21–25.
 detection model based on cnn and knowledge distillation,” Applied Soft [39] N. Moustafa, M. Ahmed, and S. Ahmed, “Data analytics-enabled intru-
 Computing, vol. 165, p. 112118, 2024. sion detection: Evaluations of ton iot linux datasets,” in 2020 IEEE 19th
[19] M. Umair, M. S. Khan, W. Al Malwi, F. Asiri, I. Nafea, F. Saeed, International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing
 and J. Ahmad, “Knowledge distillation for lightweight and explainable and Communications (TrustCom). IEEE, 2020, pp. 727–735.
 intrusion detection in resource-constrained consumer devices,” IEEE [40] N. Moustafa, M. Keshky, E. Debiez, and H. Janicke, “Federated ton iot
 Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 2025. windows datasets for evaluating ai-based security applications,” in 2020
[20] B. Xie, Z. Wang, Z. Zeng, D. He, and S. Chan, “Dtkd-ids: A dual-teacher IEEE 19th international conference on trust, security and privacy in
 knowledge distillation intrusion detection model for the industrial inter- computing and communications (TrustCom). IEEE, 2020, pp. 848–
 net of things,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 174, p. 103869, 2025. 855.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026 14

[41] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating ai-based
 security systems at the edge: Network ton iot datasets,” Sustainable
 Cities and Society, vol. 72, p. 102994, 2021.
[42] S. Zemanek, I. Hacker, K. Wolsing, E. Wagner, M. Henze, and M. Serror,
 “PowerDuck: A GOOSE Data Set of Cyberattacks in Substations,” in
 Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Cyber Security Experimentation
 and Test. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
 2022, pp. 49–53.
[43] T.-A. Nguyen, L. T. Le, T. D. Nguyen, W. Bao, S. Seneviratne, C. S.
 Hong, and N. H. Tran, “Federated PCA on grassmann manifold for IoT
 anomaly detection,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 32,
 no. 5, pp. 4456–4471, 2024.
[44] C. Qiu, G. Nan, H. Xia, Z. Weng, X. Wang, M. Shen, X. Tao, and
 J. Liu, “Disentangled dynamic intrusion detection,” IEEE Transactions
 on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 47, no. 11, pp.
 10 528–10 545, 2025.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.