4970 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 FSLog: Adversarial Margin for Cross-System
 Few-Shot Log Anomaly Detection
 Jiyu Tian , Mingchu Li , and Jianyuan Gan

 Abstract—Log-based anomaly detection (LAD) is imperative
to ensure both the reliability and security of software systems.
Although many deep learning approaches have been designed to
capture complex and diverse anomaly patterns from log files, they
heavily rely on large-scale annotated data. However, collecting sufficient labeled data is impractical when a software system has just
been deployed. In this paper, we propose a cross-system few-shot
learning log-based anomaly detection approach, namely FSLog,
to solve the abnormal label scarcity problem, which is the main
challenge of recent LAD research. Specifically, we leverage a pretrained model from source system to enrich feature representations
so that data instances from target system can also be effectively Fig. 1. An illustration of the division of datasets in few-shot learning.
represented. To this end, we introduce a novel adversarial margin
loss to enhance our feature distinguishability while preserving their
generalizability. Further, we also develop a masked interactive
temporal network for robust feature extraction of temporal rela- Despite its valuable applications, detecting anomalous logs is
tionships for log samples. We evaluate the proposed FSLog on three still a challenging task. Since there are various software systems
publicly available datasets based on a standard few-shot learning (e.g., operating system CentOS, database system SQL Server,
setup protocol. Experimental results demonstrate that our method and distributed file system HDFS), it is impractical to establish
achieves the best performance in detecting abnormal logs when
compared to state-of-the-art methods. a unified log anomaly detection model that can be applied to all
 software systems. While re-training a new log anomaly model
 Index Terms—Log anomaly detection, few-shot learning, fine- in a new software system (i.e. target system) is also difficult
tuning, Softmax, margin.
 because labeled logs in the target system are rare and may present
 different patterns when compared to the log data in the original
 I. INTRODUCTION software system (i.e. source system). We illustrate this research
 gap in Fig. 1.
 OG data is a valuable source for security analysis, fault di-
L agnosis, and troubleshooting. To reduce system downtime
and improve system reliability, log anomaly detection, enabling
 Existing log anomaly detection models have not fulfilled
 the performance requirement due to the following reasons:
 supervised learning methods for log anomaly detection heavily
rapid problem localization, abnormal behavior identification, rely on large-scale labeled training data, which is expensive to
and attack tracking, has been an active research topic [1], [2], obtain and requires tedious manual work. Thus, it is difficult to
[3]. Recently, various deep learning-based methods are proposed apply them to any new systems or dynamically evolved systems;
for this log analysis task. They include unsupervised approaches, unsupervised and semi-supervised learning methods alleviate
e.g., DeepLog [4] and LogAnomaly [5], supervised approaches, the labeling problem. However, they are extremely susceptible
e.g., LogRobust [6] and LightLog [7], semi-supervised ap- to log parsing errors since they are unable to adequately learn
proaches, e.g., PLELog [8], transfer learning-based approaches, explicit anomaly features and perform poorly in terms of dee.g., LogTransfer [9]. tection accuracy [10]; transfer learning methods leverage rich
 prior knowledge from the source system and fine-tune with a
 Received 24 January 2025; revised 28 October 2025; accepted 14 December few supervisions from the target system to achieve cross-system
2025. Date of publication 2 January 2026; date of current version 12 May 2026. detection. However, insufficient supervised samples make these
This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science Foundation of methods vulnerable to overfitting. Few-shot learning provides a
China under Grant 625B2031, Grant 62466025 and Grant T2350710232, and
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under novel solution for LAD in label-scarce scenarios. However, the
Grant DUT20GJ205. (Corresponding author: Mingchu Li.) detection performance of existing few-shot detection methods
 Jiyu Tian and Jianyuan Gan are with the School of Software Tech- is still limited either by the generalization and distinguishability
nology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail:
tianjiyu@mail.dlut.edu.cn). of the model or by the robustness of noisy logs. The research
 Mingchu Li is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Jiangxi Normal challenges we address in this paper are formalized as:
University, Nanchang 330022, China, and also with the School of Software r Generalization and Discrimination: are conflicting objec-
Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail:
mingchu@jxnu.edu.cn). tives in model training. In our study, we found that existing
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3647445 methods only focus on either of them, thus compromising

 1545-5971 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION 4971

 their overall performance. For instance, LogTransfer [9] relationships of log sequence samples while ensuring the
 focuses on the syntax and noise problems of cross-system robustness of the representations.
 logs and only shares the output layer during the fine-tuning r We provided a method to construct few-shot datasets for
 stage, while MetaLog [2] pays more attention to global base training and fine-tuning corresponding to log anomaly
 semantic consistency and generalization, ignoring the dis- detection based on HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird datasets
 criminability of representations. If an effective fine-tuning and conducted extensive experiments on four few-shot
 strategy cannot be designed, the model is likely to over-rely datasets to demonstrate the usability and superiority of our
 on the prior knowledge of the source system, which leads model.
 to a degradation of the model’s performance. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
 r Roubustness: Existing methods are difficult to process discusses related works. Section III describes the proposed
 the inherent temporal dependencies and noise in log time approach. Section IV presents the designed adversarial margin
 sequences. For example, MetaLog [2] uses a GRU network cosine softmax loss. Section V reports the evaluation results
 with an attention mechanism to extract features without of the proposed approach and compares it with advanced apconsidering the effect of noise, while Log-MatchNet [11] proaches. Section VI discusses the advantages and limitations
 combines log timestamps with the Bert model, aiming to of our approach. Finally, the work is concluded in Section VII.
 capture temporal dependencies and semantic relationships,
 but the Transformer in Bert is more sensitive to noise. Log II. RELATED WORKS
 noise may not only mask useful features but also mislead
 the model to learn erroneous patterns, thus weakening the A. Log-Based Anomaly Detection
 robustness of detection. Existing approaches that use log data for anomaly detection
 To address the challenges above, in this paper, we propose a can be grouped into two broad categories: traditional machine
novel few-shot learning-based log anomaly detection method, learning-based approaches [14], [15] and deep learning-based
which aims to improve the transferability of novel classes approaches [16], [17], [18], [9], [13], [19], [11]. Classical maby fuzzing the decision boundary with an adversarial margin. chine learning-based approaches require hand-crafted features
As shown in Fig. 1, following the fine-tuning-based few-shot and a combination of expert knowledge to classify anomalous
learning framework, we establish an explicit support set for events in the logs. These methods, such as the PCA-based
the target system based on the ”N-way K-shot” principle in method [15] and invariant mining (IM) based method [14],
meta-learning [12], which serves as the training set for the required a lot of manual effort in the modeling process and have
fine-tuning process. Specifically, (i) first, we innovatively create limited performance in detecting anomalies.
an adversarial margin cosine softmax (AMCS) loss function for Deep learning-based models have been dominant in log
both training and fine-tuning phases, i.e., using cosine soft- anomaly detection. DeepLog [4] first utilized One-Hot encoding
max with an adaptive rescaling factor to update the feature to vectorize the templates during log representation and converts
extractor during pre-training to ensure representational dis- the log sequences into a sparse matrix that contains no semantic
criminability, and utilizing appropriate negative margins during information. Noting the semantic information hidden in the log
fine-tuning to ensure generalization to the novel samples; (ii) templates, LogAnomaly [5] then modeled log detection as a
furthermore, we design a mask-based interactive temporal con- natural language sequence prediction problem by introducing
volutional network (MITNet) for extracting temporal features quantitive vectors and the word2vec algorithm. The LogRoof log samples while effectively mitigating noise. Compared bust [6] combined TF-IDF with FastText to counteract evolutionto the state-of-the-art (SOTA) log anomaly detection meth- ary and parsing noise and introduced an attention mechanism in
ods [4], [5], [6], [13], [8], [9], [2], [11] proposed in recent Bi-LSTM to capture contextual information in log sequences
years, our approach achieves better performance on classifica- based on the supervised learning framework. LightLog [7]
tion and generalizability in the presence of scarce annotated significantly reduced floating-point computation and detection
samples. time by introducing semantic vector dimensionality reduction
 The main contributions of this paper are summarized as and designing a lightweight TCN network. PLELog [8], which
follows: is based on semi-supervised learning, incorporated knowledge
 r We proposed a few-shot log anomaly detection method of historical anomalies through probabilistic label estimation
 based on the fine-tuning framework for overcoming the and designed an attention-based GRU neural network to detect
 reliance of existing methods on large-scale supervision. anomalies. LogTransfer [9] used the similarity of logs between
 With sufficient prior knowledge of the base classes from different systems and applied transfer learning to transfer the
 the source system, the novel classes in the target system knowledge of anomalies from one software system to another.
 can be classified using a limited number of samples. MetaLog [2] combines globally consistent semantic embedr We designed a novel adversarial margin cosine softmax ding modules and meta-learning methods to improve the genloss function that balances the transferability and distin- eralization ability of cross-system anomaly detection models.
 guishability of log samples during both the training and Log-MatchNet [11] extracts the features of log vectors using
 fine-tuning phases. Bert’s model and achieves anomaly detection by calculating
 r We introduce a masked interactive temporal network the distances between test samples and positive and negative
 as a backbone for extracting temporal and semantic samples through a matching network. Le et al. [10] presented a
4972 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

unified parsing and grouping of logs, as well as a fair compari- difficult to generalize existing supervised log anomaly detection
son of sophisticated log anomaly detection methods (including approaches.
DeepLog, LogAnomaly, LogRobust, PLELog, and CNN [20])
on the same platform, pointing out that existing methods still C. Margin-Based Loss Function
face challenges such as limited labeled data, early detection,
evolving systems, and relations among log events. Margin plays a critical role for achieving adequate discrim-
 Recent research has made progress in addressing the chal- ination between feature representations, and the margin-based
lenges of early detection with limited computing power, as softmax loss function has been widely studied [29], [30], [31].
described in [7]. The out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem caused Wen et al. [32] proposed to minimize intra-class variation
by log evolution as well as parsing noise has also been tackled as much as possible while ensuring that different class features
in the research of [21] and [6] respectively. Experimental results are distinguishable. To encourage intra-class compactness and
presented in [10] demonstrated that the accuracy of unsupervised inter-class separability, Liu et al. [33] proposed a generalized
and semi-supervised models is difficult to guarantee, especially large-margin softmax (L-Softmax) to adjust the decision boundin the presence of parsing noise. The transfer methods neglected aries. In their further research [34], they proposed to impose
the issue of overfitting during cross-system fine-tuning, which discriminative constraints on the hypersphere manifold, that is,
still leads to subpar detection performance. However, given the to restrict the angular margin (A-Softmax). Deng et al. [29]
diversity of log types and the significant differences between proposed additive angular margin loss (ArcFace) to further solve
software systems, initiating detection projects in scenarios with the problem of unstable training and difficult convergence in
extremely limited labeled data and log noise remains an urgent A-Softmax, and significantly improve the discrimination power.
problem. Wang et al. [35] reformulated the softmax loss as a cosine
 loss by normalizing both features and weights to remove radial
 variations and proposed a large-margin cosine loss (LMCL) to
B. Few-Shot Learning maximize the decision margin in the angular space.
 Few-shot learning refers to the training of a model using a Contrary to the common practice in previous studies, Liu
limited number of data to achieve good generalization perfor- et al. [30] found that the positive margin would expand the intramance on new tasks or novel classes [22]. Existing few-shot class variance of the novel class. Accordingly, the appropriate
learning algorithms can be roughly categorized as either: fine- negative margin would better achieve discriminability and transtuning [23], [24], meta-learning [25], [26], and metric learn- ferability of the model in few-shot learning (Negcos). However,
ing [27], [28], [12]. simply introducing negative margins in the pre-training phase
 Fine-tuning methods follow the standard transfer learning ignores the validity of the feature representation. This research
procedure, which consists of pre-training with base classes and inspired us to rethink the discriminability and representativeness
fine-tuning with novel classes. The baseline algorithm and base- of features in few-shot learning.
line++ algorithm [23], which are widely used for performance
comparison, are both implemented based on fine-tuning. The III. METHODOLOGY
primary distinction between these two algorithms resided in
 A. Problem Definition
their loss functions, with the baseline algorithm employing the
standard softmax and the baseline++ algorithm utilizing the Conventional log anomaly detection approaches typically
cosine softmax. Meta-learning methods perform a meta-training focus on using a binary classifier to determine labels for log
on multiple subtasks constructed from the base classes during samples. When the number of annotated samples is small, the
the training phase to enable the learned model can quickly traditional useful models applied to the problem will encounter
adapt novel tasks during the test phase. MAML [25] is a typical overfitting. In the above scenario, learning deep representations
representative of meta-learning in few-shot learning, which does driven on base logs and fine-tuning the classifiers with a few
not rely on any specific model architecture. By training a model support logs of novel classes is an effective research line.
on multiple related tasks, it can quickly adapt to new tasks For a few-shot log anomaly detection task, the dataset consists
with minimal data. Metric-learning methods directly compare of a base set Dbase with sufficient labeled logs from the source
the similarities between the query samples and support classes system and a novel set Dnovel containing only a few supervisions
through one single feed-forward pass. Xie et al. [28] proposed a from the target system. In a task, base samples (source-system
deep brownian distance covariance (DeepBDC) method, which samples) can form a base set B, which can be expressed as (Bi ,
measures the difference between the joint characteristic func- YiB ), where Bi ∈ Rd , i={1, 2, ..., I}, YiB ={1, 2, ..., Y}. The
tions of embedded features and the product of their marginals to novel samples (target-system samples) can constitute a support
learn image representations for few-shot classification. set S and a query set Q. Given N classes, each of which has
 Few-shot based log anomaly detection methods are a rela- K samples of the same type (N-way K-shot), S can be further
tively novel subject. To the best of our knowledge, there are denoted as (Sj,k , Yj,k
 S
 ), where Sj,k ∈ Rd , j={1, 2, ..., N}, k={1,
almost no few-shot related studies available for comparison on 2, ..., K}, Yj,k is the corresponding label. The samples with
 S

current log anomaly detection methods, and there are no suitable labels to be verified constitute a query set. The main objective
datasets for the benchmark. Introducing few-shot learning is a of few-shot log anomaly detection is to accomplish the binary
pioneering and innovative solution in the situation where it is classification task by learning Dbase and Dnovel in steps to
TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION 4973

Fig. 2. Overview of FSLog approach, which consists of two phases: the pre-training phase to learn a feature extractor fθ () with sufficient labeled logs sequences
on base classes from source system, and the fine-tuning phase to learn a new classifier C( |Wb ) on novel classes with few labeled log samples from target system.

obtain the ultimate detection model. Firstly, the pre-training from the source system to train a MITNet model capable of
phase trains a detection backbone fθ ()(using MITNet as a extracting robust temporal features, and fix the network paramfeature extractor, parametrized by the network parameters θ) eters as a feature extractor for the next phase. In the fine-tuning
with the logs in Dbase and fixes its weights fθ () after training phase, we obtain the feature representations of the novel samples
to construct the feature representation xi . Here, ω represents a through the feature extractor and train the classifier using a
fixed parameter operation. Formally, limited number of labeled samples from the target system,
 while introducing adversarial margin to adjust the intra-class
 fθ () = ω(fθ (Dbase )) = ω(fθ (Bi ), YiB ) (1)
 and inter-class distances to eliminate the heterogeneity between
 The classifier C( |Wb ) is then fine-tuned with a few labeled different log sets.
novel samples (support set S) to distinguish the unlabeled in- Pre-training with Sufficient Labeled Data From Source Sysstances (Query set Q) from novel classes, updating the weights tem: The pre-training phase aims to train an effective back-
Wb by bone fθ () with abundant annotated log sequences from the
 base classes. Logs are semi-structured semantic data in the
 C(|Wb ) = C(WbT  ω(fθ (Dsupport ))) form of text, accompanied by noise and evolution, and require
 = C(WbT  ω(fθ (Sj,k )), Yj,k
 S
 ) (2) specific processing. Specifically, the original log messages are
 first parsed into structured templates, then sequenced based on
 For the general log anomaly detection task, the target of the session, sliding, and fixed grouping algorithms. Finally, the temclassification results is expected to match the novel log instance, plates are mapped into semantic vectors to form a log semantic
by minimizing the following loss matrix Bi containing semantic information as input to the feature
 extractor. It is worth noting that different types of logs usually
 arg min Lce (σ(WbT , ω(fθ (Sj,k )), Yj,k
 S
 ) (3) differ in syntax. Therefore, for cross-system knowledge transfer,
 it is important to evaluate the similarity of logs between the
 Where σ is used to obtain the similarity between the two
 source system and the target system. LogTransfer provides a
inputs, Lce denotes the cross-entropy loss between predictions
 cross-system log processing method that not only extracts local
and truth labels.
 contextual information but also takes into account the global
 word co-occurrence information of template sets, thus reliably
B. Cross-System Few-Shot Log Anomaly Detection Framework measuring the similarity of cross-system logs. (As this is not the
 The proposed FSLog aims to achieve cross-system log focus of this paper, details are provided in [9].) Inspired by [7],
anomaly detection by utilizing an effective feature extractor the fully convolutional network MITNet fθ () is able to extract
trained with sufficient labeled data from the source system temporal features more quickly and efficiently, compensating
and constructing a classification model with limited supervision for the slow computation of LSTM and the inability of standard
from the target system. As illustrated in Fig. 2, following the CNN to capture causality in time-series data (details are provided
standard transfer learning paradigm, the FSLog detection model in Section III.C). During pre-training, first of all, the samples
consists of two phases: pre-training and fine-tuning. In the pre- are input into the backbone to obtain their feature map xi .
training phase, we utilize sufficiently labeled base class samples Afterwards, the method utilizes the AMCS Φ1 as a loss function
4974 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

to gradually update the MITNet weights while extracting more
discriminative representations for fine-tuning (more details are
provided in Section IV.C).
 Fine-tuning with Few Supervision for Target System LAD:
With insufficient supervised log samples in the newly deployed
system, the few novel classes cannot effectively transform the
backbone during fine-tuning [36]. Thus, fine-tuning follows the
meta-learning framework, using only a limited number of novel
classes to update the classifier parameters. Similar to the pretraining process, the raw logs in the target system are also parsed,
grouped, represented, and finally transformed into log semantic
matrices based on cross-system log data processing. During
fine-tuning, the samples from the novel classes are divided into
two sets: the support set S and the query set Q. The support
set consists of a few labeled samples from the novel classes,
which are used to update the classifier parameters. The query set
consists of unlabeled test samples, which are used to evaluate the
performance of the updated model. Exactly, in the LAD field,
the classification task only involves two classes: normal and
abnormal. Therefore, we set N to 2, meaning that K samples are
selected from each of the normal and abnormal classes to form Fig. 3. The MITNet architecture contains four key components: patchpositional embedding, event masking, dilation convolution, and interaction
a support set with 2∗K samples. Then, the support set is fed convolution. For the log semantic matrix consisting of log event semantic
into the feature extractor with fixed parameters as the training vectors in temporal order, MITNet uses the following strategies for processing:
samples for the fine-tuning phase. The AMCS Φ2 Loss Function patch-positional embedding is used to keep temporal ordering; event masking
 is used to ensure robustness of the representation; dilated convolution is used to
is introduced to fuzz the inter-class variance, which significantly expand the receptive field; and interaction convolution is used to extract and fuse
improves the generalization performance of the classifier (details features from different scales. After feature extraction, MITNet flattens the 300
are provided in Section IV.C). Eventually, we use the fine-tuned × 300 log sequence into 1 × n-dimensional features for input to the downstream
 classifier.
classifier to detect the query samples and obtain the exact labels.

 Specifically, we randomly mask the hidden vectors after patch
C. Feature Extraction Backbone MITNet and position embedding along the time axis with a binary mask.
 It has been widely demonstrated that temporal relations, Since each patch covers multiple log events, masking the patches
semantic relations, and parsing noise between logs. Therefore, is equivalent to removing some of the information, which motiwe develop the MITNet feature extractor for log data and intro- vates the feature extractor to ensure robust feature extraction in
duce it into a fine-tuning-based few-shot learning framework the face of missing information (e.g., incorrect parsing).
to extract robust temporal semantic representations. As shown Dilated Convolution: To obtain long and effective memories,
in Fig. 3, MITNet consists of four main parts: patch-positional standard CNN typically require a deep network and a large filter.
embedding, time masking, dilated convolution, and interactive However, dilated convolution offers an alternative approach that
convolution. Among them, the patch-positional embedding and involves the inclusion of a dilation rate d, i.e., interval sampling
interactive convolution blocks are a continuation of of the input during convolution. As the depth of the network
TSLANet [37], while the event masking and dilated increases, the receptive field size expands exponentially. Thus,
convolution [38] are enhancement modules that we introduce as shown in the figure, the 2-layer dilation convolution that we
for log data. The specific implementation of MITNet is as introduce enables MITNet to obtain long temporal dependenfollows: cies.
 Patch-Positional Embedding: To preserve the temporal de- Interactive convolution: consists of two parallel 1D convopendencies between log events, we employ a positional embed- lutional layers that use different-sized kernels to interact with
ding method. Given an input log time series sample, we first local features and remote dependencies. Specifically, the first
divide it into M patches of length |p| ( is rounded down) convolutional layer uses a smaller convolutional kernel (e.g.,
using convolution and map each patch to another embedding Kernel=1) to capture fine-grained local patterns in the data. The
vector. Then, the positional embedding is summed with each second convolutional layer, on the other hand, uses a larger conpatch to preserve its temporal order. volutional kernel (e.g., Kernel=3) to recognize long-duration
 Event Masking: first, unlike the continuous values of a stan- dependencies. These two features are activated by GELU, fused
dard time series, log samples are discrete values composed of log by multiplication and addition operations, and fed into additional
events in chronological order. Second, log noise is mainly caused convolutional layers for feature extraction and interactive fusion
by log incorrect parsing, so denoising methods for frequency across different scales.
components become infeasible. Inspired by [39], we adopt a Overall, compared with the following TSLANet [37] aprandomized masking patch approach to generate robust features. proach, MITNet addresses the problem of log discrete events
TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION 4975

and parsing noise by adopting a random event masking strategy performance, while adding an appropriate negative margin could
to simulate parsing anomalous scenarios, forcing the model to achieve a better tradeoff between the discriminability and translearn robust feature representations, effectively solving the inter- ferability. Hence, combining LMCL, the Negcos breaks with the
ference of log noise; second, MITNet introduces a double-layer inherent understanding that the margin can only be restricted to
dilated convolution that exponentially expands the filter field a positive integer by redefining the softmax loss with margin
with lower computation to capturing long term dependencies. (m<0) as follows:
These two improvements enhance the performance in terms of
robustness and model efficiency, respectively.
 ϕ1 = β · σ xi , WyTi − m (6)
 IV. ADVERSARIAL MARGIN COSINE SOFTMAX LOSS
 In this section, we begin with a review and standardization of ⎛ ⎞
existing softmax-based loss functions. Then, we analyze the differences between the proposed function and existing functions. ⎜ e ϕ1 ⎟
 Li = − log ⎜
 ⎝  ⎟ (7)
Finally, we elaborate on the proposed loss function AMCS. βσ (xi ,WjT ) ⎠
 e ϕ1 + e
 j=1,j=yi
A. Softmax Loss Function Revisited
 Where σ denotes the similarity function between two input
 We denote i-th input samples as zi and its corresponding vectors and can be either the inner product or the cosine. β delabel as yi . Combined with feature extractor fθ (), the feature notes the temperature parameter [40] which could help to apply
representations of deep networks can be indicated as xi = the appropriate concentrated level around the largest scores and
fθ (zi ), xi ∈ Rd . Based on the problem definition in Section avoids models falling into local optimum solutions.
III-A, we provided a unified and standardized explanation of
Softmax, LMCL [35], and Negcos [30].
 B. Analysis of AMCS
 Softmax The most widely used classification loss function,
standard softmax loss, can be formulated as follows: Few-shot learning can solve the problem of supervision
 ⎛ ⎞ deficits, but the implicit contradiction between the base class
 T
 Wb,y  xi cos(θyi )
 e i and the novel class is ignored, i.e., there is feature heterogene-
 Li = − log ⎝  W T  x cos(θ ) ⎠ (4) ity between different log sets. Specifically, there are not only
 j e b,j i j

 similarities but also distributional differences between the base
where weight vector WyTi is the yi -th column of W, b is a bias log samples of the source system and the novel log samples
term (for simplicity, it will be omitted next). The inner product of the target system. Similarities between the base and novel
between WjT and xi can be expressed as ||WjT || ||xi || cos(θyi ), log samples may exist due to the presence of common system
 components, standardized APIs, and shared libraries. In conwhere θj is the angle between the vector WjT and xi .
 trast, changes in system functionality, configurations, and user
 LMCL: However, the standard softmax loss function does not
 interaction behaviors lead to differences in log sequence patterns
explicitly encourage intra-class compactness and inter-class sepbetween base and novel samples. Therefore, the model trained on
arability, which results in degeneration for classification perforthe base classes gains outstanding feature discrimination ability
mance under large intra-class variations. LMCL is proposed to
 and instead fails to fit the novel classes well.
increase intra-class similarity and inter-class diversity. To elim-
 As mentioned in Negcos, when implementing few-shot
inate radial variation, the method performs L2 -normalization of
 learning using LMCL, the intra-class variance on the base class
the feature and weight vectors. Additionally, a decision margin
 decreases and the model becomes more distinguishable on the
is generated by introducing a positive number m (m>0), which
 base class as the positive margins increase during training.
makes the classification more rigorous. Since replacing the inner
 However, the dissimilarity between the base class and the new
product by the cosine similarity between two feature vectors
 class of samples instead leads to an increase in the intra-class
leads to better performance, this means that the norm of xi 
 variance of the novel class. Based on the log samples from
does not contribute to the scoring function, the method fixes the
 different systems, we also verified this phenomenon. This is
normalized WjT  to 1 and redefines xi  to s, respectively.
 because as the positive margins increase, the model focuses more
Therefore, the altered loss function reinforces the discriminaon correctly classifying existing categories, but lacks sufficient
tion of learned features by encouraging an extra margin in the
 learning and generalization ability for novel categories. In
decision. Formally, the general formulation of LMCL is defined
 addition, the increase in positive margins can also lead to
as
 ⎛ ⎞ overfitting of the model, further affecting the classification
 performance of novel categories. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 4,
 ⎜ es(cos(θyi )−m) ⎟
 Li = − log ⎝ s(cos(θ )−m)  scos(θ ) ⎠ (5) the ideology of Negcos is to weaken the distinguishability of the
 e yi
 + e j
 model on the base class samples by adding appropriate negative
 j=yi
 margins in the pre-training phase to avoid overfitting for better
 Negcos: Nevertheless, when LMCL is used for few-shot transferability. However, using a negative margin in the training
classifications, adding a positive margin instead can hurt the process does not achieve separability between classes of
4976 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 target domain, a feature extractor freezing strategy is used and a
 negative Margin mechanism for label scarcity is introduced. This
 mechanism relaxes the decision boundary from strict inequality
 cos(θyi ) ≥ cos(θj + m) to allow the target domain samples and
 the source domain to generate controlled overlap in the boundary
 region, thus effectively mitigating the inter-domain distribution
 gap Ps − PT H .

 C. Adversarial Margin Cosine Softmax Loss
 In this subsection, we give specific AMCS loss function implementation details. In AMCS, we introduce a negative margin
 in stages to counteract the overfitting of the model, i.e., adjusting
 the margin is incorporated into the fine-tuning process of the
Fig. 4. Decision boundaries of different loss functions under binary classification. (a) margin=0 (e.g., standard Softmax) lacks generalization in few-shot
 classifier. Since the work we followed (i.e., Negcos) introduces
scenarios; (b) margin>0 (e.g., LMCL) increases inter-class separation but may the training strategy of temperature parameters [40] when imcause overfitting; (c) margin<0 (e.g., NegCos) applies a negative margin during plementing margin-based few-shot learning, it effectively helps
pretraining, which weakens feature discriminability for base model; (d) the
proposed method uses margin=0 during pretraining (left) to learn clear and
 to apply appropriate concentration levels around the maximum
discriminative boundaries from source system data, and introduces a small score, providing more options for parameter optimization during
negative margin (margin<0) during fine-tuning (right) to blur boundaries and training. Inspired by Negcos, we further introduce two temperaimprove generalization to novel classes in the target system.
 ture parameters, g1 and g2 , to achieve optimization during model
 training. For a uniform description, we still use zi for i-th input
 log samples and xi for the corresponding feature representation,
 where zi ∈ {Bi , Sj,k }, the remaining cosine similarity is
samples and obtain distinguishable feature representations [35].
Consequently, Negcos faces challenges in effectively learning WyT fθ (zi )
prior knowledge from the base class. Log sequence samples σ(WyTi , xi ) = i

  WyT 2 fθ (zi )2
 i
exhibit complex temporal and semantic relationships with one
another, making it difficult for feature extractors with limited WyT xi
distinguishability to capture anomalous log patterns accurately. = i
 = cos(θyi ) (8)
  WyT 2 xi 2
 i
 To resolve the contradiction between generalization and distinguishability in Negcos, our approach focuses on achieving In the training phase, we use cosine softmax with parameter
distinguishable but not overfitted feature extractors using suf- scalar to implement the feature extractor, decoupling the direcficient base class samples in the pre-training phase and gen- tion and length of the vectors. As described in IV-B, the margin
eralizing the classifier using limited labels from novel classes of this stage is fixed to 0 to ensure effective feature extraction
in the fine-tuning phase. Exactly, by following this approach, and avoid overfitting. Additionally, we add a learnable rescaling
the feature extractor learns sufficient prior knowledge from the factor g1 [23] as an adaptive temperature parameter for training
base class while using the classifier to combat the distributional (this is the first time that g1 has been introduced in a margindifferences between the new class and the base class. As shown based loss function). Unlike the fixed temperature parameter
in Fig. 4, different from the single-stage softmax-based loss in Negcos, our strategy can provide adaptive control based on
function, we set the margin to 0 in the pre-training phase and the smoothness and sharpness of the probability distribution,
set the margin to negative in the fine-tuning phase. In the pre- avoiding falling into local optima and allowing the model to
training phase, since a positive margin can overfit the model and converge faster. The general loss formula in the training phase
a negative margin does not guarantee the effectiveness of feature is defined as
 ⎛ ⎞
extraction, we do not manipulate the margin to ensure that the
extractor achieves distinguishability without hindrance. In the ⎜ eg1 cos(θyi ) ⎟
 Φ1 = − log ⎝  g cos(θ ) ⎠ (9)
fine-tuning phase, we fix the parameters of the feature extractor e1 yi

 j
and use negative margins to fuzzy the boundaries of the classifier
to make the model more transferable. In the fine-tuning phase, we appropriately introduce a negative
 Theoretically, in the pre-training stage of the source domain, margin to fuzz the decision boundary of the classifier to make
minimizing the softmax cross-entropy loss function is equivalent the model better generalized to novel classes. It is worth noting
to accomplishing the dual optimization task described above, that log samples are time series data consisting of log events.
expanding both the inter-class distance and compressing the Consequently, anomalous samples usually overlap with normal
intra-class distribution. Thus, according to Fisher principle, the samples in the feature space, which makes samples that are
loss function of the first stage trains a representation model on close to the classification boundary sharing high similarity and
the source domain that satisfies the following condition, i.e., indistinguishable from each other. To solve the problem, we
maxfθ (.) (SB /SW ), where SB stands for inter-class variance use a very small temperature parameter g2 at the fine-tuning
and SW for intra-class variance. In the fine-tuning stage of the process to make the distribution sharper, giving difficult negative
TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION 4977

 TABLE I
 DESCRIPTION OF LOG DATASETS USED IN THE EXPERIMENTS

samples a larger gradient to separate from positive samples. As a TABLE II
 RESULTS OF THE EXISTING UNSUPERVISED AND SEMI-SUPERVISED LAD
consequence, the classifier can better capture the heterogeneity APPROACHES
between the base class and the novel class and interfere with
the features of the novel instances in an adversarial manner. The
general loss formula for the fine-tuning phase is defined as
 ⎛ ⎞
 e g2 (cos(θyi )−m)
 1
 ⎜ ⎟
 Φ2 = − log ⎜
 ⎝ 
 ⎟(10)
 ⎠
 e
 1
 g2  ( cos(θ yi )−m ) + e
 1
 g 2(cos(θ j ))
 j=1,j=yi

 Combining (9) (10), the formula (11) implements the margin
equilibrium for base class transferability and novel class discriminability.
 Φ1 , zi ∈ fθ (B)
 Li,p = (11)
 Φ2 , zi ∈ fθ (S)

 V. EXPERIMENT
 In our study, we evaluate our approach by answering the
following research questions.
 RQ1: How does the FSLog method perform in terms of
effectiveness in label scarcity scenarios?
 The BGL Dataset [42] consists of 4,747,963 logs generated
 RQ2: How does the FSLog method perform in terms of
advancement? by a supercomputing system Blue-Gene/L. As shown in Table I,
 we use the session window and sliding window to divide the log
 RQ3: How robust does the FSLog method perform in terms
of noise scenarios? sequence respectively and label the log sequence as abnormal
 RQ4: How sensitive is the FSLog method to hyperparameters? if there are any faulty logs in the sequence. When using the
 session window, we construct 69,252 log sequences based on
 RQ5: How does each component contribute to FSLog?
 its node ID, of which 31,429(45.4%) log sequences are labeled
 as malfunctions. When using the sliding window, we set the
A. Experimental Setup size of the sliding window to 300 and the step size to 100, a
 1) Datasets: In the field of log anomaly detection, the widely total of 6,007(12.7%) abnormal sequences were obtained by this
used datasets include various sources. However, there is no method.
suitable public dataset available for few-shot log anomaly de- The thunderbird dataset (TBird): [42] consists of more than
tection. To evaluate the proposed method, we consider the raw 200 million logs collected from a Thunderbird supercomputer
log messages contained in HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird as at Sandia National Labs (SNL). As presented in Table I, we
the data sources, and then reconstruct the few-shot datasets as set the window size to 300 and the step size to 100, use the
HDFS-FS-Session (HF), BGL-FS-Session (BS), BGL-FS-Time sliding window to divide the logs, and obtain 41,780 anomalous
(BT), and TBird-FS-Time (TB). The details of each raw dataset sequences (41.9%).
are as follows: The reconstruction of the dataset first requires log processing.
 The HDFS dataset [15] consists of 11,175,629 logs produced The use of Spell [41] to parse the logs was in response to the high
from more than 200 Amazon EC2 nodes. These log messages susceptibility of the unsupervised learning approach to noise as
form different log samples according to their block ID, includ- mentioned in Section II-A. We follow up the work in [6], [7],
ing 575,059 normal log sequences and 16,838 abnormal log hence the dimension d of the semantic vectors is 300, and the
sequences (2.8%). window size w is also 300. After parsing, grouping, and semantic
4978 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

representation, the length of each log sequence d∗w is 300 ∗ 300 Linux release 7.9, CUDA 11.7, cuDNN 7.6.5, Python 3.7.12,
(Note that d=w is not a strict requirement, and the introduced and PyTorch 1.7.0. All of the conducted experiments took about
MITNet can effectively process input dimensions and unequal two months to complete, using two physical GPUs.
input lengths).
 Next, according to the specific conditions of different data B. RQ1: Comparison With Different Log Anomaly Detection
sources, the four few-shot datasets HF, BS, BT, and TB were Approaches
constructed. Every few-shot dataset contains normal and abnor- This section compares the proposed few-shot detection
mal sequences. For each type of set, we chronologically selected method with the existing unsupervised and semi-supervised
2,000 samples as the data source to construct few-shot query baseline methods DeepLog, LogAnomaly and PLELog in
sets for testing. Each detection task was defined as a few-shot Table II, as well as the supervised and transfer learning basebinary classification task to distinguish between normal samples line methods LogTransfer, NeuralLog, LogRobust, LogGroup,
and abnormal samples from the same dataset, i.e., N in N-way Log-MatchNet and MetaLog in Fig. 5. Except for the methods
K-shot is 2. proposed in this paper, none of the other considered approaches
 Experiments are conducted on four few-shot datasets sepa- are the few-shot detection ones. Please note that to fairly simulate
rately. For HF and BS, they contain two types of log sequences the scarce scenario of anomalous samples, in the conducted
that are grouped by session, respectively. We utilize BS as the experiments, the normal samples of the novel sets available
data source for the base set and the remaining one as the data for each unsupervised and semi-supervised learning method are
source for the novel set. Conversely, predictions for BS using sufficient, while the samples for the supervised and transfer
HS as the base class also hold. Correspondingly, BT and TB can methods adhered to the N-way K-shot limitation and we rotate
be used as base sets for each other. Hence, there are four combi- the training and testing types of samples. Taking Fig. 5 as an
nations, providing four sets of experiments. A sufficient number example, the first experiment (Test on HF) uses the samples of
of training and testing tasks are constructed for experiments. the BS dataset as base classes for pre-training, and the samples
The model has to learn from the K (K=5, 20) samples using of the HF dataset as novel classes for fine-tuning and testing.
chronological selection, performing the real few-shot detection Since the feature extractor was trained on a large number of
of normal and abnormal log sequences. BS samples, the labeled samples in the HF dataset represent the
 2) Evaluation Metrics: To measure the effectiveness of mod- support set and are only used to fine-tune the classifier using a
els in anomaly detection, we use Precision (PRE), Recall (REC), limited number of K (K=5 or 20, i.e., 2-way 5-shot or 2-way
False Positive Rate (FPR), and F1 score (F1) as detection 20-shot) samples.
metrics. Among them, precision is the proportion of all log When K=5, the FSLog achieves the best accuracy among the
sequences identified as anomalous that are correctly identified five methods, having an averaged F1 of 96.7 percentage points
as anomalous. Precision = T PT+F P
 P Recall is the proportion (abbreviated as pp hereafter) on the BS dataset, 89.1 pp on the
of all log sequences that are correctly identified as anomalous. BT dataset, 76.6 pp on the HF and 77.5 pp on the TB dataset as
Recall = T PT+FP
 N FPR is the proportion of misclassified normal illustrated in Fig. 5. As shown in Table II, DeepLog, PLELog,
samples to all normal log sequences. FPR = T NF+F P
 P F1 score and LogAnomaly show significant advantages on the HF and BS
is the summed average of precision and Recall. F1 score = datasets and even achieve an F1 of over 99.0 pp on the BS dataset
2∗P recision∗Recall
 P recision+Recall with a false alarm rate of less than 0.5 pp. However, on the other
 TP: is the number of abnormal samples correctly detected as two datasets based on chronological selection, these methods
abnormal. FN is the number of abnormal samples that are not fail to achieve effective detection. This demonstrates that unsudetected by the model. TN is the number of normal samples that pervised and semi-supervised learning methods still cannot be
are correctly detected as normal samples. FP is the number of applied in to newly deployed software systems. The detection
normal samples wrongly identified as abnormal. performance of the metric-based few-shot learning method Log-
 3) Implementations and Environments: In our experiments, MatchNet, while higher than supervised and transfer learning
we process the log data and conduct log-based anomaly detec- methods, is lower than that of FSLog, and even slightly lower
tion as follows: we adopt the implementations of log parsing than that of meta-learning methods in most scenarios.
provided by open source [10] and log representation based on When K=20, the FSLog has significantly improved, having
FastText. We use SGD as the optimizer, set the learning rate an averaged F1 of 96.9 pp on the BS dataset, 92.8 pp on
to 0.01, the momentum of 0.9 for 100 iterations in fine-tuning, the BT dataset, 86.1 pp on the HF dataset, and 80.3 pp on
weight_decay to 0.0005, set the number of epochs to 50. Fur- the TB-FS dataset as illustrated in Fig. 5. Even compared to
thermore, the classifiers being compared are all implemented unsupervised and semi-supervised learning models trained on
using the scikit-learn library. We set neighbors = 5 for KNN, sufficient labels as shown in II, our method still has an absolute
kernel to linear in SVM, and tuned C in the interval [0,1], and advantage. Obviously, the transfer and supervised methods used
other classifier hyperparameters as default. for comparison still suffer from overfitting. This indicates that
 To complete the testing of the method, the experiments are existing methods are still powerless for application scenarios
performed using the following hardware and software platforms: such as cross-system cold starts, even with a slight increase
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5218 CPU @ 2.30 GHz, CPU cores 16, in supervision. Moreover, despite outperforming other methods
256 GB RAM, NVIDIA Tesla V100-PCIE-32 GB∗2, CentOS in terms of detection performance, FSLog still reaches a 20%
TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION 4979

Fig. 5. Comparison with the existing supervised LAD approaches.

 TABLE III and is more suitable for the cold start phase of the system with
 DETECTION EFFICIENCY OF EXISTING LAD METHODS
 limited labels and less demanding requirements on detection
 efficiency.

 C. RQ2: Comparison With the State-of-The-Art Few-Shot
 Learning Approaches
 Table IV compares FSLog and current few-shot classification
 methods on four datasets. According to novel classes on HF
 dataset, for the 5-shot task, FSLog achieved the best detection
 results on all three evaluation metrics. On the comprehensive
 evaluation criterion F1, FSLog outperforms RFS, which is also
false alarm rate on TB, hindering the online deployment of based on fine-tuning, by 6.6 pp, even exceeding the baseline
the detection model. However, our approach is still effective by 21.5 pp. With the increase of labeled samples in the support
in coping with the cold-start phase where samples are scarce. set, the detection rate of FSLog is further improved. We achieve
The proposed few-shot approach provides a feasible solution to 86.0/86.3/86.1 pp for 20-shot tasks on each of the three evaluathis challenge of cross-system detection. tion criteria, outperforming R2D2 85.4/86.0/85.7 pp (based on
 In addition, Table III demonstrates the significant differences meta-learning, the second-best result). Several few-shot learning
between the models in terms of inference time, floating point methods based on metric learning have not achieved impressive
operations (FLOPs), and number of parameters (Params). In results.
terms of inference time, LogRobust has a clear advantage, From BS dataset, our methods are high-ranking across the
being almost 760 times faster than the slowest Log-MatchNet. board. Compared to RENet (based on metric learning), the gains
The supervised inference framework makes LogRobust highly of FSLog are 0.4 pp and 0.2 pp on F1 for the 5-shot/20-shot
efficient, while the matching network-based inference model task, respectively. Using HF as the base set for the prediction of
leads to high computational consumption and low computational BGL-FS-Session, FSLog outperforms even a detection model
efficiency of Log-MatchNet. Although the inference speed of trained with sufficient labeled samples. Furthermore, all four
FSLog is slower than that of methods such as LogRobust, it fine-tuning-based methods exceed 90 pp. The results for BT
has the lowest FLOPs (5.9 M) and parametric count (105.7 K), dataset are shown in Table IV. For the 5-shot task, FSLog results
which are only 0.02% and 0.12% of that of Log-MatchNet, and are the best. But for the 20-shot task, RFS is very competitive
it can be adapted to most of the practical application scenarios. and is much better than the other methods except R2D2 and
Moreover, it has obvious advantages in detection performance ours. We are slightly inferior to RFS, being only 0.3 pp below
4980 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE IV
 EXPERIMENT RESULTS OF FEW-SHOT LEARNING APPROACHES ON DIFFERENT FEW-SHOT DATASETS

it on the F1. From TB dataset, the baseline is superior among AEL, Drain, Brain) to demonstrate FSLog performance under
our competitors. However, for the 20-shot task, our REC, FPR, different parsing noise. Additionally, to simulate the worst-case
and F1 still reached 80.7pp, 0.7pp, and 80.3pp respectively. scenario where parsed logs completely lose semantic informa-
This does not prevent our method from having the best overall tion, we randomly replace a certain percentage of events in the
detection performance. log sequence samples with zero vectors (which lose sample
 In summary, it can be observed that the fine-tuning-based information to varying degrees) to evaluate the sensitivity of
few-shot learning approaches are more suitable for log anomaly the detection model to missing noise.
detection, which is also the basis for our improvement direction. As illustrated in Fig. 6, FSLog exhibits extremely high ro-
These comparisons demonstrate that our models have stronger bustness on all datasets. The detection performance of FSLog
domain transfer capability. remains stable in the log data generated by different parsers. In
 particular, the F1 of FSLog is basically the same for the three log
D. RQ3: Robustness Analysis data parsed by Spell, Drain, and Brain. On the log data parsed
 To verify the robustness of FSLog to parsing noise, we conduct by AEL, the detection performance of FSLog is slightly lower
experiments using different log parsers and zero-vector injec- than the other three parsers, but the performance drop is not
tion. First, following [10], we employ multiple log parsers (Spell, significant.
TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION 4981

Fig. 6. Impact of Injection Noise and Parsing Noise on Detection Performance.

 In the noise-injected scenario, when K=5 and the noise ratio classifiers, namely KNN, SVM, GaussianNB, and AdaBoost, for
is increased from 0% to 10%, the F1 scores of FSLog on the anomaly detection. The experimental results depicted in Fig. 7
HF, BS, BT, and TB datasets decrease by 1.9 pp, 1.1 pp, 2.6 provide compelling evidence that the classifier when paired with
pp, and 3.2 pp, respectively. When K = 20 and the noise ratio AMCS, attains superior performance. Particularly, when K=5,
is similarly increased from 0% to 10%, the F1 score of FSLog our classifier outperforms the other classifiers by a significant
decreases by 1.4 pp, 1.2 pp, 3.3 pp, and 3.2 pp. It is worth noting margin on the BT dataset, demonstrating the capability to apthat for the HF and BS datasets, the detection performance of proach a commendable 90.0pp in the comprehensive evaluation
FSLog is almost unaffected by noise. For the BT and TB datasets, metric F1, while the F1 of KNN, SVM, GaussianNB, and
although the detection performance slightly decreases when AdaBoost are 75.9 pp, 64.6 pp, 73.3 pp and 75.2 pp respectively,
the noise reaches 10%, FSLog still maintains a good detection which are more than 15 pp lower than the proposed classifiers.
performance compared to the existing methods shown in Fig. On the other three datasets, our classifier consistently maintains
5, which indicates that FSLog has excellent robustness to deal its advantage and achieves an FPR of 3.3 pp on the BS dataset.
with log noise effectively. When K=20, a noteworthy improvement in performance is
 observed across all classifiers.
 As shown in Fig. 8, for different window sizes, on the BT
E. RQ4: Comparison With Different Classifiers and Window dataset, the detection performance of FSLog remains basically
Size the same when w is 300, 100, and 50, respectively. When w = 20,
 In this study, the LAD framework is built upon a fine-tuned the F1 of FSLog decreases by 1 pp and 0.8 pp in the scenarios
implementation of classifiers based on the Multilayer Percep- with K = 5 and K = 20, respectively. on the TB dataset, the
tron (MLP) structure. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the performance of FSLog is similar at w = 300 and w = 20, but
classifier, a comparative analysis is conducted using different the performance shows a clear decrease at w = 100 and w =
classifiers in addition to those employed in this study. The exper- 50. In particular, when K = 5 and w = 50, the F1 of FSLog
imental results are elaborated in Fig. 7. For ease of comparison, decreases by 3 pp compared to w = 300, which shows that
we use the Baseline++ model that applies ResNet18 as ConvNet FSLog is sensitive to the time window size. However, compared
to feature extraction and use cosine similarity as the metric. In with the existing methods in Table II and Fig. 5, FSLog maintains
addition, the size of the sliding window affects the detection leading performance under different windows.
performance. To better investigate the effect of window size on
FSLog, we use window size as a hyperparameter and test the
 F. RQ5: Ablation Studies
sensitivity of FSLog under four different window sizes: 300,
100, 50, and 20. To investigate the effects of core components in FSLog,
 To assess the overall performance of the classifiers, we con- we conduct extensive ablation studies either in the absence of
duct feature extraction using the MITNet with fixed parame- each component or by replacing them with others and compare
ters. The extracted features are then inputted into five different the results in the 5-shot and 20-shot settings. In Table V, the
4982 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 7. Comparison with different classifiers.

Fig. 8. Comparison with different window size.

√
 indicates that each component is utilized in the experiments, by a staged margin. However, the TB dataset is not learned by
while the ✗indicates that the component is not employed. the model using the Negcos loss, and accordingly, the detection
 As log sequences contain both temporal and semantic infor- results are very poor, even similar to random guessing. This
mation, we introduce MITNet with dilated and denosing con- further indicates that only fuzzing the decision boundary of the
volutional network to capture the relatedness between logs. As classifier during fine-tuning is more suitable for heterogeneous
shown in Table V, compared to ResNet18, when using MITNet and diverse log data.
as the feature extractor, although the detection performance is Notably, in the experimental results in Table V, the combislightly lower for the TB dataset, there is an improvement on nation of AMCS and MITNet achieved the best performance
the other three few-shot datasets. Especially on the BS dataset, in five out of the eight test scenarios (4 datasets × K = 5/20).
the highest F1 has achieved 96.8 pp (for 5-shot) and 97.0 pp (for However, in the remaining three scenarios, MITNet+ArcFace
20-shot). and ConvNet+AMCS slightly outperform FSLog, respectively.
 For each fine-tuning task of FSLog based on the meta-learning The possible reasons are: the target domain anomaly samples
framework, we need to build and train a new classifier that in- of the HF dataset contain relatively simple log types, and the
troduces new parameters. In Table V, we quantify the classifiers classification strategy of ArcFace by increasing the interclass
constructed with several different loss functions. The proposed distance may be more adapted to this kind of scenario; AMCS
AMCS loss function outperforms all baseline methods (e.g., may slightly blur the classification boundary, leading to a slight
Cosine, LMCL, Arcface, and Negcos) in the detection accuracy underperformance of FSLog’s detection performance. However,
TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION 4983

 TABLE V
 RESULTS OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS WITH FSLOG

when the K value was increased to 20, FSLog countered the meta-learning (e.g., MetaLog and MAML) relies on task gen-
MITNet+ArcFace combination. In addition, when AMCS and eralization capabilities and needs to simulate multidomain task
MITNet are used as a single component, the detection per- distributions during the training phase, but cross-domain differformance is significantly improved either in combination with ences in logs are difficult to cover by limited meta-tasks. Second,
existing modules such as ConvNet or ArcFace, which potentially fine-tuning-based few-shot learning adjusts only the lightweight
demonstrates the generalization of the proposed components. classifiers by freezing the backbone network parameters without
 having to relearn the global features, whereas meta-learning
 VI. DISCUSSION requires adjusting all the parameters in the stage of adapting
 to the target-domain data, which is susceptible to log noise.
A. Why Does FSLog Work? Our study demonstrates the effectiveness of FSLog in cross-
 There are two main reasons why FSLog outperforms state- system log anomaly detection, though limitations exist. First,
of-the-art methods in cross-system log anomaly detection. First, when high log parsing error rates cause significant information
recognizing that fuzzy classification boundaries are beneficial loss, the MITNet event masking mechanism struggles to extract
for the generalization of novel system log data, we design an features from severely noisy sequences. Second, minimal seinnovative adversarial margin cosine loss function to enhance the mantic overlap between target and source system logs hinders
discriminative and generalization performance of the detection knowledge transfer from source to target systems. Furthermore,
model. Second, noting that existing feature extractors are not FSLog is more suitable for cold-start phases with scarce target
robust enough and difficult to represent temporal relationships samples, while its accuracy remains insufficient for large-scale
when facing log data effectively, we design a novel feature data. Given unsupervised models inherent limitations in preciextraction module that can simultaneously achieve temporal sion and robustness, O&M personnel can use FSLog to leverage
relationship extraction, anti-noise interference, receptive field source system prior knowledge for initial training with minimal
expansion, and multi-scale feature fusion. target system labeled data.
 Notably, meta-learning methods have also been used to address the generalizability problem of log anomaly detection, but
 B. Threats to Validity.
we are motivated to use fine-tuning-based few-shot learning and
achieve leading detection performance for the following reasons: Data quality: Although the HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird
First, fine-tuning-based few-shot learning utilizes sufficient data datasets have been widely used and publicly available in past
from the source domain to adequately learn generalized log studies, they all originate from before 2007 and may not cover
patterns and establish strong representation ability. However, the latest features and patterns of current syslogs. Therefore,
4984 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

conclusions relying on these datasets may be biased and their [8] L. Yang et al., “Semi-supervised log-based anomaly detection via probageneral applicability in real-world environments cannot be fully bilistic label estimation,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.,
 2021, pp. 1448–1460.
guaranteed. [9] R. Chen et al., “LogTransfer: Cross-system log anomaly detection for
 Tool comparison: We implemented log anomaly detec- software systems with transfer learning,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int. Symp.
tion methods including DeepLog, LogAnomaly, PLELog and Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 37–47.
 [10] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection with deep learn-
LogRobust based on literature [10]. For LogTransfer and Neu- ing: How far are we?,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022,
ralLog, we used their public source code for implementation. pp. 1356–1367, doi: 10.1145/3510003.3510155.
For LogGroup, MetaLog, and Log-MatchNet, we reproduced [11] C. Han, B. Guan, T. Li, D. Kang, J. Qin, and Y. Wu, “Few-shot log
 anomaly detection based on matching networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
them based on the original papers and confirmed that the results Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2909–2925, Jun. 2024.
are highly consistent with the reported values. Meanwhile, the [12] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
few-shot learning method uses the open source code from the detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 Secur., vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
literature [22]. However, there may be errors or inconsistencies [13] J. Li, H. He, S. Chen, D. Jin, and J. Yang, “LogGraph: Log event graph
in the conversion process, which could potentially affect the learning aided robust fine-grained anomaly diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Defairness and accuracy of the tool comparisons. pendable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1876–1889, Jul./Aug., 2024.
 [14] J.-G. Lou, Q. Fu, S. Yang, Y. Xu, and J. Li, “Mining invariants from console
 logs for system problem detection,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. USENIX Annu.
 Tech. Conf., 2010, pp. 1–14.
 VII. CONCLUSION [15] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Detecting
 large-scale system problems by mining console logs,” in Proc. ACM
 In this paper, we have presented FSLog, a method based on the SIGOPS 22nd Symp. Operating Syst. Princ., New York, NY, USA, 2009,
fine-tuning framework to implement cross-system few-shot log pp. 117–132.
anomaly detection. FSLog adopts cosine softmax with adaptive [16] H. Studiawan, F. Sohel, and C. Payne, “Anomaly detection in operating
 system logs with deep learning-based sentiment analysis,” IEEE Trans. Dere-scaling factors to train the feature extractor MITNet and pendable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2136–2148, Sep./Oct. 2021.
pursues the balance between feature transferability and distin- [17] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log parsguishability by introducing an adversarial margin. To evalu- ing,” in Proc. 36th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng., 2022,
 pp. 492–504.
ate FSLog, we constructed four datasets based on public data [18] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust anomaly desources. Experimental results show that our approach achieves tection and localization for interleaved unstructured logs,” IEEE Trans. Dea significant advantage in initialization scenarios with scarce pendable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2762–2780, Jul./Aug. 2023.
 [19] J. Tian, M. Li, Z. Wang, L. Chen, J. Qin, and R. Zhang, “OMLog: Online log
labels. anomaly detection for evolving system with meta-learning,” IEEE Internet
 Our research still has limitations, as compared to supervised Things J., vol. 12, no. 15, pp. 30142–30155, Aug. 2025.
learning models based on sufficient label training, few-shot mod- [20] S. Lu, X. Wei, Y. Li, and L. Wang, “Detecting anomaly in Big Data
 system logs using convolutional neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int.
els exhibit a relatively higher false positive rate. Nonetheless, the Conf. Dependable, Autonomic Secure Comput., 16th Int. Conf. Pervasive
application of FSLog in the cold start scenario can effectively Intell. Comput., 4th Int. Conf. Big Data Intell. Comput. Cyber Sci. Technol.
avoid the problems of untrainable and overfitting caused by a Congr., 2018, pp. 151–158.
 [21] W. Meng et al., “A semantic-aware representation framework for online
lack of samples compared to current methods. In our future log analysis,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw., 2020,
work, we will further explore how to achieve online deployment pp. 1–7.
of few-shot models. [22] W. Li et al., “LibFewShot: A comprehensive library for few-shot learning,”
 IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 14938–14955,
 Dec. 2023.
 [23] W.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Liu, Z. Kira, Y.-C. F. Wang, and J.-B. Huang, “A closer
 REFERENCES look at few-shot classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 2019, pp. 1–16.
 [1] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on [24] K. Zheng, H. Zhang, and W. Huang, “DiffKendall: A novel approach for
 automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv., few-shot learning with differentiable Kendall’s rank correlation,” in Proc.
 vol. 54, no. 6, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 130, doi: 10.1145/3460345. 37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.. Red Hook, NY, USA:Curran
 [2] C. Zhang, T. Jia, G. Shen, P. Zhu, and Y. Li, “MetaLog: Generalizable Associates Inc., 2024, pp. 49403–49415.
 cross-system anomaly detection from logs with meta-learning,” in Proc. [25] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast
 IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1899–1910. adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017,
 [3] J. Tian, M. Li, L. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Nie, and J. Qin, “SSDALog: pp. 1126–1135.
 Semi-supervised domain adaptation for incremental log-based anomaly [26] J. Oh, H. Yoo, C. Kim, and S. Yun, “BOIL: Towards representation change
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 6607–6619, for few-shot learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021,
 2025. pp. 1–24.
 [4] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection [27] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM learning,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook,
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., New York, NY, USA, 2017, NY, USA:Curran Associates Inc., 2017, pp. 4080–4090.
 pp. 1285–1298, doi: 10.1145/3133956.3134015. [28] J. Xie, F. Long, J. Lv, Q. Wang, and P. Li, “Joint distribution matters:
 [5] W. Meng et al., “LogAnomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and Deep Brownian distance covariance for few-shot classification,” in Proc.
 quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 7962–7971.
 Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4739–4745. [29] J. Deng, J. Guo, and S. Zafeiriou, “ArcFace: Additive angular margin loss
 [6] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log for deep face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Recognit., 2018, pp. 4685–4694.
 Foundations Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 807–817. [30] B. Liu et al., “Negative margin matters: Understanding margin in few-shot
 [7] Z. Wang, J. Tian, H. Fang, L. Chen, and J. Qin, “LightLog: A lightweight classification,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.>, 2020, pp. 438–455.
 temporal convolutional network for log anomaly detection on the edge,” [31] M. Kim, A. K. Jain, and X. Liu, “AdaFace: Quality adaptive margin for face
 Comput. Netw., vol. 203, 2022, Art. no. 108616. [Online]. Available: https: recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128621005119 2022, pp. 18729–18738.
TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION 4985

[32] Y. Wen, K. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “A discriminative feature learning [48] P. Goyal et al., “Accurate, large minibatch SGD: Training imagenet in 1
 approach for deep face recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.>, hour,” 2017, arXiv:1706.02677.
 2016, pp. 499–515. [49] K. Lee, S. Maji, A. Ravichandran, and S. Soatto, “Meta-learning with
[33] W. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Yu, and M. Yang, “Large-margin softmax loss for differentiable convex optimization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 10649–10657.
 New York, New York, USA, 2016, pp. 507–516.
[34] W. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Yu, M. Li, B. Raj, and L. Song, “SphereFace: Deep hypersphere embedding for face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 6738–6746.
[35] H. Wang et al., “CosFace: Large margin cosine loss for deep face recog- Jiyu Tian received the master’s degree in cyberspace
 nition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, security from Dalian University, Dalian, China, where
 pp. 5265–5274. he is currently working toward the PhD degree. His
[36] B. Li, B. Yang, C. Liu, F. Liu, R. Ji, and Q. Ye, “Beyond max-margin: Class current research interests include log anomaly detecmargin equilibrium for few-shot object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF tion and cyberspace security.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 7359–7368.
[37] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, and X. Li, “TSLANet: Rethinking
 transformers for time series representation learning,” in Proc. 41st Int.
 Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 12409–12428.
[38] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
 convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018.
[39] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,”
 inProc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 8980–8987.
[40] F. Wang and H. Liu, “Understanding the behaviour of contrastive
 Mingchu Li received the doctorate degree in mathloss,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021,
 ematics from the University of Toronto, in 1998. He
 pp. 2495–2504. was with the School of Software, Tianjin University,
[41] M. Du and F. Li, “Spell: Streaming parsing of system event logs,” in Proc.
 as a full professor from 2002 to 2004, School of Soft-
 IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 859–864.
 ware Technology, Dalian University of Technology,
[42] A. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five
 as a full professor and the vice dean from 2002 to
 system logs,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. 2023. He has been with Jiangxi Normal University
 Netw., 2007, pp. 575–584.
 as a full professor since 2024. His main research
[43] Y. Tian, Y. Wang, D. Krishnan, J. B. Tenenbaum, and P. Isola, “Rethinking
 interests include theoretical computer science and
 few-shot image classification: A good embedding is all you need?,” in Proc.
 information security, trust models, and cooperative
 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Glasgow, U.K.: game theory.
 Springer-Verlag, 2020, pp. 266–282.
[44] L. Bertinetto, J. F. Henriques, P. Torr, and A. Vedaldi, “Meta-learning
 with differentiable closed-form solvers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019, pp. 1–15. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=HyxnZh0ct7 Jianyuan Gan received the BS and MS degrees in
[45] F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. Torr, and T. M. Hospedales, science from Nanchang Hangkong University, Nan-
 “Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning,” in Proc. chang, China, in 2016 and 2019, respectively. He
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 1199–1208. is currently working toward the EngD degree with
[46] R. Hou, H. Chang, B. MA, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Cross attention network the Dalian University of Technology. His research
 for few-shot classification,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, interests include traffic engineering and AI.
 pp. 4003–4014.
[47] D. Kang, H. Kwon, J. Min, and M. Cho, “Relational embedding for fewshot classification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021,
 pp. 8802–8813.