84 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

GCB-PPO2: A Hybrid Deep Reinforcement Learning
 Intrusion Detection System for Under-Represented
 Attack Categories in SDN
 Chen Jue , Tao Hongyu, Cui Meng, Peng Haidong, and Qiu Xihe

 Abstract—The centralized control plane inherent in SDN ar- the limitations on scalability and flexibility of traditional netchitecture creates critical security dependencies, where malicious works, while catalyzing transformative advancements in netexploitation of controller vulnerabilities could propagate systemic work technology [2]. However, this architectural paradigm intronetwork failures. The Intrusion Detection System (IDS) effectively counters cyber threats, and Deep Reinforcement Learning duces heightened security risks inherent in its centralized control
(DRL) can enable the IDS to dynamically adapt to the constantly mechanisms [3]. In conventional distributed networks, security
evolving attack patterns through autonomous environmental in- vulnerabilities typically exhibit localized impact, constrained
teraction and real-time policy optimization. However, the current by their decentralized topology structure [4]. Conversely, the
DRL based IDS face the limitations of minority-class detection,
 logical centralization of SDN enables various risks such as single
generalization gap, and tuning complexity. This paper propose
GCB-PPO2 (Generative Adversarial Networks CNNA-BiLSTM point of failure, protocol degradation attacks, and malicious
Proximal Policy Optimization 2), a hybrid DRL system with the logic implantation at the application layer. Each of these may
following three innovations: (1) We design a C-GAN (Conditional lead to severe damage to the availability and integrity of the
Generative Adversarial Networks) architecture to generate tar- entire network. For instance, the degradation attacks against
geted under-represented attack samples for the SDN scenario
 TLS (Transport Layer Security)/OpenFlow can force controllers
intentionally, improving the recognition accuracy of the model
for minority classes significantly. (2) We propose a PPO2-based to use insecure plain text channels, thereby eavesdropping or
DRL framework with a CNN-LSTM shared network to optimize implanting malicious rules [5]. These systemic security implidynamic policy adaptation while capturing spatio-temporal pat- cations necessitate that SDN protection constitutes a critical
terns, enhancing generalization ability to different environmental research priority [6].
dynamics. (3) We embed a Bayesian optimization as a dedicated
 Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have emerged as critical
hyper-parameter auto-tuner, systematically resolving sensitivity
bottlenecks and ensuring robustness in fluctuating environments. infrastructure for real-time network threat mitigation [7], par-
Experimental results demonstrate that GCB-PPO2 model achieves ticularly as conventional security measures like firewalls and
remarkable accuracy of 99.92% and 99.01% for binary and multi- heuristic analysis struggle to differentiate sophisticated attack
ple classification scenarios, respectively, with F1-scores exceeding patterns from legitimate traffic [8]. The integration of machine
85.91% for under-represented attack categories in InSDN dataset. learning methodologies has revolutionized this domain through
Moreover, the model proves its strong generalization capability for
maintaining over 98.65% accuracy on another dataset, while con- probabilistic modeling and statistical inference frameworks
firming its improved training efficiency for surpassing conventional trained on extensive network behavioral datasets [4]. Reprehybrid deep learning models by more than 22.27% in training time. sentative implementations include the hybrid IDS architecture
 Index Terms—Software define network, intrusion detection,
 proposed by Al-Yaseen et al., which integrates Support Vector
deep reinforcement learning, proximal policy optimization, Machine (SVM) with extreme learning machine to optimize
generative adversarial network, convolutional neural network, attack detection throughput [9]. Nevertheless, current machine
long short term memory. learning-driven IDS implementations confront two fundamental
 limitations: intrinsic feature homogeneity across evolving attack
 I. INTRODUCTION variants and suboptimal feature representation capabilities in existing algorithms, which collectively induce incomplete pattern
 OFTWARE Defined Network (SDN), characterized by its
S decoupled control plane and data plane architecture alongside logically centralized network management [1], addresses
 recognition and elevated false positive rates [10], [11].
 Deep learning demonstrates superior efficacy over traditional
 machine learning in IDS, attributable to its automated feature
 abstraction capabilities and scalable data processing efficiency
 Received 21 March 2025; revised 30 May 2025; accepted 16 June 2025. empowered by parallel computation architectures like Graph-
Date of publication 20 June 2025; date of current version 21 November 2025. ics Processing Units (GPU) [12], [13]. Our previous research
This work was supported by the Young Scientists Fund of the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62102241. Recommended for develops the CNNA-BiLSTM (Convolutional Neural Network
acceptance by Dr. Ali Kashif Bashir. (Corresponding author: Chen Jue.) with Attention-Bidirectional Long Short Term Memory) frame-
 The authors are with the Shanghai University of Engineering Science, School work, which is benchmarked on the InSDN dataset, a standardof Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai 201620, China (e-mail:
jadeschen@sues.edu.cn). ized SDN intrusion detection corpus. Experimental evaluations
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3581689 demonstrate accuracies of 99.86% and 96.66% for binary and
 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 85

multiple classifications, respectively, validating the architec- shaping mechanism through PPO2 [26], and (3) minority class
ture’s discriminative capacity [14]. Nevertheless, deep learning augmentation by C-GAN (Conditional Generative Adversarial
implementations exhibit stringent dependency on voluminous Networks) [27].
high-quality training data with balanced class distributions [15]. The main contributions and novelties of this paper are sum-
Analysis of the InSDN dataset reveals extreme class imbalance, marized as follows.
where high-volume attacks dominate, while low-frequency at- r We develop a customized C-GAN architecture to stratetacks are severely under-represented. In this paper, DoS (Denial gically augment under-represented attack categories for
of Service), DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service), and Probe the InSDN dataset. Existing C-GAN based methods foare classified as high-volume attacks, and U2R (User to Root), cus on traditional networks [28] or Autonomous Aerial
BFA (Brute Force Attack), Botnet, and Web are categorized as Vehicles [29], [30], whereas our C-GAN is tailored for
under-represented attacks. For instance, DoS attacks account SDN-specific attack patterns and addresses the unique class
for 24.90% of the total samples, whereas U2R attacks comprise imbalance in InSDN dataset. Moreover, as far as we know,
merely 0.013% of the total samples, resulting in a three-order-of- we are the first paper to apply C-GAN to InSDN dataset
magnitude disparity [16]. This skewed data distribution directly without data pollution. This approach yields augmentation
compromises the CNNA-BiLSTM model’s detection efficacy of under-represented attack instances with ratios ranging
for minority classes, particularly manifesting in complete failure from 30.80× to 288.75× for the training set, while preto identify U2R intrusion patterns during validation trials. serving the test set’s original imbalance for fair evaluation,
 Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) synergistically inte- which is helpful for improving the recognition accuracy of
grates the perceptual sophistication of deep neural network the model for minority classes significantly.
with the dynamic decision-making paradigms inherent to re- r We propose a framework which integrates CNNAinforcement learning [17], [18], thereby intrinsically mitigating BiLSTM architecture as a shared feature extractor within
inherent data dependency constraints [19], [20]. However, the the PPO2 reinforcement learning paradigm. The combirelated works on applying DRL to intrusion detection face the nation of CNN and LSTM can model spatial correlation
following critical challenges. and temporal dynamics simultaneously, reducing the risk
 r Minority-class Detection: Under-represented attack cate- of overfitting caused by a single modal feature. The shared
 gories exhibit sample scarcity, which are difficult for DRL feature extractors of PPO2 framework enable reinforcemodels to classify correctly. For instance, the true-positive ment learning strategies to directly utilize optimized spatiorate for U2R of the AESMOTE (Adaptive Enhanced Syn- temporal features to enhance the generalization ability to
 thetic Minority Oversampling Technique) model is only different environmental dynamics.
 0.07% [21], while other three DRL models only conduct r We pro-actively introduce Bayesian optimization as an
 binary classification experiments [22], [23], [24], [25]. autonomous hyper-parameter tuning module, building a
 r Generalization Gap: Existing studies have only proposed probabilistic model of the objective function and then using
 single-modal networks, including actor-critic [22], double this model to select the next most promising combination
 DQN (Deep Q Learning) [21], or deep deterministic pol- of hyper-parameters to find the optimal solution in as few
 icy gradient [23], and have evaluated their performances iterations as possible. This strategy not only eliminates
 on single datasets, including Gas Pipeline dataset [22], redundant feature processing layers to improve computa-
 NSL-KDD (Network Security Laboratory Knowledge Dis- tional efficiency, but also enhances model robustness in
 covery and Data Mining) [21], CIC-IDS2017 (Canadian dynamic network environments.
 Institute for Cybersecurity Intrusion Detection Systems r We conduct comprehensive experiments to demonstrate the
 2017) [24], [25], or self-generated dataset [23], thereby GCB-PPO2 model’s capabilities through five key aspects:
 failing to demonstrate sufficient generalization capability ablation studies confirming the individual contributions of
 across diverse network environments or attack patterns. C-GAN, PPO2, and shared network components; benchr Tuning Complexity: Conventional DRL implementations mark comparisons against traditional and state-of-the-art
 rely on static hyper-parameters, causing instability in fluc- models showing consistent accuracy improvements; crosstuating environments. For instance, the hyper-parameters domain evaluations on independent dataset verifying genin papers [21], [23] are determined through manual trial and eralization capacity,
 error combined with empirical selection, while papers [22], Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed GCB-
 [24], [25] do not mention parameter setting. PPO2 model’s triple advantages in SDN intrusion detection:
 To overcome the limitations of aforementioned related works, high classification accuracy, strong generalization ability, and
this study introduces GCB-PPO2 (Generative Adversarial Net- improved training efficiency.
works CNNA-BiLSTM Proximal Policy Optimization 2), a r High Classification Accuracy: GCB-PPO2 model obtains
novel framework to improve the detection accuracy for minority the accuracies of 99.92% and 99.01% for binary and multiclass attacks, enhance the generalization ability, and reduce the ple classifications, respectively, and elevates the F1-score
tuning complexity for SDN intrusion detection. This framework of under-represented attacks to over 85.91% for InSDN
dynamically assimilates network traffic patterns through three dataset.
innovation pathways: (1) temporal-spatial feature co-learning r Strong Generalization Ability: GCB-PPO2 model mainvia CNNA-BiLSTM hybrid architectures, (2) adaptive reward tains cross-domain effectiveness on NSL-KDD dataset,
86 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 achieving the accuracies of 99.66% and 98.65% for binary machine learning techniques together to detect SG based attacks,
 and multiple classifications, respectively. validating its efficiency on both NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15
 r Improved Training Efficiency: GCB-PPO2 model shows datasets [37]. Ahuja et al. import machine learning technique to
 22.27% faster convergence speed than conventional hybrid classify benign traffics from DDoS attacks by combining SVM
 deep learning models. with random forest. Experiments depict that the proposed model
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II classifies traffic with an accuracy of 98.8% along with a very low
concludes related works on IDS, including machine learning, false alarm rate [38].
deep learning, and DRL based methods. Our main contributions Although above mentioned works achieve certain effects in
are described in the following two sections. Sections III and IV intrusion detection, there are still limitations when applying maillustrate our proposed GCB-PPO2 model in detail, including chine learning based models. Firstly, machine learning models
phases of data augmentation and attack classification. In order often rely on artificially designed feature extractors which may
to prove the effectiveness of GCB-PPO2 model, the simulation not be able to fully cover all possible attack patterns, resultresults of two phases are depicted in Sections V and VI, respec- ing in limited detection effectiveness [39]. Secondly, machine
tively. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section VII. learning models may encounter challenges in computational
 complexity and storage requirements when faced with massive,
 II. RELATED WORKS high-dimensional network traffic data [40]. Thirdly, machine
 learning models may perform poorly at identifying unknown or
 The harm of cyber attacks to modern society should not be
 novel types of attacks as they often learn based on characteristics
underestimated. Malicious intruders can undermine industrial
 of known attack patterns [41].
control systems and trigger the shutdown of critical infrastructure. For instance, in September 2016, the Mirai botnet launched
a large-scale DDoS attack on OVH company in France, with a
peak traffic of 1 Tbps, completely crushing its network through- B. Related Works on Deep Learning Models
put capacity [31]. The IDS analyzes real-time traffic, captures
 Unlike traditional machine learning, deep learning can overabnormal behavior, and matches threat features, thereby issuing
 come these disadvantages to some extent. Firstly, deep learning
warnings in the initial phase of attacks. This enables emergency
 models can automatically learn feature representations from
responders to secure the golden time window for mitigation [32].
 raw data, reducing the reliance on manual feature engineer-
In recent years, IDSs based on machine learning have developed
 ing [42]. Secondly, deep learning models can handle large
rapidly and become increasingly mainstream due to its ability
 datasets more efficiently with the help of distributed computing
to handle complex data and adapt to new types of attacks [33].
 and GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) acceleration, speeding up
Their technical frameworks can be refined into traditional mathe training process and improving detection performance [43].
chine learning, deep learning, and deep reinforcement learning
 Thirdly, deep learning models usually have a stronger genermodels.
 alization ability to identify new types of attacks due to their
 deep neural network structure and complex nonlinear mapping
A. Related Works on Machine Learning Models
 capability [44].
 Due to its high accuracy, efficiency, and scalability, machine Zainudin et al. present a model for detecting DDoS attacks
learning based models have gained an increasingly important in Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) networks, which apply
role in modern network security protection [34]. Hadem et al. the extreme gradient boosting for feature selection and a hyintroduce a model combining SVM with selective logging for brid CNN-LSTM for attack classification. Performance results
IP traceback, achieving a detection accuracy of 95.98% on the show that the model achieves the accuracy of 99.50% in CIC-
NSL-KDD dataset. Thereinto, selective logging is performed DDoS2019 (Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity Distributed
at the in-memory structure of controllers to save resources Denial of Service 2019) dataset [45]. Chanu et al. propose a
and enhance performance [35]. Yang et al. propose Griffin, voting-based hybrid feature selection technique which is crossan unsupervised machine learning model, raising the accuracy analyzed by three correlation methods, and then deploy a clasby at most 19% when compared with existing models. Griffin sifier combining multi-layer perceptron with genetic algorithm.
constructs feature extraction framework to capture sequential Simulation results show that the model furnishes the accuracy
features, utilizes cluster analysis to reduce feature scales, and and false positive rate by 98.8% and 0.6%, respectively [46].
builds an ensemble auto-encoder to detect both known and Mhamdi et al. introduce a hybrid deep auto-encoder with a
zero-day intrusion attacks [6]. Lee et al. design a programmable random forest classifier model to enhance intrusion detection
switch based Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) on which ma- performance. Moreover, authors design a three-layer framework
chine learning algorithms run through utilizing switch CPU for detecting and preventing attacks, consisting of an entropyand pipeline to detect malware. Simulation results show that based detection method and aforementioned model running on
the proposed IPS increases the throughput and reduces the the control plane as well as a proactive service monitoring
response time by 183X and 99.99% than SDN-based IPS, re- program running on the application plane. Experiments depict
spectively [36]. El et al. make use of a boosting feature selection that the framework achieves the anomaly detection rates by more
algorithm to select relevant Smart Grid (SG) based features, and than 98% [47]. Shu et al. utilize a collaborative IDS to detect
put forward an ensemble learning model by combining several abnormal network behaviors for the Vehicular Ad hoc Network
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 87

(VANET), and conduct GAN models on multiple SDN controllers to jointly train a global intrusion detection model [48].
As one of our previous works, we put forward a hybrid deep
learning based IDS, which uses the genetic algorithm to extract
positive features, and CNNA-BiLSTM model to classify different intrusion types, achieving accuracies of 99.86% and 96.66%
on binary and multiple classifications, respectively [14].
 It can be deduced that deep learning has a wider application and better performance in the field of intrusion detection
when compared with traditional machine learning. However,
deep learning still has shortcomings that need to overcome. Fig. 1. Workflow diagram of GCB-PPO2.
Firstly, deep learning models often require large amounts of
labeled data for training, which may be difficult to obtain or function virtualization-assisted moving target defense mechaexpensive to label, especially because network attack means nism to enhance the performance [24], [25].
are constantly updating [49]. Secondly, deep learning models, Table I provides a structured comparison of state-of-the-art inespecially complex neural networks, often struggle to explain trusion detection approaches, including their datasets, machine
decision-making process, which makes it difficult to further learning paradigms, and model architectures. By explicitly conoptimize models [50]. Thirdly, deep learning models are prone trasting their advantage and limitations, the table underscores
to overfitting when faced with complex network environments the methodological advancements of our work. The major difand variable intrusion behaviors, leading to poor detection per- ferences in this research findings with already published works
formance in practical applications [51]. are summarized as follows.
 r We propose a framework which integrates CNNA-
C. Related Works on Deep Reinforcement Learning Models BiLSTM architecture as a shared feature extractor within
 the PPO2 reinforcement learning paradigm to make full
 Reinforcement learning, as an important branch of machine use of both techniques to achieve a high classification
learning, has a stronger learning ability when compared with accuracy and an improved training efficiency. In contrast,
deep learning [52]. It is a multi-layer neural network similar existing DRL based IDSs only apply single-modal netto the structure of human brain, which can learn features from works, including actor-critic [22], double DQN [21], and
original data in different environments automatically, resulting deep deterministic policy gradient [23], to detect or classify
in the achievement of optimal strategy [53]. Through combing network attacks.
deep learning with reinforcement learning, DRL has the abilities r We adopt the Bayesian optimization to implement autoof strong perception and powerful decision-making simultane- mated hyper-parameter tuning to make the model more
ously, which are beneficial to IDS [54]. On one hand, DRL accessible and reliable. In contrast, existing DRL based
models can learn optimal policies by interacting with environ- IDSs employ random search for hyper-parameter optimizaments, allowing it to adapt to changing network circumstances tion [24], [25] or rely on manual parameter tuning [21],
and intrusion behaviors [55]. On the other hand, DRL models [23].
can optimize response strategies by maximizing cumulative r We conduct comprehensive experiments to demonstrate
rewards, helping to make more accurate judgements in intrusion our model’s performance on both the binary and multidetection [24]. ple classification scenarios, as well as for both common
 Wang et al. propose a DRL based model to detect abnormal and under-represented attack categories. In contrast, exflows for industrial control systems, which extracts features isting DRL based IDSs do not consider multiple classithrough neural networks and adjusts learning strategy according fication [22], [23], [24], [25] or cannot classify underto reinforcement learning. Experimental results show that the represented attacks efficiently [21].
model achieves the accuracy of 98.06% [22]. Ma et al. present an
anomaly detection framework combining reinforcement learn-
 III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY OF DATA AUGMENTATION
ing with class-balance techniques, which uses the reinforcement
learning to implement auto-learning and introduces an adapted The overall workflow diagram of our proposed GCB-PPO2 is
Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) to ad- shown in Fig. 1. Each SDN controller runs a network monitoring
dress the class-imbalance problem. Simulation results on NSL- service to capture data traffic from OpenFlow switches through
KDD dataset show that the accuracy and F1 score are greater than TCPDump and Wireshark tools, including malicious and benign
82.0% and 82.4%, respectively [21]. Kim et al. build a secure traffics. Prior to providing data to attack classification model,
network system by adopting the DRL to inspect network traffic three steps are required to ensure optimal data quality. Firstly,
and shuffling-based moving target defense technique to mitigate data preprocessing is performed including data cleaning and
threats [23]. Yungaicela-Naula et al. provide a framework for standardization to improve data consistency. Secondly, genetic
detecting and mitigating slow-rate DDoS attacks automatically. algorithm is applied to select potential features and reduce
The framework uses deep learning and reinforcement learning to feature dimension, thus significantly reducing the model comdetect and mitigate attacks, respectively, and includes a network plexity. Readers can refer to our previous work in [14] for more
88 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON TABLE AMONG RELATED WORKS

details of these two steps. Thirdly, data augmentation based usually include Variational Auto Encoders (VAE) and GAN.
on C-GAN is conducted to expand the dataset by generating VAE generates samples by learning potential representations of
samples of under-represented attack categories intentionally, data, often producing samples which are highly consistent with
which can overcome the class imbalance problem, thus ben- the distribution of original samples. However, network attacks
eficial for further raising the accuracy of detecting minority aiming at SDN are complex and changeable, while attack samclass traffics. The core module of this system is the attack ples generated by VAE often lack sufficient diversity, potentially
classification model by constructing a DRL environment based leading to overfitting problem during the training process [56].
on PPO2 which takes CNNA-BiLSTM as the shared network, GAN, on the other hand, uses real data as input and generates
thus achieving high performance of identifying and classifying synthetic data through a generator, which is often applied to
network attacks. The details of data augmentation and intrusion scenarios where obtaining data is difficult, time-consuming,
detection will be introduced in the following two sections, or expensive. Two key components constitute GAN: a genrespectively. erator and a discriminator. Generator is responsible for pro-
 Unbalanced data is a non-negligible factor reducing the clas- cessing input data and generating more synthetic data, with
sification performance of IDS. For instance, our previously the goal of simulating the patterns and characteristics of real
proposed CNNA-BiLSTM model cannot detect U2R, Botnet, data. While discriminator is a classifier whose job is to identify
and Web attacks effectively, as inadequate number of samples whether the input data is real or synthetic, and to output a
result in inadequate training [14]. The common idea to counter probability representing the authenticity of samples. The probthis problem is to generate data for minority classes through data ability close to 1 means samples are more likely to be real,
generation algorithms, so as to balance the dataset by means while the probability close to 0 means samples are probably
of expansion and reconstruction. Data augmentation algorithms generated [57].
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 89

 In traditional GAN, the generator generates samples only
based on random noise and has no control over the class or
properties of generated samples. In contrast, C-GAN guides the
generation process by adding conditional variables such as class
labels, resulting in more controlled samples [58]. Therefore,
C-GAN has stronger control and interpretability. On closer
analysis, there are existing research works which allows C-
GAN based attack dataset generation for various use cases.
For instance, Zeng et al. introduce the Conditional Tabular
GAN (CT-GAN) to generate synthetic samples to enhance the Fig. 2. Workflow diagram of C-GAN.
diversity and representativeness of Autonomous Aerial Vehicles
(AAV) dataset [29], [30]. Wang et al. use CT-GAN to expand
the small category traffic samples and balance the dataset to
 of under-represented categories and those of other categories.
improve the malicious traffic identification rate for traditional
 Thirdly, C-GAN is constructed, whose generator receives not
networks and the CIC-IDS2017 dataset [28]. As far as we know,
 only random noise but also label information of specific class
there is only one paper applying C-GAN to SDN intrusion
 samples as conditional input, while the discriminator receives
detection [12]. However, authors of [12] fundamentally mix
 both real and generated data as well as their corresponding label
synthetic and real-world data during testing phase, creating
 information.
artificial data distribution overlaps that systematically overes-
 During training process, the goal of the generator is to gentimate model performance, and violating the essential machine
 erate samples of synthetic data similar to real data, and its loss
learning principle of strict train-test separation when dealing
 function can be expresses as:
with generative models.
 In contrast, our work presents three key contributions on LG = −Ez,c [log D (G(z, c))] (1)
applying C-GAN to SDN based IDS.
 r We are the second research initiative exploring C-GAN where z represents random noise, which is used as the input
 applications in SDN environments for cybersecurity pur- of the generator and can be understood as the seed or random
 poses, addressing the notable research gap in this emerging factor for generating malicious traffics, c represents a tag, and
 domain. G(z, c) represents samples generated by the generator based on
 r We design a C-GAN framework to synthesize targeted the random noise and label. On that basis, D(G(z, c)) outputs
 under-represented attack samples intentionally for InSDN a probability to judge whether the sample G(z, c) is real, and
 dataset, resolving extreme class imbalance and enabling Ez,c [·] denotes the expectation of the joint distribution of random
 models to learn discriminative features of minority class noise and label. As a result, the formula aims to maximize
 samples. Unlike prior work [12] that forcibly balance the the probability that discriminator determines that the generated
 sample size, which might introduce problems such as dis- sample is real. Through training, the generator tries to generate
 tribution distortion, noise interference and evaluation bias. samples more realistic, so that the discriminator cannot tell them
 r We confine synthetic data strictly to the training phase, with apart from real ones.
 original test data preserved, eliminating performance infla- On the other hand, the discriminator attempts to distinguish
 tion from data leakage and ensuring credible evaluations, between real data and generated data for under-represented atwhich is absent in prior work [12]. tack samples. As the generator learns through repeated iterations
 As a result, the generated samples are expected to improve how to generate more realistic samples of under-represented
the classification performance of minority class samples, as attack categories, the discriminator continues to adjust to better
validated in Section VI-B. identify the difference between real data and synthetic data. The
 InSDN dataset is uniquely designed for SDN environments, loss function of discriminator can be expressed as:
capturing the distinct architecture of SDN with its centralized
control plane and separate data plane. It collects real network LD = −Ex,c [log D(x, c)] − Ez,c [log (1 − D (G(z, c), c))] ,
traffic and covers common attack types in SDN networks, re- (2)
flecting the specific control and forwarding behaviors of SDN where x represents a known real sample, including normal
networks. On the other hand, the distribution of different attack or attack sample, and D(x, c) outputs a probability to judge
types in the dataset is highly unbalanced, reflecting the attack whether the sample is real. log(1 − D(G(z, c), c)) is responsible
distribution in the actual network. Moreover, InSDN dataset for calculating the logarithm of the probability that the generated
is widely used in the performance evaluation of IDS, and its sample is judged to be false. As a result, the first and second
design is in line with the actual operation and maintenance expected value terms denote the discriminator’s correct classifirequirements. cation probabilities for real samples and generated samples, re-
 Facing the InSDN dataset, the workflow diagram of C-GAN spectively, and the loss function is used to train the discriminator
is shown in Fig. 2. Firstly, the dataset has gone through data pre- with the goal of maximizing their sum. Moreover, the dropout
processing and feature selection steps, which are omitted in this layer is added and placed after the fully connected layer in the
figure. Then the dataset is divided into two parts: attack samples discriminator as a means of regularization to prevent it from
90 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

relying too heavily on certain specific features, improving the
 Algorithm 1: Pseudo Code of C-GAN for Undermodels’s ability to generalize and avoiding overfitting problem.
 Represented Attack Categories of InSDN Dataset.
 Conditional labels implicitly divide the feature space to ensure
that generated samples of different categories form separate Require:
clusters in the feature space. The generator learns the feature primary InSDN dataset Dreal , generator network G (see
distribution of different attack categories through conditional Table IV), discriminator network D (see Table V),
labels pgen (x|c). Through adversarial training, the generator is learning rate α, batch size m, latent dimension zdim ,
forced to approximate the conditional distribution of real data epochs N , save interval k (e.g. every 100 epochs)
pdata (x|c). Mathematically, the degree of proximity between the Ensure: augmented dataset Daug
generated distribution and the true distribution can be measured 1: initialize G and D parameters;
by KL (Kullback-Leibler) divergence: 2: for epoch = 1 to N do
 3: shuffle Dreal to create random batches;
  
 pdata (x|c) 4: for each mini-batch sampled from Dreal do
 KL (pdata (x|c)  pgen (x|c)) = Ex∼pdata log . (3)
 pgen (x|c) 5: sample random noise;
 6: sample conditional labels;
When the adversarial training converges, the KL divergence ap- 7: generate fake data using G;
proaches 0, indicating that the generated samples can represent 8: compute loss for real data;
the statistical characteristics of the real data. 9: compute loss for fake data;
 In C-GAN, the generator and discriminator are optimized 10: update D by back-propagating combined real and
through adversarial training, with the goal of making the gener- fake data;
ated samples as close as possible to the real data distribution. 11: sample new random noise and conditional labels;
According to the Nash Equilibrium theory in game theory, 12: generate new fake data;
C-GAN will converge to a Nash equilibrium under ideal circum- 13: compute loss for G;
stances. At this equilibrium point, the generator can no longer 14: update G by back-propagating loss to improve
“deceive” the discriminator by generating different samples, and generated data’s realism;
the discriminator can no longer effectively distinguish between 15: end for
real data and generated data. Therefore, the distribution of the 16: if epoch mod k = 0 then
generated samples will cover that of the real data, achieving 17: save checkpoint of G (and optionally D);
a “match” between the generated samples and the real data. 18: end if
The pseudo-code of our proposed C-GAN is illustrated in 19: end for
Algorithm 1. 20: choose desired number naug of synthetic minority
 samples;
 naug
 IV. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY OF ATTACK CLASSIFICATION 21: sample random noise {zj }j=1 and conditional labels
 naug
 As one of DRL algorithms, Proximal Policy Optimization {cj }j=1 ;
(PPO) is proposed by Google DeepMind and OpenAI in 2018, 22: generate fake data;
which aims to improve convergence speed and sampling effi- 23: combine generated data with real data;
ciency while maintaining stability. PPO is composed of four 24: return Daug ;
components, including advantage function, proximal policy optimization, multi-step sampling and importance sampling, which
are illustrated as follows. function, and implementation details, thus further improving
 r Advantage Function: PPO adopts it to evaluate the degree the performance and stability of the algorithm. Based on the
 of advantage of taking an action relative to the average above considerations, this paper constructs a PPO2 based DRL
 situation, so as to guide the direction of policy update. environment for intrusion detection of SDN.
 r Proximal Policy Optimization: PPO uses a method of cut- PPO2 is an actor-critic based algorithm, and the loss function
 ting to limit the amplitude of each policy update. of policy network can be expressed as:
 r Multi-Step Sampling: PPO typically chooses it to estimate
   
 the value of an action, which helps to improve sampling ∧ ∧ ∧
 A_loss = E min ratio × At , clip (ratio, 1−ε, 1+ε) At ,
 efficiency.
 r Importance Sampling: PPO often imports it to estimate the (4)
 expected benefits of policy updates to make better use of where ratio and Ât represent the strategy ratio and
 historical data. advantage function, which will be introduced later.
 In a conclusion, PPO algorithm achieves stable training in clip(ratio, 1 − ε, 1 + ε) denotes the clipping operation,
DRL tasks by limiting the update amplitude, increases conver- limiting the policy ratio to the range [1 − ε, 1 + ε] to avoid
gence speed by maximizing the advantage function at each time, instability caused by excessive policy update. Thereinto,
and improves sampling efficiency by combining multi-step sam- ε represents a hyper-parameter controlling the magnitude
pling with importance sampling [59]. As an improved version of of policy updates. In all, this loss function implements the
PPO, PPO2 mainly optimizes the clipping mechanism, objective policy update by selecting the minimum of two terms: (1) the
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 91

untrimmed policy update item ratio × A∧ t , which represents
the advantage function adjusted by the current policy ratio; (2)
the trimmed policy update itemclip(ratio, 1 − ε, 1 + ε)A∧ t ,
which controls the update amplitude by restricting the policy
ratio within a bounded range. This design enhances the stability
of policy updates.
 In formula (4), A∧ t represents the advantage function, which
is used to estimate the advantage at time step t, measuring how
good or bad the current action is relative to other possible actions.
It can be calculated through the difference value of action value
function and state value function by Generalized Advantage
Estimation (GAE): Fig. 3. Workflow diagram of PPO2’s interaction stage.

 Ât = Qπ (s, a) − Vπ (s). (5)
 TABLE II
This formula measures how good or bad it is to take a particular ACTION SPACE OF BINARY CLASSIFICATION
action a in state s relative to the average (given by Vπ (s)) in that
state. ratio represents the strategy ratio, and can be calculated
through:
 pθ (at |st )
 ratio = , (6)
 pθold (at |st )
which is the probability ratio of new and old strategies to choose stage. The workflow diagram of PPO2’s interaction stage is
action a in a given state s at time step t. Here, the numerator shown in Fig. 3. The main purpose of the learning stage is to use
and denominator represent the new and old strategies to choose the data collected during the interaction stage to update policies
action a in a given state s, respectively. to improve agents’ performance, that is, agents learn and update
 As a result, the clipping mechanism of PPO2 ensures that the the policy network based on sample data from experience pool
proportion of each policy update does not exceed a set range, containing previous states, current states, policies and rewards.
thereby guaranteeing the monotonic improvement of each up- The “state” of DRL refers to the environment information
date. In PPO2, the objective function measures the effectiveness observed by the agent at each step, that is, the input data provided
of the update by comparing the probability ratio between the by the environment to the agent. In this paper, the “state” is
old and new strategies. When the probability ratio exceeds the extracted from every row of data (except the label column) in
set threshold, the objective function will be trimmed to limit the dataset. As mentioned in our previous work [14], after data
the update range, thereby avoiding excessive policy updates. preprocessing and feature selection, 12 features are reserved for
According to the monotonic improvement theorem of PPO2, CNNA-BiLSTM model, including “Bwd Pkt Len Min”, “Bwd
this clipping mechanism ensures the stability of policy updates Pkt Len Std”, “Flow Byts/s”, and so on. For instance, “Bwd
and prevents performance deterioration caused by policy up- Pkt Len Min” means reverse minimum packet length, which
dates. Through this pruning mechanism, PPO2 can maintain the indicates the minimum length of a single packet in the reverse
stable improvement of the strategy in multiple training steps and traffic direction. It is obtained by aggregating the minimum
eventually converge to an optimal strategy. length of all reverse packets in the session flow, and is used
 On the other hand, the loss function of critic network can be to capture extreme events in response traffic, such as control
calculated through the mean squared error: commands or tiny packets. If very small packets frequently
    appear in reverse traffic, it may indicate covert communication
 C− loss = mean square Ât . (7) behaviors, such as network scanning and heartbeat detection,
 which are commonly seen on the botnet control channel. As a
Finally, the loss function for the whole PPO2 algorithm is: result, each state vector is an eigenvector of data with 12 features
 P P O_loss = A_loss + 0.5 × C_loss , (8) after normalization, representing relevant features of network
 traffic once, and the agent’s goal is to make the right decision
which needs to be minimized through optimization algorithms based on these features.
to update parameters of policy network. The definitions of “action” differ in binary and multiple clas-
 In this paper, the DRL process of PPO2 algorithm is divided sification scenarios. In binary classification, the defined action
into two stages: interaction stage and learning stage. The main space is shown in Table II. In multiple classification, the defined
purpose of the interaction stage is to collect training data. In this action space is shown in Table III. It can be observed that an
stage, agents interact with the environment, collect information action is the classification result of an intrusion detection.
about the current state, and make decisions based on it and exist- The PPO2 algorithm used in this paper is based on actor-critic
ing policies. At the same time, the environment provides agents algorithm, in which intrusion detection agents train policy netwith rewards and information about the next state. This process work as actors and predict the policies that should be executed
is repeated several times to gather enough data for the learning at present, with the goal of maximizing the future cumulative
92 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 ACTION SPACE OF MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION STRUCTURE OF GENERATOR

 constantly updates its strategy through interaction with environment to learn how to make optimal decisions in a changing
 Algorithm 2: Pseudo Code of GCB-PPO2 Algorithm. environment without the need to define fixed rules or struc-
 Require: tures in advance. As a result, PPO2 is appropriate to unknown
 expanded InSDN dataset, policy network, critic network or fast-changing environments through its online learning and
 1: for each iteration do continuous improvement. For instance, once PPO2 has been
 2: initialize intrusion detection environment and collect trained well in InSDN dataset, it can be ported to other intrusion
 initial state s0 ; detection datasets adaptively.
 3: initialize empty experience pool; Moreover, CNNA-BiLSTM is very efficient at extracting spa-
 4: for each step in episode do tial features (by CNN) and temporal information (by BiLSTM)
 5: output action at ∼ πθ (at |st ); from high-dimensional data. After integrating CNNA-BiLSTM
 6: execute at and observe st+1 , rt ; into PPO2, agents can better understand spatial and temporal
 7: store (st , at , rt , st+1 ) into experience pool; characteristics of input data when dealing with complex and
 8: update state st to st+1 ; time-dependent environments, so as to make more intelligent
 9: end for decisions and enhance the overall performance. Moreover, joint
 10: if sufficient data in experience pool then feature extraction by CNNA-BiLSTM can reduce the data di-
 11: sample a batch of transitions from experience pool; mension and make the input information processed by PPO2
 12: compute action value and state value functions more compact, thus reducing the computational burden. As
 Qπ (s, a) and Vπ (s) for each transition; CNNA-BiLSTM completes deep feature extraction in advance,
 13: compute advantage function Ât based on Qπ (s, a) so that PPO2 only needs to learn the strategy and does not
 and Vπ (s) using GAE; need additional complex feature learning layer, thus reducing
 14: compute clipped surrogate loss A_loss ; the calculation amount of the strategy network. As a result, this
 15: update policy network pθ to minimize A_loss ; shared network can promise a high classification accuracy as
 16: compute loss function of critic network C_loss ; well as an improved training efficiency.
 17: update critic network to minimize C_loss ;
 18: end if V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS OF DATA AUGMENTATION
 19: set pθold to be pθ ;
 20: end for A. Experimental Setup of Whole System
 In terms of hardware environment, all the deep learning and
 DRL models used in this paper are trained and tested under the
rewards. In order to update neural networks in time, it is nec- support of GPU on the CentOS operating system, with the CPU
essary to fuse policy network with critic network, so that our being Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5118 CPU @ 2.30 GH, and GPU
previously proposed CNNA-BiLSTM is shared between two being Nvidia GeForce RTX 2080Ti 11 GB. In terms of software
networks, and the weights of two networks can be shared and environment, we choose Python language and use Conda to
updated at the same time. Moreover, PPO2 uses a fixed-length manage Python environments and dependency packages. The
trajectory segment, representing a sequence of states and actions. implementation is primarily based on PyTorch deep learning
In each iteration, N parallel agents collect T steps of data, and framework with CUDA acceleration for GPU computing. For
the loss function is constructed on N T steps and optimized by a reinforcement learning components, we utilize Stable-Baseline
small-lot gradient descent or Adam optimizer. The pseudo-code library, which provides a range of easy-to-use and efficient
of PPO2 algorithm is described in Algorithm 2. algorithm implementations designed to simplify the process of
 Even though our previously proposed CNNA-BiLSTM setting, training, and evaluating. Moreover, the machine learning
achieves good classification results in intrusion detection and pipeline incorporates scikit-learn for data preprocessing and
classification of SDN, it still needs to be improved especially performance evaluation.
when facing under-represented attack categories. In this paper, The structures of the generator and discriminator of C-GAN
we innovatively combine DRL with deep neural network to make are summarized in Tables IV and V, respectively. In terms of
advantage of both techniques, i.e., constructing a PPO2 environ- the generator architecture, the network begins with an input
ment which uses CNNA-BiLSTM as the shared network. Un- layer accepting 1000-dimensional vectors (batchsize = 64).
like supervised learning methods like CNNA-BiLSTM, PPO2 The core structure contains four consecutive fully connected
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 93

 TABLE V
 STRUCTURE OF DISCRIMINATOR

layers with ReLU activation. The first dense layer expands the
feature dimension to 128, followed by progressive expansion Fig. 4. Trial-wise accuracy during bayesian optimization.
to 256, 512, and finally the last layer outputs 19-dimensional
features. Notably, the layer expansions do not strictly follow
 TABLE VI
the “doubling” pattern described, with the final layer actually HYPER-PARAMETER SETTING OF GCB-PPO2 FRAMEWORK
performing dimension reduction.
 In terms of the discriminator design, the network begins with a
19-dimensional input layer (batchsize = 64) that receives both
real and generated samples. The core architecture comprises
three sequential fully connected layers with ReLU activation,
where the first two layers are accompanied by dropout regularization. The feature dimension evolves through 512, 256,
and 128 neurons in the hidden layers. The last layer of the
discriminator is still the fully connected layer with Sigmoid as
the activation function used for identifying the authenticity of
samples.
 Considering that the performance of our proposed GCB-PPO2
relies heavily on specific hyper-parameters, we adopt Bayesian
optimization, i.e., one of the automated hyper-parameter tuning methods, to make the model more accessible and reliable.
Bayesian optimization works by building a probabilistic model
of the objective function (usually a Gaussian process) and then
using this model to select the next most promising combination
of hyper-parameters to find the optimal solution in as few iterations as possible. Compared to grid search or random search,
it is more efficient, especially in high-dimensional spaces and
complex dependencies. Moreover, Bayesian optimization is also
expected to enhance the robustness of GCB-PPO2 model by systematically selecting hyper-parameters resistant to perturbations Fig. 5. Loss curve of generator.
for the following two reasons. On one hand, the Gaussian process surrogate identifies wide, high-performance regions, where
small parameter perturbations cause minimal performance drop. there are occasional small dips, the overall trend is convergent,
On the other hand, the acquisition function favors parameters with the best trails reaching 0.9899 achieved. Finally, the derived
with low validation accuracy variance, ensuring consistent per- hyper-parameters are summarized in Table VI.
formance under environmental noise.
 We choose Optuna as the Bayesian optimization library, as
 B. Experimental Results of Data Augmentation
it is more modern and is easier to integrate with existing code.
In order to perform hyper-parameter optimization, the training As mentioned before, this paper adopts C-GAN to generate
process needs to be wrapped into an objective function that under-represented attack class samples to expand InSDN dataset
takes in hyper-parameters and returns evaluation metrics. The after data preprocessing and feature selection. The loss curve
Bayesian optimizer then continuously calls this objective func- of generator for the training process is shown in Fig. 5. It can
tion, adjusting the parameters to maximize metrics. Fig. 4 shows be observed that at the beginning of training (around the first
the model’s validation accuracy at each successive Bayesian op- 1500 epochs), the loss value rises rapidly from about 0.5 to 4.0,
timization trail, It can be observed from Fig. 4(j) that after a few which indicates that the model is trying to find a better generation
initial exploratory trials where accuracy fluctuates apparently, strategy, thus increasing losses. Between 1500 and 2500 epochs,
the optimizer quickly homes in on high-performing regions: the loss value fluctuates greatly between 1.5 and 3.5, which
most subsequent trials achieve accuracies above 0.95. Although means that generator faces challenges in adversarial training
94 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE VIII
 PERFORMANCE OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON BINARY CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 6. Loss curve of discriminator. VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS OF ATTACK CLASSIFICATION
 A. Ablation Experiments on Binary Classification
 TABLE VII
 NUMBER OF SAMPLES BEFORE AND AFTER C-GAN
 As GCB-PPO2 model uses our previously proposed CNNA-
 BiLSTM as the shared network, then the ablation experiments to
 compare GCB-PPO2 with CNN, CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM
 as well as CNNA-BiLSTM are essential. More specifically,
 we conduct comprehensive ablation studies through progressive
 architectural comparisons and generative enhancement validation. The architectural evolution analysis begins with a baseline CNN model using pure convolutional layers, subsequently
 enhanced by incorporating unidirectional temporal dependencies in CNN-LSTM, then upgraded to bidirectional context
 modeling in CNN-BiLSTM, and ultimately integrated with atagainst discriminator, resulting in large fluctuations in the quality tention mechanisms to form the CNNA-BiLSTM variant. To
of generated samples. After 2500 epochs, the loss value shows a specifically isolate the impact of C-GAN, we further compare
certain tendency to oscillate but generally stabilizes between the full GCB-PPO2 model (leveraging C-GAN synthesized
about 2.0 and 2.5, achieving a relatively good result, which under-represented class samples) against its ablated version
depicts that the model has reached a state of equilibrium where CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2 trained solely on original data. This
adversarial training makes it difficult for generator to improve dual-axis evaluation strategy enables systematic quantification
performance further. of both architectural innovations and data augmentation effects,
 The loss curve and accuracy curve of discriminator for the particularly in addressing class imbalance challenges.
training process are shown in Fig. 6. Similarly with the gen- The binary classification effect of six models is shown in
erator, it can be observed that after 2500 epochs, the loss value Table VIII. It can be concluded that GCB-PPO2 model achieves
stabilizes, staying between 0.1 and 0.4. As shown in the accuracy the best performance among six models on accuracy, precicurve, at the beginning of training (around the first 500 epochs), sion, and F1. GCB-PPO2 model performs better than CNNAthe accuracy rate rises from about 0.5 to close to 1.0 sharply, BiLSTM-PPO2 on accuracy, precision, and F1, which reflects
indicating that discriminator quickly learns to distinguish be- the advantage of C-GAN, that is, it can alleviate the problem of
tween real data and generated data. Between 500 and 2500 class imbalance by generating diversified attack traffic samples
epochs, the accuracy rate fluctuates greatly between 0.6 and 1.0, and improve the ability to identify under-represented attack
which is a common phenomenon in adversarial training, where categories.
generator and discriminator compete against each other. After In order to better demonstrate the performance of six models,
2500 epochs, the accuracy rate is stable around 0.95, showing the confusion matrixes are drawn and shown in Fig. 7. It can
that the discriminator improves the performance significantly be observed that the true positive rate of anomaly packets by
with training, thus can accurately distinguish between real data GCB-PPO2 model is 1.0, indicating that all samples which are
and generated data. malicious traffics are correctly identified as attacks. As a result,
 Table VII lists the numbers of samples for each category GCB-PPO2 model can detect all samples of attacks sensitively.
before and after the expansion by C-GAN. It can be observed As models become more complex, the training time to be
that the original sample sizes of BFA, Web, Botnet, and U2R are consumed is expected to increase in theory. However, PPO2
insufficient, while data augmentation increases these samples framework is introduced in this paper to speed up the converin the training set intentionally and significantly, with ratios gence speed. The training time of six models is summarized
ranging from 30.80× to 288.75×. However, data of testing set in Table IX. It can be observed that the training time of the
has not changed, which helps to maintain the consistency of pure CNN model is only 714 seconds, which takes the shortest
testing set and provide a stable standard for model evaluation. In time among these models. However, as models become more
all, through data augmentation, our proposed model is expected complex, the training time required increases rapidly, and the
to perform better in processing unbalanced dataset and improve longest time reaches 5842 seconds by CNN-LSTM model.
the identification accuracy of various types of attacks, especially Compared with other models, GCB-PPO2 model has the most
for under-represented attack categories. complicated structure, while its training time is only higher than
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 95

Fig. 7. Confusion matrixes of ablation experiments on binary classification.

 TABLE IX TABLE X
 TRAINING TIME OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON BINARY CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF TRAFFIC TYPES BY GCB-PPO2 MODEL

that of CNN and CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2, and obviously less
 B. Ablation Experiments on Multiple Classification
than that of CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, and CNNA-BiLSTM
models by 50.29%, 32.95%, and 22.27%, respectively. More- Table X lists the precision, recall, and F1 of each
over, GCB-PPO2 model consumes only 2.25% more training traffic type when applying our proposed GCB-PPO2
time than CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2, which is negligible. model. It can be observed that GCB-PPO2 model
 The reason why our proposed GCB-PPO2 model effectively achieves good results on each indicator for each category,
reduces the required training time than CNN-LSTM based deep including under-represented attack categories, i.e., BFA,
learning models can be explained as follows. Firstly, GCB-PPO2 Botnet, Web, and U2R attacks. More specifically, the precision,
model employs CNNA-BiLSTM as a shared network among recall, and F1 of these minority classes are more than 86.36%,
multiple tasks and data streams, thus reducing computational 84.28% and 85.91%, respectively. In other words, GCB-PPO2
redundancy as the same feature extraction layer does not need model can identify all kinds of intrusion detection attacks with
to be computed for multiple times. Secondly, GCB-PPO2 model high performance.
utilizes the parallel computing techniques, such as N parallel On the basis of binary classification, we conduct ablation
agents collecting T steps of data in each iteration, to speed up the experiments of multiple classification to compare GCB-PPO2
training process. Thirdly, GCB-PPO2 model adopts the sample model with five models mentioned in the last subsection. The
reuse techniques such as experience pool to reduce the need for simulation results are shown in Table XI. As depicted from the
collecting new data and optimize the training time. table, GCB-PPO2 model achieves the best performance among
96 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 8. Confusion matrixes of ablation experiments on multiple classification.

 TABLE XI efficiency. It can be attributed to the online learning ability of
 PERFORMANCE OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION
 GCB-PPO2 model. Moreover, we have also integrated Bayesian
 optimization to fine-tune PPO2 hyper-parameters, further improving training stability and reducing computation cost.
 In order to analyze the simulation results more deeply, we
 draw confusion matrixes for six models, which are shown in
 Fig. 8, and we list a table to display the F1 score of six models
 on each traffic type, which is shown in Table XIII. It can be
 TABLE XII observed from the confusion matrixes that GCB-PPO2 model
 TRAINING TIME OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION correctly detects all the U2R attack samples, while other four
 deep learning models cannot detect this type at all. Moreover,
 GCB-PPO2 model correctly detects 88% of Web attack samples,
 while CNN, CNN-LSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM models cannot
 detect Web traffics at all, and CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2 model only
 detects 7% of Web traffics.
 As shown in the confusion matrixes, CNN, CNN-LSTM,
 CNN-BiLSTM, and CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2 models mistake
 Web attacks as BFA traffics, and the former three models mistake
six models, with the accuracy being 99.01%, which is higher U2R attacks as normal traffics. On one hand, Web attacks
than that of other models by up to 2.42%. try different attack tactics (such as SQL injection, cross-site
 The training time of six models on multiple classification is scripting) to find a system’s weakness, while BFA attacks try all
summarized in Table XII. When compared with CNN-LSTM possible password combinations to find the right cipher. Both
based deep learning models, GCB-PPO2 model still consumes attacks exhibit persistent attempts to access system resources.
much less training time. More specifically, its training time When models detect a large number of repeated login or access
is less than that of CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, and CNNA- attempts, they may classify these actions as BFA attacks. On the
BiLSTM models by 50.86%, 33.72%, and 29.73%, respectively. other hand, attackers of U2R attacks perform malicious actions
Simultaneously, GCB-PPO2 model consumes only 9.62% more by obtaining system permissions with the characteristics of small
training time than CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2, which is acceptable. number of packets, large packet size, low traffic fluctuations
In a conclusion, GCB-PPO2 model consumes much less training and strong purpose of access, which are similar to normal user
time than traditional deep learning models effectively by at behaviors, so it is easy to be mistaken as normal traffics.
least 22.27% and 29.73% in binary and multiple classification Table XIII demonstrates that the GCB-PPO2 model excels in
scenarios, respectively, demonstrating improved computational detecting all the traffic types, achieving an F1 score of at least
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 97

 TABLE XIII
 F1 OF TRAFFIC TYPES IN ABLATION EXPERIMENTS

 different categories of data still maintain good clustering
 form after dimensionality reduction, indicating that GCB-PPO2
 model can distinguish different types of network traffic effectively.
 More specifically, the following conclusions can be derived
 from this figure. (1) Normal, DDoS, and DoS traffics form
 a certain clustering for each, indicating that these traffics are
 relatively stable and can be clearly distinguished from other
 attack categories. (2) The distribution of Probe attacks is wide,
 indicating that this traffic mode is diverse. When traffic of Probe
 attacks is running at a low rate, it is difficult to detect directly
 from traffic patterns. (3) There are few data points for Web,
 U2R, Botnet, and BFA attacks. The distribution is scattered,
 and no obvious clustering is formed. As the samples of Web,
Fig. 9. Policy latent space. U2R, Botnet, and BFA are very few, their detection effects are
 limited.
85.91%. Notably, it performs exceptionally well in identifying
all the under-represented attack categories, including BFA, Botnet, U2R, and Web attacks, with F1 scores of 94.99%, 85.91%,
86.47%, and 87.86%, respectively. On the contrary, CNN, CNN- C. Contrast Experiments With Traditional Algorithms
LSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM fail to detect U2R and Web attacks. In this subsection, we compare our proposed GCB-PPO2
CNNA-BiLSTM shows limited success, obtaining F1 scores model with traditional machine learning models on accuracy,
of 0% and 48.91% for U2R and Botnet, respectively. While precision, recall, and F1 to observe the difference between
the CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2 effectively detects most traffic types machine learning and DRL models on the performance of
with F1 scores of more than 77.80%, its performance on Web intrusion detection. Machine learning models for comparison
attacks is notably weak, with an F1 score of only 12.50%. include Decision Tree (DT), Support Vector Machine (SVM),
 The sample sizes for BFA, Web, Botnet, and U2R are only Random Forest (RF), Logistic Regression (LR), Multi-Layer
1405, 192, 164 and 17, respectively, accounting for merely Perceptron (MLP), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Stochastic Gra-
0.44%, 0.06%, 0.05% and 0.004% of all samples. This severe dient Descent (SGD), and Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost). The
class imbalance poses a significant challenge to intrusion de- simulation results are shown in Table XIV.
tection models. Five models for comparison do not solve data It can be concluded that the performance difference between
imbalance problem effectively. Due to the limited number of traditional machine learning and DRL is not obvious when
minority class samples, these models cannot fully learn the applying to binary classification tasks, while there is a huge gap
features of abnormal traffics during training, resulting in the when conducting multiple classification tasks. In multiple claslack of sufficient recognition ability when facing new malicious sification scenario, compared with other models, GCB-PPO2
flows. As a result, it is difficult for these five models to identify model improves accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 by at least
BFA, Web, Botnet, and U2R attacks. 5.68%, 4.53%, 5.85%, and 5.17%, respectively. This is because
 In order to investigate classification results more intuitively, in multiple classification problems, the increase of categories is
we use t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) usually accomplished by the increase of problem complexity.
method to draw a graph to visualize the policy latent space of Due to the multi-layer network structures and activation func-
GCB-PPO2 model, as shown in Fig. 9. The data points in this tions of deep learning, GCB-PPO2 model has higher expressivefigure are represented by t-SNE after dimensionality reduction, ness to capture category differences and more powerful handling
with the original high-dimensional feature space mapped to a ability to solve nonlinear mapping problems, resulting in the best
two-dimensional space, helpful for observing the distribution performance when applying to complex classification boundary
of different categories of data more conveniently. In general, problems.
98 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE XIV
 CONTRAST EXPERIMENTS WITH TRADITIONAL ALGORITHMS

 TABLE XV comparison results are shown in Table XV.1 The results demon-
 CONTRAST EXPERIMENTS WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART ALGORITHMS
 (2021-2025) ON MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION strate that the GCB-PPO2 model consistently outperforms the
 other eight models, achieving improvements of up to 15.56%,
 16.27%, 15.11%, and 15.68% in accuracy, recall, precision, and
 F1, respectively.
 As shown in Table XV, CNN-RF, CNN-MLP and FELIDS
 exhibit the lowest performance among all models across the
 four metrics. On one hand, CNN-RF combines the advantages
 of deep learning and ensemble learning, but the collaborative efficiency of the two may be insufficient. CNN is good
 at extracting local spatial features, while RF relies on global
 On the other hand, DT, MLP, and KNN demonstrate the feature classification. Using the output of CNN as the input
effectiveness in multiple classification, with the accuracy of of RF may lead to incomplete feature representation, thereby
more than 92.10%. It can be attributed to the following three resulting in the degradation of intrusion detection performance.
reasons. (1) These models have nonlinear modeling capability. On the other hand, CNN-MLP and FELIDS belong to federated
For instance, DT directly constructs nonlinear decision bound- learning based IDSs, which need to be trained on multiple nodes.
aries through tree splitting. (2) These models can process high However, data distribution on each node may be uneven, making
dimensional data effectively. For instance, MLP fuses multi- it difficult for these models to learn features of global data,
dimensional features through the fully connected layer. (3) and further affecting the generalization ability and classification
These models are robust to noise. For instance, KNN adjusts accuracy of models. Moreover, technologies such as differential
the number of neighbours by the K value to balance noise privacy may be introduced to protect sensitive data, which may
effects. As a result, these three models achieve competitive negatively affect model performance and reduce classification
performance, while remain substantially inferior to GCB-PPO2 accuracy. As a result, the performance of federated learning
model. models in intrusion detection tasks may be inferior to that of
 Secondly, the performance of SVM, RF, and AdaBoost is centralized learning models.
acceptable. However, these three methods have limitations on
model structures and defects on data adaptation. For instance, E. Cross-Domain Experiments on NSL-KDD Dataset
SVM requires manual selection of kernel functions, and RF In this study, C-GAN is used as a data enhancement tool
voting mechanism fails when classes are unbalanced. As a result, aimed at improving the fairness of our proposed GCB-PPO2
they do not perform as well as the first three models. Finally, model for classifying different traffic types by generating more
the performance metrics of LG and SGD are lowest among all diverse samples of attacks. Specifically, C-GAN helps the model
the models, as both of them are suitable for dealing with linear avoid the bias to common attack types in the training process
data, leading to poor performance in dealing with nonlinear and by generating samples of under-represented attack types, thus
multiple classification problems. improving the model’s ability to identify various traffic types.
 Meanwhile, we should discuss the potential bias introduced by
D. Contrast Experiments With State-of-the-Art Algorithms data augmentation techniques, and confirm whether C-GAN
 overfits specific types of attacks. In this subsection, we apply
 In order to further demonstrate the superiority of our pro- GCB-PPO2 model to another dataset named “NSL-KDD” to
posed GCB-PPO2 model, we conduct experiments to compare test the performance of the model on a different dataset as well
it with other state-of-the-art algorithms on multiple classification as to explore the applicability in various network conditions and
scenarios for InSDN dataset. The compared models include the environments.
model proposed in [60], D-GSAGE-MARC [61], AE-CNN [62], Similarly, both binary and multiple classification experiments
J48 [63], CNN-MLP [64], DCGAN [65], FELIDS [66], and are designed to evaluate the performance of the GCB-PPO2
ByteSGAN [67]. These studies were published between 2021
and 2025, representing recent advancements in this filed. The 1 The precision of D-GSAGE-MARC is not provided.
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 99

 TABLE XVI To strengthen the practical applicability and ethical account-
 CROSS-DOMAIN EXPERIMENTS ON NSL-KDD DATASET BY GCB-PPO2
 MODEL
 ability of GCB-PPO2 model, we plan to integrate this model
 as a component or module of the controller(s). Future research
 will focus on following three aspects: technical optimization,
 theoretical optimization, and scenario expansion.
 r Technical Optimization: Transferring the knowledge of
 TABLE XVII GCB-PPO2 to a lightweight model to streamline training
 PERFORMANCE OF TRAFFIC TYPES ON NSL-KDD DATASET BY GCB-PPO2 complexity and apply to resource limited SDN controllers.
 MODEL
 Integrating the adversarial perturbation penalty term into
 the reward function of PPO2 to enhance the robustness to
 adversarial attacks.
 r Theoretical Optimization: Using the causal reasoning
 model to identify the causal path between the attack features and the classification results to improve the interpretability.
 r Scenario Expansion: Designing an unsupervised anomaly
model in distinguishing normals traffic from abnormal attacks, scoring module and training it jointly with the existing
and to verify the generalization ability of the model for complex supervised learning to deal with zero-day attacks.
traffic types. The corresponding accuracy, recall, precision, and To improve the performance of GCB-PPO2 model, both the
F1 are shown in Table XVI. It can be concluded that GCB-PPO2 data augmentation strategy and the intrusion detection model
model performs well in binary classification tasks, with all can be enhanced. While C-GAN effectively addresses class
the four metrics reaching above 99.61%. In multi-classification imbalance, integrating it with other techniques such as SMOTE
tasks, the performance of the model decreases slightly, while and contrastive learning could further diversify synthetic samthe overall level still remains high, as all the four metrics are ples, especially for extremely low frequency categories (e.g.,
higher than 98.86%, verifying its robustness in complex network U2R attacks). Exploring transformer-based modules or Graph
environment. Neural Networks (GNNs) could better capture hierarchical de-
 On that basis, we measure the fine-grained classification pendencies in network traffic. For example, a spatial-temporal
performance of GCB-PPO2 model on NSL-KDD dataset, which transformer might replace the CNNA-BiLSTM to model longis summarized in Table XVII. It can be concluded that the F1 range correlations in attack patterns. These advancements aim
of GCB-PPO2 model for all the five types of traffics is above to push the performance boundaries of SDN IDS in evolving
93.47%, further verifying its multi-classification capability. The threat landscapes.
simulation results verify that GCB-PPO2 model still achieves
a high accuracy on a different dataset, indicating that C-GAN REFERENCES
successfully maintains diversity and representativeness when
 [1] R. Kumar, U. Venkanna, and V. Tiwari, “Optimized traffic engineering
generating samples, and does not lead to bias in specific at- in software defined wireless network based IoT (SDWN-IoT): State-oftack types. Moreover, the results also indicates that GCB-PPO2 the-art, research opportunities and challenges,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 49,
model can adapt to different data distributions and has strong Aug. 2023, Art. no. 100572.
 [2] C. Li, K. Jiang, and Y. Luo, “Dynamic placement of multiple congeneralization ability. trollers based on SDN and allocation of computational resources based on
 heuristic ant colony algorithm,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 241, Apr. 2022,
 Art. no. 108330.
 VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS [3] J. Chen, Y.-J. Xiong, X. Qiu, D. He, H. Yin, and C. Xiao, “A cross entropy
 In this paper, we present GCB-PPO2, a deep reinforcement based approach to minimum propagation latency for controller placement
 in software defined network,” Comput. Commun., vol. 191, pp. 133–144,
learning based hybrid intrusion detection system for SDN en- Jul. 2022.
vironments that synergistically optimizes classification perfor- [4] Z. Mustafa, R. Amin, H. Aldabbas, and N. Ahmed, “Intrusion detection
mance and training efficiency through two integrated inno- systems for software-defined networks: A comprehensive study on machine learning-based techniques,” Cluster Comput.-The J. Netw. Softw.
vations: (1) C-GAN based adversarial generation of under- Tools Appl., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 9635–9661, Oct. 2024.
represented attack synthesis to counteract class imbalance, and [5] Y. Zhang, C. Jue, W. Liu, and Y. Ma, “GRAN: A SDN intrusion detection
(2) enhanced PPO2 reinforcement learning incorporating our model based on graph attention network and residual learning,” Comput.
 J., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 241–260, Oct. 2024.
prior CNNA-BiLSTM architecture for spatio-temporal feature [6] L. Yang, Y. Song, S. Gao, A. Hu, and B. Xiao, “Griffin: Real-time network
fusion. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that GCB-PPO2 intrusion detection system via ensemble of autoencoder in SDN,” IEEE
model achieves the accuracy of 99.92% and 99.01% in binary Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2269–2281, Sep. 2022.
 [7] A. Javadpour, P. Pinto, F. Ja’fari, and W. Zhang, “DMAIDPS: A distributed
and multiple classification scenarios, respectively, and elevates multi-agent intrusion detection and prevention system for cloud IoT enthe F1 of under-represented attack detection to over 85.91%. vironments,” Cluster Comput.- The J. Netw. Softw. Tools Appl., vol. 26,
Moreover, GCB-PPO2 model proves cross-domain efficacy no. 1, pp. 367–384, Feb. 2023.
 [8] E. Hooper, “Intelligent detection and response strategies for complex
with 98.65% accuracy on NSL-KDD benchmark, and achieves attacks,” IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 3–12,
22.27% faster convergence than conventional hybrid models. Nov. 2007.
100 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 [9] W. L. Al-Yaseen, Z. A. Othman, and M. Z. A. Nazri, “Multi-level hybrid [31] Center for Internet Security, “The Mirai botnet: Threats and mitigations,”
 support vector machine and extreme learning machine based on modified CISecurity Blog, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.cisecurity.org/
 k-means for intrusion detection system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 67, insights/blog/the-mirai-botnet-threats-and-mitigations
 pp. 296–303, Jan. 2017. [32] A. Javadpour, F. Jafari, T. Taleb, M. Shojafar, and C. Benzaid, “A com-
[10] I. Ahmad, M. Basheri, M. J. Iqbal, and A. Rahim, “Performance com- prehensive survey on cyber deception techniques to improve honeypot
 parison of support vector machine, random forest, and extreme learning performance,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024, Art. no. 103792.
 machine for intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 33789–33795, [33] A. Yazdinejadna, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and M. S. Khan, “A
 2018. kangaroo-based intrusion detection system on software-defined networks,”
[11] H. H. Pajouh, R. Javidan, R. Khayami, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Comput. Netw., vol. 184, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 107688.
 Choo, “A two-layer dimension reduction and two-tier classification model [34] J. Cho, T. Shon, K. Choi, and J. Moon, “Dynamic learning model update
 for anomaly-based intrusion detection in IoT backbone networks,” IEEE of hybrid-classifiers for intrusion detection,” J. Supercomputing, vol. 64,
 Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 314–323, Apr.–Jun. 2019. no. 2, pp. 522–526, May 2013.
[12] B. Swathi, S. S. Kolisetty, G. V. Sivanarayana, and S. R. Battula, [35] P. Hadem, D. K. Saikia, and S. Moulik, “An SDN-based intrusion detection
 “Efficientnetv2-RegNet: An effective deep learning framework for secure system using SVM with selective logging for IP traceback,” Comput.
 SDN based IoT network,” Cluster Comput.-The J. Netw. Softw. Tools Appl., Netw., vol. 191, May 2021, Art. no. 108015.
 vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 10653–10670, Nov. 2024. [36] A. Y. P. Lee, M. I. C. Wang, C.-H. Hung, and C. H. P. Wen, “PS-IPS:
[13] Z. Wang, Y. Liu, D. He, and S. Chan, “Intrusion detection methods based Deploying intrusion prevention system with machine learning on switch,”
 on integrated deep learning model,” Comput. Secur., vol. 103, Apr. 2021, Future Gener. Comput. Syst.-The Int. J. Escience, vol. 152, pp. 333–342,
 Art. no. 102177. Mar. 2024.
[14] M. Cui, J. Chen, X. Qiu, W. Lv, H. Qin, and X. Zhang, “Multi-class [37] Z. A. El Houda, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Ensemble learning for intrusion
 intrusion detection system in SDN based on hybrid BiLSTM model,” detection in SDN-based zero touch smart grid systems,” in Proc. 2022 47th
 Cluster Comput.-The J. Netw. Softw. Tools Appl., vol. 27, pp. 9937–9956, IEEE Conf. Local Comput. Netw., 2022, pp. 149–156.
 May 2024. [38] N. Ahuja, G. Singal, D. Mukhopadhyay, and N. Kumar, “Automated DDoS
[15] M. Buda, A. Maki, and M. A. Mazurowski, “A systematic study of the attack detection in software defined networking,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
 class imbalance problem in convolutional neural networks,” Neural Netw., vol. 187, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103108.
 vol. 106, pp. 249–259, Oct. 2018. [39] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for in-
[16] M. S. Elsayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, and A. D. Jurcut, “InSDN: A novel SDN trusion detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5,
 intrusion dataset,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165263–165284, 2020. pp. 21954–21961, 2017.
[17] C. Liang, L. Liu, and C. Liu, “Multi-UAV autonomous collision avoidance [40] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning apbased on PPO-GIC algorithm with CNN-LSTM fusion network,” Neural proaches for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, tax-
 Netw., vol. 162, pp. 21–33, May 2023. onomy, and open issues,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 189, Feb. 2020,
[18] X. Zhang, H. Zong, and W. Wu, “Cooperative obstacle avoidance of Art. no. 105124.
 unmanned system swarm via reinforcement learning under unknown envi- [41] Y. Cui et al., “Towards DDoS detection mechanisms in softwareronments,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, 2025, Art. no. 7500615. defined networking,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 190, Sep. 2021,
[19] M. Li, S. Deng, H. Zhou, and Y. Qin, “A path selection scheme for detecting Art. no. 103156.
 malicious behavior based on deep reinforcement learning in SDN/NFV- [42] C. Fan, J. Cui, H. Jin, H. Zhong, I. Bolodurina, and D. He, “Auto-updating
 enabled network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 236, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 110034. intrusion detection system for vehicular network: A deep learning ap-
[20] B. Darabi, M. Bag-Mohammadi, and M. Karami, “A micro reinforcement proach based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 learning architecture for intrusion detection systems,” Pattern Recognit. Technol., vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 15372–15384, Oct. 2024.
 Lett., vol. 185, pp. 81–86, Sep. 2024. [43] O. Elnakib, E. Shaaban, M. Mahmoud, and K. Emara, “EIDM: Deep
[21] X. Ma and W. Shi, “AESMOTE: Adversarial reinforcement learning with learning model for IoT intrusion detection systems,” J. Supercomputing,
 smote for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, vol. 79, no. 12, pp. 13241–13261, Aug. 2023.
 pp. 943–956, Apr.–Jun. 2021. [44] J. Singh and S. Behal, “Detection and mitigation of DDoS attacks in
[22] W. Wang et al., “Abnormal flow detection in industrial control network SDN: A comprehensive review, research challenges and future directions,”
 based on deep reinforcement learning,” Appl. Math. Comput., vol. 409, Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 37, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 100279.
 Nov. 2021, Art. no. 126379. [45] A. Zainudin, L. A. C. Ahakonye, R. Akter, D.-S. Kim, and J.-M. Lee,
[23] S. Kim et al., “DIVERGENCE: Deep reinforcement learning-based adap- “An efficient hybrid-DNN for DDoS detection and classification in
 tive traffic inspection and moving target defense countermeasure frame- software-defined IIoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10,
 work,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4834–4846, pp. 8491–8504, May 2023.
 Dec. 2022. [46] U. S. Chanu, K. J. Singh, and Y. J. Chanu, “A dynamic feature selection
[24] N. M. Yungaicela-Naula, C. Vargas-Rosales, J. A. Perez-Diaz, and D. technique to detect DDoS attack,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 74, May 2023,
 F. Carrera, “A flexible SDN-based framework for slow-rate DDoS attack Art. no. 103445.
 mitigation by reinforcement,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 205, Sep. 2022, [47] L. Mhamdi and M. M. Isa, “Securing SDN: Hybrid autoencoder-random
 Art. no. 103444. forest for intrusion detection and attack mitigation,” J. Netw. Comput.
[25] N. M. Yungaicela-Naula, C. Vargas-Rosales, and J. A. Perez-Diaz, Appl., vol. 225, May 2024, Art. no. 103868.
 “SDN/NFV-based framework for autonomous defense against slow-rate [48] J. Shu, L. Zhou, W. Zhang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Collaborative intrusion
 DDoS attacks by using reinforcement learning,” Future Gener. Comput. detection for VANETs: A deep learning-based distributed SDN approach,”
 Syst.-The Int. J. Escience, vol. 149, pp. 637–649, Dec. 2023. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4519–4530, Jul. 2021.
[26] W. Chen et al., “CIPPO: Contrastive imitation proximal policy optimiza- [49] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
 tion for recommendation based on reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5753–5767, Nov. 2024. Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
[27] P.-L. Dallaire-Demers and N. Killoran, “Quantum generative adversarial [50] A. Sharma and M. Singh, “Batch reinforcement learning approach using
 networks,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 98, no. 1, Jul. 2018, Art. no. 012324. recursive feature elimination for network intrusion detection,” Eng. Appl.
[28] J. Wang, X. Yan, L. Liu, L. Li, and Y. Yu, “CTTGAN: Traffic data Artif. Intell., vol. 136, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 109013.
 synthesizing scheme based on conditional GAN,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 14, [51] A. Alotaibi and A. Barnawi, “Securing massive IoT in 6 G: Recent solu-
 2022, Art. no. 5243. tions, architectures, future directions,” Internet Things, vol. 22, Jul. 2023,
[29] Q. Zeng and F. Nait-Abdesselam, “Leveraging human-in-the-loop ma- Art. no. 100715.
 chine learning and GAN-synthesized data for intrusion detection in Au- [52] J. Ye, J. Lv, G. Xu, and T. Liu, “Leaky cable perimeter intrusion detection
 tonomous Aerial Vehicles networks,” in Proc. ICC 2024-IEEE Int. Conf. based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 Commun., 2024, pp. 1557–1562. no. 12, pp. 22616–22627, Jun. 2024.
[30] Q. Zeng and F. Nait-Abdesselam, “Enhancing UAV network security: A [53] Z. Li, C. Huang, S. Deng, W. Qiu, and X. Gao, “A soft actor-critic reinhuman-in-the-loop and GAN-based approach to intrusion detection,” IEEE forcement learning algorithm for network intrusion detection,” Comput.
 Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 20870–20884, Jun. 2025. Secur., vol. 135, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 103502.
JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN 101

[54] J. F. M. Cevallos, A. Rizzardi, S. Sicari, and A. C. Porisini, “Deep Tao Hongyu received the B.S. degree in 2022 from
 reinforcement learning for intrusion detection in Internet of Things: Best the Shanghai University of Engineering Science,
 practices, lessons learnt, and open challenges,” Comput. Netw., vol. 236, Shanghai, China, where he has been working toward
 pp. 1–24, Nov. 2023. the M.S. degree in electronic information since 2023.
[55] S. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Shen, G. Wu, S. Yu, and S. Shen, “Novel intrusion His main research interests include software defined
 detection strategies with optimal hyper parameters for industrial Internet network and intrusion detection.
 of Things based on stochastic games and double deep Q-networks,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 17, pp. 29132–29145, Sep. 2024.
[56] C. Liu, R. Antypenko, I. Sushko, and O. Zakharchenko, “Intrusion detection system after data augmentation schemes based on the VAE and
 CVAE,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1000–1010, Jun. 2022.
[57] L. Yuan, S. Yu, Z. Yang, M. Duan, and K. Li, “A data balancing approach
 based on generative adversarial network,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.-
 The Int. J. Escience, vol. 141, pp. 768–776, Apr. 2023.
[58] H. Zhang, V. Sindagi, and V. M. Patel, “Image de-raining using a conditional generative adversarial network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Cui Meng received the M.S. degree in control sci-
 Technol., vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 3943–3956, Nov. 2020. ence and engineering from the Shanghai University
[59] E. Shereen, K. Kazari, and G. Dán, “A reinforcement learning approach to of Engineering Science, Shanghai, China, in 2024.
 undetectable attacks against automatic generation control,” IEEE Trans. His main research interests include software defined
 Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 959–972, Jan. 2024. networks and intrusion detection.
[60] J. Ma and W. Su, “Collaborative DDoS defense for SDN-based AIoT
 with autoencoder-enhanced federated learning,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 117,
 May 2025, Art. no. 102820.
[61] S. Saidane, F. Telch, K. Shahin, and F. Granelli, “Deep GraphSAGE enhancements for intrusion detection: Analyzing attention mechanisms and
 GCN integration,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 90, May 2025, Art. no. 104013.
[62] Z. Wang, Z. Li, M. Fu, Y. Ye, and P. Wang, “Network traffic classification based on federated semi-supervised learning,” J. Syst. Architecture,
 vol. 149, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 103091.
[63] J. Ma, W. Su, Y. Li, Y. Yuan, and Z. Zhang, “Synchronizing real-time and Peng Haidong received the B.S. degree in 2023
 high-precision LDoS defense of learning model-based in AIoT with pro- from the Shanghai University of Engineering Science,
 grammable data plane, SDN,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 229, Sep. 2024, Shanghai, China, where he has been working to-
 Art. no. 103916. ward the M.S. degree in electronic information since
[64] A. Zainudin, R. Akter, D.-S. Kim, and J.-M. Lee, “Federated learning in- 2024. His main research interests include software
 spired low-complexity intrusion detection and classification technique for defined network, artificial intelligence, and intrusion
 SDN-based industrial CPS,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, detection.
 no. 3, pp. 2442–2459, Sep. 2023.
[65] Z. He et al., “Edge device identification based on federated learning and
 network traffic feature engineering,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw.,
 vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1898–1909, Dec. 2022.
[66] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, K.-K. R. Choo, and M.
 Nafaa, “FELIDS: Federated learning-based intrusion detection system for
 Internet of Things,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 165, pp. 17–31,
 Jul. 2022.
[67] P. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Ye, and X. Chen, “ByteSGAN: A semi-supervised
 generative adversarial network for encrypted traffic classification in SDN Qiu Xihe received the Ph.D. degree from the National
 edge gateway,” Comput. Netw., vol. 200, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 108535. University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2018. She is
 currently an Associate Professor with the School of
 Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai, China. Her
 Chen Jue received the Ph.D. degree in computer sci- research interests include intelligent clinical decision
 ence from East China Normal University, Shanghai, support and deep reinforcement learning.
 China, in 2018. He is currently a Lecturer with the
 Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai. He has authored or coauthored multiple papers
 in referred journals and conferences, including Computer Communications (JCR region 1 journal). His
 research interests include software defined network
 and artificial intelligence. Dr. Chen is also an Active
 Reviewer of several international journals, including
 ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical Systems.