IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026 925

 Generative Adversarial Networks Based Low-Rate
 Denial of Service Attack Detection and Mitigation
 in Software-Defined Networks
 Manjuluri Anil Kumar , Balaprakasa Rao Killi , Senior Member, IEEE, and Eiji Oki , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Low-rate Denial of Service (LDoS) attacks use short, Vulnerabilities in the southbound interface can result in the
regular bursts of traffic to exploit vulnerabilities in network exploitation of protocols and man-in-the-middle attacks, which
protocols. They are a major threat to network security, espe- can compromise the controller. These vulnerabilities in the
cially in Software-Defined Networking (SDN) frameworks. These
attacks are challenging to detect and mitigate because of their data layer place the entire network at risk. Further, policy
low traffic volume, making it impossible to distinguish them from conflicts can lead to vulnerabilities that allow for illegal or
normal traffic. We propose a real-time LDoS attack detection restricted traffic. Failure to effectively manage configuration
and mitigation framework that can protect SDN. The framework and policies results in security vulnerabilities. Low visibility
incorporates a detection module that uses a deep learning model, and monitoring can lead to delays in the identification of
such as a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), to identify
the attack. An efficient mitigation module follows detection, risks and increase their consequences. However, it also raises
employing mechanisms to identify and filter harmful flows in real security issues, particularly in relation to Distributed Denial
time. Deploying the framework into SDN controllers guarantees of Service (DDoS) attacks.
compliance with OpenFlow standards, thereby avoiding the A DDoS attack is a type of Denial of Service (DoS) attack
necessity for additional hardware. Experimental results demon- where attackers launch multiple attacks on a target, disrupting
strate that the proposed system achieves a detection accuracy of
over 99.98% with an average response time of 8.58 s, significantly legitimate users’ operations. Over the past two decades, DDoS
outperforming traditional LDoS detection approaches. This study attacks have evolved and undergone classification based on
presents a scalable, real-time methodology to enhance SDN protocol vulnerabilities, resource focus, attack magnitude,
resilience against LDoS attacks. and timing. They can use network-layer and transport-layer
 Index Terms—LDoS, SDN, GAN, attack detection and mitiga- protocols, as well as application-layer protocols. DDoS attacks
tion, OpenFlow. can be volumetric or non-volumetric, continuous, pulse-wave,
 periodic, or low-stealthy [1].
 Low-rate Denial of Service (LDoS) attacks are a particular
 I. I NTRODUCTION type of DoS attack. These LDoS attacks disrupt and degrade
 HE CONVENTIONAL control and data plane architec- the service performance at the victim’s end with minimal
T ture of devices imposes constraints on the adaptability
of network infrastructure, thereby restricting its capacity
 resource usage [2]. Three characteristics distinguish LDoS
 attacks from traditional DoS attacks. First, LDoS attacks target
for innovation and expansion. Software-Defined Networking widespread adaptive mechanisms. These adaptive mechanisms
(SDN) is a networking method that separates the control effectively respond and adjust to LDoS attacks, exposing the
plane, which determines the path of network traffic, from the target to a continuous attack without their knowledge. Second,
requesting entity and the forwarding of data inside the network LDoS attacks are highly concealed. The average volume
structure. The separation of the control plane from the data of LDoS attack traffic is usually minimal due to the short
plane in SDN enables programmability, thereby simplifying burst duration. The resultant attack traffic closely resembles
the use of software for network configuration and control. the brief bursts generated by benign applications. Finally,
Because of its centralized control methodology, SDN presents LDoS attacks are cost-effective. Unlike flooding attacks, LDoS
various security vulnerabilities. The centralized controller in attacks transmit minimal data and can be carried out by a
a network is susceptible to significant attacks, as a single single-source attacker [3]. LDoS attacks are harder to detect
point of failure can cause the entire system to malfunction. than DoS attacks because they are more discreet and can evade
 conventional defense mechanisms.
 Received 17 February 2025; revised 15 August 2025; accepted 21
October 2025. Date of publication 24 October 2025; date of current version
 LDoS attacks target the hosts and critical services within
29 December 2025. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article the control plane to degrade the overall Quality of Service
and approving it for publication was P. Papadimitriou. (Corresponding author: (QoS) in the SDN. Hosts in the SDN are vulnerable to LDoS
Manjuluri Anil kumar.)
 Manjuluri Anil kumar and Balaprakasa Rao Killi are with the Department
 attacks. LDoS attacks disrupt the normal Transmission Control
of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of Technology at Protocol (TCP) operation by sending intermittent bursts of
Warangal, Warangal 506004, India (e-mail: ma23csr2r05@student.nitw.ac.in). high-speed data at a very low average rate. This keeps TCP
 Eiji Oki is with the Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
 in slow starts or fast retransmission stages. The intermittent
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3625278 bursts in regular network activity can efficiently conceal LDoS
 1932-4537 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
926 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

attacks among background traffic. TCP-targeted LDoS attacks is above a predefined threshold. After detecting an attack, it
can also disrupt the southbound TCP interface between the filters the attack traffic based on mitigation measures. These
control plane and the data plane, affecting the performance of measures ensure temporary blocking and prevent unwarranted
the data plane. Detecting LDoS attacks within overall network disruption of valid traffic. The contributions of this paper are
traffic is challenging, particularly when the SDN controller as follows:
has access to comprehensive traffic data. Consequently, an 1) We propose a framework that utilizes GANs for identiadditional application is required to detect and mitigate LDoS fying LDoS attacks in a real-time SDN environment.
attacks. The management of the entire network may be 2) We develop an efficient mitigation technique to prevent
compromised when LDoS attacks target the SDN control detected LDoS attacks before they cause significant
plane. LDoS attacks have the potential to cause more damage damage. The temporary blockage of harmful IPs and the
than those in conventional networks if the control plane is control of their removal after a specific amount of time
unable to promptly identify and modify the network state. permits legitimate communication.
Current detection approaches for DoS attacks lack the ability 3) We conducted comprehensive experiments to evaluate
to differentiate LDoS attack traffic from regular traffic. The the effectiveness of LDADM. It achieves high accuracy
identification and prevention of LDoS attacks continue to pose in real-time attack detection and mitigation, outperformchallenges due to their resemblance to authorized user access ing existing techniques.
and flash event attacks. We organize the rest of this work as follows: Section II
 Existing signature-based and behavior-based attack detec- offers an overview of SDN, LDoS attacks, and GAN, encomtion techniques rely on prior knowledge of attack patterns passing the core principles and background details. Section III
and network activity and require regular upgrades to pro- provides an overview of the existing research in the field.
tect against evolving attack methods [4], [5]. However, Section IV introduces the proposed system and methodologies.
creating new signatures or updated profiles for these detec- Section V contains comprehensive information regarding the
tors requires significant time and resources, often requiring experimental configuration and the procedure employed to
network administrative skills. To address these challenges, create the dataset. It also presents the results of the experiment
several advanced detection methods have been developed, and assesses the model’s performance using those outcomes
including supervised, unsupervised, and mixed anomaly detec- and Section VI functions as the conclusion of the entire work.
tion approaches [6]. Unsupervised learning-based anomaly
detection methods assume a normal distribution of the data. II. BACKGROUND
Any data point that is significantly different from the expected A. Software-Defined Networking
pattern is considered an anomaly [7]. Supervised anomaly
detection involves training a classifier using a dataset classified The architecture of SDN is illustrated in Figure 1. It
as either “anomaly” or “normal” [8]. However, this requires consists of three planes: the control plane, the data plane,
thorough training of both “anomaly” and “normal” observa- and the application plane. The control plane is responsible for
tions, making it difficult for systems to accurately detect and the management of data packet routing within the network.
recognize these patterns. The SDN controller functions as the network’s core decision-
 Deep learning methods like Convolutional Neural Networks making authority for routing and establishing communication
(CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are utilized with network devices such as switches and routers. The
to achieve favorable outcomes in anomaly detection tasks [9]. forwarding devices that make up the data plane are responsible
Nevertheless, these methods face difficulties in efficiently for processing, forwarding, and aggregating network packets.
working in network anomaly detection situations because The application plane encompasses a variety of network
of the large number of normal samples and shortage of applications and services. The application plane aims to create
anomalous samples. The data imbalance and lack of previous and implement network services that can adapt to changing
information pose significant challenges in the detection pro- conditions, improving overall efficiency and adaptability.
cess, especially for zero-day attacks. The rapid advancement When the switch gets a packet header that does not match
of 5G/6G networks and cloud services led to a significant with the existing flow rules, it initiates packet_in and
increase in cyber-attack data flow, making real-time identifi- packet_out events. The SDN controller transmits flow rules
cation and consistent detection increasingly difficult [10]. to switches using the OpenFlow protocol through the south-
 Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are flexible bound interface. Applications communicate with the SDN
methods for generating high-quality data and classifying controller via the northbound interface to request network
information. They consist of a generator and a discriminator resources or provide services such as network administration,
to detect anomalies in time series data. GANs have become security, and traffic monitoring.
prevalent due to their ability to handle imbalanced datasets
through adversarial learning principles. Motivated by this, B. LDoS Attacks
we propose a Low-rate Denial of service Attack Detection LDoS attacks target network protocols and routing queue
and Mitigation (LDADM) framework to detect LDoS attacks. management systems by sending small amounts of traffic to a
The model trains over epochs, generates sequences with TCP/IP network, disrupting its regular operation. LDoS attacks
predetermined length, step size, and batch size, and obtains are identifiable by the regular occurrence of frequent pulses;
an anomaly score. An LDoS attack is detected if the score hence, they are also called pulsing attacks [11]. These attacks
ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs 927

Fig. 1. Software-defined networking architecture.

 Fig. 3. LDoS attacks targeting RTO mechanism.

 C. TCP-Targeted LDoS Attacks
 LDoS attacks specifically target two TCP characteristics: Retransmission TimeOut (RTO) and Additive Increase
 Multiplicative Decrease (AIMD). The RTO mechanism is a
 congestion control approach in TCP that functions by utilizing
 a window established at the data sender. The congestion win-
Fig. 2. LDoS attack scenario. dow regulates the amount of data that a network can transmit
 before requiring an acknowledgment from the recipient. Every
 time a TCP sender sends a message, the RTO mechanism starts
interfere with harmless TCP flows by employing square wave a timer. When the timer expires without an acknowledgment,
pulses, as shown in Figure 2. The size and duration of the it indicates that the message may not have reached the receiver
pulses determine the severity of the attack’s effect. Each pulse due to packet loss or network issues, prompting the sender to
measures the attack traffic over time. retransmit. This indicates that there is a high level of network
 Commonly used Internet systems are the primary target congestion, which requires the TCP protocol to switch to
of LDoS attacks. They aim to lower the rates at which the slow-start state. That is, if an acknowledgment does not
specific protocols or applications consume resources. LDoS arrive within the specified delay period, it resets the congestion
attackers intentionally direct valid traffic toward the target. window to 1, initiating a slow start phase for retransmission. In
This prompts the target’s system to generate adverse responses, real-world scenarios, the RTO is adjusted based on the Roundthereby disrupting or deteriorating service quality. Currently, Trip Time (RTT). It often ranges from 10 to 100 milliseconds
LDoS attacks mostly focus on systems that include centralized in real networks. It is computed as shown in (1), where G
services and devices, such as cloud computing and big data represents the time scale, SRTT represents the smoothed RTT,
service platforms. and VRTT represents the smoothed RTT variation. Usually, the
 LDOS attacks generate traffic that displays intermittent RTT and SRTT values, including G and four times the VRTT,
patterns and maintains a consistently low average rate. This are extremely low. Therefore, according to (1), the value of
makes them a greater threat to SDN compared to traditional RTO is often equivalent to RTOmin .
networks. A rapid surge in attack traffic overwhelms the RTO = min(RTOmax ,
victim’s switches, causing packet loss in regular TCP flows
 max(RTOmin , SRTT + max(G, 4 × VRTT))) (1)
and requiring repetitive retransmission cycles. Attackers often
leverage network measurement tools [12], [13] to analyze LDoS attacks exploit the vulnerability of TCP congestion
bottleneck links, which are narrow bandwidth lines used for management systems, causing TCP senders to repeatedly
both control and data traffic. The attacker intentionally sends switch between congestion and recovery states. While using
attack data traffic to overload the bottleneck buffer. This leads the RTO method, attackers send LDoS pulses during each
to a significant increase in the usage rate of the connection retransmission event. This stops retransmissions and keeps the
and causing severe disruption to network services. Identifying TCP congestion window (cwnd) value constant. The attacker
LDoS attacks is crucial because they pose a significant danger begins an attack pulse that lasts for a specific duration, as
to both network operators and end users. shown in Figure 3. The attacker then waits for a retransmission
928 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 Fig. 5. LDoS attack model.

 decrease in the congestion window. The intensity of the attack
 and network congestion determine this variation.

 D. LDoS Attack Model
 To assess the identification and countermeasures for LDoS
 attacks, it is important to create an LDoS attack model and
Fig. 4. LDoS attacks targeting AIMD mechanism.
 establish its attack attributes. The LDoS attack model consists
 of three essential parameters: attack cycle, attack pulse length,
 and attack rate. Adjusting these parameters may change the
time out before initiating another pulse. The attacker exhibits attack’s impact and limit the amount of traffic transmitted
this behavior with the intention of causing the victim network during each cycle to stay below bandwidth capacity. The LDoS
to exit the RTO state. This allows for a more efficient attack attack model is depicted in Figure 5. T represents the attack
while maintaining the unchanged attack cycle. cycle, t represents the duration of an individual attack pulse,
 TCP uses the AIMD as a mechanism to control network R represents the attack rate of a single attack, B represents the
congestion. When the network is not experiencing congestion, bottleneck bandwidth, and Rmean indicates the average attack
AIMD gradually increases the cwnd. When a packet loss rate within one attack cycle.
is detected, AIMD multiplicatively decreases the cwnd. The To initiate an LDoS attack, it is essential to ensure that
balance between aggressive bandwidth usage and conservative the rate of data transmission (R) exceeds the capacity of the
load avoidance guarantees equity among competing TCP bottleneck bandwidth, as depicted in (4). This will overload
flows. Several TCP versions and other network protocols the targeted connection. However, it is essential that the
extensively employ AIMD to ensure efficient and stable data total amount of attack data transferred during each attack
delivery throughout networks. Equations (2) and (3) describe period, known as Attack Cost (AC), stays below the bandwidth
the principle of AIMD, where I represents the additive increase capacity, as indicated in (5).
of cwnd when ACK packets are received within an RTT. Wt is
the value of cwnd at time t, R represents RTT, and Wt+R R>B (4)
represents the value of cwnd after one RTT. D represents the R×t
multiplicative decrease, and α, β are the parameter values AC = <1 (5)
 Bandwidth ×T
typically set to 1 and 0.5, respectively [14].
 E. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
 I: Wt+R ← Wt + α, α>0 (2) A Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is a learning
 D: Wt+R ← β × Wt , 0<β<1 (3) model that is capable of operating in unsupervised, supervised,
 and reinforcement learning contexts. The model comprises a
 While using the AIMD mechanism, attackers send periodic generator (G) and a discriminator (D) that learn concurrently.
bursts to continuously decrease cwnd, reducing it to half The generator produces samples sufficiently realistic to fool
its previous size. When attacks are silent, cwnd increases the discriminator. The discriminator differentiates between real
by 1 per RTT and then suffers new bursts, as illustrated in and fake data. Figure 6 illustrates the architecture and training
Figure 4. The recipient provides congestion feedback in the process of a GAN. The model transforms raw data (z) into
form of duplicate ACKs. The sender then uses this information synthetic data G(z), with the discriminator classifying the
to reduce the congestion window in accordance with the data sources as genuine or fake based on the distribution of
congestion avoidance method. the real data. The generator seeks to create synthetic data
 Both the RTO and AIMD mechanisms control the conges- that closely resembles real data (x), which is evaluated by
tion window of a TCP sender on real networks. Therefore, the discriminator. Iterative tuning improves performance, and
the consequences of an attack vary between these two effects. once D’s discriminative ability reaches a threshold, G can
During the attack, there may be instances where it leads to a deduce that it understands the genuine data distribution. Back
timeout and RTO effect, while in other cases, it may produce a Propagation can adjust the parameters of both the generator
ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs 929

 performance and evaluate flow features. A mitigation system
 for SDN that uses decision trees and dynamic sliding window
 algorithms to protect against LDoS attacks was presented
 in [28]. A security solution that effectively counters low-rate
 TCP attacks by monitoring data transfer rates was developed
 in [29].
 An online attack detection and mitigation system for
 SDN that uses traffic features and a Lightgbm classifier
 was introduced in [14]. Liu et al. presented a real-time
 anomaly protection framework to detect and reduce TCP-
Fig. 6. The structure of GANs.
 targeted LDoS attacks in SDN [30]. A two-phase detection
 system was developed by combining lightweight detection
 in the data plane with in-depth identification using Bayesian
and discriminator, improving their functions and generating
 voting in the control plane [31]. An LDoS attack detection
realistic data.
 algorithm that integrates an optimization-based heuristic algorithm with a backpropagation neural network was presented
 III. R ELATED W ORK in [32]. Chen et al. introduced an online real-time LDoS
 This section provides an overview of the literature on detection system that employs CNN and dynamic time
detection approaches for DDoS and LDoS attacks in SDN, warping (DTW) algorithms [33]. Liu et al. developed a twoalong with GAN-based approaches to detect and mitigate step self-adjusting support vector machine to identify LDoS
them. attacks [34]. Deng et al. introduced a system to detect real-time
 LDoS attacks in SDN environments by leveraging the Extreme
A. DDoS Attack Detection Approaches Gradient Boosting technique [35]. An ensemble model to
 identify LDDoS threats by utilizing CNN and a bidirectional
 Wang et al. presented a defense system to detect and
 LSTM network was presented in [36].
mitigate DDoS attacks in SDN by employing hybrid deep
 Existing LDoS mitigation frameworks in [14], [15], [16],
learning techniques and IP traceback [15]. The authors of [16]
 [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27],
presented a framework to enhance high-speed network intru-
 [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36] employ a
sion detection and address DDoS attack challenges in SDN by
 multi-stage process to identify the victim and trace the attacker.
utilizing the Data Plane Development Kit (DPDK). Ling et al.
 Then, they employ port-level or flow-level drop restrictions to
introduced a real-time DDoS detection technique based on
 mitigate the attacks. However, these solutions have limitations
the hurst index [17]. In [18], a mechanism was introduced
 such as, high computational overhead, delayed mitigation, and
to identify and mitigate DoS attacks in SDN by reducing the
 inability to adapt to new LDoS strategies. Further, aggregate
rate of control packets and retransmission during attacks. A
 port/flow-based action could cause collateral damage to legit-
DDoS detection framework based on deep neural networks
 imate traffic. In contrast, the proposed mitigation strategy is a
was presented in [19]. The authors of [20] investigated
 lightweight, flow-aware, and adaptive methodology. It impleadvancements in DDoS attack detection and future directions
 ments targeted mitigation at the flow level (src_ip → dst_ip)
for improved security in SDN environment. A collaborative
 immediately upon receiving an attack alert. This enables finesource-side DDoS attack detection framework using Long
 grained control without affecting legitimate traffic. Further, the
Short-Time Memory (LSTM) to address the limitations of
 proposed strategy employs a time-restricted blocking method
target-side detection techniques was presented in [21].
 that automatically unblocks flows after a specified duration.
 This approach improves flexibility and prevents legitimate
B. LDoS Attack Detection Approaches for SDN sources from permanently being disrupted.
 An algorithm that utilizes source IP addresses to detect
real-time LDoS attacks by monitoring traffic fluctuations was
presented in [22]. The authors of [23] investigated a Gramian C. GAN-Based Attack Detection Approaches
angular summation field transformation-based LDoS detection The study in [37] investigated the impact of data imbaland mitigation framework for SDN. An adaptive Kohonen ance on DDoS attack detection. It also demonstrated that
network-based fine-grained LDoS detection model that lever- using synthetic GAN-generated data to balance the dataset
ages the Smith-Waterman algorithm and cluster analysis significantly improves classification accuracy. A GAN-based
was presented in [24]. An online monitoring and mitigation approach with dual discriminators to detect adverse DDoS
architecture was developed for SDN that efficiently prevents traffic was presented in [38]. Mustapha et al. designed an
LDoS attacks without requiring any changes to switches or architecture for DDoS detection that uses Wasserstein GAN
protocols [25]. The study in [26] presented a framework that (WGAN) to generate adversarial attacks [39]. The authors
uses histogram-based gradient boosting and peak detection to of [40] introduced an unsupervised framework that utilizes
detect and mitigate LDoS attacks in real time. In [27], a real- WGAN with Gradient Penalty (WGAN-GP) and an encoder
time framework was introduced to identify and mitigate LDoS for DDoS detection and mitigation in SDN. The work
attacks in SDN. It uses machine learning to monitor traffic in [41] employed GANs to generate realistic IoT traffic data
930 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF G AN -BASED ATTACK D ETECTION few studies address mitigation, often treating it as a post-
 A PPROACHES W ITH THE P ROPOSED W ORK processing task or depending on external systems such as
 firewalls, IDS, etc., rather than incorporating it into the
 detection pipeline. This separation limits quick responses to
 LDoS attacks. In contrast, the proposed LDADM framework
 is an SDN-native solution that integrates real-time detection
 and mitigation. It employs a GAN-based model for LDoS
 attack detection and incorporates dynamic flow rule management within a controller to implement rapid mitigation
 actions.

 IV. P ROPOSED S YSTEM AND M ETHODOLOGY
 This section presents LDADM, a framework for the realtime detection and mitigation of LDoS attacks. It also provides
 a detailed discussion of GAN-based algorithms used for the
 efficient detection and mitigation of LDoS attacks.
 Figure 7 illustrates the proposed LDADM framework for
 detecting and mitigating LDoS attacks in an SDN environment. The framework consists of three layers: the data layer,
for DDoS attack detection in smart home environment. A
 the SDN controller, and the application layer. The data layer
Conditional GAN (CGAN)-based DDoS detection technique
 processes both legitimate user traffic and malicious attack
was developed for SDNs by utilizing conditional training and
 traffic from OpenFlow-enabled switches or users. It also
flow table features [42]. Abdelaty et al. introduced an adversarcollects flow data and transmit it to the SDN controller for
ial training method based on WGAN-GP [43]. Their method
 analysis. The SDN Controller serves as the central intelligence,
improved system robustness and reduced undetected malicious
 consisting of two main modules: detection and mitigation. The
flows by generating fake benign samples that disrupt real
 controller utilizes the southbound interface to get flow statistics
attacks.
 such as packet counts, byte counts, and flow durations, etc.,
 Shieh et al. employed CycleGAN to generate realistic
 from switches. These flow statistics are transmitted to the
malicious traffic [44]. They highlighted the threat posed by
 detection module of the controller. This module performs
adversarial DDoS attacks capable of bypassing ML/DL-based
 comprehensive traffic analysis to transform raw data into traffic
detection. A privacy-preserving framework for DDoS detection
 features. These features undergo extraction and selection for
in multi-domain networks by employing Federated Learning
 the training of the GAN model. The trained GAN model
and GAN was presented in [45]. Saka et al. investigated
 analyzes incoming real-time traffic to determine whether each
a Conditional Tabular GAN (CTGAN), Tabular Variational
 flow is normal or malicious, producing detection results.
Autoencoder (TVAE), and CopulaGAN for the synthesis of
 Upon detection of an attack, control moves to the mitigation
tabular data to improve DDoS detection [46]. The work
 module. It records the detected malicious flows, determines
in [47] combined Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) with a GAN
 the attacker’s IP address, identifies the victim, and develops
discriminator to detect volumetric DDoS attacks in SDN. The
 mitigation strategies. The mitigation strategy employs a timeauthors of [48] presented a GRU-enhanced GAN that uses flow
 restricted blocking mechanism that automatically unblocks
and entropy-based features for unsupervised DDoS detection
 flows after a specified duration. It implements flow rules
in SDN. Chauhan and Shah Heydari introduced a GAN-based
 through the northbound interface, which are then deployed to
methodology in [49] for generating polymorphic adversarial
 the switches for enforcement. The application layer interfaces
DDoS attacks that can bypass ML-based Intrusion Detection
 with external systems using REST APIs. It provides detec-
Systems (IDSs).
 tion and mitigation results while enabling dynamic network
 The comparative analysis of existing GAN-based attack
 monitoring and control.
detection approaches with the proposed LDADM approach
is presented in Table I. Although prior work in [37], [38],
[39], [40], [41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], A. Attack Detection Module
[49] employed GANs, none of these works investigated The attack detection module includes two algorithms: GANthe GAN-based model for the detection and mitigation of based model training and real-time attack detection in SDN
real-time LDOS attacks for SDN environment. Most of the environments.
existing works focus on conventional DDoS attacks instead Algorithm 1 illustrates the training of GAN-based model
of stealthy LDoS attacks. Various studies are implemented to detect LDoS attacks in real-time environments. It takes
in non-SDN environments that lack centralized control and as input data comprising traffic sequences, sequence length
programmability for adaptive mitigation. Most existing stud- seq_len, step size, number of epochs and batch size. The
ies employ offline detection techniques, hence limiting their algorithm begins by preprocessing the input data and initializes
effectiveness in dynamic, real-time networks. Furthermore, an empty list of sequences. It iteratively extracts data segments
ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs 931

Fig. 7. LDADM framework.

Algorithm 1 GAN Model Training abnormalities. The step parameter ensures that the sequences
Input: data, seq_len, step, epochs, batch_size overlap by one time step. This overlap allows the model
Output: Discriminator, Generator to identify deeper changes and patterns in the data. After
 1: Preprocess data preparing the sequences, the algorithm constructs the GAN
 2: Initialize sequences ← [] model, which comprises a generator that creates synthetic
 3: for i ← 0 to len(data) − seq_len, step do sequences and a discriminator that differentiates between real
 4: temp ← data[i: i + seq_len] and fake sequences. The GAN model undergoes a training
 5: Append temp to sequences phase for a predefined number of epochs. For each batch
 6: end for in the sequence, the model trains discriminator (D) and
 Construction of GAN: generator (G). The batch size parameter denotes the number
 7: Generator ← build_generator() of sequences that the model concurrently processes in each
 8: Discriminator ← build_discriminator() iteration. The training begins with the generator producing
 9: Compile and evaluate GAN by combining Generator and fake data using random noise sampled from latent space.
 Discriminator The discriminator is evaluated on the real data from the
 Training of GAN: sequences and fake data produced by the generator. Then,
10: for epoch ← 1 to epochs do loss functions are computed for discriminator and generator
11: for each batch in sequences do networks. Finally, the generator and discriminator networks
12: Train Discriminator on real and fake sequences are updated through backpropagation. The hyperparameters
13: Train Generator utilized in the algorithm are presented in Table II.
14: Compute loss for both Discriminator and Generator Algorithm 2 defines a real-time LDoS attack detection
15: Update Discriminator and Generator mechanism employing a discriminator to categorize traffic as
16: end for either legitimate or malicious depending on a predetermined
17: end for threshold. It requires a real-time flow for assessment, a
18: return Discriminator, Generator discriminator to classify the flow as either legitimate or an
 attack, and a threshold.
 The algorithm begins with the extraction of features from
of length seq_len using the specified step size from raw data the input data flow. The feature vector is then passed to
and adds them to the sequences list. This procedure transforms the discriminator, which computes a score to determine the
the continuous data stream into fixed-length segments for probability that the input flow is legitimate or an attack. If the
better analysis over time. The seq_len parameter defines the score exceeds a predetermined threshold, it is categorized as an
number of time steps or observations in each input sequence. attack. If it is below or equal to the threshold, it is categorized
This parameter also defines the volume of data that the model as legitimate traffic. The attack_flag is set to 1 upon
concurrently evaluates for generating predictions or finding detection of an attack and 0 when the traffic is considered to be
932 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE II
 H YPERPARAMETERS
 Algorithm 3 Mitigation of LDos Attacks
 Input: Traffic sequence flow, block_duration, detection
 result attack_flag
 Output: Defense Rule
 1: Initialize malicious_ips ← []
 2: Function: handle_mitigation()
 3: if attack_flag == 1 then
 4: if src_ip not in malicious_ips then
 5: Log “Blocking IP: src_ip”
 6: Add src_ip to malicious_ips
 7: Construct flow rule to block packets from src_ip
 8: Match ← {ipv4_src =src_ip, eth_type =
 IPv4}
 9: Action ← Drop
 10: add_flow_entry(Match, priority,
 actions, datapath)
Algorithm 2 GAN-Based Attack Detection Algorithm 11: Print “src_ip is blocked for block_duration seconds”
Input: flow, Discriminator, threshold 12: Wait untill block_duration to release src_ip later
Output: attack_flag 13: else
 1: feature_vector ← extract_features(flow) 14: Print “src_ip is already blocked”
 2: score ← Discriminator(feature_vector) 15: end if
 3: if score > threshold then 16: end if
 4: Print “Attack detected from source IP” 17: Function: release_blocked_ips()
 5: attack_flag ← 1 18: for each src_ip in malicious_ips do
 6: else 19: if block_duration has expired for src_ip then
 7: Print “Legitimate traffic detected from source IP” 20: Remove src_ip from malicious_ips
 8: attack_flag ← 0 21: Print Released src_ip
 9: end if 22: end if
10: return attack_flag 23: end for
 24: return Action

legitimate. The algorithm’s final result is the attack_flag,
indicating the identification of an LDoS attack. list of blocked IPs by releasing IPs from the malicious_ips
 list after the expiration of their blocking period. That is, the
 algorithm traverses all blocked IPs and verifies whether the
B. Mitigation Module
 block duration for an IP is lapsed. It removes the src_ip
 Algorithm 3 describes the mitigation strategy to counter lapsed blocking period from the malicious_ips list and records
LDoS attacks through the use of defensive measures against the release of the src_ip. Finally, the algorithm produces an
malicious IP addresses. It takes as input a traffic flow, a action that signifies the implementation of a defense rule to
specified block duration, and the outcome of the detection mitigate identified malicious activities. This algorithm ensures
algorithm on the traffic flow, which is represented as an attack the temporary blocking of harmful IPs, thereby preserving the
flag. The algorithm initializes an empty list of malicious_ips network’s operational integrity and protecting it from potential
to store the IP addresses of sources identified as malicious. LDoS attacks.
If the src_ip of the traffic flow detected as an attack is not
present in the malicious_ips list, then it is appended to the V. R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
list and records the action as blocking the src_ip address.
The algorithm then creates a flow rule that aims to prevent This section presents the experimental setup, traffic generpackets from the malicious IP. The match field of the flow ation, evaluation metrics, evaluation of LDADM framework,
rule corresponds to packets with ipv4_src specified as src_ip and performance comparison of the LDADM with existing
and eth_type specified as IPv4. The corresponding action for methods.
these matched packets is to drop them. The add_flow_entry()
method incorporates the flow entry into the network switch. A. Experimental Setup
This method requires parameters including the match field, The LDADM is evaluated using Linux operating system
priority, action, and the datapath object. The algorithm gener- and SDN environment created by Mininet [50] and Ryu
ates a message confirming that the src_ip is blocked for the controller as illustrated in Table III. We considered the Abilene
designated block duration. If the src_ip is already included topology from the Internet Topology Zoo [51] as shown in
in the malicious_ips list, then the algorithm alerts that the IP Figure 8. It consists of 25 links, 11 switches, and 11 hosts.
is currently blocked. The algorithm continually updates the We have obtained the topology as a graphic file with. gml
ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs 933

 TABLE III
 S IMULATION E NVIRONMENT samples. To measure the effectiveness of mitigation, we
 utilized six metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, false
 positive rate (FPR), and response time (RT).
 1) Accuracy: This metric measures the degree to which
 detection results correspond to true values. It is calculated as
 follows:
 TP + TN
 Accuracy = (6)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 2) Precision (P): It computes the percentage of positives
 that are accurately detected during LDoS attacks. It is
 expressed as follows:
 TP
 P= (7)
 TP + FP
 3) Recall: It is a measure of the proportion of true positives
 correctly detected. It is calculated as follows:
 TP
 Recall = (8)
 TP + FN
 4) F1-Score: This metric measures the balance between
 precision and recall in a classification model. It is computed
 by obtaining the harmonic mean of the precision and recall
 values of the model. It is calculated as follows:
 Precision × Recall
 F1-score = 2 × (9)
 Precision + Recall
Fig. 8. The network topology. 5) False Positive Rate (FPR): It estimates the percentage
 of negative cases that are mistakenly identified as positive. It
 is determined as follows:
extension and used Python code to convert it into Mininet
 FP
file with. mn extension. The topology uses OpenFlow v1.3 FPR = (10)
and OpenVSwitches that implement the OpenFlow protocol TN + FP
(OpenVSwitch v2.5.5). The bandwidth between switches is 6) Response Time (RT): This metric measures how quickly
set to 1.92 Gbps, while the bandwidth between a switch and a system detects and reacts to an attack. It is calculated as
a host is set to 10 Gbps. All switches are interconnected follows:
by a solitary remote Ryu controller. The IP addresses of all
network devices are configured within the 10.0.0.1/11 network RT = MitigationTime − AttackStartTime (11)
segment, ensuring connectivity between hosts.
 D. Comparison Approaches
B. Traffic Generation
 The performance of the LDADM is compared with three
 The background traffic is generated by the iperf3 tool and state-of-the-art approaches: PeakSAX [25], HGB-FP [26], and
LDoS attack traffic is generated through a Python script. The GASF-IPP [23]. We briefly describe these approaches below.
traffic collection and recording module interacts in real time 1) PeakSAX: This approach uses a traffic symbolization
with switches connected to the Ryu controller to obtain flow technique to detect LDoS attacks and classifies attacks
table data. The module reads incoming messages and extracts based on peak attributes using a random forest classifier.
relevant information. Then, mitigation is performed by blocking malicious
 traffic using flow rules.
C. Evaluation Metrics 2) HGB-FP: This framework employs a histogram-based
 The LDoS attack detection and mitigation framework cat- gradient boosting for the detection of LDoS attacks. The
egorizes time periods as positive samples during attacks and mitigation process involves applying the peak finding
negative samples during normal network conditions. True technique and blocking malicious traffic by implementpositives (TP) are the number of accurately detected positive ing flow rules.
samples, whereas false positives (FP) are negative samples that 3) GASF-IPP: This approach identifies LDoS attacks using
are incorrectly labeled as positive. False negatives (FN) are the Gramian angular summation field transformation
positive samples that are incorrectly categorized as negative, technique. It mitigates attacks by using IP-Port analysis
whereas true negatives (TN) are accurately detected negative and implementing flow rules to block malicious traffic.
934 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 9. Traffic distribution of the generated dataset.

Fig. 10. Generator loss vs discriminator loss.
 Fig. 11. Visual summary of classification metrics.
E. Performance Evaluation
 The distribution of traffic within a dataset is crucial for how well the discriminator can classify inputs as real or fake.
understanding network traffic balance, particularly for the It is often improved using binary cross-entropy to help the
detection of anomalies and performance evaluation. Figure 9 discriminator learn to differentiate between real and generated
illustrates the traffic distribution in our generated dataset. data. As the discriminator gets better at distinguishing real and
It consists of 21,71,852 total values with 15,12,389 repre- fake inputs, it supplies more accurate feedback to help the
senting normal traffic and 6,59,463 indicating attack traffic. generator create more realistic synthetic data. The generator
A majority of normal traffic results in an imbalance. Class loss measures how well the generator can create synthetic
imbalance significantly affects the accuracy and efficacy of data that misleads the discriminator, pushing the generator
LDoS attack detection. The proposed LDADM framework to produce outputs that look like real data. The generator is
manages class imbalance by prioritizing the modeling of designed to produce samples that the discriminator erroneously
normal traffic instead of requiring large volumes of attack identifies as real, hence enhancing the reality of the generated
data. During training, the generator learns to mimic legitimate data over successive iterations. This adversarial relationship is
traffic patterns and the discriminator is able to distinguish essential to GAN training.
between real and generated data. This process enhances the The loss patterns exhibited three distinct phases of learning
discriminator’s ability to identify normal traffic, enabling it to during training. In the initial phase (epochs 0–50), the generidentify LDoS attacks even when these occurrences are rare or ator’s loss increased, while the discriminator’s loss decreased.
new. Instead of generating fake attack samples or oversampling This signified the discriminator’s initial dominance, as the
the minority class, the proposed LDADM framework trains generator at this stage produced inconsistent traffic patterns
its discriminator to thoroughly comprehend normal behavior. that the discriminator could easily identify as fake. During
Focusing on normal traffic patterns reduces the risk of bias the intermediate phase (epochs 50–200), the generator and
and overfitting, leading to more robust and reliable detection discriminator maintained a balanced and competitive adverof LDoS attacks. sarial dynamic, exhibiting fluctuations in their loss patterns.
 Figure 10 represents the training behavior of the proposed During the final phase of convergence (epochs 200-250), both
LDADM in terms of discriminator loss and generator loss. networks reached a state of relative equilibrium, with their
These losses represent the specific functions optimized by losses stabilizing and fluctuations becoming minimal. The
the discriminator and generator, respectively. These losses are reduced volatility at this stage indicates the convergence of the
vital for maintaining a balance between the generator and adversarial training process, suggesting that additional training
discriminator. They force the generator to produce realistic is likely to yield only minimal qualitative enhancements.
data and test the discriminator’s ability to differentiate between Figure 11(a) represents the Receiver Operating
real and generated inputs. The discriminator loss measures Characteristic (ROC) curve alongside its associated Area
ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs 935

 TABLE V
 ATTACK PARAMETERS S ETTING

Fig. 12. Anomaly distribution.

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON
 2) Mitigation Performance: To verify the effectiveness of
 the LDADM under different real-world conditions, we carry
 out eight sets of simulations under attacks with different
 parameters, as illustrated in Table V. It consists of attack
 cycle (T), burst duration (t), attack rate (R), attack time, and
 attack cost. The possible t values vary from 0.1 to 0.5, while
 the possible T values range from 1 to 5. Changes in attack
 parameters enable the framework to handle a wide range of
Under the Curve (AUC) value. The GAN model employs attack patterns, reflecting real-world LDoS behavior. Table V
a neutral threshold of 0.5 to avoid sensitivity bias. The also illustrates the influence of various attack parameters on
ROC curve demonstrates the network’s predictive confidence, the cost of an attack. As t or R increases, the cost increases,
with elevated AUC values signifying effective class demonstrating that reduced values of t and R yield lower costs.
differentiation. Figure 13 illustrates the network traffic patterns recorded
 The confusion matrix illustrated in Figure 11(b) indicates during each simulation set executed with the LDADM
that the model effectively identifies attack traffic. It shows a deployed on the controller. Network traffic is recorded using
high number of accurately classified attacks and normal traffic Wireshark at a sampling period of 0.1 seconds. The blue
samples. The model incorrectly categorizes a fraction of actual traffic pattern denotes TCP traffic, whereas the green traffic
attacks as normal traffic, indicating the missed detection of pattern indicates UDP traffic. The red dotted line indicates
some attacks. However, it incorrectly categorizes a fraction of the beginning of the attack, the green dotted line denotes the
normal traffic as an attack. mitigation of the attack, and the gray region represents the
 The distribution of anomaly scores depicted in Figure 12 network under attack.
illustrates the variation of anomaly scores over time. The We conduct experiments on each set of attack scenarios
neutral threshold is indicated in a horizontal black line, and an ten times and record the maximum and minimum response
anomaly score beyond the threshold, indicated in red, signifies times, as illustrated in Table VI. It consists of Set No.,
attack traffic. The lower scores indicated in green represent R, t, T values, min, max, and average response times for
normal traffic. eight attack scenarios. Note that the attack rate (R), burst
 It provides a clear differentiation between normal and duration (t), and cycle time (T) influence response times.
anomalous classes, hence increasing the model’s confidence The response time for all sets varies from 0.12 seconds to
and improving its accuracy. 21.39 seconds. Consequently, the LDADM can efficiently
 1) Detection Performance: Table IV illustrates the detec- identify and mitigate LDoS attacks with an average response
tion performance of the LDADM in comparison to time of 8.58s.
state-of-the-art approaches, namely PeakSAX [25], HGB- Table VI shows that the order of response time depends
FP [26], and GASF-IPP [23]. The LDADM results in a 7.35%, on the combination of attack rate (R), burst duration (t), and
9.85%, and 10.96% higher accuracy compared to PeakSAX, cycle time (T). High attack rates, such as 60 to 100 Mbps,
HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP, respectively. The framework also impose considerable load on the system, resulting in longer
achieves high precision by minimizing false positives and response times, whereas reduced attack rates, such as 20 to 30
effectively managing dataset imbalance. It achieves a 9.77%, Mbps, generate less traffic load, leading to faster responses.
9.80%, and 9.84% higher precision compared to PeakSAX, Reduced cycle times, like T = 1, lead to more frequent bursts,
HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP, respectively. Moreover, the LDADM which gives the system less recovery time and a faster response
yields 8.64%, 9.82%, and 11.01% higher recall rates than than longer cycles, like T = 2. This is the case if the attack
PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP, respectively, showing that rates of any two attack scenarios are equal and also have the
it is better at finding attack traffic. Further, the LDADM same burst times. Moreover, even though the attack rate of 20
achieves a 7.47%, 8.30%, and 9.86% higher F1-Score than Mbps is lower than 25 Mbps, longer burst durations (t = 0.3 s)
PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP, respectively. make the system more vulnerable to attack traffic and result
936 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 13. Attack scenarios.

 TABLE VI
 M ITIGATION R ESPONSE T IMES

 Fig. 14. Response time comparison.
in slower responses compared to shorter bursts (t = 0.1 s).
These combinations demonstrate how quickly the LDADM
can detect and respond to attacks. The proposed LDADM framework employs a GAN to han-
 Figure 14 illustrates the 95% confidence interval for the dle class imbalance. The GAN improves the discriminator’s
average response time of the LDADM compared to the learning ability by producing synthetic minority-class attack
PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP approaches. The x-axis samples. This preserves the statistical characteristics of actual
denotes the set number ranging from 1 to 8, whereas the traffic. Hence, facilitating the detection of complex LDoS
y-axis represents the response times in seconds. Each model patterns frequently ignored by the state-of-the-art approaches.
is denoted by a distinct color and the average response time is Moreover, HGB-FP is limited by the absence of a generative
indicated by a dot. We can observe that the LDADM results process and dependence on manually engineered features.
in the lowest average response time compared to the state-of- These constraints limit its adaptability in dynamic or imbalthe-art approaches. The average response time of the LDADM anced traffic conditions, limiting its effectiveness in addressing
varies from 0.15 to 17.69 for different set numbers. The evolving network scenarios. The proposed LDADM frame-
LDADM achieves a reduction in the response time of 17.89%, work is further differentiated by its seamless integration with
21.71%, and 27.71% compared to PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and the SDN control plane. This facilitates real-time flow-level fea-
GASF-IPP, respectively. The confidence intervals for the ture extraction and rapid mitigation through dynamic flow rule
LDADM are narrower, indicating improved stability and con- updates, which is absent in GASF-IPP and PeakSAX. This sigsistency in performance. This makes the framework quicker nificantly decreases detection latency and enhances response to
and more reliable for the evaluated scenarios, outperforming evolving traffic conditions. We additionally integrate detailed
PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP in response time and statistical features, including entropy, inter-arrival time varistability. ance, and packet burst characteristics. This facilitates enhanced
 The state-of-the-art approaches, such as GASF-IPP and LDoS detection compared to the aggregated or symbolic
PeakSAX, utilized temporal compression methods and sym- information employed in state-of-the-art approaches. These
bolic approximation approaches to handle class imbalance. architectural and algorithmic advancements together results
ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs 937

in the continuously improved performance evaluation metrics
and faster mitigation response for the proposed LDADM
framework.
 3) Resource Consumption: Memory consumption refers to
the amount of memory utilized by a program during its
execution. The memory utilization of the proposed LDADM
compared to state-of-the-art PeakSAX, HGB-FP and GASF-
IPP approaches is illustrated in Figure15(a). The proposed
LDADM framework exhibits marginally higher memory uti- Fig. 15. Comparative analysis of computational resource utilization.
lization when compared to the state-of-the-art approaches. Two
deep neural networks, the generator and the discriminator,
which are trained simultaneously, increase storage require- for real-world deployment where detection performance is
ments of the proposed LDADM framework. However, this critical.
increase is marginal and well within acceptable operational The proposed LDADM framework for detecting and
limits. Specifically, the proposed LDADM framework exhibits mitigating LDoS attacks is specifically designed for SDN enviaverage memory usage of 8.8%, which is only 1-2% higher ronments. Its effectiveness relies heavily on the architectural
than memory utilization of the state-of-the-art approaches. principles of SDN. The absence of centralized control in non-
GASF-IPP exhibits moderate memory utilization, with average SDN environment leads to fragmented and device-level data,
memory consumption of 7.5%. HGB-FP demonstrates slightly which significantly reduces detection accuracy and increases
lower consumption, with an average memory utilization of response latency. The lack of programmable APIs in non-SDN
6.8%. Finally, PeakSAX exhibits minimal resource utilization, devices prevents retrieving fine-grained flow-level statistics or
with average memory consumption of 6.5%. The additional deploying mitigation rules quickly. It must rely on indirect
memory required by the proposed LDADM framework is methods like polling or manual configuration, which is slower
feasible and can be managed by SDN controllers operating and inconsistent. The packet-based or interface-based monitorwithin standard resource constraints. The minor increase in ing in non-SDN environment requires extra hardware/software
memory utilization does not affect the controller’s ability to reconstruct flows. This significantly increases processing
to manage network events or regulate flows. This indicates overhead and delay of the LDoS attack detection. Moreover,
that enhanced detection capabilities can be achieved without in non-SDN networks, relying on offline methods limits the
compromising the overall stability of the system. real-time responsiveness necessary to counter stealthy LDoS
 The CPU consumption of a certain process measures attacks. Each network device operates on its own, which
the extent to which the processor is utilized by that pro- makes it difficult to analyze data thoroughly and respond
cess. Figure 15(b) illustrates the CPU utilization of the quickly, both of which are important for the effectiveness
proposed LDADM framework compared to the state-of-the-art of the proposed framework. Hence, limitations of traditional
PeakSAX, HGB-FP and GASF-IPP approaches. The proposed non-SDN environments significantly limit the practicality and
LDADM framework exhibits marginally higher CPU utiliza- effectiveness of implementing the proposed approach.
tion when compared to the state-of-the-art approaches. The
synthetic samples generated in each training iteration of the
 VI. C ONCLUSION
proposed framework add extra CPU computation. The discriminator and generator are updated alternately also increases This study proposed a real-time GAN-based framework for
CPU workload. However, these increases are marginal and the detection and mitigation of LDoS attacks. We utilized a
well within acceptable operational limits. Specifically, the GAN model to identify the LDoS attacks based on a neutral
proposed LDADM framework exhibits an average CPU usage threshold. The LDADM also identifies the attack flows by
of 3.1%, which is only 1-2% higher than CPU utilization of examining sudden spikes from the source. The mitigation
the state-of-the-art approaches. GASF-IPP exhibits moderate module in the LDADM protects SDN by continuously mon-
CPU utilization, with average consumption of 2.7%. HGB-FP itoring and identifying malicious traffic from attackers’ IP
demonstrates slightly lower consumption, with an average addresses and enforcing mitigation flow rules on switches.
CPU utilization of 2.4%. Finally, PeakSAX exhibits minimal Consequently, the mitigation module adds the attackers’ IP
utilization, with an average CPU consumption of 1%, respec- addresses to the blocklist and halts the attack traffic for a
tively. The CPU utilization of the proposed framework remains specific duration through the controller, and executes flow regbelow acceptable operational limits for the majority of SDN ulations. Simulation results indicate that the LDADM achieves
controller implementations, despite occasional surges during higher performance measures, enabling effective detection of
GAN activity. This additional overhead does not slow down LDoS attacks and quick mitigation response in an average of
performance or create bottlenecks in the data layer. The results 8.58 seconds.
indicate that the enhanced detection capabilities of the GAN
can be achieved with minimal additional utilization of control R EFERENCES
plane resources. The small trade-off in computational overhead
 [1] Q. Li et al., “A comprehensive survey on DDoS defense systems:
is justified by the significant performance gains achieved. This New trends and challenges,” Comput. Netw., vol. 233, Sep. 2023,
makes the proposed method a practical and efficient choice Art. no. 109895.
938 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 [2] M. Guirguis, A. Bestavros, and I. Matta, “Exploiting the transients of [27] D. Tang, Y. Yan, S. Zhang, J. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Performance
 adaptation for RoQ attacks on Internet resources,” in Proc. 12th IEEE and features: Mitigating the low-rate TCP-targeted DoS attack via
 Int. Conf. Netw. Protoc., 2004, pp. 184–195. SDN,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 428–444,
 [3] M. U. Rahman, Z. U. Rahman, M. Fayaz, S. Abbas, and R. K. ShahSani, Jan. 2022.
 “Performance analysis of TCP/AQM under low-rate denial-of-service [28] Q. Wang, Y. Tian, L. Huang, J. Chen, C. Zheng, and Y. Lu, “SDN-based
 attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Invent. Comput. Technol. (ICICT), vol. 3, LDoS mitigation system,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Comput.
 2016, pp. 1–5. Inf. Technol. (AICIT), 2023.
 [4] P. Lin, K. Ye, and C.-Z. Xu, “Dynamic network anomaly detection [29] R. Xie, M. Xu, J. Cao, and Q. Li, “SoftGuard: Defend against the lowsystem by using deep learning techniques,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud rate TCP attack in SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC),
 Comput., 2019, pp. 161–176. 2019, pp. 1–6.
 [5] J. Dromard and P. Owezarski, Study and Evaluation of Unsupervised [30] B. Liu, D. Tang, J. Chen, W. Liang, Y. Liu, and Q. Yang, “ERT-EDR:
 Algorithms Used in Network Anomaly Detection, K. Arai, R. Bhatia, and Online defense framework for TCP-targeted LDoS attacks in SDN,”
 S. Kapoor, Eds., San Francisco, CA, USA: Springer Int. Publ., 2020, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 254, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 124356.
 pp. 397–416. [31] M. Yue, Q. Yan, Z. Lu, and Z. Wu, “CCS: A cross-plane collaboration
 [6] A. Smiti, “A critical overview of outlier detection methods,” Comput. strategy to defend against LDoS attacks in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Sci. Rev., vol. 38, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 100306. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3522–3536, Jun. 2024.
 [7] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, H. Zhou, and L. Jiao, “Hyperspectral anomaly [32] X. Li, N. Luo, D. Tang, Z. Zheng, Z. Qin, and X. Gao, “BA-BNN:
 detection via background and potential anomaly dictionaries construc- Detect LDoS attacks in SDN based on bat algorithm and BP neural
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2263–2276, network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Process. Appl., Big
 Apr. 2019. Data Cloud Comput., Sustain. Comput. Commun., Soc. Comput. Netw.
 (ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), 2021, pp. 300–307.
 [8] A. Boukerche, L. Zheng, and O. Alfandi, “Outlier detection: Methods,
 [33] J. Chen, Y. Tian, L. Huang, J. Jiao, Q. Wang, and C. Tang, “Detection
 models, and classification,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, pp. 1–37,
 of LDoS system based on periodic comparison and CNN,” in Proc. 2nd
 Jun. 2020.
 Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Comput. Inf. Technol. (AICIT), 2023, pp. 1–4.
 [9] X. Xia et al., “Gan-based anomaly detection: A review,” Neurocomput., [34] B. Liu, D. Tang, Y. Yan, Z. Zheng, S. Zhang, and J. Zhou, “TSvol. 493, pp. 497–535, Jul. 2022. SVM: Detect LDoS attack in SDN based on two-step self-adjusting
[10] S. Alnawayseh, W. Al-Sit, and T. Ghazal, “Smart congestion control in SVM,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy Comput.
 5G/6G networks using hybrid deep learning techniques,” Complexity, Commun. (TrustCom), 2021, pp. 678–685.
 vol. 2022, pp. 1–10, Oct. 2022. [35] J. Deng, L. Cheng, H. Yuan, K. Zheng, X. Li, and Q. Li, “An online
[11] X. Luo and R. Chang, “On a new class of pulsing denial-of-service detection system for LDoS attack based on XGBoost,” in Proc.
 attacks and the defense,” in Proc. NDSS Symp., 2005, pp. 1–19. IEEE Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Process. Appl., Big Data
[12] J. Cao et al., “The crosspath attack: Disrupting the SDN control channel Cloud Comput., Sustain. Comput. Commun., Soc. Comput. Netw.
 via shared links,” in Proc. 28th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2019, pp. 19–36. (ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), 2023, pp. 1083–1088.
[13] H. Liu, “A new form of DoS attack in a cloud and its avoidance [36] Z. Liu, J. Yu, B. Yan, and G. Wang, “A deep 1-D CNN and bidirectional
 mechanism,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Secur. Workshop, LSTM ensemble model with arbitration mechanism for LDDoS attack
 2010, pp. 65–76. detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 6, no. 6,
[14] D. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Yan, D. Zhang, and H. Zhao, “ADMS: An pp. 1396–1410, Dec. 2022.
 online attack detection and mitigation system for LDoS attacks via [37] C.-S. Shieh et al., “Detection of adversarial DDoS attacks using
 SDN,” Comput. Commun., vol. 181, pp. 454–471, Jan. 2022. generative adversarial networks with dual discriminators,” Symmetry,
[15] J. Wang and L. Wang, “SDN-defend: A lightweight online attack vol. 14, p. 66, Jan. 2022.
 detection and mitigation system for DDoS attacks in SDN,” Sensors, [38] V. G. Da Silva Ruffo, L. F. Carvalho, J. Lloret, and M. L. Proenca,
 vol. 22, p. 8287, Oct. 2022. “Unsupervised DDoS detection using entropy features and f-AnoGAN
[16] J. E. Varghese and B. Muniyal, “An efficient IDS framework for DDoS in software-defined networks,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Softw. Defined
 attacks in SDN environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 69680–69699, Syst. (SDS), 2024, pp. 35–41.
 2021. [39] A. Mustapha et al., “Detecting DDoS attacks using adversarial neural
[17] Y. Ling et al., “Real-time detection of DDoS attacks based on hurst network,” Comput. Secur., vol. 127, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 103117.
 index,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Netw. Syst. AI (INSAI), 2022, pp. 42–45. [40] R. I. Nekvi, S. Saha, Y. A. Mtawa, and A. Haque, “Examining generative
[18] L. F. Eliyan and R. D. Pietro, “DeMi: A solution to detect and mitigate adversarial network for smart home DDoS traffic generation,” in Proc.
 DoS attacks in SDN,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 82477–82495, 2023. Int. Symp. Netw., Comput. Commun. (ISNCC), 2023, pp. 1–6.
[19] V. Hnamte, A. A. Najar, H. Nhung-Nguyen, J. Hussain, and [41] Liu, Luo, Jiang, Wang, Li, and Jia, “A CGAN-based DDoS attack
 M. N. Sugali, “DDoS attack detection and mitigation using deep neural detection method in SDN,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile
 network in SDN environment,” Comput. Secur., vol. 138, Mar. 2024, Comput. (IWCMC), 2021, pp. 1030–1034.
 Art. no. 103661. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ [42] Liu, Luo, Jiang, Wang, Li, and Jia, “A CGAN-based DDoS
 science/article/pii/S0167404823005710 attack detection method in SDN,” in Proc. Int. Wireless
 Commun. Mobile Comput. (IWCMC), 2021, pp. 1030–1034,
[20] H. Wang and Y. Li, “Overview of DDoS attack detection in softwaredoi: 10.1109/IWCMC51323.2021.9498840.
 defined networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 38351–38381, 2024.
 [43] M. Abdelaty, S. Scott-Hayward, R. Doriguzzi Corin, and D. Siracusa,
[21] S. Yeom, C. Choi, and K. Kim, “LSTM-based collaborative source-side “GADoT: Gan-based adversarial training for robust DDoS attack
 DDoS attack detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 44033–44045, 2022. detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur. (CNS), 2022,
[22] D. Tang, C. Gao, X. Li, W. Liang, S. Xiao, and Q. Yang, “A detection pp. 119–127.
 and mitigation scheme of LDoS attacks via SDN based on the FSS-RSR [44] C.-S. Shieh, T.-T. Nguyen, W.-W. Lin, M.-F. Horng, T.-V. Nguyen,
 algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1952–1963, and D. Miu, “Generating adversarial DDoS attacks with cyclegan
 Jul./Aug. 2023. architecture,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Technol. (ICCTech), 2022,
[23] D. Tang, S. Wang, B. Liu, W. Jin, and J. Zhang, “GASF-IPP: Detection pp. 64–69.
 and mitigation of LDoS attack in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., [45] L. H. De Melo, G. D. C. Bertoli, M. Nogueira, A. L. Dos Santos,
 vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3373–3384, Sep./Oct. 2023. and L. A. Pereira, “Anomaly-flow: A multi-domain federated generative
[24] D. Tang, X. Wang, X. Li, P. Vijayakumar, and N. Kumar, “AKN- adversarial network for distributed denial-of-service detection,” IEEE
 FGD: Adaptive kohonen network based fine-grained detection of LDoS Netw., early access, May 5, 2025, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2025.3567251.
 attacks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, [46] S. Saka, A. Al-Ataby, and V. Selis, “Generating synthetic tabular data
 pp. 273–287, Jan./Feb. 2023. for DDoS detection using generative models,” in Proc. IEEE 22nd
[25] D. Tang, Z. Zheng, X. Wang, S. Xiao, and Q. Yang, “PeakSAX: Real- Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), 2023,
 time monitoring and mitigation system for LDoS attack in SDN,” IEEE pp. 1436–1442.
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3686–3698, Sep. 2023. [47] M. Komarchesqui, D. M. B. Lent, V. G. Da Silva Ruffo, L. F. Carvalho,
[26] D. Tang, S. Zhang, Y. Yan, J. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Real-time detection J. Lloret, and M. L. Proenca, “Explainable AI feature selection
 and mitigation of LDoS attacks in the SDN using the HGB-FP algo- in generative adversarial networks system aiming to detect DDoS
 rithm,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3471–3484, attacks,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Softw. Def. Syst. (SDS), 2024,
 Nov./Dec. 2022. pp. 27–34.
ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs 939

[48] D. Lent, V. Ruffo, L. Carvalho, J. Lloret, J. Rodrigues, and M. Proença, Balaprakasa Rao Killi (Senior Member, IEEE)
 “An unsupervised generative adversarial network system to detect DDoS received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and
 attacks in SDN,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 70690–70706, 2024. engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology
[49] R. Chauhan and S. Shah Heydari, “Polymorphic adversarial DDoS Guwahati. He is currently an Assistant Professor
 attack on IDS using GAN,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Netw., Comput. with the National Institute of Technology at
 Communications (ISNCC), 2020, pp. 1–6. Warangal, Warangal, India. His research interests
[50] “Mininet.” 2022. [Online]. Available: http://mininet.org/ include network function virtualization, software-
[51] S. Knight, H. Nguyen, N. Falkner, R. Bowden, and M. Roughan, “The defined networks, AI enabled networks, and network
 Internet topology zoo,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 29, no. 9, optimization.
 pp. 1765–1775, Oct. 2011.

 Manjuluri Anil Kumar received the B.Tech. and Eiji Oki (Fellow, IEEE) is a Professor with Kyoto
 M.Tech. degrees in computer science and engineer- University, Kyoto, Japan. He was with Nippon
 ing from Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Telegraph and Telephone Corporation Laboratories,
 Kakinada, India. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. Tokyo, from 1993 to 2008, and the University of
 degree with the Department of Computer Science Electro-Communications, Tokyo, from 2008 to 2017.
 and Engineering, National Institute of Technology From 2000 to 2001, he was a Visiting Scholar
 at Warangal, Warangal, India. His research interests with Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
 include software-defined networks and AI enabled His research interests include routing, switching,
 networks. protocols, optimization, and traffic engineering in
 communication and information networks.