This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3658881

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2025 1

GenFed-IDS: A Lightweight Federated Generative AI Framework for
 UAV Anomaly Detection in Rescue Operations
 Hafiz Muhammad Attaullah, Muhammad Ehsan, Shakila Basheer, Ala Saleh Alluhaidan

 Abstract—Unmanned Aerial Vehicles are increasingly deployed
in consumer applications such as logistics, disaster recovery,
and surveillance, yet their wireless communication links remain
highly vulnerable to cyber-attacks. Traditional intrusion detection systems (IDS) often struggle in UAV environments due to
resource constraints, dynamic network conditions, and scarcity
of labeled datasets. To address these challenges, we propose
a Generative AI-enabled lightweight IDS framework tailored
for UAV communication networks. The framework integrates
hybrid Convolutional Neural Network–Gated Recurrent Unit
(CNN-GRU) autoencoders with generative augmentation and
knowledge distillation, achieving high accuracy while maintaining computational efficiency. Explainability is incorporated
via SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) analysis to ensure
trustworthy and interpretable decision-making. Experimental
evaluations on a multimodal UAV dataset demonstrate stateof-the-art performance with 99.49% accuracy, 99.48% recall,
and AUROC of 0.9999, alongside a student model that reduces
model size, inference latency, and memory footprint by nearly
50%. Comparative results confirm that the proposed framework
outperforms recent IDS baselines in both detection capability and
lightweight deployment, offering a practical and scalable solution
for next-generation UAV communication networks.
 Index Terms—IDS, UAV, Generative AI, Federated Learning,
Variational Autoencoder, Cyber-Physical Security. Fig. 1: Architecture of UAV-assisted rescue operations showing communication links between UAV, Ground Control Station, rescue payload, and command center.
 I. I NTRODUCTION

U NMANNED Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are rapidly transforming modern communication and consumer electronics ecosystems. From smart city surveillance and disaster Control Station (GCS) via a dedicated wireless link, ensuring
recovery to logistics and agriculture, UAVs are increasingly real-time command-and-control as well as data transmission.
deployed in critical and consumer-centric applications [1]. Simultaneously, the UAV interacts with rescue payloads and
These UAV systems rely heavily on wireless communication on-site devices such as first-aid kits and sensors through direct
links for command-and-control, navigation, and cooperative communication links. The GCS, in turn, coordinates with
tasks. the central rescue command center, which oversees mission
 As illustrated in Fig. 1, a UAV-assisted rescue system planning and operational decisions. This architecture enables
typically consists of a UAV platform equipped with high- rapid situational awareness, efficient coordination, and timely
resolution cameras, first-aid payloads, and communication delivery of emergency services in disaster-stricken or hard-tomodules. The UAV communicates securely with the Ground reach environments.
 However, their open wireless medium and distributed ar-
 Hafiz Muhammad Attaullah (ORCID: 0000-0002-4647-2607) is with the chitecture make them highly vulnerable to cyber-attacks [2].
Faculty of Computing and Informatics, Multimedia University, Cyberjaya,
Malaysia (email: attaullah@ieee.org). UAV systems are vulnerable to a broad spectrum of adversarial
 Muhammad Ehsan (ORCID: 0009-0004-2494-4484) is with the Centre threats to both cyber and physical layers. On the cyber level,
of AI and Cyber Security, The ICT Global, Cyberjaya, Malaysia (email: the adversaries can use communication channels to interfere
m.ehsan.ops@gmail.com).
 Shakila Basheer (ORCID: 0000-0001-9032-9560) and Ala Saleh Alluhaidan with the telemetry and mission data by jamming, hacking,
(ORCID: 0000-0001-6829-9705) is with the Department of Information or spoofing. Physically, UAVs may be tampered with or
Systems, College of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah their payload altered. Moreover, data security and operational
bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia (emails: sbbasheer@pnu.edu.sa, ASALIuhaidan@pnu.edu.sa). security are also important because mission-critical informa-
 The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research tion should be confidential, authentic, and tamper-resistant
and Libraries in Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University for funding throughout rescue operations. The physical attacks to cyber
this research work through the Program for Supporting Publication in Top-
Impact Journals, Grant No. (SPTIF-2025-32). and data-oriented threats hierarchical nature of UAV threat
 Corresponding author: Shakila Basheer. models requires effective security solutions that can be adapted

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3658881

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2025 2

to changing environments and resource-limited UAV platforms based on pre-defined patterns or attack signatures to detect
[3]. malicious activities and are therefore effective in known
 Secure and trustworthy UAV communication is thus essen- threats but not in zero-day or new attacks. Anomaly-based
tial in ensuring safe integration of UAVs in consumer and IDS observe system behavior or communication patterns and
industrial ecosystems. One of the effective defenses against indicate anomalies in behavior as possible intrusions. These
such attacks has been the Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) systems can identify new and emerging attacks and evolving
that monitors the communication traffic and detects anomalies attacks, but they are usually characterized by high false alarm
in it [4]. In this regards, the main protection of this study is rates because of dynamic environments. Hybrid IDS are a
the communication and network level UAV channels against combination of the two methods that use signature databases
jamming, spoofing, and packet-level manipulation, and the and anomaly detection modules to enhance accuracy and
reduction of the effects of compromised FL clients. resilience, but these systems are generally more resource-
 However, traditional IDS systems have major limitations in intensive.
UAV networks because of resource limitations, high mobility, Recent research has investigated the design of IDS in
dynamic topology, and lack of attack datasets. Conventional the IoT, UAVs, and Industry 5.0 application with growing
ML- and DL-based IDS methods are based on large labeled interest in explainability, data privacy, and generative models.
datasets, fixed signatures, or complicated deep models, which Indicatively, the article in [5] introduced a federated multiare not applicable to UAV networks. UAV-specific data is party computation (FMPC)-based collaborative CNN model
limited and unbalanced, UAVs are in a highly dynamic wire- to perform privacy-aware pneumonia diagnosis, which showed
less environment, and onboard devices have severe energy high accuracy and maintained data confidentiality. Though the
and computation constraints. In addition, most IDS systems method is mostly aimed at healthcare IoT, the role of federated
are black boxes, which are not interpretable, which is a and privacy-preserving learning is emphasized in the context
requirement of mission- and safety-critical UAV operations. of UAV communication systems. On the same note, [6] created
 Generative AI (GenAI) solves these issues with the help a explainable and robust IDS by integrating BiLSTM and
of Variational Autoencoder (VAE), generative adversarial net- BiGRU models with SHAP-based feature attribution, which
works (GANs), diffusion models, and lightweight Transform- is highly robust to poisoning attacks. Although this research
ers. It is capable of generating realistic attack traffic to alleviate offers a basis to reliable IDS, its analysis is confined to
the problem of data scarcity, train compact latent features to conventional IoT data without UAV-specific modification.
effectively detect anomalies, and adapt to unknown attacks Within the context of consumer IoT security, a new framethrough generative-discriminative training. GenAI also enables work was proposed in the article by [7] that combines offexplainable IDS, revealing abnormal patterns, which makes policy Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) reinforcement
systems reliable and deployable in UAV settings. learning with GAN-based augmentation of DDoS detection in
 This paper presents a Generative AI-based Intrusion De- healthcare IoT systems. This method showed better flexibiltection Framework that is specific to UAV communication ity in changing conditions, yet its healthcare-specific dataset
networks. An edge-deployed lightweight anomaly detection shows that it is necessary to adapt to UAV conditions. In [8]
model is trained using quantization and pruning to be energy- a strong generative collaborative IDS was suggested, which
efficient. integrates federated learning (FL) with differential privacy and
 The major contributions of this paper are: generative models, demonstrating encouraging outcomes on
 • We propose a GenAI-enabled IDS for UAV networks, heterogeneous edge IoT data. Nevertheless, the UAV telemeintegrating lightweight VAE-based representation learn- try and multi-modal communication data were not tackled
 ing with GAN-driven data augmentation. completely. Equally, a study by [9] explored a clustering-
 • We develop a resource-efficient detection pipeline using based anomaly detection system that is improved with multipruning, quantization, and knowledge distillation for real- critic GANs to semi-supervised IDS to facilitate the successful
 time UAV deployment. detection of rare attacks in semi-labeled datasets. This method
 • We enhance trustworthiness via explainability, employ- is particularly applicable to UAV traffic in which labeled
 ing SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) and attention- datasets are scarce, but UAV-specific validation has not been
 based insights for interpretable decisions. studied.
 • We conduct comprehensive evaluations, showing higher Another emerging line of work focuses on adversarial
 accuracy, lower latency, and reduced energy use than robustness and explainability. In [10], the authors presented
 existing ML/DL baselines. NonsaliencyCrossover, an explainable AI-driven adversarial
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section example generation strategy for IDS, where SHAP-guided
II reviews related work; Section III details the proposed perturbations were used to evaluate and strengthen model
methodology; Section IV presents the experimental setup; robustness. While promising, the study remains constrained
Section V discusses results; and Section VI concludes the to conventional IoT datasets, highlighting the opportunity to
paper. extend adversarial robustness research to UAV-based IDS.
 A trustworthy intrusion detection system leveraging ex-
 II. R ELATED W ORK plainable AI was built for in-vehicle networks in [11], where
 There are three broad classes of IDS, namely: signature- standard deep learning models displayed modest accuracy with
based, anomaly-based, and hybrid. Signature-based IDS are better interpretability and robustness. Subsequently, a GAN-

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3658881

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2025 3

 TABLE I: Summary of Key IDS Approaches Relevant for Generative Federated UAV and IoT Security
 Ref. Model / Approach Dataset Used Key Focus Limitations
 FedAvg, DNN X-IIoTID, edge IIoT- Federated IDS with high accuracy, FL vulnerable to poisoning attacks, lim-
 [16] set, WUSTL-IoT-2021 privacy, and scalability ited explainability for UAV/IoT settings
 FedGen+, Generative Fed Dis- Edge/IoT datasets Handles non-IID, robust generative Requires strong aggregation, limited
 [17] tillation, GANs distillation UAV evaluation, mostly IoT focus
 FedGAN, WGAN-GP IVN/CAN bus datasets FL GAN for privacy-preserving at- Focus on IVN, limited UAV or multi-
 [18] tack sample generation modal IoT applicability
 FFCNN collaborative DL IDS UAVIDS Real-time collaborative UAV-IDS, Missing generative augmentation, lacks
 [19] zero-day attack detection explainability components
 [8] DP-GAN, FL Edge-IIoTset, CIC, FL + GAN with differential privacy Less explored in resource-constrained
 TON-IoT for collaborative IDS UAV-edge environments
 Human-in-the-Loop + GAN UAV network traffic Combines HITL and GAN to im- HITL scalability issues, needs constant
 [20] prove IDS human feedback
 GAN-based adversarial train- UAVIDS, IoFT attack Robust adversarial UAV-IDS via Lacks formal FL privacy validation, at-
 [21] ing traces GAN augmentations tack scope narrow
 Generative Few-Shot Learning CICIDS2017, CICD- Few-shot generative rare-class detec- Not UAV-specific, no integrated feder-
 [22] (CDDPM, CNNBiGRU) DoS2019 tion ation or GenAI pipeline
 CNN-LSTM hybrid, IoMT CSE-CIC-IDS2018 Real-time and edge-friendly blended Lacks GenAI and federated learning,
 [23] edge IDS DL IDS focused on IoMT only
 Conceptual Survey (GenAI, UAVNet, UAVIDS, Reviews emerging GenAI, FL, and High-level overview, limited experi-
 [24] Fed, Semantic Comms) IoT UAV datasets challenges in UAV/IoT IDS mental UAV results

based IDS targeting automobile CAN networks was proposed lightweight, energy-efficient, and interpretable design.
in [12], obtaining increased detection rates by adversarial
sample augmentation and deep feature extraction. Cloud-based III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
cybersecurity solutions harnessing CNN architectures were The proposed Generative AI-enabled IDS framework for
given in [13], concentrating on remote detection in automotive UAV communication networks is illustrated in Fig. 2. The syscontexts with balanced computational costs and detection ef- tem is composed of four stages: (i) data preprocessing, feature
fectiveness. Collaborative blockchain-enabled IDS frameworks engineering, and cross-validation setup; (ii) teacher–student
boosting IoT and cloud network security while preserving learning using a hybrid CNN–GRU autoencoder distilled into a
privacy were introduced in [14], merging anomaly detection lightweight model; (iii) evaluation through federated learning,
with distributed ledger technology. Lastly, a hybrid semi- explainable AI, and ablation studies; and (iv) export and
supervised GRU model was applied for anomaly detection deployment for UAV applications. This design ensures rein vehicular networks in [15], demonstrating effective feature source efficiency while maintaining robustness against evolvrepresentation and elevated accuracy in challenging traffic ing threats.
settings. First we design a lightweight Variational Autoencoder as
 A broader survey of related IDS approaches is summarized the core of our Generative Encoder Module (GEM). Let x̂t ∈
in Table I. Several frameworks have integrated federated learn- Rd denote the normalized feature vector corresponding to a
ing with GANs and differential privacy to enhance scalability, UAV traffic window. The encoder network f ϕ : Rd → R2k
data protection, and robustness across distributed IoT environ- projects x̂t into a mean vector µϕ(x̂t) ∈ Rk and a log-variance
ments [8], [16]–[18]. Collaborative UAV-specific IDS models, vector log σ 2 ϕ(x̂t ) ∈ Rk which parameterize the approximate
such as FFCNN-based architectures, have been proposed to posterior distribution as in Eq. (1) and 2:
support real-time detection and zero-day attack identification
 x − xmin
[19], though explainability and generative augmentation are x′ = , (1)
still lacking. Other studies have introduced Human-in-the- xmax − xmin
Loop IDS enhanced by GAN-generated synthetic samples  
[20], and adversarial training strategies to improve UAV IDS qϕ (zt |x̂t) = N zt ; , µϕ(x̂t), , diag(σ 2 ϕ(x̂t )) . (2)
robustness [21]. Furthermore, few-shot generative learning Latent samples are obtained via the reparameterization trick
approaches [22] and CNN-LSTM hybrid IDS frameworks [23] as Eq. (3):
have advanced anomaly detection in IoT networks but remain
resource-intensive for UAV deployment. zt = µϕ (x̂t) + σϕ(x̂t ) ⊙ ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0, Ik ), (3)
 Finally, conceptual surveys [24] highlight the promise of
generative AI and federated learning in UAV and IoT security which enables gradient backpropagation through stochastic
but do not offer much experimental validation. sampling. The decoder gθ : Rk → Rd reconstructs the input
 by generating a probability distribution over x̂t , as shown in
 Overall, while recent works demonstrate significant progress
 (4):
in IDS design for IoT and UAV networks, challenges remain
in addressing data scarcity, dynamic UAV communication
 pθ (x̂t |zt ) = N µθ (zt ), σx2 Id .
 
 (4)
environments, adversarial robustness, and explainability. This
motivates our proposed Generative AI-enabled IDS framework The VAE is optimized by minimizing the negative Evidence
that specifically targets UAV communication networks with a Lower Bound (ELBO), given in (5):

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3658881

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2025 4

 Fig. 2: Comprehensive methodology pipeline of the proposed framework, highlighting the steps.

 h i
LV AE = Eqϕ (z|x̂) ∥x̂t − µθ (zt )∥22 + β DKL qϕ (z|x̂t ) ∥ p(z) ,
  !
 N
 X
 − γ∥zt − zi ∥22
 
 (5) f (zt ) = sign αi exp −ρ , (11)
 where p(z) = N (0, I) is the isotropic Gaussian prior and i=1

DKL represents the Kullback–Leibler divergence. The explicit
form of the KL divergence is expressed in (6) and compression
 d
in (8): X
 f (x) = φ0 + φj xj ,
 j=1
 k
  1X X |S|! (d − |S| − 1)! 
 1 + log σj2 − µ2j − σj2 .
 
 DKL qϕ (z|x̂t ) ∥ p(z) = φj = fS∪{j} (x) − fS (x) .
 2 j=1 d!
 S⊆{1,...,d}\{j}
 (6) (12)

 LGAN = Ex∼pdata [log D(x)] The complete pipeline is outlined in Algorithm 1, ensuring
   (7) accuracy, efficiency, and transparency in system. So, building
 + Ez∼pz (z), y∼p(y) log(1 − D(G(z | y))) .
 on these gaps, we propose a generative discriminative IDS
  tailored for UAV networks. Traffic flows are first segmented
 θcompressed = QINT8 Pκ θteacher , (8) and normalized (Eq. (2)–(3)), followed by a lightweight VAE
 Unlike conventional VAEs, our GEM integrates a supervised that learns compact embeddings via reconstruction and KL
contrastive loss that improves latent space discriminability divergence (Eq. (5), Eq. (6)). A supervised contrastive loss
for IDS tasks. Specifically, given a batch of embeddings (Eq. (9)) further enforces class separation, leading to the joint
{z1 , . . . , zB } with labels {y1 , . . . , yB }, we enforce that em- GEM objective (Eq. (10)).
beddings of the same class are pulled closer, while embeddings To address scarcity and imbalance, conditional GAN augof different classes are pushed apart, as defined in (9): mentation (Eq. (7)) synthesizes realistic attack traffic, which
 is classified using a CNN–GRU–Attention model under cross-
 B
 entropy training. In our federated setup, the T-TIS dataset was
 X −1 X exp(sim(zi , zp )/τ ) partitioned across 10 virtual UAV clients, where each trained
 Lcon = log PB , (9)
 i=1
 |P(i)| a=1 exp(sim(zi , za )/τ )
 locally for 5 epochs before aggregation. Approximately 2 000
 p∈P(i)
 ( 1.8×) synthetic samples per attack class were generated.
 where P(i) is the set of positive indices sharing the same For deployment, teacher networks are distilled and comz⊤ z
label as i, sim(zi , zj ) = ∥zii∥∥zjj ∥ is cosine similarity, and τ is pressed (Eq. (8)) into a lightweight θcompressed model. Inference
a temperature parameter controlling separation sharpness. relies on kernel-based anomaly scoring (Eq. (11)) with SHAP
 The complete GEM objective is thus defined in (10): explanations (Eq. (12)) for interpretability.

 LGEM = LV AE + λLcon , (10)
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
 with λ balancing reconstruction fidelity against discriminative structure. This ensures that the learned latent codes is This section describes the experimental design, datasets,
compact for deployment on UAV and sufficiently structured pre-processing pipeline, and evaluation metrics employed to
to enable downstream anomaly detection. validate the proposed GenAI-enabled UAV IDS framework.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3658881

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2025 5

Algorithm 1 Proposed GenFed-IDS: Generative Federated TABLE II: System Specifications for Experimentation
Learning Framework System Aspect Specification
Require: UAV Dataset (T-TIS) X = {x1 , . . . , xN }, Labels CPU Intel Core i7 (2.40 GHz, 8-core)
 GPU NVIDIA RTX 3070 (8 GB)
 Y , Clients K Operating System Windows 11
Ensure: Intrusion label ŷ, Explanation report E RAM 32 GB
 // Phase 1: Preprocessing & Representation Learning Language Python 3.13
 Libraries PyTorch, Scikit-learn, Pandas, NumPy, SHAP
 0: Xnorm ← Normalize(X) using Eq. (1)–(3)
 0: Initialize VAE Encoder Eϕ , Decoder Dθ
 TABLE III: Details of the T-TIS Dataset
 0: while not converged do
 0: Compute reconstruction loss LV AE via Eq. (5) Category Details
 Total Samples Cyber: ∼54,000; Physical: ∼45,000
 0: Compute regularization DKL via Eq. (6) Target Labels 0: Benign, 1: DoS, 2: Replay, 3: Evil Twin, 4: FDI
 0: Compute contrastive loss Lcon via Eq. (9) Benign Cyber: 1–9426
 0: Update ϕ, θ ← ∇(LV AE + λLcon ) Physical: 9427–13717
 0: end while DoS Attack Cyber: 13718–25389
 Physical: 25390–26363
 // Phase 2: Generative Augmentation & Distillation Replay Attack Cyber: 26364–38370
 0: Train cGAN minimizing LGAN via Eq. (7) Physical: 38371–39344
 0: Zsyn ← G(z|y) {Generate synthetic latent samples} Evil Twin Attack Cyber: 39345–45028
 Physical: 45029–50502
 0: Daug ← Latent(Xnorm ) ∪ Zsyn False Data Injection (FDI) Cyber: 50503–53976
 0: θT eacher ← TrainHybridModel(Daug ) Physical: 53977–54784
 0: θStudent ← Distill(θT eacher ) Total No. of Features Cyber: 37
 Physical: 16
 0: θdeploy ← PruneAndQuantize(θStudent ) using Eq. (8)
 // Phase 3: Federated Learning & Robustness
 0: for round r = 1 to R do
 B. Dataset
 0: for client k = 1 to K in parallel do
 0: θk ← LocalUpdate(θdeploy , Dk ) We utilized the T-TIS [25], which captures both cyber and
 0: end for physical telemetry of unmanned aerial vehicles under benign
 0: θdeploy ← FedAvg({θ1 , . . . , θK }) and adversarial conditions as mentioned in Table III. The
 0: end for dataset is collected through a UAV testbed comprising a drone,
 0: θf inal ← AdversarialTrain(θdeploy , FGSM/PGD) controller, and monitoring tools, where four major cyber-
 // Phase 4: Inference (On-Device) attacks were executed as dependent variable: de-authentication
 0: for new sample xt do denial-of-service (DoS), replay attacks, false data injection
 0: zt ← Eϕ (xt ) {Encode input} (FDI), and evil twin attacks. It contains two complementary
 0: score ← OC-SVM(zt ) using Eq. (11) views as Independent variables: a cyber dataset with 37
 0: if score < 0 then features (e.g., packet statistics, protocol metadata, and timing
 0: ŷ ← Intrusion information) and a physical dataset with 16 features (e.g.,
 0: E ← SHAP(xt , θf inal ) using Eq. (12) altitude, velocity, and positional data).
 0: else The dataset is well-organized and has distinct indices of
 0: ŷ ← Benign benign and attack samples, as described in the original publi-
 0: end if cation, and includes over 54,000 cyber and 45,000 physical
 0: return ŷ, E records. In our experiments, we combined both cyber and
 0: end for=0 physical modalities to create a multimodal feature space, so
 that the IDS could take advantage of cross-domain associations
 between network traffic and UAV flight behavior. To maintain
 the distribution of minority classes and increase resistance to
 overfitting, we used stratified k-fold cross-validation to divide
A. Simulation Environment the data into training, validation, and testing subsets.

 C. Evaluation Metrics
 All experiments were conducted on a workstation equipped
with an Intel Core i7-11800H (2.40 GHz, 8-core), 32 GB The proposed UAV IDS performance is evaluated by stan-
RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 3070 GPU (8 GB VRAM). dard classification measures, i.e. Accuracy (ACC), Precision
The implementation was carried out using Python 3.10 with (PR), Recall (RE), and F1-score (F1). These are based on
PyTorch 2.0 and supporting libraries including Scikit-learn, the entries of the confusion matrix: True Positives (TP), True
Imbalanced-learn, LightGBM, and SHAP. Model quantization Negatives (TN), False Positives (FP), and False Negatives
and pruning experiments were conducted using ONNX Run- (FN).
time and TensorFlow Lite for embedded deployment. The The corresponding formulations are using Eq. 13 to 16:
complete software–hardware configuration is summarized in TP + TN
Table II. ACC = , (13)
 TP + TN + FP + FN

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3658881

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2025 6

 TABLE IV: Model architecture and training configuration for UAV IDS.
 Dataset Input Features Hybrid Modules Dropout Optimizer (lr) Batch / Epochs†

 UAV-IDS (T-ITS) 37 CNN (1D, 64) → MaxPool → GRU (128) → Autoencoder (128/64), MLP (64) (teacher); CNN (16) + GRU (32), Linear (student, pruned+quantized) 0.3 (linear/MLP), 0.0 (CNN/GRU) Adam (1e-4) 64 / 30 (CV)/10 (student)
† Epochs: 30 per fold main/teacher, 10 for student, all with early stopping. Data standardized, 5-fold CV, post-training (std) with quantization and pruning.

 TABLE V: Performance validation of the proposed model TABLE VI: Confusion Matrix (Predicted vs Actual)
 Metric Value Actual
 Predicted
 Accuracy 0.99488 Benign DoS Replay Evil Twin FDI
 Precision 0.99490 Benign 2742.8 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.20
 Recall 0.99488 DoS 0.00 2511.4 17.40 0.00 0.40
 F1-score 0.99488 Replay 0.00 36.60 2559.4 0.00 0.20
 AUROC 0.99999 Evil Twin 0.00 0.00 0.40 2231.0 0.20
 Validation Loss 0.01415 FDI 0.00 0.00 0.40 0.00 856.0
 FPR 0.00743
 FNR 0.00521
 MCC 0.99325
 Cohen’s Kappa 0.99428

 TP
 PR = , (14)
 TP + FP
 TP
 RE = , (15)
 TP + FN
 2 · P R · RE
 ,
 F1 = (16)
 P R + RE
 Besides, Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves,
Area Under the Curve (AUC), and Confusion Matrices (CM) Fig. 3: Teacher model validation loss across 5 folds and the
are used to offer a holistic and comparative analysis. distilled student model’s validation accuracy.

 V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
 To test the performance of the proposed Generative AI- the capability of the model to provide very accurate, reliable,
enabled IDS model, the UAV data was strictly tested with and secure intrusion detection in real-life UAV communication
several evaluation metrics. All clients were trained locally in conditions.
5 epochs per round and global aggregation through FedAvg In order to further evaluate the learning behavior, Fig. 3
was done in 20 communication rounds. As summarized in shows the validation loss curves of the 5-fold cross-validation
Table V. The model had a very high accuracy of 99.49% of the teacher model.
per cent, precision, recall and F1-score values were all above The loss consistently decreases with epochs, confirming
0.994, which means that the model has balanced and reliable smooth convergence and stable generalization across all folds.
classification. The model has a better discriminatory power In parallel, the same figure presents the validation accuracy
between benign and malicious traffic as indicated by the of the distilled student model. The model rapidly improves
AUROC of 0.999 Moreover, the low false positive rate (FPR within the first few epochs and stabilizes above 99% accuracy,
= 0.00743) and false negative rate (FNR = 0.00521) prove its highlighting the effectiveness of knowledge distillation in
strength against both types of misclassification. The Matthews achieving lightweight yet highly accurate intrusion detection.
Correlation Coefficient (MCC = 0.99325) and Cohen Kappa To interpret the decision-making of the proposed IDS,
(0.99428) support the consistency of predictions in different SHAP analysis was used to identify the most important
types of attacks, and the low validation loss indicates the features across all attack classes. Fig. 4 shows the top 10
consistency of model convergence. features contributing to the classification of benign and mali-
 The confusion matrix in Table VI gives more information cious traffic. Features such as ip.id_x, data.len_x, and
on the classification results of the five traffic classes, which are frame.len_x had the highest impact on the model output,
Benign, DoS, Replay, Evil Twin, and False Data Injection. The showing their key role in distinguishing between normal and
diagonal dominance of the matrix indicates the near-perfect abnormal UAV communications.
classification accuracy of all categories with only 0.2-0.4 cases The color-coded bars represent contributions for each attack
per category being misclassified, mostly between Replay and category as defined in the confusion matrix (Class 0: Benign,
DoS attacks. Notably, the model was able to identify all Class 1: DoS, Class 2: Replay, Class 3: Evil Twin, Class
the cases of Evil Twin and FDI attacks with insignificant 4: FDI). The results indicate that while some features (e.g.,
error rates, which proves the effectiveness of the model in ip.id_x) are dominant across multiple classes, others (e.g.,
identifying advanced threats. All in all, these findings confirm tcp.window_size_x and wlan.duration_x) provide

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3658881

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2025 7

 detection capability, the distilled student model also demonstrated lightweight characteristics with reduced model size,
 faster training and inference times, and lower GPU memory
 usage.
 These findings prove that the suggested framework does
 not only promote the accuracy of detection but also fulfills the
 essential need of resource efficiency, which is very appropriate
 in UAV communication networks.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 This paper has suggested a Generative AI-based lightweight
 intrusion detection system that is specific to UAV communication networks. The model combines hybrid CNN-GRU
 autoencoders with knowledge distillation to obtain high detection accuracy and low computational overhead. The strength
Fig. 4: SHAP summary plot of the top 10 most influential of the framework was proven by extensive experiments with
features for benign and attack classes. an accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score of 99.49% and
 almost perfect values of the AUROC. The confusion matrix
TABLE VII: Model performance and lightweight capacity proved that there was little misclassification between benign
comparison between Teacher and Student models. and attack classes, which proved the effectiveness of the
 Attribute Teacher Model Student Model Unit
 proposed approach.
 Cross-validation revealed that the convergence was stable,
 Model Size 6.5 3.2 MB
 Parameters 1.58 0.86 Million and the SHAP-based explainability demonstrated the most
 Training Time 0.85 0.43 s/epoch significant features that influenced the classification decisions.
 Total Training Time 5.4 3.6 min The distilled student model was very resource-efficient, de-
 Inference Latency 0.83 0.41 ms/sample
 GPU Memory Usage 64 37 MB creasing model size, training and inference time, and GPU
 memory consumption. In addition, the comparative analysis
 with the current baseline IDS models showed that the proposed framework was superior in terms of performance and
class-specific insights. This shows that the model not only
 efficiency.
achieves high accuracy but also learns meaningful feature
 The proposed IDS framework offers an effective and pracrepresentations relevant to UAV intrusion detection.
 tical solution for securing UAV networks against evolving
 Further, Table VII compares the performance and threats. In the future, we plan to extend this work by incorpolightweight capacity of the teacher and student models. The rating real-time deployment on UAV platforms and exploring
results show that the student model is almost half the size of reinforcement learning-based adaptive defense strategies.
the teacher model (3.2 MB vs. 6.5 MB) with fewer parameters
(0.86M vs. 1.58M). Training and inference are also faster for
 R EFERENCES
the student model, with training time per epoch reduced from
 [1] L. Gupta, R. Jain, and G. Vaszkun, “Survey of important issues in uav
0.85s to 0.43s and inference latency reduced from 0.83ms to communication networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
0.41ms per sample. In addition, the student model consumes vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1123–1152, 2016.
less GPU memory (37 MB compared to 64 MB). These results [2] A. Awadallah, K. Eledlebi, M. J. Zemerly, D. Puthal, E. Damiani,
 K. Taha, T.-Y. Kim, P. D. Yoo, K.-K. Raymond Choo, M.-S. Yim, and
confirm that the knowledge-distilled student model achieves a C. Y. Yeun, “Artificial intelligence-based cybersecurity for the metamuch lighter footprint while maintaining competitive perfor- verse: Research challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Communications
mance. Surveys Tutorials, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 1008–1052, 2025.
 [3] B. Neupane, J. Jang, and D. S. Kim, “Explainable intrusion detection
 Finally, to highlight the efficiency gains and novelty, a systems: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 43 110–43 141, 2022.
comparative analysis between the proposed model and baseline [4] H. M. Attaullah, S. Memon, O. F. Erkan, and R. Khawar, “Iot based
IDS models was conducted in terms of the standard evaluation systems and services: Recent security concerns and feasible solutions,”
 in 2024 IEEE 1st Karachi Section Humanitarian Technology Conference
metrics along with model size, computational cost, and mem- (KHI-HTC), IEEE. IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6.
ory footprint. As shown in Fig. 5, the proposed CNN-GRU- [5] A. A. Siddique, W. Boulila, M. S. Alshehri, F. Ahmed, T. R. Gadekallu,
AE framework significantly outperforms recent state-of-the-art N. Victor, M. T. Qadri, and J. Ahmad, “Privacy-enhanced pneumonia
 diagnosis: Iot-enabled federated multi-party computation in industry
IDS models, including GAN-MCNN-DFS, ANN, CNN, XAI- 5.0,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 70, no. 1, pp.
DNN, and SEMI-GRU. 1923–1939, 2024.
 In particular, the proposed model achieved the highest [6] D. Javeed, T. Gao, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “An explainable and
 resilient intrusion detection system for industry 5.0,” IEEE Transactions
accuracy (99.49%), precision (99.49%), recall (99.48%), and on Consumer Electronics, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1342–1350, 2024.
F1-score (99.48%), surpassing the closest baseline (GAN- [7] J. Yang, V. Govindarajan, L. Y. Por, Z. A. Shaikh, Q. Xin, P. Bhat-
MCNN-DFS) by margins of 4–7%. The recall improvement is tacharya, A. A. Khan, and Y. Wang, “Ddos attack detection in consumer
 iot-based healthcare systems using improved off-policy proximal policy
especially important for UAV network security, as it minimizes optimization and generative adversarial network,” IEEE Transactions on
the chances of undetected attacks. While achieving superior Consumer Electronics, pp. 1–1, 2025.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3658881

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, 2025 8

 Fig. 5: Comparison of the proposed framework with baseline IDS models from recent studies across performance metrics

 [8] W. Yao, H. Zhao, and H. Shi, “Privacy-preserving collaborative intrusion time collaborative intrusion detection system in uav networks using deep
 detection in edge of internet of things: A robust and efficient deep learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 20, pp. 33 371–
 generative learning approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11, 33 391, 2024.
 no. 9, pp. 15 704–15 722, 2024. [20] Q. Zeng and F. Nait-Abdesselam, “Enhancing uav network security: A
 [9] H. Wang, F. Kandah, T. Mendis, and L. Medury, “Clustering-based human-in-the-loop and gan-based approach to intrusion detection,” IEEE
 intrusion detection system meets multicritics generative adversarial Internet of Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 20 870–20 884, 2025.
 networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 16 112– [21] T. Gaber, T. Ali, M. Nicho, and M. Torky, “Robust attacks detection
 16 128, 2025. model for internet of flying things based on generative adversarial
[10] J. Zhang, Q. Dai, X. Zhou, and L. Chen, “Nonsaliencycrossover: A network (gan) and adversarial training,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
 novel adversarial example generation strategy for ids using explainable vol. 12, no. 13, pp. 23 961–23 974, 2025.
 ai,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 18, pp. 38 680–38 696, [22] Z. Zhang, P. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Liu, and X. Zhou, “Trustworthy
 2025. generative few-shot learning-based intrusion detection method in internet
[11] H. Lundberg, N. I. Mowla, S. F. Abedin, K. Thar, A. Mahmood, M. Gid- of things,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 71, no. 1,
 lund, and S. Raza, “Experimental analysis of trustworthy in-vehicle pp. 1992–2002, 2025.
 intrusion detection system using explainable artificial intelligence (xai),” [23] J. A. Alzubi, O. A. Alzubi, I. Qiqieh, and A. Singh, “A blended deep
 IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 102 831–102 841, 2022. learning intrusion detection framework for consumable edge-centric iomt
[12] G. Xie, L. T. Yang, Y. Yang, H. Luo, R. Li, and M. Alazab, “Threat industry,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 70, no. 1,
 analysis for automotive can networks: A gan model-based intrusion pp. 2049–2057, 2024.
 detection technique,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation [24] Z. Kaleem, F. A. Orakzai, W. Ishaq, K. Latif, J. Zhao, and A. Jamalipour,
 Systems, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4467–4477, 2021. “Emerging trends in uavs: From placement, semantic communications
[13] G. Loukas, T. Vuong, R. Heartfield, G. Sakellari, Y. Yoon, and D. Gan, to generative ai for mission-critical networks,” IEEE Transactions on
 “Cloud-based cyber-physical intrusion detection for vehicles using deep Consumer Electronics, pp. 1–1, 2024.
 learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 3491–3508, 2018. [25] S. C. Hassler, U. A. Mughal, and M. Ismail, “Cyber-physical intrusion
 detection system for unmanned aerial vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on
[14] O. Alkadi, N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A deep
 Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 6106–6117, 2024.
 blockchain framework-enabled collaborative intrusion detection for protecting iot and cloud networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8,
 no. 12, pp. 9463–9472, 2021.
[15] G. ALMahadin, Y. Aoudni, M. Shabaz, A. V. Agrawal, G. Yasmin, E. S.
 Alomari, H. M. R. Al-Khafaji, D. Dansana, and R. R. Maaliw, “Vanet
 network traffic anomaly detection using gru-based deep learning model,”
 IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4548–
 4555, 2024.
[16] S. I. Popoola, A. L. Imoize, M. Hammoudeh, B. Adebisi, O. Jogunola,
 and A. M. Aibinu, “Federated deep learning for intrusion detection in
 consumer-centric internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer
 Electronics, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1610–1622, 2024.
[17] Z. Li, W. Yao, J. Luo, and Z. Huang, “Flow-based iot intrusion detection
 via improved generative federated distillation learning,” IEEE Internet
 of Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 14 797–14 811, 2025.
[18] M. Chen, B. Wu, H. Sun, and Z. Wang, “Fedgan-id: Federated-learningbased intrusion detection for in-vehicle network using gans,” IEEE
 Internet of Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 17, pp. 36 155–36 167, 2025.
[19] H. Jalil Hadi, Y. Cao, S. Li, Y. Hu, J. Wang, and S. Wang, “Real-

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.