IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026 1831

 Guest Editorial
 Enhancing Edge-Based Consumer
 Electronics Devices and IoT Ecosystem
 With Post-Quantum Cryptosystem:
 Security Challenges and Solutions
 I. I NTRODUCTION and the IoT ecosystem engaging post-quantum cryptography
 algorithms and protocols. With the tremendous advancements
T HE conventional Internet of Things (IoT) architectures
 typically transmit a substantial amount of data to centralized cloud systems for processing that could strain bandwidth
 in quantum computing, this Special Section is timely, as it
 has drawn a large number of submissions. Out of these suband introduce latency problems. Edge/fog computing model missions, 12 high-quality research papers have been accepted,
may shift an extensive portion of data processing to edge which explore the security aspects of the integration of
nodes at the network periphery. This local processing approach PQC solutions with existing cloud, edge, and fog computing
mitigates reliance on central cloud datacenters by forwarding hardware technologies.
only essential data from consumer IoT or edge computing (EC) In [A1], Sharma and Rani strengthen the resistance of
devices to these datacenters. EC devices store and process IoT to classical and quantum-based cyber attacks by intesensitive data in a distributed manner that could expose it to a grating deep learning (DL) with PQC algorithms. For the
range of various threats. We can witness numerous edge-based provision of real-time anomaly detection and response expeintelligent security solutions designed for classical comparchi- diency, it suggests a hybrid lightweight security framework
tectures. Recent progress in the quantum computing paradigm with the combination of optimized PQC algorithms and a
severely imperils the widely adopted classic public-key cryp- DL-assisted intrusion detection system (IDS) for deployment
tosystems as well as the enciphered data employing those in a resource-constrained edge-based IoT ecosystem. The
algorithms. proposed methodology ensures secure data exchanges linked
 Quantum computers can be used to efficiently solve to quantum threats against IoT systems with the help of
mathematical problems that are considered computationally continuous learning through IDS models for adapting to novel
intractable for classical systems, intractable on the clas- attack vectors.
sical computing paradigm—thereby compromising widely In [A2], Badar et al. suggested a novel secure communicaadopted public-key cryptographic systems. The integration tion paradigm for EC-enabled consumer devices and IoT-based
of post-quantum cryptography (PQC) into EC-assisted con- smart grid ecosystem by integrating PQC for ensuring resilient
sumer IoT (EACI) environments presents a promising path for data integrity and access control against the classical as well
enhancing the security of consumer data by ensuring resilience as quantum-assisted threats. The suggested framework uses a
against the quantum-aided adversaries. Most of the consumer lightweight consortium blockchain with the use of the hyper-
IoT devices operate over extended lifespans that could last for ledger fabric framework for maintaining tamper-proof records
decades—the need for long-term data safety becomes more of authentication logs and energy-based transactions. For this
challenging in the face of future quantum threats due to the purpose, regional edge gateways (REGs) are introduced to
quantum revolution. execute local crypto-operations and minimize computational
 To address these emerging challenges, this special issue requirements on resource-deficient IoT nodes. In addition,
explores quality research papers on PQC algorithms, protocols, an AI-driven real-time IDS promotes the resilience of the
theories, and hardware to curb emerging security threats for suggested framework.
edge/fog-enabled EACI frameworks following the forthcoming In [A3], Huang and Sharma suggest a lightweight group
quantum computing developments. signcryption authentication scheme by using lattice cryptography to meet the increasing security requirements of resource
 resource-constrained edge-based IoT ecosystems. The scheme
 II. A RTICLES I NCLUDED IN THIS S PECIAL S ECTION
 improves the key generation efficiency with the use of an
 This Special Section of IEEE T RANSACTION ON C ON - optimized trapdoor diagonal matrix, supporting simultaneous
SUMER E LECTRONICS comprises various aspects of enhanc- signing as well as encryption through signcryption in a single
ing the security of edge-based consumer electronics devices logical step, and the leftover hash-based lemma. The proposed
 scheme introduces a low-interaction access control technique
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3628198 for group-based access authentication.
 1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1832 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 In [A4], Ahmed and Anisi suggested a post-quantum secure malicious nodes, exhibiting strong resistance to good and
federated learning framework for cross-domain vehicle-to-grid bad-mouthing threats in simulations.
(V2G) authentication, since the reliance of existing cross- In [A10], Ullah et al. introduced Q-P2FL, a quantumdomain V2G access control mechanisms on centralized based privacy-preserving federated learning technique for the
authorities may lead to a single point of failure and com- detection of adversarial attacks on consumer edge devices. The
putational bottlenecks. This paper presents a lightweight scheme combines quantum intelligence, additive homomorphic
quantum-resistant authentication protocol (LQAP) with the encryption, and vision transformer (ViT)-based feature extracuse of a hybrid extended Merkle signature scheme (XMSS) tion to ensure data privacy and model security. This approach
and a lightweight Merkle signature (LMS) system. A decen- largely suggests a convincing solution for safeguarding contralized hierarchical federated learning (HFL) architecture at sumer edge devices from adversarial threats and improving
the edge layer supports distributed anomaly detection and their privacy-preserving capabilities.
secure hardware-assisted entity identification using physically In [A11], Cao et al. design a physical layer security fog
unclonable functions (PUFs), without reliance on centralized computing IoT (PSFC-IoT) system, which ensures physical
data aggregation. layer security (PLS) against multiple eavesdroppers in a fog
 In [A5], Bagchi et al. suggested a ring-LWE-based multi- computing IoT system. A joint resource allocation method
authority CP-ABE (MA-CP-ABE) protocol for addressing based on the post-quantum beetle optimization algorithm
privacy and single-point failure problems in blockchain-based (QBOA) is employed for optimal resource allocation. Simedge-IoT aided healthcare systems. The security of the pro- ulations confirm the enhanced secrecy rates under varying
tocol is enhanced against quantum threats with threshold conditions while meeting optimal latency requirements for
secret-sharing by Shamir and the Lagrange interpolation consumer electronics such as wearables, linked devices, and
formula. The protocol was implemented for CE-based IoT- smart home devices.
enabled smart healthcare applications employing blockchain To overcome the Kyber protocol’s requirement of prior
technology as a secure storage. authentication, in [A12], Shahidinejad et al. present a
 In [A6], Aneesh Kumar et al. contribute a hybrid architec- NIST-compliant quantum-resistant password-authenticated key
ture with the combination of quantum key distribution (QKD), exchange (PAKE) for mobile devices. In this way, the scheme
chaos-based encryption, and PQC for securing multimedia manages to counter quantum threats in the conventional key
data in IoT-oriented consumer electronic networks. The intent exchange framework. Leveraging CRYSTALS-Kyber encrypwas to address the challenges posed by quantum technology tion, it supports anonymity, mutual authentication, and perfect
to classical image encryption algorithms. This integrates a forward secrecy. The hardware-based implementation and for-
2-D-logistic sine coupling map (2D-LSCM) with the keys mal analysis validate the scheme’s security and efficiency.
generated from QKD and the NTRU algorithm. In this manner, In comparison with Kyber’s protocol, it manages to cut
the scheme largely enhances image processing speeds, the communication and computation overheads.
performance of the chaotic map, confidentiality, and sensitivity We extend our sincere appreciations to the authors for their
values. valued contributions, the reviewers for their intuitive feedback,
 In [A7], Farouk et al. suggest a quantum blockchain and Prof. K. F. Tsang, Editor-in-Chief of IEEE T RANS -
framework for scalable and secure integration with 6G net- ACTIONS ON C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS , for his continuous
works. The scheme employs temporally entangled GHZ support throughout the editing process.
states, promoting inherent quantum encoding of block linkage and integrity, and a four-qubit blockchain data structure
implemented with the use of IBM Q quantum processors. A ZEEM I RSHAD , Lead Guest Editor
The system largely ensures quantum-resilient block integrity Punjab Higher Education Department
and tamper resistance against quantum threats, support- Faculty of Computer Science
ing useful 6G consumer applications like telemedicine, IoT GGC Asghar Mall Rawalpindi
authentication, and decentralized finance. Rawalpindi 46000, Pakistan
 In [A8], Seno et al. suggest a novel blind signature e-mail: azeemirshad@gpgcam.edu.pk
scheme (CDBS) for securing consumer electronic IoT (CIoT)
applications against quantum attacks. The motivation was M UHAMMAD U SMAN , Guest Editor
to overcome the challenges of traditional blink signature Department of Computer Science
schemes. The proposed CDBS is based on NIST-standardized Edge Hill University
CRYSTALS-Dilithium and incorporates blinding as well as L39 4QP Ormskirk, U.K.
unblinding steps—supporting enhanced privacy for applica- e-mail: usmanm@edgehill.ac.uk
tions related to anonymous payments and privacy-focused
e-ticketing.
 In [A9], Mahmood et al. proposed APPLETA, an effi- A LAVALAPATI G OUTHAM R EDDY, Guest Editor
cient trust management framework for resource-constrained Department of Computer Science
IoT devices. It calculates trust values based on application University of Illinois Springfield
transactions and authentication behaviors without additional Springfield, IL 62703 USA
overhead. Moreover, APPLETA effectively detects and isolates e-mail: galav@uis.edu
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026 1833

 S HEHZAD A SHRAF C HAUDHRY, Guest Editor [A4] S. Ahmed and M. H. Anisi, “A post-quantum secure feder-
 Department of Computer Science and ated learning framework for cross-domain V2G authentication,”
 IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Jun. 16, 2025, doi:
 Information Technology 10.1109/TCE.2025.3580338.
 College of Engineering [A5] P. Bagchi, A. Bisht, A. K. Das, N. Saxena, and M. S. Hossain, “Design-
 Abu Dhabi University ing quantum-safe lattice-based multi-authority CP-ABE scheme
 for blockchain-enabled IoT-based consumer healthcare electronics,”
 Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4983–4994,
 Department of Software Engineering, Faculty May 2025.
 of Engineering and Architecture [A6] K. B. A. Kumar, L. S. Mohith, K. Jain, P. Krishnan, N. Venkatachalam, and R. Buyya, “Post-quantum cryptography-based multimedia
 Nisantasi University encryption communication scheme in IoT consumer electronics,”
 34398 Istanbul, Türkiye IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4995–5006,
 e-mail: shehzad.ashraf@adu.ac.ae May 2025.
 [A7] A. Farouk, B. K. Behera, and E. A. Ahmed, “Design and
 K HALID M AHMOOD , Guest Editor implement a quantum blockchain framework to secure 6G communication for consumer applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 Graduate School of Intelligent Data Science Electron., early access, Jun. 17, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2025.
 National Yunlin University of Science and 3580583.
 Technology [A8] M. E. Seno et al., “Post quantum-resistant blind signature
 scheme for consumer Internet of Things security,” IEEE
 Douliu 64002, Taiwan Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4949–4958,
 e-mail: khalid@yuntech.edu.tw May 2025.
 [A9] S. Mahmood, M. Gohar, S.-J. Koh, M. U. Tariq, and A. Ghani,
 “Application level trust authority (APPLETA) for resource-constrained
 edge devices in IoT and 6G,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71,
 no. 2, pp. 4934–4948, May 2025.
 A PPENDIX : R ELATED A RTICLES [A10] F. Ullah, N. Mohammad, L. Mostarda, D. Cacciagrano, and Y. Zhao,
 [A1] A. Sharma and S. Rani, “Post-quantum cryptography (PQC) for “Q-P2FL: Quantum-enhanced federated edge intelligence for privacy-
 IoT-consumer electronics devices integrated with deep learning,” preserving adversarial attack detection on consumer edge devices,”
 IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4925–4933, IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4914–4924,
 May 2025. May 2025.
 [A2] H. M. S. Badar, S. Ahmed, N. I. Kajla, G. Fan, and C. Zhang, [A11] Z. Cao, B. Geng, and D. Yu, “Consumer technology in focus:
 “Q-BLAISE: Quantum-resilient blockchain and AI-enhanced security Post-quantum security for fog computing IoT systems against
 protocol for smart grid IoT,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, eavesdropping,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2,
 no. 2, pp. 4959–4971, May 2025. pp. 4972–4982, May 2025.
 [A3] R. Huang and A. Sharma, “Post-quantum verifiable decryption [A12] A. Shahidinejad, J. Abawajy, and S. Huda, “Quantum-proof anonyscheme for Internet of Thing-based consumer electronic edge device,” mous key exchange with perfect forward secrecy for mobile devices,”
 IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4903–4913, IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Jun. 24, 2025, doi:
 May 2025. 10.1109/TCE.2025.3582742.

 Azeem Irshad received the master’s degree from Arid Agriculture University, Rawalpindi,
 Pakistan, and the Ph.D. degree from International Islamic University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
 He has co-edited a book IoT and Smart Devices for Sustainable Environment (Springer). He has
 authored more than 130 international journal and conference publications, including 80 SCI-E
 journal publications. His research work has been cited over 2766 times with an H-index of
 30 and an i10-index of 66. He is recognized by Stanford University as one of the top 2% mostcited scientists worldwide in 2025. His research interests include strengthening authenticated
 key agreements in cloud-IoT, smart grids, pervasive edge computing, CPS, 5G networks, smart
 logistics, WSN, post-quantum cryptography, and ZKPs in blockchain. He received the Top
 Peer-Reviewer Award from Publons in 2018 with 126 verified reviews. He is in the technical
 editorial committee (Computer Communications Elsevier). He has served as a reviewer for
 more than 55 reputed journals, including IEEE S YSTEMS J OURNAL, IEEE Communications
 Magazine, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE Consumer Electronics
Magazine, IEEE S ENSORS J OURNAL, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY, IEEE IAS, Computer Networks,
Information Sciences, CAEE, Cluster Computing, AIHC, JNCA, and FGCS. He served as a Guest Editor for IEEE T RANSAC -
TIONS ON C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS , SLAS Technology (Elsevier), IET ITS, and De Gruyter and CMC (Techscience)-based
special issues. He is serving as an Academic editor for Wiley SCN.
1834 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 Muhammad Usman received the M.S. (Hons.) and Ph.D. degrees in cyber security from
 the School of ICT, Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia. He was a Research Fellow (Post-
 Doctoral) in cyber security and machine learning with the University of Surrey, Guildford,
 U.K. He possesses over two decades of experience, during which he has held several academic
 and industrial positions in different parts of the globe, including Australia, Asia, and Europe.
 He provides advisory and consultancy in multiple areas, such as higher education, curriculum
 design and development, cyber security, digital forensics, risk assessment and management,
 security management, research and development, and career professional development training.
 He has a proven track record of providing leadership to IT staff and teaching teams. He is
 currently leading a Research Group of Human-Centered Intelligent and Secure Systems.
 He has many research publications, including in prestigious journals, such as several IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS and a book focused on mobile agent-based anomaly detection and verification
 systems for smart home sensor networks. He is a regular invited speaker. He has been a recipient
of several research and travel grants. His current research interests include interdisciplinary areas around cyber security, digital
forensics, trust and privacy, AI-driven complex systems, human-centered systems, digital twins, agritech, healthtech, community
tech, consumer electronics, drones, electrical and autonomous vehicles, and formal and statistical modelling. He has been a
member of the COVID-19 Outbreak Expert Database of the U.K. Parliament. He is also a Juniper Certified Networking and
Security Specialist. He has served in different leading capacities, such as a focal person, the publication chair, an organizing
committee member, and/or a TPC member of several IEEE conferences. He has led and acted as a guest editor for special
issues in several IEEE T RANSACTIONS and other journals.

 Alavalapati Goutham Reddy received the Ph.D. degree from the Information Security
 Laboratory, Kyungpook National University, South Korea, in 2017. He is an Assistant Professor
 with the Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Springfield, USA. Before that,
 he was an Assistant Professor with Fontbonne University, USA, and the National Institute of
 Technology, India. Prior to that, he was a Researcher with Sejong University, South Korea,
 and the KINDI Center for Computing Research, Qatar University, in collaboration with Purdue
 University. He holds several publications on cryptographic authentication protocols. His primary
 research interests revolve around cryptography and information security. He is a Professional
 Member of ACM.

 Shehzad Ashraf Chaudhry (Member, IEEE) received the master’s and Ph.D. degrees (Hons.)
 from International Islamic University Islamabad, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2009 and 2016,
 respectively. He is a Professor of cybersecurity engineering with the College of Engineering,
 Abu Dhabi University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; and an Associate Professor of
 software engineering with Nisantasi University, Istanbul, Türkiye. He has authored more than
 180 scientific publications in different international journals and proceedings. With an H-index
 of 53, an i10-index of 133, and an accumulated impact factor of more than 530, his work has
 been cited around 7741 times. His research interests include lightweight cryptography, elliptic
 curve cryptography, multimedia security, E-payment systems, MANETs, SIP authentication,
 smart grid security, the IoT and cloud infrastructure security, and next-generation networks.
 He was a recipient of the Gold Medal for achieving a 4.0/4.0 CGPA in the master’s degree.
 He delivered several keynote speeches and received several awards for best research papers.
 Considering his research, the Pakistan Council for Science and Technology granted him the
Prestigious Research Productivity Award while affirming him among the Top Productive Computer Scientists in Pakistan. For
the consecutive five years (2020–2025), he has been listed among the top 2% of computer scientists across the world in Stanford
University’s report.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026 1835

 Khalid Mahmood (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from International Islamic
 University, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2018. He is a distinguished scholar in the field of computer
 science. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Future Technology Research Center,
 National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Yunlin, Taiwan. His expertise and
 contributions to the field have earned him recognition as one of the top 2% scientists globally,
 as acknowledged by Stanford University. Throughout his illustrious academic career, he has
 authored over 80 SCI/E-indexed articles, garnering more than 1900 citations and demonstrating
 the impact of his research. He is an approved Supervisor by the Higher Education Commission
 of Pakistan and has successfully guided over 15 graduate students in their research pursuits. With
 a focus on lightweight authenticated and key agreement solutions, his research spans various
 infrastructures, including smart grids, the Internet of Drones (IoD), the Internet of Things (IoT),
 vehicular ad hoc networks (VANET), mobile edge computing, and blockchain technologies.
 He is an ACM Professional Member. In recognition of his outstanding contributions, he has
been honored with the Prestigious Young Productive Scientist Award by the Pakistan Council for Science and Technology in
2017. He has also received accolades, such as the Productive Researcher Award and the Newcomer Productive Researcher
Award at the National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Yunlin, Taiwan. He continues to advance the field of
computer science, establishing himself as a leading figure in academia with his dedication to excellence in research and
scholarship.