936 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 HADES: Detecting and Investigating Active
 Directory Attacks via Whole Network
 Provenance Analytics
 Qi Liu , Kaibin Bao , Wajih Ul Hassan, and Veit Hagenmeyer , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Due to its crucial role in identity and access manage- Active Directory (Domain Service) plays a crucial role for
ment in modern enterprise networks, Active Directory (AD) is a top identity and access management in modern enterprises’ IT intarget of Advanced Persistence Threat (APT) actors. Conventional frastructures, with 90% of Fortune 1000 companies relying on
intrusion detection systems (IDS) excel at identifying malicious
behaviors caused by malware, but often fail to detect stealthy it [4], [7]. To advance the attack after the initial access, attackattacks launched by APT actors. Recent advance in provenance- ers routinely leverage Active Directory (AD) functionalities in
based IDS (PIDS) shows promises by exposing malicious system several stages of the cyber-kill-chain, in particular, internal reactivities in causal attack graphs. However, existing approaches connaissance, credential access, lateral movement and privilege
are restricted to intra-machine tracing, and unable to reveal the
 escalation. Comparing to network scanning using third-party
scope of attackers’ traversal inside a network. We propose HADES,
the first PIDS capable of performing accurate causality-based tools like nmap [8], SPN (Service Principle Name) scanning,
cross-machine tracing by leveraging a novel concept called logon a form of AD internal reconnaissance, via native Windows
session based execution partitioning to overcome several challenges programs like setspn [9] is much less noisy while achieving
in cross-machine tracing. We design HADES as an efficient on- the same goal, i.e., identifying potentially vulnerable servers in
demand tracing system, which performs whole-network tracing the network. Hence, advanced attackers like APT (Advanced
only when it first identifies an authentication anomaly signifying
an ongoing AD attack, for which we introduce a novel lightweight Persistent Threat) actors primarily rely on Living-Off-the-Land
authentication anomaly detection model rooted in our extensive Binaries (LOLBins) [10], [11], which are system pre-installed
analysis of AD attacks. To triage attack alerts, we present a new programs that are often used by system administrators and
algorithm integrating two key insights we identified in AD attacks. genuine users. This complicates intrusion detection and poses
Our evaluations show that HADES outperforms both popular open- significant risks to enterprises.
source detection systems and a prominent commercial AD attack
detector. Conventional intrusion detection systems (IDS) often focus
 on isolated system events, and excel at identifying malware caus-
 Index Terms—Advanced persistence threat detection, active ing a burst of malicious behaviors. Facing APT actors frequently
directory security, enterprise security, data provenance analysis,
auditing, logging. employing LOLBins and the so-called low and slow strategy,
 these IDS tend to miss those attacks and suffer from a high false
 I. INTRODUCTION negative rate. To overcome this, security vendors resort to the
 ECENT CrowdStrike studies [1], [2], [3], [4] show that
R 80% of modern cyberattacks are identity-driven, i.e., leveraging compromised credentials. After the initial access, attack-
 MITRE ATT&CK Matrix [12] as a reference for further creating
 detection rules. The MITRE ATT&CK Matrix, maintained with
 contributions from leading industrial security vendors, provides
ers increasingly target Microsoft Active Directory for obtaining a high-level summary of attack tactics and techniques, including
critical domain credentials, and hence gaining the ability to usage of LOLBins. Our evaluation in Section VI shows that the
move laterally in the victim network and escalate privilege. For isolated analysis of these IDS create many false alerts due to
instance, Kerberoasting attacks [5] increased almost 600% from the fact that LOLBins are programs executed frequently also by
2022 to 2023, and Pass-the-Hash attacks [6] increased 200% [2]. genuine users.
 Provenance-based intrusion detection systems (PIDS) [13],
 Received 15 July 2024; revised 14 September 2025; accepted 16 September [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]
2025. Date of publication 22 September 2025; date of current version 14 January emerged as a new solution, stitching causally related system
2026. This work was supported by funding of the Helmholtz Association (HGF)
through the Energy System Design (ESD) Program . (Corresponding author: activities by parsing system events like process creation, file
Qi Liu.) access and network socket access into provenance graphs. Given
 Qi Liu, Kaibin Bao, and Veit Hagenmeyer are with the Institute for a suspicious event as a starting point, a backward tracing and
Automation and Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT), 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany (e-mail: qi.liu@kit.edu; forward tracing in the provenance graph can expose more related
kaibin.bao@kit.edu; veit.hagenmeyer@kit.edu). malicious system activities caused by attackers, i.e., the root
 Wajih Ul Hassan is with the School of Engineering & Applied Science, cause and attack ramifications, respectively. PIDS have proved
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4740 USA (e-mail: hassan@
virginia.edu). to be effective in particular in reducing false alarm rates and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3611866 presenting real attack activities in attack graphs. Attack graphs

 © 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 937

provide much richer context for security analysts to further reliable detection. The attack graphs produced in the second
investigate the scope of an attack, invaluable for an effective stage of HADES are both explainable and contextual, providing
and efficient security operation center (SOC). an analytical overview of the attack. Finally, the system’s cus-
 However, current PIDS are constrained to intra-machine tomizable weighting factors for indicators introduced in its threat
provenance tracing, and lack the ability to track across machines score calculation make HADES highly transferable and adaptable
in an enterprise environment, and accurately reveal the scale of for practical use in various scenarios.
attackers’ traversal inside the network, crucial for attack remedi- The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
ation. Cross-machine provenance tracing faces significant chal- r We give a succinct and contextualized AD attack overview
lenges due to the notorious dependency explosion problem [25], based on a thorough analysis, critical for understanding
[26]. While intra-machine dependency explosion occurs for and detecting AD attacks.
long-running processes, in which each input is conservatively r We present a light-weight authentication anomaly detecconsidered causally responsible for all subsequent outputs, and tion model for AD attacks.
vice versa, cross-machine dependency explosion arises if cross- r We propose a novel concept called logon session-based
machine edges are created simply on a network connection execution partitioning and tracing.
basis. Naively connecting two intra-machine provenance graphs, r We demonstrate the first accurate and efficient causalitywhenever there is a logon event from one machine to another, or based cross-machine provenance tracing system HADES.
even whenever there is a network connection between them [27], r We introduce a new alert triage algorithm for accurate AD
would inevitably result in numerous false dependencies, as dis- attack detection.
cussed further in Section IV-B in detail. Recognizing the critical
importance of logon session ID, we propose a novel concept II. BACKGROUND
named logon session based execution partitioning and tracing.
 AD attacks are a set of cyberattacks targeting Microsoft Active
By leveraging both authentication & logon logs and system logs,
 Directory service employed in most corporate environments.
our system HADES is capable of 1) fine-grained cross-machine
 Half of organizations worldwide have experienced an AD attack
provenance tracing, 2) alleviating dependency explosion also
 in recent years, while 40% of those attacks were successful [4],
for intra-machine provenance tracing, 3) drastically reducing
 [31]. AD uses a database to store critical information about
log size, 4) automatically pinpointing privilege escalation.
 organizations’ network resources, and provides administrators
 HADES employs a two-stage approach for efficient AD attack
 the ability to manage the access to those resources. That is,
detection. Its first stage consists of a light-weight authentication
 AD holds the blueprint of an organization’s environment, and
anomaly detection model responsible for identifying potential
 the keys to all available resources. Consequently, various kinds
AD attacks and forwarding its results to HADES’s stage two
 of attacks specifically exploiting vulnerabilities in Microsoft’s
component, which performs logon session-based tracing and
 AD design and implementation emerged over time, resulting
attack graph triage. Both our authentication anomaly detection
 in a partial or even full-scale compromise of many enterprise
model and attack graph triage algorithm are rooted in our thornetworks [32], [33].
ough analysis of AD attacks. Through HADES’s development,
 Often, an attack is launched first against a targeted user via
we faced several difficulties in realizing accurate cross-machine
 spear-phishing, or a vulnerable domain-joined machine accessitracing. First, depending on remote access type, each authentible from outside, to get an initial foothold inside the domain. The
cation & logon process causes varying number of logon events
 attacker then performs internal AD discovery to gain knowledge
with distinct logon session ID, complicating the identification
 about the internal network and spot more machines, before
of the correct session ID. Second, under certain circumstances,
 moving to them typically via some form of stolen credentials
system activities in a new logon session are assigned with an
 from the first machine.
existing session ID, causing false dependencies. Third, it is often
 A proper understanding of the prerequisites of various AD
not possible to disclose the remote access type by examining
 attacks, and logging possibilities as well as limitations is critical
the current logon event alone. We overcome these challenges
 for accurate AD attack detection. Fig. 1 shows the AD attack
by introducing a remote access type inference module, a logon
 skeleton, in which most relevant AD attack techniques are
session ID reassignment module, and a logon session linking
 listed. This model serves as a blueprint for reliably detecting
module in HADES, based on our extensive profiling and analysis
 AD attack techniques and reconstructing high-level AD attack
of Windows logging frameworks. Our implementation of logon
 graphs. These graphs can be further expanded to create whole
session-based tracing avoids time-consuming instrumentation,
 network attack graphs, including all malicious system activities
error-prone training, and applies to the whole system rather than
 conducted by attackers.
a single program.
 Unlike previous techniques, HADES produces alarms satisfying all five properties of reliability, explainability, analytical III. THREAT MODEL
depth, contextuality, and transferability as introduced in [28]. In Like other PIDS [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20],
its first stage, HADES’s anomaly detection model avoids easily [21], [22], [23], [34], our system HADES assumes the integrity
changeable indicators such as hard-coded IP addresses and file of the underlying operating systems, firmware and our logging
hashes, which are typical in popular Security Information and frameworks. We only consider attacks in which threat actors
Event Management (SIEM) detection rules [29], [30], ensuring already achieved an initial foothold on a domain-joined host via
938 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 1. Active Directory attack overview.

 backward & forward on each authentication event (Algorithm 1
 Lines 24-25), as authentication is a multiple-step process. The
 core component of HADES’s stage 1 is a light-weight authentication anomaly detection model, against which the authentication
 & logon tracing result is matched. Once an anomaly is found,
 HADES produces a high-level attack graph including involved
 AD entities (Algorithm 1 Line 5), i.e., users and machines,
 and labeled with a suspected AD attack type (Algorithm 1
 Line 27), at the end of its stage 1. A concrete example of such
 high-level attack graphs is given in Fig. 3, in which it shows
Fig. 2. HADES overview.
 that user Alice from the Exchange Server has used user Bob’s
 password hash to authenticate against the Domain Controller,
 and then accessed the Data Server, mimicking the Pass-the-Hash
 behavior.
binary exploitation or social engineering, and move laterally to
 The identified host names, user names and their logon sesother machines leveraging stolen credentials instead of program
 sion ID are passed to HADES’s stage 2, in which it performs
exploitation. That is, only identity-based remote access types are
 logon session-based execution partitioning and tracing. On the
of interest, in which valid accounts are used to access a computer.
 accessed host, e.g., the Data Server in Fig. 3, by leveraging both
Attacks restricted to only one machine are deemed less severe
 authentication & logon logs and system logs, HADES first infers
and are hence out of HADES’s detection scope.
 the remote access type (Algorithm 1 Line 7), which is critical for
 deciding whether the logon session ID needs to be reassigned in
 IV. SYSTEM DESIGN the next step (Algorithm 1 Line 8). Then it links related logon
 Our system HADES employs a two-stage approach for efficient sessions resulted from the same identity (Algorithm 1 Line 9),
and accurate detection of AD attacks, producing an initial high- and performs intra-machine backward & forward tracing inside
level attack graph and a low-level whole network attack graph, these logon sessions (Algorithm 1 Lines 10-11). Afterwards,
respectively. Fig. 2 provides an overview of HADES, whereas a HADES checks the authentication & logon logs to spot any
formal description of HADES’s detection procedure is given in logon event inside any domain-joined machine initiated from the
Algorithm 1. HADES’s first stage starts with its authentication accessed host, i.e., cross-machine forward tracing (Algorithm 1
anomaly detection, and ends with producing a high-level attack Line 14). Meanwhile, HADES examines the authentication &
graph. HADES’s second stage starts with its logon session-based logon logs to find out whether and from which domain-joined
partitioning and tracing, and ends with producing a low-level machine the current logon session inside the accessing host, e.g.,
whole network attack graph with assigned threat score. To en- the Exchange Server in Fig. 3, is initiated, i.e., cross-machine
hance readability of Algorithm 1, we provide a short description backward tracing. After the logon session-based tracing ends as
for symbols and functions that are not self-explanatory in Table I. no further involved machine can be found, HADES passes the
 In its first stage, HADES relies on authentication & logon low-level whole network provenance graph to its threat scoring
logs only, and parses through each AD authentication & logon algorithm (Algorithm 1 Line 14), the final step of stage 2. In
log event. It traces backward on each logon event, and traces this step, we leverage open-source TTP (Tactics, Techniques,
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 939

Fig. 3. An AD attack graph created by HADES on the Oilrig [35] dataset. HADES first creates an initial high-level attack graph involving AD entities like users
and hosts, after it detects an authentication & logon anomaly and suspects a Pass-the-Hash attack. Then it performs system-level forward tracing inside the specific
logon session under user Bob in the accessed host Data Server, and system-level forward & backward tracing inside the logon session of Alice in the accessing
host Exchange Server. Subsequently, it traces back to a logon session of Alice in the Workstation_1. Next, it traces forward & backward inside this logon session,
leading to another two logon sessions in the Exchange Server. This graph reveals that an attacker leveraged a C2 (Command & Control) agent disguised under
the process name SystemFailureReporter on the Workstation_1 to perform AD discovery via LOLBins like net and netstat. The attacker then pivoted to the
Exchange Server, performed further AD discovery, credential access, before moving to the Data Server for accessing critical data.1 .

Procedures) detection rules [30] for AD discovery and credential
access (Algorithm 1 Lines 35-36).
 In the example of Fig. 3, the whole network forward
tracing from the accessed host, i.e., the Data Server, did not
lead to further logon session on another machine, as the attacker
found the targeted data and did not advance further in the
network. However, the whole network backward tracing from
the accessing host, i.e., the Exchange Server, reveals that the
current logon session on it is a RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol)
session that was initiated from another logon session of user
Alice inside another machine Workstation_1. Backward tracing
from the Workstation_1 did not lead to further domain-joined
 Fig. 4. Standard AD authentication process.
machine, but rather an external IP address, which belongs to
the C2 (Command & Control) server operated by the attacker.
Forward tracing from the Workstation_1 resulted in another two
logon sessions in the Exchange Server preceding the RDP logon a domain controller (DC), i.e., the Authentication Service (AS)
session on it. In one of these logon sessions, credential access and the Ticket-Granting Service (TGS). Fig. 4 shows a simplified
was performed, contributing to the later lateral movement from version of standard AD authentication process: 1) the user sends
the RDP logon session on the Exchange Server to a logon session an encrypted AS request for a TGT (Ticket-Granting-Ticket), 2)
on the Data Server. Note that backward tracing can only lead to the DC replies with a TGT if it can decrypt the request and
exactly one logon session, while forwarding tracing can lead to hence verify the user’s identity, 3) the user asks for a TGS ticket
multiple logon sessions, as one may remotely access multiple by providing the TGT, 4) the DC replies with a TGS ticket, 5)
machines from one machine and multiple logon sessions inside the user asks for access to an application server by providing
one machine do not interfere with each other. the TGS ticket, 6) the server gives the user requested access
 after validating the TGS ticket. Note that each communication
A. Authentication Anomaly Detection step is represented in a directed line in Fig. 4. The entire
 The main purpose of AD is providing the service of au- process uses shared secret cryptography to deter network-level
thentication of user or machine accounts and authorization to eavesdropping, meaning that credential access is only possible
different network resources. AD employs Kerberos as its default inside hosts.
authentication protocol, and implements it in two components in The complicated network authentication process is often exploited by attackers who manage to steal some form of creden-
 1 Note that the bounding boxes with a session ID label or host name are
 tials or credentials-related data on one machine, i.e., credential
manually added for better readability; this information is encoded in nodes in access, and ultimately use them to successfully authenticate
the original attack graph. Besides, we replaced the user names in the original against a domain controller and hence access another machine,
emulation plan with shorter names. Some processes, e.g., ps and vmware, in i.e., lateral movement. Several AD attack techniques exhibit
the attack graph are malicious processes disguised under a false name. Further,
we introduced a graph optimization technique called meta-nodes to conclude similarities, often causing confusion. However, we believe that
system activities of standard known benign routines. a practical detection system needs to differentiate between these
940 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE I
 Algorithm 1: ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACK DETECTION DESCRIPTION OF SYMBOLS & FUNCTIONS

attacks and hence triage the alerts due to the varying degrees
of severity of those attacks. For instance, a Golden-Ticket [36]
attack is more critical than others since it can lead to a full-scale
domain compromise.
 We analyzed each attack type, and identified anomaly in the
corresponding authentication process, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
Note that, in Fig. 5, each attack type is associated with directed
lines of a specific color. Like in Fig. 4, each directed line
represents a communication step between the user machine and
the domain controller or an application server during the authentication process. Fig. 5 demonstrates that, comparing to the request and aim to crack the user’s password from the restandard authentication process shown in Fig. 4, each attack type ceived TGT offline. Hence no TGS request follows. This is
manifests itself in a specific non-standard, incomplete/abnormal demonstrated in Fig. 5, in which only two green directed lines
authentication process. representing the first two communication steps are observed
 For instance, in AS-REP Roasting attacks (associated with during the authentication process, instead of six directed lines. In
the green directed lines in Fig. 5), attackers only send a TGT Kerberoasting attacks (associated with the purple directed lines
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 941

 blue directed lines in Fig. 5). HADES’s authentication & logon
 tracing can also start with checking each authentication event
 with the Windows Event ID 4768. For each such event, i.e., a
 TGT request, if a corresponding event of Event ID 4769, i.e.,
 a TGS request, does not exist, it indicates a AS-REP Roasting
 attack (associated with the green directed lines in Fig. 5).
 In our evaluation in Section VI, this model proves to be effective in catching each attack instance, but is plagued with a high
 false positive rate, hindering its adaptability in practice. The reasons for false positives are manifold. For instance, false positives
 for AS-REP Roasting and Kerberoasting can be resulted from
 network disruption. Further, legitimate use of native Windows
 programs like runas causes false Pass-the-Hash alerts.
Fig. 5. Authentication incompleteness/abnormality. Note that the list of AD attack types involved in the authentication & logon process (in Fig. 5) was constructed based
 on our extensive analysis of AD attacks observed as of today,
 and is meant to be exhaustive. Our sources include the MITRE
in Fig. 5), attackers aim to crack a service account’s password ATT&CK knowledge base [40], threat reports linked in it, and
from a received TGS, meaning that no access on the application threat reports posted in leading security vendors’ websites, like
server follows the TGS request. Therefore, only four purple CrowdStrike [1], Mandiant [41], Trellix [11]. However, we
directed lines representing the first four communication steps cannot exclude the existence of an unknown anomalous authenare observed in Fig. 5. In Pass-the-Ticket attacks (associated tication & logon sequence that cannot be mapped to our known
with the light blue directed lines in Fig. 5), attackers send a AD attack types. Such a sequence would also be detected, as it,
TGS request to the DC with a stolen TGT, meaning that no TGT by definition, would deviate from the standard authentication &
request precedes the TGS request. Thus, only four light blue logon process illustrated in Fig. 4. It makes sense to flag such
directed lines representing the last four communication steps a sequence; this would likely further increase the false positive
are observed in Fig. 5. rate. Such a check can be easily implemented in the function
 Therefore, we propose a light-weight authentication anomaly CHECKATTACKTYPE (Algorithm 1 Line 27). Nevertheless, durdetection model based on our finding. This anomaly detection ing our experiments, we did not observe any anomalous authenmodel relies on authentication & logon logs only; it parses tication & logon sequence that cannot be mapped to a known
through each AD authentication & logon log event. It traces AD attack type in Fig. 5. If an anomalous authentication & logon
backward on each logon event, and traces backward & forward sequence associated with an unseen attack type was observed by
on each authentication event (Algorithm 1 Lines 24-25), as our system HADES, it would run its stage 2 for a whole network
authentication is a multi-step process. By doing so, HADES aims investigation and reveal attack tactics and techniques employed
to identify whether there is an authentication anomaly, and which by the attacker, as it does for known AD attack types. That is,
kind of authentication anomaly is present. Based on Fig. 5, HADES handles each unknown authentication anomaly in the
HADES labels the authentication anomaly with a suspected AD same way as it does for those that are associated with a known
attack type (Algorithm 1 Line 27). Note that AD authentication AD attack type. HADES would output an AD attack graph similar
logs and logon logs can be linked with a logon GUID (Globally to Fig. 3; the initial high-level attack graph involving AD entities
Unique Identifier), which is a critical information for HADES’s would be labeled as “Unknown AD Attack”.
authentication & logon tracing; a logon GUID is inserted into
each AD authentication event and the corresponding logon event B. Logon Session-Based Execution Partitioning and Tracing
by default by Windows specifically for associating these events.
 During runtime, HADES checks, for instance, each authentica- Recent PIDS have proved to be invaluable in reducing false
tion event with the Windows Event ID 4769, which records each alarms. To tackle the high rate of false positive, we aim to
Kerberos service ticket (TGS) request [37], i.e., the step 3) in develop the first causality-based cross-machine PIDS. A naive
Fig. 4. Then it extracts the logon GUID from the authentication approach would be to connect the intra-machine provenance
event, and checks if there is a logon event with Windows Event graphs of two domain-joined machines with a cross-machine
ID 4624 that contains the same logon GUID, which records edge, whenever there is a network connection between them, as
each successful logon [38]. If such logon event does not exist, suggested in [27]. However, this kind of cross-machine edges
it indicates a Kerberoasting attack (associated with the purple do not represent a causality,2 but rather a correlation, leading to
directed lines in Fig. 5). For each authentication event with numerous cross-machine edges between intra-machine provethe Windows Event ID 4769, HADES also checks if there is a nance graphs. Take Fig. 3 as an example; this would result in
corresponding authentication event with the Windows Event ID
 2 Causality is defined as the relationship between cause and effect. A causality-
4768, which records each Kerberos authentication ticket (TGT)
 based cross-machine edge connects two logon sessions, in which one session
request [39], i.e., the step 1) in Fig. 4. If it does not exist, initiated the other session via remote access, while a correlation-based edge
it indicates a Pass-the-Ticket attack (associated with the light connects two logon sessions without this relationship.
942 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

7364 edges3 between the Exchange Server’s provenance graph
and other hosts’ graphs after only one day operation, while in fact
there are only 4 causality-based cross-machine edges to/from the
Exchange Server in the true attack chain, shown as the four thick,
red directed lines in Fig. 3.
 A more advanced approach would be to connect intra-machine
provenance graphs, whenever there is a logon event from one
machine to another. Yet, due to the prevalence of credential
thefts, in particular in AD attacks, it is impossible to identify
the true identity behind each logon. For instance, in Fig. 3,
Alice’s credentials were stolen by the attacker. Given that both
Alice and the attacker have accessed the Exchange Sever from
the Workstation_1 using the same credentials, this approach
would still create false-dependencies. In fact, this approach
would produce 479 correlation-based cross-machine edges,4
instead of 4 causality-based ones, to/from the Exchange Server.
Correlation-inferred edges are the root cause of the notorious Fig. 6. Comparison of cross-machine tracing approaches. Whereas a thin black
dependency explosion problem [25], [42]. edge denotes a network connection, a thick black edge denotes a logon by a
 In order to enable causality-based provenance tracing, we re- genuine user and a thick red edge denotes a logon by an attacker.
sort to a critical yet previously undiscovered information: logon
session ID, and propose a novel concept: logon session-based
execution partitioning and tracing. To the best of our knowledge,
this work presents the first PIDS leveraging logon session ID.
Windows assigns a logon session ID (unique until next reboot)
after each successful authentication & logon to label system
activities run in that session in Windows Security logs [43]. A
logon session is a computing session assigned with an access
token representing the authenticated account’s security context
and permissions [44]. Every Windows process runs within a
logon session’s context.
 Fig. 6 further illustrates the difference between the three
cross-machine tracing approaches. Network connection-based
tracing, which naively connects two intra-machine provenance
graphs whenever there is a network connection between the
two machines, as shown in Fig. 6(a), would lead to a dense
graph indiscriminately connecting all system activities as depicted in Fig. 7(a). Logon-based tracing in Fig. 6(b) reduces
false dependencies by considering only logon-initiated network
connections, resulting in less dense graphs in Fig. 7(b). However,
in the prevalence of identity theft, it is infeasible to discern the
true identity behind each logon. That is, a provenance graph
produced from logon-based tracing can still contain system
activities of multiple identities. In contrast, logon session-based
 Fig. 7. Comparison of results from different cross-machine tracing aptracing narrows down system activities deemed as relevant from proaches. Whereas black denotes system activities originated from genuine
an entire machine to just one logon session, as shown in Fig. 6(c), users, red denotes system activities caused by attackers. If a tracing approach
truly linking system activities belonging to the same identity, returns more than one graph, these graphs are numbered and considered as
 independent for further investigation.
and separating system activities unrelated to each other into
individual provenance graphs shown in Fig. 7(c).
 1) Benefits: The benefits of logon session-based trac- cross-machine provenance tracing, 2) it alleviates dependency
ing are fourfold: 1) it enables fine-grained causality-based explosion also for intra-machine provenance tracing, 3) it reduces log size as most forensics-irrelevant system activities
 3 This number is returned from a query that checks for the number of es- under logon sessions with predefined logon ID5 can be safely
tablished network connections. That is, there are 7364 network connections discarded, 4) it automatically pinpoints privilege escalation durestablished between the Exchange Server and other machines during the corre- ing intra-machine provenance tracing.
sponding emulation plan’s execution.
 4 This number is returned from a query that checks for the number of succeeded
logons. That is, there are 479 logons performed from/to the Exchange Server 5 Predefined logon ID include 0x3e4, 0x3e5, and 0x3e7, belonging to Netduring the corresponding emulation plan’s execution. work Service account, Local Service account, System account, respectively [45].
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 943

 When a user from one machine logs into another machine,6 the the number of logon sessions created varies. Second, under
corresponding logon session in the second machine is resulted certain circumstances, system activities resulted from a new
from exactly one logon session in the first machine. For example, logon are recorded with an existing session ID, leading to false
in Fig. 3, Alice’s logon session 0xb4874 on the Exchange dependency. Third, it is often not possible to reveal the remote
Server is only resulted from Alice’s logon session 0xb0db1 access type by inspecting the logon event alone.
on the Workstation_1, while there are multiple Alice’s logon 3) Remote Access Type Inference: Identifying remote access
sessions on the Workstation_1 in parallel. Our system HADES can type is critical for logon session ID reassignment and session
accurately disclose this, as it checks authentication & logon logs linking, both crucial for accurate cross-machine tracing. The
among involved machines and performs logon session-based way how exactly Windows emits logon events and assigns logon
tracing. With logon session-based tracing, we can create a ID is obscure. Due to Windows’ closed-source nature, revealing
whole-network provenance graph representing activities con- this via source code is not possible. Reference to the most
ducted by exactly one true identity, be it the attacker or a normal detailed sources about Windows [45], [46], [47], [48] also failed
user. to deliver an answer. Hence we resorted to extensive testing and
 The benefit is even more apparent during intra-machine prove- analysis of each remote access type.
nance tracing. An enterprise-level application server typically We found that both authentication & logon events and system
hosts more than a hundred logon sessions at the same time, activities events need to be processed to extract a list of atwith some belonging to the same user, and runs cumulatively tributes for accurately inferring remote access type. Hence, for
thousands of logon sessions after just one day operation. For each logon event, HADES checks related authentication & logon
instance, in the Oilrig [35] dataset, system activities run on the events and system events to analyze the context and then classify
Exchange Server spread over more than 5 thousands logon ses- the remote access type. HADES can identify all standard resions. While some logon sessions are (interactive) long-running mote access types: RDP, SSH, Powershell-Remoting (WinRM),
ones, many others die soon after a short execution, e.g., accessing WMI, RPC, PsExec, Network Share (SMB), internal web-server
some resources. Oblivious to logon session ID, prior provenance request. Note that only identity-based remote access types are of
tracing approaches would connect all these system activities, as interest, in which valid accounts are used to access a computer.
they all at the end can be traced back to the root process, system Remote access via malware/C2 agent is not identity-based, and
(PID=4) on Windows. In contrast, our approach identifies the will not create new logon sessions. Repetitive accesses via the
truly involved logon sessions and tracks system activities only same malware/C2 agent run in the same logon session and their
inside them, greatly easing the dependency explosion problem. system activities are recorded with the same session ID. That
 The efficiency introduced by leveraging logon session ID is, as long as HADES can trace to the session in which the C2
shows not only during provenance tracing, but also for log agent is present, it can detect all system activities conducted by
storage reduction. Under the assumption of OS integrity, most it, without the need for inferring remote access type and session
system activities run under logon sessions with predefined linking etc. For example, in Fig. 3, the attacker has performed
logon ID belong to standard routines, and can be considered several attack steps via the C2 agent on the Workstation_1 at
as forensics-irrelevant and safely discarded. In the example of different times, and all of these steps are detected by HADES, as
the Exchange Server in the Oilrig dataset, these system activities they are all executed in the same session 0xb0db1 and HADES
account for over 90% of all log events created on it. However, has successfully traced back to this session.
some of these system activities are forensics-relevant, as they are We also found that some logon events and associated logon
related to remote access and logons. HADES identifies and tracks sessions are purely byproducts. Some of these sessions terminate
these system activities during its logon session linking. Further, soon after being created and others live until a logoff occurs.
as logon sessions also introduce the separation of privileges, These logon sessions typically do not contain any forensics-
HADES automatically identifies privilege escalation during intra- relevant system activities. Although their creations are resulted
machine cross-session tracing by checking the value of ”Token from a user logon, they are not influenced by the logged-on user.
Elevation Type” and ”Integrity Level” associated with a logon For instance, when a domain user logs into a machine via SSH,
session ID. By doing so, it has identified, e.g., in Fig. 3, the a byproduct logon session under a virtual user sshd_xxx gets
privilege escalation from unprivileged user to Administrator, created.
i.e., from 0xb4874 to 0xb4829, and then privilege esca- 4) Logon Session ID Reassignment: For several remote aclation from Administrator to System, i.e., from 0xb4829 to cess types, system activities performed on a new logon session
0xb247f9c3e. are recorded under an existing logon session ID, necessitating
 2) Challenges: We encountered several challenges while de- session ID reassignment for causally correct tracing. A typical
veloping HADES. First, each network authentication & logon example is RDP, which is often misused by attackers [49]. Unlike
process results in multiple logon events with distinct logon SSH, a remote logon session via RDP in the accessed machine
session ID on the accessed machine. Depending on the remote will not terminate, when the client program on the accessing
access type, e.g., via RDP or SMB (Server Message Block), machine exits. The user has to explicitly log out to terminate
 that session.
 6 Note that a user accessing resources on a remote machine also triggers a
 When the user’s credentials are stolen by an attacker who then
logon on the remote machine. The authentication & logon process is transparent logs into the same remote machine with the same credentials,
to users due to Single Sign-on. all system activities conducted by the attacker are labeled with
944 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

the ID of the user’s long-running session, although a new logon Logon session linking is also needed when a privileged user
session with a different ID is created. This is due to Fast User logs in a remote machine via RDP. Due to UAC [51], two logon
Switching [50], which provides users the same setup after recon- sessions are created inside a remote desktop session, of which
necting to an existing local console session or remote desktop one has a privileged access token and the other does not. System
session7 . The new logon session starts with the new logon by activities run under both logon sessions can only result from the
the attacker, and ends when the attacker disconnects, marking same true identity. Hence these two sessions need to be linked for
the exact timespan of system activities conducted only by the accurate tracing. Note that there can be no more than two RDPattacker. Hence, if HADES identifies a logon as RDP access, based logon sessions under the same user account at any time,
it further checks for another specific related event indicating which is a restriction enforced on Windows OS. There may be
whether the user has entered a new remote desktop session more logon sessions under the same user account of other remote
or an existing one. If an existing remote desktop session is access types at the same time. Nevertheless, it is straightforward
being reentered, HADES takes the ID of the new logon session for HADES to differentiate between these logon sessions through
and replaces the existing logon session’s ID with it for the its remote access type inference module introduced above, and
corresponding system activities. hence correctly link the sessions.
 Other remote access types requiring session ID reassignment It is worth noting that a logon session cannot be nested inside
include Powershell-Remoting and internal web-server request. another logon session. That is, a logon session on one machine
In Fig. 3, the attacker from the Workstation_1 leveraged web- cannot originate from another logon session on the same mashell to execute commands on the Exchange Server. How- chine, but from exactly one logon session on another machine.
ever system activities caused by the attacker’s web requests Race condition is not an issue for logon session-based execution
are recorded with System account’s logon session ID, i.e., partitioning and tracing. Take Fig. 6(c) as an example; even
0x3e7, along with system activities resulted from other domain when two distinct logon sessions under the same user account
users’ web requests. HADES correctly identified the remote from Machine A have each initiated another logon session inside
access type and reassigned the attacker’s system activities with Machine B at the same time, our system HADES can still correctly
0x2476c741, separating them from unrelated system activi- perform cross-machine system activity tracing and produce
ties caused by other users. graphs as shown in Fig. 7(c). This is because that each newly
 Note that the logon session ID 0x2476c741 is a random created logon session is assigned with a logon session ID, e.g.,
ID that Windows created for the corresponding internal web logon session z inside Machine B, with which system activities
request of the attacker; this ID is recorded in the corresponding performed inside this logon session are recorded, and a logon
logon event. Each successful internal web request is preceded GUID, which is inserted into the corresponding logon event on
by a corresponding authentication event recorded on the domain Machine B by default by Windows specifically for associating
controller and a logon event recorded on the web server. Al- this logon event with the authentication request originated from
though the attacker’s system activities should be recorded with another machine [38]. That is, there is a logon event generated
the logon session ID 0x2476c741, Windows records system on Machine B for recording the creation of logon session z; this
activities caused by internal web requests from all users with event contains a logon GUID as well. The same logon GUID
System account’s logon session ID 0x3e7. It is worth noting is present in an authentication event recorded on the domain
that our system HADES’s objective is to perform tracing of system controller; this authentication event holds the information that
activities attributed to / caused by the same identity, no matter leads to logon session x inside Machine A.
under which user account these system activities were executed. If a logon session is terminated, no more system activities will
Therefore, it is important to reassign the logon session ID from be created and recorded under the corresponding logon session
0x3e7 to 0x2476c741, and separate the associated system ID; this logon session will be considered as a leaf logon session.
activities from unrelated system activities caused by other users. That is, no further logon session on another machine can origi-
 5) Logon Session Linking: Although most system activities nate from this logon session; the logon session-based tracing will
under predefined logon ID are forensics-irrelevant, some are not advance from this logon session. If a logon attempt from a
directly responsible for the creation of users’ logon sessions. For machine to another machine fails, it will not lead to any system
instance, when a user from one machine executes remote com- activities on the second machine; no cross-machine system
mands on another machine via Powershell-Remoting, the remote activity tracing is needed for this. For instance, in Fig. 6(c),
commands are executed by the process wsmprovhost.exe if the attacker on Machine B tried to access Machine C, but
on the second machine, which is spawned by an instance of failed due to lack of permission, only a failed logon event [52]
svchost.exe process under the System logon session, i.e., will be generated on Machine C; the logon session-based tracing
0x3e7, once the user successfully authenticated against a do- will not advance further from the logon session w as shown in
main controller. HADES links users’ logon sessions with those Fig. 7(c). HADES’s logon session-based tracing ends, when all
predefined logon sessions, and performs only backward-tracing relevant logon sessions are terminated or no more logon event
in those sessions until finding the root process responsible for can be observed.
the creation of the user logon session of each access type.
 C. Threat Score Assignment
 7 Note that logon sessions and local console / remote desktop sessions are two
different concepts. Only a few logon sessions “live” in local console / remote With our summarization of AD attacks in Fig. 1, we identified
desktop sessions, which could be seen as a container. two key insights for accurate AD attack detection. The first
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 945

insight is that attacks against AD follow a rigid pattern: AD the most relevant tactic, and should receive a higher weight than
discovery, credential access, lateral movement and privilege discovery and privilege escalation, as per our second insight. As
escalation. The second insight is that the key enabler of an AD mentioned above, credential access involving lsass.exe is
attack is successful credential access, and the most observable deemed more severe, and hence is assigned with an even higher
result of an AD attack is lateral movement. For instance, in weight than credential access without involving lsass.exe.
Kerberoasting attacks, a service must be first identified, whose As the consequence of privilege escalation is more severe than
credentials will be then stolen, and used for lateral movement the consequence of discovery, privilege escalation receives a
and privilege escalation afterwards. higher weight than discovery as well. The differences between
 Based on these two critical insights, HADES calculates a threat these weights are kept small, as having a much larger value for
score for each provenance attack graph generated after logon one tactic than others would mean that the effect of other tactics
session-based backward & forward tracing. This is to ensure on threat score calculation would be negligible; note that each
that the most likely true attacks are always investigated first constant is the exponent of a power function.
by security analysts. For each potential lateral movement, i.e., a Whereas (1) calculates the threat score for each cross-machine
cross-machine edge in an attack graph, HADES checks how many edge (Algorithm 1 Line 38), (2) accumulates the threat scores
credential access techniques were executed in the corresponding returned from (1), and outputs the threat score for the attack
hosts before, and how often each technique was performed graph (Algorithm 1 Line 41).
(Algorithm 1 Line 36). For each performed credential access n
 
technique, HADES explicitly checks whether the corresponding T SG = (T Si × (DA + 1) × Criticality) (2)
process has accessed the system process lsass.exe8 , which is i=1
the most critical process for managing credentials like password where n denotes the number of cross-machine edges found in
hashes and access tokens on Windows OS, and is hence often a given attack graph, and T Si denotes the threat score assigned
abused by attackers. Credential access techniques involving for each cross-machine edge from (1). DA indicates whether
accessing lsass.exe’s memory should be considered more credentials of domain administrators are involved in the crosssevere. Then, HADES examines how many AD discovery tech- machine system activities, and takes the value 0 or 1. By doing
niques were operated on related hosts and the frequency of each so, we prioritize attack graphs for further investigation, in which
discovery step conducted (Algorithm 1 Line 35). Also, HADES credentials of domain administrators are involved due to more
inspects how many times privilege escalation is observed in the severe consequence of these attacks. Similarly, we assign a
provenance attack graph (Algorithm 1 Line 37). Criticality to different attack types. Because, for instance, a
 We formulate the threat score calculation in the following two Golden-Ticket attack may imply a compromise of the entire
equations. domain, whereas a Silver-Ticket attack’s scope is limited to
 n
  certain servers in the domain. If credentials of a non-privileged
 T SE = (F req(teqi ) × V ar(taci ))wi (1) domain user are involved in a Pass-the-Hash attack, the consei=1 quence is even less critical. Currently, the Golden-Ticket attack
where n denotes the number of tactics involved, e.g., creden- type, the Silver-Ticket attack type, and the Keberoasting attack
tial access. F req(teqi ) denotes the accumulated execution fre- type are assigned with a Criticality 10 of value 4, 3, and 2,
quency of techniques in a given tactic, and V ar(taci ) denotes respectively, while all other attack types are assigned with a
the number of techniques being applied for the given tactic9 . Criticality of value 1. Note that Keberoasting targets service
Considering both the intensiveness F req(teqi ) and the exten- credentials, whereas other attack types (except Golden-Ticket
siveness V ar(taci ) of a tactic being performed aligns with the and Silver-Ticket) target user credentials, which are typically
fact broadly observed in threat reports [54] that attackers often less critical than service credentials.
apply multiple techniques within the same tactic to boost their
chances of success. Besides, wi is a weighting factor introduced V. IMPLEMENTATION
for each tactic. The weights for discovery, privilege escalation, We implemented a prototype of HADES in Python, and decredential access, and credential access involving lsass.exe ployed it on a 64-bit Ubuntu 22.04 OS with 256 GB of RAM and
are currently set to 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.4, respectively. a 32-core processor. We developed HADES with considerations
 The rationales for having a different weight for each tactic are of its deployability in real world in mind, and aim to avoid
explained in the following. Credential access is considered as possible deployment-related restrictions in practice. That is,
 HADES does not require any specific, non-standard hardware
 8 Access to the system process lsass.exe from various processes is fre- or network configuration; HADES can be easily integrated into
quently observed on a Windows machine also during a normal operation. That an existing security infrastructure.
is, this action alone does not necessarily indicate a malicious activity. However,
this action can be suspicious, and is hence often logged. In fact, Sysmon [53]
employed by HADES can record access to lsass.exe. 10 The values of Criticality are subjectively assigned, not objectively, as we
 9 MITRE defines tactics as attacker’s strategic goals when performing an do not think there is an answer (agreed by security researchers and practitioners)
action, e.g., “credential access”, and techniques as specific actions an attacker to the question how much more critical a particular attack type is than others.
uses to achieve a tactic, e.g., “OS credential dumping”. A tactic includes many We believe that, in practice, these values should be decided/tuned by the security
techniques. For instance, to achieve “credential access”, an attacker may employ team of an organization according to their specific preferences, settings and past
“OS credential dumping”, “input capture” or other techniques. experiences etc., similar to risk assessment in practice.
946 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 First, HADES leverages system logs and authentica- TABLE II
 OVERVIEW OF THE EVALUATION DATASETS
tion & logon logs collected by popular industry-standard
instrumentation-free logging frameworks. In Active Directory,
authentication logs are recorded on domain controllers by default, whereas logon logs are collected in the accessed hosts
by default. We collect authentication logs from the domain
controller and logon logs from each domain-joined host. Authentication logs and logon logs can be linked with a logon
GUID. For system activities, we collect Windows Security [43]
 recorded only in domain controllers, are critical for HADES’s
logs and Sysmon [53] logs; both are industry-standard logs. To
 functionality. Hence we cannot evaluate HADES on the OpTC
ensure log integrity, recent Sysmon versions start as protected
 dataset either.
processes, preventing tampering or disabling by attackers. Win-
 MITRE Attack Emulation: AD attacks are present in almost
dows introduced Protected Event Logging [55] to secure logs
 all MITRE Emulation Plans [58]. MITRE Engenuity ATT&CK
from unauthorized access.
 Evaluations [66] use these plans to assess commercial detec-
 Second, HADES’s whole network tracing rests on a general
 tion systems from leading security vendors. MITRE’s emulaconcept called logon session-based execution partitioning and
 tion plans target enterprise networks with more sophisticated,
tracing, which is not tied to any specific environment. Third,
 cross-machine attacks than most public datasets, offering greater
HADES’s detection rules are based on the MITRE ATT&CK
 authenticity. However, MITRE has not published any corre-
Matrix [12], which is a widely recognized framework esteemed
 sponding datasets. We stringently implemented three emulation
by organizations worldwide. Leading security vendors, thereplans, i.e, APT29 [67], Oilrig [35], and WizardSpider [68],
fore, not only contribute to this framework but also utilize it
 and then evaluated HADES on these datasets. Table II gives an
as a reference for the development of detection mechanisms.
 overview of our datasets. Note that these three datasets are now
Last, HADES interfaces with Elasticsearch [56] via EQL [57],
 combined into a published dataset called AVIATOR [69], [70].
a query language designed for security purposes; Elasticsearch
 A detailed comparison between the AVIATOR dataset and other
is a widely utilized tool for event searching and threat analysis
 APT datasets is provided in [69].
within organizations.
 HADES has been tested in an emulated environment with a
typical organization network as specified in the MITRE Emu- A. HADES vs. SIEM Detection Rules
lation Plans [58], but not yet deployed in a production system. We extracted all detection rules for AD-based attacks from
There is a concern that the detailed logs required by HADES the most popular and established SIEM rule repositories, i.e.,
would violate users’ privacy, especially because, by combining Elastic [29], Sigma [30], Google Chronicle [71], and converted
recorded system activities and logon activities, HADES can reveal them into EQL queries, which we then run parallel to HADES
which employee has carried out what activities at what time. A on our datasets. We compare the detection results of Elastic,
proper log anonymization mechanism needs to be designed in Chronicle, Sigma and our system HADES in Table III. To ensure
future work and incorporated into HADES. Deploying HADES fair comparison, in Table III, we only show the detection results
as a real-time detection system in a production system requires of these SIEM rules for attack techniques that HADES’s stage 1
the capability of real-time log ingestion, which can be easily can detect (Fig. 5), and not other AD attack techniques like AD
realized, as HADES interfaces with Elasticsearch and relies on discovery, which would lead to a much higher number of false
Winlogbeat [59] to ship logs to Elasticsearch. Winlogbeat is positives.
provided by Elastic, and designed to ship logs off of endpoints as Note that we implement HADES as an on-demand PIDS for
soon as possible. Elastic also provides guidelines for data storage enhanced efficiency. Only when HADES’s stage 1 detects a pomanagement in Elasticsearch in a production environment [60], tential lateral movement, it runs its stage 2 for a whole-network
[61], [62]. investigation, which unfolds other tactics like AD discovery and
 credential access when they are causally related to the lateral
 movement. That is, HADES cannot detect an early-stage AD
 VI. EVALUATION attack, in which the attacker has only performed AD discovery
 Public Datasets: Public datasets often do not contain AD and credential access, but not yet moved to other machines.
attacks presumably due to higher requirement on setting up em- In particular, for attacks like Golden-Ticket, HADES’s stage 1
ulation infrastructures. For instance, the DARPA E3 dataset [63] cannot detect the creation of a Golden-Ticket, i.e., credential
does not contain any AD-based attack. Although in the DARPA access, but its usage for lateral movement. HADES’s stage 2
E5 dataset [64], a so-called Copykatz module is used for cre- checks credential access techniques related to Golden-Ticket,
dential access, the credentials obtained are local credentials, as if the stage 1 detects a Golden-Ticket-based lateral movement.
the corresponding machines are not joined to a domain. The HADES avoids a high rate of false alarms by neglecting potential,
DARPA OpTC dataset [65] is the only public dataset including yet less critical early-stage attack steps.
AD-based attacks that we can find. Unfortunately, this dataset Table III reveals that, comparing to HADES, SIEM rules
only includes system logs on domain-joined hosts, but no logs produced more false positives and missed some true attacks.
from the domain controller. Authentication logs, which are Whereas Chronicle has a relatively low false positive rate in all
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 947

Fig. 8. CDF of threat score for false and true alerts.

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON OF HADES AND PRIOR DETECTION SYSTEMS

datasets, it missed the true attack in each dataset. In contrast, a provenance graph via precise cross-machine tracing, it exposes
Sigma detected all true attacks, at the cost of having a much provenance graphs containing system activities conducted by
higher false positive rate. Elastic detected the Pass-the-Hash attackers as they typically follow a rigid AD attack pattern unlike
attack in the Oilrig dataset with less false positives, but missed benign graphs.
the attacks in APT29 dataset and WizardSpider dataset. Detailed comparison between HADES’s stages 1 and 2 is given
 To understand why SIEM rules have a high rate of false in Fig. 8, which presents the cumulative distribution function of
positives and false negatives, we resort to manually inspect threat scores for benign and attack alerts. HADES’s stage 2 results
them. On the one hand, we find that a high number of false in Table III are based on the true attack threat score threshold.
positives often results from overly general rules matching system Our threat triage algorithm in HADES’s stage 2, combined with
activities caused by benign programs often misused by attackers, logon session-based execution partitioning and tracing, coni.e., LOLBins. Further, Sigma’s unusually high number of false tributes to an average false positive reduction rate of 99% when
positives is also due to the fact that Sigma’s rule repository comparing to its stage 1.
includes many similar rules created by different contributors
for the same attack techniques. On the other hand, both Chronicle’s and Elastic’s rules tend to be overly specific, i.e., having B. HADES vs. CAD
hard-coded strings as conditions, and also often allowlist system Prior research [72] shows that, contrary to general perception,
activities caused by known “benign” programs. Simply favoring commercial security products may have poor detection quality
high-degree of specificity and overly allowlisting lead to less despite high price tag. In order to answer the question how much
false positives, but inevitably cause more false negatives. value a commercial attack detection product could bring, we
 Unlike open-source SIEM rules, HADES employs an advanced subscribed to a cloud-based dedicated AD attack detection sodetection strategy that goes beyond solely looking for specific lution from a popular security vendor and evaluated it alongside
isolated log events, contributing to an average false positive HADES on our datasets. The security vendor is considered as
reduction rate of 98%. Most activities involved in AD attacks are a significant security solution provider in the security market
based on (mis)using legitimate AD infrastructures and services. overviews of Gartner [73] and Forrester [74]. However we did
For example, network shares are used intensively by normal do- not get the permission to name the vendor in the present paper,
main users and only occasionally by attackers for lateral move- and hence refer to the security product we purchased simply as
ment. That is, attackers can easily blend into the noise caused CAD (commercial attack detector).
by legitimate users, as indicative system and network activities We installed CAD on the domain controller of our emulation
related to AD attacks are so prevalent in benign operations. infrastructure. We were also provided with a documentation
However, when putting truly causally related system activities in of the security product we purchased, in which a guideline
948 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 9. CDF of response time of HADES.

 Fig. 10. An attack graph created by HADES on the APT29 dataset.

for CAD’s logging configuration and its high-level detection
logic/rules are included. To our surprise, as shown in Table III, provenance attack graph with associated threat score for each
the commercial product did not raise a single false alarm, but is stage 1’s high-level alert in every dataset.
plagued with a high false negative rate. The result of our investigation, however, aligns with the findings in prior work [72],
 D. Case Study
i.e., commercial security products may sacrifice detection rate
in exchange for analyst time. 1) Pass-the-Hash: Pass-the-Hash attacks leverage NTLM
 By consulting on the documentation, in particular CAD’s authentication process, instead of the default AD authenticahigh-level detection logic, we were able to find some explanation tion process Kerberos. This authentication anomaly manifests
for the poor detection rate. First, we find that CAD, as a dedicated in our authentication anomaly detection model introduced in
AD attack detection system, does not collect enough data we Section IV. However, using this model alone introduces many
consider as necessary for accurate detection. That is, CAD only false alerts, as NTLM authentication process is still widely in
collects a limited set of authentication & logon event types, use in Windows domains. For instance, when a user accesses
leading to restricted visibility. Second, some of its detection a remote network share via NTLM, the authentication process
rules do not fire alerts on events that are previously observed on against the target server and the domain controller looks the same
the same computers. With the prevalence of LOLBins, doing so as in Pass-the-Hash attacks. That is, without resorting to system
reduces false positives, but inevitably introduces false negatives. logs, it is difficult to reliably detect Pass-the-Hash attacks. This is
Third, CAD does not check system logs inside each host at all. also why CAD missed this attack in the Oilrig dataset. However,
We argue that credential access techniques, a critical step in AD we show that, by using whole network provenance tracing and an
attacks, are detectable mostly via system logs. alert triage algorithm, HADES can reliably detect Pass-the-Hash,
 To avoid false conclusion, we engaged with the vendor over and drastically reduce false positives caused by benign user
weeks by first checking if our installation and configuration of activities. Fig. 3 automatically created by HADES presents the
CAD was correct, and then presenting our finding, and asking entire attack chain conducted by the attacker.
for explanation on the high false negative rate. The answer of 2) Golden-Ticket: In a Golden-Ticket attack, the attacker
the vendor confirmed our evaluation findings. In particular, the manages to steal the credentials of the krbtgt account from
vendor responded to the false negative for the Pass-the-Hash a domain controller, and is then able to create a TGT imattack by saying that CAD’s detection on Pass-the-Hash attacks personating any domain user. The attacker does not request a
has known issues and they are working on a fix. TGT from a domain controller before requesting a TGS to an
 application server, showing an anomaly in our authentication
 anomaly detection model. However, during a benign operation,
C. Response Time when a cached TGT is used to request access to a server,
 We measure the response time of HADES in two separate parts. it exhibits the same network authentication anomaly, making
Fig. 9 shows the cumulative distribution function of response Golden-Ticket difficult to detect without inspecting system logs
time of HADES in its two stages, respectively. HADES’s stage on each involved machines. For the Golden-Ticket attack in the
1 response time is measured per authentication & logon alert. APT29 dataset, as illustrated in Fig. 10, HADES first creates an
Fig. 9(a) reveals that it takes less than 35 milliseconds to find an initial high-level attack graph involving AD entities like users
authentication & logon anomaly for all authentication & logon and hosts, after it detects an authentication & logon anomaly and
events in each dataset. We measure HADES’s stage 2 response suspects a Golden-Ticket attack. Then it performs system-level
time as the time to perform logon session-based backward & forward tracing inside the specific logon session of involved
forward tracing on a high-level alert found in the stage 1, while username Bob in the accessed host Workstation_2, and systemchecking for system activities related to AD discovery tech- level forward & backward tracing inside the logon session of
niques, credential access, and privilege escalation, and calculate Alice in the accessing host Workstation_1, leading to a logon
the threat score for the resulted attack graph. As shown in session in the Domain Controller. This attack graph discloses
Fig. 9 (b), it takes at most 45 seconds to return a low-level that the attacker first performed AD discovery and credential
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 949

 detect AD attacks. TRACE [27] is an early attempt to detect
 cross-machine attacks in enterprise networks by connecting
 intra-machine provenance graphs whenever there is a network
 connection between two machines, oblivious to the domain
Fig. 11. An attack graph created by CAD on the APT29 dataset. context. This naive approach inevitably leads to cross-machine
 dependency explosion, as discussed in Section IV. In contrast,
 HADES is designed with realistic multi-users computing enviaccess on the initially compromised machine Workstation_1,
 ronment in domain context in mind, and can narrow the crossthen moved to the Domain Controller for further credential
 machine tracing down to a specific logon session containing
access, and finally created a Golden-Ticket for accessing the
 system activities conducted truly by the same identity, drastically
Workstation_2.
 reducing false dependencies.
 In comparison, attack graphs produced by the commercial de-
 However, HADES’s cross-machine tracing is limited to AD
tector CAD are incomplete and much less informative, hindering
 environment and domain-joined machines. Devices brought by
swift attack investigation by security analysts. For the attack
 employees themselves, aka BYOD, are out of HADES’s scope,
scenario in the WizardSpider dataset and the attack scenario
 since for these devices the authentication & logon process is
in the Oilrig dataset, CAD did not output an attack graph,
 done locally with local credentials instead of domain credentials.
as it has missed the attacks. Fig. 11 shows the attack graph
 Yet, local credentials cannot be used in identity-based attacks for
produced by CAD for the attack scenario in the APT29 dataset.
 moving laterally to other machines in a network. That is, BYOD
Comparing to the attack graph produced by our system HADES
 cannot be used for identity-based attacks. Although attackers
in Fig. 10, CAD’s attack graph is much less valuable for security
 may move laterally from BYOD to domain-joined devices via
analysts in practice. First, it does not present the complete list
 binary exploitation, these kind of attacks are much more expenof machines and users that are involved in the attack. Second,
 sive and much less popular than identity-based attacks in reality,
due to CAD’s limited tracing ability, its attack graph reveals no
 as recent CrowdStrike studies [1], [2], [3], [4] show that 80%
malicious system activities conducted by the attacker. That is,
 of modern cyberattacks are identity-driven. Binary exploitation
when presented with such an attack graph, security analysts need
 does not cause any authentication event. Nor does it cause any
to perform laborious, error-prone manual analysis to assess the
 logon event. It may, however, cause some system activity events
attacker’s traversal inside the network for attack remediation and
 on an accessed device. Without authentication and logon events,
recovery.
 HADES cannot perform accurate causality-based cross machine
 tracing. The only way to also address binary exploitation-based
E. Threats to the Validity of the Experimental Evaluation
 cross-machine attacks would be to conduct network connection-
 HADES is evaluated on datasets resulted from implementa- based cross-machine tracing, which is highly inaccurate, as
tion of MITRE emulation plans. We stringently followed the discussed in Section IV-B.
emulation plans including the infrastructure setups, and are
unaware of any uncontrolled variables within our experiments B. Dependency Explosion
that could introduce threats to the internal validity. HADES’s
 Intra-machine dependency explosion happens for longperformance is measured not only by its false positive rate &
 running processes, in which each input event is conservatively
false negative rate, but also by its ability to construct concise and
 considered causally responsible for all subsequent output events,
complete attack graphs, which we consider as the most important
 and vice versa, resulting in excessive amounts of false dependenperformance metrics. We developed HADES with considerations
 cies and formidably dense provenance graphs. Similarly, crossof its deployability in real world in mind. HADES is evaluated
 machine dependency explosion occurs if edges are built simply
on a typical organization network as specified in the MITRE
 on a (coarse-granular) network connection basis. Program exeemulation plans. HADES’s whole network tracing rests on a gencution partitioning techniques [13], [25], [26] are the first proeral concept called logon session-based execution partitioning
 posed to combat intra-machine dependency explosion. MPI [75]
and tracing, which is not tied to any specific environment. We
 improves these techniques by introducing a semantics aware
believe that HADES can achieve similar detection performance in
 program annotation and instrumentation technique. Whereas all
various environments. However, there might be unknown factors
 these techniques focus on execution of individual long-running
influencing HADES’s performance in real world. Due to privacy
 processes, logon session-based execution partitioning operates
concern, HADES is not yet extensively tested in real world, as
 at a higher level, beneficial for alleviating both intra-machine and
further discussed in Section VIII-C.
 cross-machine dependency explosion. Nonetheless, the existing
 techniques are complementary to HADES and can further reduce
 VII. DISCUSSION & RELATED WORK false dependencies in provenance graphs.
A. Provenance-Based IDS
 Prior PIDS [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], C. Lateral Movement Detection
[23] are restricted to intra-machine tracing, and unaware of Although HADES is more than a lateral movement detector,
the network context, hindering their adaptability for AD attack its design is centered on lateral movement detection. That is,
detection. That is, by construction, these systems would fail to HADES’s stage 1 alerts on potential lateral movements, which
950 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

are then further investigated in its stage 2 via whole-network A. Evading HADES
provenance tracing, and triaged with the insights from an exten-
 In practice, a PIDS’s ability to reconstruct concise and
sive analysis of AD attacks conducted by APT actors, accurately accurate attack graphs is invaluable for security analysts, as
and comprehensively unraveling attackers’ traversal inside endetection systems cannot guarantee perfect accuracy. Further
terprise networks. HADES overcomes several inherent weakinvestigation by security analysts is vitally important for further
nesses, in terms of logging and assumptions, of state-of-the-art removing false positives and pinpointing true attacks. Conlateral movement detection system Hopper [76]. First, Hopper
 cise and complete attack graphs automatically generated from
proposes an inference algorithm to identify complete login paths
 PIDS can substantially speed up the investigation process, and
in enterprise networks, as leveraging standard authentication therefore contribute to swift attack recovery & remediation.
logs alone is insufficient to identify those paths. In contrast,
 Knowing this, advanced attackers may employ attack techniques
HADES combines authentication & logon logs and system logs to specifically hinder HADES’s accurate system activity tracing
to trace these paths on a logon session basis, producing lo- and prevent it from reconstructing correct and complete attack
gin paths guaranteed to be correct, unlike Hopper’s inference
 graphs.
algorithm. Second, Hopper’s detection algorithm operates on For instance, attackers may perform logon session hijacking to
two assumptions: 1) attackers use a different set of credentials disrupt HADES’s cross-machine tracing. With sufficient privilege
when moving to other machines, 2) attackers eventually access a
 on one session, attackers can hijack another existing session.
machine which they previously could not access. While intuitive, However, a session hijacking attack is not directly evident in
these assumptions are not reliable enough, as HADES’s stage 1 system logs; the link between a hijacking logon session and a
shows that detection based on authentication & logon anomaly
 hijacked logon session cannot be created by solely processing
alone leads to many false positives. A thorough investigation via system logs. If a session hijacking attack is not detected, the
detailed system activities checking is critical for reducing these
 hijacking session would not be linked to the hijacked session durfalse alarms.
 ing logon session-based tracing. This would inevitably lead to
 premature end of the cross-machine system activity tracing, and
D. Active Directory Attack Detection result in incomplete or even incorrect attack graphs. Therefore,
 Like the lateral movement detector Hopper [76], existing future work needs to make HADES more robust by discovering all
Active Directory attack detectors [77], [78] are only comparable possible evasion techniques and introducing countermeasures to
to our system HADES’s stage one. That is, these systems are safeguard HADES’s cross-machine tracing.
anomaly detectors that can only output an (unranked) alert
simply suggesting a possible attack, but no attack graph assisting B. Reliance on Log Integrity
in understanding the detection decision and hence further investigation. Anomaly detection alone often leads to many false A further limitation of HADES is its reliance on logs & log
positives. The lack of an explanation makes it less useful for integrity. Like all detection systems that rely on logs, i.e., every
security analysts in practice. system listed in Section VII, our system HADES would likely fail
 In comparison, HADES is not just a classification system. at detecting the attacks, if attackers have managed to manipulate
Rather, HADES facilitates the investigation process in unearthing logs without leaving any trace, or there are no logs generated or
the root causes and attack ramifications, by providing contex- left at all. This would be a very effective evasion technique.
tualized and more interpretable detection results. HADES can However, as mentioned in Section V, there are already efforts
perform accurate cross-machine system activity tracing in its being put into preventing log manipulation. For instance, Winsecond stage, thanks to our novel concept called logon session- dows introduced Protected Event Logging [55] to secure logs
based execution partitioning, to automatically associate all sys- from unauthorized access. Nevertheless, we believe that more
tem activities of each user or attacker. By mapping the system log protection techniques need to be designed in future work in
activities inside each graph to AD-related attack techniques case attackers can bypass existing ones.
when possible and then counting the number of attack techniques
present in each graph, HADES ranks these graphs and therefore C. Deploying HADES in Real World
outputs ranked alerts, with the most likely AD attacks being
 We developed HADES with considerations of its deployability
ranked the highest. This is to help security analysts perform swift
 in real world in mind; HADES has been tested in an emulated
investigation, as they often find it difficult and time consuming to
 environment based on a typical organization network as speciinvestigate on, associate and understand the detection results of
 fied in the MITRE Emulation Plans [58]. HADES leverages syscurrently deployed security systems [79], [80], [81]. We believe
 tem logs and authentication & logon logs collected by popular
that this functionality makes HADES much more practical than
 industry-standard instrumentation-free logging tools provided
existing systems. Note that a direct, empirical comparison with
 by Microsoft. These logging tools are installed on each host and
these existing systems [27], [76], [77], [78] is difficult given the
 have low computational overhead. Collected logs are shipped
absence of source code and differences in evaluation datasets.
 to Elasticsearch and stored in a more efficient format. HADES
 interfaces with Elasticsearch, a widely utilized tool for scalable
 VIII. LIMITATIONS
 and near real-time event searching and threat analysis within
 Currently, our system HADES has a few known limitations that organizations. HADES’s response time, i.e., time to output an
need to be addressed in future work. AD attack graph assigned with a threat score, does not directly
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 951

depend on the size of an enterprise environment, but rather on the [3] V. Shastri, “Attackers set sights on active directory: Understandnumber of cross-machine hops in each suspected attack instance, ing your identity exposure,” Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/attackers-set-sights-on-activei.e., the number of involved hosts. Note that HADES performs directory-understanding-your-identity-exposure/
fine-grained provenance tracing only on involved hosts. That [4] V. Shastri, “Endpoint and identity security: A critical combination to stop
is, HADES’s performance degradation in terms of response time modern attacks,” Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 crowdstrike.com/blog/unifying-endpoint-and-identity-security/
in a large enterprise environment would be insignificant. Fur- [5] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE T1558.003,” Accessed: Dec. 2023.
ther, the size of an enterprise would have no direct impact on [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1558/003/
HADES’s performance on generating accurate attack graphs and [6] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE T1550.002,” Accessed: Dec. 2023.
 [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1550/002/
its detection accuracy. [7] S. Krishnamoorthi and J. Carleton, “Active directory holds the keys
 HADES has not yet been deployed in a production system. This to your kingdom, but is it secure?” 2020. [Online]. Available:
is due to a concern that the detailed logs required by HADES https://www.frost.com/frost-perspectives/active-directory-holds-thekeys-to-your-kingdom-but-is-it-secure/
would violate users’ privacy. By combining recorded system [8] “Nmap,” Accessed: May 2024. [Online]. Available: https://nmap.org/
activities and logon activities, HADES can reveal which employee [9] Microsoft, “Setspn,” Accessed: Jan. 2024. [Online]. Available:
has carried out what activities on which machines at what https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/itpro/windows-server-2012-r2-and-2012/cc731241(v=ws.11)
time. That is, deploying HADES without integrating a privacy- [10] Falcon OverWatch Team, “8 LOLBins every threat hunter should know,”
preserving logging solution in an organization might lead to Accessed: May 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/
increased vulnerability to abuse of power, decreased trust, or blog/8-lolbins-every-threat-hunter-should-know/
 [11] Trellix, “Trellix threat report 2023,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
even legal consequences. A proper privacy-preserving logging www.trellix.com/advanced-research-center/threat-reports/feb-2023/
mechanism needs to be designed in future work and incorporated [12] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE matrix,” Accessed: Jan. 2023. [Online].
into HADES; only then is HADES readily deployable in real Available: https://attack.mitre.org/matrices/enterprise/
 [13] S. Ma, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “ProTracer: Towards practical provenance
world. HADES is potentially compatible with popular privacy- tracing by alternating between logging and tainting,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
preserving techniques like log anonymization, data masking, Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2016, pp. 1–15.
noise injection. That is, personally identifiable information from [14] M. N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction
 from COTS audit data,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 487–504.
logs like user ID can be replaced with hashes or pseudonyms [15] W. U. Hassan, L. Mark, N. Aguse, A. Bates, and T. Moyer, “Towards
that are unique but non-reversible. Besides, information like scalable cluster auditing through grammatical inference over provenance
IP addresses inside network activity logs that may reveal user graphs,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2018, pp. 1–15.
 [16] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakridentity but is irrelevant to HADES can be masked with a fixed ishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of
value. Further, random forensics-irrelevant user activities can be suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019,
injected into the logs to make any attempt to reverse-engineer pp. 1137–1152.
 [17] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
personal information more difficult. automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2019,
 pp. 1–15.
 [18] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis
 for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 IX. CONCLUSION Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189.
 [19] M. N. Hossain, S. Sheikhi, and R. Sekar, “Combating dependence explo-
 We present a novel accurate AD attack detection and investi- sion in forensic analysis using alternative tag propagation semantics,” in
gation system named HADES in this paper. Based on a thorough Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 1139–1155.
study of AD attacks launched by APT actors, we create a succinct [20] Z. Cheng et al., “KAIROS: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
 using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
and contextualized AD attack overview revealing key steps and 2024, pp. 9–28.
prerequisites of various AD attack types. We leverage critical [21] M. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. Hassan, “FLASH: A comprehensive
insights from our extensive analysis on AD attacks to design approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 142–161.
a light-weight authentication anomaly detection model, and a [22] J. Zeng et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber threat
threat triage algorithm. We propose the concept logon session- analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy
based execution partitioning and tracing, which significantly (S&P), 2022, pp. 489–506.
 [23] F. Yang, J. Xu, C. Xiong, Z. Li, and K. Zhang, “PROGRAPHER: An
reduces false dependencies, contributing to accurate and swift anomaly detection system based on provenance graph embedding,” in
AD attack detection. Our evaluations, conducted on datasets Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 4355–4372.
derived from rigorously implemented MITRE emulation plans, [24] F. Dong et al., “Are we there yet? An industrial viewpoint on provenancebased endpoint detection and response tools,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput.
demonstrate that HADES significantly outperforms open-source Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 2396–2410.
SIEM detection rules and a commercial dedicated AD attack [25] K. H. Lee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “High accuracy attack provenance via
detector. binary-based execution partition,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.,
 2013, pp. 1–16.
 [26] S. Ma, K. H. Lee, C. H. Kim, J. Rhee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Accurate,
 low cost and instrumentation-free security audit logging for windows,” in
 REFERENCES Proc. Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2015, pp. 401–410.
 [27] H. Irshad et al., “TRACE: Enterprise-wide provenance tracking for
 [1] CrowdStrike, Inc., “CrowdStrike 2023 global threat report,” 2023. [On- real-time APT detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16,
 line]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/global-threat-report/ pp. 4363–4376, 2021.
 [2] CrowdStrike, Inc., “CrowdStrike 2023 threat hunting report,” 2023. [On- [28] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
 line]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/resources/reports/threat- qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in
 hunting-report/ Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2783–2800.
952 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

[29] Elastic, “Elastic detection rules,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Avail- [54] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE ATT&CK campaigns,” Accessed:
 able: https://github.com/elastic/detection-rules May 2024. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/
[30] SigmaHQ, “Sigma,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https:// [55] S. Wheeler and M. Lombardi, “About logging windows,” Accessed:
 github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma Apr. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-
[31] M. Crockett, “Why 86% of organizations are increasing their invest- us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_logging_
 ment in active directory security,” Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Avail- windows?view=powershell-7.3
 able: https://securityboulevard.com/2021/11/why-86-of-organizations- [56] Elastic NV, “Elasticsearch,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available:
 are-increasing-their-investment-in-active-directory-security/ https://www.elastic.co/
[32] A. Talyanski, “nopac exploit: Latest microsoft AD flaw may lead to total [57] Elastic NV, “EQL search,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available:
 domain compromise in seconds,” Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Avail- https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/eql.html
 able: https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/nopac-exploit-latest-microsoft- [58] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE adversary emulation library,”
 ad-flaw-may-lead-to-total-domain-compromise/ Accessed: Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/center-for-
[33] Inc Tenable, “A gloabl threat to enterprises: The impact of threat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_library
 active directory attacks,” Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Avail- [59] Elastic NV, “Lightweight shipper for windows event logs,” Accessed:
 able: https://de.tenable.com/whitepapers/a-global-threat-to-enterprises- Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.elastic.co/beats/winlogbeat/
 the-impact-of-ad-attacks?page=2 [60] M. Davis, “How to design your elasticsearch data storage architecture for
[34] X. Han, T. Pasqueir, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “UNICORN: scale,” Accessed: Apr. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.elastic.co/
 Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in beats/winlogbeat/
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2020, pp. 1–18. [61] Elastic NV, “Resize your deployment,” Accessed: Apr. 2025. [Online].
[35] The MITRE Corporation, “Oilrig emulation plan,” Accessed: Oct. 2023. Available: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-enterprise/current/ece-
 [Online]. Available: https://github.com/center-for-threat-informed- resize-deployment.html
 defense/adversary_emulation_library/tree/master/oilrig [62] Elastic NV, “Get ready for production,” Accessed: Apr. 2025. [On-
[36] The MITRE Corporation, “Golden ticket,” Accessed: Jan. 2024. [Online]. line]. Available: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/
 Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1558/001/ current/scalability.html
[37] V. Pamnani, “4769(s, f): A kerberos service ticket was requested,” [63] A. D. Keromytis, “DARPA transparent computing E3,”
 Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en- Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpaus/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-10/security/threat- i2o/Transparent-Computing/blob/master/README-E3.md
 protection/auditing/event-4769 [64] J. Torrey, “DARPA transparent computing,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [On-
[38] V. Pamnani, “4624(s): An account was successfully logged on,” line]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing
 Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en- [65] M. van Opstal and W. Arbaugh, “DARPA OpTC,” Accessed: Sep. 2023.
 us/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-10/security/threat- [Online]. Available: https://github.com/FiveDirections/OpTC-data
 protection/auditing/event-4624 [66] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE engenuity,” Accessed: Jan. 2023. [On-
[39] V. Pamnani, “4768(s, f): A kerberos authentication ticket (TGT) line]. Available: https://attackevals.mitre-engenuity.org/
 was requested,” Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: [67] The MITRE Corporation, “APT29 emulation plan,” Accessed: Oct. 2023.
 https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/it- [Online]. Available: https://github.com/center-for-threat-informedpro/windows-10/security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4768 defense/adversary_emulation_library/tree/master/apt29
[40] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE ATT&CK,” Accessed: Jan. 2023. [68] The MITRE Corporation, “WizardSpider emulation plan,” Accessed:
 [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org Oct. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/center-for-
[41] Mandiant, “Mandiant M-trends 2023,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https: threat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_library/tree/master/
 //www.mandiant.com/resources/reports wizard_spider
[42] M. A. Inam et al., “SoK: History is a vast early warning system: Auditing [69] Q. Liu, K. Bao, and V. Hagenmeyer, “AVIATOR: A MITRE emulation
 the provenance of system intrusions,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, plan-derived living dataset for advanced persistent threat detection and in-
 2023, pp. 2620–2638. vestigation,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2024, pp. 5592–5601.
[43] Microsoft, “Security auditing,” Accessed: May 2023. [Online]. Available: [70] Q. Liu, K. Bao, and V. Hagenmeyer, “AVIATOR dataset,” Accessed:
 https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/it- Nov. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://gitlab.kit.edu/kit/iai/rsa/aviator
 pro/windows-10/security/threat-protection/auditing/security-auditing- [71] Google Security Operations, “Chronicle detection rules,” Accessed:
 overview Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/chronicle/detection-
[44] Microsoft, “LSA logon sessions,” Accessed: Feb. 2024. [Online]. rules
 Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/secauthn/ [72] X. Bouwman, H. Griffioen, J. Egbers, C. Doerr, B. Klievink, and M. van
 lsa-logon-sessions Eeten, “A different cup of TI? The added value of commercial threat
[45] M. E. Russinovich and A. Margosis, Troubleshooting With the Win- intelligence,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 433–450.
 dows Sysinternals Tools, 2nd ed. Redmond, WA, USA: Microsoft Press, [73] E. Mirolyubov, M. Taggett, F. Hinner, and N. Patel, “Magic quadrant for
 2016. endpoint protection platforms,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.
[46] A. Allievi, A. Ionescu, D. A. Solomon, K. Chase, and M. E. Russinovich, gartner.com/doc/reprints?id=1-2FFCXFOM&ct=231025&st=sb
 Windows Internals, Part 2, 7th ed. Redmond, WA, USA: Microsoft Press, [74] A. Mellen, “The forrester new wave: Extended detection and
 2022. response (XDR) providers, Q4 2021,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
[47] A. Miroshnikov, Windows Security Monitoring: Scenarios and Patterns. https://www.forrester.com/report/the-forrester-new-wave-tm-extended-
 Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2018. detection-and-response-xdr-providers-q4-2021/RES176400
[48] J. Forshaw, Windows Security Internals: A Deep Dive Into Windows [75] S. Ma, J. Zhai, F. Wang, K. H. Lee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “MPI:
 Authentication, Authorization, and Auditing. San Francisco, CA, USA: Multiple perspective attack investigation with semantic aware execution
 No Starch Press, 2024. partitioning,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1111–1128.
[49] The MITRE Corporation, “T1021.001,” Accessed: Jan. 2024. [Online]. [76] G. Ho et al., “Hopper: Modeling and detecting lateral movement,” in Proc.
 Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1021/001/ USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3093–3110.
[50] Microsoft, “Fast user switching,” Accessed: Feb. 2024. [Online]. Avail- [77] L. Kotlaba, S. Buchovecká, and R. Lórencz, “Active directory kerberoastable: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/shell/fast-user- ing attack: Detection using machine learning techniques,” in Proc. 7th Int.
 switching Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2021, pp. 376–383.
[51] Microsoft, “User account control,” Accessed: Feb. 2024. [Online]. Avail- [78] W. Matsuda, M. Fujimoto, and T. Mitsunaga, “Detecting APT attacks
 able: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/application- against active directory using machine leaning,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE Conf.
 security/application-control/user-account-control/ Appl. Inf. Netw. Secur., 2018, pp. 60–65.
[52] V. Pamnani, “4625(f): An account failed to log on,” Accessed: [79] E. Segal, “Alert fatigue,” Accessed: Aug. 2023. [Online]. Available:
 Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en- https://www.forbes.com/sites/edwardsegal/2021/11/08/alert-fatigueus/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-10/security/threat- can-lead-to-missed-cyber-threats-and-staff-retentionrecruitment-issuesprotection/auditing/event-4625 study/?sh=4c96871035c9
[53] M. Russinovich and T. Garnier, “System monitor,” Accessed: [80] C. Robinson, “In cybersecurity every alert matters,” 2021. [On-
 Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en- line]. Available: https://www.criticalstart.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/
 us/sysinternals/downloads/sysmon 11/US48277521_TLWP.pdf
LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS 953

[81] CRITICALSTART, “The impact of security alert overload,” 2019. [On- Wajih Ul Hassan received the PhD degree in comline]. Available: https://www.criticalstart.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/ puter science from the University of Illinois Urbana-
 02/CS_Report-The-Impact-of-Security-Alert-Overload.pdf Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA, in 2021. He is
 currently an assistant professor with the Department
 of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. He has collaborated with NEC
 Labs and Symantec Research Labs to integrate his
 defensive techniques into commercial security prod-
 Qi Liu received the PhD degree from the Karlsruhe
 ucts. His research interests include securing complex
 Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany, in 2025.
 networked systems by leveraging data provenance
 His research interests include system security, auditing & logging, data provenance analysis, and ad- approaches and scalable system design. He was the
 recipoient of the NSF CAREER Award, Symantec Research Labs Graduate
 vanced persistence threat detection and investigation.
 Fellowship, recognition as a Young Researcher at the Heidelberg Laureate
 Forum, RSA Security Scholarship, Mavis Future Faculty Fellowship, Sohaib and
 Sara Abbasi Fellowship, and an ACM SIGSOFT Distinguished Paper Award.

 Kaibin Bao received the PhD degree from the Karl- Veit Hagenmeyer (Member, IEEE), received the PhD
 sruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany, in degree from Université Paris XI, Paris, France in
 2021. He is currently the head with Working Group 2002. He is currently a professor of energy infor-
 Resilient Secure Automation, Institute for Automa- matics with the Faculty of Computer Science, and
 tion and Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of the director with the Institute for Automation and
 Technology. His research topics include cybersecu- Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technolrity for critical infrastructures and automation sys- ogy, Karlsruhe, Germany. His research interests intems using machine learning methods. clude modeling, optimization and control of energy
 systems, machine learning-based forecasting in energy systems, and integrated cybersecurity of such
 systems.