2982 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 Hardware-Aware Neural Architecture Search for
 Encrypted Traffic Classification on
 Resource-Constrained Devices
 Adel Chehade , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Edoardo Ragusa , Member, IEEE,
 Paolo Gastaldo , Member, IEEE, and Rodolfo Zunino

 Abstract—This paper presents a hardware-efficient deep I. I NTRODUCTION
neural network (DNN), optimized through hardware-aware
neural architecture search (HW-NAS); the DNN supports the
classification of session-level encrypted traffic on resourceconstrained Internet of Things (IoT) and edge devices. Thanks to
 T HE proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies
 introduces security challenges that traditional methods
 often cannot handle effectively [1]. Resource-constrained
HW-NAS, a 1D convolutional neural network (CNN) is tailored devices generate huge amounts of data; relying on centralized
on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset to meet strict memory and servers to process that data may lead to transfer delays,
computational limits while achieving robust performance. The increased network load, and additional power consumption
optimized model attains an accuracy of 96.60% with just 88.26K [2]. Ideally, data flow monitoring should be carried out on
parameters, 10.08M floating-point operations (FLOPs), and a
maximum tensor size of 20.12K. Compared to state-of-the-art edge devices to limit overhead in network management [3].
(SOTA) models, it achieves reductions of up to 444-fold, 312-fold, This paper proposes a design strategy to enable efficient traffic
and 15-fold in these metrics, respectively, significantly minimizing classification (TC) on constrained devices at the network edge.
memory footprint and runtime requirements. The model also The growth of encrypted Internet traffic, which now
demonstrates versatility, achieving up to 99.86% across multiple accounts for up to 96% of data [4], worsens this scenario.
VPN and traffic classification (TC) tasks; it further generalizes to Widespread encryption complicates network security and trafexternal benchmarks with up to 99.98% accuracy on USTC-TFC fic analysis [5], [6]; since modern protocols conceal packet
and QUIC NetFlow. In addition, an in-depth approach to headerlevel preprocessing strategies confirms that the optimized model
 contents, traditional methods such as Deep Packet Inspection
can provide notable performance across a wide range of config- (DPI) and port-based classification are mostly ineffective [3].
urations, even in scenarios with stricter privacy considerations. Efficient real-time traffic analysis is essential in today’s
Likewise, a reduction in the length of sessions of up to 75% cybersecurity ecosystem, especially for devices with limited
yields significant improvements in efficiency while maintaining resources like IoT and edge platforms [2]. These devices
high accuracy with only a negligible drop of 1-2%. However, the require fast, adaptive processing to manage encrypted traffic
importance of careful preprocessing and session length selection patterns and support real-time decision-making. Use cases
in the classification of raw traffic data is still present, as improper
settings or aggressive reductions can bring about a 7% reduction
 include edge monitoring in high-bandwidth 5G applications,
in overall accuracy. The quantized architecture was deployed such as video streaming and gaming, which need smooth peron STM32 microcontrollers and evaluated across input sizes; formance [7], and sensitive areas like finance and healthcare,
results confirm that the efficiency gains from shorter sessions where secure data exchange is critical [4].
translate to practical, low-latency embedded inference. These Deep neural networks (DNNs) are increasingly used for
findings demonstrate the method’s practicality for encrypted traffic classification (TC) due to their high accuracy and ability
traffic analysis in constrained IoT networks. to automatically extract features [5], [8]. However, their high
 Index Terms—Deep neural networks, encrypted traffic classi- computational needs limit their use in devices with limited
fication, hardware-aware neural architecture search, Internet of resources [9]. This work explores ways to optimize DNN
Things, resource-constrained devices. designs specifically for these restricted settings.
 Beyond the DNN architecture, optimizing classification
 performance requires careful design choices. Network traffic
 can be classified at different levels, namely packets, flows, and
 Received 15 January 2025; revised 22 August 2025 and 26 January 2026; sessions [10]. A packet is the smallest unit of data, while a flow
accepted 15 February 2026. Date of publication 20 February 2026; date of includes packets sent from a source to a destination. A session
current version 10 March 2026. This work was partially supported by project extends this concept by including bidirectional communication
SERICS (PE00000014) under the MUR National Recovery and Resilience between two endpoints, capturing the full packet exchange
Plan funded by the European Union - NextGenerationEU. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was over time. This paper focuses on session-level classification,
G. Sun. (Corresponding author: Adel Chehade.) as it provides a broader view of network behavior, particularly
 The authors are with the Department of Naval, Electrical, Electronic for identifying encrypted traffic patterns [11], [12], [13], [14].
and Telecommunications Engineering (DITEN), University of Genoa, 16126
Genoa, Italy (e-mail: adel.chehade@edu.unige.it; edoardo.ragusa@unige.it;
 Another important aspect is the processing of packets; this
paolo.gastaldo@unige.it; rodolfo.zunino@unige.it). process aims to ensure that only relevant information feeds
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3666676 the neural network. Several approaches in the literature [15],

 © 2026 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
CHEHADE et al.: HARDWARE-AWARE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH FOR ETC 2983

[16], [17], [18] considered both accuracy and computational dataset [26], demonstrates strong performance across
costs. diverse TC tasks. It achieves 96.60% accuracy in the main
 Finally, one should consider that the varying levels of VPN-nonVPN classification. Additionally, it delivers
complexity in the overall design problem can make certain high accuracy in VPN differentiation (99.86%), VPNstrategies more feasible than others. This paper analyzes the type (99.14%), broader traffic categories (96.74%), and
interaction between those factors from an empirical viewpoint session-level application identification (94.18%), showing
and provides the reader with practical design guidelines. its flexibility and effectiveness in real-world scenarios.
 The paper presents a solution that relies on hardware- • Cross-dataset generalization: The very same architecaware neural architecture search (HW-NAS) for network TC. ture, tailored on the ISCX dataset, proves able to achieve
HW-NAS has been applied in various deep learning (DL) up to 99.98% accuracy on the USTC-TFC2016 [27] and
fields [19], [20]; prior studies have shown that hardware QUIC NetFlow [28] datasets.
objectives are most effectively handled during architecture • On-device inference: Efficiency gains from reduced sesoptimization, rather than through post-hoc compression or sion lengths also result in lower latency and energy
manual tuning [21], [22]. In this work, HW-NAS is employed consumption, enabling the model to run reliably on conas a constraint-driven design methodology, in which parameter strained IoT hardware; the quantized architecture operates
count, floating-point operations (FLOPs), and peak intermedi- in real time on Cortex-M4 and M7 microcontrollers, with
ate tensor size are explicitly bounded during the search. These latency under 115 ms and energy below 29 mJ.
constraints reflect practical deployment bottlenecks in model • Code availability: The proposed HW-NAS is available
storage, computational cost, and runtime memory usage. at https://github.com/SEAlab-unige/ProtectIT Unige.
 The application considered in this paper deals with a
significant, uncovered aspect in the literature, that is, the
 II. R ELATED W ORK
design of optimized neural models that satisfy strict hardware
constraints and yet maintain satisfactory classification perfor- A. Traditional Approaches
mances across diverse network environments, thus making Traditional TC methods such as port-based classification
real-world deployment on IoT (edge) platforms feasible. and DPI often fail on encrypted and obfuscated traffic.
 The main contributions of this paper are: Port-based classification associates traffic with specific ser-
 • Hardware-aware deep networks for traffic classifica- vices based on port numbers, which was suitable for older
 tion: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work architectures but fails in modern networks due to dynamic
 to design hardware-efficient deep networks for TC under ports and HTTP tunneling [3], [4]. Foundational studies
 strict, IoT-compatible constraints. HW-NAS specifically indicated that default ports in Peer-to-Peer (P2P) protocols
 targets session-level classification and endows DNNs account for less than 70% of actual traffic, thus confirming
 with hardware efficiency and satisfactory classification the increasing ineffectiveness of this method [29], [30].
 accuracy; previous approaches primarily focused on max- DPI identifies applications by detecting signatures within
 imizing accuracy [5], [11], [13], [14], [23], [24], [25]. packet payloads [3], [4]. While effective on unencrypted traffic,
 • Header-level preprocessing and session length reduc- it fails on encrypted flows where payloads are inaccessible [3],
 tion: This work extends existing studies by covering and it remains resource-intensive [4].
 multiple header-level preprocessing methods, such as
 IP/MAC addresses, UDP padding, and anonymization,
 alongside session-length reductions, on the optimized B. Machine Learning Methods
 model. Experimental evidence demonstrates that the Classic machine learning (ML) approaches infer patterns
 model achieves stable performance, maintaining high from statistical features (e.g., packet size, flow duration, and
 accuracy with session lengths reduced by up to arrival intervals) without examining packet payloads [3], [4].
 75%, while achieving greater efficiency for resource- Various algorithms, including Naı̈ve Bayes for real-time
 constrained devices through these reductions. At the same application classification, k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN), and
 time, excessive data obfuscation or aggressive reductions Decision Trees, have demonstrated effectiveness in identifying
 in session lengths can affect accuracy; hence, careful encrypted flows based on these features [26]. Additionally,
 selection of configurations is required to avoid drops Random Forests (RF) have been successfully employed for TC
 of up to 7%. The paper gives practical guidelines for in real-world specialized environments like software-defined
 optimizing preprocessing and session length, providing networking (SDN) [31].
 a basis for future research on trading off accuracy and Addressing the need for high-speed processing, [32] impleresource efficiency. mented a fully in-switch classification framework that executes
 • Efficiency benchmarks: Established benchmarks vali- RF inference at line rate within the data plane. Moreover, [33]
 date the HW-NAS-driven strategy against state-of-the-art combined flow label propagation with compound classification
 (SOTA) methods. The proposed model yields substantial to detect unknown flows and boost accuracy.
 resource savings, with reductions of up to 444-fold in Some limitations affect traditional ML methods for TC.
 parameters, 312-fold in FLOPs, and 15-fold in maxi- They rely on manual feature extraction, which is labormum tensor size compared to baseline models. These intensive, and even strong models such as RF require frequent
 reductions streamline session-level TC by reducing com- retraining to maintain satisfactory performance [4].
 putational cost and memory usage. DL models extract complex features from raw traffic,
 • Comprehensive validation across tasks: The HW-NAS- bypassing manual feature selection. While Convolutional Neuoptimized model, tailored on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN ral Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
2984 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

achieve high accuracy, they are often computationally heavy, Networks (HAN) to classify flows as time-series data. The
hindering deployment in resource-limited applications. attention mechanism captures key features, achieving 91.2%
 Several studies focused on session-level data. In [11], accuracy, but with limited efficiency on constrained devices.
a 1D-CNN and 2D-CNN were evaluated on this task: the
1D-CNN scored an accuracy of 86.6% and outperformed the C. Trends in Hardware-Aware NAS
2D-CNN. The approach presented in [27] also used 1D-CNN NAS methods improve model performance by tuning the
for malware TC. [34] proposed an image-based approach network architecture on the target data. Many approaches have
that converted initial non-zero payload sessions into grayscale been proposed in the literature [19], [20], each improving
images for classification using CNNs. Although it achieved architecture exploration in unique ways.
high F1 scores (97.73% for conventional encrypted traffic HW-NAS extends NAS by optimizing models for accuracy
and 99.55% for VPN traffic), the coarse-grained handling alongside hardware constraints, such as memory, latency, and
of subflows disregarded relevant session information. The computational efficiency [41]; this direction was established by
framework in [35] combined CNN and Stacked AutoEncoders works such as MnasNet [21] and ProxylessNAS [22], which
(SAE) for encrypted traffic classification (ETC) by integrating integrated hardware objectives into the search process targeting
trimmed raw traffic data and statistical features; the method mobile platforms. Frameworks like MCUNet [42] further spereached 98% F1-score, at the expense of additional time cialized these techniques for microcontrollers by using systemrequired for feature extraction. Long Short-Term Memory algorithm co-design to fit deep models within strict SRAM
(LSTM) networks, often used to model sequential dependen- and Flash constraints. Additionally, studies such as [43], [44],
cies, were employed in the Inception-LSTM (ICLSTM) model and [45] illustrated how HW-NAS could produce models
[24], which converted traffic data into grayscale images and tailored to efficient deployment on resource-limited platforms
combined Inception modules with LSTM layers; it attained by matching network design with target hardware needs.
over 98% accuracy but showed limitations in adapting to A recent work applied NAS to ETC [8], although without
diverse real-world scenarios. The integration of LSTM, CNN, strict IoT-centric constraints. Other works have applied NAS
and a squeeze-and-excitation module to capture spatiotempo- to malware detection using proximal-iteration search [46], and
ral features [13] achieved over 90% accuracy on encrypted have shown that session-level ETC is feasible under hardware
and unencrypted traffic via end-to-end representation learn- constraints [47]. A HW-NAS strategy was also adopted in [48]
ing. Focusing on attention mechanisms added computational for session-level inference on microcontrollers; however, the
overhead and limited scalability for resource-constrained study did not account for how input data variation can affect
environments. efficiency and performance.
 At the packet level, [6] introduced Deep Packet, which NAS effectiveness relies on careful adaptation to the specific
classified encrypted traffic using a combination of SAE and constraints and priorities of the target application domain.
CNN. Packet-level approaches require large volumes of data, The research presented in this paper relies on HW-NAS to
thus leading to high computational requirements and extended develop a hardware-efficient neural network for ETC. The
training times. The work in [36] proposed DataNets, which target environment includes IoT applications, in which high
used Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), SAE, and CNN models for accuracy and resource efficiency are of paramount importance.
the accurate categorization of encrypted traffic in smart home
networks. Aggressive undersampling was used to address III. P RELIMINARIES
dataset imbalance, but it may affect the model’s generalization NAS automates neural network design by applying a search
performance. The authors in [37] proposed a deep hierarchical algorithm to identify optimal architectures within a predefined
neural network for packet-level malicious traffic detection; a search space; this approach outperforms traditional handmade
1D-CNN for spatial feature extraction and Gated Recurrent models [8], [20] in terms of accuracy.
Unit (GRU) for temporal features scored high accuracy levels Conventional NAS algorithms aim to optimize computaacross multiple intrusion detection datasets [38], [39]. tional performance but often overlook hardware constraints;
 Several works integrated session and packet-level data. as a result, the models they produce may lack the efficiency
Capsule Networks (CapsNet) [23] yielded a session packet- required for their deployment in resource-limited devices. HWbased model for ETC. It prioritized classification performance NAS overcomes this limitation by directly including hardware
at the expense of computational overhead. Likewise, the CBS constraints in the search process; this makes it possible to envimodel in [5] combined 1D-CNN, attention-based Bi-LSTM, sion deployment on a variety of application devices, such as
and SAE for ETC at both session and packet levels by integrat- microcontroller units (MCUs), field-programmable gate arrays
ing spatial, temporal, and statistical features. CBS employed (FPGAs), and cloud accelerators. The extended optimization
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) for data augmen- problem takes into account multiple objectives and constraints,
tation and class imbalance handling, resulting in improved including accuracy, memory usage, computational complexity
performance. The computational requirements limited its use (measured in FLOPs), and energy efficiency [19].
in offline processing and made the method unsuitable for The HW-NAS optimization problem is to identify an archireal-time applications. In [40], the authors proposed a hybrid tecture a ∈ A that minimizes the validation loss on a given
model that extracts flow-level statistical features and classifies dataset D. This objective can be formally defined as:
them using a deep feedforward DNN followed by a maximum
entropy classifier. Despite reporting 99.23% accuracy, the min Lval (w∗ (a), a)
 a∈A
approach relies on handcrafted features and static encoding, s.t w∗ (a) = argmin Ltrain (w, a)
limiting its adaptability to raw or evolving traffic. Other works w
[18] applied attention-based LSTM and Hierarchical Attention ψ(a, HW) < Thr (1)
CHEHADE et al.: HARDWARE-AWARE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH FOR ETC 2985

where A denotes the search space containing all candidate Data scaling: This process prepares the data for subsequent
architectures, Lval represents the validation loss, and Ltrain is input to the model, converting raw byte information into
the training loss minimized to optimize the model weights a standardized format suitable for neural network training.
w∗ (a). ψ(a, HW) is a function that measures the performance Each byte in the raw packet values forming session data is
of the architecture with respect to hardware-specific metrics normalized into the range [0,1].
and Thr is a threshold value associated with these constraints.
 Three main phases characterize NAS, namely, defining the B. Optimization Problem in HW-NAS
search space, selecting the search strategy, and evaluating the
performance. The search space defines the set of admissible The HW-NAS design strategy adopted in this paper casts
network structures (including layer configurations and opti- architecture selection as a constrained optimization problem
mization hyperparameters), which collectively determine the over candidate models a ∈ A, defined as follows:
exploration boundaries for the NAS algorithm. The search min Accuracyval (w∗ (a), a)
 a∈A
strategy then controls how the NAS algorithm explores the
architecture space. Finally, the performance evaluation tests s.t w∗ (a) = argmin Ltrain (w, a)
 w
the candidate architecture using a task-specific merit function,
 |P(a)| < FTh
which adapts to the requirements of the application.
 |T (a)| < RTh
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY: D ESIGN OF E FFICIENT N ETWORK Flops(a) < FlopsTh (2)
 FOR T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION
 Hardware constraints are applied using thresholds FTh , RTh ,
 The method described in this paper provides a novel design and FlopsTh , which manage the critical resource limitations
pipeline to develop lightweight, optimized DNN architec- typically characterizing IoT devices. These thresholds stem
tures for session-level ETC, with a focus on deployment from existing works, such as [43].
on resource-constrained IoT devices. The workflow consists The parameter-count threshold, FTh , controls the total numof three key stages: (1) Data preprocessing arranges raw ber of model parameters P(a) of a candidate architecture and
traffic data for DL by converting sessions into a consistent directly affects memory usage. Reducing that quantity miniinput format; (2) in HW-NAS execution, the search algorithm mizes the model’s memory footprint and helps fit the limited
explores the space of admissible architectures to find a high- Flash memory available on edge devices. The threshold on
performing model that also satisfies hardware constraints; the maximum tensor size, RTh , bounds the peak intermediate
finally, (3) the Model selection and testing first picks out activation size T (a) during inference and ensures that it fits the
the best-performing architecture, based on performance and available RAM. This is critical for session-level classification
constraints, then completes a rigorous testing process involving tasks, where efficient memory utilization is essential to avoid
multiple tasks and deployment settings, ensuring generaliza- overflows during computation. Finally, the FLOPs threshold,
tion and real-world feasibility. FlopsTh , limits computational complexity by bounding the
 number of floating-point operations, which serves as a proxy
A. Preprocessing for inference speed and energy consumption. This constraint
 is essential for maintaining real-time performance on devices
 The following steps implement the preprocessing phase. that often lack dedicated Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).
 Session extraction: Raw traffic data is divided into sessions;
each session consists of an ordered sequence of bidirectional
packets exchanged between two endpoints, identified by IP C. Search Space Design
addresses, port numbers, and protocol. Packet data is typically The HW-NAS search space in this work is a block-wise
stored as raw bytes. structure relying on 1D CNNs, which efficiently capture
 Data cleaning: This step removes data-link layer informa- dependencies in session-based traffic data. They extract localtion, including MAC addresses, and anonymizes IPs. This ized structural patterns within packet content (e.g., payload
approach is frequently adopted in the literature to prevent and headers) and sequential trends across an entire session
overfitting; otherwise, some session-specific features could (e.g., bidirectional exchanges). Recurrent neural networks
lead the model to memorize traffic patterns instead of learning (RNNs), such as LSTMs and GRUs, can model sequengeneralization-relevant features [5], [6]. tial dependencies in session-based traffic data. At the same
 Filtering irrelevant data: Packets without payloads time, their step-by-step processing paradigm increases over-
(e.g., those featuring SYN, ACK, or FIN flags) and irrelevant head and training time, making them unsuitable for real-time
DNS segments are discarded. Prior studies showed that those applications. Likewise, Transformers capture global relationkinds of packets did not contribute meaningfully to TC and ships using self-attention but exhibit impractical memory and
could actually add noise to the dataset. Filtering these packets computational requirements for resource-constrained environensures only meaningful traffic is used for training [5]. ments. In contrast, 1D CNNs can benefit from weight sharing
 Session normalization: In compliance with a method orig- and local connectivity to extract features efficiently, yieldinally proposed in [11] and [27], each session is normalized to ing a balance between computational cost and classification
a uniform length of 784 bytes. This approach proved effective accuracy.
in handling varying session sizes while ensuring consistency Each convolutional layer in the CNN block is defined by
for model input. Longer sessions are truncated, and shorter its kernel size, number of filters, padding, and stride. These
sessions are padded with null bytes to maintain a uniform parameters allow the model to flexibly adjust its receptive field
length over all sessions. and depth so that it can capture both detailed packet-level
2986 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

features and overall session-level patterns. A series of batch TABLE I
normalization, ReLU activation, pooling (max or average, with ISCX VPN- NON VPN 2016 N UMBER OF S AMPLES
adjustable pooling size), and dropout (with a configurable
dropout rate) follow each convolutional layer. This improves
feature representation while minimizing computational load.
A Global Average Pooling (GAP) layer supports the final
feature aggregation, which condenses spatial information into
a compact representation and feeds a dense layer for the
eventual classification outcome.

D. Evolutionary Algorithm for NAS Search
 In the proposed HW-NAS framework, an evolutionary
algorithm supports the exploration of architecture space. Evolutionary algorithms proved to be highly effective toward that
purpose [19]. This approach is suitable to ensure that target TABLE II
architectures meet predefined hardware requirements [43]. OVERVIEW OF C LASSIFICATION TASKS
 The search strategy starts from an initial (parent) architecture, a0 . A mutation function Rm (a p ) then spawns candidate
architectures (children). Mutations involve random modifications to the parent, such as adding new blocks with
randomly generated hyperparameters, removing blocks to
reduce complexity, or adjusting parameters within existing
blocks (e.g., number of filters, kernel size). Each child is then
evaluated against the predefined hardware constraints H, and
only those that satisfy them proceed to training.
 This spawning/selection process iterates over a predefined
 the next generation. After all generations, the architecture with
number of generations Ng ; each generation yields Nc child
 the highest validation score is selected.
architectures. If a child fails the hardware constraint check,
further mutations are applied until the required number of
admissible children is achieved. A maximum depth constraint V. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
limits the number of blocks within each architecture, ensuring This section outlines the empirical setting for designing
that each child remains within a preset complexity level. and evaluating efficient DNNs for session-level TC. It covers:
 (1) the encrypted traffic datasets; (2) the deployment-driven
Algorithm 1 Evolutionary NAS with hardware constraints. hardware constraints; and (3) the HW-NAS process for dis-
Inputs: Training set XT = {Xi , yi }i=1...n , validation set XV = covering models under resource limits.
 {Xi , yi }i=1...m , search space A, initial parent a0 , mutation
 operator Rm (·), Nc children per generation, number of A. Datasets and Tasks
 generations Ng , evaluation function E(a, XV ), hardware 1) Encrypted VPN Dataset: The ISCX VPN-nonVPN
 constraints H. dataset [26], consisting of approximately 30GB of traffic
 Procedure: divided into 11 classes, is used in this study. It includes
 1: Initialize parent architecture a p ← a0 traffic for various applications in packet capture (PCAP)
 2: Initialize best architecture a∗ ← a p format, labeled according to application and activity type.
 3: for g = 1 to Ng do Table I outlines the dataset structure, detailing traffic cate-
 4: for c = 1 to Nc do gories, encapsulation types (VPN and Non-VPN), and their
 5: Generate child ac ← Rm (a p ) respective proportions. Widely adopted in TC research [5], [6],
 6: if ac satisfies H then [11], [14], [18], [24], this dataset serves as the main benchmark
 7: Train ac on XT for architecture optimization and supports the definition of
 8: end if various TC tasks.
 9: end for These tasks span a range of complexities and objectives,
 as detailed in Table II. The rows represent different tasks,
10: Select a p ← arg max E(ac , XV )
 ac while the columns specify the name of the experiment, its
11: Update a∗ ← arg max(E(a∗ , XV ), E(a p , XV )) objective, and the number of output classes. VPN-NonVPN
12: end for classifies traffic into 11 categories across both VPN and
13: Return a∗ Non-VPN traffic. VPN-Diff performs binary classification to
 detect whether traffic is VPN or Non-VPN. VPN-Type and
 The search loop is outlined in Algorithm 1. After passing NonVPN-Type further classify traffic types within the VPN
the hardware check, each child undergoes training on the train- and Non-VPN groups into 6 and 5 categories, respectively.
ing dataset XT , and is subsequently evaluated for validation Traffic-Cat evaluates general traffic categorization across both
accuracy on the validation set XV . The architecture with the VPN and Non-VPN traffic into 6 usage-based categories.
highest validation accuracy becomes the new parent, a p , for Finally, App-ID identifies 15 specific network applications.
CHEHADE et al.: HARDWARE-AWARE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH FOR ETC 2987

 TABLE III for comparisons with SOTA models. It includes both VPN and
 USTC-TFC2016 AND QUIC N ET F LOW OVERVIEW Non-VPN traffic, capturing shared structural patterns relevant
 to broader classification settings. The goal is to discover a
 network architecture that generalizes effectively across various
 tasks and datasets, without the need for task-specific designs.
 We ran the search on a workstation with an NVIDIA 2080 Ti
 GPU, using session-level data preprocessed with Scapy, while
 the HW-NAS framework was built on Keras and TensorFlow.
 The thresholds for memory usage and FLOPs have been
 initially set using the minimum values observed among
 session-level TC models in prior works as reference. These
 metrics were calculated following details provided by each
 study and implemented in Keras to ensure consistency and
 accuracy. We found substantial headroom for improving effi-
 TABLE IV ciency. Since deployment targets both STM32F746G-DISCO
 TARGET M ICROCONTROLLER S PECIFICATIONS and the more constrained Nucleo-F401RE, the thresholds
 were aligned with the latter’s resource limits (see Table IV).
 Specifically, we set the maximum parameter count to 120K
 and the maximum tensor size to 22K, corresponding to 480 KB
 Flash and 88 KB RAM under 32-bit floating-point assumptions
 (float32). These estimates match the Nucleo’s 512 KB Flash
 and 96 KB RAM and enable compatibility checks during
 float32-based training and search. The FLOPs threshold was
 set to 11M based on the device’s 84 MHz clock, which theo-
 2) Generalization Benchmarks: In addition to ISCX, we retically allows up to 84 million operations per second. This
consider two public benchmarks, USTC-TFC2016 [27] and implies an upper bound of approximately 130 ms for inference
QUIC NetFlow [28], to evaluate generalization under different execution, excluding memory access overheads, which are
traffic distributions. Both datasets are provided in raw pcap not explicitly modeled in this estimate. This latency remains
format (approximately 4GB for USTC and 120GB for QUIC) acceptable in session-level TC scenarios, where inference
and reflect distinct classification scenarios. is invoked once per aggregated session, and it falls well
 USTC-TFC2016 includes 20 traffic classes across benign within typical limits observed in edge-hosted analytics and netand malware categories, spanning diverse protocols and com- work monitoring tasks, which tolerate response times between
munication behaviors in both encrypted and unencrypted data. 100-250 ms depending on application domain [49]. Further
 QUIC NetFlow focuses on encrypted services over the compression (e.g., quantization or pruning) can provide addi-
QUIC protocol, grouped into five usage categories: chat, voice, tional margin at deployment. Empirical measurements on the
video, music, and file transfer. It captures structural differences target MCUs confirmed that latency remains within this limit,
in encrypted traffic generated by the QUIC protocol, which as reported in Section VIII.
encrypts transport-layer metadata over UDP. A validation set consisting of 20% of the training data is
 Table III summarizes the key characteristics of both created using a standard holdout method. Architectures are
datasets. Each row specifies a traffic category, the correspond- trained for up to 100 epochs, with an initial learning rate
ing application type, the number and share of samples, and of 10−3 , a batch size of 128, and a learning rate reduction
the total number of classes per dataset. triggered by a plateau in validation loss. Early stopping is
 applied using the validation loss as the stopping criterion.
 Networks are trained 3 times using a multi-start approach, and
B. Target Hardware for Deployment the best validation accuracy is used to score each architecture.
 We target two microcontroller platforms commonly used HW-NAS is conducted over 100 generations with 10 candiin embedded systems: the STM32F746G-DISCO and the date architectures (children) per generation. On average, 16
Nucleo-F401RE. These boards represent distinct deployment children had to be generated per generation to obtain 10
scenarios for low-power TC at the edge: the STM32F7 suits admissible ones, as approximately 6 were discarded due to
moderately capable systems, while the Nucleo-F4 is a good hardware constraint violations. Each child is derived through
example of a minimal IoT edge node. two random mutations applied to the parent, with mutation
 Table IV reports key specifications for both targets. Rows types drawn uniformly from block insertion, block removal,
list core type, Flash/RAM, clock speed, and power. These con- or block-level parameter modification (e.g., kernel size, filstraints set a reference for the deployment envelope and guide ters). To prevent overcomplex architectures, the maximum
the design of lightweight models for on-device inference. depth is 5 blocks. This setup promotes structural diversity
 and reduces the risk of early convergence to suboptimal
 solutions.
C. HW-NAS Procedure The search space includes filters ranging from 16 to 140,
 The HW-NAS search is conducted on the VPN-NonVPN kernel sizes from 3 to 7, strides from 1 to 6, and dropout
task from ISCX, selected for its comprehensive nature and fre- rates from 0.1 to 0.5. Pooling, if enabled, can be either max
quent use in prior research, which provides a solid foundation or average, with a pool size between 2 and 3. Padding is
2988 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. Validation accuracy over HW-NAS generations.

 TABLE V
 B EST CNN A RCHITECTURE I DENTIFIED BY HW-NAS

 Fig. 2. Comparison of session-level methods based on accuracy, F1 score,
 parameters, max tensor, and FLOPs.

 kernel or pooling size (Ker/Pool), stride (Str), and padding
 (Pad).
 A key aspect is the progressive reduction of filters across
 convolutional layers, which allows the model to balance feaset as either “same” or “valid.” The best-performing model
 ture extraction and computational cost. Kernel size and stride
is selected based on validation accuracy.
 vary adaptively: early layers use larger receptive fields to
 Figure 1 shows the validation accuracy of the best candidate
 capture broad patterns, while deeper layers focus on finer
per generation (solid line), along with the average accuracy of
 details. This design achieves both accuracy and hardware
all admissible children (dashed line). Orange markers indicate
 efficiency, with only 88.26K parameters, a maximum tensor
generations where a new absolute best model was found
 size of 20.12K, and 10.08M FLOPs. These values are com-
(e.g., G0, G1, G6, G12, G28, G57); no further improvements
 fortably below the thresholds set by the Nucleo-F401RE and
occurred beyond G57, indicating that the search converged
 STM32F7 platforms, confirming on-device deployability; they
early under the imposed hardware constraints. The average
 also indicate likely compatibility with other microcontrollers
curve complements this view by capturing the overall perforand low-power edge devices available on the market with
mance trend of each generation beyond the individual best
 similar or higher resource capacity.
models.
 In the following comparisons, we assess if SOTA models
 The best model found by HW-NAS is retrained on all
 meet RAM and Flash limits using float32 parameter counts
tasks in Table II and evaluated on the external datasets in
 and max tensor sizes as proxies. Models above these limits
Table III to assess its generalization performance. For these
 may run on more capable platforms, but require structural
retraining experiments, we performed 10 independent runs
 reduction to operate on the tested low-power MCU class
and reported the sample standard deviation of accuracy to
 (e.g., redesign or compression). Furthermore, when a model
capture performance variability. Each experiment is trained
 fits within the memory constraints but exceeds the proposed
with early stopping, using a maximum of 50 to 200 epochs
 model’s 10.08M FLOPs, one should expect both latency and
depending on the task and dataset, with higher limits applied
 energy consumption to increase on comparable devices.
when convergence required more iterations.

 B. VPN-NonVPN Task: Performance and Efficiency
 VI. R ESULTS AND E VALUATION
 This subsection reports the session-level results of the VPN-
A. HW-NAS-Optimized Architecture NonVPN experiment, the target scenario of this study.
 The best architecture identified by HW-NAS is shown Figure 2 compares accuracy, F1 score, parameters, FLOPs,
in Table V. Rows list the sequential CNN layers, and and maximum tensor size across SOTA models. The proposed
columns report the corresponding layer attributes: layer type model is annotated with its standard deviation across ten
(e.g., one-dimensional convolution (Conv1D), average pooling independent training runs. A single check mark (X) indicates
(AvgPool1D), max pooling (MaxPool1D), or Dense), input compatibility with STM32F7-class MCUs; a double check
dimensions (Input Dim), number of filters or units (Filt/Units), mark (XX) denotes compatibility with both STM32F7 and
CHEHADE et al.: HARDWARE-AWARE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH FOR ETC 2989

 TABLE VI
 ACCURACY AND H ARDWARE FOR M ULTIPLE E XPERIMENTS

 Packet-level methods, such as the SAE of [6], proved
 efficient, requiring 0.81M parameters and 1.62M FLOPs in
 their most efficient setup. However, its parameter count still
 exceeds the available flash memory of our target MCUs unless
 structural reduction is applied. This setup achieves an F1 score
 of 92.00%. The CNN-based approach of [6] is a larger model,
 demanding 3.55M parameters and 208.19M FLOPs (F1 score
 93.00%). Similarly, [51] incurs high hardware costs, requiring
 0.69M parameters and 259.26M FLOPs.
 Flow-based methods [18], which process flows as time
 series with predefined packet counts and lengths, show similar
Fig. 3. Comparison of non-session methods based on accuracy, parameters, trade-offs. While their configurations are relatively efficient in
max tensor, and FLOPs.
 terms of FLOPs, their parameter counts (1.35M and 39.49M,
 respectively) surpass the limits of the selected target devices.
 Their reported accuracy (91.20% and 89.50%, respectively)
the more constrained F401RE platform; a cross (×) marks remains lower than that of the proposed model (96.60%). Simcases where deployment is not feasible. No other model in this ilarly, [25], which focuses on flow headers for classification,
session-level comparison meets both constraints, underscoring achieves an accuracy of 99.20% but requires 5.77M parameters
the distinctive efficiency of the proposed architecture. and 400.43M FLOPs, exceeding the target resource envelope.
 The proposed model achieves an accuracy of 96.60% and Hybrid input methods, like [5], which combines raw packet
an F1 score of 96.63%, which are slightly lower than some of data with hand-crafted session features, and [23], which
the most resource-intensive models in the SOTA. For example, segments sessions based on thresholds, achieve superior accu-
[12] and [14] achieve accuracy and F1 scores exceeding 99% racy (99.70% and 99.10%, respectively). These methods have
but require 2.06M and 1.24M parameters, respectively, com- high requirements, with [5] demanding 138.45M parameters,
pared to the proposed model’s 0.09M, with a reduction of up to 153.87M FLOPs, and a max tensor size of 4500.00K, and [23]
22 times. Their FLOPs requirements (3152.27M and 28.96M) requiring 6.80M parameters and 401.89M FLOPs.
surpass the proposed model’s (10.08M) by up to 312 times This analysis highlights the balance of competitive accuracy
and nearly 2.9 times, respectively. The maximum tensor size in and remarkable efficiency achieved by the proposed model,
certain works, such as 313.60K in [50], further underscores the solidifying its position as a reference point for hardwareefficiency of the proposed model, which operates with a tensor aware TC, even when compared across different problem
size of only 20.12K, achieving a reduction of over 15 times. formulations and input setups. While some other methods
[24] achieves an accuracy of 98.10%, requiring an increment report higher accuracy, they do so at the cost of exceeding
of 435, 24.9, and 7.5 times of the three hardware estimators. the memory or compute constraints set by the target devices
Similarly, [35] achieves 98.00% accuracy at the expense of selected in this work.
68, 4, and 1.25 times increment. These results highlight the
proposed model’s ability to deliver competitive performance
compared to SOTA while remaining within the strict memory C. Evaluation on Multiple Traffic Classification Tasks
and compute constraints of microcontroller-class devices. Table VI includes accuracy and hardware efficiency metrics
 Figure 3 extends the analysis to non-session methods, for different methods in diverse TC tasks. Each row represents
which include packet-level [6], [51], flow-based [18], [25], a method (Meth.) and its corresponding input type, while
and hybrid [5], [23] input approaches. These differ in format, columns detail accuracy for VPN-Diff (VPN-D.), VPN-Type
preprocessing, and problem framing, making direct compar- (VPN-T.), NonVPN-Type (NVPN-T.), and Traffic-Cat (T-Cat.)
isons inherently complex. The figure mirrors the structure of tasks, along with parameters (Par.), max tensor size (M-Tens.),
Figure 2, reporting accuracy, F1 score, parameters, FLOPs, and FLOPs as hardware measures. Proposed model results are
and maximum tensor size. The proposed model is annotated reported as mean ± standard deviation over ten runs.
with its standard deviation over ten independent runs. It is The proposed model (Prop.) achieves near-perfect accuracy
also the only configuration that fits within both STM32F7 and (99.86%) in VPN-Diff, matching [24] and surpassing [5]
F401RE constraints, as denoted by the XX symbol; a cross (99.82%). In VPN-Type classification, it achieves 99.14%,
(×) marks configurations where deployment is not feasible. outperforming [18] (94.80% and 92.90%) and [11] (98.30%).
2990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE FOR THE A PP -ID E XPERIMENT

 In the NonVPN-Type task, the model delivers strong performance (94.04%), exceeding [18] (89.30% and 85.10%) and
[11] (81.70%). For Traffic-Cat, a challenging task addressed
only by [24], the proposal scores 96.74%. Although [24]
obtains slightly higher accuracy (98.20%), the proposal maintains competitive performance while being resource-efficient.
 The results validate the proposal across a broad spectrum
of tasks, achieving high accuracy and often outperforming
SOTA models. As the architecture was optimized for the VPN-
NonVPN classification task using HW-NAS, the proposed
results can be considered a worst-case analysis.

D. Performance on Application Identification (App-ID)
 Fig. 4. Results on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset.
 The App-ID experiment assesses the ability of the proposed session-level model to classify specific applications, a
task traditionally dominated by packet-level approaches and
 distributions. We report results on USTC-TFC2016 and QUIC
hybrid methods [5]. Table VII presents accuracy (Acc.), F1
 NetFlow. The proposed model is re-evaluated on these datasets
score (F1), and hardware efficiency metrics: parameters (Par.),
 using the same architecture found during search (see Table V).
maximum tensor size (M-Tens.), and FLOPs (M) for the App-
 Figure 4 shows results on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. The
ID experiment. Each row represents a method (Meth.) and
 comparison includes session-based models [10], [27], [52],
its corresponding input type. Scores for our model include
 flow-based models [15], [16], [46], [52], and packet-based
standard deviation across ten independent runs.
 models [37], [53]. A horizontal line in the figure separates the
 The proposal (Prop.) achieves 94.18% accuracy and 94.42%
 session-based approaches (shown below), which are the focus
F1 score with reduced hardware cost. [6] presents two packetof this study, from the rest. Reported scores for the proposed
level models: one with higher accuracy (98.00%) but greater
 model include standard deviation over ten independent runs.
resource use, and another reaching 95.00% F1 with 0.81M
 Device compatibility follows the same notation as previous
parameters and 1.62M FLOPs. The latter model would require
 figures: X for STM32F7, XX for both STM32F7 and F401RE,
a Flash memory larger than the one available in the target
 and × where deployment is not feasible.
devices. Packet-level models operate at finer granularity, which
 The proposed model achieves 99.73% accuracy and 99.73%
leads to larger training volumes and more frequent inference.
 F1 score with 0.09M parameters, 10.08M FLOPs, and a
While this may enable fast per-packet predictions and strong
 20.12K max tensor. Although optimized on ISCX, it maintains
App-ID accuracy, it also results in higher cumulative prostrong performance on USTC with minimal hardware cost.
cessing overhead. These structural differences inherently affect
 Among session-level models, [10] reports the highest accuboth performance and resource use, and should be considered
 racy (99.84%), but at the cost of 18.11M parameters and over
when interpreting the comparison with session-level methods.
 3900M FLOPs. The session-based variant of [52] also incurs
 CBS [5] achieves the highest accuracy (99.67%) and F1
 high compute demand (7.13M parameters, 43.69M FLOPs).
score (99.51%) but requires higher resource consumption.
 [27] achieves similar accuracy (99.17%) with fewer resources
Moreover, it was explicitly designed for offline use and is
 than the others in its category, though its compute and memory
documented as unsuitable for real-time scenarios, which limits
 footprint remains higher than ours. None of these baselines are
its applicability to embedded deployment.
 deployable on the tested MCUs due to excessive parameter and
 These results confirm the feasibility of session-level models
 tensor sizes, making our model the only viable session-level
for application classification, achieving competitive perforsolution in constrained settings.
mance with substantially lower hardware cost. Despite the
 The NAS-based flow model from [46], tailored for USTC,
inherent granularity differences, the session-level approach
 reaches 99.99% accuracy with slightly fewer parameters
remains a practical and scalable option for constrained
 (0.07M) but nearly doubles the FLOPs (19.63M). Its max
platforms.
 tensor is unreported, but we conservatively assume it fits
 within memory limits. However, its higher compute load
E. Cross-Dataset Evaluation suggests greater energy use and latency than ours on similar
 This subsection evaluates how well the architecture dis- hardware. Other flow-level models [15], [16], [52] are far more
covered by HW-NAS on ISCX generalizes to other traffic complex, with parameter counts from 4.49M to 450.58M.
CHEHADE et al.: HARDWARE-AWARE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH FOR ETC 2991

 TABLE VIII TABLE IX
 QUIC N ET F LOW: C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE E FFECT OF P REPROCESSING ON M ODEL P ERFORMANCE

 The model presented in [37] achieves 99.94% accuracy
with 0.22M parameters, 3.06M FLOPs, and a 13.82K tensor,
making it compatible with STM32F7-class devices. However,
it exceeds the Flash constraints of F401RE and operates
at packet-level granularity, requiring inference at finer time
scales. This incurs higher cumulative overhead than our
session-level model, which classifies entire sessions in a single
pass. [53] combines high accuracy (99.95%) with the smallest
tensor (6.27K), yet its 2.10M parameter count far exceeds the
Flash capacity of our target devices.
 Table VIII presents classification results on the QUIC
NetFlow dataset. Each row corresponds to a method, while
columns report input type, accuracy, and F1 score. Hardware
metrics for existing methods are omitted due to missing implementation details. Compared approaches rely on flow-level TCP headers 20 bytes. These modifiable fields collectively
features [32], handcrafted signals [54], or hybrid pipelines account for approximately 26 to 38 bytes per packet, out of
combining raw bytes with flow features [28]. the standardized session input size of 784 bytes.
 Our model attains the highest accuracy (99.98%) and F1 Table IX evaluates the effects of 24 preprocessing stratescore (99.98%) with minimal complexity (0.09M parameters, gies (Strat.), i.e., all possible combinations of preprocessing
10.08M FLOPs); results are averaged over ten runs. CNN+RF choices for header fields, on the model derived from the
[28] performs competitively (99.00%) but uses a two-stage NAS. Each row represents a strategy, with columns describing
pipeline with limited deployment suitability. Feature-based applied steps such as removing the Ethernet layer (Eth. Rem.),
methods [32], [54] lag by 4 to 6 points. These results show anonymizing (Anon.; replacing field values with hashed
that a compact session-based model using raw bytes can pseudonyms), zeroing (Zero; setting values to 0) MAC and
outperform protocol-specific and feature-heavy pipelines, even IP addresses, zeroing protocol-related fields like ports (Port
in specialized QUIC traffic scenarios. Zero), and applying UDP padding (UDP Pad.) to align UDP
 Overall, these findings confirm the model’s ability to and TCP segments. A checkmark (X) indicates that a step
generalize across encrypted traffic datasets with differing char- was applied. The final column shows the accuracy (%; Acc.).
acteristics, while maintaining its efficiency advantage. It should be noted that zeroing enhances privacy by replacing
 original values with zeros, which removes meaningful vari-
 VII. E VALUATION AND A NALYSIS ability and makes it harder for the model to infer patterns.
 Strategy 2, used during the NAS process, achieves the
A. Preprocessing Analysis highest accuracy (96.59%) and represents a frequently adopted
 Header-level preprocessing is critical for balancing privacy approach in prior works. It anonymizes IP addresses without
and the retention of key structural features essential for TC. zeroing them and avoids UDP padding, retaining key features
Packet headers carry structural and protocol information that for classification. The model also performs well under more
is particularly relevant for ETC, where the payload is obfus- restrictive preprocessing, like strategy 6 (95.38%), which zeros
cated and contributes little to feature extraction. This study IP addresses, or strategy 7 (95.12%), which zeroes both IP
modifies specific header fields, commonly targeted in prior addresses and ports while applying UDP padding. These
works, to evaluate their impact on classification performance results show that the proposed model generalizes well, without
in the VPN-NonVPN task from ISCX, which serves as the overfitting specific header fields like IP addresses or ports.
reference benchmark for analysis. The dataset predominantly Some strategies cause drops in accuracy when compared
includes TCP and UDP protocols, where headers follow a to Strategy 2. For example, Strategy 24, which zeros MAC
layered hierarchy: the Ethernet layer (14 bytes), containing addresses, IP addresses, and ports, leads to the lowest accuracy
source and destination MAC addresses (6 bytes each) and (89.08%), with a drop of 7.51%. Strategy 22, similar to
EtherType (2 bytes); the IP layer, which includes source and Strategy 24 but without port zeroing, performs slightly better
destination IP addresses (4 bytes each); and the transport (92.25%) but still exhibits a 4.34% drop, suggesting that
layer, which adds source and destination ports (2 bytes each) excessive zeroing disrupts critical structural patterns. However,
and protocol headers, with UDP headers being 8 bytes and Strategies 23 and 21 (95.24% and 94.30%, respectively), using
2992 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE X
 I MPACT OF I NPUT S IZE ON H ARDWARE M ETRICS

UDP padding, absent in Strategies 22 and 24, partially mitigate
the accuracy drops caused by extensive zeroing.
 Removing the Ethernet layer entirely, as in Strategy 8
(95.00%), outperforms zeroing MAC addresses in Strategy 24
(89.08%). Both strategies are identical in other preprocessing
steps. This complete removal prevents partial masking and Fig. 5. Accuracy across strategies for different input sizes.
preserves structural consistency, yielding better performance.
We discourage anonymizing MAC addresses, as demonstrated
in Strategies 9 through 16. For example, Strategy 10 (95.42%) to 4% as input size decreases. Conversely, Strategies 7 and
takes a moderate approach by anonymizing both MAC and IP 3, which follow the same steps as 8 and 4, respectively,
addresses instead of zeroing them but still yields limited gains. but include UDP padding, mitigate this issue. Incorporating
It is 1.17% below the best strategy, highlighting the minimal padding mechanisms can trade off input size reduction and
impact MAC addresses have on classification. classification performance, as shown by the table and figure.
 The proposal performs robustly across many configurations.
Strategies like 7 and 23 demonstrate its adaptability, achieving
a commendable balance between privacy preservation and VIII. E MBEDDED I NFERENCE D EPLOYMENT
classification performance, making it suitable for applications
with privacy regulations. These findings help practitioners A. Deployment Methodology and Setup
strike the right balance between obfuscating sensitive fields
and keeping essential header features for optimal performance. Building on the session length analysis in Section VII-B,
 we evaluate how the model selected by HW-NAS performs on
 MCUs across various input sizes. All deployment results use
B. Impact of Session Length on Performance this architecture and preprocessing Strategy 2 from Table IX,
 This analysis tests the impact of session length on the trade- which served as the main configuration throughout this study.
offs between efficiency and classification performance in the We consider a deployment setting in which fixed-length
VPN-NonVPN task. Header-level strategies affect accuracy, session vectors are prepared on an upstream device (e.g., an
leaving hardware measures unchanged, while session length IoT gateway or embedded Linux board), which is assumed
reductions impact efficiency by altering the input size. We to perform packet capture, session aggregation, and buffering,
considered the first eight preprocessing strategies in Table IX and forwarded to a microcontroller (e.g., STM32F401RE
because the Ethernet layer is removed, a common practice or STM32F746G), which executes the classification stage
in TC. We progressively reduced the standardized session under tight memory and compute constraints. Inference is
length from 784 bytes (the standard value used in most triggered when the required input representation is availresearch papers) to smaller lengths: 676, 576, 484, 400, 324, able, and real-time operation is therefore defined in terms of
256, and 196 bytes. The reductions are selected to capture bounded response time at the session level. Our evaluation
meaningful performance trends while preserving key session- focuses on MCU-side execution, which represents the actual
level features, such as critical header fields and early-packet resource-constrained component of the deployment pipeline
information essential for classification. and determines the feasibility of on-device TC.
 Table X shows how different input sizes, listed in the The HW-NAS-optimized architecture was quantized to
columns, affect FLOPs and maximum tensor size (M-Tens.), 8-bit (INT8) using TensorFlow Lite and converted to C code
listed in the rows, regardless of preprocessing strategy. As via STM32Cube.AI. Both post-training quantization (PTQ)
input size decreases, FLOPs drop from 10.08M to 2.24M, and quantization-aware training (QAT) were considered; PTQ
and M-Tens. reduces proportionally from 20.12K to 4.90K. applies INT8 conversion to a pretrained Float32 model, while
Smaller input sizes improve efficiency, making the model more QAT fine-tunes the pretrained model under simulated INT8
suitable for deployment in resource-constrained environments. arithmetic to mitigate quantization-induced accuracy loss. For
The number of parameters remains constant at 88.26K. each input size, PTQ and QAT were repeated 10 times to
 Figure 5 complements Table X by showing how accuracy evaluate accuracy variability; one representative INT8 model
varies with input size across the first eight strategies from per input size was deployed, as all quantized variants share the
Table IX. The x-axis represents input size, while the y-axis same architecture, memory footprint, and computational cost.
shows accuracy for each strategy. The figure highlights that Inference metrics were averaged over 1000 runs per device.
for most strategies (1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7), a small drop of 1 to 2% A USB power meter, connected between the board and host
at 196 bytes affected the accuracy. For strategies with extensive PC, recorded current and voltage during idle and active phases.
zeroing, such as Strategy 8 (zeros IP addresses and ports) Power per session was derived from the average current and
and Strategy 4 (zeros ports but anonymizes IP addresses), voltage during the active phase, and energy was calculated as
the accuracy drop becomes more pronounced, reaching up E = P · t, where t is the inference latency.
CHEHADE et al.: HARDWARE-AWARE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH FOR ETC 2993

 TABLE XI
 I NFERENCE L ATENCY BY P LATFORM AND P OWER B UDGET

Fig. 6. Accuracy across quantization levels (VPN-NonVPN).

 At an input size of 784 bytes, the model runs at its full
 hardware configuration found by HW-NAS: 88.26K parameters, 20.12K max tensor, and 10.08M operations (the INT8
 equivalent of the baseline FLOPs), matching the setup used
 throughout Section VI. This setting yields 115.4 ms latency
 and 28.85 mJ energy on Cortex-M4, and 31.43 ms and 7.86 mJ
 on Cortex-M7. These values can serve as an empirical deployment reference for models with similar or higher complexity,
 assuming deployment on comparable devices.
 Overall, the results confirm that HW-NAS models can be
 deployed on low-power MCUs for real-time TC. Input sizes
 like 324 and 484 bytes offer a good trade-off: they achieve
 over 95% INT8 accuracy while keeping latency under 72 ms
 on Cortex-M4 and 20 ms on Cortex-M7; energy remains below
 18 mJ and 5 mJ, respectively. Smaller inputs such as 256 bytes
 are more efficient but slightly less accurate. Despite the
Fig. 7. Inference cost across MCUs and input sizes. increase in latency with input size, delays remain acceptable
 in realistic scenarios, especially given that session aggregation
 and preprocessing occur on the gateway. These values align
B. Experimental Results and Discussion with response time ranges in embedded monitoring tasks [49].
 The literature includes only a few works that report deploy-
 Figure 6 compares model accuracy across Float32 and INT8 ment measurements, and the target platform varies across
configurations (PTQ and QAT) for input sizes from 196 to studies. Table XI summarizes inference latency reported in
784 bytes. The x-axis reports the input size, while the y- prior work. Each row corresponds to a method and platform,
axis shows test accuracy (%). Error bars indicate the standard while the columns report the hardware class, power budget (in
deviation across 10 independent training and quantization runs. watts), input type, and inference latency. For our work, two
 INT8-PTQ incurs a moderate but consistent accuracy degra- session input sizes are reported per platform, corresponding
dation; QAT recovers most of this loss and significantly to a maximum-length configuration (784 B) and a shorter
reduces variance across runs. Across all input sizes, QAT operating point (484 B), where B denotes bytes. Underlining
remains within 0.1–0.3% of the Float32 baseline, confirming highlights the best latency among low-power deployments
stable and deployment-ready behavior. (power budget <1 W), which is the primary target scenario
 Figure 7 illustrates inference latency (top, in ms) and energy of this work, while the asterisk (∗ ) denotes the best overall
per session (bottom, in mJ) across input sizes and MCUs. latency across all platforms.
 During inference, both boards exhibited an average current By comparison, STM32-based inference was previously
draw of 0.05 A at a 5 V supply, resulting in an average active shown in [48], but only for a single input size (784 bytes),
power of 0.25 W across the tested configurations. Idle current without examining empirical trade-offs across different input
was measured separately: 0.02 A for the F401RE and 0.23 A lengths. FENXI [2] reports 10–30 ms inference latency using
for the F746G, corresponding to idle power baselines of a high-power (30 W) tensor processing unit (TPU) attached
0.10 W and 1.15 W, respectively. Energy values in Figure 7 via PCI Express, under 100 Gbps traffic with batching and
are based on active power only, isolating the model execution model caching. The in-switch approach of [32] achieves subcost from background consumption. microsecond latency at line rate by executing Random Forest
 Latency increases with input size, as expected. The Nucleo- models directly on Intel Tofino programmable switches; how-
F401RE maintains latency below 60 ms for sizes up to ever, this relies on high-end network hardware, and the feature
400 bytes, but reaches 115 ms at 784 bytes. The STM32F746G pipeline is limited by the P4 programming model, which
achieves consistently lower latency, ranging from 8 ms to restricts flexibility and applicability to broader embedded
31 ms, reflecting its faster clock and memory bandwidth. settings. In contrast, our results show that ETC inference is
Energy trends follow latency linearly due to constant power. feasible on microcontrollers with a power budget below 1 W,
2994 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

and that practical latency can be achieved by varying the input [8] N. Malekghaini et al., “AutoML4ETC: Automated neural architecture
length to balance efficiency and response time. search for real-world encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2715–2730, Jun. 2024.
 [9] E. Tabanelli, G. Tagliavini, and L. Benini, “DNN is not all you
 IX. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK need: Parallelizing non-neural ML algorithms on ultra-low-power IoT
 processors,” ACM Trans. Embedded Comput. Syst., vol. 22, no. 3,
 This paper introduces a DNN optimized through HW-NAS pp. 1–33, May 2023.
for efficient TC in resource-constrained environments. The [10] Z. Li and X. Xu, “L2-BiTCN-CNN: Spatio-temporal features fusionstudy shows that incorporating hardware constraints during based multi-classification model for various internet applications
 identification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 243, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 110298.
architecture synthesis supports reproducible and deployable [11] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
design choices, where accuracy is achieved under strict effi- encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
ciency requirements. The proposed model achieves up to networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
 2017, pp. 43–48.
96.60% accuracy in session-level classification while requiring [12] W. Maonan, Z. Kangfeng, X. Ning, Y. Yanqing, and W. Xiujuan,
up to 444 times fewer parameters and 312 times fewer FLOPs “CENTIME: A direct comprehensive traffic features extraction for
than SOTA methods. These results highlight its suitability for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Comput.
IoT and edge platforms, where efficiency is critical. Commun. Syst. (ICCCS), Apr. 2021, pp. 490–498.
 [13] F. Hu, S. Zhang, X. Lin, L. Wu, N. Liao, and Y. Song, “Network traffic
 The optimized architecture delivers satisfactory perfor- classification model based on attention mechanism and spatiotemporal
mance across diverse tasks and settings; it also obtains features,” EURASIP J. Inf. Secur., vol. 2023, no. 1, p. 6, Jul. 2023.
consistent performance in terms of cross-dataset generaliza- [14] A. Zou, W. Yang, C. Tang, J. Lu, and J. Guo, “A novel and effective
tion, confirming its adaptability to different TC challenges. encrypted traffic classification method based on channel attention and
 deformable convolution,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 118, Aug. 2024,
The study further shows that reducing input size improves Art. no. 109406.
efficiency without sacrificing performance; combined with [15] J. Xu et al., “A cascaded broad learning network embedded image feaquantization, this yields notable latency and energy gains on tures for malware traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun.
embedded microcontrollers. Additionally, techniques like UDP Netw., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2426–2439, Aug. 2025.
 [16] H. Yao, P. Gao, J. Wang, P. Zhang, C. Jiang, and Z. Han, “Capsule
padding mitigate accuracy loss in restrictive preprocessing network assisted IoT traffic classification mechanism for smart cities,”
scenarios, offering practical solutions. IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 7515–7525, Oct. 2019.
 Future work will explore broader deployment scenarios, [17] Z. Bu, B. Zhou, P. Cheng, K. Zhang, and Z.-H. Ling, “Encrypted
 network traffic classification using deep and parallel network-in-network
including adaptive runtime optimization and integration with models,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 132950–132959, 2020.
real-time network operations. Federated learning will also [18] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
be investigated to enable decentralized training with pri- of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
vacy preservation and improved scalability. We further plan memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
 [19] C. White et al., “Neural architecture search: Insights from 1000 papers,”
to extend HW-NAS to other traffic analysis tasks, such as 2023, arXiv:2301.08727.
intrusion and anomaly detection, to assess its adaptability [20] K. T. Chitty-Venkata, M. Emani, V. Vishwanath, and A. K. Somani,
across domains, and to incorporate additional deployment- “Neural architecture search benchmarks: Insights and survey,” IEEE
aware objectives, such as quantization-aware constraints and Access, vol. 11, pp. 25217–25236, 2023.
 [21] M. Tan et al., “MnasNet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for
robustness considerations (e.g., adversarial perturbations and mobile,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun.
distribution shift), thereby improving reliability under prac- 2019, pp. 2820–2828.
tical operating conditions. These directions aim to advance [22] H. Cai, L. Zhu, and S. Han, “ProxylessNAS: Direct neural architecture
hardware-efficient ML for next-generation network systems. search on target task and hardware,” 2018, arXiv:1812.00332.
 [23] S. Cui, B. Jiang, Z. Cai, Z. Lu, S. Liu, and J. Liu, “A session-packetsbased encrypted traffic classification using capsule neural networks,”
 R EFERENCES in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun.,
 IEEE 17th Int. Conf. Smart City, IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Syst.
[1] M. Martalò, G. Pettorru, and L. Atzori, “A cross-layer survey (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), Aug. 2019, pp. 429–436.
 on secure and low-latency communications in next-generation IoT,” [24] B. Lu, N. Luktarhan, C. Ding, and W. Zhang, “ICLSTM: Encrypted
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4669–4685, traffic service identification based on inception-LSTM neural network,”
 Aug. 2024. Symmetry, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 1080, Jun. 2021.
[2] M. Gallo, A. Finamore, G. Simon, and D. Rossi, “FENXI: Deep-learning [25] S. Cui, J. Liu, C. Dong, Z. Lu, and D. Du, “Only header: A reliable
 traffic analytics at the edge,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Symp. Edge Comput. encrypted traffic classification framework without privacy risk,” Soft
 (SEC), Dec. 2021, pp. 202–213. Comput., vol. 26, no. 24, pp. 13391–13403, Dec. 2022.
[3] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar, [26] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
 traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
 vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019. pp. 407–414.
[4] W. Dong, J. Yu, X. Lin, G. Gou, and G. Xiong, “Deep learning and pre- [27] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 training technology for encrypted traffic classification: A comprehensive classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 review,” Neurocomputing, vol. 617, Feb. 2025, Art. no. 128444. learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[5] M. Seydali, F. Khunjush, B. Akbari, and J. Dogani, “CBS: A [28] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel QUIC traffic
 deep learning approach for encrypted traffic classification with classifier based on convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Global
 mixed spatio-temporal and statistical features,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 pp. 141674–141702, 2023. [29] S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and D. Wang, “Accurate, scalable in-network
[6] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and identification of p2p traffic using application signatures,” in Proc. 13th
 M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traf- Int. Conf. World Wide Web, May 2004, pp. 512–521.
 fic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, [30] A. W. Moore and K. Papagiannaki, “Toward the accurate identification
 pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020. of network applications,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Passive Active Netw.
[7] M. Adil, H. Song, M. K. Khan, A. Farouk, and Z. Jin, “5G/6G-enabled Meas., 2005, pp. 41–54.
 metaverse technologies: Taxonomy, applications, and open security [31] Y. Zhai and X. Zheng, “Random forest based traffic classification method
 challenges with future research directions,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., in SDN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput., Big Data Blockchain
 vol. 223, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 103828. (ICCBB), Nov. 2018, pp. 1–5.
CHEHADE et al.: HARDWARE-AWARE NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH FOR ETC 2995

[32] A. T.-J. Akem, G. Fraysse, and M. Fiore, “Encrypted traffic classification Adel Chehade (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 at line rate in programmable switches with machine learning,” in Proc. received the B.S. degree in electronics and the
 NOMS - IEEE Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., May 2024, pp. 1–9. M.S. degree in signal, telecoms, image, and speech
[33] J. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and A. V. Vasilakos, “An effective from Lebanese University, Lebanon, in 2021 and
 network traffic classification method with unknown flow detection,” 2023, respectively. He is currently pursuing the
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 133–147, Jun. Ph.D. degree with the Department of Naval, Electri-
 2013. cal, Electronic and Telecommunications Engineering
[34] Y. He and W. Li, “Image-based encrypted traffic classification with (DITEN), University of Genoa, Italy. His research
 convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci. interests include hardware-aware machine learn-
 Cyberspace (DSC), Jul. 2020, pp. 271–278. ing and embedded systems, with a focus on
[35] M. Wang, K. Zheng, D. Luo, Y. Yang, and X. Wang, “An encrypted TinyML applications for network security and edge
 traffic classification framework based on convolutional neural networks intelligence.
 and stacked autoencoders,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Comput.
 Commun. (ICCC), Dec. 2020, pp. 634–641.
[36] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep learning based
 encrypted network traffic classification in SDN home gateway,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
[37] B. Wang, Y. Su, M. Zhang, and J. Nie, “A deep hierarchical net- Edoardo Ragusa (Member, IEEE) received the
 work for packet-level malicious traffic detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, master’s degree (cum laude) in electronic engineerpp. 201728–201740, 2020. ing and the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering
[38] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward from the University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, in 2015
 developing a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for and 2018, respectively. He is currently a Tenure
 intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374, May Track Researcher with DITEN, University of Genoa,
 2012. where he teaches digital systems electronics and
[39] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating tiny machine learning. He has co-authored more
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” than 70 refereed papers in international journals and
 in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018, conferences. His research interests include machine
 pp. 108–116. learning in resource-constrained devices, convolu-
[40] M. Basit Umair, Z. Iqbal, M. Bilal, T. Adnan Almohamad, J. Nebhen, tional neural networks, and deep learning applications.
 and R. Majid Mehmood, “An efficient internet traffic classification
 system using deep learning for IoT,” 2021, arXiv:2107.12193.
[41] H. Benmeziane, K. El Maghraoui, H. Ouarnoughi, S. Niar, M. Wistuba,
 and N. Wang, “A comprehensive survey on hardware-aware neural
 architecture search,” 2021, arXiv:2101.09336.
[42] J. Lin, W. Chen, Y. Lin, J. Cohn, C. Gan, and S. Han, “MCUNet: Tiny Paolo Gastaldo (Member, IEEE) received the
 deep learning on IoT devices,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Laurea degree in electronic engineering and the
 Syst., 2020, pp. 11711–11722. Ph.D. degree in space sciences and engineering
[43] E. Ragusa, F. Zonzini, P. Gastaldo, and L. De Marchi, “Combining from the University of Genoa, Italy, in 1998 and
 compressed sensing and neural architecture search for sensor-near 2004, respectively. He is currently an Associate
 vibration diagnostics,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 8, Professor with the Department of Naval, Electripp. 10488–10498, Aug. 2024. cal, Electronic and Telecommunications Engineering
[44] E. Ragusa, F. Zonzini, L. De Marchi, and R. Zunino, (DITEN), University of Genoa, where he teaches
 “Compression–accuracy co-optimization through hardware-aware computer architecture and sensors. His research
 neural architecture search for vibration damage detection,” IEEE focuses on embedded machine learning and intel-
 Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19, pp. 31745–31757, Oct. 2024. ligent embedded systems, with applications to
[45] A. Mattia Garavagno, E. Ragusa, A. Frisoli, and P. Gastaldo, robotics, prosthetics, structural health monitoring, and cybersecurity. He has
 “Searching neural architectures for sensor nodes on IoT gateways,” authored over 100 peer-reviewed publications in international journals and
 2025, arXiv:2505.23939. conferences.
[46] X. Zhang, L. Hao, G. Gui, Y. Wang, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari,
 “An automatic and efficient malware traffic classification method for
 secure Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5,
 pp. 8448–8458, Mar. 2024.
[47] A. Chehade, E. Ragusa, P. Gastaldo, and R. Zunino, “Tiny neural
 networks for session-level traffic classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Appl. Rodolfo Zunino was born in Genoa, Italy, in 1961.
 Electron. Pervading Ind., Environ. Soc., 2024, pp. 347–354. He received the Laurea degree (cum laude) in elec-
[48] A. Chehade, E. Ragusa, P. Gastaldo, and R. Zunino, “Energy-efficient tronic engineering from Genoa University in 1985.
 deep learning for traffic classification on microcontrollers,” 2025, From 1986 to 1995, he was a Research Consultant
 arXiv:2506.10851. with the Department of Biophysical and Electronic
[49] X. Jiang et al., “Low-latency networking: Where latency lurks and how Engineering (DIBE, now DITEN), Genoa Univerto tame it,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 280–306, Feb. 2019. sity. He is currently with DITEN as a Full Professor
[50] M. Song, J. Ran, and S. Li, “Encrypted traffic classification based on in electronics and electronics for embedded systems.
 text convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Comput. He is also the Head of the Smart Embedded Appli-
 Sci. Netw. Technol. (ICCSNT), Oct. 2019, pp. 432–436. cations Laboratory (SEALab), DITEN, and also the
[51] Y. Zhou et al., “Identification of encrypted and malicious network Head of the Master in Cyber Security and Critical
 traffic based on one-dimensional convolutional neural network,” J. Cloud Infrastructure Protection, Genoa University. His main scientific research
 Comput., vol. 12, no. 1, p. 53, Apr. 2023. interests include embedded electronic systems for neural networks, efficient
[52] Z. Li, Y. Liu, C. Zhang, W. Shan, H. Zhang, and X. Zhu, “Trustworthy models for data representation and learning, massive-scale text-mining and
 deep learning for encrypted traffic classification,” Soft Comput., vol. 29, text-clustering methods, advanced techniques for multimedia data processno. 2, pp. 645–662, Jan. 2025. ing, intelligent systems for computer security, network security, and critical
[53] L. Yu, J. Yuan, J. Zheng, and N. Yang, “A model of encrypted network infrastructure protection. He is the co-inventor of two patents and co-authored
 traffic classification that trades off accuracy and efficiency,” J. Netw. more than 270 scientific papers in international journals and conferences. He
 Syst. Manage., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1–32, Jan. 2025. has been the Co-Chair of the two editions of the International Workshop on
[54] N. Dillbary, R. Yozevitch, A. Dvir, R. Dubin, and C. Hajaj, “Hidden Computational Intelligence for Security in Information Systems (CISIS’08
 in time, revealed in frequency: Spectral features and multiresolution and CISIS’09). From 2001 to 2010, he contributed as an Associate Editor
 analysis for encrypted internet traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE 21st of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS and participates in the
 Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), Jan. 2024, pp. 266–271. scientific committees of several international events.

 Open Access funding provided by ‘Universita degli studi di Genova’ within the CRUI CARE Agreement