IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026 5381

 Hermes: Boosting the Performance of
 Machine-Learning-Based Intrusion
 Detection System Through
 Geometric Feature Learning
 Chaoyu Zhang , Student Member, IEEE, Shanghao Shi , Member, IEEE, Ning Wang ,
 Xiangxiang Xu, Member, IEEE, Shaoyu Li, Student Member, IEEE, Lizhong Zheng , Fellow, IEEE,
 Randy Marchany , Member, IEEE, Mark Gardner, Member, IEEE, Y. Thomas Hou , Fellow, IEEE,
 and Wenjing Lou , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) advanced and realistic benchmarks, including CIC-IDS-2017,
have been extensively studied for their ability to detect zero-day TON-IoT, and UNSW-NB15, demonstrating strong generalizabilattacks by establishing a baseline of normal behavior from benign ity. To address privacy concerns and enable collaborative learning
traffic and flagging deviations as potential threats. However, across distributed environments, we extend our centralized design
they often suffer from higher false positive rates compared to to a federated learning (FL) setting, preserving user privacy while
signature-based IDSs. Unlike image data, raw network traffic leveraging the collective knowledge of diverse IoT devices. Finally,
lacks directly useful features and requires additional process- we deploy the proposed IDS on a Raspberry Pi 4 to showcase its
ing to capture meaningful patterns. Simple traffic statistics efficiency and suitability for resource-constrained IoT scenarios.
(e.g., connection duration, packet inter-arrival time) often fail
to represent the complex relationships necessary for accurate Index Terms—Machine learning-based intrusion detection sysdetection, making feature engineering essential. We propose a tem, geometric feature learning, contrastive learning, federated
geometric feature learning method to optimize feature extraction. learning, anomaly detection, IoT security.
Specifically, we employ contrastive feature learning to build a representation space where benign traffic forms a compact cluster, I. I NTRODUCTION
and then apply H-Score feature learning to further enhance intraclass compactness and inter-class separability, thereby improving
anomaly detection performance. Beyond the NSL-KDD and
N-BaIoT datasets, we further validate our approach on more
 T HE development of cloud computing, the expansion of
 5G networks, and the exponential growth of IoT devices
 have led to an unprecedented increase in network traffic and
 complexity. This expansion not only facilitates innovative
 Received 15 January 2025; revised 11 August 2025 and 5 February 2026;
accepted 4 May 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING applications but also causes significant vulnerabilities [2].
Editor E. Bertino. Date of publication 26 May 2026; date of current version Cyber threats have evolved to be more sophisticated, and
1 June 2026. This work was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research attackers are exploiting these vulnerabilities to compromise the
under Grant N00014-24-1-2730 and Grant N00014-19-1-2621; in part by confidentiality, integrity, and availability of critical information
U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant 1916902, Grant 2154929,
Grant 2247560, Grant 2235232, and Grant 2312447; and in part by Virginia on the network. The 2016 Mirai botnet [3] is a notable example
Commonwealth Cyber Initiative (CCI). The preliminary version of this paper of powerful distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks. In
was published in ACM MobiHoc 2024 [DOI: 10.1145/3641512.3686380]. these attacks, numerous Internet-connected devices, infected
(Corresponding author: Chaoyu Zhang.)
 Chaoyu Zhang, Shaoyu Li, and Wenjing Lou are with the Department
 with Mirai malware, flooded targeted servers with excessive
of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA 22203 USA (e-mail: Internet traffic. This attack rendered major websites, including
chaoyu@vt.edu; shaoyuli@vt.edu; wjlou@vt.edu). Twitter, Netflix, Reddit, and CNN, temporarily inaccessible
 Shanghao Shi is with the Department of Computer Science, Washington to millions of users. Given these circumstances, the imple-
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63144 USA (e-mail: shanghao@wustl.edu). mentation of an intrusion detection system (IDS) has become
 Ning Wang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, imperative. IDS plays a crucial role in the continuous moni-
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail: ningw@usf.edu). toring and analysis of network traffic, capable of identifying
 Xiangxiang Xu is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA (e-mail: xiangxiangxu@rochester.edu).
 potential attacks.
 Lizhong Zheng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and In general, there are two types of IDSs to safeguard net-
Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, work infrastructures: signature-based and anomaly-based IDS.
MA 02139 USA (e-mail: lizhong@mit.edu). Signature-based IDS functions by comparing observed traffic
 Randy Marchany is with the IT Security Office, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
VA 24061 USA (e-mail: marchany@vt.edu). against a database of known attack patterns or signatures [4],
 Mark Gardner is with the Advanced Research Computing, Virginia Tech, [5], [6], [7]. This method is highly effective in recognizing
Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail: mkg@vt.edu). and thwarting established threats, making it an essential tool
 Y. Thomas Hou is with the Bradley Department of Electrical and Com- for defending against known attacks. However, its efficacy
puter Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
thou@vt.edu). is limited to known threats, leaving a gap that anomaly-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3697115 based IDS aims to fill. Anomaly-based IDS works on the
 2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5382 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

principle of behavioral analysis [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. which enables principled, distance-based feature extraction
It establishes a baseline of normal network behavior and with a clear geometric interpretation. For clarity, we define
continuously monitors for deviations, flagging any unusual features as the feature representations extracted by the neural
activity that could signify a potential intrusion. This approach network. The space mapped by this neural network is referred
enables it to detect novel (a.k.a., zero-day) attacks, which do to as the feature space, and the space encompassing all benign
not match any known signatures. While more adaptable to feature representations is termed the baseline.
emerging threats, anomaly-based IDS can be prone to higher The high-level design of Hermes includes a two-step
false-positive rates [14], [15]. training phase. The first step involves Contrastive Feature
 Research Motivation: An effective anomaly-based IDS Learning. To achieve clear separation between benign and
should not only detect intrusions but also identify their types, malicious traffic representations in the latent space, we employ
including both known attacks and generalized zero-day threats. it to guide the representation structure. Our approach forms a
This capability is essential for Intrusion Response Systems positive pair using two normal traffic records, and a negative
(IRS) [16], [17], which rely on attack type identification pair using one normal and one abnormal traffic record. This
to trigger targeted responses. For example, a DDoS attack learning process pulls positive pairs closer and pushes negative
may require rate limiting [18], while malware infiltration may pairs farther apart, thereby generating a new baseline. In this
demand system isolation [19], [20]. Detecting zero-day attacks space, benign instances are tightly clustered, while attack
is also critical [21], [22], as it enables the discovery of new instances are repelled from the benign cluster, enhancing
signatures to enhance signature-based IDSs and provides novel the effectiveness of subsequent anomaly detection. The secsamples to improve anomaly-based models through retraining. ond step involves H-Score Feature Learning, which further
 However, building such an all-in-one solution is particu- refines the learned features by maximizing the compactness
larly challenging for resource-constrained devices, which have of the cluster representing normal behavior. It also increases
limited compute, memory, and energy. Signature-based IDSs the separation between different types of traffic, enabling the
require substantial resources to maintain and update attack IDS to more clearly distinguish between attack classes. The
signature databases, an especially difficult task in large-scale theoretical foundation of the geometrically optimal distance
IoT environments with limited bandwidth and massive device optimization underpinning H-Score feature learning is forpopulations. mally established in [27] and [28].
 Research Objective: Therefore, the goal of our research is For IDS inference, Hermes employs a dual inference mechto 1) improve the overall performance of the anomaly-based anism: it uses a similarity-based rule to measure deviations of
IDS by minimizing the false positive rate and reducing the traffic features from the baseline for anomaly-based detection,
incidence of detection omissions, and 2) extend the capabilities and a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) rule for attack type
of anomaly-based IDS by enabling them not only to detect an identification. This inference mechanism also evaluates if an
intrusion but also to precisely identify the specific type of the instance is a zero-day attack using entropy-based uncertainty
intrusion for resource-limited devices. from the posterior distribution and inconsistency between the
 In the conventional approach to machine learning-based two predictions.
IDS, feature engineering holds substantial importance within In this work, we further extend the Hermes centralized
the pipeline as it directly impacts the ultimate detection design to a decentralized setting through federated learning
performance. Unlike image data, where the observed features (FL). In centralized IDSs, while collecting data from multiple
provide immediate utility, raw network traffic necessitates sources can provide better intrusion detection performance,
additional processing for effective detection [23], [24]. Learn- they are hindered by privacy concerns and legal restrictions,
ing useful patterns directly from raw data traffic or simple such as those imposed by HIPAA,1 which prevent the collectraffic statistics (e.g., connection duration, packet inter-arrival tion of sensitive user data on central servers. On the other hand,
time) is challenging as the complex relationships are difficult naı̈ve distributed IDSs, trained only with local private datasets,
to distinguish. Therefore, it becomes imperative to extract often suffer from low performance due to both the quantity and
features that can directly enhance the performance of detection quality of local data. FL offers a promising solution to these
models rather than relying solely on raw data traffic or simple challenges by enabling local gateways to collaboratively train a
traffic statistics. global model without sharing raw data, thus preserving privacy
 Existing contrastive learning-based IDS methods, such as while leveraging the collective knowledge of diverse IoT
FeCo [14] and CIDS [25], employ contrastive loss to learn devices [29], [30], [31], thereby enabling the creation of more
representations of complex network traffic and improve IDS powerful IDS models for various IoT devices. Therefore, we
performance. AOC-IDS [26] introduces a contrastive loss build FL-Hermes by incorporating geometric feature learning
tailored for autoencoders to obtain better baseline represen- into the FL system to achieve better detection performance
tations, thereby enhancing anomaly detection. while simultaneously preserving user data privacy. In this FL-
 Our Contribution: Going beyond contrastive learning, based design, each gateway trains an individual IDS model
which relies on similarity-based objectives to structure rep- locally via geometric feature learning, and all gateways coopresentations in latent space, we interpret the neural network’s eratively upload local updates to a central parameter server for
latent space through a geometric lens. We propose Hermes model aggregation. After the FL-Hermes training phase, the
[1], a novel IDS that projects complex network traffic into well-trained model is deployed to these gateways for traffic
a geometrically optimized space for enhanced representation,
enabling clearer decision boundaries and more accurate intru-
 1 https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/index.html
sion detection. We adopt geometric feature learning [27],
ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS 5383

 TABLE I
 A R EVIEW OF M ACHINE -L EARNING -BASED I NTRUSION D ETECTION S YSTEMS : M ECHANISMS , C APABILITIES , AND TARGETED T HREATS

inference. We further extend our evaluation to demonstrate strated its effectiveness. Hermes outperforms various
the effectiveness of Hermes in the FL setting. state-of-the-art IDS baselines.
 Our contributions are summarized as follows:

 1) Hermes employs contrastive feature learning to estab- II. R ELATED W ORK
 lish a well-formed baseline to distinguish benign and
 intrusion features, thus enabling anomaly detection. A critical factor in anomaly-based IDS performance is the
 2) Building on this, Hermes employs H-Score feature learn- construction of a representative baseline space. Prior work
 ing to capture the dependencies between traffic and their has explored various strategies: Yan et al. [47] employed
 types, enabling the inference phase to identify the attack non-parametric density estimation to learn legitimate access
 types. This method focuses on reducing geometrical patterns, while KNN-based approaches [11] assess similarity
 distance in the baseline, narrowing distances among fea- to benign instances. Deep learning models have also been
 tures of the same type, and increasing distances between applied, including LSTMs for log modeling [48], autoencoder
 features of different classes, further enhancing anomaly ensembles for traffic features [33], and VAEs for feature
 detection ability and enabling attack identification. compression [10], [35]. Sequence-based modeling using GRUs
 3) The dual inference of Hermes applies a similarity-based [49] and Isolation Forests [41], [43] further contribute diverse
 rule to the learned features to determine if the traffic anomaly detection strategies. Recent methods such as FeCo
 is malicious and utilizes MAP estimation to assess the [14], CIDS [25], and AOC-IDS [26] leverage contrastive learnpreliminary type of intrusion. Furthermore, it classifies ing to improve feature representations and baseline quality.
 the types of known attacks and flags zero-day attacks. To enhance intrusion classification, signature-based IDSs [4],
 4) We extend the Hermes centralized design to an FL- [5], [6], [7] match traffic patterns against known attack sigbased distributed setting to address privacy concerns in natures. For example, graphical models [9], SVMs for botnet
 centralized IDS learning processes and overcome the detection [8], two-tier classifiers [37], and hybrid clusteringperformance limitations of naı̈ve distributed IDSs trained classification approaches [34] demonstrate the strengths of this
 on low-quality and low-quantity data. paradigm in identifying specific attack types. We summarize
 5) Extensive evaluations of Hermes across five datasets existing ML-based IDS by analyzing their underlying ML
 and diverse hardware platforms, in both centralized and mechanisms, capabilities, and the security threats they target
 federated learning settings, have consistently demon- in Tab. I.
5384 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GN } and a parameter server S that coordinates
 model aggregation. Each gateway locally monitors traffic,
 generates flow records using the Flow Record Generator, and
 trains a local IDS model. At each FL round t, the parameter
 server S initializes or maintains a global model M(t) with the
 same architecture as the centralized IDS. A trusted subset of
 gateways G0 ⊆ G is selected to participate, and the current
 global model is broadcast to these clients to initialize their
 local models. Each selected gateway Gi ∈ G0 performs local
 training using its own flow records and computes a model
 update δ(t)
 i . After local training, participating gateways upload
 their updates {δ(t) i }Gi ∈G0 to the server S. The server aggregates
 these updates using a standard FL aggregation rule, such as
 FedAvg or FedSGD [29], to obtain an updated global model
 M(t+1) . This process is repeated for multiple rounds until
 convergence, resulting in a global IDS model that generalizes
 across heterogeneous local traffic distributions without sharing
 raw traffic data.
 Threat Model: In our threat model, we assume attackers
 manipulate network traffic to launch various network-based
 attacks, including probing, data injection, denial of service, malware, infiltration, exfiltration, and man-in-the-middle
 attacks. These may include zero-day attacks with no known
 signatures. We assume such manipulations result in detectable
 deviations from benign traffic patterns. The IDS and the
 gateways on which it resides are assumed to be trusted and
 secure. To ensure trustworthiness, we assume only verified
Fig. 1. The system workflow of Hermes. (a) Centralized system model where
the IDS model is trained on a single server. (b) Distributed system model
 clients participate in the FL system, contributing diverse and
leveraging FL to collaboratively train the IDS model across multiple local distributed data for collaborative training. While Byzantine
gateways. threats like poisoning attacks are a known concern, we assume
 an honest and cooperative setting. As extensive work exists on
 poisoning resilience [54], we consider such threats mitigable
 III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND T HREAT M ODEL and beyond the scope of this study.
 We acknowledge that adversarial evasion attacks, including
 Centralized System Model: We consider a general IDS
 black-box attacks such as transfer-based and query-based
architecture following prior work [50], [51], as illustrated
 attacks, remain an important and challenging research probin Fig. 1 (a). We assume that a network gateway G interlem. Defending against such attacks typically requires dedconnects multiple local devices and manages both incoming
 icated threat modeling and specialized defense mechanisms,
and outgoing traffic, making it a natural vantage point for
 and thus represents a complementary line of work beyond
traffic monitoring and analysis. The IDS operates in two
 the scope of this paper [13], [55]. In this work, Hermes is
modes: training and inference. In the training mode, raw
 evaluated under standard IDS deployment assumptions, where
network packets observed at the gateway are first summarized
 the detection model is accessed as a black box, and attackers
into flow-level records by a Flow Record Generator. This
 do not have access to internal parameters or gradients. Rather
module represents a general abstraction that aggregates packets
 than claiming explicit adversarial robustness, Hermes focuses
belonging to the same communication session and extracts
 on improving detection accuracy and generalization under
flow-level features. Such functionality can be implemented
 realistic traffic conditions. As a possible extension, adversarial
using various schemes or tools, including NetFlow [52],
 training [55] could be incorporated into our framework without
CICFlowMeter [53], or customized aggregation mechanisms.
 modifying its core design, which we leave as future work.
NetFlow is referenced here only as a representative example,
 The privacy aspects of Hermes, including leakage risks
rather than a required component. The generated flow records,
 and resilience strategies inspired by [56] and [57], form an
which encapsulate key characteristics of network communicaorthogonal research direction deserving further exploration.
tions, are forwarded to a training server S and used as input
for IDS model training. In the inference mode, the trained IV. D ESIGN OF H ERMES
IDS model is deployed at the gateway G to perform real-time
intrusion detection based on locally generated flow records. A. Overview
For clarity, we refer to recorded traffic as flow-level records The key steps of the Hermes learning process are depicted
that summarize sequences of packets and capture essential in Fig. 1 (a), offering an overview of our system. The precommunication characteristics between network endpoints. training phase begins with the traffic monitor gathering packet
 Distributed System Model: In FL-Hermes (Fig. 1 (b)), data from network gateways (¬). This data is processed and
we extend the centralized design to a federated learning then relayed to the flow record generator (­), which creates
(FL) setting. The system consists of a set of local gateways structured flow records (®). The training phase (¯) involves
ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS 5385

Fig. 2. Hermes Design: Our approach begins with contrastive feature learning to train a model f (x; θ0 ), establishing a baseline space (Training Step One).
Subsequently, we refine this model to f (x; θ1 ) and develop the identification model g(y; θ2 ) using H-Score feature learning (Training Step Two). During the
Inference phase, the established IDS model employs a similarity-based rule for anomaly detection and a MAP rule for attack identification. We further analyze
each instance to ascertain whether it could be a zero-day attack, based on the results from dual inference.

two critical steps: first, we construct an initial anomaly TABLE II
detection model f (x; θ0 ) using contrastive feature learning to D EFINITIONS AND N OTATIONS
define a baseline. We then refine this model from f (x; θ0 ) to
 f (x; θ1 ), and develop the identification model g(y; θ2 ) through
H-Score feature learning (as shown in Fig. 2). Once the fully
trained IDS model is deployed at the gateway G (°), Hermes
performs dual inference: it utilizes a similarity-based rule for
anomaly detection and a MAP rule for attack identification,
and analyzes whether the intrusion is a zero-day attack. The
system’s pivotal elements, contrastive feature learning, H-
Score feature learning, and dual inference, are expounded in
the following sections.

B. Training Step One: Contrastive Feature Learning
 To establish a representative baseline for anomaly detection,
we employ geometrical feature extraction through contrastive
feature learning. This method leverages the inherent differences and similarities in network traffic to enhance the
performance of anomaly-based IDS. Specifically, each training
data record in our system consists of two components: the flow
record x ∈ Rd , where d represents the dimensionality of the
flow record, and its corresponding output label y ∈ {0, 1}. Here,
0 denotes benign traffic flow, while 1 indicates an intrusion.
The primary aim of our contrastive learning algorithm is to
extract a representative benign feature cluster as a baseline.
 To achieve this, we train a neural network f (x; θ0 ) with
weights θ0 , which takes the input record x ∈ Rd and produces
a feature f (x) ∈ Rk . Let xi and x j represent benign inputs,
and xm represent an intrusive input. Given a training dataset
containing benign and intrusion instances, we compute feature
representations f (xi ) and f (x j ) for pairs of benign samples.
Here, x j is another benign sample within the same minibatch as xi to form a positive pair. Positive and negative pairs
are constructed dynamically within each mini-batch to reduce
computational overhead, following the strategy in [58].
 In contrastive feature learning, training is performed in a
mini-batch manner. Within each mini-batch of size B, we
denote benign samples as xi and x j , where xi is an anchor
benign sample and x j is another benign sample in the same xm , which serve as negative samples. Let N and M denote the
mini-batch forming a positive pair, and malicious samples as numbers of benign and malicious samples in the mini-batch,
5386 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

respectively. The values of N and M are not manually specified To begin, we define a variable X indicating flow records, and
hyperparameters; instead, they are determined by the natural a variable Y as corresponding labels. In this context, each label
class distribution of the (non-IID) training dataset within yi is an integer where yi ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}; here, 0 represents
each mini-batch and may vary across batches. Intuitively, a a benign label, while any non-zero number corresponds to
sufficient number of benign samples (N) helps learn a compact a specific type of attack. These variables, X and Y, follow
and stable representation of normal traffic, while the pres- the joint distribution PX,Y . Given the complexity of traffic
ence of malicious samples (M) promotes separability between encountered by IDS, this joint distribution PX,Y is typically
benign and intrusive behaviors. The mini-batch size B controls unknown, making the direct computation or estimation of the
the trade-off between representation stability and computa- statistical dependence, as indicated by the CDK (canonical
tional cost, and is selected accordingly in our evaluation. dependence kernel) function iX;Y (referenced in [27, Eq. 4]),
Notably, malicious samples are typically not used as anchors infeasible.
because anomaly detection fundamentally relies on modeling PX,Y (x, y) − PX (x)PY (y)
 iX;Y = . (3)
consistent benign behavior and detecting deviations from it. PX (x)PY (y)
Incorporating variable and sparse malicious data as anchors Consequently, we focus on learning iX;Y from data samples
may obscure the learned boundary by introducing unstable using H-Score feature learning, specifically by considering its
or non-generalizable representations. We follow the original rank-k approximation ζ≤k (iX;Y ), given k ≥ 1. The approxdataset’s class distribution and a widely used partitioning imation of iX;YP by the rank-k joint function is expressed
strategy to preserve the benign-to-malicious ratio. A complete as f ⊗ g = k k k
 i=1 fi ⊗ gi , where f ∈ FX and g ∈ FY
list of definitions and notations is provided in Table II. represent k-dimensional features. This formulation translates
 Based on the above mini-batch construction and sample the computation of ζ≤k (iX;Y ) into an optimization problem,
roles, the contrastive learning objective aims to maximize aiming to minimize the approximation error kiX;Y − f ⊗ gkF ,
the similarity between f (xi ) and f (x j ), while simultaneously where k · kF is as defined in Table II. The optimization
distinguishing between benign f (xi ) and all malicious f (xm ) variables in this context are the k-dimensional features f and
instances, where f (xm )|m∈{M} . In this context, ui = f (xi ) and g. However, the error kiX;Y − f ⊗ gkF for a specific f and g
u j = f (x j ) are the features of benign inputs xi and x j , cannot be directly computed due to the unknown nature of iX;Y .
respectively, and vm = f (xm ) is the feature of an intrusive To overcome this challenge, we utilize the H-Score H ( f , g),
input xm . defined for k ≥ 1 and f ∈ FXk , g ∈ FYk , as
 !
 exp(uTi u j /τ) 1
 li j = − log . (1)
 
 2 2
 PM H ( f , g) , iX;Y F − iX;Y − f ⊗ g F
 exp(uTi u j /τ) + m=1 exp(uTi vm /τ) 2
  1
 The term 0 < τ < 1 represents the temperature coefficient.
 T 
 = E f (X)g(Y) − E f (X) E g(Y) − · tr Λ f Λg ,
  T   
The overall loss function L aggregates all pairwise losses, 2
 (4)
encompassing both li j and l ji terms:
 T
 where Λ f = E f (X) f T (X) − E f (X) E f (X) and Λg =
     
 N N
 1 X X
 L= (li j + l ji ). (2) T
      
 N(N − 1) E g(Y)gT (Y) − E g(Y) E g(Y) are the covariance matrices
 i=1 j=i+1 of f (X) and g(Y) respectively, with tr(·) denoting the trace
 Phase one of the training, as depicted in Fig. 2, offers an function. The H-Score serves as a measure of the quality of the
intuitive visualization of the learning process. In this phase, approximation, where a higher H-Score value indicates a lower
by minimizing the loss function, we enhance the similarity approximation error. Accordingly, the optimal weights refined
among benign data representations, effectively drawing them through the H-Score are designed to maximize the correlation
closer together. Concurrently, this process distances benign between the traffic flow record and its specific types. This
representations from those indicative of intrusions. Once the approach not only maximizes the average distance between
model converges, it results in a well-defined baseline for nor- different classes but also minimizes the distance within the
mal traffic, which is essential for effective anomaly detection. same class, thereby enhancing class separability. This detailed
 discussion can be found in [28, Proposition 4], with its proof
C. Training Step Two: H-Score Feature Learning provided in Appendix F therein.
 In the subsequent discussion, we delve into how features
 While our current model is adept at anomaly detection, are integrated to discern the specific type of traffic. Assuming
it cannot identify specific types of attack and the baseline we have obtained f ∈ FXk and g ∈ FYk by maximizing the
is not optimal yet. To address this limitation, we employ H-Score H ( f , g), we determine the traffic flow where k ≥
H-Score feature learning [28], [59], which explores the rank(iX;Y ), having established that f ⊗ g = iX;Y . With the above
geometric feature space beyond the established baseline. assumption, we can obtain the following result, as discussed in
In essence, H-Score learning geometrically maps the fea- [27, Section 3.2].
ture to construct unique clusters for each attack type. This Suppose f ⊗ g = iX;Y . Then, we will have
enables the identification of specific attack types during the
inference phase. Additionally, it increases the separability kiX;Y k2F = tr(Λ f · Λg ), (5)
between features of different classes. This approach further PY|X (y|x) = PY (y)(1 + f (x)g(y)).
 T
 (6)
refines the baseline feature space, distancing it from intrusion
clusters, which in turn enhances the performance of the Using the features f and g, we are able to compute the
anomaly-based IDS. strength of the dependence between X and Y, represented
ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS 5387

as iX;Y . The posterior distribution, as outlined in Eq. 6, is To assess the similarity S (xi ) between a new traffic flow xi
instrumental in identifying the specific type of traffic. In and the anchor baseline template z̄, we employ the similarity
Hermes, where X represents the input records and Y denotes estimator:
the types, the system obtains the results of the posterior z̄T f (xi )
 S (xi ) = . (10)
distribution PY|X of the label Y by Eq. 6. The traffic type kz̄k × k f (xi )k
is determined through a corresponding maximum a posteriori This similarity score ranges between 0 and 1. In order to
(MAP) estimation, defined as follows: classify a new traffic flow xi as normal or anomalous, we set a
 threshold score ρ within the range of [0, 1]. This threshold is
 ŷMAP (x) = arg max PY|X (y|x) (7)
 y∈Y derived from the distribution of similarity scores of the benign
 = arg max PY (y)(1 + f T (x)g(y)), (8) training data. We start by sorting these scores in ascending
 y∈Y order, resulting in a sequence S = [S 1 , S 2 , . . . , S N ]. The
 threshold ρ is then determined by selecting the p-th percentile
where PY can be sourced from the monitored daily traffic. This
 of this sequence:
method is proposed and explained in [27, Eq. 25]. j p k
 A visual representation of H-Score feature learning is r= ·N , (11)
 100
illustrated in Fig. 2. In Training Step Two, the primary loss
 where b·c denotes the floor function, and p represents a
function used is −H ( f , g). This function is used for calculatpercentage. As a result, the threshold ρ is set to S r , which
ing the optimal parameters θ1 and θ2 during the second step of
 corresponds to the r-th value in the sorted sequence S. To
the training phase. It is specifically designed for the joint trainminimize the False Positive Rate, a low percentile p is
ing of the parameters θ1 and θ2 in a two-network architecture.
 recommended. An observation x is predicted as an intrusion
In this architecture, the neural network f (x; θ1 ) is responsible
 if its similarity score falls below this threshold ρ:
for generating k-dimensional features f in the feature space
FXk . The identification model g(y; θ2 ) is a fully connected ŷS im (x) = 1(S (x) < ρ). (12)
network, given the underlying distribution of Y. This network
takes the one-hot encoded vector [1{y = 1}, . . ., 1{y = |n|}] 2) Rule 2: Maximum A Posteriori Rule for Attack Identiof y as input, and produces the k-dimensional features g fication: The second rule, a MAP rule, can help to identify
from labels in the feature space FYk as output. Thus, the H- the type of attack. It does this by comparing the correlation
Score estimator evaluates the H-Score between f and g to between the features extracted from the traffic and the geocapture the dependence between traffic and the corresponding metric features corresponding to specific attack types. The
type. The main goal during the second step of the training neural network f (x; θ1 ) processes these records to extract the
phase is to maximize this H-Score for geometrically optimal corresponding features, represented as f (x). The identification
representation of features, as depicted in the training step two model g(y; θ2 ) generates the feature for each class, denoted as
of Fig. 2. g(y). For a new record x, we predict the corresponding attack
 type using the MAP rule as:
 ŷMAP (x) = arg max PY (y)[1 + f T (x)g(y)] ,
 ˚
 (13)
D. Dual Inference Phase y∈Y

 The inference phase, as shown in Fig. 2, is designed to where PY (y) is the true traffic type distribution that can be
detect the intrusion, identify the type, and explore zero-day monitored from the daily network flow traffic.
attacks. In this phase, two rules are employed, both utilizing
the same features extracted from the model f (x; θ1 ). The first
 E. Zero-Day Attack Analysis
rule, a similarity-based detection rule, measures the deviation
of traffic features from the learned baseline, thereby enabling The dual inference of Hermes is adept at discerning whether
anomaly detection. The second rule, a Maximum A Posteriori an attack could be a zero-day attack.
rule, identifies the type of attack. It compares the posterior Suppose an instance is a zero-day attack; it will exhibit
distribution for all types of traffic and outputs the type with new characteristics and previously unseen signatures, leading
the maximum value as the classification result. The dual to increased uncertainty in the model’s predictions. This
inference mechanism also evaluates if an instance is a zero-day uncertainty is evaluated based on the entropy of the posterior
attack using entropy-based uncertainty from the posterior distribution (see Equation 6): PY|X (y|x) = PY (y)·(1+ f T (x)g(y)).
distribution and inconsistency between the two predictions. The features of a zero-day attack may manifest in a feature
 1) Rule 1: Similarity-Based Detection: The anomaly-based space distinct from any known attack’s space, resulting in no
detection in our system utilizes a threshold-based mechanism dominant probability for any known attack in the posterior
based on similarity measures. This process starts with the distribution and consequently, a higher entropy. This metric
aggregation of features from the baseline space. We then can help to determine if it is a zero-day attack. We define this
compute the mean of these normalized features to establish uncertainty as follows:
an anchor baseline template, denoted as z̄: Z (PY|X (y|x)) = −
 X
 PY|X (yi |x) log PY|X (yi |x). (14)
 1 X f (xi )
 
 i
 z̄ = P 1(yi = 0) , (9)
 i 1(yi = 0) i k f (xi )k2 Consistent results from similarity-based and MAP rules are
 typically observed in detection scenarios. However, inconsiswhere 1(·) denotes the indicator function, with yi = 0 signify- tencies may arise, such as when the similarity rule indicates
ing benign traffic, and k·k2 represents the L2 -norm. an instance is benign, while the MAP rule identifies it as an
5388 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

attack, or vice versa. These inconsistencies are more likely to Algorithm 2 Dual Inference
occur when the features of a zero-day attack are geometrically N
 1: Input: Flow Records {(xi )}i=1
situated in the mid-area between the feature spaces of different N
 2: Output: Anomaly detection results: {ŷS im (xi )}i=1 , and the
types of traffic. Therefore, if an instance is a zero-day attack, it traffic types {ŷ MAP (xi )}i=1 . N
is more likely to provoke inconsistent predictions between the /* Compute normalized features for benign traffic */
similarity and MAP rules, necessitating further investigation 3: z sum ← 0
to confirm if it is a zero-day attack. We have validated these 4: for all benign records xi do
findings through observations and experimental results. 5: z sum ← z sum + k ff(x(xii)k) 2
 6: end for
Algorithm 1 Training Phase z sum
 7: z̄ ← number of benign records
 1: Training Step One: Contrastive Feature Learning
 N /* Compute the threshold ρ from the benign similarity
 2: Input: Flow Records with benign inputs {xi }i=1 and mali-
 M distribution */
 cious inputs {xm }m=1
 8: S ← sorted similarity scores of benign records
 3: Output: Optimized parameters θ0 for f (x; θ0 ) p ˘
 9: r ← 100 · N
 4: for each epoch in num epochs do
 10: ρ ← S r
 5: for each benign input pair (xi , x j ) do N
 11: for each xi in Flow Records {(xi )}i=1 do
 /* Compute the features */
 /*Compute the similarity S for new traffic flow xi */
 6: ui ← f (xi ), u j ← f (x j ) z̄T f (xi )
 12: S (xi ) ← kz̄k×k f (xi )k
 7: vm ← f (xm )
 /* Predict new observation based on similarity score and
 /* Compute the pairwise loss li j */
 exp(uT u /τ)
  threshold */
 8: li j = − log exp(uT u /τ)+Pi M j exp(uT v /τ) 13: ŷS im (xi ) = 1(S (xi ) < ρ)
 i j m=1 i m
 9: end for /* Predict the traffic by MAP rule ŷ(x) */
 /* Compute the Pcumulative loss function L */ 14: Estimate the prior distribution PY (y)
 N PN
10: L = N(N−1)1
 i=1 j=i+1 (li j + l ji ) 15: ŷ MAP (xi ) = arg maxy∈Y PY (y) · (1 + f T (xi )g(y))
 /* Update the parameters */ /* Zero-Day Attack P Analysis */
11: θ0 = θ0 − α∇L, 16: Z (PY|X ) = − j PY|X (y j |xi ) log PY|X (y j |xi )
12: end for 17: if Z (PY|X ) is an outlier then
13: Training Step Two: H-Score Feature Learning 18: return zero-day attack
14: Input: Flow Records with labels {(xi , yi )}i=1 N
 19: else if ŷ MAP (x) is consistent with ŷS im (x) then
15: Output: Optimized parameters θ1 for f (x; θ1 ), and θ2 for 20: return not zero-day attack
 g(y; θ2 ) 21: else if ŷ MAP (x) is inconsistent with ŷS im (x) then
16: for each epoch in num epochs do 22: return zero-day attack
17: for each (xi , yi ) in Training data {(xi , yi )}i=1 N
 do 23: end if
 /* Convert labels (y to one-hot encoding yone-hot */ 24: end for
 1 if i = y
18: yone-hot [i] =
 0 otherwise
 /* Get f and g values using x and yone-hot */ In step ¬, at the beginning of FL iteration t, the parameter
19: f = { f (xi )}i=1
 N
 , g = {g(yone-hot, i )}i=1N server S initializes a global IDS model M(t) . The model
 /* Compute the negative H-Score as loss, L */ architecture is the same as the centralized setting ( f (x; θ0 )
20: L = −H ( f , g) and g(y; θ2 )), consistent across all participating local gateways.
 /* Update the models’ parameters */ During each FL iteration t, S selects a subset of gateways
21: θ1 = θ1 − α∇L, θ2 = θ2 − α∇L G0 = {G1 , G2 , . . . , Gn } ⊆ G to participate. The global model
22: end for M(t) is broadcast to the selected gateways G0 .
 In the local training phase, each selected gateway Gi , where
23: end for
 Gi ∈ G0 , initializes its local model using the received global
 model M(t) . The gateway trains the local IDS model using
 We summarize the whole training phase and dual inference
 flow records collected from its network, as in step ­. Similarly
procedures in Algorithms 1 and 2, and compose the notations
 to the centralized setting, step ® involves two critical subin Tab. II. The whole illustration for H-Score feature learning
 steps: first, the client constructs a local anomaly detection
can be found in [27].
 model f (x; Θ0 ) using contrastive feature learning to define
 a baseline; it then optimizes the traffic representation of this
F. FL-Hermes Design model from f (x; Θ0 ) to f (x; Θ1 ) and develops the identification
 In FL-Hermes (Fig. 1 (b)), the learning process, instead of model g(y; Θ2 ) using H-Score feature learning, allowing the
operating on a central server, distributes the training process identification of intrusion types and the analysis of zero-day
across a set of local gateways G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GN } and utilizes attacks. After training for several local epochs, the gateway
a parameter server S to coordinate the training. This FL computes the model update δ(t) i as δi
 (t)
 = {Θ1 , Θ2 }. In step
training paradigm allows participants to jointly train a shared ¯, Model Update Aggregation, the local gateways upload
IDS model without sharing raw data. The learning process can their model updates δ(t) i to the parameter server S. The server
be outlined as follows: aggregates these updates using an aggregation rule, such as
ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS 5389

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE (%) OF H ERMES ON NSL-KDD DATASET

 Fig. 3. Evaluating Hermes on Raspberry Pi 4, an IoT device in a resourceconstrained environment.

 evaluations are conducted on a server equipped with an Intel
 Core i9-11900K CPU (8 cores / 16 threads, 3.50 GHz base),
 an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 GPU, and running Ubuntu
 20.04.5 LTS.
 The N-BaIoT dataset focuses on IoT traffic, encompassing data from nine commercial IoT devices, including those
 compromised by malicious software, such as Mirai and BASH-
 LITE. This dataset records benign traffic and five types
 of attacks for both Mirai (‘scan’, ‘ack’, ‘syn’, ‘udp’, and
FedAvg, to produce a new global M(t+1) for the next ‘udpplain’) and BASHLITE (‘scan’, ‘junk’, ‘udp’, ‘tcp’, and
 P model(t) ‘combo’) [46]. A principal goal to use this dataset is to
FL iteration: M (t+1)
 ← |G0 | i∈G0 δi , The updated global
 1

model M(t+1) is broadcast back to the selected gateways in verify the applicability of Hermes in resource-constrained IoT
the subsequent iteration. This process repeats across multiple environments. Accordingly, our experiments with the N-BaIoT
FL iterations until the global model converges to an optimal dataset are conducted on a Raspberry Pi 4 as depicted in Fig. 3,
solution M∗ , which generalizes well across all gateways. Once equipped with a 1.5 GHz quad-core A72 64-bit ARMv8 CPU,
the fully trained IDS model M∗ is deployed at the gateway 4GB RAM, 32GB SD card storage, and running the Raspbian
G, it operates, similar to the previous design, as described OS, to evaluate Hermes’s efficiency in such settings.
in step °. The model uses a similarity-based rule to detect The default configurations of Hermes are outlined as folanomalies and a MAP rule to identify the type of attack. lows. For the NSL-KDD dataset, the network f (x; θ0 )/ f (x; θ1 )
Additionally, it analyzes whether the detected intrusion is a is composed of an input layer with d = 112 dimensions
zero-day attack. This FL-Hermes design ensures data privacy and an output layer with k = 256 dimensions. Additionally,
by keeping sensitive flow records locally while leveraging it includes two hidden layers with sizes of 128 and 256.
collaborative learning to enhance IDS performance across The g(y; θ2 ) network, designed for attack identification, utidiverse network environments. lizes a three-layer structure with 256, 128, and 5 neurons.
 For the N-BaIoT dataset, the architecture largely mirrors
 that of the NSL-KDD. The key difference is in the input
 V. E XPERIMENT and output layers of the f (x; θ0 )/ f (x; θ1 ) network, which are
 We evaluate Hermes under both centralized and federated configured to accommodate 115 feature inputs and 11 class
settings, focusing on three aspects: anomaly detection accu- outputs. The ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) activation function
racy, attack identification capability, and performance under is implemented after each hidden layer in both models to
zero-day attack scenarios. We further benchmark Hermes introduce non-linearity. Hermes employs the Adam optimizer
against representative baseline methods and state-of-the-art with parameters that include a learning rate of α = 10−4 and
anomaly-based IDSs. a mini-batch size of B = 128. The training regimen varies
 between datasets: for the first phase, e = 20 epochs are used for
A. Datasets and Experiment Settings NSL-KDD and e = 15 for the N-BaIoT dataset. In the second
 training phase, an additional 20 epochs are applied to both
 We prototype Hermes using the PyTorch framework and
 datasets. For comprehensive analysis, Hermes’s performance
evaluate on two prominent network traffic datasets: NSLis benchmarked against machine learning models from the
KDD [32] and N-BaIoT [46]. The NSL-KDD dataset, a
 renowned scikit-learn library [60].
well-established benchmark in IDS performance evaluation
[34], [37], [50], includes benign traffic along with four categories of intrusions, as listed in Tab. IV. We highlight the B. Evaluation Metric and Baselines
16 intrusion sub-classes that are only present in the test We evaluate intrusion detection performance using standataset. This presents a significant challenge to Hermes in dard metrics, including Accuracy, Recall, Precision, F1-score,
detecting emerging zero-day threats. Each record in the dataset and False Positive Rate (FPR), following commonly adopted
features 41 attributes extracted from network traffic. These definitions in prior IDS studies [11], [34], [37]. In addition,
5390 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE IV
 I NTRUSION C LASSES (S UB -C LASSES ) OF THE NSL-KDD DATASET

Fig. 4. Visualization of FXk and MLP Output on a Randomly Selected 5% Subset of the NSL-KDD Test Dataset for: (a) Hermes Anomaly-Detection,
(b) MLP Anomaly-Detection, (c) Hermes Attack Identification, and (d) MLP Attack Identification.

we report ROC curves by plotting Recall against FPR under
varying decision thresholds, and use the Area Under the Curve
(AUC) to summarize overall detection performance.
 Our experimental configuration is as follows: Hermes Sim
employs f (x; θ1 ) with the similarity rule for anomaly detection.
Hermes MAP uses f (x; θ1 ) and g(y; θ2 ) with the MAP rule
for attack identification. CL (Contrastive Learning) utilizes
the architecture of f (x; θ1 ) and adheres to the similarity
rule. The multi-layer perceptron (MLP) model integrates the
architectures of f (x; θ1 ) and a classification head, optimized Fig. 5. (a) The ROC curve of Hermes Sim. (b) Uncertainty analysis for
using cross-entropy loss. Comparative performance evalua- traffic subclasses in exploring zero-day attacks.
tions include models such as support vector machine (SVM),
variational autoencoder (VAE), isolation forest (IsoForest), score among all tested methods while maintaining an FPR as
logistic regression (LGR), Bernoulli naive Bayes (BNB), K- low as 3.74%.
nearest neighbors (KNN), and decision tree classifier (DTC), The ablation study demonstrates that adding contrastive
along with IDS methods TDTC [37], Two-Tier [11], ESFCM feature learning to the basic MLP method results in improve-
[34], and contrastive-learning-based variants AOC-IDS [26], ments across all metrics, including a 3.97% increase in recall,
FeCo [14], and CIDS [25]. while keeping a similar FPR. Introducing H-Score feature
 learning further enhances performance, with overall improve-
C. Hermes Results on NSL-KDD Dataset ments of 7.63% in recall, while reducing the FPR by 1.36%
 1) Feature Space Insights: We utilize t-SNE—a dimen- compared to the baseline MLP. Detection Speed: The average
sionality reduction technique—to project the feature space, inference time (over 100 records) is 3.58 ms for MLP, 3.20 ms
FXk , into a two-dimensional figure as shown in Fig. 4. In the for CL, and 4.25 ms for Hermes Sim. Other methods like
presented visualizations of FXk with a randomly selected 5% KNN, although having a low FPR, do not perform as well in
subset of the NSL-KDD test dataset, distinct patterns emerge Recall, accuracy, and F1 score. TDTC (4.86%) and Two-Tier
when comparing Hermes and the MLP method across both (5.43%) systems show competitive FPRs but are less effective
binary anomaly detection and multi-class attack identification. in other metrics and in identifying specific attack types.
For anomaly detection, the Hermes approach in (a) exhibits The ROC curves of Hermes and three other baselines are
a more discernible separation between the “malicious” and plotted in Fig. 5 (a), with our method exhibiting a higher AUC
“benign” clusters, whereas the MLP model in (b) shows a score compared to the baselines. For intrusion identification,
considerable overlap between the two categories. (c) Hermes Tab. III shows that Hermes MAP attains an 87.77% accuracy
and (d) MLP demonstrate multi-cluster separations. Hermes in in identifying four classes of intrusions amid normal traffic.
(c) maintains better-delineated boundaries between the classes, The table’s lower section details the identification performance
especially when differentiating subtle distinctions like between for each traffic class, alongside their ratio in the training data.
“DoS”, “Probe”, “U2R”, and “R2L”. In contrast, the MLP’s With adequate samples, Hermes consistently maintains high
features in (d) show more intermingling among classes. accuracy. Remarkably, it effectively identifies the R2L attack,
 2) Centralized Hermes Evaluation: In Tab. III, Her- which represents a mere 0.13% of the training dataset, with a
mes Sim achieves high accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 low FPR of 4.85%.
ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS 5391

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE (%) OF H ERMES IN FL, NA ÏVE D ISTRIBUTED L EARNING , AND C ENTRALIZED L EARNING

 TABLE VI IID data distribution, the training dataset is randomly and
 D EVICES S PECIFICATION IN N-BA I OT DATASET evenly divided among all clients, ensuring that each client
 receives a balanced subset. In the non-IID-1 setting, each
 client is assigned data from n ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}, representing one
 to four of the total intrusion attack categories. In the non-
 IID-2 setting, each client is restricted to data from only one
 (n = 1) intrusion attack category. Notably, the non-IID-2
 setting represents a more extreme case of non-IID-1, where
 FL training becomes significantly more challenging. This is
 due to the highly uneven data distribution, with each client
 holding data from only a single intrusion category. The lack
 of diversity in local datasets amplifies the non-IID nature,
 TABLE VII resulting in more biased local models and making it more
I MPACT OF THE N UMBER OF FL C LIENTS ON D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE challenging to achieve well-trained global models.
 To ensure a fair comparison, the testing dataset across all
 settings remains the same as in the centralized setting. We
 evaluate Hermes under three different learning frameworks:
 FL, naı̈ve distributed learning, and centralized learning. In the
 naı̈ve distributed learning framework, training is performed
 entirely on local devices using only local data, and evaluation
 metrics are averaged across all clients. Centralized learning, as
 To illustrate Hermes’s ability to identify zero-day attacks, discussed in Sec. V-C2, involves training on a single merged
we display in Fig. 5 (b) the uncertainty for each intrusion dataset.
subclass and normal traffic, calculated using Eq. 14. The x-axis For local training, we configure E = 3 epochs for both
in the figure represents the intrusion subclasses enumerated in the contrastive feature learning and H-Score feature learning
Tab. IV, with indices 0 to 23 denoting benign and known phases. The FL process is set to run for I = 20 iterations to
attacks, and 24 to 39 indicating zero-day attacks. The y-axis train the local models. Across all settings, we use the Adam
is the uncertainty associated with the corresponding traffic. optimizer with a consistent learning rate to ensure uniformity
Notably, known traffic types exhibit lower mean and variance in the experiments.
in uncertainty, whereas zero-day samples display significantly Experimental Results: We evaluate the performance of
higher variance and mean. This pattern suggests that high- FL-Hermes, naı̈ve distributed learning with Hermes, and cenuncertainty outliers could be potential zero-day attack samples tralized Hermes under various local client data distributions,
warranting further investigation. Furthermore, by analyzing the as shown in Tab. V.
discrepancies between outputs from ŷS im (x) and ŷ MAP (x), we FL-Hermes consistently outperforms naı̈ve distributed learnfind that 77.24% of the intrusions are zero-day attacks. This ing across most evaluation metrics, regardless of the data
insight offers an additional method for identifying potential distribution. Moreover, FL-Hermes demonstrates consistent
zero-day attack samples. detection performance across the three data distributions (IID,
 FL System Setting: We simulate an FL system with 50 non-IID-1, and non-IID-2), highlighting the ability of the FL
clients to evaluate Hermes in distributed settings. This choice design to enable distributed clients, each holding different
follows common practice in prior FL studies (e.g., FeCo [14], types of data, to collaboratively train a robust model. This
PyramidFL [61], AUCTION [62]). We additionally evaluate aligns well with real-world privacy-sensitive application scedifferent client scales by varying the number of clients from narios, where different clients hold their own private data,
25 to 100 under the same training configuration. As shown resulting in inherently highly non-IID distributions. In contrast,
in Table VII, FL-Hermes exhibits stable performance across naı̈ve distributed learning, although preserving privacy, heavily
these settings; therefore, we adopt 50 clients in the rest of the relies on the quality of local data. For example, under the
evaluation for fair comparison and engineering practicality. non-IID-2 distribution, naı̈ve distributed learning achieves an
 We consider both IID and non-IID data partitioning strate- average accuracy as low as 67.11% and an average recall
gies, where the same training dataset used in the centralized as low as 48.68%, highlighting its vulnerability to imbalsetting is partitioned and distributed among clients. For the anced data distribution and limited local data diversity. While
5392 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

the detection accuracy of FL-Hermes is lower than that of
centralized learning, the latter is challenging to deploy in
privacy-sensitive scenarios, making FL-Hermes a more practical alternative.
 We also compare the performance of Hermes across different data distributions within the same learning framework.
In the FL setting, Hermes achieves an accuracy of 87.28%
under the non-IID-1 distribution, which is higher than the
83.19% accuracy achieved under the non-IID-2 distribution.
A similar trend is observed for recall, where Hermes achieves
81.60% under the non-IID-1 distribution, compared to 73.75%
under the non-IID-2 distribution. Similar trends are also
observed in naı̈ve distributed learning across non-IID-1 and
non-IID-2 distributions. This decreased diversity makes it
more challenging to learn stable representations of benign
instances, as geometric feature learning iteratively optimizes
the feature representations away from diverse types of attack
representations. Fig. 6. The performance (%) of Hermes compared with baselines on the N-
 In summary, FL-Hermes achieves robust performance across BaIoT dataset is presented across various metrics: (a) Accuracy, (b) Recall,
 (c) Precision, (d) F1 Score, and (e) FPR.
diverse data distributions and significantly outperforms naı̈ve
distributed learning. Although centralized Hermes achieves
higher accuracy, its practical limitations in privacy-sensitive IoT devices, instead of training models independently on
applications underscore the importance of FL-Hermes as a local data from each device. In this setup, local models are
viable and effective alternative. trained by each client and then uploaded to a parameter server
 for aggregation into a global model. After the FL training
D. Hermes Results on N-BaIoT Dataset phase, the well-trained global model is deployed back to
 each IoT device, where it is evaluated using the same testing
 1) IoT Device Evaluation: To demonstrate the feasibility
 data collected from the respective devices. The results are
of utilizing IoT devices for intrusion detection, we conduct
 summarized in Tab. IX.
evaluations of Hermes on real IoT botnet traffic datasets
 The experimental results demonstrate the robust perderived from nine commercially available IoT devices infected
 formance of FL-Hermes across various evaluation metby the Mirai and BASHLITE botnets. The specifications
 rics. Specifically, under the similarity-based rule (FLof these devices are detailed in Tab. VI, which provides
 Hermes Sim), the system achieves high detection accuracy,
a comprehensive breakdown of their characteristics. For a
 recall, precision, and F1 score, all exceeding 99.30%. Addidetailed analysis, we create a specific model for each IoT
 tionally, the FPR remains exceptionally low, never exceeding
device and evaluate its performance individually. To simulate
 0.35%. This highlights the system’s ability to detect intrua typical resource-constrained IoT environment, we implement
 sions effectively while minimizing false alarms in a federated
our system on a Raspberry Pi 4, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
 environment. Similarly, FL-Hermes MAP Rule achieves con-
 The Hermes Sim model consistently demonstrates a lower
 sistently strong detection performance across individual IoT
FPR compared to the CL approach, confirming its effectivedevices, even with distributed and heterogeneous local clients.
ness in reducing erroneous anomaly detections. Meanwhile,
 The ability of FL-Hermes to collaboratively train a global
the Hermes MAP variant excels in attack identification tasks,
 model that is then deployed to individual IoT devices ensures
achieving consistently high classification accuracy while maineffective detection of intrusion types in distributed and privacytaining competitive FPR values across all devices. These
 sensitive environments. The results validate FL-Hermes as a
experimental results highlight the robustness of Hermes in
 practical and robust solution for real-world intrusion detecdetecting anomalies, identifying attack types, and addressing
 tion scenarios in IoT environments, where data privacy and
zero-day attacks. Importantly, the results validate the practicaldistributed deployments are critical.
ity of deploying Hermes in resource-constrained environments,
showcasing its ability to operate effectively across a variety of
IoT devices and multi-application scenarios. E. Extended Experimental Evaluation
 To further evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we Table X reports a comprehensive comparison of Hermes
compare the performance of Hermes Sim with several base- against advanced deep learning baselines on three benchmark
line methods across multiple performance metrics, as shown in IDS datasets. Hermes achieves competitive accuracy across all
Fig. 6. Both Hermes Sim and CL demonstrate high levels of datasets, reaching 99.12% on CIC-IDS-2017, 100% on TONperformance across all metrics, including accuracy, recall, pre- IoT, and 89.17% on the challenging UNSW-NB15 dataset.
cision, and F1 scores, while maintaining consistently low FPR While LSTM slightly outperforms Hermes on CIC-IDS-2017
values. These comparisons underscore the superior capability in accuracy, Hermes consistently delivers substantially faster
of Hermes Sim in balancing robust detection performance inference. On TON-IoT, both Hermes and LSTM achieve
with minimal false alarms. perfect classification with zero false positives. The most
 2) FL-Hermes Evaluation: We extend the evaluation by notable gains are observed on UNSW-NB15, where Hermes
leveraging FL to collaboratively train a global model across outperforms all baselines by 1.48–4.31% in accuracy while
ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS 5393

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE (%) OF H ERMES ON THE N-BA I OT DATASET

 TABLE IX
 P ERFORMANCE (%) OF FL-H ERMES ON THE N-BA I OT DATASET

 TABLE X
P ERFORMANCE (%) OF H ERMES AND D EEP L EARNING BASELINES (CNN, LSTM, AND TF = T RANSFORMER ) ON R ECENT IDS DATASETS . VALUES A RE
 M EAN [95% CI] F ROM 1000 B OOTSTRAP S AMPLES . T IME I NDICATES AVERAGE I NFERENCE T IME IN M ILLISECONDS

 TABLE XI competing methods, highlighting its suitability for real-time
 S IGNIFICANCE T ESTS : H ERMES VS . BASELINES intrusion detection. Statistical significance tests (Table XI)
 ( T-T EST / W ILCOXON P -VALUES ) confirm that the observed performance differences are significant (p < 0.001). We further evaluate the training overhead
 of the proposed contrastive learning framework by comparing
 it with an MLP trained using cross-entropy loss under the
 same architecture and batch size. Leveraging in-mini-batch
 pairing and cached latent representations, Hermes incurs only
 a modest training time increase of 2.45×, 2.28×, and 2.59×
 on CIC-IDS-2017, TON-IoT, and UNSW-NB15, respectively.
 Combined with its lightweight geometry-guided feature learning, Hermes achieves a favorable balance between accuracy,
 inference efficiency, and training cost, making it practical for
 deployment across diverse IDS scenarios.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
maintaining high precision (98.41%). Across all datasets, In this paper, we proposed Hermes, a machine-learning-
Hermes achieves approximately 5–11× faster inference than based anomaly IDS that leverages geometric feature learning
5394 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

to improve detection accuracy and reduce false positives. By [15] C. Zhang, N. Wang, S. Shi, C. Du, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “MINDFL:
learning compact and discriminative feature representations, Mitigating the impact of imbalanced and noisy-labeled data in federated
 learning with quality and fairness-aware client selection,” in Proc. MIL-
Hermes unifies the strengths of anomaly-based and signature- COM - IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM), Oct. 2023, pp. 331–338.
based IDSs: it models normal traffic to detect deviations while [16] S. Anwar et al., “From intrusion detection to an intrusion response
incorporating known attack data to improve separability and system: Fundamentals, requirements, and future directions,” Algorithms,
enable attack classification. Extensive evaluations demonstrate vol. 10, no. 2, p. 39, Mar. 2017.
 [17] M. Bashendy, A. Tantawy, and A. Erradi, “Intrusion response systems
that Hermes achieves strong detection performance and effi- for cyber-physical systems: A comprehensive survey,” Comput. Secur.,
ciency, and is suitable for deployment on resource-constrained vol. 124, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 102984.
IoT devices. To address privacy and scalability concerns, [18] G. Dayanandam, T. Rao, D. B. Babu, and S. N. Durga, “DDoS attackswe further extended Hermes to a federated learning setting. analysis and prevention,” in Proc. 5th Innov. Comput. Sci. Eng. Cham,
 Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 1–10.
FL-Hermes enables distributed gateways to collaboratively [19] M. Yao, J. Fuller, R. P. Kasturi, S. Agarwal, A. K. Sikder, and
train IDS models without sharing raw traffic data, preserv- B. Saltaformaggio, “Hiding in plain sight: An empirical study of Web
ing privacy while benefiting from diverse local observations. application abuse in malware,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.,
Experimental results show that FL-Hermes maintains stable 2023, pp. 6115–6132.
 [20] R. Canzanese, “Cloud as a malware infiltration channel,” Comput. Fraud
detection performance across different client scales and data Secur., vol. 2023, no. 4, Apr. 2023.
distributions. While Hermes improves robustness and general- [21] H. Hindy, R. Atkinson, C. Tachtatzis, J.-N. Colin, E. Bayne, and
ization, it does not aim to provide definitive classification for X. Bellekens, “Utilising deep learning techniques for effective zero-day
zero-day attacks, which remain a long-standing challenge in attack detection,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 10, p. 1684, Oct. 2020.
 [22] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
intrusion detection. Enhancing interpretability and robustness O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
against adaptive adversaries is an important direction for future detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
work. pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
 [23] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions
 R EFERENCES in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383.
[1] C. Zhang et al., “Hermes: Boosting the performance of machine- [24] G. D’Angelo and F. Palmieri, “Network traffic classification
 learning-based intrusion detection system through geometric feature using deep convolutional recurrent autoencoder neural networks for
 learning,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Theory, Algorithmic Found., Protocol spatial–temporal features extraction,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 173,
 Design Mobile Netw. Mobile Comput., Oct. 2024, pp. 251–260. Jan. 2021, Art. no. 102890.
[2] S. Li, S. Shi, Y. Xiao, C. Zhang, Y. T. Hou, and W. Lou, “Bijack: [25] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning
 Breaking Bitcoin network with TCP vulnerabilities,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
 Res. Comput. Secur. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023, pp. 306–326. vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, Dec. 2022.
[3] M. Antonakakis et al., “Understanding the Mirai botnet,” in Proc. 26th [26] X. Zhang et al., “AOC-IDS: Autonomous online framework with con-
 USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1093–1110. trastive learning for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
[4] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban IDS: Commun., May 2024, pp. 581–590.
 An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT edge [27] X. Xu and L. Zheng, “Neural feature learning in function space,”
 devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, Aug. J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 25, no. 142, pp. 1–76, 2024.
 2020.
 [28] X. Xu and S.-L. Huang, “Maximal correlation regression,” IEEE Access,
[5] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and
 vol. 8, pp. 26591–26601, 2020.
 E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques,
 [29] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
 systems and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28,
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 Feb. 2009.
 data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, Fort
[6] V. Jyothsna, V. V. R. Prasad, and K. M. Prasad, “A review of anomaly
 Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
 based intrusion detection systems,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 28, no. 7,
 pp. 26–35, 2011. [30] P. Kairouz and H. B. McMahan, “Advances and open problems in
[7] O. Kopuklu, J. Zheng, H. Xu, and G. Rigoll, “Driver anomaly detection: federated learning,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, nos. 1–2,
 A dataset and contrastive learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. pp. 1–210, Jun. 2021.
 Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 91–100. [31] N. H. Tran, W. Bao, A. Zomaya, M. N. H. Nguyen, and C. S. Hong,
[8] Q. Yan, Y. Zheng, T. Jiang, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “PeerClean: Unveil- “Federated learning over wireless networks: Optimization model design
 ing peer-to-peer botnets through dynamic group behavior analysis,” and analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019,
 in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2015, pp. 1387–1395.
 pp. 316–324. [32] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
[9] B. Wang, Y. Zheng, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “DDoS attack protection in analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
 the era of cloud computing and software-defined networking,” Comput. Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., Jul. 2009, pp. 1–6.
 Netw., vol. 81, pp. 308–319, Apr. 2015. [33] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
[10] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
 “Conditional variational autoencoder for prediction and feature recovery Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018.
 applied to intrusion detection in IoT,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 9, p. 1967, [34] S. Rathore and J. H. Park, “Semi-supervised learning based distributed
 Aug. 2017. attack detection framework for IoT,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 72,
[11] H. H. Pajouh, G. Dastghaibyfard, and S. Hashemi, “Two-tier network pp. 79–89, Nov. 2018.
 anomaly detection model: A machine learning approach,” J. Intell. Inf. [35] Y. Yang, K. Zheng, C. Wu, and Y. Yang, “Improving the classification
 Syst., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 61–74, Feb. 2017. effectiveness of intrusion detection by using improved conditional varia-
[12] S. Rezvy, Y. Luo, M. Petridis, A. Lasebae, and T. Zebin, “An efficient tional AutoEncoder and deep neural network,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 11,
 deep learning model for intrusion classification and prediction in 5G and p. 2528, Jun. 2019.
 IoT networks,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), Mar. [36] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set
 2019, pp. 1–6. for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data
[13] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “MANDA: On set),” in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015,
 adversarial example detection for network intrusion detection system,” pp. 1–6.
 in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10. [37] H. H. Pajouh, R. Javidan, R. Khayami, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K.-
[14] N. Wang, S. Shi, Y. Chen, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “FeCo: Boosting intru- R. Choo, “A two-layer dimension reduction and two-tier classification
 sion detection capability in IoT networks via contrastive learning,” IEEE model for anomaly-based intrusion detection in IoT backbone networks,”
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 4215–4230, Jul. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 314–323, Apr.
 2025. 2019.
ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS 5395

[38] N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K.-R. Choo, “An ensemble intrusion [61] C. Li, X. Zeng, M. Zhang, and Z. Cao, “PyramidFL: A fine-grained
 detection technique based on proposed statistical flow features for client selection framework for efficient federated learning,” in Proc. 28th
 protecting network traffic of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw., Oct. 2022, pp. 158–171.
 J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4815–4830, Jun. 2019. [62] Y. Deng et al., “AUCTION: Automated and quality-aware client selec-
[39] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be tion framework for efficient federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
 identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?,” Distrib. Syst., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1996–2009, Aug. 2022.
 Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, Apr. 2011.
[40] C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou, and S. Gritzalis, “Intrusion
 detection in 802.11 networks: Empirical evaluation of threats and a public dataset,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 184–208,
 1st Quart., 2016.
[41] Y. Zhang et al., “Efficient and intelligent attack detection in software
 defined IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Embedded Softw. Syst.
 (ICESS), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–9.
[42] R. Fontes, S. Afzal, S. Brito, M. Santos, and C. Esteve Rothenberg,
 “Mininet-WiFi: Emulating software-defined wireless networks,” in Proc.
 11th Int. Conf. Netw. Service Manag., Nov. 2015, pp. 1–16.
[43] Y. Fan, Y. Li, M. Zhan, H. Cui, and Y. Zhang, “IoTDefender: A federated Chaoyu Zhang (Student Member, IEEE) received
 transfer learning intrusion detection framework for 5G IoT,” in Proc. the Bachelor of Science degree in electrical engi-
 IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng. (BigDataSE), Guangzhou, neering from Beijing University of Posts and
 China, Dec. 2020, pp. 88–95. Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2018, and
[44] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward the Master of Science degree in computer science
 generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic from Arkansas State University, Arkansas, USA, in
 characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
 pp. 108–116. computer science with Virginia Tech, USA, under
[45] N. Ravi and S. M. Shalinie, “Semisupervised-learning-based security to the supervision of Prof. Wenjing Lou. His research
 detect and mitigate intrusions in IoT network,” IEEE Internet Things J., focuses on machine learning security, network secuvol. 7, no. 11, pp. 11041–11052, Nov. 2020. rity, blockchain technology, and high-performance
[46] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet computing. He was a recipient of the Best Paper Award at IEEE CNS 2024.
 attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
 no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul. 2018.
[47] Q. Yan et al., “SpecMonitor: Toward efficient passive traffic monitoring
 for cognitive radio networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13,
 no. 10, pp. 5893–5905, Oct. 2014.
[48] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[49] T. D. Nguyen et al., “Dı̈oT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection
 system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst.
 (ICDCS), Aug. 2019, pp. 756–767.
[50] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and
 P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on Shanghao Shi (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 learning techniques,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, degree in telecommunication engineering from Beipp. 2671–2701, 3rd Quart., 2019. jing University of Posts and Telecommunications
[51] M. A. Al-Garadi, A. Mohamed, A. K. Al-Ali, X. Du, I. Ali, and in 2019 and the Ph.D. degree in computer sci-
 M. Guizani, “A survey of machine and deep learning methods for ence from Virginia Tech in 2025. He is currently
 Internet of Things (IoT) security,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, a Post-Doctoral Research Associate of computer
 no. 3, pp. 1646–1685, 3rd Quart., 2020. science with Washington University in St. Louis.
[52] B. Claise, “Cisco systems netflow services export version 9,” His research focuses on network security and infor-
 RFC, vol. 3954, pp. 1–33, 2004. [Online]. Available: https:// mation privacy, with particular interests in machine
 api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6125326 learning security and privacy, wireless security, and
[53] (2026). CICFlowmeter: A Network Traffic Flow Generator and CPS/IoT security.
 Analyzer. [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/research/
 applications.html#CICFlowMeter
[54] N. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Chen, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou,
 “FLARE: Defending federated learning against model poisoning attacks
 via latent space representations,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2607–2623, May 2025.
[55] I. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
 adversarial examples,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2014.
[56] R. Fotohi, F. Shams Aliee, and B. Farahani, “Decentralized and
 robust privacy-preserving model using blockchain-enabled federated
 deep learning in intelligent enterprises,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 161,
 Aug. 2024, Art. no. 111764.
[57] R. Fotohi, F. Shams Aliee, and B. Farahani, “A lightweight and Ning Wang received the B.E. degree in communicasecure deep learning model for privacy-preserving federated learning tion engineering and the M.S. degree in electronics
 in intelligent enterprises,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19, and communication engineering from Beijing Unipp. 31988–31998, Oct. 2024. versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
[58] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework China, in 2015 and 2018, respectively, and the
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int. Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from Virginia
 Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, pp. 1597–1607. Tech in 2023. She is currently an Assistant Pro-
[59] X. Xu and L. Zheng, “Multivariate feature extraction,” in Proc. 58th fessor with the Department of Computer Science
 Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2022, and Engineering, University of South Florida. Her
 pp. 1–8. current research interests include federated learning,
[60] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” J. Mach. anomaly detection, adversarial machine learning,
 Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, Nov. 2011. differential privacy, and LLM applications in cybersecurity.
5396 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 Xiangxiang Xu (Member, IEEE) received the Mark Gardner (Member, IEEE) is currently the
 B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering Network Research Manager of advanced research
 from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2014 computing with the Division of Information Techand 2020, respectively. He is currently an Assistant nology, Virginia Tech. His research interests include
 Professor of computer science with the University network monitoring and measurement, cybersecuof Rochester. Prior to joining the University of rity, virtualization, high-performance networking,
 Rochester, he was a Post-Doctoral Associate with the high-performance storage and file systems, research
 Department of EECS, MIT. His research focuses on computing, operating systems, and programming
 information theory, statistical learning, representa- languages, including interpreters and compilers.
 tion learning, and their applications in understanding
 and developing artificial intelligence and machine
learning algorithms. He was a recipient of the IEEE PES Student Prize
Paper Award in Honor of T. Burke Hayes and the Information Theory and
Applications (ITA) Workshop Sand Award.

 Shaoyu Li (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 B.S. degree from the College of Cyber Science,
 Nankai University, and the M.S. degree from the
 College of Science and Engineering, University of
 Glasgow. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree Y. Thomas Hou (Fellow, IEEE) received the
 with the Department of Computer Science, Virginia Ph.D. degree from the NYU Tandon School of
 Tech, under the supervision of Prof. Wenjing Lou. Engineering in 1998. He is currently the Bradley
 His research interests include network security and Distinguished Professor of electrical and computer
 blockchain. engineering with Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA,
 USA, where he joined in 2002. He has published over 400 papers in IEEE/ACM journals
 and conferences. He holds six U.S. patents. He
 has authored/co-authored two graduate textbooks,
 such as Applied Optimization Methods for Wireless
 Networks (Cambridge University Press, 2014) and
 Lizhong Zheng (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. Cognitive Radio Communications and Networks: Principles and Practices
 and M.S. degrees from the Department of Electronic (Academic Press/Elsevier, 2009). His current research focuses on developing
 Engineering, Tsinghua University, and the Ph.D. real-time optimal solutions to complex science and engineering problems
 degree from the Department of Electrical Engineer- arising from wireless and mobile networks. He is also interested in wireless
 ing and Computer Science, UC Berkeley. Since security. He was named an IEEE Fellow for contributions to the modeling
 2002, he has been with MIT, where he is currently a and optimization of wireless networks. His papers were recognized by 12
 Professor of electrical engineering and computer sci- best paper awards from IEEE and ACM, including the IEEE INFOCOM Test
 ence. His current research interests include statistics, of Time Paper Award in 2023. He was the Steering Committee Chair of the
 information theory, and their applications in data IEEE INFOCOM Conference and a member of the IEEE Communications
 science. He received the NSF CAREER Award, the Society Board of Governors. He served on the editorial boards of several
 AFOSR Young Investigator Award, and the IEEE IEEE and ACM transactions and journals. He was a Distinguished Lecturer
Information Theory Society Paper Award. He is an Area Editor of IEEE of the IEEE Communications Society.
T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION T HEORY.

 Randy Marchany (Member, IEEE) has been
 involved in the computer industry since 1972. He is
 currently the Virginia Tech Information Technology
 Security Officer and the Director of Virginia Tech
 IT Security Laboratory. He is the co-holder of three
 cybersecurity patents on moving target IPV6 defense
 and IDS via power monitoring. His research interests are in network security and forensics. He is a Wenjing Lou (Fellow, IEEE) is the W. C. English
 member of the Center for Internet Security (CIS) Endowed Professor of computer science with Virworking group that created version 8 of the CIS ginia Tech. Her research interests cover many topics
 Security Controls. He is a Former Member of the in the cybersecurity field, with her current research
Research, Education, Networking, Information Sharing, and Analysis Center interests focusing on wireless network security, trust-
(REN-ISAC) Board. He is an Executive Committee Member of Virginia Cyber worthy AI, blockchain, and security and privacy
Range. He is one of the founders of Virginia Alliance for Secure Computing problems in the Internet of Things (IoT) systems.
and Networking, a consortium of security practitioners and researchers from She is a Steering Committee Member of IEEE
the major universities in Virginia. He received the 2021 SANS Difference INFOCOM and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE
Maker Award. He was a recipient of the 2016 Shirley C. Payne IT Security C OMPUTING. She served as the Program Director
Advancement Award, the 2000 SANS Institute’s Security Technology Lead- for U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) from
ership Award, the 2003 VA Governor’s Technology Silver Award, a member 2014 to 2017. She is a Highly Cited Researcher by the Web of Science Group.
of the team that won the EDUCAUSE Excellence in Information Technology She received the Virginia Tech Alumni Award for Research Excellence in
Solutions Award in 2005, and a member of the Virginia Cyber Range Team 2018 and the INFOCOM Test-of-Time Paper Award in 2020. She was the
that won the 2017 Virginia Governor’s Technology Award for innovative use TPC Chair of IEEE INFOCOM 2019 and ACM WiSec 2020. She was the
of technology in education. Steering Committee Chair of the IEEE CNS Conference from 2013 to 2020.