This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 1

 HFLAD: AI-Driven Hierarchical Fusion Learning
 for Predictive Anomaly Detection in
 Consumer-Centric Systems
Wei Liu, Hongbo Zhao, Nan Chen, Xu Yang* (IEEE Member), Jiwu Shu* (IEEE Fellow), Hui Cui, Xiaoding
 Wang (IEEE Senior Member) and Md. Jalil Piran (IEEE Senior Member)

 Abstract—Audit logs, crucial for service auditing and security, security. As consumer devices become more interconnected
capture user and system activities, which can be effectively and autonomous, ensuring their behavioral reliability through
represented as multivariate time series data to enable efficient predictive anomaly detection is essential [1]–[3].
log analysis, such as behavior analytics for anomaly detection.
However, it is technically challenging to analyze such data Notably, consumer systems bear unique characteristics that
due to its high dimensionality and strong time correlation. To make early anomaly detection far more critical than in traaddress these challenges and enhance predictive security for con- ditional industrial or enterprise scenarios. For smart home
sumer applications, we propose an AI-driven anomaly detection ecosystems [4], for instance, a delayed response to anomalies
model named HFLAD. This model comprehensively considers in HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) sensor
the feature and time correlation of multivariate time series
data. It employs causal and dilated convolutions for encoding to data could lead to excessive energy consumption or equipment
capture multi-scale temporal dependencies, and utilizes an HVAE overheating[1]. In wearable devices, timely identification of
(Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder) generator for information irregularities in heart rate or blood glucose sensor streams
reconstruction. Then, it identifies anomalies by leveraging the is directly tied to user health—delays could result in missed
difference between the reconstructed data and the original data. warnings for potential medical emergencies, a risk emphasized
By leveraging hierarchical fusion learning, HFLAD proactively
detects deviations in consumer-related system activities and audit in studies of healthcare wearables where real-time anomaly
logs, aligning with modern security demands in smart devices, alerts improve clinical intervention timelines [5]. For mobile
IoT, and online services. Experimental results demonstrate that services, early detection of anomalous login patterns (e.g.,
HFLAD outperforms other existing techniques in identifying unrecognized locations or unusual device types) can block
anomalies, thereby improving the effectiveness of predictive account breaches before sensitive user data (such as payment
security measures for consumer systems.
 information or personal messages) is compromised, a capabil-
 Index Terms—Multivariate Time Series, Anomaly Detection, ity highlighted as critical for consumer privacy protection in
Feature Correlation, Time Correlation mobile security frameworks [6].
 Traditional approaches such as statistical methods (e.g.,
 I. I NTRODUCTION LOF and Gaussian mixture models) and machine learning
 techniques (e.g., clustering or density-based methods) have
 In consumer-facing systems such as smart appliances, wear- laid the foundation for anomaly detection [7]–[9]. However,
ables, and mobile services, audit logs and telemetry streams these methods often fail to fully capture the intricate temporal
are increasingly used to track user–device interactions and and feature-based interdependencies of multivariate time series
operational status. These data, typically modeled as multivari- data [10], which are particularly common in telemetry streams
ate time series, form the foundation for AI-driven predictive generated by smart consumer devices, such as home sensors,
 wearables, and IoT services.
 More recently, deep learning models like LSTM [11],
 This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant No. 62302203, and in part by the Science and VAE [12], and GAN [13] have demonstrated their ability to
Technology Project of State Grid Corporation of China under Grant No. 5700- model complex patterns, but they typically focus on either
202440239A-1-1-ZN. temporal or feature-based attributes, leading to incomplete
 Wei Liu, Hongbo Zhao and Jiwu Shu are with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen, and Wei Liu is also with representations. This limitation is especially problematic for
NARI Group Corporation/State Grid Electric Power Research Institute, predictive security in consumer environments, where anoma-
Nanjing, China, e-mail: liuwei5@stu.xmu.edu.cn, hbzhao@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lies may manifest through subtle, multi-dimensional interacshujw@tsinghua.edu.cn.
 Nan Chen and Xiaoding Wang are with College of Computer tions—such as coordinated behavior deviations, delayed fault
and Cyber Security, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, China, e-mail: accumulation, or cross-device anomalies [14]. Hence, there
qsx20221346@student.fjnu.edu.cn, wangdin1982@fjnu.edu.cn. is a pressing need for AI-driven models that can holistically
 Xu Yang and Jiwu Shu are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Minjiang University, Fuzhou, China, e-mail: xu.yang@mju.edu.cn. integrate temporal dynamics and feature relationships to en-
 Hui Cui is with the Department of Software Systems & Cybersecurity, able early and accurate identification of abnormal behavior in
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, e-mail: hui.cui@monash.edu. consumer-facing applications.
 Md. Jalil Piran is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sejong University, Seoul, South Korea. e-mail: piran@sejong.ac.kr. Existing anomaly detection models for multivariate time
 Corresponding Authors: Xu Yang and Jiwu Shu series primarily encode either feature correlations or temporal

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 2

dynamics but often neglect their joint modeling, leading to the do not require prior distribution assumptions. Although statisfollowing limitations: tical methods are interpretable and efficient for small datasets,
 Isolated Modeling: Most approaches focus on feature cor- they often struggle with scalability and high-dimensional data
relations or temporal dependencies in isolation, which limits complexity.
the ability to fully represent the interdependencies and complexity inherent in multivariate time series data [15], [16].
 B. Machine Learning Methods
 Single Time-Scale Modeling: Short time-span encodings
often miss critical long-term dependencies, while long time- Machine learning techniques extend statistical methods by
span encodings may overlook local patterns. This reliance on introducing more flexible and adaptive algorithms. Densitya single time scale prevents effective modeling of inter-scale based methods, such as LOF [7], identify anomalies by
temporal impacts [17]. measuring the density of local neighborhoods. Distance-based
 To address these challenges, we propose HFLAD, a hier- approaches [20] flag anomalies based on deviations from proxarchical fusion learning-based anomaly detection model that imity thresholds. These methods can effectively detect outliers
captures both temporal trends and latent feature dependen- but are often sensitive to parameter tuning and computationally
cies. HFLAD leverages multiscale time encoders and a re- intensive for large-scale datasets.
lational feature extractor to model normal system behavior
and identifies anomalies based on reconstruction deviation. C. Deep Learning Methods
This design enables predictive detection of subtle behavioral
 Deep learning has driven significant advancements in
shifts in consumer-centric systems before service disruption
 anomaly detection, particularly for complex, high-dimensional
or security compromise occurs. The key contributions of this
 multivariate time series. Prediction-based models, such as
work include:
 LSTM-NDT [11] and HilBERT [21], forecast time series data
 (1) We propose a predictive anomaly detection framework
 and use prediction errors to detect anomalies. Reconstruction-
 (HFLAD) designed for multivariate time series data,
 based methods, including LSTM-VAE [12] and DAGMM [8],
 particularly suited for consumer-centric systems such as
 learn latent representations to reconstruct input data, identismart home platforms and mobile services. It integrates
 fying anomalies as reconstruction errors. GAN-based models,
 temporal modeling and relational reasoning to address
 such as MAD-GAN [22], use adversarial training to implicitly
 complex behavior monitoring needs.
 model normal data distributions and detect deviations [23].
 (2) We design a hierarchical fusion architecture that in-
 While these approaches have achieved success, most focorporates a multiscale time encoder and latent relacus on either temporal dependencies or feature correlations,
 tional modeling via a structured recurrent neural network
 limiting their ability to comprehensively model multivariate
 (SRNN), enabling proactive detection of subtle and
 time series. Recent efforts, such as OmniAnomaly [13] and
 evolving anomalies.
 InterFusion [10], have attempted joint modeling of temporal
 (3) We implement and evaluate HFLAD on four real-world
 and feature information. However, challenges remain in capdatasets, demonstrating its superior detection perforturing inter-scale temporal patterns and complex inter-variable
 mance across multiple anomaly types and scenarios. The
 relationships.
 results highlight its effectiveness in early identification
 In recent years, methods based on Transformers and reof risks in consumer-facing applications.
 lated temporal modeling have significantly advanced robust
 Extensive experiments conducted on public datasets confirm anomaly detection [24], [25] for high-dimensional multithat HFLAD achieves state-of-the-art performance in anomaly variate time series. Addressing the scarcity of anomalous
detection, surpassing existing methods while providing inter- samples, Anomaly Transformer [26] proposes the ”adjacency
pretable results. concentration bias” hypothesis, computes association discrep-
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
 ancies via an anomaly-attention mechanism, and amplifies
reviews related work, Section III details the proposed HFLAD
 the discriminability between normal and anomalous samples,
model, Section IV evaluates its performance, and Section VI
 achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) results across multiple sceconcludes this article.
 narios. TimesNet [27] innovatively transforms 1D time series
 II. R ELATED W ORK into 2D tensors, integrating 2D convolutions with adaptive
 Fourier transforms to capture multi-scale temporal patterns,
 Anomaly detection for multivariate time series has evolved
 demonstrating outstanding performance on non-stationary infrom statistical approaches to machine learning and deep learndustrial data. Dual-TF [28] adopts a dual-branch Transformer
ing techniques. A summary of their advantages and limitations
 architecture to process time-domain and frequency-domain
is provided in Table I.
 data in parallel, enhancing detection accuracy for noisy in-
A. Statistic-based Methods dustrial scenarios.
 Statistical anomaly detection methods typically fit data to
a predefined distribution and identify deviations as anoma- III. T HE S TRUCTURE OF HFLAD
lies. Parametric approaches, such as Gaussian mixture mod- Our anomaly detection model, HFLAD, reconstructs multiels [18], assume that data follow fixed distributions, while non- variate time series data to uncover abnormal patterns deviating
parametric techniques, such as kernel density estimation [19], from normal distributions. Unlike general data, multivariate

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 3

 TABLE I
 A DVANTAGES AND L IMITATIONS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS

 Method Advantages Limitations
 Statistic-based (Parametric) Simple, reusable Assumes fixed distribution
 Statistic-based (Non-parametric) Flexible, adaptive Greater complexity
 Density-based (ML) Identifies low-density anomalies Sensitive to density thresholds
 Distance-based (ML) Effective for local patterns Parameter-dependent
 Prediction-based (DL) Good at time series forecasting Relies on representation learning
 Reconstruction-based (DL) Extracts informative latent features Complex latent space learning
 GAN-based (DL) Implicit modeling of normal data Difficulty overcoming mode collapse

time series possess two defining characteristics: temporal
 xt at
dependencies and feature correlations. Effective anomaly detection requires jointly modeling both attributes, which many
 xt-1 at-1
existing methods fail to address.
 As shown in Figure 1, the proposed model consists of three xt-2 at-2
key modules: .
 .
 Hidden .
 .
 Hidden
 ...
 .
 .
 Hidden .
 .
 . Layer 1 . Layer 2 . Layer n .

 ● Hierarchical Time Encoder: Captures multi-scale tempo- x3 a3
 ral patterns using causal, dilated, and temporal convolutional networks. x2 a2
 ● Feature Encoder: Extracts inter-variable relationships
 with dimensionality reduction. x1 a1

 ● HVAE-Based Generator: Reconstructs the original input
 by combining multi-level latent representations. Fig. 2. Causal Convolution

 Hierarchical Time Encoder Feature Encoder x̂ computes the encoded output a = {a1 , a2 , ..., aT } with K
 hidden layers is computed as:
 Causal Convolution a zt-1 zt zt+1 z1
 K
 x HVAE at = ∑ hk xt−k (1)
 Dilated Convolution b dt-1 dt dt+1 z2 Generative k=1
 Module

 Temporal Convolutional
 where K is the kernel size and hk denotes the filter coc yt-1 yt yt+1 z3
 Networks
 efficients. This operation efficiently captures local temporal
 dependencies and provides a foundation for hierarchical encoding. In Algorithm 1, g1 (∗) serves as the causal convolution
Fig. 1. Model Architecture module to generate the encoded sequence a.
 2) Dilated Convolution: To capture long-term dependencies, dilated convolution expands the receptive field by introducing a dilation rate l. As depicted in Figure 3, dilated
A. Hierarchical Time Encoder convolution shares the causal convolution architecture but
 introduces dilation rate l within convolutional hidden layers.
 The time encoding module processes input data X ∈ RM ×T , For input x, the encoded output with K hidden layers is given
where M represents the feature dimension and T denotes by:
the time series length. This module integrates three tech- K
niques—causal convolution, dilated convolution, and temporal bt = ∑ hk xt−kl . (2)
convolutional networks (TCN)-to capture both short- and long- k=1

term temporal patterns. The receptive field span (K − 1)l + 1, allowing information
 1) Causal Convolution: As shown in Figure 2, the causal from distant time points to be encoded efficiently. By adjusting
convolutional network module can be divided into input, l and K, the encoder dynamically balances between local and
hidden, and output layers. The hidden layers, which is the global information. In Algorithm 1, g2 (∗) serves as the dilated
key module, perform time series encoding. Causal convolution convolution module to generate the encoded sequence b.
ensures the output at time t depends only on the current and 3) Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN): TCNs intepreceding inputs, respecting temporal causality. Given input grate causal and dilated convolutions(DC) with additional enx = {x1 , x2 , ..., xT } over time T , the causal convolution hancements, such as weight normalization(WN), dropout, and

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 4

 Output b B. Feature Encoder
 l=8
 Hidden After the Hierarchical Time Encoder generates multi-scale
 l=4
 temporal feature sequences a, b, and c via causal convolution,
 Hidden
 l=2 dilated convolution, and TCN, these sequences are fed into
 Hidden
 l=1
 the Feature Encoder as independent inputs y (e.g., y = a =
 {a1 , a2 , ..., aT }). The core goal of this module is to map
 Input x
 these temporal features to latent variables z1 , z2 , and z3 (via
 the mapping function g4 (∗)) while preserving inter-variable
Fig. 3. Dilated Convolution
 relationships and reducing dimensionality. To achieve this,
 we adopt an adapted State-Space Recurrent Neural Network
 (SRNN) architecture that integrates state space models with
ReLU activation, ensuring stable training and better scalability. recurrent neural networks, enabling joint encoding of feature
The TCN outputs c are computed hierarchically, combining and temporal dependencies.
information across multiple temporal scales: At each time step t, the SRNN computes the hidden state
 dt and random latent variable zt by balancing the update of
 tmp(x) = Dropout (ReLU (WN (DC (x)))) (3) new information and retention of historical states. The hidden
 state dt is defined as:
 K
 ct = ∑ wk (tmp (tmp(x)))t−lk + x (4) dt = f (ut , dt−1 ) + (1 − ut )d′t , (5)
 k=1
 where ut is the update gate that controls how much new
 where wk are learnable weights and b is the bias term. As information is integrated, d′t is the temporary state capturing
shown in Figure 4, TCN effectively captures both local and current input features, and f is a learned transition function.
long-term dependencies, making it a critical component of To compute ut and d′t , we introduce the reset parameter
the hierarchical time encoder. In Algorithm 1, g3 (∗) serves rt that regulates the influence of the previous hidden state
as the temporal convolution network to generate the encoded dt−1 . The update gate ut and reset parameter rt are calculated
sequence c. using the sigmoid activation function σ (which outputs values
 between 0 and 1) as:

 Dropout ut = σ(An yt + Bn zt + Cn dt−1 + biasn ), (6)

 ReLU rt = σ(Ar yt + Br zt + Cr dt−1 + biasr ). (7)
 Here, An , Bn , Cn (and analogous matrices for rt ) are learnable parameters, and biasn (and biasr ) are bias matrices
 WeightNorm that adjust the linear transformations of the input yt , latent
 variable zt , and previous hidden state dt−1 .The temporary
 Dilated state d′t is then computed using the tanh activation function
 Concolution (which constrains values between -1 and 1) to introduce non-
 + c linearity, with the reset parameter rt modulating the contribution of dt−1 via element-wise multiplication (⊙):
 Dropout

 d′t = tanh(Ad yt + Bd zt + rt ⊙ (Cd dt−1 ) + biasd ), (8)
 ReLU
 To model the statistical distribution of latent variables, we
 assume the joint distribution of z and d follows a sequential
 probabilistic structure, where each time step’s variables depend
 WeightNorm on the previous step’s state:
 pθ (z, d∣y, z0 , d0 ) = pθz (z∣d, z0 )pθd (d∣y, d0 )
 Dilated
 x T (9)
 Concolution = ∏ pθz (zt ∣zt−1 , dt )pθd (dt ∣dt−1 , yt )
 t=1

Fig. 4. Temporal Convolutional Network. It captures local and long term with z0 and d0 initialized as zero vectors to provide a
dependencies, serving as a key part of the hierarchical time encoder to generate starting point for the sequence.We further specify that the
c.
 conditional probability of zt given zt−1 and dt follows a
 Gaussian distribution, as Gaussian distributions effectively

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 5

model continuous latent spaces and enable efficient learning: conditional probability of x given latent variables to the joint
 and posterior probabilities:
 pθz (zt ∣zt−1 , dt ) = N(zt , µt , σt2 I), (10)
 pθ (x, z1 , z2 , z3 )
where µt (mean) and σt2 (variance) are dynamically updated pθ (x̂) = , (17)
 pθ (z1 , z2 , z3 ∣x)
by two feedforward neural networks N N1 and N N2 that
take zt−1 and dt as inputs: This formulation ensures that x̂ adheres to the same distribution as the original input x by leveraging the hierarchical
 µt = N N1 (zt−1 , dt ), σt2 = N N2 (zt−1 , dt ). (11) latent structure to capture both local and global data patterns.
 The HVAE’s architecture (illustrated in Fig.5) enables chain
 To optimize the model parameters θ = {θz , θd }, we maxi- conduction between latent variables: z3 (highest-level, commize the log-likelihood of the latent variables given the input plex features) influences z2 , which in turn guides z1 (lowestdata, ensuring the model learns meaningful latent representa- level, fine-grained features). This structure ensures that the
tions: fused latent representation comprehensively encodes all critical dependencies, enabling precise reconstruction of x̂ for
 τ (θ) = ∑ log pθ (zm ∣ym , zm m
 0 , d0 ), (12) normal data and noticeable deviations for anomalies.
 m

 where m indexes individual data points. For further refinement of hidden state dynamics, we simplify the transition
function f to fθd (parameterized by θd ): z3
 dt = fθd (yt , dt−1 ), (13)
and define the likelihood of dt using a regularization function φ to prevent overfitting and stabilize training: z2
 pθd (dt ∣dt−1 , yt ) = min(φ(dt − fθd (dt ))), (14)

C. HVAE-Based Generator
 The Hierarchical Time Encoder and Feature Encoder colz1
lectively produce three latent representations z1 , z2 , and z3 ,
each capturing distinct multi-scale temporal and feature dependencies. The HVAE-Based Generator’s role is to fuse
these hierarchical latent variables and reconstruct the original x̂
input x into x̂, following the pipeline:
 x → {z1 , z2 , z3 }, {z1 , z2 , z3 } → x̂.
 Fig. 5. Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder (HVAE) Generative Module
 The quality of this reconstruction directly determines Architecture. Hierarchical latent variables (z1 , z2 , z3 ) interaction for precise
 x̂ reconstruction.
anomaly detection performance—anomalous data
(unseen during training) will have larger discrepancies
between x and x̂ than normal data.To achieve effective fusion
and reconstruction, we employ a HVAE [29], which organizes D. Model Training Algorithm
latent variables into a hierarchical structure to model the
 To optimize the model parameters and align the distributions
intrinsic distribution of raw data. The key insight is to
 of reconstructed data x̂ and original data x, we design a
impose a probabilistic chain structure on the latent variables,
 loss function Γloss based on reconstruction accuracy and KL
where higher-level latent variables (capturing complex, global
 divergence:
patterns) guide the distribution of lower-level variables
(capturing fine-grained, local features). This hierarchical Γloss = Epθ (x̂) Eqφ (z∣x) [log pθ (x∣z)]
 (18)
dependency is formalized as: −E[KL(qφ (z∣x)∥pθ (z))]
 pθ (z1 , z2 ) = pθ (z1 ∣z2 )pθ (z2 ). (15) The training algorithm alternates between encoding time
 and feature representations and reconstructing x̂ via HVAE.
 Extending this to all three latent variables, the joint proba-
 Parameters θ and φ are updated using stochastic gradient
bility of the input x and latent variables z1 , z2 , z3 is decomdescent to minimize Γloss . The whole training process is
posed into a product of conditional probabilities, reflecting the
 detailed in Algorithm 1.
hierarchical fusion process:
pθ (x, z1 , z2 , z3 ) = pθ (x∣z1 , z2 , z3 )pθ (z1 ∣z2 , z3 )pθ (z2 ∣z3 )pθ (z3 ).
 (16) E. Abnormal Score
 From this joint probability, we derive the distribution of the During training, reconstruction deviations guide parameter
reconstructed data x̂ using Bayes’ theorem, which relates the updates. For anomaly detection, we quantify abnormalities

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 6

Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm Air Force local area network environment, including 7
Input: Datasets x weeks of training data and 2 weeks of test data. Anomaly
Output: Encoding distribution qφ (z∣x), reconstruction distri- types are subdivided into 4 major categories (DOS, R2L,
 bution pθ (x̂), parameter spaces θ and φ U2R, PROBING) with a total of 39 types, which can
Initialize φ, θ for e ← 0 to n do effectively verify the model’s ability to identify network
 // n is number of iterations attack behaviors.
 // time encoding stage ● ASD [10]: Constructed based on 45 days of operation
 a ← g1 (x) ; // g1 : causal convolution monitoring data from 12 servers. Anomaly types mainly
 b ← g2 (x) ; // g2 : dilated convolution include server performance degradation, resource overc ← g3 (x) ; // g3 : TCN load, and service response delay, which are consistent
 // feature encoding stage with the actual operation and maintenance monitoring
 z1 , z2 , z3 ← g4 (a, b, c) ; // g4 : feature encoder scenarios of server clusters in data centers.
 // reconstruction stage Key statistics of the datasets, including the sizes of trainx̂ ← h(z1 , z2 , z3 ) ; // h: HVAE ing/test set, number of dimensions (NoD), and anomaly rates
 Floss ← Calculate loss as Eq. 18 Update φ, θ via stochas- (ANR), are summarized in Table II. Each dataset contains distic gradient descent tinct anomaly types, such as cyberattacks, sensor malfunctions,
end intrusion attempts, and system degradations, reflecting realreturn θ, φ world challenges in service auditing and security.

 TABLE II
using a reconstruction-based anomaly score. Poor reconstruc- T HE DETAIL OF DATASETS
tion on anomalous data results in higher scores, indicating
deviations from normal patterns. Dataset Training set Test set NoD ANR(%)
 The anomaly score is defined as:
 SWaT 475200 449919 51 12.13
 Eqϕ (z1 ,z2 ,z3 ∣x) [log pθ (x∣z1 , z2 , z3 )] MSL 58317 73729 27 * 55 10.72
 1 M (19) KDD 56139 24602 34 5.69
 i i i
 = ∑[log pθ (x∣z1, z2, z3, )] ASD 102331 51840 19 4.61
 M i=1
Data points with scores exceeding a threshold λ are classified Performance metrics include:
as anomalous, as they represent patterns unseen during train- ● Precision (P): Fraction of predicted positives that are true
ing. This score effectively quantifies model uncertainty and positives, P = T PT+F P
 .
 P
highlights deviations in new data. ● Recall (R): Fraction of actual positives correctly predicted, R = T PT+F P
 N
 .
 IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION ● F1 Score: Harmonic mean of precision and recall, F1 =
 This section evaluates HFLAD’s performance on multivari- R
 2 PP+R .
ate time series datasets, including comparisons with state-of- ● AUC: Evaluates model discrimination ability, where
the-art models, analysis of detection capabilities on different higher values indicate better performance with fewer false
anomaly types, complexity evaluations, and ablation studies. positives.

A. Datasets and Experimental Setup B. Comparison with State-of-the-Art Models
 HFLAD is evaluated on four public multivariate time series HFLAD is compared with the following benchmarks:
datasets: ● MSCRED [32]: Uses ConvLSTM networks with atten-

 ● SWaT [30]: Water recycling system with 7 days of normal tion to model inter-variable correlations.
 operation and 4 days of attack, which can simulate ● MAD-GAN [22]: Leverages LSTM-based GANs for

 changes in multivariate time series under scenarios such anomaly detection.
 as equipment anomalies and malicious attacks in indus- ● InterFusion [10]: Fuses temporal modeling and ensemble

 trial environments. It is a classic benchmark dataset for learning.
 anomaly detection in the industrial control field. ● TFAD [33]: Utilizes time-frequency analysis for feature

 ● MSL [11]: It records sensor perception data (e.g., ambi- extraction.
 ent temperature, equipment voltage) and actuator status Performance Results:
 data during the operation of the Mars Rover. Anomaly ● SWaT: HFLAD improves InterFusion’s F1 score by 2.5%
 types mainly include sensor malfunctions and equipment and AUC by 2.51%.
 operation deviations, which align with the requirements ● MSL: HFLAD advances by 3.39% in F1 score and 3.09%
 for equipment reliability and anomaly prediction in the in AUC.
 aerospace field. ● ASD: Gains of 2.01% in both F1 score and AUC.
 ● KDD-Cup99 [31]: Constructed based on 9 weeks of ● KDD-Cup99: HFLAD exceeds InterFusion by 1.66% in
 network connection data collected by simulating the U.S. both metrics.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 7

 TABLE III
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF M ODELS ACROSS DATASETS

 SWaT MSL ASD KDD-Cup99
 Method
 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
 MSCRED 0.9041 0.8392 0.8698 0.8894 0.9106 0.8993 0.9121 0.8923 0.9020 0.9318 0.9229 0.9273
 MAD-GAN 0.8493 0.8821 0.8653 0.8295 0.7898 0.8089 0.9254 0.9345 0.9299 0.9226 0.9536 0.9378
 InterFusion 0.9182 0.9231 0.9206 0.9002 0.9207 0.9102 0.9513 0.9584 0.9548 0.9624 0.9715 0.9669
 TFAD 0.9121 0.8604 0.8855 0.8558 0.9097 0.8819 0.8982 0.9181 0.9079 0.9284 0.9397 0.9339
 Ours 0.9391 0.9526 0.9458 0.9528 0.9298 0.9409 0.9719 0.9783 0.9751 0.9826 0.9842 0.9834

Fig. 6. The AUC values comparison of models Fig. 7. F1 score of model in three abnormal modes of ASD dataset

 Detailed Analysis: Performance Analysis:
 ● MSCRED: Focuses solely on temporal patterns, neglect- ● MSCRED and TFAD: Detect time trend anomalies effecing inter-variable dependencies, resulting in suboptimal tively due to their emphasis on temporal modeling.
 performance. ● MAD-GAN: Performs better on sequence correlation
 ● MAD-GAN: Excels at capturing sequence correlations anomalies by leveraging inter-variable dependencies.
 but overlooks time-series dynamics. ● InterFusion: Fuses temporal and feature information, out-
 ● InterFusion: Combines temporal and feature modeling but performing MSCRED, TFAD, and MAD-GAN.
 lacks hierarchical depth, limiting its capacity to capture ● HFLAD: Surpasses all benchmarks, demonstrating its
 multi-scale dependencies. ability to detect diverse anomaly types through hierar-
 ● TFAD: Emphasizes time-frequency analysis, suitable for chical temporal modeling and feature encoding.
 specific types of anomalies but less robust for diverse These results highlight HFLAD’s capability to model both
 patterns. local and global dependencies, ensuring accurate detection of
 HFLAD Advantage: The hierarchical time encoder and complex anomaly patterns.
feature modeling in HFLAD provide comprehensive anomaly
characterization, resulting in robust performance across D. Time and Space Complexity Analysis
datasets.
 Time Complexity: The time complexity of HFLAD is determined by the operations in hierarchical time encoding, feature
C. Detection of Different Anomaly Types encoding, and reconstruction with HVAE:
 The ASD dataset includes three types of anomalies: ● Hierarchical Time Encoding: For n time-series points and
 ● Time Trend Anomalies: Deviations from historical pat- t time scales, assuming linear operations at each time
 terns. scale, the time complexity is O(nt).
 ● Sequence Correlation Anomalies: Changes in inter- ● Feature Encoding: Assuming a linear transformation of
 variable relationships. the d-dimensional data, the time complexity is O(nd).
 ● Bimodal Anomalies: A combination of trend and corre- ● Reconstruction (HVAE): If the HVAE model has l layers
 lation deviations. with a maximum of m nodes per layer, the time com-
 Figure 7 compares detection performance on these anomaly plexity for one data point is O(lmn). For n data points,
types, and visualizes the results. the total time complexity is O(nlmn).

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 8

 TABLE IV
 R ESULTS OF ABLATION EXPERIMENT

 SWaT MSL ASD KDD-Cup99
 Method
 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
 A 0.8753 0.8931 0.8842 0.8921 0.9137 0.9028 0.9214 0.9235 0.9225 0.9344 0.9234 0.9288
 B 0.8989 0.8832 0.8911 0.9123 0.9035 0.9078 0.9032 0.8978 0.9005 0.8997 0.9168 0.9188
 C 0.9112 0.8725 0.8914 0.9232 0.8956 0.9091 0.9304 0.9445 0.9374 0.9521 0.9412 0.9466
 Ours 0.9404 0.9538 0.9471 0.9541 0.9314 0.9426 0.9715 0.9680 0.9718 0.9822 0.9789 0.9824

Thus, the overall time complexity of HFLAD is O(nt + nd + ●Scheme C: HFLAD outperforms Scheme C on all four
nlmn). datasets, with F1-score improvements of 0.0559 (SWaT),
 Space Complexity: The space complexity of HFLAD in- 0.0335 (MSL), 0.0423 (ASD), and 0.0396 (KDD-Cup99).
cludes the storage for the time-series data, encoded features, When Scheme C replaces the HVAE generator with a
and HVAE model parameters: basic decoder, its simplistic reconstruction capability fails
 ● Time-series Data: For n data points, each with d dimen- to capture complex data patterns, limiting anomaly desions, the storage requirement is O(nd). tection performance. Taking KDD-Cup99 network traffic
 ● Encoded Features: If the encoded feature space has p data as an example, complex attack traffic patterns cannot
 dimensions, the space required for storing the encoded be accurately reconstructed by the basic decoder, while
 features is O(np). the HVAE generator of HFLAD can learn complex data
 ● HVAE Model Parameters: For a model with l layers and distributions.
 m nodes per layer, the storage required is O(lm). Summary: These findings validate the necessity of
Therefore, the overall space complexity is O(nd + np + lm). HFLAD’s components. The hierarchical temporal modeling,
 feature encoding, and HVAE generator synergistically enhance
E. Ablation Studies anomaly detection in multivariate time series.
 To evaluate the contributions of HFLAD’s components, we
conduct ablation experiments with the following variants:
 ● Scheme A: Replace the time encoder with a simple
 LSTM.
 ● Scheme B: Remove the feature encoder entirely.
 ● Scheme C: Replace the HVAE generator with a basic
 decoder.
 Results and Analysis: By selectively replacing or removing
key modules, we can quantify each component’s contribution
to anomaly detection performance. Table IV and Figure 8
illustrate the impact of these modifications:
 ● Scheme A: HFLAD (Ours) outperforms Scheme A on
 all four datasets, with F1-score improvements of 0.0629
 (SWaT), 0.0398 (MSL), 0.0532 (ASD), and 0.0554
 (KDD-Cup99). Scheme A’s LSTM time encoder fails to
 capture hierarchical multi-scale temporal dependencies
 (e.g., simultaneous fine-grained pressure surges, flow rate Fig. 8. F1 Score of model ablation experiment
 fluctuations, and coarse-grained temperature in SWaT),
 reducing anomaly detection accuracy, while Ours’ hierarchical time encoder models multi-scale dependencies in V. D ISCUSSION
 parallel. This study focuses on consumer-centric systems (e.g., smart
 ● Scheme B: HFLAD outperforms Scheme B on all four homes, wearables, IoT devices), where user interaction logs,
 datasets, with F1-score improvements of 0.0559 (SWaT), sensor readings, and device operational metrics often contain
 0.0398 (MSL), 0.0812 (ASD), and 0.0374 (KDD-Cup99). sensitive information. Therefore, from the perspective of pri-
 When Scheme B completely removes the feature en- vacy preservation, this paper discusses the applicability of the
 coder, the model fails to capture multivariate collaborative HFLAD model in real-world scenarios to address the gap. To
 anomaly patterns due to the lack of inter-variable relation- address this, HFLAD can be adapted to federated learning (FL)
 ship modeling. In ASD, abnormal correlations between and differential privacy (DP) as follows:
 CPU usage, memory utilization cannot be effectively For FL, a two-tier decentralized framework aligns with
 identified, while the feature encoder of the HFLAD HFLAD’s modular design: resource-constrained consumer deexplicitly learns inter-variable associations. vices train lightweight local sub-models (e.g., simplified TCNs

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 9

in the Hierarchical Time Encoder, compact HVAE decoders) [8] Bo Zong, Qi Song, Martin Renqiang Min, Wei Cheng, Cristian
using on-device data, edge servers aggregate local parameter Lumezanu, Daeki Cho, and Haifeng Chen. Deep autoencoding gaussian
 mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection. In International
updates via weighted federated averaging without centralizing conference on learning representations, 2018.
raw data, and only high-confidence anomaly flags are shared [9] Gen Li and Jason J Jung. Deep learning for anomaly detection
for verification. in multivariate time series: Approaches, applications, and challenges.
 Information Fusion, 91:93–102, 2023.
 For DP, Gaussian noise is added to aggregated FL param- [10] Zhihan Li, Youjian Zhao, Jiaqi Han, Ya Su, Rui Jiao, Xidao Wen, and
eters during server-side aggregation, and Laplacian noise is Dan Pei. Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation
injected into local anomaly scores to meet (ε, δ)-DP guar- using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding. In Proceedings
 of the 27th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery & data
antees—with noise scales calibrated to balance privacy and mining, pages 3220–3230, 2021.
detection performance (F1-score drops ≤ 6% on SWaT/ASD [11] Kyle Hundman, Valentino Constantinou, Christopher Laporte, Ian Coldatasets). well, and Tom Soderstrom. Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms
 and nonparametric dynamic thresholding. In Proceedings of the 24th
 These adaptations, combined with parameter pruning to ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data
reduce on-device overhead, enable HFLAD to retain its mining, pages 387–395, 2018.
multi-scale temporal modeling and hierarchical reconstruction [12] Daehyung Park, Yuuna Hoshi, and Charles C Kemp. A multimodal
strengths while complying with regulations and protecting anomaly detector for robot-assisted feeding using an lstm-based variational autoencoder. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 3(3):1544–
consumer privacy, making it viable for real-world deployment 1551, 2018.
in smart homes, wearables, and IoT services. [13] Ya Su, Youjian Zhao, Chenhao Niu, Rong Liu, Wei Sun, and Dan Pei.
 Robust anomaly detection for multivariate time series through stochastic
 recurrent neural network. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD
 VI. C ONCLUSION international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pages
 In this paper, we proposed HFLAD, a hierarchical fusion 2828–2837, 2019.
 [14] Xingguo Jiang, Hong Luo, Yan Sun, and Mohsen Guizani. Fast anomaly
learning-based framework for predictive anomaly detection in detection for iot services based on multisource log fusion. IEEE Internet
multivariate time series. The model integrates multiscale tem- of Things Journal, 11(6):9405–9419, 2023.
poral encoding, latent dependency reasoning, and a hierarchi- [15] Cheng Wang and Hangyu Zhu. Wrongdoing monitor: A graph-based
 behavioral anomaly detection in cyber security. IEEE Transactions on
cal variational reconstruction module to detect abnormal sys- Information Forensics and Security, 17:2703–2718, 2022.
tem behaviors. Through extensive experiments on benchmark [16] Hengrun Zhang, Kai Zeng, and Shuai Lin. Federated graph neural
datasets, HFLAD demonstrated robust performance across network for fast anomaly detection in controller area networks. IEEE
various anomaly types and datasets. By capturing subtle de- Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 18:1566–1579,
 2023.
viations in time-evolving consumer behavior logs, HFLAD [17] Min Cheng, Qian Xu, LV Jianming, Wenyin Liu, Qing Li, and Jianping
addresses the growing need for predictive AI security in smart Wang. Ms-lstm: A multi-scale lstm model for bgp anomaly detection. In
homes, wearable devices, and mobile services. Its modular 2016 IEEE 24th international conference on network protocols (ICNP),
 pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016.
design and general applicability make it suitable for deploy- [18] Xingwei Yang, Longin Jan Latecki, and Dragoljub Pokrajac. Outlier
ment in diverse consumer-oriented scenarios. Future work detection with globally optimal exemplar-based gmm. In Proceedings
will focus on real-time adaptation and edge deployment for of the 2009 SIAM international conference on data mining, pages 145–
 154. SIAM, 2009.
resource-constrained consumer platforms, along with privacy- [19] M Pavlidou and G Zioutas. Kernel density outlier detector. In Topics
preserving learning extensions to ensure secure and scalable in Nonparametric Statistics: Proceedings of the First Conference of
integration. the International Society for Nonparametric Statistics, pages 241–250.
 Springer, 2014.
 [20] Eamonn Keogh, Jessica Lin, Ada Waichee Fu, and Helga Van Herle.
 R EFERENCES Finding unusual medical time-series subsequences: Algorithms and
[1] Shujiang Xie, Lian Li, and Yian Zhu. Anomaly detection for multivariate applications. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in
 time series in iot using discrete wavelet decomposition and dual graph Biomedicine, 10(3):429–439, 2006.
 attention networks. Computers & Security, 146:104075, 2024. [21] Shaohan Huang, Yi Liu, Carol Fung, He Wang, Hailong Yang, and
[2] Mohammed Ayalew Belay, Sindre Stenen Blakseth, Adil Rasheed, and Zhongzhi Luan. Improving log-based anomaly detection by pre-training
 Pierluigi Salvo Rossi. Unsupervised anomaly detection for iot-based hierarchical transformers. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 2023.
 multivariate time series: Existing solutions, performance analysis and [22] Dan Li, Dacheng Chen, Baihong Jin, Lei Shi, Jonathan Goh, and Seefuture directions. Sensors, 23(5):2844, 2023. Kiong Ng. Mad-gan: Multivariate anomaly detection for time series
[3] Usama Tahir, Muhammad Kamran Abid, Muhammad Fuzail, and Naeem data with generative adversarial networks. In International conference
 Aslam. Enhancing iot security through machine learning-driven anomaly on artificial neural networks, pages 703–716, 2019.
 detection. VFAST Transactions on Software Engineering, 12(2):01–13, [23] Dongyang Zhan, Kai Tan, Lin Ye, Xiangzhan Yu, Hongli Zhang, and
 2024. Zheng He. An adversarial robust behavior sequence anomaly detection
[4] Xuan Dai, Jian Mao, Jiawei Li, Qixiao Lin, and Jianwei Liu. Home- approach based on critical behavior unit learning. IEEE Transactions
 guardian: Detecting anomaly events in smart home systems. Wireless on Computers, 2023.
 Communications and Mobile Computing, 2022(1):8022033, 2022. [24] Shaohan Huang, Yi Liu, Carol Fung, He Wang, Hailong Yang, and
[5] D Pavithra, T Parameswaran, Mani Choudhry, S Amrutha, T Deepa, Zhongzhi Luan. Improving log-based anomaly detection by preand R Kiruthiga. Application of lstm networks for continuous patient training hierarchical transformers. IEEE Transactions on Computers,
 monitoring and anomaly detection in wearable health devices. Indian J. 72(9):2656–2667, 2023.
 Sci. Technol, 17(37):3909–3921, 2024. [25] Defu Cao, Wen Ye, Yizhou Zhang, and Yan Liu. Timedit: General-
[6] Viraaji Mothukuri, Prachi Khare, Reza M Parizi, Seyedamin Pouriyeh, purpose diffusion transformers for time series foundation model. arXiv
 Ali Dehghantanha, and Gautam Srivastava. Federated-learning-based preprint arXiv:2409.02322, 2024.
 anomaly detection for iot security attacks. IEEE Internet of Things [26] Jiehui Xu, Haixu Wu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Anomaly
 Journal, 9(4):2545–2554, 2021. transformer: Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy.
[7] Markus M Breunig, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Raymond T Ng, and Jörg arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02642, 2021.
 Sander. Lof: identifying density-based local outliers. In Proceedings [27] Haixu Wu, Tengge Hu, Yong Liu, Hang Zhou, Jianmin Wang, and
 of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of Mingsheng Long. Timesnet: Temporal 2d-variation modeling for general
 data, pages 93–104, 2000. time series analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02186, 2022.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3663615

 10

[28] Youngeun Nam, Susik Yoon, Yooju Shin, Minyoung Bae, Hwanjun Xu Yang is currently an Associate Professor with the
 Song, Jae-Gil Lee, and Byung Suk Lee. Breaking the time-frequency School of Cyber Security and Engineering, Minjiang
 granularity discrepancy in time-series anomaly detection. In Proceedings University, China. He received the Ph.D. degree
 of the ACM Web Conference 2024, pages 4204–4215, 2024. from the School of Science, RMIT University, Aus-
[29] Jakub Tomczak and Max Welling. Vae with a vampprior. In International tralia, with Data61, CSIRO in 2021, and used to
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1214–1223. be a Postdoctoral Researcher with Fujian Normal
 PMLR, 2018. University. He has published 50+ papers in major
[30] Aditya P Mathur and Nils Ole Tippenhauer. Swat: A water treatment conferences/journals, such as IEEE TDSC, TSC,
 testbed for research and training on ics security. In 2016 international TIFS, TC, InfoCom, etc. His research interests inworkshop on cyber-physical systems for smart water networks (CySWa- clude cryptography and information security.
 ter), pages 31–36. IEEE, 2016.
[31] Richard Lippmann, Joshua W Haines, David J Fried, Jonathan Korba,
 and Kumar Das. The 1999 darpa off-line intrusion detection evaluation.
 Computer networks, 34(4):579–595, 2000.
[32] Chuxu Zhang, Dongjin Song, Yuncong Chen, Xinyang Feng, Cristian
 Lumezanu, Wei Cheng, Jingchao Ni, Bo Zong, Haifeng Chen, and Jiwu Shu received the PhD degree in computer
 Nitesh V. Chawla. A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly science from Nanjing University, in 1998, and findetection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data. In Proceedings ished the postdoctoral position research with Tsof the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pages 1409–1416. inghua University, in 2000. Since then, he has been
 AAAI Press, 2019. teaching with Tsinghua University, and currently he
[33] Chaoli Zhang, Tian Zhou, Qingsong Wen, and Liang Sun. Tfad: A is also the president of Minjiang university. His
 decomposition time series anomaly detection architecture with time- current research interests include storage security
 frequency analysis. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International and reliability, non-volatile memory based storage
 Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pages 2497– systems, and parallel and distributed computing.
 2507, 2022.

 Hui Cui received her PhD from University of Wollongong, Australia. Before joining the Department
 Wei Liu is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the Depart- of Software Systems and Cybersecurity, Faculty of
 ment of Computer Science and Technology, Xiamen IT, Monash University, Australia, she was a lecturer
 University. He is currently an Senior Engineer of at Murdoch University, Australia. Prior to that, she
 NARI Group Corporation/State Grid Electric Power worked as a research fellow first at Singapore Man-
 Research Institute, Nanjing, China. His research agement University, Singapore, and then at RMIT
 interests include deep learning, information security, University, Australia and Data61, CSIRO, Australia.
 operating system, and security of power industry
 control system.

 Xiaoding Wang (Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree from the College of Mathematics
 and Informatics, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou,
 China,in 2016. He is currently a Professor with
 Hongbo Zhao is currently a Master of Artificial Fujian Normal University. His research interests
 Intelligence student with the Institute of Artificial include network optimization and fault tolerance.
 Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. His
 research interest is artificial intelligence.

 Md. Jalil Piran (S’10, M’16, SM’21) is an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Sejong University, Seoul,
 South Korea. He earned his Ph.D. in Electronics
 and Information Engineering from Kyung Hee University in 2016, followed by a postdoctoral fellowship focused on intelligent communication and data-
 Nan Chen is currently pursuing the M.S. de- driven systems. His research spans AI, Machine
 gree in Network and Information Security from the Learning, Deep Learning, Big Data Analytics, intel-
 School of Computer and Cyberspace Security, Fujian ligent, and data-centric systems. He has published
 Normal University. His current research focuses on extensively and serves in editorial roles for IEEE
 anomaly detection and artificial intelligence security. TITS and Engineering Applications of AI, among others, while holding leadership positions in IEEE technical committees and international conferences.
 A Senior Member of IEEE, he represented South Korea at the ISO/IEC
 MPEG standardization body and is a frequent keynote speaker on AI, machine
 learning, and next-generation communication systems. His awards include the
 2025 Research Excellence Professor Award (Sejong University), the 2017
 Scientist Medal of the Year (IAAM, Sweden), and the 2016 Dissertation of
 the Year Award in Engineering (Iran).

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.