3144 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 HKD-Net: Hierarchical Knowledge Distillation
 Based on Multi-Domain Feature Fusion for
 Efficient Network Intrusion Detection
 Zhaoping Li , Student Member, IEEE, Mingshu He , Member, IEEE, and Xiaojuan Wang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—We propose HKD-Net, a hierarchical knowledge detection (NID) technology has emerged, aiming to detect
distillation network based on multi-domain feature fusion, for and identify malicious activities within networks to provide
efficient network intrusion detection on resource-constrained robust security safeguards for cyberspace [3], [4], [5]. Howedge devices. The framework incorporates dedicated feature
extraction modules across temporal, frequency, and spatial ever, NID systems face significant challenges in balancing
domains, and introduces a dynamic gating mechanism for detection accuracy with computational efficiency, especially
adaptive feature fusion, resulting in a more discriminative and on resource-constrained edge devices.
comprehensive feature representation. Moreover, a hierarchi- Compared to traditional machine learning methods, deep
cal distillation mechanism is designed that not only preserves learning demonstrates powerful automatic feature extraction
soft labels from the output layer but also aligns intermediate
features from spatial, temporal, frequency, and fused domains, capabilities when handling large-scale intrusion traffic, making
enabling efficient knowledge transfer from a large teacher model it widely adopted in the field of NID. Currently, researchers
to a compact student model. Through knowledge distillation, have employed various deep learning models to study NID,
the final lightweight model requires only 278,580 parameters, including convolutional neural networks (CNN) [6], long
reducing the number of parameters by approximately 74.68% short-term memory networks (LSTM) [7], and multi-scale
compared to the teacher, while maintaining high detection accuracy. Extensive experiments on three public datasets (Kitsune, temporal convolutional networks (TCN) [8], among others.
CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw2020, and CICIoT2023) demonstrate that In the temporal dimension, since the introduction of recur-
HKD-Net outperforms five state-of-the-art methods, achieving rent neural network (RNN) models, they have been widely
accuracies of 96.72%, 97.19%, and 87.19%, respectively, while applied in the field of sequential data processing [9]. However,
reducing parameters by 74.68% and maintaining low computa- time-domain-based methods often fail to effectively utilize
tional cost.
 frequency characteristics and are prone to interference.
 Index Terms—Network traffic anomaly detection, knowledge In the frequency domain, existing studies typically apply
distillation, multi-domain feature, deep learning, network intru- spectral or time-frequency transformations—such as the 2D
sion detection.
 Fourier transform [10], the combined fast Fourier transform
 I. I NTRODUCTION and continuous wavelet transform [11], and the discrete
 wavelet transform (DWT) integrated into Transformer archi-
W ITH the rapid development of network technology and
 the increasing complexity of network attack methods,
network intrusions have become increasingly covert, frequent,
 tectures [12]to convert time-series traffic data into frequency
 representations. These methods leverage the concentrated
 nature of low-frequency components and the distributed
and advanced [1]. In recent years, organized and targeted
 characteristics of high-frequency bands to enhance feature
cyberattacks, such as data breaches, cyberfraud, and rancontinuity and discriminability, thereby improving the perforsomware, have become frequent, posing severe challenges to
 mance of intrusion detection models. In the spatial domain,
cybersecurity [2]. To address these threats, network intrusion
 extracting spatial features using CNN has become a cutting-
 Received 29 August 2025; revised 7 January 2026; accepted 20 February edge method [13]. Regarding feature fusion, Yao et al. [14]
2026. Date of publication 27 February 2026; date of current version 17 March adopted the cross-layer feature fusion of the CNN and LSTM
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science to separately obtain global and periodic features.
Foundation of China under Grant 62402053 and Grant 62227805, and in
part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under While recent efforts have integrated multi-domain fea-
Grant 2025KYQD17 (BUPT). The associate editor coordinating the review of tures or adopted knowledge distillation (KD) for lightweight
this article and approving it for publication was T. Wauters. (Corresponding
author: Mingshu He.)
 intrusion detection, they still exhibit notable limitations.
 Zhaoping Li and Xiaojuan Wang are with the School of Cyberspace Secu- For instance, methods like Dual-Modal Intrusion Detection
rity, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing System(DM-IDS) [19] fuse dual-modal features via bilinear
100876, China (e-mail: 2024010404@bupt.edu.cn; wj2718@bupt.edu.cn). attention but employ static fusion strategies, lacking adapt-
 Mingshu He is with the School of Cyberspace Security and the Key
Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service, Ministry ability to diverse attack patterns. TFTKD [10] leverages
of Education, BUPT, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: hemingshu@bupt. frequency-domain transformation and output-layer distillation
edu.cn).
 Data is available on-line at https://github.com/lzp8341/HKD-Net.git
 yet overlooks intermediate feature representations, restrict-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3668812 ing knowledge transfer depth. Similarly, MT-Security [20]
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LI et al.: HKD-Net: HIERARCHICAL KD BASED ON MULTI-DOMAIN FEATURE FUSION 3145

combines raw-byte and graph features but relies on complex A. DL-Based Traffic Anomaly Detection Methods
architectures unsuitable for edge deployment. Deep learning technology has demonstrated significant
 To address these problems, we propose a hierarchical advantages in handling large-scale intrusion traffic due to
knowledge distillation network based on multi-domain feature its powerful automatic feature extraction capabilities and
fusion, termed HKD-Net. The framework adopts a hierarchical has therefore been widely applied in the NID field [15].
distillation strategy that aligns features from both the final Current research trends indicate that multi-domain feature
output and intermediate layers across the spatial, temporal, extraction methods are shifting from single-feature analysis
and frequency domains. On this basis, a dynamic gating toward multi-domain collaboration to more comprehensively
mechanism is introduced for adaptive fusion of cross domain capture abnormal patterns in network traffic [16]. For instance,
features, thereby constructing a more discriminative and com- Xu et al. [17] introduced a channel attention mechanism
prehensive feature representation. This fine-grained alignment to dynamically weight spatio-temporal-frequency features in
ensures that the student model learns the rich semantic, struc- industrial anomaly detection. Kotak et al. [18] employed
tural, and contextual information embedded in the teacher’s V-NTC (VPN-encrypted Network Traffic Classification), a
intermediate features, rather than merely mimicking its final sliding-window time-series approach with InceptionTime, to
decisions. Furthermore, by employing a dynamic balancing classify VPN-encrypted traffic at both category and applicamechanism based on learnable weights, the training process tion levels. Zha et al. [19]proposed DM-IDS, a dual-modal
automatically adjusts the relative importance of alignment attention–CNN architecture that fuses flow and binary-encoded
losses at different levels, which achieves self-optimization payload features via bilinear fusion. Yang et al. [20] introof distillation. This method significantly enhances distillation duced MT-Security, which fuses raw-byte and graph-based
performance while maintaining a lightweight architecture, interaction features to classify encrypted malicious traffic.
offering a lightweight and efficient solution for resource- D’Angelo et al. [22] employed CRAE-Net (Convolutionalconstrained environments. In summary, this paper’s main Recurrent AutoEncoder Network), a stacked CNN-LSTM
contributions are as follows: sparse-autoencoder architecture, to distill spatial–temporal fea-
 • HKD-Net is proposed to overcome the limitations of tures from raw traffic statistics. While these methods improve
 traditional single-feature extraction methods. The model accuracy through complex multi-domain feature extraction,
 can extract the spatial-temporal-frequency stream features numerous rely on serial multi-network architectures that
 in parallel and adaptively weight the contributions of increase computational cost and memory consumption, limdifferent modalities based on attack characteristics, which iting their applicability in resource-constrained environments.
 constructs a more discriminative and comprehensive feature space.
 • The hierarchical knowledge distillation framework sys- B. Knowledge Distillation for Lightweight NID
 tematically transfers the intermediate features of the Deep learning-based light weight methods have been
 teacher model to the student model by establishing align- applied to NIDSs. Ayyat et al. [21] present ClassyNet, a
 ment at multiple intermediate semantic levels, such as class-aware early-exit network that prioritizes high-priority
 spatial, temporal, frequency, and fusion features, while threats for low-latency edge-side detection. Das et al. [23]
 maintaining the soft labels of the output layer. This propose a lightweight incremental IDS combining OCSVM
 approach enables a deeper and more structured form of with adaptive random forest to enable streaming detection
 knowledge transfer. and real-time blocking in underwater sensor networks. The
 • The dynamic balancing mechanism based on learn- aforementioned deep learning methods adopted lightweight
 able weights can adaptively calibrate the contribution structures, while the limited representa tion ability astricts the
 of multi-level distillation losses according to training accuracy performance and makes the models sustain the risk
 dynamics. Compared to static weight allocation, this of poor generalization ability.
 strategy addresses the rigidity of fixed weighting schemes Recently, Knowledge distillation (KD) is an effective techby dynamically adjusting the weights of each feature nique for compressing large models by transferring knowledge
 modality during the optimization process. from a teacher to a lightweight student model while preserving
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II performance. Traditional response-based KD uses soft labels
reviews related work on deep learning-based intrusion detec- from the teacher’s output layer to supervise the student via
tion and knowledge distillation. Section III presents the KL divergence. Zhao et al. [24] first introduced KD into NID,
proposed algorithms. Section IV presents the analysis and proposing a lightweight model using separable convolutions.
results of the experiments conducted. In Section V,wediscuss Wang et al. [25] combined a triple-state CNN with K-fold
the strengths and limitations, and present future directions of cross-training, though such methods often lose structural and
our work. Last, we summarize our work in Section VI. semantic information from intermediate layers, limiting generalization in fine-grained detection tasks. Feature-based KD
 II. R ELATED W ORK addresses this by aligning intermediate feature representa-
 In this section, we provide a concise review of the relevant tions between teacher and student. Wang et al. [26] used a
literature on network traffic anomaly detection from two spatio-temporal residual network to transfer feature extraction
methodological perspectives: deep learning approaches and capabilities. Ding et al. [27] incorporated knowledge alignment
knowledge distillation techniques. and correlation modules to improve structured knowledge
3146 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. Architecture of HKD-Net. The teacher model extracts and fuses multi-domain (spatial, temporal, frequency) features, the student model learns
through hierarchical distillation, and the hierarchical distillation module aligns both output logits and intermediate features across domains to achieve efficient
knowledge transfer.

transfer. AL-Nomasy et al. [28] built a Transformer-based and replacing IP addresses with random values while preservteacher with selective gradient distillation to transfer spatio- ing their directionality. Subsequently, we extract M adjacent
temporal context features for IoT traffic detection. packets from each flow and format them into an H × W two-
 Despite these advances, efficient transfer of multi-level dimensional matrix as the flow representation.
features and maintaining high accuracy in lightweight models The matrix directly encodes raw byte values while adhering
remain challenging. Our work addresses these limitations to a hierarchical structure:
by proposing a hierarchical knowledge distillation network • Byte-level: Each row contains only one type of traffic
(HKD-Net) with multi-domain feature fusion, enabling effi- bytes (header or payload).
cient and accurate lightweight network intrusion detection. • Packet-level: Each packet is represented by its header and
 payload sub-matrices.
 III. M ETHODS • Flow-level: M packet-level matrices are sequentially
 stacked to form the final MFR matrix.
A. Network Traffic Anomaly Detection Framework
 By leveraging this preprocessing method, we effectively
 In this section, we propose HKD-Net, a lightweight network capture hierarchical traffic characteristics, providing hightraffic anomaly detection framework based on hierarchi- quality input for subsequent multi-domain feature fusion and
cal knowledge distillation with multi-domain feature fusion. knowledge distillation.
As shown in Figure 1, we construct a teacher model consisting of a three-modal feature extraction module (1D-VIT
time domain encoder, SE-ResNet spatial encoder, and wavelet C. Teacher Model
frequency domain encoder), as well as a dynamic chan- The teacher model is a core component of the multi-domain
nel attention gating. This design enables high-accuracy feature fusion network intrusion detection framework proposed
joint optimization across domains. The lightweight student in this paper. The objective of its design is to construct a
model employs depth-wise separable convolutions and a high-performance feature representation system by integrating
simplified ViT, and learns via a hierarchical distillation strat- feature extraction modules from the temporal, spatial, and
egy. By synergistically transferring multi-modal knowledge frequency domains. The model consists of four key modules: a
and dynamically weighting feature alignments, HKD-Net temporal domain feature extraction module, a spatial-domain
effectively balances detection accuracy with computational feature extraction module, a frequency-domain feature extracefficiency. tion module, and a dynamic feature fusion module. These
 modules collaborate to extract and fuse multi-domain features
 of network traffic data, providing high-quality feature repre-
B. Data Preprocessing sentations for subsequent knowledge distillation.
 Inspired by the Multi-level Flow Representation (MFR) 1) Temporal Domain Feature Extraction: The temporal
design in YaTC [29] we adopt a structured matrix-based feature extraction module captures time series characteristics
approach for data preprocessing. First, raw network traffic is in network traffic data. This is crucial for identifying timepartitioned into individual flows based on IP addresses, port dependent attack patterns. Aiming at the long time-series
numbers, and protocol types to preserve flow-level context. dependency characteristics of network traffic data, this paper
To eliminate potential biases, we standardize the traffic by designs an improved one-dimensional Vision Transformer
removing Ethernet headers, resetting port numbers to zero, (1D-ViT) architecture, as shown in Figure 2 The inputs of
LI et al.: HKD-Net: HIERARCHICAL KD BASED ON MULTI-DOMAIN FEATURE FUSION 3147

 Fig. 3. Frequency domain feature extraction module utilizing Discrete Wavelet
 Transform with Daubechies-4 basis. The module decomposes traffic signals
 into low-frequency (LL) and high-frequency (LH,HL,HH) subbands, followed
Fig. 2. Temporal feature extraction module based on a lightweight 1D Vision
 by energy normalization and convolutional processing.
Transformer. The module processes sequential traffic data with multi-head
self-attention and outputs a 64-dimensional temporal feature vector.

 2) Spatial Domain Feature Extraction: The spatial domain
this module are time series numbers according to T ∈ R , n×d feature extraction module employs an improved SE-ResNet
where n denotes the time step and d is the feature dimension. architecture to capture local spatial features from network
The original features are mapped to the embedding space traffic data, such as protocol fields and packet length statistics.
through a linear projection layer: This variant of ResNet integrates parallel multi-scale convolution with a channel attention mechanism (SE module) to
 E = XWe + P (1) mitigate the gradient vanishing problem through residual connections, thereby yielding more refined feature representations.
where We ∈ Rd×dmodel is the learnable projection matrix A multi-scale convolutional branch is first constructed:
(dmodel = 64) and P ∈ Rn×dmodel is the position encoding
matrix whose element values are generated by the following Fmulti = [Conv3×1 (X); Conv5×1 (X); Conv7×1 (X)] (6)
equation: A channel attention mechanism is then incorporated to dynam-
 
 i
  ically adjust channel weights via the Squeeze-and-Excitation
 Epos (i, 2j) = sin , (2) (SE) module:
 100002j/d
   H X W
 i 1 X
 Epos (i, 2j + 1) = cos (3) zc = uc (i, j) (7)
 100002j/d H × W i=1 j=1
 The relative positional relationship of timing information s = σ (W2 δ (W1 z)) (8)
can be effectively preserved by this positional encoding
method. where δ denotes the ReLU activation function, σ is the
 The multi-head attention mechanism is the core component Sigmoid function, and the compression ratio r = 16.
of the Transformer model’s encoder. It’s main purpose is to The module adopts a three-level residual structure. The final
find relevant information in the input sequence and perform output is a 128-dimensional spatial feature vector Fs ∈ R128 ,
weighted summarization to produce the output sequence. Each which contains complete spatial information from low-level
group of attention mechanisms is called a “head”, and each protocol features to high-level behavioral patterns.
head learns a different representation and concatenates and 3) Frequency Domain Feature Extraction: The frequency
projects these representations to obtain the final representa- domain feature extraction module aims to capture potential
tion. In this paper, we use a lightweight multi-head attention periodic patterns and sudden anomalies in network trafstructure as follows: fic, which are often difficult to identify effectively in time
 and space domain analysis. This module combines Discrete
 MultiHead(Q, K, V) = Concat(head1 , . . ., headh )Wo (4) Wavelet Transform (DWT) with deep learning methods to
 realize multi-resolution frequency domain analysis. Figure 3
 headi = Attention(QWiQ , KWiK , VWiV )
 shows the architecture of the frequency domain feature extrac-
 (5)
 tion module.
where the number of attention heads h = 4, much less than The Daubechies-4 wavelet basis function is first used to
the standard ViT configuration (usually 8-12 heads), and the decompose the input signal at multiple levels, the wavelet
dimension of each head dk = 16. With this streamlined decomposition submodule:
design, the computational complexity is reduced to O(4nd2 ).
 [LL, (LH, HL, HH)] = pywt.dwt2(x,0 db40 ) (9)
The module finally performs feature abstraction through two
tandem Transformer blocks and uses global average pooling Specifically, the input signal is decomposed into multiple
to generate a 64-dimensional temporal domain feature vector subbands using the Daubechies-4 wavelet basis function,
Ft ∈ R64 . which yields one low-frequency approximation component
3148 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

(LL), which reflects the overall trend of the flow, and three significantly reducing computational complexity while retainhigh-frequency detail components (LH, HL, HH), which effec- ing the feature extraction capabilities of convolutional neural
tively capture abrupt traffic changes and anomalous pulses. networks. The processing flow is as follows:
Furthermore, a wavelet coefficient energy normalization layer
 DepthwiseConv(X) = Depthwise(X) ∗ Wdepthwise + b, (15)
is introduced:
 bi = q Ci
 C (10) Pointwise(X) = Conv1×1 (X) ∗ Wpointwise (16)
 PN 2
 C
 j=1 j this design reduces the number of parameters of
 2
 
 This layer effectively eliminates the interference caused standard convolution from  O k × Cin × C out · to ·
by amplitude differences across traffic samples, thereby O k 2 × Cin + Cin × Cout , which significantly reduces the
enhancing the model’s cross-scenario generalization capa- model complexity.
bility. The module ultimately outputs a 256-dimensional The 1D Vision Transformer (ViT) in the temporal domain
frequency domain feature vector, which, together with the retains only a single-layer Transformer block and 2 attention
spatial and temporal features, constitutes a comprehensive heads, using global average pooling to replace the fully
multi-domain representation system. connected layer. This results in a 64-dimensional time-domain
 4) Dynamic Feature Fusion: To effectively integrate multi- feature vector Ftemporal ∈ R64 , reducing computation by
domain features from the temporal, spatial, and frequency more than 60%. The frequency domain processing branch
domains, HKD-Net employs a dynamic feature fusion strategy uses a truncated wavelet transform strategy, performing onebased on a gating mechanism. This strategy enables the level Daubechies-1 wavelet decomposition on the input signal
model to adaptively select and combine features from different and preserving the low-frequency LL subbands. The subband
domains, enhancing its ability to characterize complex network coefficients are processed by a 3 × 3 convolution kernel with
traffic patterns. shared weights, and the 64-dimensional frequency domain fea-
 Firstly, the features are projected to a uniform dimension tures are generated by global pooling. This lightweight design
by 1 × 1 convolution: ensures that the student model can be efficiently deployed on
 resource-constrained edge devices.
 Fbk = Wk Fk , k ∈ {t, s, f } (11) 2) Efficient Fusion Module: The student model’s fusion
where Wk ∈ Rdk ×256 is the projection matrix ensuring all module employs a dynamic gating mechanism to integrate
features are in the same dimension space. The gated weight multi-domain features adaptively. Given spatial domain feanetwork uses a two-layer fully connected structure: tures fs ∈ Rds , temporal features ft ∈ Rdt and frequency
   h i domain features ff ∈ Rdf , they are first projected to a unified
 g = δ W2 · δ W1 Fbt ; Fbs ; Fbf (12) dimension using linear transformations:
 egk fei = Wi fi + bi , i ∈ {s, t, f } (17)
 wk = P (13)
 j∈{t,s,f } egj du ×di
 where Wi ∈ R are learnable projection matrices. The
where δ is the ReLU activation function, and W1 and W2 gating network then calculates modality weights:
are weight matrices. The final fusion feature is obtained by a
weighted sum and residual connection: w = Softmax(W2 δ(W1 [fes ; fet ; fef ] + b1) + b2) (18)
 X h i where W1 ∈ R3du ×dm and W2 ∈ Rdm ×3 are weight matrices,
 Ffused = wk Fbk + Wr Fbk ; Fbs ; Fbf (14)
 and δ is the ReLU activation function. The final fused features
 k∈{t,s,f }
 are obtained by:
Wr ∈ R768×256 is the residual projection matrix. This  
structure preserves the distinctiveness of each modality while X
 ffused = LayerNorm  wi fei + Wr [fs ; ft ; ff ] (19)
enhancing inter-feature interactions.
 i∈{s,t,f }

D. Student Model where Wr [fs ; ft ; ff ] are used to supplement the original
 feature interaction information. This design not only maintains
 The student model consists of a lightweight and effi- the discriminative combination of multi-domain features, but
cient spatiotemporal network structure, which integrates multi also enhances the robustness of features through cross-modal
domain information through deep separable convolution, connections.
simplified Transformer architecture, and efficient wavelet processing, and finally through a dynamic gating fusion module.
 1) Lightweight Feature Extraction: The student model E. Hierarchical Knowledge Distillation
employs a lightweight and efficient spatiotemporal network Hierarchical knowledge distillation is an effective model
structure, integrating multi-domain information through deep compression technique designed to migrate knowledge from
separable convolution, simplified Transformer architecture, the teacher model to the lightweight student model. The
and efficient wavelet processing. In the spatial domain branch, framework consists of three core components: softened-label
Depthwise Separable Convolution is used instead of standard distillation at the output layer, alignment of the intermediate
convolution. This technique decomposes traditional convo- feature layer, and adaptive loss weighting, which form an endlution operations into depthwise and pointwise convolution, to-end knowledge learning to ensure that the student model
LI et al.: HKD-Net: HIERARCHICAL KD BASED ON MULTI-DOMAIN FEATURE FUSION 3149

maintains performance close to that of the teacher model while 3) Total Loss Function: In order to dynamically balance the
significantly reducing computational complexity. importance of different distillation objectives, we propose an
 1) Output Layer Distillation (Softened Labels): Using the adaptive loss function based on learnable weights. A vector
standard knowledge distillation loss of the output layer, this of trainable weight parameters is first introduced θ ∈ R4 ,
loss utilizes the softmax of the temperature scale to generate which generates a normalized weight distribution by softmax
softening labels from the teacher model. The student model function:
is trained to mimic this softened output distribution, thereby exp(θk )
inheriting the teacher’s inter-class relational knowledge. The wk = P4 , k = 1, 2, 3, 4 (25)
distillation loss is defined by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) diver- j=1 exp(θj )

gence: ! where the four weight components correspond to the loss
 C (s)
 X (s) pi terms of spatial features wspa , temporal domain features wtmp ,
 LKL = pi log (20)
 (t)
 pi frequency domain features wf re and fusion features wf us .
 i=1
 Based on the generated weights, the contribution of each
 (s) (t)
where pi and pi represent the temperature-scaled softmax feature alignment term is dynamically adjusted to form a
probabilities of the student and teacher models for the i-th weighted feature loss:
class, respectively, and C is the total number of categories. X (k)
The temperature parameter T>1 smooths the probability dis- LFeat = wk · LMSE (26)
tribution, facilitating more effective knowledge transfer. k∈{spa,tmp,f e,f is}

 2) Feature Layer Alignment: The feature layer alignment (k)
 each feature loss term LMSE calculates the mean square error
mechanism breaks through the limitation of traditional disof the teacher and student models on the corresponding feature
tillation that only focuses on the output layer, and realizes
 space. This dynamic weighting mechanism exhibits adaptive
deep knowledge migration through multi-level feature mapcharacteristics for attack types, enabling the model to autoping. Aiming at the differences in feature dimensions of the
 matically focus on the most relevant feature dimensions for
intermediate layer of the teacher-student model, the spindledifferent attack modes. The final total loss function balances
shaped MLP adapter is invoked to carry out the dynamic
 the three types of critical losses through the hyperparameter
dimensionality transformation at, and its loss function is
 α (set to 0.5 by default):
defined as:
 1 XX
 H W 2 LTotal = αLCE + (1 − α)LKL + βLFeat (27)
 spa spa
 Lspa = φspa (ftea )ij − φspa (fstu )ij
 HW i=1 j=1 2 above equation achieves the organic integration of three types
 (21) of key loss functions: the cross-entropy classification loss LCE
where φspa is the feature adapter and HW is the feature ensures that the student model maintains its base recognition
map dimension. The time-domain feature alignment module capability, the temperature-scaled KL dispersion distillation
focuses on the temporal features of the ViT output, and realizes loss LKL is responsible for migrating the knowledge of the
the feature space mapping through a learnable projection teacher model’s decision boundaries, and the weighted feature
matrix: loss LFeat (β = 1) improves the generalization performance of
 T the student model by aligning the multilevel representations.
 1X tmp tmp 2
 Ltmp = Wtmp ftea,t − Wtmp fstu,t 2
 (22) These three are dynamically balanced by the hyperparameter
 T t=1 α, and the network parameters and trainable weight parameter
where Wtmp ∈ R64×d is the dimension transformation matrix θ are synchronously optimized during back propagation to
and T denotes the timing length. Frequency domain feature form a training mechanism with adaptive properties.
alignment combines wavelet transform and neural network,
firstly, DWT is performed on the input signal to obtain four IV. E XPERIMENTS AND E VALUATION
subbands, LL, LH, HL, and HH, and then frequency domain A. Experimental Setting
features are aligned by the adapter φf re :
 1) Experimental Environment: The simulation experi-
 2
 Lf re = kφf re (DW T (ftea )) − φf re (DW T (fstu ))kF (23) ment are Implemented on a device with Intel Xeon (R)
 W-2255 GHz, NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 and 128 GB
 The highest level of fusion feature alignment then directly
 RAM, which equipped with Ubuntu 20.04.1 LTS, PyCharm
matches the comprehensive characterization generated by the
 2021.1.2 × 64, Python 3.8, and Tensorflow 2.10.0. The GPU
dynamic gating network:
 is NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti 11 GB.
 1 2 2) Datasets: Our experiments utilized three benchmark
 Lf is = kφf is (gtea ) − φf is (gstu )k2 (24)
 256 datasets: Kitsune [30], CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw2020 [31], and
 The four alignment paths are dynamically balanced by adap- CICIoT2023 [32], which include novel network attacks such
tive weights wk̂ (t), which effectively solves the key problems as backdoors and worms, thereby reflecting current network
of feature dimension mismatch and semantic information loss intrusion behavior patterns. All datasets were split into training
by establishing a complete hierarchical distillation system and testing sets at an approximate ratio of 8:2. Further details
from local perception to global understanding. of each dataset are briefly described below.
3150 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 4. Effect of distillation temperature T on F1 score and Accuracy across
three datasets.

 • Kitsune dataset contains traffic from a real IoT network
 testbed. The classification task is a 10-class problem,
 involving the detection of normal traffic and 9 distinct
 attack types: Video Injection, ARP MitM, Active Wiretap,
 SSDP Flood, SSL Renegotiation, Fuzzing, OS Scan, SYN
 Fig. 5. Sensitivity analysis of learning rate and batch size on student model
 DoS, and Mirai botnet. performance using grid search on CICIoT2023 and CICDoHBrw2020.
 • CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw2020 dataset focuses on encrypted
 DNS-over-HTTPS (DoH) traffic. The task is to identify
 benign traffic versus malicious activity conducted over of the dataset-specific optimum) and its role in providing
 DoH tunnels. The malicious traffic encompasses a wide moderate softening—avoiding both overly sharp (T = 1)
 range of threats, including Malware, Botnet, Data Exfil- and over-smoothed (T ≥ 6) distributions—thereby ensuring
 tration, Cryptojacking, Downloaded Attack, Phishing, Tor robust knowledge transfer without compromising task-specific
 Connection, and DGA (Domain Generation Algorithm). discriminability.
 • CICIoT2023 is a large-scale dataset encompassing a wide 2) Learning Rate and Batch Size: We conduct a joint
 variety of IoT traffic and attacks. The task is a compre- grid search over learning rate and batch size (Figure 5).
 hensive multi-class classification involving normal traffic On CICIoT2023, lr = 0.001 combined with batch size = 32
 and 33 specific attack types. These attacks are grouped delivers the highest student F1 (0.8790) and accuracy (0.8775).
 into 7 major categories: DDoS, DoS, Mirai, Spoofing, On CICDoHBrw2020, lr = 0.005 together with batch size =
 Web-based, Reconnaissance, and Forgery. 128 yields the best result (F1 = 0.9779, accuracy =
 3) Evaluation Metrics: The performance of the intrusion 0.9780). The sensitivity analysis reveals that smaller batch
detection models is evaluated using multiple criteria. First, we sizes generally yield better student performance but increase
assess detection accuracy through standard metrics: accuracy, training time, while larger batches offer superior hardware
precision, recall, and the F1-score. Second, model efficiency utilization. Balancing computational efficiency, stable converis quantified by the number of parameters and the model gence, and cross-dataset robustness, we adopt lr = 0.001 and
size. Finally, given the high security requirements of intrusion batch size = 128 as the default configuration. This combinadetection tasks, False Positive Rate (FPR) and False Negative tion ensures reliable convergence behavior while maintaining
Rate (FNR) are also provided. A high FPR, indicating frequent GPU memory efficiency and consistent performance across
false alarms, can undermine operational efficiency and analyst different traffic profiles.
trust. A high FNR, representing missed attacks, constitutes a
severe security vulnerability. Reporting these metrics provides C. Traffic Classification Task
a balanced view of both the model’s performance and its In order to comprehensively evaluate the performance of
practical utility. our proposed HKD-Net framework, we conducted extensive
 experiments on three public datasets: Kitsune, CIRA-CIC-
 DoHBrw2020, and CICIoT2023, and compared them with
B. Hyperparameter Setting several state-of-the-art network intrusion detection methods,
 1) Distillation Temperature: Knowledge distillation tem- including DPCNN, DL-BiLSTM, TFTKD, CNN-LSTM, and
perature critically determines the softening degree of teacher CNN-GRU. These methods cover everything from convooutputs. As shown in Figure 4, we evaluate T ∈ {1, 3, 5, 6, 7} lutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks to
on all datasets. Results reveal dataset-dependent optimal tem- hybrid models and advanced methods based on knowledge
peratures. CICDoHBrw2020 achieves peak performance (F1 = distillation.
0.9513, Acc = 0.9517) at T = 6; CICIoT2023 attains its best DPCNN [33] propose a low-complexity text categorization
F1 (0.8709) and accuracy (0.8691) at T = 3; and Kitsune framework based on pyramidal downsampling convolutional
yields the highest scores (F1 = 0.9534, Acc = 0.9558) at networks and residual concatenation, which dynamically cap-
T = 5. Considering the need for a generalizable and stable tures remote semantic associations of text through hierarchical
temperature across diverse traffic types, we select T = 5 feature pyramids. DL-BiLSTM [34], combines Deep Neural
as the default setting. This choice is motivated by its near- Networks (DNNs) and Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memoptimal performance on all datasets (consistently within 2% ory Networks (BiLSTMs) for efficient intrusion detection
LI et al.: HKD-Net: HIERARCHICAL KD BASED ON MULTI-DOMAIN FEATURE FUSION 3151

 TABLE I
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON T HREE DATASETS

on resource-constrained IoT devices through feature down- TABLE II
sampling and model quantization techniques. TFTKD [10] R ESULTS OF THE E VALUATION OF THE E FFECTIVENESS OF
propose a lightweight intrusion detection model based on M ULTI -D OMAIN F EATURE F USION
two-dimensional Fourier transform and knowledge distillation, aiming at solving the problems of data sparsity, model
complexity, and deployment efficiency in traditional intrusion detection. CNN-LSTM-Trans [35], A parallel detection
framework based on hybrid Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) and Long Short-Term Memory Network (LSTM) is
proposed to dynamically fuse spatio-temporal features through
Transformer’s self-attention mechanism. CNN-GRU [36],
A parallel integration framework based on hybrid convolutional neural network (CNN) and gated recurrent unit (GRU) is
proposed to dynamically optimize the spatio-temporal feature
representations through a multi-domain feature fusion mechanism. Table I shows the performance metrics of HKD-Net
and baseline methods on three datasets, including accuracy,
precision, recall, FPR and FNR, which are widely used to
evaluate the effectiveness of intrusion detection systems. with the frequency-domain feature extraction module removed
 As shown in Table I, HKD-Net not only achieves leading (HKD WT), the model with the spatial domain feature extracaccuracy, but also maintains a well-balanced performance in tion module removed (HKD SE), and the model with the
terms of both false positive rate (FPR) and false negative rate dynamic feature fusion mechanism removed (HKD DFF).
(FNR). On the CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw2020 dataset, HKD-Net These experiments aim to quantify the specific contribution
attains the lowest FNR (2.81%) while maintaining a low FPR of each part to the overall performance by removing the key
(0.55%), demonstrating its ability to minimize missed attacks components of the model one by one.
without significantly increasing false alarms. On the more The results are summarized in Table II. Overall, HKD-Net
challenging CICIoT2023 dataset, HKD-Net achieves an accu- demonstrates the highest and most consistent performance.
racy of 87.19%, which is approximately 2 percentage points Ablation studies reveal that each feature domain contributes
higher than the suboptimal DL-BiLSTM. Moreover, it attains significantly to model effectiveness. The removal of the
the lowest FPR (1.86%) among all compared methods, while spatial, temporal, and frequency modules leads to accuracy
also delivering a low FNR (13.14%). These results indicate drops of approximately 2.0%, 1.5%, and 1.0% respectively,
that our model offers distinct advantages in reducing false with consistent trends observed across datasets. Furthermore,
positives for normal traffic while preserving high detection removing the dynamic feature fusion mechanism decreases
sensitivity in complex multi-class scenarios. the performance metrics by 0.55%, 0.5%, 0.5% and 0.5%,
 Collectively, these results demonstrate the robustness and respectively. These findings emphasize the significant impact
effectiveness of HKD-Net in detecting network intrusions of the lack of a dynamic feature fusion module in feature
across datasets of varying scales and protocol types. fusion, suggesting that multi-domain feature fusion needs to
 be nuanced for a specific context, allowing for varying degrees
 of involvement of features from different domains.
D. Ablation Experiments 2) Multi-Level Knowledge Distillation: In order to sys-
 In this section, ablation studies are conducted to validate tematically evaluate the contribution of each component in
the effectiveness of the key components of HKD-Net. hierarchical distillation, this paper designs comparison experi-
 1) Multi-domain Feature Fusion: In this section, we com- ments of three distillation strategies on three publicly availpare the performance of five different models on the Kitsune, able datasets, namely Kitsune, CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw2020 &
DoHBrw2020, and CICIoT2023 datasets, respectively: the CICIoT2023. The experiments conduct ablation experiments
full model (HKD-Net), the model with the time-domain by taking the complete HKD-Net (with both output-layer KL
feature extraction module removed (HKD VIT), the model distillation and intermediate-layer feature alignment) as the
3152 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE III To quantify its advantage, we compare the Adaptive Weight-
 E FFECTIVENESS E VALUATION R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT ing (AW) strategy against a Fixed Weighting (FW) baseline
 D ISTILLATION S TRATEGIES under controlled conditions (see Table IV). Except for the
 weighting strategy, the teacher model, the student model
 architecture, the number of training rounds, the optimizer,
 and the random seed are all kept the same. The AW strategy
 achieves significantly higher validation accuracy (+ 1.34%),
 reduces inference latency by 14.2 ms, and converges 2 epochs
 earlier than the FW approach, with all improvements statistically significant (p <0.01). Especially, the AW mechanism
 accelerates convergence speed by approximately 16% while
 substantially reducing inference time, highlighting its practical
 effectiveness in expediting model training. Furthermore, the
 low standard deviations (<0.1%) across three independent runs
 confirm the the robustness of the results.
 In summary, learnable adaptive weights simultaneously
 achieve higher accuracy, faster convergence and lower inference latency without increasing the number of parameters
 and computational overhead, providing a concise and effective
 solution for cross-modal knowledge distillation.

Fig. 6. Dynamic evolution of adaptive weights (spatial, temporal, frequency, E. Edge Deployment Feasibility Analysis
fusion) and validation accuracy during training on the Kitsune dataset.
 1) Resource Requirements and Compatibility: As shown
 in Table V, the student model of HKD-Net occupies only
baseline, and evaluating three variants: KD CE (hard-label
 1.06MB of storage and 4.24MB of peak runtime memory. This
training only), KD KL (output-layer distillation only), and the
 corresponds to minimal resource utilization—e.g., 0.003%
intermediate-feature-alignment-only model.
 storage and 0.10% memory on a Raspberry Pi 4. Even on sim-
 As shown in Table III, the complete HKD-Net framework
 ulated low-end devices (1GB RAM), memory usage remains
achieves the best performance across all datasets. Compared
 below 0.5%. Full compatibility across all tested platforms
to using only hard labels (KD CE) or output-layer distilconfirms that HKD-Net’s footprint fits well within typical
lation (KD KL), hierarchical distillation provides significant
 edge-hardware constraints, enabling practical deployment in
improvements. For instance, on Kitsune, it surpasses KD KL
 resource-limited environments.
by 8.78% in F1 score. Even on encrypted traffic scenario
 2) Computational Efficiency and Performance Trade-offs:
(DoHBrw2020) and complex (CICIoT2023) traffic, it main-
 As shown in Table VI, HKD-Net student achieves a remarktains clear advantages. Overall, output-layer and intermediate
 able balance between performance and efficiency. With only
feature alignment are complementary, with the former ensuring
 0.0085 GFLOPs, it is 2.4× more computationally demanding
semantic consistency and the latter capturing fine-grained
 than the lightest baseline TFTKD (0.0035 GFLOPs), yet
representations, together establishing the effectiveness of hierdelivers significantly superior F1 scores across all datasets.
archical distillation.
 Compared to its teacher (0.0634 GFLOPs), the student reduces
 3) Adaptive Knowledge Distillation: In this paper, an adap-
 FLOPs by 86.6% while retaining over 97% of its F1 score. Furtive loss function based on learnable weights is adopted to
 thermore, HKD-Net achieves inference latencies of 95–101ms.
guide the lightweight student model to automatically focus on
 These confirms its practical viability for resource-constrained
the most discriminative modal representations under dynamic
 edge environments where detection accuracy and operational
data distributions by evaluating the quality of the alignment of
 efficiency must be jointly satisfied.
each modal feature with the teacher model in real-time during
the training process and adaptively adjusting the relative
weights of spatial, time-domain, frequency-domain, and fusion F. Adversarial Robustness Via Cross-Dataset Evaluation
features in the distillation loss. Compared to the traditional We consider the scenario where adversarial traffic manifixed-weight scheme, this strategy simplifies the engineering fests as novel attack patterns or modified traffic signatures
process by improving accuracy without the need for additional that induce distribution shifts relative to the training data.
hyperparameter tuning. To evaluate robustness under such realistic adversarial condi-
 Figure 6 shows the dynamic evolution of adaptive weights tions, we trained HKD-Net on the CICDoHBrw2020 dataset
across the spatial, temporal, frequency, and fusion domains and tested its performance on the original test set (baseline)
during training(taking the Kitsune dataset as example). The and the CICIoT2023 dataset—which contains multiple attack
weights exhibit clear differentiation in the early training phase, categories not present during training (e.g., DDoS, Web-based,
with the validation accuracy curve rising sharply in tandem. Spoofing). To ensure fair comparison, we converted multi-class
This concurrent behavior confirms the efficacy of the adaptive tasks to binary classification (normal vs. adversarial) using
weighting mechanism. dataset-specific normal class identification.
LI et al.: HKD-Net: HIERARCHICAL KD BASED ON MULTI-DOMAIN FEATURE FUSION 3153

 TABLE IV
 Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON OF PAIRED T-T ESTS W ITH A DAPTIVE W EIGHTS AND F IXED W EIGHTS

 TABLE V
 HKD-N ET E DGE -D EPLOYMENT R ESOURCE R EQUIREMENTS

 TABLE VI
 C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON T HREE DATASETS

 TABLE VII
 C ROSS -DATASET ROBUSTNESS E VALUATION O F
 HKD-N ET U NDER D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT

 Fig. 8. Loss curves of the student model under two strategies: output layer
 distillation and complete distillation (including alignment of output layer and
 intermediate layer features).

Fig. 7. Comparison of training/validation loss evolution between the teacher
model and the student model.

 Table VII presents the cross-dataset evaluation results. The
student model maintains strong detection capability on unseen
attack types, achieving 99.00% detection rate on CICIoT2023
(containing DDoS, Web attacks, etc. not present in training).
Notably, on the same-distribution CICDoHBrw2020 test set,
 Fig. 9. t-SNE visualization of the distribution of teacher and student model
the model achieves 99.92% accuracy and 99.98% detection features.
rate, outperforming its original performance. These results
validate that knowledge distillation effectively enhances the
 section conducts a systematic study from three dimensions:
student model’s generalization to unseen traffic variations.
 loss function convergence characteristics, feature space evolu-
Crucially, achieving a 99.00% detection rate on entirely absent
 tion, and dynamic weight analysis.
attack patterns demonstrates HKD-Net’s robustness against
 1) Loss Function Convergence Characteristics: As shown
adversarial traffic, even under significant distribution shift
 in Figure 7, the teacher model exhibits rapid and stable
from known attacks.
 convergence, while the student trained solely with output-layer
 distillation shows slower initial convergence and fluctuating
G. Training Process and Knowledge Migration Analysis validation loss. A further comparison in Figure 8 demonstrates
 In order to thoroughly analyze the optimization mechanism that introducing intermediate feature alignment and adapand knowledge transfer effect of the HKD-Net model, this tive weighting significantly accelerates the student model’s
3154 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 10. Epoch change curves of dynamic weights on various datasets.

convergence and stabilizes its validation loss compared to representations that are more context-aware and discriminausing output-layer distillation alone. These results confirm tive. Experimental results validated the effectiveness of our
that our hierarchical distillation strategy effectively facilitates approach in various datasets, including Kitsune, CIRA-CICknowledge transfer and enables the student model to better DoHBrw2020, and CICIoT2023. The student model with only
approximate the teacher’s performance. 0.278M parameters and 0.0064 GFLOPs, achieves compa-
 2) Feature Space Evolution: We use the t-SNE algorithm rable accuracy to the teacher and consistently outperforms
to visualize the features of the key layers to present the differ- lightweight baselines like TFTKD across all datasets (e.g.,
ences and evolutionary process between the teacher model and +10.6% in F1-score on Kitsune). This design enables the
the student model in the feature space. The results are shown in lightweight student model to inherit the teacher’s comprehen-
Figure 9. The teacher model exhibits compact, well-separated sive representational capacity across multiple domains.
clusters across spatial, temporal, and frequency domains. One potential limitation of our research is that the robust-
In contrast, the student trained with only output distillation ness of HKD-Net to novel zero day attacks has not been
shows dispersed and overlapping distributions. Under full validated, as the model was trained and tested on known
hierarchical distillation, the student’s features progressively attack types. Second, although we have conducted resource
align with the teacher’s, forming more discriminative clusters. feasibility analysis on simulated edge devices (as shown in
This demonstrates that intermediate feature alignment and Table V), the actual deployment of HKD-Net on physical edge
adaptive weighting effectively guide the student to learn richer hardware under sustained operational load requires further
and more structured representations, contributing to improved validation. Real-world deployment may encounter constraints
detection performance. not captured in our server environment, including memory
 3) Dynamic Weight Analysis: As depicted in Figure 10, bandwidth limitations and variable power budgets. In the
the adaptive weights for spatial, temporal, frequency, and future, we plan to integrate an online incremental learning
fusion domains evolve distinctly across datasets, reflecting framework into HKD-Net, enabling the model to continuously
domain-specific feature importance. For instance, frequency adapt to emerging attack patterns without costly full retraining.
weights rise rapidly on CICDoHBrw2020, while fusion Meanwhile, we will implement HKD-Net on physical edge
weights dominate early training on Kitsune and CICIoT2023. devices to conduct rigorous benchmarking of its real-time
Weights gradually stabilize as training proceeds, with each inference latency, power consumption, and long-term stability
dataset reaching a distinct equilibrium. This demonstrates the under realistic network conditions.
mechanism’s ability to dynamically recalibrate modal contributions based on dataset characteristics, thereby optimizing VI. C ONCLUSION
fusion performance. Moreover, modalities assigned higher In this paper, we propose HKD-Net, a hierarchical knowlweights correlate strongly with improved detection perfor- edge distillation framework for efficient network intrusion
mance, confirming that the weighting strategy successfully detection on resource-constrained edge devices. By integrating
prioritizes the most discriminative features per scenario. temporal, spatial, and frequency domain feature extraction
 with a dynamic gating mechanism, HKD-Net constructs a discriminative multi-domain representation. Through hierarchical
 V. D ISCUSSION
 distillation that aligns both output logits and intermediate
 This study aims to address the effectiveness of balancing the features, the lightweight student model achieves performance
detection accuracy and computational efficiency of network comparable to the teacher while reducing parameters by
intrusion detection on resource constrained devices. Unlike 74.68% and maintaining low computational cost. Experimental
conventional knowledge distillation methods, our framework results on three public datasets demonstrate that HKD-Net
introduces a hierarchical distillation strategy that explic- outperforms state-of-the-art methods in accuracy and F1-score
itly aligns intermediate-level feature representations across while significantly lowering false positive and false negative
temporal, spatial, and frequency domains. Additionally, by rates. The model also exhibits efficient resource usage, conleveraging gated networks to adaptively assign weights to the firming its suitability for edge deployment. In future work,
contributions of various feature domains, we can construct we will focus on real-world edge validation and extend
LI et al.: HKD-Net: HIERARCHICAL KD BASED ON MULTI-DOMAIN FEATURE FUSION 3155

HKD-Net towards open-world scenarios, including robustness [19] C. Zha et al., “DM-IDS—A network intrusion detection method based
testing against zero-day attacks and the integration of incre- on dual-modal fusion,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22,
 no. 4, pp. 3646–3661, Aug. 2025.
mental learning for adaptive threat detection. [20] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, and S. Li, “MTSecurity:
 Privacy-preserving malicious traffic classification using graph neural
 network and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21,
 R EFERENCES no. 3, pp. 3583–3597, Jun. 2024.
[1] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and [21] M. Ayyat, T. Nadeem, and B. Krawczyk, “Class-aware neural net-
 E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, works for efficient intrusion detection on edge devices,” in Proc. 20th
 systems and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28, Annu. IEEE Int. Conf. Sens., Commun., Netw. (SECON), Sep. 2023,
 Feb. 2009. pp. 204–212.
[2] A. Blaise, M. Bouet, V. Conan, and S. Secci, “Detection of zero- [22] G. D’Angelo and F. Palmieri, “Network traffic classification
 day attacks: An unsupervised port-based approach,” Comput. Netw., using deep convolutional recurrent autoencoder neural networks for
 vol. 180, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 107391. spatial–temporal features extraction,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 173,
[3] G. Karatas, O. Demir, and O. K. Sahingoz, “Deep learning in intrusion Jan. 2021, Art. no. 102890.
 detection systems,” in Proc. Int. Congr. Big Data, Deep Learn. Fighting [23] S. Das, A. M. Pasikhani, P. Gope, J. A. Clark, C. Patel, and B. Sik-
 Cyber Terrorism (IBIGDELFT), Dec. 2018, pp. 113–116. dar, “AIDPS: Adaptive intrusion detection and prevention system for
[4] R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. P. Soman, P. Poornachandran, A. Al- underwater acoustic sensor networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
 Nemrat, and S. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach for intelligent no. 2, pp. 1080–1095, Apr. 2024.
 intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 41525–41550, [24] R. Zhao, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, and Z. Xue, “An efficient
 2019. and lightweight approach for intrusion detection based on knowl-
[5] A. Javaid, Q. Niyaz, W. Sun, and M. Alam, “A deep learning approach edge distillation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2021,
 for network intrusion detection system,” in Proc. 9th EAI Int. Conf. pp. 1–6.
 Bio-Inspired Inf. Commun. Technol., 2016, pp. 21–26. [25] Z. Wang, Z. Li, D. He, and S. Chan, “A lightweight approach for
[6] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based network intrusion detection in industrial cyber-physical systems based
 learning applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11, on knowledge distillation and deep metric learning,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
 pp. 2278–2324, 1998. vol. 206, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 117671.
[7] N. Wei et al., “An autoencoder-based hybrid detection model for [26] X. Wang, Z. Wang, E. Wang, and Z. Sun, “Spatial-temporal knowledge
 intrusion detection with small-sample problem,” IEEE Trans. Netw. distillation for lightweight network traffic anomaly detection,” Comput.
 Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2402–2412, Apr. 2024. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103636.
[8] Z. Liu, C. Hu, and C. Shan, “Riemannian manifold on stream data: [27] F. Ding, Y. Yang, H. Hu, V. Krovi, and F. Luo, “Dual-level knowledge
 Fourier transform and entropy-based DDoS attacks detection method,” distillation via knowledge alignment and correlation,” IEEE Trans.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 109, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 102392, doi: 10.1016/ Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2425–2435, Feb. 2024,
 j.cose.2021.102392. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3190166.
[9] B. Zhao, X. Li, and X. Lu, “CAM-RNN: Co-attention model based RNN [28] N. AL-Nomasy, A. Alamri, A. Aljuhani, and P. Kumar, “Transformerfor video captioning,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 28, no. 11, based knowledge distillation for explainable intrusion detection system,”
 pp. 5552–5565, Nov. 2019. Comput. Secur., vol. 154, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 104417, doi: 10.1016/
[10] L.-H. Wang, Q. Dai, T. Du, and L.-F. Chen, “Lightweight intrusion j.cose.2025.104417.
 detection model based on CNN and knowledge distillation,” Appl. [29] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked
 Soft Comput., vol. 165, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 112118, doi: 10.1016/ autoencoder based traffic transformer with multi-level flow
 j.asoc.2024.112118. representation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
[11] Y. Wang, M. Yang, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, J. Huang, and X. Fang, “A pp. 5420–5427.
 bearing fault diagnosis model based on deformable atrous convolution [30] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
 and squeeze-and-excitation aggregation,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
 vol. 70, pp. 1–10, 2021. Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), San Diego, CA, USA,
[12] P. Liang, L. Yang, Z. Xiong, X. Zhang, and G. Liu, “Multilevel intrusion 2018, pp. 1–15.
 detection based on transformer and wavelet transform for IoT data [31] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari,
 security,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 15, pp. 25613–25624, “Detection of DoH tunnels using time-series classification of
 Aug. 2024. encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Depend. Auton.
[13] H. Ben Abdallah, C. J. Henry, and S. Ramanna, “1-dimensional polyno- Secure Comput. Int. Conf. Pervasive Intell. Comput. Int. Conf.
 mial neural networks for audio signal related problems,” Knowl.-Based Cloud Big Data Comput. Int. Conf. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr.
 Syst., vol. 240, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 108174. (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Aug. 2020, pp. 63–70, doi:
[14] R. Yao, N. Wang, Z. Liu, P. Chen, and X. Sheng, “Intrusion detection 10.1109/DASC-PICom-CBDCom-CyberSciTech49142.2020.00026.
 system in the advanced metering infrastructure: A cross-layer feature- [32] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
 fusion CNN-LSTM-based approach,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 2, p. 626, A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark
 Jan. 2021. for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13,
[15] C. F. Tsai, Y. F. Hsu, C. Y. Lin, and W. Y. Lin, “Intrusion detection p. 5941, Jun. 2023, doi: 10.3390/s23135941.
 by machine learning: A review,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36, no. 10, [33] R. Johnson and T. Zhang, “Deep pyramid convolutional neupp. 11994–12000, 2009. ral networks for text categorization,” in Proc. 55th Annu. Meet-
[16] M. Almseidin, M. Alzubi, S. Kovacs, and M. Alkasassbeh, “Evaluation ing Assoc. Comput. Linguistics (Long Papers), vol. 1, 2017,
 of machine learning algorithms for intrusion detection system,” in pp. 562–570.
 Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Symp. Intell. Syst. Informat. (SISY), Sep. 2017, [34] Z. Wang, H. Chen, S. Yang, X. Luo, D. Li, and J. Wang, “A lightweight
 pp. 277–282. intrusion detection method for IoT based on deep learning and dynamic
[17] Y. Xu et al., “MDFF: Multi-domain feature fusion for anomaly quantization,” PeerJ Comput. Sci., vol. 9, p. e1569, Sep. 2023, doi:
 recognition,” Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 64, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 103047, 10.7717/peerj-cs.1569.
 doi: 10.1016/j.aei.2024.103047. [35] M. S. Ataa, E. E. Sanad, and R. A. El-Khoribi, “Intrusion detection in
[18] J. Kotak, I. Yankelev, I. Bibi, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “VPN-encrypted software defined network using deep learning approaches,” Sci. Rep.,
 network traffic classification using a time-series approach,” IEEE Trans. vol. 14, no. 1, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 29159.
 Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 2225–2242, Apr. 2025, doi: [36] N. Bayat, W. Jackson, and D. Liu, “Deep learning for network traffic
 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3543903. classification,” 2021, arXiv:2106.12693.