8646 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 HoneyLLMd: A Large Language Model-Powered
 Adaptive Honeypot System
 Wenjun Fan , Member, IEEE, Fei Du , Zhihui Wang , Qiyu Cao , Lekun Liu , Kejing Chang ,
 and Sang-Yoon Chang

 Abstract—A honeypot is a cybersecurity mechanism designed malicious behaviors. As honeypots have no production value, the
to lure attackers by emulating vulnerabilities and serving as a egress traffic from a honeypot can indicate that the honeypot has
decoy, intentionally crafted to detect and analyze malicious activ- been compromised. Over the past decade or so, the development
ities. However, achieving a balance between the ability to engage
attackers extensively and the need to minimize exposure of system of honeypot projects and research has been greatly affected by
resources remains an enduring challenge. High-interaction honey- the evolution of the virtualization technology [2], since virtualpots (HIHs) provide in-depth system-level observation through full ization can facilitate the creation and deployment of the honeyoperating systems, yet they inherently increase the risk of being pot efficiently, which results in the rapid growth of virtual honeycompromised due to the extensive exposure of functionalities. In pot solutions as well [3], [4]. Taking advantage of virtualization
contrast, low- and medium-interaction honeypots (LIHs/MIHs)
emulate only minimal or disguised services, which cannot spawn technology, virtual honeypots support large-scale deployment
reverse shells or execute real command responses, but significantly and dynamic configuration. However, other than the honeypots
reduce the risk of system intrusion. To overcome this limitation, we that use the genuine guest operation system (OS) as the decoy for
present a large language model (LLM)-powered adaptive honeypot attracting the network adversary, virtual honeypots do not often
system capable of supporting both bind and reverse shell interac- provide the entire system functionality and only use the minimal
tions with authentic shell-like responses generated by the LLM
rather than a real OS. This design enables convincing, continuous system resource. Usually, we call the virtual honeypot using min-
“request–response” interactions in which attackers unintentionally imal or limited system resources low-/medium-interaction honreveal behavioral and intent data. Furthermore, a hierarchical eypot (LIH/MIH), which exposes low-security risk to the adverprobabilistic automaton (HPA) is employed to model attack tran- sary but it lacks the fidelity to interact with the adversary to learn
sitions and dynamically adapt honeypot strategies. Experimental the adversary’s system-level activity. By contrast, the virtual
validation on real-world attacks demonstrates that the proposed
system achieves superior engagement and data capture while main- honeypot building on the genuine OS is called a high-interaction
taining low security risk. honeypot (HIH), which has high fidelity but is less scalable for
 deployment, unless hybrid system architecture is involved where
 Index Terms—Deceptive defense, honeypot, large language
model, hierarchical probabilistic automaton, authentic response.
 the lightweight and distributed front-ends (e.g., sensors or LIHs)
 are used to capture data in large-scale, e.g., Collapsar [5] and
 I. INTRODUCTION Potemkin [6]. However, such hybrid systems still suffer the risk
 HONEYPOT is a trap tool [1] deliberately created to of being entirely compromised by the network adversary in terms
A be probed, attacked and compromised in order to capture of exploiting the vulnerability of the OS. Further, we notice
 that most advanced attacks focus on obtaining a shell with the
 Received 18 October 2025; revised 26 March 2026; accepted 6 April 2026. compromised system to further command and control (C&C)
Date of publication 15 April 2026; date of current version 28 April 2026.
Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Weiting Zhang. (Corresponding author:
 it. Such compromised systems can constitute a botnet to carry
Fei Du.) out various attacks such as distributed denial-of-service (DDoS),
 Wenjun Fan is with the School of Engineering and Technology, University of which is still at the top of the list of current cyber threats [7].
Washington, Tacoma, WA 98402-3100 USA (e-mail: wjfan@uw.edu).
 Fei Du is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Liver-
 The balance between security and utility of honeypot is an
pool, L69 7ZX Liverpool, U.K., and also with the School of Advanced Tech- arduous research challenge. HIH is able to execute the shell
nology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou 215123, China (e-mail: payload to further interplay with the adversary, however, it often
Fei.Du@liverpool.ac.uk).
 Zhihui Wang is with the Department of Electrical and Systems Engibrings the full compromise risk and lacks the means to control
neering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail: the shell TCP connection. On the other hand, LIH/MIH has little
wang52@seas.upenn.edu). risk to get compromised, but it is neither to run any payload for
 Qiyu Cao is with the School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an
Jiaotong-Liverrpool University, Suzhou 215123, China (e-mail: Qiyu.Cao22
 creating a reverse shell for the attacker to undertake C&C due
@student.xjtlu.edu.cn). to the minimal system functionality nor to provide real shell
 Lekun Liu is with the School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an command responses.
Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou 215123, China (e-mail: Lekun.Liu22
@student.xjtlu.edu.cn).
 To this end, this paper aims to leverage the large language
 Kejing Chang is with the School of Computing, National University of model (LLM) [8], [9] to generate authentic-seeming, yet fab-
Singapore, Singapore 117417 (e-mail: e1520128@u.nus.edu). ricated responses tailored to adversarial inputs such as shell-
 Sang-Yoon Chang is with the Computer Science Department, University of
Colorado, Colorado Springs, CO 80918 USA (e-mail: schang2@uccs.edu).
 codes, commands, keystrokes, etc. LLMs are sophisticated
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2026.3683862 AI systems capable of comprehending and generating human

 2327-4697 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8647

language through extensive text data processing. Consequently, machine learning, and LLM-driven approaches. Finally, the
LLM-based honeypots can establish highly realistic interac- problem statements which this paper builds on are provided.
tions with adversaries. Rather than requiring the deployment
of a fully operational system, the LLM-powered honeypot can
convincingly mimic one by generating appropriate command A. Honeypot Interaction Level
outputs. This approach offers significant cost and security ad- The interaction capacity of a honeypot is generally defined
vantages over conventional HIH, while maintaining a higher as the extent to which the information system resources are
level of credibility compared to LIH/MIH. Furthermore, our ap- exposed to network adversary. Therefore, honeypot systems can
proach transcends simple LLM-based emulation by integrating be classified into several types as follows.
hierarchical probabilistic automaton (HPA)-based strategy that 1) Low-Interaction Honeypots (LIH): An LIH usually exgoverns the interaction logic. By modeling the attack process poses less access to the attackers, emulating basic protocols
through an HPA, the honeypot gains an advanced intelligence: and network services of an OS. Virtual environments are often
it can predict the attacker’s next command and proactively steer employed in the LIH to simulate the functionality. For example,
the interaction toward low-payoff attack paths. This maneuver Honeyd [10] is a seminal virtual honeypot framework that
ensures that the LLM generates more appealing and contextually simulates entire network topologies at the network layer. By
precise responses, which misleads the attacker into believing emulating the TCP/IP stack of various OSs through configurable
that the exploitation was successful, thereby inducing further ‘personalities’, it can effectively deceive remote fingerprinting
novel malicious activities. The contributions of this paper can tools like Nmap. The main objective of LIHs is to detect and
be summarized as follows: collect malicious activities, such as unauthorized probes or login
 r A comprehensive literature review is delivered to identify actions [11]. The development of LIH has expanded with the
 the development tendency and current problems in honey- scope of cyber attacks, such as HoneydV6 [12] that simulates
 pot systems. entire IPv6 networks on a single host, KFSensor [13] for aid
 r A large language model-powered adaptive honeypot LIH in fingerprinting attack, and HoneyPy [14] for minimizing
 termed HoneyLLMd is proposed, which leverages the Slowloris attack. Beyond these examples, LIHs are primarily
 hierarchical probabilistic automaton to model the attack valued for their resource efficiency and ability to be deployed
 process in order to adapt the strategy for responding the at scale, serving as an early-warning sensor network. However,
 attack activities. their inherent limitation lies in the shallow level of emulation,
 r Both bind shell and reverse shell have been realized, and a which can be detected by sophisticated attackers.
 suite of evaluation metrics for shell performance is intro- 2) Medium-Interaction Honeypots (MIH): MIHs offer a
 duced, aimed at assessing the responses of shells utilizing higher degree of service emulation than their low-interaction
 various LLMs. counterparts. They are capable of limited interaction with atr A comparative analysis of several prominent large lan- tackers, going beyond simple traffic identification, all while opguage models (like GPT-5, GPT-4o-mini, Gemini-2.5- erating without a real underlying OS. Representative examples
 flash, and Claude-haiku-3.5) is conducted using a unified such as Amun [15] and Dionaea [16], which emulate vulnerable
 benchmark. services by pre-defining the corresponding service reply logic
 r A proof-of-concept system has been developed and de- to capture attack payloads. Cowrie [17] under a shell mode imployed to detect real-world attacks. Following this, a series plements a UNIX-like shell environment, providing a deceptive
 of experiments were carried out to assess the effectiveness shell to log adversary commands and keystrokes. While MIHs
 of the proposed method. offer deeper interaction than LIHs-enabling behavioral analysis
 Ethics Statement: This research adheres to ethical principles of attack sequences, they remain constrained in capturing full
and guidelines in conducting and reporting our findings. All data intrusion chains, such as post-exploitation activities including
collection and analysis were carried out with due consideration rootkit installation.
for the ethical implications. 3) High-Interaction Honeypots (HIH): HIHs are character-
 Paper Organization: Section II provides a comprehensive ized by their provision of a realistic, compromisable environliterature review of honeypot systems, and outlines the research ment for adversaries. This is most commonly achieved by deproblems. Section III proposes the design of the LLM-powered ploying real OS and applications, allowing attackers to perform
adaptive honeypot. Section IV details a proof-of-concept and its full intrusion chains. Alternatively, HIHs can be implemented
deployment for capturing real-world attacks. Section V presents through high-fidelity emulation (e.g., using instrumented fullthe experimental results and discusses the limitations. Section VI system virtual machines (VMs)). The honeypot fidelity comes
draws a conclusion and outlines potential avenues for future with increased risk, as attackers gain actual system access [2]. In
research. other words, if the honeypot would like to learn more from the
 adversary, it needs to provide more resources for the malicious
 interaction, while that also brings more threats and security
 II. STATE-OF-THE-ART
 concerns. For example, Argos [18] used QUME to emulate
 This section reviews research on honeypot systems, with a the OS, and exposed complete system resources to attackers;
focus on honeypot interaction levels, honeypot shells, and intel- however, it faced challenges in security maintenance, dynamic
ligent honeypots, including those based on statistical methods, reconfiguration, and scalable deployment. Cowrie in proxy
8648 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 permits inbound connections to the chosen port. In contrast, a reverse shell (Fig. 1(b)) involves the compromised host initiating
 an outbound connection to a listener controlled by the adversary.
 Compared to bind shell, this approach offers several operational
 advantages for adversaries [29], [30]:
 1) Outbound traffic is typically subject to fewer firewall
 restrictions than inbound connections;
 2) Reverse shells circumvent the need to determine the target’s public IP address, thus avoiding NAT traversal complications;
 3) Outbound callbacks can maintain stealth over extended
 periods, evading detection more effectively than persistent
 listening services.
 These advantages have established reverse shells as the dom-
Fig. 1. Honeypot Shell Description.
 inant C&C pattern in modern exploitation frameworks.
 However, conventional honeypots-particularly LIHs and
 MIHs-are inherently limited in their ability to handle remode [19] can redirect interactions to fully functional backend verse shells. For instance, the LIH Honeyd [10] and the MIH
VMs, transforming it into an HIH. In addition, containerization Cowrie [17] support only bind shell establishment. Although
technology is also often employed in honeypot system with HIHs that host full OS can, in theory, support reverse shells,
separated host access. HoneyKube [20] developed by Cupta their operational complexity and security risks limit widespread
et al. is a microservice-based network honeypot that achieves deployment. This is particularly concerning given the prevalence
maximum control over system vulnerabilities and permissions, of reverse shells in mainstream penetration frameworks. For inas well as increases the number of interactions. The applica- stance, Metasploit [31] includes a majority of payloads dedicated
tion scenarios of HIH are diverse, such as HoneyPLC [21] for to establishing reverse shells post-exploitation, with numer-
Industrial Control Systems (ICS) and for specific companies ous modules supporting raw TCP and HTTPS-based callbacks.
scenarios [22]. In summary, while HIHs provide unparalleled Moreover, attackers increasingly employ covert channels, such
insight into attack behaviors, they require significant resources as DNS tunneling [32], WebSocket-based callbacks [33], and
and robust isolation mechanisms to mitigate security risks. ICMP tunneling [34] to evade conventional network controls.
 4) Hybrid Honeypots (HyH): HyHs integrate multiple hon- The widespread adoption of reverse shells for C&C, coupled
eypot types to balance scalability and interaction depth. For with their limited support in conventional honeypots, motivates
instance, BitSauce [23] combines LIHs and HIHs, using the development of honeypot systems capable of safely spawnlightweight LIHs for broad monitoring and invoking HIHs only ing and monitoring reverse-shell connections to enhance threat
when sophisticated interaction is required, thereby optimizing intelligence collection.
resource utilization. Alberdi et al. [24] proposed a transparent
redirection mechanism that stealthily channels malicious traffic
to appropriate honeypots while shielding production systems. C. Honeypot Intelligence
Similarly, [25] integrated LIHs and HIHs to address the trade-off 1) Statistic Approach: To counter increasingly sophisticated
between coverage breadth and behavioral fidelity. Furthermore, anti-honeypot techniques, traditional honeypots have become
in order to eliminate the situation of identity exposure caused by insufficient to effectively deceive attackers. In this context,
the lack of interaction with other network nodes in a single hon- statistic-based honeypots employ mathematical abstraction to
eypot within the network traffic, honeynet was introduced [26], capture the stochastic nature of attacker behaviors. These models
[27]. T-Pot [28] is an open-source platform that creates a ded- aim to quantify uncertainties, optimize defensive responses, and
icated segment to deploy LIHs and HIHs to track hackers on support decision-making under incomplete information.
either a single host or across multiple systems. However, the se- Game theory is particularly relevant to the modeling and
curity risk of honeynet remains, as they hold large attack surface, analysis of strategic operations of information [35], including
complicate configurations, and high maintenance cost [26]. deception tactics that are highly applicable to honeypots. In [36],
 the authors proposed a game-theoretic honeypot framework
 integrated with an HPA. This framework models the interactions
B. Honeypot Shell
 between HIHs and attackers, as well as the command transition
 Network adversaries commonly establish remote control over probability. The Monte Carlo simulations were tested to find
the compromised hosts by spawning interactive command shells, the Nash equilibria, with the goal of maximizing the honeypot’s
which serve as C&C channels. These shells are broadly classified utility. However, the efficacy of such model heavily relies on
into two types: bind and reverse shells. the assumption of rational adversaries and predefined behav-
 In a bind shell (Fig. 1(a)), the compromised host listens on a ioral patterns, limiting their effectiveness against non-rational,
specified network port, awaiting an incoming connection from automated, or novel threats. An innovative pseudo honeypot
the attacker. This method succeeds only if the target environment game (PHG) [37] has been proposed, which combines Bayesian
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8649

networks to infer the attacker’s intentions, enhances decep- In addition, ML is able to optimize the deceptive response
tiveness and prevents DDos attacks. Moreover, to address the performance. Honey-imprint [43] employed Generative Adverlimitation of traditional game theory on dynamic behavior mod- sarial Networks (GAN) for generating deceptive decoys, and
eling, stochastic games (SG) was adopted. In [38], the honeypot steganography for imprinting the honey watermark. However,
strategy was optimized in terms of the uncertainty of network and this work is limited in its inability to generate real-time fake
opponents based on one-sided partially observable stochastic responses for deceiving SE attackers. In [52], an intelligent intergame (OS-POSG). SG was also employed for honeypot defense action honeypot named IoTCandyJar was realized. Specifically,
in Uncrewed Aerial Vehicle (UAV) systems [39]. In addition, the behaviors of different types of IoT devices are obtained and
Markov Decision Process (MDP) and its variants offer another learned by a variety of heuristics and ML mechanisms to genprincipled methodology. In paper [40], MDP was utilized to erate credible responses. HoneyIoT presented by [53] modeled
model the interactions between botmasters and honeypots, and the attacker’s behavior using RL and MDP, and used differential
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) was analysis to provide real time and high fidelity responses. Chamoextended to help honeypot predict uncertain honeypot states tra et al. [54] presented SAGE, a novel IoT honeypot that leveras determined by botmasters. Meanwhile, Tapaswi et al. [41] ages a Finite-State Machine (FSM) for protocol emulation, and
deployed a Markov chain-based honeypot model on LIHs and augments it with a GraphRAG-LLM framework. This architec-
HIHs to identify systems most likely to be attacked, dynamically ture dynamically generates context-aware, deceptive responses,
changing honeypot IP addresses to avoid detection and collect mitigating fingerprinting and engaging adversaries proactively.
more attack data. Chamotra et al. [54] presented SAGE, a novel IoT honeypot
 Nevertheless, statistical models often struggle with the com- that leverages a Finite-State Machine (FSM) for protocol emuplexity and adaptability of real-world threats. A significant lation, and augments it with a GraphRAG-LLM framework. This
limitation remains their inability to dynamically enhance the architecture dynamically generates context-aware, deceptive
fidelity of the honeypot’s interactions. responses, mitigating fingerprinting and engaging adversaries
 2) Machine Learning-Based Approach: In response to the proactively.
shortcomings of statistical methods, honeypots have begun in- ML techniques have made great contributions to honeypot
corporating learning-based methods. systems. Yet now the rise of LLMs represents a new frontier,
 ML methods have been widely used to assist honeypot sys- promising even greater transformative power.
tems in malious traffic detection and post-attack data anal- 3) LLM-Based Approach: LLMs represent a specific cateysis [42]. In [43], Natural Language Processing (NLP) for gory within the broader group of pre-trained language models
detecting social engineering (SE) attacks was developed with (PLMs). The landscape of high-performance LLMs has experilabeled SE data for honeypot decoys generation. TwinPot pro- enced a notable expansion, particularly after OpenAI unveiled
posed by [44] integrated ten different classification algorithms ChatGpt [55]. These models have showcased exceptional capato detect internal attacks. Holgado et al. [45] proposed a multi- bilities across various fields [56], [57] with significant contribustep attack prediction method based on Hidden Markov Model tions to cybersecurity, including areas like code analysis [58],
(HMM), and Li et al. [46] improved this method by using vulnerability remediation [59], generation of control code [60],
HMM and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) with honey- reverse engineering [61], and protocol fuzzing [62]. Furtherpot captured data. Fraunholz et al. [26] took advantage of more, the advent of Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT)
ML to identify unique types of attack sessions and charac- models by OpenAI and other models such as Deekseek, Gemini,
teristics based on issued commands and provided credentials. and Claude have positioned LLMs as powerful mechanisms for
HuntGPT [47] introduced Explainable AI (XAI) to ML tech- automating tasks related to vulnerability exploitation [63], [64],
niques for reliable and actionable intrusion detection. More- [65] and penetration testing [66]. The potential of GPT in genover, ML for anti-detection is realized in [48], which de- erating cybersecurity policies to deter and mitigate ransomware
veloped an learning-evaluated honeypot using Reinforcement attacks was investigated by [67]. Their research demonstrated
Learning (RL), increasing the number of instructions in the that GPT-generated policies have the potential to outperform
“secure shell” sequence presented by the honeypot, thereby human-generated policies in certain contexts, particularly when
increasing the number of interactions and reviewing more attack optimized with tailored input prompts. However, human input
information. remains crucial in guiding the generation process. In [68], a tool
 Also, the configuration of the honeypot system has been for helping security analyst was proposed, which can produce
implemented in a ML manner. Taofeek et al. [49] proposed a cog- a swift and effective response against incoming threats. While
nitive deception model (CDM) using a neuro-semantic model the tool can generate a ranked list of potential solutions for the
to generate honeyfiles to deceive the adversaries. Paper [50] analyst to quickly assess, human intervention is still required to
proposed a method that can identify, analyze, and cluster the implement and evaluate the appropriate response.
machines and equipment entities in the network to realize the LLM agents are advanced systems that leverage LLMs to
dynamic configuration, deployment and maintenance strategy address problems, devise solutions, and execute these solutions
of honeypot. The study by Franco et al. [51] proposed S-pot, an using a suite of tools [63]. In the context of cybersecurity, LLM
intelligent honeypot capable of learning from captured attacks to agents must incorporate three essential components to function
dynamically adjust Software-Defined Networking (SDN) con- effectively. First, they need the capability to interact with tools
figurations. and APIs [69], [70], [71] enabling autonomous actions that
8650 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

would otherwise require human involvement, with responses TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF EXISTING HONEYPOT INSTANCES. THE LISTED HONEYPOT
integrated as contextual feedback. Second, they must be adept INSTANCES ARE PRESENTED IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER. THE HONEYPOTS
at planning and responding to tool and API outputs [69], rang- MARKED BY INDICATE THAT THEY HOLD THE CORRESPONDING
ing from straightforward tasks such as incorporating outputs CHARACTERISTIC OR TECHNIQUE.
into the model for further context, to more complex planning
processes. Finally, the ability to read and analyze documents
(closely related to Retrieval-Augmented Generation, RAG) [72]
is crucial, as it allows the agent to focus on pertinent topics
and refine its problem-solving capabilities. At present, API
calls are the mainstream approach for integrating LLMs into
honeypot systems. Local deployment is less common due to
its prohibitively high resource demands and maintenance costs.
Nevertheless, the latency and instability inherent to API-based
solutions present significant concerns [73].
 Given the autonomous planning and tool-integration capabilities of LLM agents, researchers have begun to explore their
application in honeypot systems. Initially, LLMs have been
widely adopted for analyzing honeypot data [74]. For instance,
GPT-2C [75] fine-tuned an LLM to promptly interpret Cowrie
logs, delivering near-real-time threat analysis that can support
Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Although GPT-2 is mainly
used as a pre-trained transformer, this work has not yet generated
real-time fake responses. [76] employed NLP to evaluate and
cluster different types of cyber attack against SSH service.
In [77], a dialogue agent named CYGENT was designed to
assistant with log file summarizing and analyzing.
 Subsequent work extended LLMs from passive analysts to active generators of deceptive decoys: Raví et al. [78] used naturallanguage models to create “honeyfiles” (fabricated lure documents) that prolong attacker engagement, and Reti et al. [79]
employed multiple LLMs to synthesize diverse “honeytokens”
(e.g., log entries, database records, and simulated vulnerable
services) as part of a comprehensive cyber-deception solution. Prasad et al. [89] combined RL and generative AI to enhance
The ability of LLMs to build entire honeypot shells was also the honeypot replies for the simulated SSH service. Safargalieva
being explored. In [80], shelLM, an LLM-supported fake con- et al. [90] introduced “Ohra”, a scalable honeypot framework
versational shell, was first explored, which aimed to address built on LLMs. The system employs multiple protocol models
the drawbacks in the previous deception approaches, such as and utilizes prompt control alongside session management to
deterministic responses and a lack of adaptability, etc. Based produce context-aware responses.
on shelLM, an extensible and modular shell architecture LIM-
BOSH was also developed by [81].
 LLMs for deceptive responses generation in terms of adaptive D. Problem Statement
interaction and semantic realism have been extensively studied Table I statistics the aforementioned honeypot instances with
recently. ShellGPT [82] demonstrated LLM’s superiority com- their characteristics. When the honeypot can respond to compared to other baseline models for shell language understanding mands in the same way as a real system does, we consider it to be
tasks. A honeypot called DecoyPot [83], which combines RAG able to provide “authentic responses”. When the response delay
and LLMs has been presented. It generates more realistic API- aligns with the actual situation, it conforms to the characteristics
like responses dynamically based on the received Web API query of “real-time response”. It should be noted that some systems can
requests. Paper [84] proposed a honeypot supported by GPT- offer real-time responses, but the content may not be authentic.
3, enabling human-like conversations with attackers, thereby From Table I, several drawbacks of current honeypot systems
providing a more realistic and engaging environment. Hon- can be summarized as follows:
eyGPT [85] was presented, which mainly focused on enhancing r Existing honeypots are limited to passive request-response
the shell response capabilities of Cowrie by integrating the behavior, simply replying when possible without adaptive
OpenAI GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4. [86] leveraged fine-tuned or intelligent strategies to actively engage, manipulate, or
open-source LLMs to develop an interactive honeypot, which prolong attacker interactions.
significantly enhances realism and effectiveness in deployment. r Reverse shell capability mainly appears in HIHs and some
The HoneyLLMs proposed by [87] and [88] concentrate on HyHs, while most LIHs and MIHs remain restricted to bind
enhancing authentic bind shell responses using various LLMs. interactions. In addition, while ML and LLM techniques
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8651

 have been introduced and integrated to honeypot systems,
 the reverse shell functionality is still underrepresented.
 r Most honeypots are unable to achieve the simultaneous
 realization of authentic response and real-time response.
 Majority of LLM-powered honeypots can achieve high linguistic realism but limited to real time reply for maintaining
 deception credibility.
 Therefore, our work is motivated to facilitate both bind
and reverse shell capabilities, enabling effective responses to
various attack scenarios. Also, it is crafted to emulate multiple OS, enhancing its versatility. Moreover, our design tran-
 Fig. 2. An Overview of the Design of HoneyLLMd.
scends the confines of OpenAI’s models, boasting compatibility with a broad spectrum of LLMs. We have also dedicated
considerable effort to fine-tuning the base model, as well as B. System Overview
probability and separated state modeled automaton, aiming to Fig. 2 illustrates the design of the proposed LLM-powered
generate more realistic and interactive shell interactions. In adaptive honeypot. The entire system is composed of four
essence, although previous studies have explored honeypot sys- components-Request Handler (RH), Shell Engine (SE), Logger,
tems and deception methodologies, our innovative application and Countermeasure Engine(CE)-and one external componentof LLMs within this domain marks a significant and novel the LLM Engine (LE). HoneyLLMd not only provides bind
advancement. shell functionality but also introduces support for reverse shell
 capabilities.
 III. DESIGN OF HONEYLLMD The RH, as its name suggests, is responsible for handling
 This section outlines the threat model underlying our ap- malicious connection requests, particularly managing concurproach, as well as the design of the adaptive HoneyLLMd. rent requests, processing payload operations, and invoking the
It includes an overview of the system architecture, a detailed appropriate shell emulation processes. Within RH, the Port Lisdescription of each functional module, the honeypot modeling tener monitors traditional bind shell ports as well as other ports
approach, and the evaluation metrics used. that may receive malicious payloads, acting as a preliminary
 filter to facilitate reverse shell functionality. Additionally, RH
A. Threat Model forwards and displays the commands and responses exchanged
 between the attacker and the shell.
 The proposed HoneyLLMd is designed to enhance traditional The SE primarily provides deceptive responses to attackers
low-/medium-interaction honeypots by integrating LLM to gen- using LLM engine, including fake shells for traditional bind
erate imitative shell responses. Our work focuses on engaging shell requests and reverse shells for reverse connection requests
and mesmerizing attack activities through shell interaction based identified from malicious payloads.
on intelligence strategies. Thus, in addition to the basic data The Logger records and stores content generated from all
capture capabilities for port scanning, probing, traffic flood- modules of HoneyLLMd, covering essential details such as
ing, etc., our HoneyLLMd is capable of maneuvering to resist incoming commands, decoding procedure, block decisions, and
handcrafted/script-generated shell commands. It is assumed that LLM responses for system analysis and optimization.
the adversary is able to exploit the vulnerabilities set up by our The CE consists of two modules. The first part is the HPA,
honeypot and can create bind/reverse shell as if our honeypot which is constructed by preprocessing the raw incoming comcan recognize the exploit payload and spawn the corresponding mands into states, and the transition matrices which deliver
shell session with the attacker. the frequency and probability transitions between states. They
 Also, we stress on the attackers seeking targets of oppor- are continuously updated when detecting new transitions. The
tunities (like internet-based opportunists), however, they are another part is Block Judgement, which determines whether
not limited to the attacker aiming for targets of choice, e.g., incoming content should be blocked according to the transition
target intruders in an enterprise network. Essentially, it depends matrix.
on how the HoneyLLMd would be used and where it will The LE is an external module that the virtual honeypot relies
be deployed. We assume that it would be more likely to be on. Multiple LLMs can be integrated into the LE to meet the
deployed in the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), while there is no performance requirements necessary for effective deception and
constraint to deploy it inside networks. Furthermore, the adver- defense.
sary may employ honeypot detection techniques based on sidechannel signals such as latency, IP addresses, and traffic patterns,
 C. Key Functional Components
whereas our deception defense approach primarily focuses on
generating authentic shell responses rather than manipulating In terms of the systematic description of the whole workflow,
other side-channel signals. Thus, enhancing deception quality each key component is detailed as follows.
by tweaking side-channel signals is outside the scope of this 1) Request Handler (RH): This component is comprised of
threat model. two programs: port listener and session management.
8652 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 The Port Listener is responsible for monitoring specific ports 3) LLM Engine (LE): The LLM Engine plays a decisive
on the honeypot system. In addition to the SSH service on port role for the HoneyLLMd. This external component includes
22, it also listens on other ports to simulate different service the prompt, model, and API modules. The API represents the
types and attract a broader range of attackers attempting various underlying application programming interface exposed by the
attack methods. This allows the system to capture malicious concrete LLM. With this, HoneyLLMd can use the API based
payloads that can be used to prepare for subsequent reverse shell URL. In our case, the API is only required to provide an
interactions. By monitoring these ports, the honeypot system OpenAI-compatible chat completion endpoint. The Prompt and
can capture a wider array of attack behaviors, analyze different Model stand behind the the API. Prompt provides contextual
types of threats, and enhance the system’s ability to respond to constraints, role specification, and response control, which coldiverse attacks. Once a connection request is detected, it triggers lectively guide the LLM to generate outputs that are coherent
the session manager to handle the incoming connection. This with the task requirements. Our design is not limited to a certain
component ensures that attackers can connect to the honeypot large language model, while we even lean toward to the plug-in
system and proceed to the next stage of interaction. architecture for the sake of extendable implementation.
 The Session Manager handles both the transport-layer connection and the application-layer session. Specifically, once D. Honeypot Modeling
the TCP three-way handshake is completed, this program can
 1) Data Capture Capability Vs. Risk of Compromise: As we
provide application-layer-specific responses according to the
 know that there is always a trade-off between the data capture
request, such as setting up an SSH session. When the remote
 capability and the risk of compromise in honeypots. Thus,
attacker closes the connection or the program detects that the
 modeling the trade-off between the risk of compromise (security
process has existed, it will terminate the corresponding process.
 level) and data capture capability (ability to attract malicious
Further, the Session Manager is in charge of ensuring the session
 activities) in a honeypot is an interesting and arduous challenge.
input piped into stdin, while stdout redirected to the session
 The honeypot design objective is to maximize attack data capture
output. In our design, the Session Manager process is additioncapability while minimizing the security risk.
ally responsible for passing the attacker’s C&C requests to the
 We define x ∈ [0, 1] as the exposure level, i.e., the amount
Shell Emulation and forwarding the bogus responses generated
 of the exposed information system resources (e.g., vulnerable
by the Shell Emulation back to the attacker.
 services), where ‘0’ indicates minimal exposure and ‘1’ denotes
 2) Shell Engine (SE): The Shell Engine is the core comfull exposure; thus, λ(x) is the data capture capability, which
ponent responsible for simulating the shell environment and
 is a function of x; and also, p(x) is the probability of honeypot
interacting with the attacker. It consists of several programs that
 being fully compromised, whereby p(x) must be constrained to
work together to create a convincing interaction.
 an acceptable risk threshold. Therefore, the honeypot objective
 The Shell Decoder is used to dissect the malicious payload
 function is to maximize the following with respect to x, i.e.,
in order to obtain the parameters, especially for generating the
 controlling x:
reverse shell. We employ two methods for decoding the shellcode. One relies on the regular expression to match the shellcode max λ(x) − α · p(x), (1)
 x∈[0,1]
patterns, and the other uses LLM to analyze the shellcode and
get parameters. where α is a risk-aversion parameter.
 The Bind Port Interaction handles direct shell interaction by Taking advantage of using LLM to emulate the real system
binding to a local port (i.e., 22 for SSH and 23 for Telnet). In this response for the honeypot, x in (1) can be optimized to ‘1’,
mode, the attacker connects to a specific port on the honeypot, however, the whole honeypot system will never be compromised
where the Shell Emulation processes incoming commands and because there is no real system behind, which is the beauty of
returns appropriate fake responses. The Connect Back Interac- the LLM-powered honeypot.
tion prepares to initiate a reverse connection upon notification 2) Hierarchical Probabilistic Automaton: An HPA is a powfrom the Decoder, typically triggered after an attacker’s mali- erful computational model, which is essentially a state machine
cious payload has been injected into the system. The attackers where states can themselves be other probabilistic automata.
believe they have successfully exploited a system vulnerability This allows HPA to model complex, multi-stage processes in a
and gained shell access, while the Shell Engine initiates a reverse manageable and compact way, significantly enhancing the abilconnection back to the attacker’s machine. This method further ity to estimate attack vectors and dynamically adapt engagement
entices the attacker to continue their operations, making them strategies.
believe they have full control over the system. As shown in Fig. 3, the commands will be divided into sub-
 The Shell Emulation program takes the critical responsi- commands if possible, and each of them can be independently
bility for preparing the execution environment, including en- treated as an automaton. Within each automaton, the structure is
vironment variables, arguments, standard input/output (I/O), first captured as process trees, which describe the parent-child
and then executing the command. Regarding the command relationships among states, and the primary program invoked
execution, it essentially invokes the LLM API to obtain the is identified as the macro state, while the arguments associated
authentic response and then forward the response to the Session with that program are represented as its micro states. From these
Management which further returns the bogus response to the process trees, process vectors are derived, describing the ordered
attacker. sequence of programs executed during an attack. All process
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8653

 where Pact denotes the probability of the transition actually
 chosen by the attacker, and Popt denotes the probability of the
 most probable (optimal) path computed from the matrix M .
 When the attacker follows the most probable path, the attacker’s
 payoff approaches 1 while the honeypot’s payoff converges
 to 0. In contrast, when the attacker deviates due to honeypot
 interference, the honeypot’s payoff is maximized. Specifically,
 when a new state transition that does not exist in the matrix is
 observed, the Pact and Popt are recognized as N one since the
 transition probability is absent from the underlying data. In this
 case, the attacker’s payoff Rap is assigned a value of with 0, which
Fig. 3. Process of HPA Modeling.
 indicates that the attacker has not gained any effective progress
 toward the objective, and the honeypot’s payoff Rhp is valued as
 1, which means the honeypot has recorded a new attack path.
 Dynamic update of the state transition matrix: Since attacker
 behavior evolves continuously during interaction, the matrix C
 and matrix M must be dynamically updated to reflect the most
 recent observations. Incoming inputs are processed in the same
 manner as in HPA construction (see Section III-D2), where each
 input is mapped into a corresponding state representation.
Fig. 4. Example of HPA Generation. The system would update the count transition matrix C by
 incrementing the frequency if the transition already exists, or by
vectors observed from attacks are then aggregated into an overall adding a new entry if it is observed for the first time. Next, the
HPA, which encodes the global transitions among states. From probability transition matrix M is derived. In practice, there are
this representation, two N × N square matrices are derived, three distinct updating cases of as (4) shows:
namely probability transition matrix M and count transition
 ⎧ C
matrix C. In these two matrices, both the first row and the first ⎪  ij · (1 − ε), if Cij > 0,
 ⎪
 ⎪ j Cij
column correspond to the complete set of HPA states. In matrix ⎪
 ⎨
C, each entry Cij records the count of transitions from state i to 
 Pij = N ε−n , if Cij = 0 and j Cij > 0, (4)
state j, thereby capturing the distribution of attacker behaviors. ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪ 
To transform these frequencies into matrix M , the outgoing tran- ⎩
 ε, if j Cij = 0
sitions of each state are normalized such that their cumulative
probability sums to one. Furthermore, a small smoothing factor
ε is incorporated during this process to prevent zero-probability 1) For observed transitions (Cij > 0), the probability is comcases. Fig. 4 illustrates the HPA generation procedure. In this puted by multiplying the normalized transition frequency
example, an attack session consists of a sequence of three by (1 − ε).
commands: “ls -la | cd /bin”, “ls -a | cd /dev”, 2) For unobserved
  transitions from active states (Cij = 0
and “ls”. These commands are decomposed into five distinct and j Cij > 0), the probability is set to ε/(N − n),
automatons, each defined by its specific macro and micro states. distributing the smoothing factor evenly among all N − n
For instance, the command “ls -la | cd /bin” is parsed missing transitions, where n is the number of observed
into two sub-commands: the first automaton is represented by transitions from state i.
the macro state “ls” and the micro state “-la”. Therefore, the  completely new states with no recorded transitions
 3) For
session is transformed into the process vector: <ls, -la, ( j Cij = 0), there is no prior information to estimate
cd, /bin, ls, -a, cd, /dev, ls>, and the HPA is the likelihood of any particular transition.
generated accordingly. A probability of 1/N is assigned to the smoothing factor
 3) Strategy of Adaptation: Built upon the HPA modeled at- ε, ensuring that the system remains unbiased and capable of
tack process, we are able to adapt the deception defense strategy, adapting as new observations are collected, while keeping the
whereby the honeypot payoff is stressed on in order to optimize matrix M valid for subsequent updates.
the honeypot benefit but still engage the attack activity. To Algorithm for path searching: To efficiently identify the the
quantitatively evaluate the interaction between the attacker and actual transition probability Pact and optimal path probability
the honeypot, payoff captures how likely the attacker’s chosen Popt , we reformulate the problem as a shortest-path search on
path is compared to the most probable path. Formulas (2) and (3) a weighted graph. As Fig. 5 shows, each transition p = Mij
define the attacker’s payoff Rap and honeypot’s Rhp respectively: in the probability matrix is transformed into an edge weight.
 So that the task of maximizing path probability is equivalent to
 Pact
 Rap = (2) minimizing cumulative weight. Specifically, a higher probability
 Popt
 yields lower edge weight. This transformation enables Dijkstra’s
 Pact algorithm to explores states by increasing path cost, ensuring the
 Rhp = 1 − , (3)
 Popt optimal path is found.
8654 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Algorithm 1: Dynamic Optimal Path Search with Probabil- i.e., the initialization of the weight matrix and the shortest-path
 ity Threshold. search with probability threshold. First, the initialization of the
 weight matrix requires computing − log Mij for each non-zero
 transition probability, which is linearly related to the number
 of edges E, namely, O(E). Second, the shortest-path search is
 similar to Dijkstra’s algorithm and involves updating distances
 and priority queue operations for each node and edge. Using
 a heap-based priority queue, the complexity of this search is
 O((V + E) log V ), where V denotes the number of states. The
 pruning procedure does not change the worst-case complexity. Therefore, the overall time complexity of the algorithm is
 O((V + E) log V ). Regarding space, the algorithm stores the
 weight matrix, distance array, and priority queue, leading to a
 space complexity of O(V + E).
 Block mechanism and corresponding LLM responses: After
 modeling the attacker’s path and training the HPA on historical
 attack chains, we compute the attacker’s payoff (Rap ). This value
 represents the current probabilistic intent of the attacker to reach
 the target malicious state (e.g., payload execution), based on
 the observed HPA state transitions. The honeypot implements a
 security policy governed by a Block Threshold B ∈ [0, 1]. The
 decision is made dynamically: when the calculated attacker payoff (Rap ) exceeds this threshold (Rap > B), the system adaptively
 enforces a block, forcing the attacker to diverge from their most
 optimal path. Given the complementary relationship between
 the honeypot and the attacker’s payoff (Rap + Rhp = 1), we aim
 to ensure that a block threshold is found such that the payoff of
 the honeypot is at least greater than 0.5.
 When the attacker is blocked, HoneyLLMd calls the LLM
 API to generate deceptive responses, such as “permission
 denied” or “timeout”, so that the attacker perceives the
 command as unsuccessful. In contrast, if the input is allowed,
 HoneyLLMd generates valid simulation responses, making the
 attacker believe that the command has been successfully exe-
Fig. 5. Relationship between Probability and Edge Weight. cuted. By adaptively adjusting this blocking policy, the HoneyLLMd is able to enforce fine-grained control while maintaining a coherent and adaptive strategy for engaging the attacker,
 To ensure scalability on large N × N matrices, a probability ultimately enabling richer observation and capture of attacker
threshold pmin is introduced to prune infeasible paths. A path activities.
π = (i1 , i2 , . . . , ik ) is retained only if its cumulative probability
satisfies E. Deception Evaluation Metrics
 k−1
  We define the deception evaluation metrics for honeypots
 P (π) = Mir ,ir+1 ≥ pmin (5) from two perspectives:
 r=1
 1) The system’s ability to successfully execute and respond
We can generally select a fixed minimum cumulative probability to an attacker’s commands: When an attacker initiates
threshold pmin to prune infeasible paths without dynamically an attack, a honeypot, as a protective system, should
computing it for each update. Considering the size of the state provide the responses that the attacker expects to lure them
space (N ≥ 8000) and the typical path lengths in our system, into further attacks, thereby collecting more information
a value of pmin = 10−9 is chosen. This threshold is sufficiently about the attacker. Therefore, successfully answering the
small to retain realistic paths while efficiently discarding se- attacker’s commands and providing the information they
quences with extremely low probability, thereby reducing the seek is crucial.
search space and improving computational efficiency. 2) The system’s responses should align with the logic of
 Algorithm 1 presents the detailed procedure, which takes the OS: When the system responds to the attacker’s comthe probability transition matrix M , start and end states (s, t), mands, these responses should conform to the logic of
and the threshold pmin as input, and returns the values of Pact , the current OS to avoid being detected by the attacker. In
Popt . The complexity of Algorithm 1 involves two main aspects, addition, when the attacker sends probing commands that
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8655

 TABLE II
 DECEPTION PERFORMANCE CATEGORIES
 SALC + FALC
 Accuracy = (9)
 SALC + SANLC + FALC + FANLC
 IV. IMPLEMENTATION
 This section presents the implementation details of the proposed approach.

 A. Prototype Implementation
 We developed a modular prototype of HoneyLLMd using
 do not follow logical patterns, the honeypot should still be programming language Python 2.7. The system leverages the
 able to provide a response that aligns with what the OS asynchat framework for asynchronous I/O, allowing it to
 would do, thereby evading the attacker’s probes. manage multiple concurrent attacker connections. Furthermore,
 Based on these two aspects, we propose four categories as in we integrated OpenAI APIs via OpenRouter.1 These APIs are
Table II to calculate the metrics of deception performance. We invoked by specifying the model identifier and their corresponduse real system responses as the oracle of the four categories. The ing endpoint. The model prompts are defined within the system
“successful attack” item indicates the system successfully exe- configuration, and a cache recording the session history in JSON
cutes the command and provides effective response information format was utilized to reduce the API latency. The transition
when the attacker issues a command. The “logic compliance” matrices are stored as CSV files that can be dynamically updated
item holds when the system response adheres to the logic of a during the interaction. The block mechanism is enabled or disreal OS. abled via a boolean flag defined in the configuration file. When
 Based on these four categories, we define four metrics to we disable the block mechanism, it is equivalent to the block
evaluate the deception performance of honeypots: threshold that equals 0. The shell decoder was realized using
 r Precision: This represents the precision of the system in two approaches, namely the RE-based decoding and LLM-based
 successfully executing attack commands. A higher value decoding. The implementation for the shell decoder is detailed
 indicates that the system closely mimics a real system when in Section IV-B.
 successfully executing commands.
 B. Shell Decoder
 SALC We generated the reverse shell obfuscated payloads that op-
 Precision = (6) erate across eight common script languages-including Bash,
 SALC + SANLC
 r Temptation: This metric represents the system’s attractive- Perl, Python, PHP, Ruby, Netcat, PowerShell, and Lua, and
 eight common obfuscation and encoding techniques under a
 ness to attackers, which is the proportion of successfully controlled testbed environment. We also augmented the dataset
 executed commands among all responses that comply with with normal payloads which contains benign samples. For each
 the OS’s logic. A higher value means that the system of the eight languages we added a set of harmless command
 provides more valuable information to attackers, making it snippets and benign code examples (e.g., file listing, simple I/O,
 more realistic and attractive. language-specific no-op snippets and benign network requests).
 In addition, we included a subset of benign strings called hard
 SALC negatives that intentionally contain superficially suspicious arte-
 Temptation = (7)
 SALC + FALC facts. These resulting malicious payloads were only used for
 recognition under both methods in a controlled test environment
 r Attack Success Rate: The proportion of successful at- and did not involve actual execution. The obfuscation techniques
 tack commands among the total number of commands. are detailed as follows:
 r Base64 Encoding: A method of encoding binary data into
 It indicates the proportion of commands that attackers
 can successfully execute. A higher value suggests that the a text representation using the Base64 encoding scheme.
 system often allows attackers to succeed in their attacks, Commonly used to obfuscate data or embed it in text-based
 thereby providing more information to them. formats.
 r URL Encoding: A technique used to encode special
 characters in a URL to ensure that they are transmitted
 SALC + SANLC correctly. Characters are replaced with a ‘%’ followed by
Attack Success Rate =
 SALC + SANLC + FALC + FANLC their hexadecimal ASCII code.
 (8) r Hexadecimal Encoding: A method of encoding binary data
 into a text representation using the hexadecimal format.
 r Accuracy: It is a crucial metric that signifies the system’s
 Often used to represent binary data in a human-readable
 resemblance to a real system. A higher accuracy indicates form.
 that the system closely mimics a real system, thereby
 effectively deceiving attackers. 1 https://openrouter.ai/
8656 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 r String Concatenation: The process of joining multiple TABLE III
 ATTACK CATEGORIES DISTRIBUTION UNDER MITRE ATT&CK ENTERPRISE
 strings together to form a single string, This technique is MATRIX (LINUX)
 usually used to dynamically construct payloads or commands.
 r Inline Comments: Comments inserted directly into code to
 obscure the actual logic or intent of the code. This technique
 complicates the static analysis and reverse engineering
 process.
 r Environment Variable Injection: A technique where parts
 of the payload or command are stored in environment
 variables and then combined or executed dynamically at
 runtime.
 r Environment Variable Concatenation: The technique of was applied. First, all input-related events were extracted from
 splitting a payload into multiple environment variables the raw JSON logs, while retaining essential metadata such
 and then concatenating them at runtime to reconstruct the as session identifier, source address, and timestamp. Second,
 original payload. events were grouped into sessions according to their identifiers,
 r Multi-layer Encoding: The use of multiple encoding tech- and within each session the commands were ordered based on
 niques (e.g., Base64 combined with string concatenation) their timestamps to preserve the natural execution sequence.
 to further obscure the payload and make detection and Third, compound commands (e.g., involving pipes, conditional
 analysis more challenging. operators, or semicolons) were further decomposed into subcommands using regular-expression-based parsing rules, while
C. Dataset Statistics and Preprocessing ensuring that quoted strings and protected segments were not
 erroneously split.
 We employed two real-world open-source datasets collected
by Cowrie honeypots deployed in cloud-based environments.
Both datasets consist of SSH and Telnet interaction logs, with D. Deception Metrics Labeling Procedure
the honeypots listening on ports 22 and 23, respectively. The To implement the deception evaluation metrics, we developed
dataset 1, collected by [91], was replayed to the system to an automated labeling pipeline using Python and LLM. The
evaluate the LLM capability in terms of shell decoding and procedure uses the real system output (Rora ) as the oracle to
deception performance, and was used to construct the HPA categorize the LLM response (Rllm ).
transition matrices. It contains 214,132 log entries during 9 The first layer of the pipeline determines the “successful
June to 4 July 2022, consisting of 82 unique commands. Dataset attack” status by scanning for execution failure indicators. We
2 [92] is a publicly available dataset from Kaggle. It contains utilize RE to identify a predefined and continuously updated set
42,817 log entries and 67 unique commands during the period of failure keywords, such as error, EOF, not found, and
of October 2024. It is under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and is no/not such file. If Rllm does not contain these failure
used exclusively as the attack&evaluation dataset against the indicators, it is initially categorized as either SALC or SANLC.
HPA-enabled honeypot. These datasets are kept separately to Otherwise, it is categorized as either FALC or FANLC. Also,
prevent training/evaluation contamination. the LLM would be used to divide the response into logical
 We categorized and compared the attack categories of these compliance and logical non-compliance. If the response adheres
datasets by classifying them at the session level using the to one of the following four conditions, it would be classified as
MITRE ATT&CK2 Enterprise Matrix for Linux platform. This logical non-compliance:
framework reflects the current knowledge base of adversary r Syntactic Incorrectness: If Rllm is not in the shell format
tactics and technologies that has been formed based on actual of the currently specified system, but rather a response in
observations. Each tactic and technique has been described in other format (e.g., nature language).
detail and has been assigned a unique identifier. Table III lists the r State Inconsistency: If Rllm reflects a system state that
tactics reflected in the datasets and the corresponding technique contradicts prior interactions. For instance, if an attacker
types. Compared with the official techniques, both of these successfully deletes a directory, but Rllm still lists it in
datasets cover most of the threat types. However, they differ subsequent commands.
in the emphasis of the attack categories. Specifically, dataset 1 r Environment Nonalignment: If Rllm references tools or
shows a higher concentration in activities such as Execution, paths inconsistent with the target OS (e.g., a yum error on
Persistence, Privilege Escalation, and Command and Control an Ubuntu target).
operations. In contrast, dataset 2 focuses more on Discovery r Permission Non-compliance: If Rllm indicates an opposite
techniques and includes 19 of them. It also covers most of permission result with Rora .
the techniques of Initial Accesses. As the datasets are initially
raw logs, a systematic preprocessing procedure for datasets E. Testbed Deployment
 To evaluate the capabilities of HoneyLLMd against traditional
 2 https://attack.mitre.org/ MIHs, such as Amun [15] and Cowrie [17], they were deployed
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8657

 TABLE IV
 STATISTIC COMPARISON OF VARIOUS LLMS

on CloudLab.3 Each honeypot was hosted on a dedicated VM
configured with 4 vCPU cores and 4096 MB of RAM running
Ubuntu 22.04. The VMs were configured with public accessible
IP addresses for collecting and comparing real-world attack data.
 To validate the effectiveness of HoneyLLMd against humandriven attack scenario, we conducted a controlled cyber-range
simulation. We employed the CTFAgent [93], an autonomous
capture the flag (CTF) framework, as the offensive agent to
emulate malicious activities. It is supported by an LLM-driven
engine with Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning to adapt its at- Fig. 6. Payload Recognition Capability Comparison.
tack strategy based on feedback. The simulation was conducted
within a controlled environment, utilizing two VMs. Both VMs the minimum cost. Similarly, the input and output cost should
share an identical configuration, running Ubuntu 22.04 with also be controlled. Therefore, GPT-4o and Claude-Opus-4.1
4096 MB of RAM. To facilitate communication, the VMs are are not preferred since they cost relatively high on catching.
configured with bridged adapters in promiscuous mode, placing Moreover, GPT-5, Claude-Sonnet-4, and Gemini-2.5-pro are not
them within the same subnet. This isolated setup ensures that considered since their output cost are expensive for invoking.
traffic is restricted exclusively to these two nodes, preventing As a result, we evaluate the rest of models in the following
any interference with external network infrastructure. experiments.

 V. EXPERIMENTS B. Comparison of Shell Decoder Performance
 This section presents the experimental results obtained from As aforementioned, the selected testing LLMs include GPT-5,
the prototype implementation along with the corresponding GPT-4o-mini, Gemini-2.5-flash, and Claude-haiku-3.5. To asanalysis and discussion. sess the performance of the LLM-based shell decoder, we test
 the payload recognition correctness (Fig. 6(a)) and the payload
A. Comparison of Large Language Models recognition latency (Fig. 6(b)). We define payload recognition
 As the LLM plays an essential role in our design as shell correctness as the ability of the analyzer agent to accurately
decoder and session responser, Table IV compares four official identify and extract payload information, and payload recogniindexes4 5 6 of a number of common LLMs. The context index tion latency as the interval to finish the recognition procedure.
refers to the maximum number of tokens that the model’s word Using this definition, we employ 91 payloads (64 obfuscated
interactions can handle and remember. For example, Gemini- payloads and 27 normal payloads) as benchmarks to evaluate
2.5-pro can memory information related to 976,000 tokens. the five analyzer agents.
The input, cached input, and output indexes explain the cost Fig. 6(a) shows that the correctness of normal payload is
of invoking the API of corresponding model. generally higher than the obfuscated one. Specifically, regular
 Context and cached input cost determine the scope of the expression exhibits a dissatisfied result on obfuscated payload
context that our system can handle. We hope that Context can recognition correctness as their are 12 payloads are not correctly
be as large as possible or the cached input cost can be as small recognized, where 4 benign payloads are mismatched and 8
as possible, so as to obtain the largest historical record space at obfuscated payloads are missed. GPT-5-mini, Claude-haiku-3.5,
 and Gemini-2.5-flash demonstrate excellent performance, with
 3 https://www.cloudlab.us/
 obfuscated payload recognition accuracy rates generally above
 4 https://openai.com/api/pricing 90%. In contrast, GPT-4o-mini shows a marked decrease in
 5 https://www.anthropic.com/api#pricing recognition correctness for both normal and obfuscated pay-
 6 https://deepinfra.com/pricing loads. In addition, Fig. 6(b) shows the average latency of payload
8658 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

recognition under different instances. RE’s latency (53.48 ms)
delivers a ideal value that is similar to the real system (41.95 ms)
within a smaller error range. However, LLMs exhibit a worse
performance compared to the real system and RE with an average
latency of 805.38 ms. The detailed sub figure reveals the latency
of four LLMs, and it is clear that the latency of obfuscated
recognizing is usually longer than normal one. Although GPT-
4o-mini exhibits the smallest latency in both two recognition
tasks, its recognition accuracy is much worse than other models,
indicating it is not a good choice for payload recognition tasks.
 Overall, RE seems to be an appropriate choice for shell
decoding. However, RE’s limitations stem from its inherently
rigid nature, which can struggle to adapt to the diverse and
complex patterns present in different shellcode types. In contrast,
 Fig. 7. Deception Performance Comparison between Real System and Proleveraging the capabilities of LLMs has shown a promising posed Honeypots.
ability to enhance the effectiveness of shellcode decoding. The
advanced pattern recognition and learning abilities of LLMs
enable them to better understand and interpret the complexities As the Fig. 7 shows, apart from GPT-5-mini, Cowrie and the
of obfuscated code, offering a more versatile solution to the other LLMs perform similarly in terms of precision, with values
challenge of shellcode decoding. approaching 90%. Moreover, LLM-powered HoneyLLMds out-
 Therefore, while RE-based decoding aligns more closely with perform Cowrie in terms of temptation, attacker success rate, and
expected service latency and offers a straightforward approach, accuracy. It is clear that four LLMs are able to provide a higher
incorporating LLMs into the decoding process can significantly temptation value. In particular, GPT-5-mini exhibits the most
enrich the toolset available for tackling sophisticated obfusca- significant improvement in temptation, surpassing Cowrie by
tion techniques in shellcode, albeit with a trade-off in terms of approximately 68%. This indicates that, compared to Cowrie,
increased latency. This suggests a potential area for further re- it is able to execute more commands and provide responses
search and development, aiming to optimize the balance between that appear substantially more attractive to attackers. Meandecoding accuracy and efficiency when dealing with complex while, GPT-4o-mini, Gemini-2.5-flash, and Claude-haiku-3.5 all
cybersecurity threats. achieve temptation levels around 58%. Although not as high as
 Insight 1: Advanced LLMs demonstrate remarkable correct- GPT-5-mini, these results still demonstrate stronger engagement
ness in recognizing and analyzing the shell code, even when capabilities than Cowrie. With respect to the attack success rate,
the shell code is obfuscated. However, its effectiveness with LLM-powered models generally achieve higher values than the
zero-day exploitations has yet to be determined. real system.
 Among them, GPT-5-mini reaches 60%, highlighting its
 strong capacity to consistently generate outputs that mimic
C. Comparison of Deception Performance
 command execution. This suggests that GPT-5-mini is especially
 We evaluate the deceptive capabilities of various LLMs with effective at maintaining the illusion of successful execution,
no block threshold to facilitate model selection. We identified thereby sustaining the attacker’s engagement. Claude-haiku-3.5
the dataset [91] to assess six different systems across four follows with a score of 51%, marking it as the second-best
predefined categories, using a real system and a Cowrie honeypot performer. In contrast, GPT-4o-mini shows a weaker ability in
as baselines for comparison. We use SSH to connect to each this aspect, reaching only 43%, which is merely 4% higher than
of them, and perform traffic replay to emulate the real attack Cowrie. Finally, regarding accuracy, Claude-haiku-3.5 achieves
scenario. the best performance with 76%, followed closely by GPT-5-mini
 From Fig. 7, it can be observed that in the test of 82 distinct with 75%. These results indicate that both models are highly
commands, the real system was able to successfully respond capable of generating system responses that align with realistic
to 28 commands from the attacker, while the remaining 54 behaviors, thereby enhancing the credibility of the deception.
commands could not provide the desired information due to Overall, the results demonstrate that LLM-powered honeypots
permission restrictions or other security mechanisms. The LLM- surpass Cowrie in both authenticity and persuasiveness of repowered HoneyLLMds show a higher average SALC value sponses. Among the tested models, GPT-5-mini and Claudethan real system and Cowrie, indicating LLMs provide more haiku-3.5 emerge as the strongest candidates for integration into
executable and reasonable response. However, Cowrie’s perfor- HoneyLLMd, as they combine strong engagement potential with
mance was less than satisfactory, which only provided 24 SALC a high degree of response fidelity.
items, and 25 FALC items. The remaining 33 responses fell into
the categories of logically inconsistent responses (SANLC and
 D. Dataset Similarity
FANLC). The result indicates that Cowrie’s simulation of the OS
was not realistic enough to conceal the identity of a honeypot, As the datasets is the basic of HPA and affects a lot on the
and not deceptive enough compared with an LLM. payoff and block results. We first analyze the similarity and
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8659

 TABLE V
 COMPARISON OF CAPTURED TOP 10 COMMANDS BETWEEN DATASETS

 the attacker and the honeypot are inherently mirror images
 of each other. The disparity is reasonable given the low
 similarity between the datasets [92] and [91]. HoneyLLMd
 tends to assign the new transitions with high payoff during
 each update and therefore block them. By giving such transitions high payoff, the system deliberately encourages the
 attacker to execute more commands. This behavior shows
 that the real-time decision logic of our system is effective in
 steering attacker actions and improving capture of malicious
 activities.
 2) Sensitivity Analysis of Block Threshold: To determine the
Fig. 8. Payoff Distribution. appropriate block threshold, achieving the trade-off between
 data capture capability and system risk, we evaluate the average
commands distribution of the two datasets. payoff of the attacker and the honeypot, the number of blocked
 transitions, and the deception performance under different block
 Nset
 1  thresholds. Based on the previous experimental results, we adopt
 vset = xi (10)
 Nset i=1 GPT-5-mini for this evaluation.
 As shown in Fig. 9(a), of unblocked transitions occurs when
 vset 1 · vset 2
 Cosine Similarity = (11) the block threshold increases from 0.1 to 0.6: the majority of
 vset 1  vset 2  transitions remain blocked (95%), and the attacker’s average
To assess the similarity of these two datasets, we calculate the payoff increases slowly. Specifically, when the threshold crosses
average vector of them with Formula (10), and the cosine simi- 0.6, the attacker’s average payoff jumps markedly (from 0.14 to
larity of the command distributions according to Formula (11) is 0.44) while the honeypot’s payoff and the blocked-transition
only approximately 0.15, indicating that the attacker behaviors ratio both drop substantially. This sharp transition indicates a
in 2022 and 2024 have undergone a substantial shift. Table V loss of the honeypot’s protective margin: permitting a higher
presents the top-10 most frequent commands of two datasets threshold yields little additional capture benefit but substantially
respectively. The results reveal a remarkable divergence: com- increases compromise risk. As Fig. 9(b) depicted, when the
mands in the set [91] are dominated by information-gathering block threshold is within the range of 0.1 to 0.6, the number
and system profiling activities (e.g., querying CPU, memory, of “successful attack” (SALC and SANLC) slightly increases.
and system binaries), while those in set [92] primarily consist However, when the threshold exceeds 0.6, there is an evident
of persistence, reverse shell, and BusyBox-related behaviors raise of SALC (from 31 to 37) and reduction of FALC. Ac-
(e.g., injecting SSH keys, executing sh, and issuing chained cordingly, the Temptation and Attack Success Rate ascend to
commands). approximately 0.7, indicating the improve of system’s attract
 ability, but also suggesting a higher risk of the system being
 breached. Overall, the number of SANLC and FANLC keeps
E. Payoff Analysis and Block Threshold Evaluation
 stable. Precision and Accuracy remain robust at approximately
 1) Payoff Distribution: We depict the payoff distribution 0.82. Although both metrics exhibited a marginal decline as
between the attacker and the honeypot in Fig. 8. It is clear the threshold increased, the magnitude of this decrease was
that over 80% of attacker’s payoffs clustering near 1.0, whereas negligible. This suggests that HoneyLLMd can exhibit consisthe honeypot’s payoffs remain predominantly near 0. Ow- tent emulation fidelity relative to the real OS across varying
ing to the definition of payoff, the payoff distributions of thresholds.
8660 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Fig. 10. Session Duration Comparison.

 metrics. The rest shows the session data collected after cloud
 deployment.
 Firstly, the integration of HPA enhances the system’s Precision (+0.019) and Accuracy (+0.029). This improvement suggests that HPA is conductive to emulating the OS. In addition,
 a reduction in Temptation (−0.173) and Attack Success Rate
 (−0.15) are also observed. A lower Attack Success Rate indicates that the HPA module successfully intercepts high-payoff
 attacker commands that could potentially compromise the honeypot’s true identity. Secondly, Fig. 10
 further plots CDF curves of connection duration across
Fig. 9. Block Threshold Evaluation.
 Cowrie, Amun, and HoneyLLMd. Specifically, Amun shows
 TABLE VI the worst performance on session duration: most of the con-
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF HONEYLLMD nections can merely last for 5 to 10 seconds. Since the Amun
 honeypot only hard-codes little response logic, it is unable to
 cover all possible response scenarios for attack commands, nor
 can it dynamically change the response strategy during the
 interaction. Cowrie performs better than Amun, as evidenced
 by the longest duration of Cowire reaching nearly 100 seconds,
 and almost all of the connection durations were longer than
 those of Amun. However, it still struggles to sustain extended
 conversations due to its hard-coded nature. Notably, as LLMs
 are able to dynamically generate responses, they demonstrate
 superior duration performance. They are capable to maintain at
 least 50% of the interactions for 20 s, and at the same time, the
 Therefore, we identify a threshold of 0.6 as the operationally maximum duration can reach the hundreds of seconds level. Benoptimal trade-off where honeypot system is able to retain rel- efit from the adaptive HPA mechanism, fully-functioned Honatively high data capture capability while keeping the risk of eyLLMd further outperforms the LLM-only one. In particular,
system being compromised at an acceptable and relatively low the maximum session duration of fully-functioned HoneyLLMd
level. increases by 148.14 s, reaching 390.67 s, while the average
 duration improves from 63.64 s to 76.41 s. This implies that the
 LLM+HPA configuration achieves more robust performance,
F. Evaluation of HoneyLLMd
 thereby allows it to capture a much broader range of malicious
 1) Ablation Study: To clarify the contributions of LLM and behaviors. In the meantime, the fully-functioned HoneyLLMd
HPA in the proposed system, we compare the deception perfor- collects 2,842 unique commands, a substantial increase of 1,337
mance, session duration, and the unique commands collected by over the LLM-only system, suggesting that the adaptive defense
HoneyLLMd under two configurations: the ‘LLM-only’ version strategy effectively mitigates attacker suspicion and maintains
sets the block threshold B = 1, rendering the HPA mechanism engagement far longer than both non-adaptive models.
disabled; the ‘LLM+HPA’ version utilizes the evaluated thresh- In summary, compared with Amun and Cowrie, the two
old of B = 0.6 (the optimal value in terms of Section V-E2 main- LLM-supported honeypot systems are superior with signifitaining relatively high honeypot payoff and acceptable system cantly longer session durations. Moreover, the HPA component
compromise risk), representing the fully-functioned honeypot effectively enhances both the deception performance and the
system. The upper half of Table VI details the data of deception data capture capability, as well as reduces the compromised risk,
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8661

thereby improving the system robustness and inducing more
malicious activities.
 2) HPA and Blocking Mechanism Validation: To further
evaluate the feasibility of HPA and Blocking mechanism, we
conduct a comparative experiment comparing HPA adaptive
blocking against two baselines: anomaly-based blocking and
random blocking. The experiment begins by performing a replay
attack with the blocking mechanism disabled. As a result, we can
get all the state transitions and the payoff pair (Rap , Rhp ) for each
transition, where Rap + Rhp = 1. Next, we block a certain rate (r)
of transitions at a time and observe the overall honeypot benefit
 Fig. 11. Honeypot Payoff Comparison of Blocking Methods.
P to show the performance of different blocking methods.
The HPA adaptive blocking method aims to block transitions TABLE VII
based on their payoff; the anomaly-based blocking method aims ATTACK INFO VARIATIONS WITHIN THE SIMULATION
to block the repeated transitions to filter the redundant attack
information; the random blocking method aims to block the
transitions at random.
 HPA adaptive Blocking: The HPA adaptive blocking first sorts
all transitions in descending order based on the value of Rap .
The first i transitions, which are determined by the block rate r,
are blocked. For these blocked transitions, their payoff values
are uniformly set to the payoff of the i-th transition, denoted
as α, to emulate a threshold decision. Therefore, the overall
honeypot benefit for HPA adaptive blocking Ph can be calculated
as follows: Fig. 11 presents the overall honeypot benefit under different
 rN N p block rates. The HPA adaptive blocking consistently achieves
 i=1 (1 − α) + j=i+1 (1 − Ra,j )
 Ph = , (12) higher honeypot benefit across all block rates. In the low block-
 N rate regime (0.1–0.3), HPA exhibits a noticeably steeper growth
where N is the total number of transitions, rN represents the trend than the two baselines. For instance, at a block rate of
 p
number of blocked transitions, and Ra,j is the payoff for the j-th 0.3, HPA already achieves a benefit of 0.42, compared with
unblocked transition. 0.34 for random blocking and 0.30 for anomaly-based blocking,
 Anomaly-based Blocking: The anomaly-based blocking demonstrating its early-stage efficiency. At a block rate of 0.5,
method is a baseline that simulates the blocking behavior caused HPA attains a honeypot benefit of 0.65, whereas random and
by the frequency of transitions. It merely blocks the transi- anomaly-based blocking only reach 0.50 and 0.52, respectively.
tions based on their frequency, without taking into account the This indicates that HPA can obtain comparable or higher system
correlations between transitions, i.e., the payoff between them. benefit while blocking substantially fewer transitions. In partic-
Therefore, the transitions are ranked based on the their frequency ular, HPA achieves the minimal interaction goal (Rhp ≥ 0.5) at
in descending order. Similarly, the first i transitions are blocked approximately a 0.37 block rate, whereas both baselines require
according to the block rate r. The Rap of blocked transitions a block rate close to 0.5. This represents a reduction of more than
are set to 0 to simulate failed attack, as transitions that occur 25% in blocking cost, highlighting the efficiency gain of HPA
frequently enough to be blocked are considered redundant for the adaptive blocking. Overall, the results demonstrate that HPA
honeypot system, indicating that the attack no longer provides adaptive blocking not only maximizes honeypot self-benefit but
meaningful interactions. The overall honeypot benefit Pa for also preserves richer attack interaction data, outperforming both
anomaly-based blocking can be calculated as Formula (13). anomaly-based and random blocking baselines.
 rN N p 3) System Validation Under Cyber-Range Simulation: A
 i=1 (1 − 0) + j=i+1 (1 − Ra,j )
 Pa = (13) customized CTF challenge is defined for this simulation, in
 N
 which the CTFAgent follows a prescribed process vector sam-
 Random Blocking: The random blocking baseline does not rely pled from the HPA transition matrix to accomplish the target
on sorting the transitions at all. Similarly, a certain percentage objective, i.e., establishing persistence via a malicious SSH key.
r of transitions are randomly chosen and blocked. The blocked During the interaction, HoneyLLMd dynamically determines
transitions are assigned with Rap = 0 to indicate failed attack. blocking decisions and generates deceptive responses. As a
As the blocked transitions might not be consecutive, the Rhp of result, the CTFAgent will try alternative strategies to finish the
unblocked transitions are iteratively accessed. Let the unblocked challenge.
transitions belong to set R. The overall honeypot benefit Pr of Table VII summarizes the variations in attack commands and
random blocking is calculated as: state transitions recorded by HoneyLLMd before and after the
  p
 rN + j∈R (1 − Ra,j ) simulation with CTFAgent. The original process vector reflects
 Pr = . (14) eight attack purposes, such as information detection activities
 N
8662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Second, our evaluation of LLM-driven deception is limited to
 four models for economic reasons. This constraint may bias our
 conclusions about temptation and engagement. To strengthen
 external validity, future work should broaden the model set,
 and report cost-performance tradeoffs (latency, token cost, and
 deception metrics). Such an expanded evaluation would also
 enable more robust statements about which model capabilities
 (e.g., contextual understanding, code synthesis, hallucination
 tendencies) most strongly drive honeypot effectiveness.
 Finally, although the LLM-based shell decoder consistently
 achieves richer, more semantically coherent interpretations of
 attacker input than a rule-based RE approach, its runtime cost is
Fig. 12. Token Consuming per Round.
 substantially higher. We deliberately retained the LLM decoder
 in this study because its expressive power better supports map-
(e.g., CPU, memory, and system inspection), exploitation and ping free-form attacker commands into the hierarchical states
backdoor behaviors. After the simulation, noticeable increases required by our HPA framework. However, the latency and
in commands are observed across all attack goals. Correspond- compute overheads are nontrivial and may impede real-time
ingly, extra state transitions are recorded in the HoneyLLMd sys- deployment. A pragmatic path forward is to explore hybrid
tem. This variance is particularly pronounced in the information pipelines (e.g., a fast RE front end that delegates ambiguous
detection phase, where CPU information detection alone intro- or complex cases to an LLM), or lightweight LLMs tuned
duces 6 additional commands and 13 new transitions. Moreover, specifically for shell parsing to reduce latency while preserving
17 extra transitions are observed in password modification and semantic accuracy.
execution as well as SSH key–based persistence, indicating that
the attacker have made extensive attempts to establish backdoor
access. This further indicates that HoneyLLMd’s block mecha- VI. CONCLUSION
nism and deceptive responses lead the agent to explore additional This paper presented a novel approach to enhancing cyexecution paths and adjust its operational strategies. bersecurity measures through the implementation of an LLM-
 Fig. 12 illustrates the token consumption of CTFAgent over 24 powered adaptive honeypot. By integrating advanced LLM techinteraction rounds. Input tokens represent the contextual over- nology, the proposed system successfully emulates authentic
head required to perceive environmental feedback and historical shell interactions without exposing the vulnerabilities of a real
interaction traces, whereas output tokens capture the compu- OS, thereby reducing the inherent security risks associated with
tational reasoning cost associated with LLM-driven strategic HIHs. Moreover, the innovative use of HPA modeling attack
decision-making and replanning. As not all commands are process for optimizing the deception defense strategy not only
blocked, low token consumption is expected when the agent deceives attackers into revealing valuable information through
directly executes commands with minimal deliberation. Notice- detailed “request-response” interactions but also maintains a low
able increases in token consumption are observed at several key risk profile. The experimental results from our proof-of-concept
interactions. During rounds 1–6, an average of approximately system have demonstrated the effectiveness of this approach,
400 tokens is consumed, corresponding to information detection showcasing its ability to capture a wide range of real-world
activities. A more pronounced increase occurs in rounds 13–18, attacks while minimizing security risks. This balance represents
which align with credential manipulation behaviors, where token a significant advancement in the field of cybersecurity, offering a
usage peaks with the highest input token count (821) and output solution to the ongoing challenge of engaging attackers without
token count (611). Token consumption also rises during rounds compromising the security of information systems.
19–21, corresponding to backdoor operations. Overall, the ele- Future research could focus on refining the LLM’s undervated input and output token usage at these critical interactions standing and response to more sophisticated cyber-attack techprovides direct evidence that HoneyLLMd effectively induces niques, potentially through the integration of specialized cydeeper reasoning and diversified path exploration in CTFAgent, bersecurity datasets during the training phase. Furthermore,
thereby demonstrating its effectiveness. expanding the range of emulated environments beyond shell
 interactions to include web applications, databases, and other
 critical systems could broaden the scope of attacks that can
G. Discussion
 be detected and analyzed. In addition, to balance the trade-off
 The presented discussion summarizes several limitations of between shell decoding accuracy and efficiency, exploring the
our current work and outlines directions for future research. application of a distillation technique to open-source LLMs
 First, we currently model honeypot and attacker payoffs as would be valuable.
perfectly complementary (their sum equals one), which may
not reflect real interactions. In practice, their outcomes are not
necessarily constant-sum, as both sides can incur costs or gain REFERENCES
benefits independently, influenced by factors such as operational [1] L. Spitzner, Honeypots: Tracking Hackers. Boston, MA, USA: Addisonoverhead, detection risk, and the value of collected information. Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2002.
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8663

 [2] W. Fan, Z. Du, D. Fernández, and V. A. Villagrá, “Enabling an anatomic [27] J. Franco, A. Aris, B. Canberk, and A. S. Uluagac, “A survey of honeyview to investigate honeypot systems: A survey,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 12, pots and honeynets for Internet of Things, industrial Internet of Things,
 no. 4, pp. 3906–3919, Dec. 2018. and cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 23, no. 4,
 [3] N. Provos and T. Holz, Virtual Honeypots: From Botnet Tracking to pp. 2351–2383, Fourthquarter 2021.
 Intrusion Detection, 1st ed. Boston, MA, USA: Addison Wesley, Jul. 2007. [28] “T-pot: The all in one multi honeypot platform,” 2023. Available at: https:
 [4] S. Wu and W. Fan, “An SDN-NFV-enabled honeypot for manipulat- //github.com/telekom-security/tpotce.
 ing command control shell TCP connection,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. [29] T. Yadav and A. M. Rao, “Technical aspects of cyber kill chain,” in Proc.
 Operations Manage. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–5. Int. Symp. Secur. Comput. Commun., 2015, pp. 438–452.
 [5] X. Jiang and D. Xu, “Collapsar: A VM-based architecture for net- [30] A. Safarkhanlou, A. Souri, M. Norouzi, and S. E. H. Sardroud, “Forwork attack detention center,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2004, malizing and verification of an antivirus protection service using model
 pp. 15–28. checking,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 57, pp. 1324–1331, 2015.
 [6] M. Vrable et al., “Scalability, fidelity, and containment in the potemkin [31] G. Willcox, “How to use a reverse shell in metasploit,” Jun. 2020.
 virtual honeyfarm,” in Proc. 20th ACM Symp. Operating Syst. Princ., [Online]. Available: https://docs.metasploit.com/docs/using-metasploit/
 Brighton, U.K., 2005, pp. 148–162. basics/how-to-use-a-reverse-shell-in-metasploit.html
 [7] R. A. Rodríguez-Gómez, G. Maciá-Fernández, and P. García-Teodoro, [32] J. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Yu, and J. Ma, “A DNS tunneling detection method
 “Survey and taxonomy of botnet research through life-cycle,” ACM Com- based on deep learning models to prevent data exfiltration,” in Proc. Int.
 put. Surv., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 1–33, 2013. Conf. Netw. Syst. Secur., 2019, pp. 520–535.
 [8] E. Kasneci et al., “Chatgpt for good? On opportunities and challenges of [33] S. Saad, F. Mahmood, W. Briguglio, and H. Elmiligi, “JSLESS: A tale
 large language models for education,” Learn. Individual Differences, vol. of a fileless javascript memory-resident malware,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf.
 103, 2023, Art. no. 102274. Secur. Pract. Experience, 2019, pp. 113–131.
 [9] Y. Chang et al., “A survey on evaluation of large language models,” ACM [34] G. Kaddissi, M. W. Hatoum, K. Samrouth, and A. El Attar, “Securing
 Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1–45, 2024. networks against ICMP covert channels: Detection and countermeasures,”
[10] N. Provos, “A virtual honeypot framework,” in Proc. 13th Conf. in Proc. 5th IEEE Middle East North Afr. Commun. Conf., 2025, pp. 1–8.
 USENIX Secur. Symp., Berkeley, CA, USA: USENIX Association, 2004, [35] C. Kiekintveld, V. Lis, and R. Píbil, “Game-theoretic foundations for the
 pp. 1–14. strategic use of honeypots in network security,” in Cyber Warfare: Building
[11] S. Almotairi, A. Clark, G. Mohay, and J. Zimmermann, “A technique for the Scientific Foundation, Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2015, pp. 81–101.
 detecting new attacks in low-interaction honeypot traffic,” in Proc. 4th Int. [36] G. Wagener, R. State, A. Dulaunoy, and T. Engel, “Self adaptive high inter-
 Conf. Internet Monit. Protection, 2009, pp. 7–13. action honeypots driven by game theory,” in Proc. Symp. Self-Stabilizing
[12] S. Schindler, B. Schnor, S. Kiertscher, T. Scheffler, and E. Zack, “Hon- Syst., 2009, pp. 741–755.
 eydV6: A low-interaction IPv6 honeypot,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Secur. [37] M. Du, Y. Li, Q. Lu, and K. Wang, “Bayesian game based Pseudo honeypot
 Cryptogr., 2013, pp. 1–12. model in social networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Secur., 2017,
[13] N. Naik, P. Jenkins, R. Cooke, and L. Yang, “Honeypots that bite back: pp. 62–71.
 A fuzzy technique for identifying and inhibiting fingerprinting attacks on [38] K. Horák, B. Bošansk, P. Tomášek, C. Kiekintveld, and C. Kamhoua,
 low interaction honeypots,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Syst., 2018, pp. “Optimizing honeypot strategies against dynamic lateral movement using
 1–8. partially observable stochastic games,” Comput. Secur., vol. 87, 2019, Art.
[14] N. Fitri, A. Budi, I. Kustiawan, and S. Suwono, “Low interaction honeypot no. 101579.
 as the defense mechanism against slowloris attack on the web server,” in [39] Y. Wang, Z. Su, A. Benslimane, Q. Xu, M. Dai, and R. Li, “Collaborative
 Proc. IOP Conf. Ser., Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, vol. 850, Art. no. 12037. honeypot defense in UAV networks: A learning-based game approach,”
[15] J. G. Göbel, “Amun: A python honeypot,” Inst. Comput. Sci., Univ. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 1963–1978, 2024.
 Mannheim, Tech. Rep., Mannheim, Germany, 2009. [Online]. Available: [40] O. Hayatle, H. Otrok, and A. Youssef, “A Markov decision process model
 https://ub-madoc.bib.uni-mannheim.de/2595 for high interaction honeypots,” Inf. Secur. J., A Glob. Perspective, vol. 22,
[16] T. H. Project, “Dionaea - catched bugs,” Nov. 2019. [Online].Available: no. 4, pp. 159–170, 2013.
 http://dionaea.carnivore.it/ [41] S. Tapaswi, A. Mahboob, A. S. Shukla, I. Gupta, P. Verma, and J. Dhar,
[17] M. Oosterhof, “Cowrie,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ “Markov chain based roaming schemes for honeypots,” Wireless Pers.
 cowrie/cowrie Commun., vol. 78, no. 2, pp. 995–1010, 2014.
[18] G. Portokalidis, A. Slowinska, and H. Bos, “Argos: An emulator [42] I. M. M. Matin and B. Rahardjo, “The use of honeypot in machine learning
 for fingerprinting zero-day attacks for advertised honeypots with au- based on malware detection: A review,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Cyber IT
 tomatic signature generation,” in Proc. 1st ACM SIGOPS/EuroSys Service Manage., 2020, pp. 1–6.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Syst., New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, [43] Z. Zhong and W. Fan, “A honey-imprint enabled approach for resisting
 pp. 15–27. social engineering attacks,” in Proc. 24th Asia-Pacific Netw. Operations
[19] W. Cabral, C. Valli, L. Sikos, and S. Wakeling, “Review and analysis of Manage. Symp., 2023, pp. 302–305.
 cowrie artefacts and their potential to be used deceptively,” in Proc. Int. [44] Y. Yigit, O. K. Kinaci, T. Q. Duong, and B. Canberk, “TWINPOT: Digital
 Conf. Comput. Sci. Comput. Intell., 2019, pp. 166–171. twin-assisted honeypot for cyber-secure smart seaports,” in Proc. IEEE
[20] C. Gupta, T. Van Ede, and A. Continella, “HoneyKube: Designing and Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops, May 2023, pp. 740–745.
 deploying a microservices-based web honeypot,” in Proc. IEEE Secur. [45] P. Holgado, V. A. Villagrá, and L. Vázquez, “Real-time multistep attack
 Privacy Workshops, 2023, pp. 1–11. prediction based on hidden MARKOV models,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
[21] E. López-Morales et al., “HoneyPLC: A next-generation honeypot for in- Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 134–147, Jan./Feb. 2020.
 dustrial control systems,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. [46] Y. Li, W. Fan, and R. Luo, “Machine learning-based approach for en-
 Secur., 2020, pp. 279–291. hancing multi-step attack prediction,” in Proc. 24th Asia-Pacific Netw.
[22] S. Hilt, F. Maggi, C. Perine, L. Remorin, M. Rösler, and R. Operations Manage. Symp., 2023, pp. 48–53.
 Vosseler, “Caught in the act: Running a realistic factoryhoneypot to [47] T. Ali and P. Kostakos, “HUNTGPT: Integrating machine learningcapture real threats,” Trend Micro Res., 2020. [Online]. Available: based anomaly detection and explainable ai with large language models
 https://documents.trendmicro.com/assets/white_papers/wp-caught-in- (LLMS),” 2023, arXiv:2309.16021.
 the-act-running-a-realistic-factory-honeypot-to-capture-real-threats.pdf [48] S. Dowling, M. Schukat, and E. Barrett, “Using reinforcement learning
[23] Y. Adachi and Y. Oyama, “Malware analysis system using process- to conceal honeypot functionality,” in Proc. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov.
 level virtualization,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun., 2009, Databases, U. Brefeld, E. Curry, E. Daly, B. MacNamee, A. Marascu, F.
 pp. 550–556. Pinelli, M. Berlingerio, and N. Hurley, Eds., Berlin, Germany: Springer,
[24] I. Alberdi, É. Philippe, O. Vincent, and N. M. Kaâniche, “SHARK: Spy 2019, pp. 341–355.
 honeypot with advanced redirection kit,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Monit., [49] O. T. Taofeek, M. Alawida, A. Alabdulatif, A. E. Omolara, and O. I.
 Attack Detection Mitigation, 2007, pp. 47–52. Abiodun, “A cognitive deception model for generating fake documents to
[25] M. Bailey, E. Cooke, F. Jahanian, N. Provos, K. Rosaen, and D. Watson, curb data exfiltration in networks during cyber-attacks,” IEEE Access, vol.
 “Data reduction for the scalable automated analysis of distributed dark- 10, pp. 41457–41476, 2022.
 net traffic,” in Proc. 5th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., 2005, [50] D. Fraunholz, M. Zimmermann, and H. D. Schotten, “An adaptive honpp. 21–21. eypot configuration, deployment and maintenance strategy,” in Proc. 19th
[26] D. Fraunholz, D. Krohmer, S. D. Anton, and H. D. Schotten, “Investigation Int. Conf. Adv. Commun. Technol., 2017, pp. 53–57.
 of cyber crime conducted by abusing weak or default passwords with a [51] J. Franco, A. Aris, L. Babun, and A. S. Uluagac, “S-POT: A smart honeypot
 medium interaction honeypot,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber Secur. Protection framework with dynamic rule configuration for SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Glob.
 Digit. Serv., 2017, pp. 1–7. Commun. Conf., 2022, pp. 2818–2824.
8664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[52] T. Luo, Z. Xu, X. Jin, Y. Jia, and X. Ouyang, “IoTCandyJar: Toward SAN [78] A. Ravi and T. Surve, “Exploring applications of NLP to create deceptive
 intelligent-interaction honeypot for IoT devices,” Black Hat, vol. 1, no. 11, sandbox environments with honeyfiles,” Mar. 2023. [Online]. Available:
 pp. 1–11, 2017. osf.io/qpdjw_v1
[53] C. Guan, H. Liu, G. Cao, S. Zhu, and T. La Porta, “HoneyIoT: Adaptive [79] D. Reti et al., “Act as a honeytoken generator! An investigation into
 high-interaction honeypot for IoT devices through reinforcement learn- honeytoken generation with large language models,” in Proc. 11th ACM
 ing,” in Proc. 16th ACM Conf. Secur. Privacy Wireless Mobile Netw., 2023, Workshop Adaptive Auton. Cyber Defense, 2024, pp. 1–12.
 pp. 49–59. [80] M. Sladi’c, V. Valeros, C. Catania, and S. Garcia, “LLM in the shell: Gen-
[54] S. Chamotra and F. Barbhuiya, “Sage: An adaptive IoT honeypotwith erative honeypots,” IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy Workshops, pp. 430–
 FSM-driven protocol emulation and GraphRAG-powered re-sponse gen- 435, 2024.
 eration,” ACM Trans. Internet Things, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1–34, Apr. 2026. [81] S. Johnson, R. Hassing, J. Pijpker, and R. Loves, “A modular generative
[55] Openai, “Chatgpt,” Nov. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://chatgpt.com honeypot shell,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Cyber Secur. Resilience, 2024,
[56] Y. Fu, H. Peng, and T. Khot, “How does GPT obtain its ability? tracing pp. 387–394.
 emergent abilities of language models to their sources,” Yao Fu’s Notion, [82] J. Shi, S. Jiang, B. Xu, J. Liang, Y. Xiao, and W. Wang, “ShellGPT: Gen-
 2022. [Online]. Available: https://yaofu.notion.site/How-does-GPT- erative pre-trained transformer model for shell language understanding,”
 Obtain-its-Ability-Tracing-Emergent-Abilities-of-Language-Models- in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2023, pp. 671–682.
 to-their-Sources-b9a57ac0fcf74f30a1ab9e3e36fa1dc1 [83] A. Sezgin and A. Boyacı, “DecoyPot: A large language model-driven web
[57] T. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc. Adv. API honeypot for realistic attacker engagement,” Comput. Secur., vol. 154,
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901. 2025, Art. no. 104458.
[58] H. Pearce, B. Ahmad, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and R. Karri, “Asleep at the [84] U. Raut, A. Nagarkar, C. Talnikar, M. Mokashi, and R. Sharma, “Engaging
 keyboard? Assessing the security of github copilot’s code contributions,” attackers with a highly interactive honeypot system using chatGPT,” in
 in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 754–768. Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Comput., Commun., Control Automat., 2023, pp. 1–5.
[59] H. Pearce, B. Tan, B. Ahmad, R. Karri, and B. Dolan-Gavitt, “Examining [85] Z. Wang et al., “HoneyGPT: Breaking the trilemma in honeypots with
 zero-shot vulnerability repair with large language models,” in Proc. IEEE large lan-guage models,” Comput. Netw., p. 112223, 2026.
 Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2023, pp. 2339–2356. [86] H. T. Otal and M. A. Canbaz, “LLM Honeypot: Leveraging large language
[60] J. He and M. Vechev, “Large language models for code: Security hardening models as advanced interactive honeypot systems,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 and adversarial testing,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Commun. Netw. Secur., 2024, pp. 1–6.
 Secur., 2023, pp. 1865–1879. [87] W. Fan, Z. Yang, Y. Liu, L. Qin, and J. Liu, “HoneyLLM: A large language
[61] P. Hu, R. Liang, and K. Chen, “DeGPT: Optimizing decompiler output model-powered medium-interaction honeypot,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Inf.
 with LLM,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2024. [Online]. Commun. Secur., 2024, pp. 253–272.
 Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267622140 [88] C. Guan, G. Cao, and S. Zhu, “HoneyLLM: Enabling shell honeypots with
[62] R. Meng, M. Mirchev, M. Böhme, and A. Roychoudhury, “Large language large language models,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., 2024,
 model guided protocol fuzzing,” in Proc. 31st Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. pp. 1–9.
 Secur. Symp., 2024. [89] P. Prasad, N. Girish, S. V, A. Vh, and P. K. S, “Generative AI SSH honeypot
[63] R. Fang, R. Bindu, A. Gupta, Q. Zhan, and D. Kang, “LLM agents can with reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Commun. Syst.
 autonomously hack websites,” 2024, arXiv:2402.06664. Netw. Technol., 2025, pp. 770–775.
[64] R. Fang, R. Bindu, A. Gupta, and D. Kang, “LLM agents can autonomously [90] A. Safargalieva, A. Rüffer, and E. Vasilomanolakis, “OHRA: Dynamic
 exploit one-day vulnerabilities,” 2024, arXiv:2404.08144. multi-protocol LLM-based cyber deception,” in Proc. 30th Nordic Conf.
[65] Y. Zhu et al., “Teams of LLM agents can exploit zero-day vulnerabili-ties,” Secure IT Syst., 2025, pp. 109–128.
 in Proc. 19th Conf. Eur. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, vol. 1, 2026, [91] V. D. Priya and S. S. Chakkaravarthy, “Containerized cloud-based honeypp. 23–35. pot deception for tracking attackers,” Sci. Rep., vol. 13, no. 1, 2023, Art.
[66] G. Deng et al., “PENTESTGPT: Evaluating and harnessing large language no. 1437.
 models for automated penetration testing,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., [92] A. Nlaha, “Global SSH & Telnet Honeypot logs (Cowrie),” Kaggle
 2024, pp. 847–864. Dataset, 2022. [Online]. Avaliable: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
[67] T. McIntosh et al., “Harnessing GPT-4 for generation of cybersecurity nlaha11/global-ssh-and-telnet-honeypot-logs-cowrie
 GRC policies: A focus on ransomware attack mitigation,” Comput. Secur., [93] Y. Zou, J. Liu, and W. Fan, “CTFAgent: An LLM-powered agent for CTF
 vol. 134, 2023, Art. no. 103424. challenge solving,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 96, 2026, Art. no. 104305.
[68] K. A. Akbar, S. M. Halim, Y. Hu, A. Singhal, L. Khan, and B. Thuraisingham, “Knowledge mining in cybersecurity: From attack to defense,” in
 Proc. Data Appl. Secur. Privacy XXXVI, 2022, pp. 110–122.
[69] S. Yao et al., “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in languagemodels,”
 in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022.
[70] T. Schick et al., “Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use Wenjun Fan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 tools,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2023, pp. 68539– degree in telematics systems engineering from the
 68551. Technical University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain, in
[71] G. Mialon et al., “Augmented language models: A survey,” 2023, 2017. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
 arXiv:2302.07842. the University of Washington, Tacoma, WA, USA.
[72] P. Lewis et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive His research interests include cybersecurity, cloud
 NLP tasks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. computing, network softwarization, blockchain, and
 9459–9474. artificial intelligence. He is a member of ACM and
[73] X. Chen, C. Gao, C. Chen, G. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “An empirical study IET.
 on challenges for LLM application developers,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
 Methodol., vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 1–37, 2025.
[74] M. B. Ozkok, B. Birinci, O. Cetin, B. Arief, and J. Hernandez-Castro,
 “Honeypot’s best friend? Investigating ChatGPT’s ability to evaluate
 honeypot logs,” in Proc. Eur. Interdiscipl. Cybersecur. Conf., 2024,
 pp. 128–135.
 Fei Du received the bachelor’s degree in informa-
[75] F. Setianto, E. Tsani, F. Sadiq, G. Domalis, D. Tsakalidis, and P. Kostakos,
 tion and computing science from Xi’an Jiaotong-
 “GPT-2C: A parser for honeypot logs using large pre-trained language Liverpool University, Suzhou, China and University
 models,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Adv. Social Netw. Anal. Mining,
 of Liverpool, Liverpool, U.K., in 2025. She is cur-
 2021, pp. 649–653.
 rently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
[76] M. Boffa, G. Milan, L. Vassio, I. Drago, M. Mellia, and Z. B. Houidi,
 Department of Computer Science, University of Liv-
 “Towards NLP-based processing of honeypot logs,” in Proc. IEEE Eur.
 erpool. Her research interests include networking,
 Symp. Secur. Privacy Workshops, 2022, pp. 314–321.
 security, and artificial intelligence.
[77] P. Balasubramanian, J. Seby, and P. Kostakos, “CYGENT: A cybersecurity
 conversational agent with log summarization powered by GPT-3,” in Proc.
 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Internet Things, 2024, pp. 1–6.
FAN et al.: HONEYLLMD: A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-POWERED ADAPTIVE HONEYPOT SYSTEM 8665

 Zhihui Wang received the bachelor’s degree in infor- Kejing Chang received the bachelor’s degree in
 mation and computing science from Xi’an Jiaotong- information and computing science from Xi’an
 Liverpool University, Suzhou, China and University Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China and
 of Liverpool, Liverpool, U.K., in 2025. She is cur- University of Liverpool, Liverpool, U.K., in 2025.
 rently working toward the master’s degree with the He is currently working toward the master’s degree
 School of Engineering and Applied Science, Univer- with the School of Computing, National University of
 sity of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA, USA. Her Singapore, Singapore. His research interests include
 research interests include network security, artificial system, database and information security.
 intelligence, and the Internet of Things (IoT).

 Sang-Yoon Chang received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-
 Qiyu Cao is currently working toward the under- Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA, in 2007 and 2013,
 graduation degree with the School of Advanced respectively. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow with Ad-
 Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, vanced Digital Sciences Center. He is currently an
 Suzhou, China. Her research interests include human- Associate Professor with Computer Science Departcomputer interaction, artificial intelligence, and net- ment, University of Colorado Colorado Springs, Colwork security. orado Springs, CO, USA. His research interests include security, networking, wireless, cyber–physical
 systems, and applied cryptography.

 Lekun Liu is currently working toward the undergraduation degree with the School of Advanced
 Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University,
 Suzhou, China. His research interests include networking, security, and artificial intelligence.