IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026 5507217

 HTDC: Hyperbolic Transformer With
 Dual-Momentum Contrastive Learning for
 Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection
 Yulei Wang , Member, IEEE, Chao Deng , Enyu Zhao , Member, IEEE,
 and Chunyan Yu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) remains a I. I NTRODUCTION
challenging task due to the complex spectral variability and
spatial heterogeneity of real-world scenes. Reconstruction-based
methods have been widely explored for deep learning-based HAD,
but they rely on the assumption that background pixels can be
 H YPERSPECTRAL imaging (HSI) acquires detailed
 spectral information across tens to hundreds of contiguous narrow bands, enabling the generation of high-dimensional
faithfully reconstructed while anomalous pixels cannot. Although spectral response vectors for each pixel while preserving
intuitive, this dichotomy oversimplifies the spectral–spatial char- spatial structures [1], [2]. Due to this unique capability, HSI
acteristics of hyperspectral data and often fails in practice. In has been extensively employed in a wide range of remote
particular, when background regions exhibit strong variability
or when anomalies share spectral similarities with their sur- sensing tasks, including classification [3], [4], [5], anomaly
roundings, reconstruction-based methods tend to generate false detection [6], [7], [8], target detection [9], [10], [11], and
alarms and suffer from limited robustness. To overcome these band selection [12], [13]. From a perspective of material
limitations, this article moves beyond the reconstruction-based identification, the fine spectral resolution of HSI enables preparadigm and proposes HTDC, a novel hyperbolic Transformer cise discrimination of subtle compositional variations, which
with a dual-momentum contrastive learning (DMCL) framework, which shifts the focus from background reconstruction is particularly advantageous for detecting anomalous targets
to discriminative representation learning at both global and in complex backgrounds such as camouflage detection and
local levels. First, a custom-designed multiview data augmen- pollutant monitoring. In general, anomalies in HSIs exhibit
tation module generates complementary views from different three characteristics: 1) low probability of occurrence; 2) small
perspectives, enriching spectral diversity and alleviating the spatial extent; and 3) significant spectral differences from
limitations of contrastive learning (CL) under homogeneous
samples. Second, a hyperbolic Transformer encoder exploits the the surrounding background [14], [15]. Existing hyperspectral
hierarchical and structured nature of hyperspectral data, where anomaly detection (HAD) methods can be broadly classified
hyperbolic geometry enables more effective attention aggregation into three categories: statistical-based methods, representationthan Euclidean space. Subsequently, a dual-momentum mecha- based methods, and deep learning-based methods, each of
nism with dual temporal queues further stabilizes global learning which has produced representative approaches as outlined
while dynamically adapting to local changes, thereby mitigating
sensitivity to class imbalance and spectral drift. Finally, in the below.
detection stage, a sliding dual-window detection strategy with Statistical-based methods assume that background pixels
exponential mapping and guided filtering is employed to suppress follow a specific distribution, with anomalies identified as
background interference and enhance spatial contrast. Extensive outliers. One of the most representative approaches is the RX
experiments on multiple real hyperspectral images acquired by detector [16], which models the background pixels using a
different sensors across various scenes demonstrate that the
proposed HTDC consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art multivariate Gaussian distribution and detects anomalies as
methods in HAD tasks. pixels that exhibit significant deviations from this distribution.
 However, in real-world scenarios, the background is often too
 Index Terms—Contrastive learning (CL), dual-momentum,
hyperbolic transformer, hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD), complex to be accurately represented by a single multivariate
multiview data augmentation. Gaussian model, resulting in degraded detection performance.
 Various such as local RX (LRX) [17], weighted RX (WRX)
 Received 23 September 2025; revised 22 January 2026; accepted [18], kernel-based RX (KRX) [19], and recursive RX with
23 February 2026. Date of publication 9 March 2026; date of current version multiattribute profiles [20] attempt to improve the robustness
13 March 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 42271355 and Grant 62471079, of the conventional RX detector, but all remain fundamenin part by the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province under Grant tally constrained by their reliance on predefined distributional
2022-MS-160, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for Central assumptions.
Universities under Grant 3132025251. (Corresponding authors: Enyu Zhao;
Chao Deng.) To avoid reliance on inaccurate distribution assumptions,
 The authors are with the Center of Hyperspectral Imaging in Remote Sens- representation-based methods have attracted significant attening (CHIRS) and the Information Science and Technology College, Dalian tion [21]. These approaches represent hyperspectral data
Maritime University, Dalian 116026, China (e-mail: wangyulei@dlmu.edu.cn;
dengchao@dlmu.edu.cn; zhaoenyu@dlmu.edu.cn; yucy@dlmu.edu.cn). as linear or nonlinear combinations of a set of bases
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2026.3670890 or dictionaries. Main approaches in this category include
 1558-0644 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5507217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

low-rank representation (LRR), sparse representation, collabo- adjustment to avoid manual parameter tuning. However,
rative representation, and tensor-based modeling. For instance, AE-based methods may inadvertently reconstruct anomalies
the collaborative representation-based detector (CRD) [22] is along with the background, thereby degrading detection
designed to exploit the sparsity and locality characteristics of performance. GAED [37] addresses this by incorporating a
HSI by assuming that background pixels can be linearly rep- feedback strategy to suppress the representation of anomaly
resented by their neighboring pixels, while anomalies cannot. features. Similarly, to prevent anomaly leakage, a blind-spot
However, the performance of CRD is sensitive to the selection network [38] utilizing multiscale mask convolutions has
of dual-window sizes across different datasets. LRR-based been proposed, while FCAE-DCAC [39] integrates dual
methods model hyperspectral data as a linear combination clustering priors with latent feature adversarial consistency
of a small number of intrinsic components, reconstruct the to ensure prioritized background reconstruction. Other
background, and detect anomalies as reconstruction residuals. approaches embed physical priors, such as TAEF [40],
While effective in capturing global structures, LRR tends to which integrates an extended multilinear mixing model and
ignore local structural information. To address this limitation, employs a Transformer for improved performance. In order
GTVLRR incorporates graph regularization and total variation to exploit the spatial–spectral characteristics inherent in HSI,
regularization into the LRR model [23], preserving global S3S-LTGRMA [41] integrates spectral, spatial, and structural
structural characteristics while simultaneously capturing local features through superpixel segmentation and a Transformer
geometric properties. Given the widespread nature of back- backbone. Beyond Transformers, emerging architectures
ground distributions in HSI and the rarity of anomalies, have also been explored; MMR-HAD [42] leverages
hybrid methods combining low-rank and sparse constraints the Mamba model with random masking to inhibit anomaly
have been explored to refine anomaly-background separation. reconstruction, while DWSDiff [43] introduces a dual-window
Representative methods include low-rank and sparse represen- spectral diffusion model for precise background estimation.
tation (LRASR) [24] and low-rank matrix decomposition using Despite these advances, most AE-based methods remain
Mahalanobis distance (LSMAD) [25]. fundamentally tied to the reconstruction assumption—that
 In practical applications, both statistical-based and background pixels can be accurately reconstructed while
representation-based methods encounter significant challenges anomalies cannot. In practice, anomalies may be partially
when dealing with the complex and high-dimensional nature of reconstructed with the background, causing distortion and
hyperspectral backgrounds. To address these limitations, deep reducing robustness. This problem is exacerbated in highlearning has been increasingly explored in recent years [26], dimensional data with complex land-cover distributions,
[27], owing to its ability to model nonlinear spectral–spatial where the binary distinction of “background versus anomaly”
features. Current deep learning-based HAD methods primarily often breaks down.
focus on three types of architectures: convolutional neural To overcome these limitations, this article moves beyond the
networks (CNNs), generative adversarial networks (GANs), reconstruction paradigm and adopts contrastive learning (CL)
and autoencoders (AEs). CNN-based methods are generally [44], [45], [46] to develop a discriminative anomaly detection
unsuitable for practical anomaly detection tasks due to approach driven by intersample differences. Building upon
their reliance on prior labeled information for supervised this, this article proposes a hyperbolic transformer with dualtraining [28], [29]. To overcome this, DeCNN-AD [30] momentum contrastive learning (HTDC), a unified framework
introduces a plug-and-play CNN denoiser to regularize that synergistically integrates multiview data augmentation, a
representation coefficients, enabling unsupervised learning hyperbolic Transformer encoder, and a dual-momentum mechwithin a traditional framework. Furthermore, to address the anism to enable HAD through CL. In particular, a multiview
computational burden of retraining and the constraints of data augmentation strategy is employed to generate semantifixed input dimensions often faced by CNNs, AdaptHAD cally consistent yet diverse views, providing the foundation
[31] proposes an adaptive hybrid network that integrates a for robust contrastive representation learning. A Transformer
CNN with a Transformer to simultaneously extract local equipped with hyperbolic attention is then constructed to
and global features. GANs enhance the generalization ability capture the hierarchical structural dependencies inherent in
of neural networks through adversarial learning [32], [33]. HSI. During the CL, a dual-momentum strategy with dynamic
Although their effectiveness in HAD has been demonstrated, queues is introduced. The high-momentum encoder, updated
many GAN-based variants suffer from unstable training slowly with a large momentum coefficient, captures global
and interference from redundant information, leading to contextual semantics, whereas the low-momentum encoder,
high false-alarm rates and reduced detection accuracy. To updated more frequently with a smaller momentum, focuses
mitigate this, CL-BioGAN [8] incorporates biologically on local, fine-grained spectral representations. In this proinspired synaptic plasticity to actively balance memory cess, a spectral feature encoder serves as the query branch,
stability and learning flexibility, ensuring robust detection in performing CL by comparing its outputs with those from
cross-domain scenarios. In contrast, AE-based methods have both momentum branches. Finally, in the detection stage, a
been increasingly adopted in HAD owing to their capacity to sliding dual-window strategy is applied, combined with a
extract deep features with nonlinear characteristics and their guided filter and a power function, to effectively suppress
strong unsupervised learning capabilities [34]. For instance, background interference and enhance spatial–spectral contrast.
RGAE [35] integrates graph constraints and superpixel The main contributions of this work are summarized as
segmentation, while Auto-AD [36] employs adaptive loss follows.
WANG et al.: HTDC: HYPERBOLIC TRANSFORMER WITH DUAL-MOMENTUM CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR HAD 5507217

Fig. 1. Flowchart of the proposed HTDC method.

 1) Multiview Augmentation for CL: A strategy that generates learning (HTDC) framework for HAD. The framework condiverse perspectives by simulating data completeness, reso- sists of five main components: a multiview data augmentation
lution variation, and band absence. Through Gaussian noise to enhance the quality and diversity of data samples, a spectral
perturbation and random spectral band masking, it enriches feature extraction network based on a hyperbolic Transformer
spectral diversity and alleviates the limitations of CL under to capture hierarchical spectral–spatial dependencies, a CL
homogeneous samples. mechanism with a dual-momentum strategy to improve feature
 2) Hyperbolic Transformer Encoder: An architecture discrimination, and a dual-window anomaly detection module
built upon the conventional Transformer, incorporating a that applies the proposed model with background suppression.
hyperbolic-optimized multihead self-attention to exploit the The overall architecture of the proposed HTDC is illustrated
hierarchical structure of hyperspectral data. By modeling in Fig. 1.
feature interactions in hyperbolic space, it enhances the representation of complex hierarchical dependencies.
 A. Multiview Data Augmentation
 3) DMCL: A spectral discriminative model fundamentally
different from reconstruction-based approaches, incorporating CL typically begins with data augmentation to increase
a dual-momentum mechanism with two temporal queues to data variability and provide diverse views of the same
stabilize global optimization while adapting to local variations, instance. Conventional augmentation techniques in comthereby mitigating sensitivity to class imbalance and spectral puter vision—such as cropping, flipping, rotation, and color
drift. transformations—are not well-suited for hyperspectral remote
 The remainder of this article is organized as follows. sensing, particularly in HAD. The heavy reliance on spectral
Section II presents the details of the proposed HTDC. information makes these conventional methods inadequate for
Section III provides experimental results and analysis to fully exploiting HSI characteristics. To address this limitavalidate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Finally, tion, a multiview data augmentation strategy is proposed that
conclusions are drawn in Section IV. considers three key aspects: spectral completeness, resolution
 variation, and spectral absence, enriching the diversity of data
 distribution within the CL framework, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
 II. M ETHODOLOGY
 For spectral completeness, the original data is first pre-
 This section presents a comprehensive overview of the pro- served without any augmentation to retain its full spectral
posed hyperbolic transformer with dual-momentum contrastive information. To simulate resolution variation, Gaussian noise
5507217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 2. Spectral feature extraction via hyperbolic transformer.

is then introduced for the generation of positive and negative construct these tokens by controlling the overlap between adjasample pairs used in training [47], [48]. Zero-mean Gaussian cent spectral blocks. This design preserves sufficient spectral
noise introduces mild perturbations to the original high- information within each token and enhances the Transformer
frequency features, which, in moderate amounts, can enhance encoder’s ability to capture contextual dependencies. In parthe network’s learning capability, expressed as follows: ticular, given an input HSI with C spectral bands, a 1-D
 convolution layer with a kernel size of k is applied. The stride
 X0 = X + β × N (1) parameter s (s < k) controls the degree of overlap between
where X denotes the original input, N is standard Gaussian spectral blocks, with the overlap v defined as
noise, and β is set to 0.005. v = k − s. (2)
 Finally, spectral absence is simulated through random bandwise masking. In particular, for each spectral band, a random In addition, to address the inherent position-invariance of the
binary mask is applied to 20% of the pixel values, generating standard Transformer self-attention mechanism, both relative
diverse spectral views. This process emulates partial spec- positional encoding (RPE) and dynamic positional encoding
tral loss and encourages the model to learn robust feature (DPE) are incorporated into the architecture. The RPE module
representations under missing-band conditions. captures relative positional relationships among spectral bands,
 enhancing the Transformer’s capacity to model sequential
 dependencies. The encoding is defined as:
B. Spectral Feature Extraction via Hyperbolic Transformer  pos 
 This section is motivated by two key considerations. First, RPE (pos, 2i) = sin 2i/d
 (3)
 100000
 pos
constructing a fine-grained spectral feature extraction module
 
 RPE (pos, 2i + 1) = cos (4)
is essential for improving the effectiveness of CL. Sec- 1000002i/d
ond, hyperspectral data naturally exhibit hierarchical spectral where pos denotes the position of the token, i represents the
structures: local variations between adjacent bands, holistic dimension index, and d indicates the embedding dimension.
spectral signatures within individual pixels, and statistical In contrast, DPE takes into account the strong local correladependencies across the dataset. To model such structures, a tions of spectral features by integrating a depthwise separable
hyperbolic space is introduced, whose non-Euclidean proper- convolution (DWC) layer with a kernel size of k = 3, as can
ties are particularly well-suited for representing hierarchical be shown in the left side of Fig. 2.
data distributions. Integrating this geometric framework with 2) Hyperbolic Transformer Module: While most existing
the Transformer architecture enhances the model’s capacity Transformer-based methods operate in Euclidean space, their
to represent structured spectral information, as illustrated in ability to represent the spatial hierarchies of HSI is limited.
Fig. 2. The spectral feature extraction process consists of two Considering that real-world data commonly exhibit hierarchicomponents: spectral pixel encoding, which performs initial cal structures, this article incorporates the geometric properties
spectral feature extraction, and the hyperbolic Transformer of hyperbolic space into the Transformer architecture [49],
module, which models hierarchical dependencies in a hyper- [50], [51], [52], [53], [54]. This integration enables more effecbolic latent space. tive modeling of hierarchical dependencies while maintaining
 1) Spectral Pixel Encoding: The first component, spec- the global context modeling capability of the Transformer, as
tral pixel encoding, generates high-quality spectral token illustrated on the right side of Fig. 2, along with the design
sequences to support efficient and fine-grained feature extrac- of the Hyperbolic multihead self-attention (HMSA) module
tion in the hyperbolic Transformer. Considering the inherent shown in Fig. 3.
correlations among hyperspectral bands, an Overlapping Spec- The hyperbolic Transformer module is built upon the contral Block Embedding (OSBE) module is first employed to ventional Transformer framework. In the HMSA mechanism,
WANG et al.: HTDC: HYPERBOLIC TRANSFORMER WITH DUAL-MOMENTUM CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR HAD 5507217

 the Fréchet mean estimation, the number of iterations is fixed
 at t = 2, balancing computational efficiency and aggregation
 stability.
 • Initialization
 u1 = pro j A0 · V 0 .
 
 (10)
 • Iterative refinement

 ut = expcut−1 A0 · logcut−1 V 0
 
 (11)
 A = pro j (ut ) (12)
 where proj(·) denotes the Poincaré projection operator, and t
 refers to the aggregation iteration step.
 • Exponential and logarithmic maps
Fig. 3. HMSA module.
 √ λcx kvk
    
 v
 exp x (v) = x ⊕c tanh
 c
 c √ (13)
 2 ckvk
the input matrix X is linearly projected to obtain the query 2 √  −x ⊕c y
(Q), key (K), and value (V), as defined below logcx (y) = √ c · tanh−1 ck−x ⊕c yk · (14)
 cλ x k−x ⊕c yk
 Q = W q X, K = W k X, V = W v X (5) where λcx = 2/(1 − ckxk2 ) is the conformal factor, and ⊕c
where W q , W k , and W v are the corresponding weight matrices denotes the Möbius addition in the Poincaré ball in the
 To embed HMSA in hyperbolic space, a Poincaré projection following equation:
  
is applied, mapping Q, K, and V onto a hyperbolic ball of 1 + 2chx, yi + ckyk2 x + 1 − ckxk2 y
radius r, as formulated in (6) and (7). This guarantees that all x ⊕c y = (15)
 1 + 2chx, yi + c2 kxk2 kyk2
computations are performed within hyperbolic space, enabling
more faithful modeling of hierarchical structures compared to where h·, ·i denotes the inner product, c = 1/r2 , and r denotes
Euclidean formulations. a learnable radius parameter.
 Finally, the outputs of all attention heads are concatenated to
 r · (1 − ε)
  
 pro j (x) = x · min 1, (6) form the final output of the HMSA module, shown as follows:
 kxk + ε
 Q0 = pro j (Q) , K 0 = pro j (K) , V 0 = pro j (V) (7) HMSA (X) = Concat (A1 , A2 , . . . , AN ) (16)

where r denotes a learnable radius parameter. where N denotes the number of attention heads.
 After projection, the attention weights are computed by Subsequently, this concatenated feature is fed into a feedmeasuring the hyperbolic distance between Q and K under forward network. The feed-forward network in the Hyperbolic
the Poincaré ball model, as defined in the following equation: Transformer encoder consists of two linear layers with a
 Gaussian error linear units (GELUs) activation in between,
 d Q0 , K 0
 
 as shown in Fig. 2.
 Following the feed-forward stage, a layer normalization
 !
 2 2c · kQ0 − K 0 k22
 = √ cosh −1
 1+ (8) (LN) operation is applied to the output of the Transformer
 1 − ckQ0 k22 1 − ckK 0 k22 + ε
  
 c
 encoder. This standardizes the feature distribution, mitigating
 d (Q0 , K 0 )
  
 the internal covariate shift and facilitating smoother conver-
 A = softmax − √
 0
 (9)
 dk gence for the subsequent contrastive mapping.
where c = 1/r2 , ε is a small constant introduced for numerical
stability, and dk is a scaling factor used to prevent the attention C. Dual-Momentum CL
weights from becoming excessively large, thereby ensuring the To enable fine-grained CL in HAD tasks, this article moves
stability of the computed values. beyond the conventional background anomaly dichotomy and
 Because Euclidean weighted averaging is not directly appli- focuses instead on capturing structural differences in spectral
cable in hyperbolic space, a hyperbolic aggregation strategy features. To this end, a DMCL framework is proposed to
based on the Fréchet mean is adopted. In particular, the Fréchet support hierarchical feature comparison across multiple scales.
mean is approximated by first performing a logarithmic map In particular, two encoders with distinct momentum coeffito project the points onto the tangent space, applying weighted cients are employed to maintain dual temporal queues: the
averaging in the Euclidean domain, and then using an expo- high-momentum branch captures stable semantic structures,
nential map to project the result back into the hyperbolic while the low-momentum branch enhances responsiveness to
space. To ensure numerical stability and geometric validity, fine-grained spectral anomalies. In addition, a multiview data
a Poincaré projection is introduced throughout the process to augmentation strategy is applied to enrich the diversity and
constrain all results within the unit ball, as demonstrated in informativeness of sample pairs. This design facilitates a more
(10)–(15). Furthermore, given the rapid convergence speed of nuanced and hierarchical modeling of contrastive features.
5507217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

 First, a small batch of spectral pixels Xq is randomly A larger queue, Q1 , is also maintained to store extensive
sampled from the original HSI X ∈ RH×W×C . After apply- historical negatives, enhancing the learning of global spectral
ing multiview data augmentation, three augmented views are invariance.
generated: Xq , Xb , and X s , as defined in (17). Spectral pixels at 2) The low-momentum encoder E s , in contrast, uses a
the same spatial location across different views are considered smaller momentum coefficient m, enabling faster updates that
as positive pairs, while those at different locations are treated improve sensitivity to local spectral variations. A smaller
as negative pairs negative sample queue Q2 is also adopted to reduce the impact
 8 of outdated negative samples on local discriminative learning.
 <Xq =  xq ; xq ; · · ·; xq  ∈ R
  1 2 N
  N×B
 The overall parameter update process can be formally defined
 ˆ
 X = x ; x ; · · ·; xb ∈ R
 1 2 N N×B
 (17) as follows:
 ˆ b  1b 2b
 X s = x s ; x s ; · · ·; x s ∈ R
 N N×B
 : 
 θb ← nθb + (1 − n) θq
 8
 ˆ
 ˆ
 <θ
 b-MLP ← nθb-MLP + (1 − n) θq-MLP
where Xq denotes the original spectral data, Xb is produced via
 ˆ
random band masking, and X s is obtained by adding Gaussian (22)
 θ
 ˆ s ← mθ s + − m) θq
 ˆ (1
noise.
 ˆ
 θ s-MLP ← mθ s-MLP + (1 − m) θq-MLP
 :
 The query encoder Eq is then applied to Xq , followed
by a projection head MLPq to obtain the feature matrix where θq , θb , and θ s denote the parameters of the encoders
Uq . Simultaneously, the high-momentum encoder Eb and the Eq , Eb , and E s , respectively, while θq−MLP , θb−MLP , and θ s−MLP
low-momentum encoder E s extract spectral features from Xb correspond to the parameters of the projection heads MLPq ,
and X s , respectively. These features are then passed through MLPb , and MLP s , respectively. In contrast, the query encoder
corresponding projection heads, MLPb and MLP s , to produce Eq and its projection head MLPq are updated through gradient
feature matrices Ub and U s , which are stored in two tempo- backpropagation. An overview of the relationships among
rally updated queues for subsequent CL, as expressed in the these parameters is provided in Fig. 1.
following equation:
 8
 <Uq = uq ; uq ; · · ·; uq  ∈ R
  1 2 N
  N×dMLPq
 ˆ D. Anomaly Detection
 Ub = ub ; ub ; · · ·; ub ∈ RN×dMLPb
 1 2 N
 (18) In the detection phase, the original HSI is fed into the
 U s = u s ; u s ; · · ·; u s ∈ R . well-trained model to effectively identify anomalies in the
 ˆ
 :  1 2 N
  N×dMLP s
 feature space. Owing to its self-supervised training scheme,
 Finally, the feature Uq is jointly compared with the features the proposed method functions as a reliable discriminative
Ub and U s , which are stored in the high-momentum queue Q1 detector. In the learned feature space, the anomalous targets
and the low-momentum queue Q2 , respectively. These features exhibit distinctive characteristics compared to their surroundare fed into a contrastive loss function designed to maximize ing backgrounds.
the similarity between positive pairs while minimizing the sim- 1) Sliding Dual-Window Anomaly Detection: An anomaly
ilarity between negative pairs, thereby enforcing the encoder detection strategy based on a sliding dual window is adopted.
to learn discriminative spectral representations. In this work, The inner and outer window sizes of the dual window are set
the similarity between feature pairs is measured using the dot to 3 and 5, respectively. Given an input HSI, each pixel to be
product. The proposed dual-momentum contrastive loss adopts tested is paired with its 16 surrounding pixels within the outer
the InfoNCE formulation [55], which is defined as follows: window to form multiple pixel pairs. The model computes
 N
 exp uiq · uib /τ1 similarity scores for each pair, and the average of these scores
 
 1 X
 lb = − log P   (19) is taken as the final output. If the score exceeds a predefined
 N Q1 j
 j=0 exp uq · ub /τ1
 i
 i=1 threshold η, the pixel is classified as an anomaly; otherwise,
 it is considered background.
 N
 exp uiq · uis /τ2
 
 1 X
 ls = − log P   (20) 2) Background Suppression: To suppress background
 N Q2
 exp ui · u j /τ responses in the detection map R, a three-stage suppression
 i=1 j=0 q s 2
 strategy is employed. First of all, an exponential mapping is
 l = λ · lb + (1 − λ) · l s (21)
 applied to amplify the relative intensity differences between
where λ serves as a balancing parameter that controls the anomalous and background pixels. This operation enhances
relative contributions of two branches, while τ1 and τ2 denote anomaly saliency by expanding the separation between weak
the temperature parameters associated with the two momentum anomaly signals and background clutter, thereby producing a
queues, respectively. Each InfoNCE loss term consists of one refined detection map Y [as can be described in (23)]. Then,
positive sample embedding (anchor) and a set of negative a guided filtering with spatial smoothing is applied, where
sample embeddings drawn from the queues Q1 and Q2 . the 2-D spatial structure of the HSI is leveraged through
 During training, the consistency of the dual memory queues recursive filtering within a guided filter. This step enforces
is maintained via momentum update mechanisms. To balance local spatial consistency, suppresses isolated noisy responses,
the learning of global and local spectral features. and preserves structural boundaries, ensuring that anomalies
 1) The high-momentum encoder Eb employs a larger are highlighted without introducing excessive blurring. Finally,
momentum coefficient n, resulting in slower parameter updates a normalization operation is performed to standardize the
that preserve the long-term statistical characteristics of HSI. refined detection scores across the entire image. This operation
WANG et al.: HTDC: HYPERBOLIC TRANSFORMER WITH DUAL-MOMENTUM CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR HAD 5507217

 TABLE I
 S OME H YPERSPECTRAL I MAGE C HARACTERISTICS OF F IVE DATASETS

Fig. 4. (Top row) Pseudo-color images of five hyperspectral datasets, (middle
row) corresponding ground truth maps, and (bottom row) 3-D view of the GT
maps.

 A. Experimental Datasets
balances scale variations among different datasets and further
clarifies the separation between anomalies and background To validate the proposed HTDC framework, experiments
regions. The overall suppression process is formulated in the are conducted on five real-world datasets: Texas Coast, Los
following equations: Angeles, Beach, Gulfport, and Pavia. These datasets represent
 diverse anomaly detection scenarios, with variations in spectral
 Y = βR (23) bands, spatial resolution, anomaly percentage, and anomaly
 √ !o ! √ !o type. The detailed characteristics of each dataset, including
 2 2
 hi = 1 − exp − yi + exp − hi−1 (24) sensor type, spatial resolution, image size, number of spectral
 ε1 ε1 bands, number of anomalies, anomaly ratio, and anomaly
 i  types, are summarized in Table I. Furthermore, Fig. 4 presents
 ε1
 X 
 si = f0 + 1 + | f j − f j−1 | (25) the pseudo-color images, the corresponding ground-truth (GT)
 ε2
 j=1 maps of anomalous targets, and the 3-D visualizations of
 hi − hmin the GT maps for each dataset. In Figs. 4–14, the color
 mi = (26)
 hmax − hmin gradient from blue to red indicates anomaly probability, with
 regions approaching bright red signifying a higher likelihood
where β is a parameter that controls the strength of background of anomalies.
suppression, hi denotes the filtered result, yi represents the
anomaly score obtained from the sliding dual-window, and
mi is the final detection result. The spatial distance between B. Comparison Methods and Evaluation Criteria
adjacent pixels in the transformed domain is denoted as o = This section introduces comparison methods, including trasi –si−1 , while ε1 and ε2 correspond to the standard deviations ditional methods and deep learning, as well as evaluation
in the spatial and range domains, respectively. Furthermore, fi metrics, including AUC values, ROC curves, and box plots.
denotes the value of the ith pixel in the guidance image F, 1) Comparison Methods: To validate the effectiveness of
which is constructed as a pseudo-color image formed by the the proposed HTDC framework, it is compared against eight
first three principal components (PCs) of the input HSI. representative state-of-the-art approaches, encompassing both
 traditional statistical models and deep learning-based models.
 III. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS The traditional baselines include 2S-GLRT [56], GTVLRR
 [23], and AHMID [57], while the deep learning-based models
 In this section, a comprehensive set of experiments is include GAED [37], RGAE [35], Auto-AD [36], GIL-HAD
conducted on five hyperspectral datasets to validate the effec- [58], and NL2Net [59]. These baselines are carefully chosen
tiveness of the proposed HTDC in terms of anomaly detection to ensure a fair and comprehensive evaluation, as they collecperformance, where Section III-A describes the hyperspec- tively cover different methodological paradigms.
tral datasets used in the experiments, Section III-B outlines 2) Evaluation Metrics: The detection performance of difthe comparison methods and evaluation metrics employed ferent methods is assessed using both visual and quantitative
in the experiments, Section III-C provides a brief intro- evaluation metrics. For visual evaluation, both 2-D view and
duction of hardware environment and parameter settings, 3-D view of detection results are provided, together with 3-D
Section III-D presents the experimental results of the proposed ROC (3-D ROC) curves and their corresponding 2-D projecmethod against eight state-of-the-art methods, Section III-E tions (2-D ROC) of (PD , PF ), (PD , τ), and (PF , τ) [60], [61].
discusses the ablation studies, and Section III-F discusses the These visualizations provide intuitive insight into the tradeoffs
computational complexity analysis. between detection probability, false-alarm rate, and threshold
5507217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 5. 2-D view of anomaly detection results for the Texas Coast dataset.

Fig. 6. 3-D view of anomaly detection results for the Texas Coast dataset.

Fig. 7. 2-D view of anomaly detection results for the Los Angeles dataset.

Fig. 8. 3-D view of anomaly detection results for the Los Angeles dataset.

Fig. 9. 2-D view of anomaly detection results for the Beach dataset.

Fig. 10. 3-D view of anomaly detection results for the Beach dataset.

variation. For quantitative evaluation with a more rigorous fundamental metric, reflecting the overall effectiveness of the
comparison, multiple AUC metrics as listed in Table II anomaly detector. AUCTD evaluates the effectiveness of both
are employed, including AUC (PD , PF ), AUCTD , AUCBS , the detector and the detectability of the targets. AUCBS mea-
AUCODP , AUCTD−BS , and AUCSNPR [62]. AUC (PD , PF ) is the sures the background suppression capability of the detector.
WANG et al.: HTDC: HYPERBOLIC TRANSFORMER WITH DUAL-MOMENTUM CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR HAD 5507217

Fig. 11. 2-D view of anomaly detection results for the Gulfport dataset.

Fig. 12. 3-D view of anomaly detection results for the Gulfport dataset.

Fig. 13. 2-D view of anomaly detection results for the Pavia dataset.

Fig. 14. 3-D view of anomaly detection results for the Pavia dataset.

 TABLE II performance, incorporating aspects such as signal-to-noise
 S UMMARY OF THE AUC I NDEXES ratio and target–background discrimination. This combination
 of visual and quantitative metrics ensures a comprehensive and
 multiperspective evaluation of different models, allowing both
 qualitative interpretation and numerical comparison of detector
 performance.
 Moreover, to further evaluate the separation between backgrounds and anomalies obtained by different algorithms, box
 plots are employed for comparative analysis. In particular, the
 values of the detected anomalies and backgrounds are first
 normalized, after which statistical computations are used to
 generate box representations for both categories. For all five
 datasets, values within the [10% and 90%] range are retained
 to characterize the distributions of anomaly and background
 pixels, reducing the influence of extreme outliers. It is worth
 noting that although the percentile thresholds can be adjusted,
 the [10%, 90%] range is commonly adopted in most cases.

 C. Experimental Setup
AUCODP indicates the overall detection probability. AUCTD-BS This section mainly introduces the experimental environassesses the separability between background and target. ment and parameter configurations of both the proposed
AUCSNPR provides a comprehensive assessment of detection HTDC and the comparison baselines.
5507217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

 1) Experimental Environment: The experiments are con- comparing it with eight state-of-the-art approaches mentioned
ducted on two hardware platforms. For deep learning-based above.
methods, the environment consists of a 24 vCPU AMD EPYC Figs. 5–14 show the detection maps of nine different
7642 48-Core Processor and RTX 3090 24-GB GPU. The anomaly detection methods on five HSI datasets. Since 2-D
implementation is carried out using PyTorch 1.10, Python detection maps cannot fully reflect the detection performance,
3.8, and MATLAB R2023a. While for traditional statistical this article provides corresponding 3-D visualizations for
methods, an Intel Core i7-10510U CPU is used, with imple- enhanced interpretability. Figs. 15(b)–19(b) present the ROC
mentations completed in MATLAB R2023a. curves in the (PD , PF ) space for all methods on each dataset,
 2) Parameter Settings of HTDC: All hyperparameters of where curves closer to the upper-left corner indicate better
the proposed HTDC are empirically selected to ensure consis- performance. Figs. 15(c)–19(c) illustrate the ROC curves in the
tent performance across datasets: the OSBE parameters (k, s) (PD , τ) space, where curves approaching the upper-left corner
are set to (9, 4) for all datasets. The hyperbolic Transformer signify superior results. Figs. 15(d)–19(c) display the ROC
module is configured with a depth of 2, 8 attention heads, and curves in the (PF , τ) space, with curves closer to the lower-
8 neurons in each MLP layer. The sizes of the dual temporal left corner indicating better performance. Figs. 15(a)–19(a)
queues (Q1 , Q2 ) are set to (10 000, 2000) across all datasets. show the 3-D ROC curves for each dataset, from which
During the training phase, the network is optimized using the eight key evaluation metrics are derived to comprehensively
layerwise adaptive rate scaling (LARS) optimizer. The initial assess detection capability. The highest performance indices
learning rate l is set to 0.05 and is dynamically adjusted using are highlighted in bold, and the second-best results are marked
a cosine annealing scheduler. The temperature coefficients (τ1 , with an underline.
τ2 ) are set to (0.1, 0.05), and the momentum coefficients (n, m) To provide a detailed analysis of the evaluation metrics,
are set to (0.999, 0.8). The number of training epochs is set to the Texas Coast dataset is taken as an example. As shown
50 for the contrastive stage and 200 for dataset-specific fine- in Fig. 5, the detection results of different methods are comtuning. For all datasets, the batch size is set to 400, and the pared. Traditional methods fail to achieve clear and complete
balance parameter λ is set to 0.5. The detection dual-window anomaly detection. Except for GAED and Auto-AD, most
sizes are fixed at (3, 5). As for the background suppression deep learning-based methods can identify the contours and
process, β is set to 10, 20, 50, 20, and 10 for the Texas Coast, locations of anomalies; however, they exhibit relatively weak
Los Angeles, Beach, Gulfport, and Pavia datasets, respec- background suppression. Taking GIL-HAD as an example,
tively. The parameter ε1 (used to control the window size of both the proposed HTDC and GIL-HAD can effectively detect
the filter), the parameter ε2 (used to control the ambiguity anomalies, but the targets detected by GIL-HAD are less
of the filter), and the number of iterations (performed in the prominent compared to those by HTDC. As reported in
guided filter) are set to (3, 2.5, 0.5), (3, 1.2, 0.5), (3, 2.5, 1), (3, Table III, the proposed method achieves a detection accuracy
2.5, 0.5), and (3, 2.5, 0.5) for the Texas Coast, Los Angeles, of 0.9987, which is 12% higher than that of GTVLRR, the
Beach, Gulfport, and Pavia datasets, respectively. method with the lowest performance. For the AUC (PF , τ)
 3) Parameter Settings of Comparison Methods: For a fair metric, the proposed method ranks second, slightly behind
comparison, baseline methods are configured according to the Auto-AD. However, HTDC outperforms Auto-AD by 1.12% in
optimal parameters recommended in their respective refer- the AUC (PD , PF ) metric, indicating that Auto-AD’s superior
ences. For 2S-GLRT in [56], the outer and inner window sizes anomaly detection comes at the cost of weaker background
are set to 7 and 5. For GTVLRR in [23], the number of clusters suppression. Compared with GIL-HAD, the HTDC improves
K and total number of pixels per cluster P are set to 15 and 20, the overall detection accuracy by 0.54% and outperforms it
respectively, with parameters λ = 0.5, β = 0.2, and γ = 0.05. across the remaining seven evaluation metrics.
For AHMID [57], the parameters α, λ, and the number of For the Los Angeles dataset, the detection results are shown
layers are set to 1, 0.05, and 1, respectively. For GAED in in Fig. 7. AHMID, RGAE, GIL-HAD, NL2Net, and HTDC
[37], the second to sixth layer sizes are set to 100, 50, 25, 50, can accurately localize all anomaly positions and contours.
and 100, respectively, window size c = 7, learning rate l = 0.4, However, the results of 2S-GLRT and Auto-AD contain
number of iterations = 300, and penalty β = 1. For RGAE in significant background interference, embedding the detected
[35], the weight parameter, number of superpixels, and hidden targets into the background and making them difficult to
layer dimension are set to 0.01, 150, and 100, respectively. For observe. GTVLRR is severely affected by noise. As shown
Auto-AD in [36], the number of training epochs is set to 50 in Table III, with background suppression evaluated using the
across all five datasets, with a loss threshold of 1.0 × 10−5 . AUC (PF , τ), the proposed method ranks second. For all other
For GIL-HAD in [58], the size of the N(p) = 7 × 7, learning evaluation metrics, HTDC outperforms all competing methods.
rate LR = 0.01, reg noise = 0.1, layers = 5, and threshold Compared with Auto-AD, although the proposed method ranks
τ = 0.000015. For NL2Net in [59], the parameter PD = 5, slightly lower in background suppression, it surpasses Autothe learning rate = 1.0 × 10−4 , and the number of training AD across all other metrics.
epochs = 100. For the Beach dataset, the detection results are shown
 in Fig. 9. Except for 2S-GLRT, all other methods are able
D. Results and Analysis to accurately localize the anomaly positions and contours.
 This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of the The 2S-GLRT result map contains significant background
proposed HTDC method through a series of experiments, interference, embedding the detected targets and making them
WANG et al.: HTDC: HYPERBOLIC TRANSFORMER WITH DUAL-MOMENTUM CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR HAD 5507217

Fig. 15. ROC curves for the Texas Coast dataset. (a) 3-D ROC curve. (b) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , PF ). (c) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , τ). (d) 2-D ROC curve
of (PF , τ).

Fig. 16. ROC curves for the Los Angeles dataset. (a) 3-D ROC curve. (b) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , PF ). (c) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , τ). (d) 2-D ROC curve
of (PF , τ).

Fig. 17. ROC curves for the Beach dataset. (a) 3-D ROC curve. (b) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , PF ). (c) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , τ). (d) 2-D ROC curve of (PF ,
τ).

Fig. 18. ROC curves for the Gulfport dataset. (a) 3-D ROC curve. (b) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , PF ). (c) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , τ). (d) 2-D ROC curve of
(PF , τ).

unobservable, along with a number of false alarms. GTVLRR the remaining evaluation metrics. Compared with Auto-AD,
is heavily affected by noise. AHMID, RGAE, GAED, GIL- although the detection map of HTDC shows similar back-
HAD, and NL2Net exhibit varying degrees of background ground suppression and target detection performance, the
interference, and AHMID in particular produces a large num- proposed method outperforms Auto-AD across all evaluation
ber of false detections. As shown in Table III, the HTDC metrics, as detailed in Table III.
method ranks second in terms of AUC (PF , τ), AUC (PD , For the Gulfport dataset, the detection results are shown in
τ), and AUCTD , while outperforming all other methods in Fig. 11. HTDC and NL2Net successfully detect most small
5507217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 19. ROC curves for the Pavia dataset. (a) 3-D ROC curve. (b) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , PF ). (c) 2-D ROC curve of (PD , τ). (d) 2-D ROC curve of (PF ,
τ).

 TABLE III
 AUC VALUES C OMPUTATION OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON F IVE DATASETS : (I) T EXAS C OAST,
 (II) L OS A NGELES , (III) B EACH , (IV) G ULFPORT, AND (V) PAVIA

targets as well as some large ones. In contrast, the other demonstrates superior anomaly highlighting and background
methods fail to detect small targets by visual inspection, as suppression capabilities compared with other competing algothey tend to over-suppress the background at the cost of rithms. According to Table III, although the AUC (PF , τ)
missing a large portion of the anomalies. The targets detected metric is not dominant, the proposed method ranks first across
by GAED remain embedded in the background and are barely the remaining seven evaluation metrics, indicating strong pervisible upon inspection. As illustrated in Fig. 11, HTDC formance in anomaly detection, background suppression, and
WANG et al.: HTDC: HYPERBOLIC TRANSFORMER WITH DUAL-MOMENTUM CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR HAD 5507217

Fig. 20. Box plot of comparison algorithms for five datasets. (a) Coast dataset. (b) Los Angeles dataset. (c) Beach dataset. (d) Gulfport dataset. (e) Pavia.

background–target separation. Moreover, the method achieves top and bottom 10% of pixel values. In each subfigure, red
a detection accuracy of 0.9860, which is 6.17% higher than boxes indicate the distribution of anomalous targets, while
the second-best result achieved by NL2Net. Compared with green boxes represent the background. The central horizontal
GIL-HAD, the proposed method improves the detection rate line denotes the median, and the upper and lower boundaries
by 12.22%. indicate the value range. Ideally, a compact background box
 For the Pavia dataset, the detection results are shown in (indicating strong suppression) and a large gap between the
Fig. 13. The experimental results demonstrate the superior target and background boxes (indicating high separability)
robustness of the proposed method compared to state-of- are desired. As observed, on the Texas Coast dataset, the
the-art competitors. While Auto-AD struggles significantly proposed HTDC exhibits strong target responses with backwith a lower detection rate of 0.9910, likely due to over- ground maximum values compressed near zero. For the Beach
suppression of targets in complex backgrounds, the proposed and Gulfport datasets, although the median target scores
method maintains high confidence and stability. According of HTDC are slightly lower than those of GTVLRR and
to the table, although the AUCSNPR metric is not dominant NL2Net, the latter methods exhibit significantly higher backcompared to Auto-AD, the proposed method ranks first in ground residuals (elevated green boxes). Consequently, HTDC
critical metrics, including AUCTD , AUCODP , and AUC (PD , achieves a superior contrast ratio. Consistently across all five
τ). This indicates exceptional capabilities in background-target datasets, HTDC yields the distinctest margin between the
separation and anomaly highlighting without sacrificing signal target and background distributions with virtually no overlap.
integrity. In particular, the method achieves a remarkable The highly compact background boxes further confirm the
detection accuracy of 0.9993. This result is 0.45% higher method’s robust suppression capability. In summary, the prothan the runner-up GAED and outperforms Auto-AD by a posed method effectively suppresses background interference
significant margin of 0.83%, comprehensively validating its and maximizes the separability of anomalies.
effectiveness in handling challenging scenarios. Overall, the proposed HTDC method successfully and
 To further validate the detection results, 3-D views comprehensively detects all of the anomalous targets while
of the detection results were performed, as shown in demonstrating strong background suppression capabilities in
Figs. 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14. Compared to traditional 2-D complex environments. As shown in Figs. 15–19, the 3-D ROC
detection results, the 3-D visualization represents the “anomaly and the corresponding 2-D ROC curves further highlight the
score” in the form of height, offering a clearer representation superior overall performance of HTDC. In addition, the eight
of the prominence of anomalies relative to the background. metrics in Table III also indicate that HTDC exhibits excellent
As shown in Figs. 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14, anomalies in all detection capabilities across various aspects. Therefore, HTDC
five datasets are significantly elevated above the background, shows outstanding detection performance in both qualitative
demonstrating the method’s strong separability. Moreover, the and quantitative analyses.
anomaly detection results exhibit high spatial consistency with
the ground truth maps, being more closely aligned with the
 E. Ablation Article
true anomalies than other methods, thereby reflecting a higher
detection accuracy. Simultaneously, the background regions in In this section, a comprehensive ablation study is conducted
all five datasets are relatively flat, indicating strong background to evaluate the effectiveness of different modules within the
suppression capability. In conclusion, the proposed method proposed HTDC method. To clearly isolate the contribution
effectively enhances detection performance and the ability to of each component, the study is divided into two parts: 1) an
separate anomalies from the background. analysis of the momentum CL framework and 2) an analysis
 To visually verify the separability between the background of the core functional components, specifically the geometric
and anomalies, boxplots of the detection scores from nine space and data augmentation strategies. The visualization
methods are illustrated in Fig. 20. To mitigate the influence of the detection accuracy for these variants is presented in
of outliers, the distributions are plotted after excluding the Figs. 21 and 22.
5507217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

 TABLE IV
 D ETAILED S ETTINGS OF D IFFERENT C ASES IN A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

Fig. 21. Detection accuracy comparison between MOCO-HAD and the
proposed method.

 Fig. 23. Running time of the comparative methods on five datasets.

 2) Contribution of Core Components: Based on the dualmomentum framework, the specific contributions of the
 hyperbolic geometry and multiview augmentation were further
 investigated. As detailed in Table IV, four variants (denoted as
 A, B, C, and proposed) are designed to isolate these components. In the experimental setup for Case C, the Euclidean
 Transformer (i.e., the standard Transformer architecture) is
 configured with a depth of 2, 8 attention heads, and 8 neurons
Fig. 22. Detection accuracy comparison for variants of the proposed method. in each MLP layer. These hyperparameters are kept consistent with the Hyperbolic setting to ensure a fair comparison
 1) Effectiveness of Parameter Update Strategy: The impact regarding the geometric space.
of the training framework is first evaluated by comparing Fig. 22 presents the radar chart of AUC (PD , PF ) perthe proposed DMCL with the conventional single-momentum formance across five hyperspectral datasets. Visually, the
[momentum contrast (MoCo)] approach (referred to as enclosed area of the proposed method is the largest, indicating
MOCO-HAD) [52], [63]. For MOCO-HAD, data augmenta- superior overall performance. More importantly, the shape
tion is performed using Gaussian noise (with β = 0.005), consistency reveals significant differences in robustness. Meththe momentum coefficient is set to 0.999, the temperature ods A and B exhibit a “star-like” shape with sharp contractions
parameter is set to 0.07, and the queue length is set to along the Los Angeles and Gulfport axes, indicating their
10 000. Crucially, to ensure a fair comparison, the feature vulnerability to complex background clutter in these specific
extraction networks of both the proposed method and MCT scenes. In contrast, the proposed method maintains a quasiare consistently based on the spectral feature extraction via regular pentagonal shape, demonstrating that it effectively
hyperbolic Transformer proposed in this article. mitigates the performance degradation observed in other meth-
 Fig. 21 visualizes the AUC (PD , PF ) performance compar- ods. The proposed method essentially “closes the gap” on
ison using a radar chart. Visually, the curve of the proposed the challenging datasets while retaining near-perfect scores
method completely encloses that of MOCO-HAD, indicat- on easier tasks (e.g., Texas Coast), confirming its excellent
ing superior detection accuracy across all five hyperspectral generalization capability.
datasets. A critical observation lies in the shape of the
polygons. While MOCO-HAD exhibits a sharp contraction F. Computational Complexity Analysis
along the Gulfport axis, the proposed method maintains a To comprehensively evaluate the proposed HTDC, the
high AUC (PD , PF ) of 0.9860. This result confirms that our computational efficiency of all methods is further compared.
method effectively eliminates the “performance bottleneck” Table V reports the computational complexity metrics, includobserved in the baseline, demonstrating exceptional capability ing the number of parameters (Params) and floating point
in handling challenging scenarios. operations (FLOPs) on the five datasets. Fig. 23 displays
WANG et al.: HTDC: HYPERBOLIC TRANSFORMER WITH DUAL-MOMENTUM CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR HAD 5507217

 TABLE V
 C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON F IVE DATASETS

the running times (e.g., training time and inference time) of DMCL framework. The proposed method adopts a two-stage
various detectors for all detectors applied to the five datasets design. In the training stage, a multiview data augmentaunder consideration. tion strategy is employed to generate semantically consistent
 1) Model Complexity: Regarding model complexity, HTDC yet diverse sample pairs for CL. Subsequently, a hyperbolic
demonstrates an exceptional lightweight advantage. As Transformer-based feature extraction module is integrated with
reported in Table V, the parameter count of HTDC is constant CL, incorporating both a dual-momentum update strategy and
at 1.4604 M, which is significantly lower than that of large- hyperbolic space optimization to facilitate multilevel modeling
scale models like Auto-AD. Most notably, HTDC achieves the of local geometric structures and global spectral information.
lowest computational cost in terms of FLOPs. In particular This design enhances the model’s ability to learn discrimon the Texas Coast dataset, HTDC requires only 0.0399 G inative spectral representations for distinguishing anomalies
FLOPs, standing in sharp contrast to the 11.9589 G required from the background. In the testing stage, the pretrained
by Auto-AD. This indicates that our method is extremely model is applied to anomaly detection using a sliding dualenergy-efficient, making it particularly suitable for resource- window strategy, enabling fine-grained response to anomalous
constrained platforms where power consumption is a critical regions. To further optimize detection results, several postconstraint. processing techniques are employed, including exponential
 2) Time Consumption: The computational efficiency of transformation, normalization, and guided filtering, effectively
the compared methods is visualized in Fig. 23. Note that a suppressing background interference and enhancing anomaly
logarithmic scale is used to accommodate the vast differences saliency. Extensive experiments and ablation studies conducted
in time costs. In the train phase, traditional methods (e.g., on five real-world hyperspectral datasets confirm that the
GTVLRR and 2S-GLRT) do not involve a training stage. In proposed HTDC framework consistently outperforms eight
contrast, deep learning-based methods, including the proposed state-of-the-art methods in terms of detection accuracy and
HTDC, require a training phase to learn feature representa- robustness.
tions. The proposed HTDC incurs a moderate training time, Future efforts will be directed toward extending the
which is comparable to that of RGAE but higher than that of framework to address large-scale anomaly detection scesimple lightweight models like Auto-AD. Crucially, it is worth narios through implementation optimization. Moreover,
noting that training is a one-time, offline computational cost. spatial–spectral attention mechanisms are planned to be inte-
Once the model is trained, it can be deployed permanently grated to enhance performance, with potential applications on
without reoptimization. Therefore, the training overhead does resource-constrained edge devices.
not impact the real-time detection capability. Real-time capability is determined by inference time. Traditional methods R EFERENCES
suffer from heavy computational burdens due to iterative [1] S.-E. Qian, “Hyperspectral satellites, evolution, and development
 history,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14,
optimization, taking tens to hundreds of seconds per image. In pp. 7032–7056, 2021.
contrast, HTDC demonstrates a significant speedup. Taking the [2] C. Yu et al., “Distillation-constrained prototype representation network
Texas Coast dataset as an example, HTDC records an inference for hyperspectral image incremental classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5507414.
time of approximately 4.5 s, achieving a speedup of nearly [3] X. Chen, L. Gao, M. Zhang, C. Chen, and S. Yan, “Spectral–spatial
two orders of magnitude compared to traditional approaches. adversarial multidomain synthesis network for cross-scene hyperspectral
While slightly slower than millisecond-level networks due to image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
 Art. no. 5518716.
the sophisticated feature extraction, this acceptable latency is [4] C. Yu, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, E. Zhao, Q. Zhang, and X. Lu, “Concern with
a worthy tradeoff for the superior detection accuracy. center-pixel labeling: Center-specific perception transformer network for
 hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5514614.
 IV. C ONCLUSION [5] E. Zhao, N. Qu, Y. Wang, C. Gao, and J. Zeng, “TEBS:
 To address the vulnerability of reconstruction-based HAD Temperature–emissivity–driven band selection for thermal infrared
 hyperspectral image classification with structured state-space model and
methods to contamination from anomalous pixels during gated attention,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf., vol. 142, Aug. 2025,
background reconstruction, this article proposes a multiview Art. no. 104710.
5507217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

[6] H. Su, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection: [28] Y. Wang, H. Wang, E. Zhao, M. Song, and C. Zhao, “Tucker
 A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 64–90, decomposition-based network compression for anomaly detection with
 Mar. 2022. large-scale hyperspectral images,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
[7] C.-I. Chang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection: A dual theory of hyper- Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17, pp. 10674–10689, 2024.
 spectral target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, [29] M. Zhao, W. Zheng, and J. Hu, “HTC-HAD: A hybrid transformer-CNN
 2022, Art. no. 5511720. approach for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
[8] J. Wang, Z. Hua, W. Zhang, S. Hao, Y. Yao, and M. Gong, “CL- Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 18, pp. 10144–10156, 2025.
 BioGAN: Biologically inspired cross-domain continual learning for [30] X. Fu, S. Jia, L. Zhuang, M. Xu, J. Zhou, and Q. Li,
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via deep plug-and-play denoising
 vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5514715. CNN regularization,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11,
[9] Y. Wang, X. Chen, F. Wang, M. Song, and C. Yu, “Meta-learning based pp. 9553–9568, Nov. 2021.
 hyperspectral target detection using Siamese network,” IEEE Trans. [31] X. Dai, Y. Dong, Y. Zhang, and B. Du, “AdaptHAD: Adaptive one-
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5527913. step hybrid network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
[10] S. Feng, R. Feng, D. Wu, C. Zhao, W. Li, and R. Tao, “A coarse- Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5531614.
 to-fine hyperspectral target detection method based on low-rank tensor [32] Y. Li, T. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Sparse coding-inspired GAN
 decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. for hyperspectral anomaly detection in weakly supervised learning,”
 no. 5530413. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512811.
[11] H. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, E. Zhao, and J. Zeng, “Breaking dimen- [33] Z. Wang, X. Wang, K. Tan, B. Han, J. Ding, and Z. Liu, “Hyperspectral
 sional barriers in hyperspectral target detection: Atrous convolution with anomaly detection based on variational background inference and gengramian angular field representations,” Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 143, erative adversarial network,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 143, pp. 1–16, Nov.
 Dec. 2024, Art. no. 105623. 2023.
[12] Y. Zhou, Q. Yao, S. Huo, and X. Li, “Hyperspectral band selection with [34] X. Lu, W. Zhang, and J. Huang, “Exploiting embedding manifold of
 iterative graph autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, autoencoders for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 2023, Art. no. 5511013. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 1527–1537, Mar. 2020.
[13] Y. Wang, H. Ma, Y. Yang, E. Zhao, M. Song, and C. Yu, “Self-supervised [35] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
 deep multi-level representation learning fusion-based maximum entropy anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 subspace clustering for hyperspectral band selection,” Remote Sens., Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314.
 vol. 16, no. 2, p. 224, Jan. 2024. [36] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
[14] D. Manolakis and G. Shaw, “Detection algorithms for hyperspectral hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolutional
 imaging applications,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no.
 pp. 29–43, Jan. 2002. 5503314.
 [37] P. Xiang, S. Ali, S. K. Jung, and H. Zhou, “Hyperspectral anomaly
[15] Z. Wu, W. Zhu, J. Chanussot, Y. Xu, and S. Osher, “Hyperspectral
 detection with guided autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 anomaly detection via global and local joint modeling of background,”
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5538818.
 IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 14, pp. 3858–3869, Jul. 2019.
 [38] Z. Yang et al., “A multi-scale mask convolution-based blind-spot
[16] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
 network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
 optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
 no. 16, p. 3036, Aug. 2024.
 Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Oct. 1990.
 [39] R. Zhao, Z. Yang, X. Meng, and F. Shao, “A novel fully convolutional
[17] S. Matteoli, T. Veracini, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A locally auto-encoder based on dual clustering and latent feature adversarial
 adaptive background density estimator: An evolution for RX-based consistency for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
 anomaly detectors,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, no. 4, p. 717, Feb. 2024.
 pp. 323–327, Jan. 2014. [40] Z. Wu and B. Wang, “Transformer-based autoencoder framework
[18] Q. Guo, B. Zhang, Q. Ran, L. Gao, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Weighted-RXD for nonlinear hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 and linear filter-based RXD: Improving background statistics estimation Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5508015.
 for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics [41] X. Chen, Y. Cui, S. Gao, L. Wang, C. Zhao, and T. Luo, “S3S-LTGRMA:
 Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2351–2366, Jun. Local-to-global based spatial-structural-spectral joint reconstruction with
 2014. residual multi-head autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
[19] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 145, pp. 1–14, Mar. 2025.
 anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. [42] X. Fu, T. Zhang, J. Cheng, and S. Jia, “MMR-HAD: Multiscale mamba
 Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005. reconstruction network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
[20] F. He et al., “Recursive RX with extended multi-attribute profiles for Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5516914.
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 3, p. 589, [43] W. Chen, X. Zhi, S. Jiang, Y. Huang, Q. Han, and W. Zhang, “DWSDiff:
 Jan. 2023. Dual-window spectral diffusion for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
[21] Q. Ling, Y. Guo, Z. Lin, and W. An, “A constrained sparse representa- IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5504617.
 tion model for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. [44] Y. Wang, X. Chen, E. Zhao, and M. Song, “Self-supervised spectral-level
 Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2358–2371, Apr. 2019. contrastive learning for hyperspectral target detection,” IEEE Trans.
[22] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5510515.
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3, [45] X. Cao, J. Yu, R. Xu, J. Wei, and L. Jiao, “Mask-enhanced contrastive
 pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015. learning for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
[23] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Graph and total variation regularized low- Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 4415415.
 rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. [46] X. Sun, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, and B. Du, “Contrastive self-supervised
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 391–406, Jan. 2020. learning-based background reconstruction for hyperspectral anomaly
[24] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no.
 hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,” 5504312.
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000, Apr. [47] Y. Wang, C. Deng, H. Wang, E. Zhao, and Q. Lan, “Deep spectral metric
 2016. learning with Siamese network for hyperspectral target detection,” Infr.
[25] Y. Zhang, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Wang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix Phys. Technol., vol. 150, pp. 1–15, Nov. 2025.
 decomposition-based Mahalanobis distance method for hyperspectral [48] X. Ou, L. Liu, S. Tan, G. Zhang, W. Li, and B. Tu, “A hyperspectral
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3, image change detection framework with self-supervised contrastive
 pp. 1376–1389, Mar. 2016. learning pretrained model,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
[26] C. Zhao, X. Li, and H. Zhu, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection based on Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 7724–7740, 2022.
 stacked denoising autoencoders,” J. Appl. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 4, [49] W. Peng, T. Varanka, A. Mostafa, H. Shi, and G. Zhao, “Hyperbolic deep
 p. 1, Sep. 2017. neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
[27] X. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Wang, A. Vizziello, and P. Gamba, “Hyperspectral vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 10023–10044, Dec. 2022.
 target detection via global spatial–spectral attention network and back- [50] H. Sun, L. Wang, L. Zhang, and L. Gao, “Hyperbolic space-based
 ground suppression,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 Sens., vol. 16, pp. 9011–9024, 2023. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5522115.
WANG et al.: HTDC: HYPERBOLIC TRANSFORMER WITH DUAL-MOMENTUM CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR HAD 5507217

[51] Y. Yang et al., “Spectral-enhanced sparse transformer network for Chao Deng was born in Panzhou, Guizhou, China,
 hyperspectral super-resolution reconstruction,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. in 1998. He received the B.S. degree in electronic
 Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17, pp. 17278–17291, 2024. information science and technology from the Infor-
[52] Y. Wang, X. Chen, E. Zhao, C. Zhao, M. Song, and C. Yu, “An mation Science and Technology College, Dalian
 unsupervised momentum contrastive learning based transformer network Maritime University, Dalian, China, in 2023, where
 for hyperspectral target detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in informa-
 Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17, pp. 9053–9068, 2024. tion and communication engineering.
[53] M. Luo, R. Zhao, S. Zhang, L. Chen, F. Shao, and X. Meng, “IM- His research interests include hyperspectral
 CMDet: An intramodal enhancement and cross-modal fusion network anomaly detection and deep learning.
 for small object detection in UAV aerial visible-infrared imagery,” IEEE
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5008316.
[54] Y. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Xu, and E. Zhao, “Butterfly residual network: A hybrid approach with spectral transformers and depth-wise
 convolutions for hyperspectral image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Nov. 20, 2025, doi: 10.1109/
 TNNLS.2025.3631243.
[55] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
 contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[56] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel
 anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567,
 Oct. 2022.
[57] T. Guo, L. He, F. Luo, X. Gong, Y. Li, and L. Zhang, “Anomaly
 detection of hyperspectral image with hierarchical antinoise mutual- Enyu Zhao (Member, IEEE) was born in Dalian,
 incoherence- induced low-rank representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Liaoning, China, in 1987. He received the Ph.D.
 Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5510213. degree in cartography and geographic information
[58] R. Wang and J. Hu, “Gaussian-inspired attention mechanism for hyper- systems from the College of Resources and Environspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 22, ment, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 pp. 1–5, 2025. Beijing, China, in 2017.
[59] D. Wang, L. Ren, X. Sun, L. Gao, and J. Chanussot, “Nonlocal and He was a joint Ph.D. Student with the Engineering
 local feature-coupled self-supervised network for hyperspectral anomaly Science, Computer Science, and Imaging Laboradetection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., tory, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,
 vol. 18, pp. 6981–6993, 2025. from 2014 to 2016. He is currently an Associate
[60] C.-I. Chang, “An effective evaluation tool for hyperspectral target Professor with the College of Information Science
 detection: 3D receiver operating characteristic curve analysis,” IEEE and Technology, Dalian Maritime University, Dalian. His research interests
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 5131–5153, Jun. 2021. include quantitative remote sensing and hyperspectral image processing.
[61] C.-I. Chang, “Comprehensive analysis of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5541124.
[62] C.-I. Chang, “Effective anomaly space for hyperspectral anomaly
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no.
 5526624.
[63] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9726–9735.

 Yulei Wang (Member, IEEE) was born in Yantai,
 Shandong, China, in 1986. She received the B.S. and
 Ph.D. degrees in signal and information processing
 from Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China, Chunyan Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 in 2009 and 2015, respectively. B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in environmental engineering
 She was a Joint Ph.D. Student with the Remote from Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, China, in
 Sensing Signal and Image Processing Laboratory, 2004 and 2012, respectively.
 University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Balti- In 2004, she joined the College of Computer
 more, MD, USA, from 2011 to 2013. From 2011 to Science and Technology, Dalian Maritime Univer-
 2013, she was a Research Assistant with the School sity. From 2013 to 2016, she was a Post-Doctoral
 of Medicine, Shock, Trauma and Anesthesiology Fellow with the Information Science and Technology
Research Organized Research Center (STAR-ORC), University of Maryland. College, Dalian Maritime University. From 2014 to
She is currently an Associate Professor and a Doctoral Supervisor with the 2015, she was a Visiting Scholar with the College of
Hyperspectral Imaging in Remote Sensing (CHIRS), Information Science and Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New
Technology College, Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, China. Her research York, NY, USA. She is currently an Associate Professor with the Information
interests include hyperspectral image processing, multisource remote sensing Science and Technology College, Dalian Maritime University. Her research
fusion, and vital signs signal processing. For more information, please visit interests include image segmentation, hyperspectral image classification, and
the website https://github.com/YuleiWang1/ pattern recognition.