8478 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 IHUD-BERT: A Large-Scale Network Traffic
 Classification Method Based on Pre-Training
 Transformers and Knowledge Distillation
 Yahui Hu, Tiancun Deng , Junping Song , Pengfei Fan, and Xu Zhou

 Abstract—Accurate and efficient classification of large-scale I. I NTRODUCTION
network traffic is fundamental to ensuring network Quality
of Service (QoS) and security. However, existing methodologies face critical challenges. While payload-based pre-trained
models have achieved success, they often rely on memorizing session-specific encryption artifacts, leading to catastrophic
 T RADITIONAL network traffic classification methods,
 including port-based and Deep Packet Inspection (DPI),
 have been challenged by dynamic port allocation and the
performance degradation under realistic “inter-flow” splitting proliferation of end-to-end encryption [1]. While conventional
scenarios. Furthermore, the scarcity of labeled samples and the Machine Learning(ML) approaches to bypass payload depenhigh computational cost of large models hinder their practical dency, they still struggle with feature engineering costs and
deployment. To address these limitations, this paper proposes an the evolving nature of encrypted protocol [2].
integrated framework, IHUD-BERT, which integrates robust fea- To overcome the constraints of feature engineering, research
ture representation with knowledge distillation. We first introduce
the IP Header Unit (IHU) scheme, applying a sliding window over focus shifted to Deep Learning (DL) techniques such as Con-
IP packet headers. Unlike payload-based approaches, this method volutional and Recurrent Neural Networks (CNNs and RNNs),
captures invariant behavioral patterns that remain consistent which can automatically learn hierarchical feature representaacross encrypted sessions, ensuring robustness against encryption tions from raw traffic data [3]. Building on this foundation, and
randomization while augmenting limited training data. Subse- inspired by successes in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
quently, a pre-trained Transformer (IHU-BERT) is constructed as [4], pre-trained models based on the Transformer architecture
a teacher model, and its comprehensive knowledge is transferred have been introduced to the field [5], [6]. These models
to a lightweight student model (IHUD-BERT) via hierarchical
knowledge distillation. Comprehensive evaluations on multiple learn generic “behavioral paradigms” from vast, unlabeled
datasets validate our approach. The results demonstrate that traffic datasets and can be fine-tuned to achieve state-of-thewhile payload-based baselines collapse under strict inter-flow art performance on specific downstream tasks. Despite the
evaluation on encrypted traffic, our method maintains high remarkable capabilities of existing pre-trained models, their
accuracy. Notably, the lightweight IHUD-BERT achieves only application to network traffic classification faces three critical
a marginal performance degradation compared to its teacher challenges that hinder practical deployment.
counterpart while delivering millisecond-level inference latency.
 First, the validity of payload-based feature extraction is
These results establish the proposed framework as a robust,
high-precision, and efficient solution for modern encrypted traffic fundamentally compromised by modern encryption protocols.
classification. While existing studies often report high accuracy [5], our
 empirical analysis reveals that these results are largely inflated
 Index Terms—Traffic classification, pre-training, knowledge
distillation, IP header, sliding window.
 by “session artifacts” rather than stemming from generalized
 feature learning. This overestimation is critically dependent on
 Received 24 August 2025; revised 19 December 2025, 22 March 2026,
 the sample processing strategy employed. Conventional “intraand 9 May 2026; accepted 15 May 2026. Date of publication 22 May 2026; flow” (packet-level) splitting randomly partitions packets from
date of current version 29 May 2026. This work was supported by the the same session across both training and testing sets. This
the 2026 Enhancement of Independent Innovation - Disciplinary Interdisci- overlap allows models to memorize session-specific encryption
plinary Innovation Project through the project Construction of Multi-mode
Fusion Communication Platform for Mine Leaky Cable (81001203A56), the patterns (e.g., ephemeral keys) found in both sets. In sharp
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2025ZKPYZN02), contrast, strict “inter-flow” (session-level) splitting enforces a
the National Key R&D Program of China (2024YFB2908700), the hard boundary where complete sessions are assigned exclu-
Youth Innovation Promotion Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences
(2021168), and Guoneng Zhishen Control Technology Co., Ltd. through
 sively to either the training or testing set. This ensures that
the project Research and Development of Boundary-aware Intelligent Coal the testing data consists of entirely unseen flows with dif-
Sorting Technology Using Weakly Supervised Training. The associate editor ferent encryption parameters, faithfully simulating real-world
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was deployment. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, while payload-based
E. Oki. (Corresponding author: Tiancun Deng.)
 Yahui Hu and Tiancun Deng are with China University of Mining and models thrive under the permissive intra-flow setting, their
Technology-Beijing, Beijing 100083, China (e-mail: huyahui@cumtb.edu.cn; performance collapses significantly under the realistic interdengtiancun.cumtb@gmail.com). flow protocol, exposing the inherent inapplicability of payload
 Junping Song, Pengfei Fan, and Xu Zhou are with the Computer Network features for encrypted traffic.
Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
(e-mail: songjunping@cnic.cn; fanpengfei@cnic.cn; zhouxu@cnic.cn). When evaluating the payload-based ET-BERT [5]
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2026.3695843 on encrypted data, its accuracy precipitates from
 2332-7731 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
HU et al.: IHUD-BERT: A LARGE-SCALE NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD 8479

Fig. 1. The impact of encryption artifacts on model generalization. (a) Limitations of intra-flow classification: A conceptual illustration showing how payloadbased models memorize ephemeral session keys (visualized as distinct textures) during intra-flow training. This results in “data leakage,” where the model
fails to generalize to unseen flows (Inter-flow inference) due to domain shifts caused by new encryption keys. (b) Empirical validation: Experimental results
on the encrypted CIC200 dataset confirm a performance collapse for ET-BERT under strict inter-flow splitting. However, the high accuracy on the plaintext
Modbus-15* dataset proves that this failure is induced specifically by encryption. Crucially, our header-based approach (IHU) remains robust in all settings,
demonstrating that header behaviors are consistent and encryption-agnostic.

97.89%(intra-flow) to approximately 13.76%(inter-flow) work hardware such as routers, switches, and Internet of
as empirically verified in Figure 1b. In contrast, our header- Things(IoT) gateways. This creates a significant gap between
based approach maintains superior robustness across all high-performance academic models and the industrial demand
scenarios, proving its resilience to encryption randomization. for low-cost, high-efficiency solutions.
To confirm that this degradation is attributable to encryption To address these challenges, we propose a systematic framerather than the inherent complexity of the inter-flow task, we work that synergizes robust feature representation with model
conducted a control experiment using the Modbus-15.1 As compression. Capitalizing on the insight that packet header
shown in Figure 1b, payload-based models generalized well behaviors remain unencrypted and highly consistent across
on plaintext Modbus traffic even under inter-flow splitting. sessions even when payloads are randomized, we introduce the
This isolates encryption as the root cause of the performance IP Header Unit (IHU) as a robust and session-invariant feature
degradation in CIC200. This is because IP header is plaintext input, which effectively captures consistent behavioral patterns
and header-based models can learn traffic behavior patterns across different encrypted sessions. Furthermore, to bridge
from the header (e.g., specific service requests often send the gap between high-performance pre-training and practical
initial packets of a fixed size, or follow a particular sequence deployment on resource-constrained devices, we employ a
of message exchanges). Since these behavioral patterns are knowledge distillation strategy to derive a lightweight student
characteristics of the application itself, and not products of model, IHUD-BERT(IHU Distilled-BERT), from a large-scale
the session key, they maintain consistency and robustness pre-trained teacher IHU-BERT.
across different sessions (i.e., under strict Inter-flow splitting). The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
 Second, there is a data scarcity problem. The immense First, we propose the IHU scheme, which employs a stratecost and difficulty of collecting and labeling large-scale, real- gic sliding window mechanism exclusively over IP packet
world network data across hundreds of application classes headers. This mechanism serves as an effective data augmenmean most public datasets are limited in either variety or tation technique to mitigate the scarcity of labeled data. Unlike
sample volume [8]. This data deficiency, combined with a lack payload-based methods that are vulnerable to session-specific
of effective data augmentation techniques, results in models encryption artifacts, our approach captures invariant behavioral
with low accuracy and poor usability, presenting a major features. Consequently, it maintains high accuracy even under
hurdle for both academia and industry [9]. Third, pre-trained strict inter-flow splitting scenarios where traditional payloadmodels suffer from excessive computational complexity [5]. based baselines experience significant performance collapse.
Their powerful representational capabilities are supported by Second, we design a two-stage “pre-training and knowledge
enormous parameter counts and high computational costs, distillation” framework to achieve lightweight deployment.
which prohibit their deployment on resource-constrained net- By transferring comprehensive knowledge from the highperformance teacher (IHU-BERT) to the streamlined student
 1 To isolate the impact of encryption, we employed the unencrypted CIC (IHUD-BERT), we effectively solve the deployment bottle-
Modbus Dataset 2023 [7] as a control group. We constructed the Modbus- neck. This distillation-based approach ensures that the student
15 dataset by extracting the first 10,000 packets from each flow across 15 model retains the teacher’s representational power while meetcategories. Its consistent plaintext payload allows us to confirm that the
performance degradation observed in other datasets is specifically induced ing the stringent efficiency requirements of edge network
by encryption artifacts. devices.
8480 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 Finally, comprehensive evaluations on multiple large-scale shift in traffic classification. DL models can automatically
datasets validate the superiority of our framework. The results learn hierarchical features from raw or minimally processed
demonstrate that our teacher model surpasses existing state-of- traffic data, thereby reducing the reliance on manual feature
the-art methods, while the lightweight IHUD-BERT achieves engineering [3]. This has enabled DL models to achieve statean optimal trade-off, maintaining near-teacher accuracy while of-the-art performance in various traffic classification tasks.
significantly accelerating inference speed. However, deep learning methods also face their own set of
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec- challenges. First, DL models typically require large labeled
tion II reviews related work on network traffic classification, datasets for training, which are often scarce or expensive to
pre-trained models applied in this domain, and knowledge acquire in the networking domain. Second, they are prone
distillation techniques. Section III elaborates on our proposed to learning biased representations from imbalanced data and
model design, including the IHU representation method, the may struggle to adapt to new or unseen traffic patterns
core IHU-BERT pre-training architecture, and the IHUD- without retraining [12]. Furthermore, many early DL methods
BERT knowledge distillation framework for generating the still relied on payload data, thereby inheriting some of the
lightweight model. Section IV presents the experimental eval- limitations of DPI when handling encrypted traffic. The IHU
uation, first introducing the datasets, evaluation metrics, and method proposed in this study aligns with this trend by
experimental setup, followed by a presentation and analysis using only the first 12 bytes of the IP header for analysis.
of the performance of IHU-BERT and IHUD-BERT. Finally, This approach eliminates the reliance on encrypted payloads,
Section V discusses and summarizes our work and looks thereby avoiding the risk of models overfitting to sessionforward to future research directions. specific encryption artifacts. Instead, through a sliding window
 mechanism, it effectively captures robust, invariant behavioral
 II. R ELATED W ORKS features to acquire more complex representations from limited
 This section reviews three key areas closely related to data.
our research: the evolution of network traffic classification 2) Classification of Large-Scale Network Traffic Data:
techniques, the use of pre-trained models for enhancing traffic Much of the current academic research focuses on datasets
representation, and the application of knowledge distillation with a limited number of classes, which may not fully reflect
for developing efficient and deployable models. the diversity and complexity of real-world network environments. This study aims to address the classification problem
A. Network Traffic Classification for “large-scale network traffic data”. Taylor et al. utilized
 a Random Forest algorithm based on statistical features to
 1) The Evolution of Classification Techniques: The devel- classify 110 mobile applications, achieving high accuracy
opment of network traffic classification technology has [13]. Rezaei et al. employed a hybrid model of 1D-CNN
progressed through four primary stages: port-based meth- and LSTM to classify 80 application categories based on
ods, DPI-based methods, traditional ML-based methods, and packet and payload sequences within a session [14]. Notably,
DL-based methods. the AppClassNet dataset, proposed by Wang et al.(Huawei),
 Early attempts at traffic classification primarily relied on provides an important benchmark for research on large-scale,
well-known port numbers assigned by the Internet Assigned commercial-grade application identification [15]. This dataset
Numbers Authority (IANA), such as port 80 for HTTP and contains up to 500 application categories and focuses on
port 25 for SMTP [10]. While offering simplicity and low over- classification using packet size and direction information
head, these methods have been rendered unreliable in modern from session prefixes. The release of AppClassNet spurred
environments by dynamic port allocation and obfuscation subsequent research, such as the lightweight CNN model,
techniques. Subsequently, DPI emerged as a more powerful LEXNet [16], proposed by Fauvel et al., based on this dataset.
technique. DPI identifies signatures or patterns associated with These advancements highlight the “scalability gap” between
specific applications or protocols by analyzing the payload academic research and real-world requirements—many existcontent of data packets. By examining the actual data content ing methods that perform well on small datasets have yet
and matching ‘fingerprints’ (specific strings or bitstreams) to have their effectiveness or applicability validated when
against a signature library, DPI provided high classification faced with the vast diversity of applications in operational
accuracy at the time [11]. However, the widespread adop- networks. Ultimately, large-scale classification demands not
tion of encryption protocols such as TLS/SSL has greatly only high accuracy but also imposes stringent requirements
diminished the effectiveness of DPI, as encryption renders on model efficiency (e.g., model size and inference speed)
packet payloads opaque. As methods dependent on payload to facilitate practical deployment. This is also one of the
content waned, machine learning techniques began to gain core motivations for employing knowledge distillation in our
prominence, with the core idea of classifying traffic based on IHUD-BERT model.
statistical properties that are generally independent of encryption. These features include packet sizes, inter-arrival times,
flow duration, byte counts, and other time or volume-related B. Pre-Training Models
statistics [2]. Despite this, traditional ML-based methods are The advent of pre-training techniques, particularly prehighly dependent on expert-driven feature engineering. This trained models based on the Transformer architecture, has
process is not only time-consuming but also domain-specific, revolutionized fields such as Natural Language Processing
making feature engineering itself a new bottleneck [1]. (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV). This paradigm is increas-
 The emergence of deep learning models, particularly the ingly being applied to network traffic analysis, aiming to learn
application of CNNs and RNNs, brought about a paradigm robust and generalizable representations from vast amounts of
HU et al.: IHUD-BERT: A LARGE-SCALE NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD 8481

unlabeled data to achieve superior performance on downstream
classification tasks, especially when labeled data is limited.
Pre-trained language models, represented by BERT, marked a
watershed moment [4]. Following BERT, a series of improved
models have emerged. For example, RoBERTa [17] optimized
pre-training strategies, such as using dynamic masking and
larger datasets; ALBERT [18] significantly reduced the number of model parameters through techniques like parameter
sharing and matrix factorization of word embeddings; while
ELECTRA [19] introduced a new pre-training paradigm,
Replaced Token Detection, which transforms the generative
task into a discriminative one, thereby improving pre-training
efficiency and effectiveness. These advancements collectively
demonstrate the powerful capability of self-supervised learning to learn universal representations from large, unlabeled
corpora.
 Although network traffic data is not linguistic text, it similarly exhibits sequential patterns and contextual dependencies,
such as the sequential relationship of packets within a flow
or the associations between byte patterns within a packet.
Pre-training techniques can capture this inherent structural Fig. 2. Overview of the IHUD-BERT framework.
information from large-scale unlabeled traffic data, generating
representations that can achieve good performance during the
fine-tuning stage with only a small amount of task-specific traditional hard labels (one-hot encoding), which is known as
labeled data [17], [20]. “Dark Knowledge”.
 The PERT model proposed by He et al. was one of the first Knowledge distillation has been widely applied to compress
attempts to apply Transformer-based pre-training techniques to large Transformer-based language models. TinyBERT [22] is
encrypted traffic classification [6]. However, PERT lacks pre- a representative work in this area; it designed a comprehentraining tasks and input representations specifically designed sive layer-by-layer distillation scheme for the Transformer
for traffic characteristics, which may limit its generalization architecture, transferring knowledge from the teacher model’s
ability. The ET-BERT model proposed by Lin et al. [5] embedding layer, attention matrices, hidden states, and final
represents a significant advancement, adapting the BERT prediction layer to the student model. DistilBERT [23], on
architecture to learn robust contextual representations directly the other hand, employs a distillation strategy during the prefrom encrypted packet payloads. However, despite its high training phase itself to directly train a general-purpose BERT
performance in intra-flow settings, the model’s reliance on model with fewer parameters. However, to the best of our
encrypted payload data renders it susceptible to overfitting knowledge, the combination of knowledge distillation and
session-specific artifacts, which severely limits its general- pre-training has not yet been applied to the field of largeization capability across unseen flows. Furthermore, its large scale network traffic classification. The IHUD-BERT model
model structure poses challenges for practical deployment. proposed in this study directly applies these principles. In
To address these issues, this paper proposes the IHUD-BERT our work, IHU-BERT (based on the BERT-base architecture)
framework, an effective integration that utilizes robust IP serves as the teacher model, while IHUD-BERT (based on the
header features and achieves lightweighting through knowl- BERT-tiny architecture) acts as the student model.
edge distillation.
 III. M ETHOD
C. Knowledge Distillation
 Although large pre-trained models have achieved remark- A. Workflow
able performance, their substantial model size and high This paper proposes a framework for large-scale network
computational demands often become obstacles to their traffic classification based on a pre-trained Transformer and
deployment in resource-constrained environments or low- knowledge distillation, which we name IHUD-BERT. As illuslatency applications, such as real-time network traffic clas- trated in Figure 2, IHUD-BERT comprises five core modules:
sification. Knowledge Distillation (KD) has emerged as an Data Processing, Dictionary Construction, Pre-training, Distileffective model compression technique. Its objective is to lation, and Fine-tuning.
transfer the knowledge learned by a large, complex “teacher First, the framework extracts session flows from the raw
model” to a smaller, more efficient “student model”, aiming to network traffic. This paper introduces a specialized scheme
maintain the original performance while reducing complexity. that exclusively uses IP packet header bytes and employs a
Hinton et al. systematically articulated the core idea of knowl- sliding window mechanism to sample over the packet sequence
edge distillation [21]. They proposed that the student model of each session flow, thereby enhancing the data for capturing
learns by mimicking the softened class probabilities (i.e., “soft temporal features. The data sampled from each window is
targets”) generated by the teacher model. These soft targets aggregated into an IHU, which serves as the fundamental input
carry more information about inter-class similarities than unit for the model (Section III-B).
8482 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 3. Generation of an IHU via sliding window sampling.

 The subsequently generated IHUs are first passed through Simultaneously, to reduce collection costs and enhance the
the Dictionary Construction module to be converted into feature richness of samples, this paper introduces a sliding
token sequences that the pre-trained model can process window mechanism for data augmentation. As specifically
(Section III-C). These token sequences are then input into a illustrated in Figure 3, we first extract session flows that share
large Transformer model based on the BERT architecture for the same five-tuple (source/destination IP, source/destination
self-supervised pre-training on a massive amount of unlabeled port, and protocol number) from a large volume of raw
IHU data (Section III-D). The objective is to enable the model network traffic covering various categories; for the k session
to learn the universal context and structural representations of flow, we denote it as Sk . If this session flow contains Lk
IHU traffic data. This thoroughly pre-trained large model is packets, then Sk can be formally represented as a packet
defined as IHU-BERT. sequence, as shown in Equation (1) Here, pk,i represents the
 Considering that the IHU-BERT model has a large num- i packet in session flow Sk (1 ≤ i ≤ Lk ) and we then extract
ber of parameters and high computational costs, making it the first 12 bytes of its IP header as its feature representation,
unsuitable for direct deployment in resource-constrained envi- denoted as h(pk,i ). This feature is a 12-byte vector, as shown in
ronments and causing increased inference latency for traffic Equation (2). Therefore, the k session flow Sk can be converted
classification, this paper introduces a Knowledge Distillation into a feature vector sequence Hk , as shown in Equation (3).
module (Section III-E). In this module, we use the pre-trained
 Sk = (pk,1 , pk,2 , . . . , pk,Lk ) (1)
IHU-BERT as the teacher model to guide the learning of
 12
a student model of the same architecture but with fewer h(pk,i ) ∈ R (2)
parameters and layers. Through distillation training using a Hk = (h(pk,1 ), h(pk,2 ), . . . , h(pk,Lk )) (3)
defined loss function, the knowledge from the teacher model is
efficiently transferred to the student model, resulting in a more After obtaining the feature vector sequence Hk for a session
lightweight model. This distilled, lightweight, and efficient flow, we employ a sliding window of length Nω to sample from
student model is defined as IHUD-BERT. this sequence. This window slides backward by N s packets at
 Finally, the distilled lightweight model, IHUD-BERT, is each step, where N s is the stride. The j window ( j ≥ 0)captures
fine-tuned on specific, labeled datasets for downstream tasks a subsequence Wk, j which contains the feature vectors from
(Section III-E). With only a small amount of labeled data the ( j·N s +1) packet to the ( j·N s +Nω ) packet; the Nω packets
and computational resources, the model can quickly adapt to are stacked vertically in order to form a feature matrix X0k, j ,
specific tasks and make high-precision predictions. as shown in Equation (4).
 h(pk,( j·Ns )+1 )
 0 1
B. Network Traffic Feature Extraction and Data B h(pk,( j·Ns )+2 ) C
Augmentation X0k, j = B .. C (4)
 .
 @ A
 Existing network traffic classification methods almost unih(pk,( j·Ns )+Nw )
versally involve data payloads. To ensure robust classification
independent of encryption artifacts, this paper uses only Here, X0k, j is an Nω · 12 dimensional matrix, where each
the IP packet header for network traffic classification. The row represents the 12-byte feature of a single packet, for a
IP packet header typically consists of a fixed length of total of Nω rows. This matrix is considered the intermediate
20 bytes, including fields such as the version number and representation of the IHU for the window. Before being input
header length. However, some of these fields, such as the to the classification model, X0k, j is flattened into a 1 · (Nω · 12)
source and destination IP addresses, constitute private user one-dimensional row vector, denoted as Xk, j . Each window
information and are not strongly correlated with the intrinsic outputs one feature sample, the IHU; for a single session
characteristics of the traffic type itself. Therefore, this paper flow, the collection of all generated IHUs constitutes the set
selects the first 12 bytes of each packet’s IP header as the of feature samples for that flow, denoted as IHUs. These IHUs
representation for that packet [24]. are then fed into the next module for dictionary construction.
HU et al.: IHUD-BERT: A LARGE-SCALE NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD 8483

 from the same sliding window sample, thereby capturing the
 continuity features of the traffic in its time series.
 4) Special Tokens & Embedding: Finally, to meet the input
 requirements of the BERT model and to assist with subsequent
 training tasks, the Special Tokens module adds four types of
 special control tokens to the processed token sequence:
 [CLS] (Classification): Added to the beginning of each
 sequence. During the fine-tuning stage, the final hidden state
 vector corresponding to this token in the Transformer’s output
 layer serves as the aggregate representation of the entire
 sequence for downstream classification tasks.
Fig. 4. IHU data flow diagram. [SEP] (Separator): Used to separate different sequence
 segments. This token is primarily used to mark sub-IHUtokens
 pairs, explicitly indicating the boundary between the two
C. Dictionary Construction segments to the model.
 [PAD] (Padding): Used to pad sequences. Since the
 The core task of the Dictionary Construction module is to sequences input to the model must have a uniform length, this
convert the IHUs generated in the previous stage from raw token is appended to the end of a sequence until it reaches the
byte sequence data into token sequences that the pre-trained predefined maximum length.
model can understand and process. This process draws on [MASK] (Mask): Used for masking. In the pre-training
ideas from NLP, “textualizing” the network traffic data to task of the Masked IHU Model (MIM), this token randomly
lay the foundation for subsequent pre-training and fine-tuning. replaces some of the tokens in the input sequence, and the
As shown in Figure 4, the entire conversion process comprises model is required to predict the original masked tokens based
four core components: Hex Encoding, Byte-Pair Encoding on the context.
(BPE), Half-splitting, and Special Tokens. After being processed through all the steps mentioned
 1) Hex Encoding: The input IHU is a one-dimensional above, the original IHU data stream is successfully converted
row vector formed by concatenating the first 12 bytes of into a formatted token sequence. These sequences are then
multiple IP packet headers; it is fundamentally binary data. passed through an Embedding layer, which includes Position
To facilitate subsequent tokenization while preserving the Embedding and Segment Embedding. Position Embedding is
original byte information, the data first passes through the Hex used to capture the positional information of tokens within
Encoding module. This module converts each byte into two the sequence, preserving the inherent order and structure of
hexadecimal characters (e.g., the byte 01000101 is converted the IP header fields. Segment Embedding assigns different
to the hexadecimal string ‘45’); after this step, the IHU is embedding vectors to the two sub-sequences, helping the
transformed into a hexadecimal string. model to distinguish and understand their logical relation-
 2) Byte-Pair Encoding: After obtaining the hexadecimal ship. Finally, the token embedding, position embedding, and
sequence, the BPE module is responsible for constructing the segment embedding are summed together to form the final
vocabulary and performing tokenization. Similar to how two representation that is input to the pre-trained model.
adjacent bytes are combined into a basic unit in BERT, our
method first merges adjacent characters in the hexadecimal
sequence. Subsequently, the BPE algorithm iteratively counts D. Pre-Training
the most frequently occurring adjacent byte pairs and merges To enable the model to learn deep, task-agnostic, and
them into a new, larger token. universal feature representations from network traffic data, we
 Specifically, every two adjacent bytes (four hexadecimal have designed a self-supervised pre-training stage. Traditional
characters) are combined into a base token. As shown in supervised learning methods are highly dependent on large-
Figure 4, the hexadecimal sequence ‘4500003c’ would be scale labeled datasets, which are often difficult to obtain in the
initially processed into units such as [‘4500’, ‘0000’, ‘003c’]. field of network traffic analysis. Drawing inspiration from the
The BPE algorithm then learns further merging rules on this success of BERT in NLP, we adopt the Pre-training and Finebasis, ultimately generating a rich vocabulary. In this way, tuning approach. This approach first involves pre-training the
BPE strikes a balance between the non-semantic nature of model on a massive amount of unlabeled traffic data to grasp
raw bytes and the statistical properties of high-frequency byte universal traffic patterns and structural knowledge; it is then
combinations. Each generated token (IHUtoken) corresponds fine-tuned on a small amount of labeled data for a specific
to a unique integer ID ranging from 0 to 65535; therefore, the downstream task to achieve superior performance.
maximum size of the base vocabulary, |V|, constructed by our To achieve this goal, we have designed two self-supervised
model is 65,536. pre-training tasks: the Masked IHU Model (MIM) and Same-
 3) Half-Splitting: To support the Same-origin IHU Pre- origin IHU Prediction (SIP). These two tasks jointly encourage
diction (SIP) task in the subsequent pre-training stage, the the model to learn the contextual and structural relationships
Half-splitting module evenly divides a single long IHU token of IHUs at different granularities.
sequence into two sub-sequences of equal length; these two 1) Masked IHU Model (MIM): Standard language models
sub-sequences are referred to as a sub-IHUtokens pair. The are typically unidirectional (either left-to-right or right-to-left),
purpose of this design is to enable the model to learn to a structure that limits the contextual information the model can
determine whether two consecutive traffic segments originate leverage during pre-training. To construct a deep bidirectional
8484 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

model capable of simultaneously utilizing both left and right
contextual information, this paper introduces the MIM model.
This task is analogous to the Masked Language Model (MLM)
in BERT.
 In the MIM task, we randomly select 15% of the tokens
from each IHU sequence for a masking operation. Doing so
corrupts the original input and drives the model to predict the
original value of the masked tokens based on their bidirectional
context. However, this introduces a mismatch between the pretraining and fine-tuning stages, as the [MASK] token does not
appear during fine-tuning. To mitigate this issue, we do not
always replace the selected tokens with the [MASK] token.
The specific replacement strategy is as follows: of the masked
tokens, 80% are replaced with [MASK], 10% are replaced
with a random token, and 10% remain unchanged. Through Fig. 5. The distillation process.
this strategy, the model can learn a distributed contextual
representation for every token in the sequence, rather than linear classifier to output the probability. The SIP loss function
merely relying on the presence of the [MASK] label. The LS IP is calculated using binary cross-entropy, as shown in
model’s objective is to minimize the cross-entropy loss to Equation (6). Through this task, the model learns high-level
accurately predict the original value of the masked tokens. Let abstract knowledge regarding traffic continuity, protocol handthe input IHU sequence after masking be X, a masked position shakes, and session structures.
be f ∈ F, and its true token be t f . With model parameters θ, Finally, the overall pre-training objective of this paper is the
the loss function is as shown in Equation (5). sum of the MIM loss and the SIP loss, which are optimized
 simultaneously through multi-task learning. The total loss Ltask
 is defined as shown in Equation (7). During the training
 X
 L MI M = − log P(t f | X; θ) (5)
 f ∈F
 phase, the gradients from both the token-level MIM task
 (focusing on local header syntax) and the sequence-level SIP
 2) Same-Origin IHU Prediction (SIP): Many important task (focusing on global session logic) are backpropagated in
network traffic analysis tasks, such as session identification parallel. This synergistic optimization allows the Transformer
or anomaly detection, require an understanding not only of to comprehensively model both the micro-level packet features
the internal structure of a single IHU sequence but also and the macro-level flow dynamics.
of the logical relationships and interaction patterns between N
different groups of packets. Inspired by the Next Sentence
 X
 LS IP = − log P(yg | Ig ; θ) (6)
Prediction (NSP) task in BERT, we designed the SIP task to g=1
enhance the model’s ability to capture these inter-packet-group
 Ltask = L MI M + LS IP (7)
dependencies and the underlying communication logic within
a network flow.
 The SIP task is formulated as a binary classification prob- E. Distillation and Fine-Tuning
lem. First, we define how the input sequences are constructed. To efficiently transfer the rich knowledge embedded in the
Since our sliding window mechanism already groups multiple large teacher model (IHU-BERT) to the lightweight student
packets into a single IHU, we treat two IHU sub-sequences as model (IHUD-BERT), while also addressing the challenge
IHU A and IHU B . To construct the input for the model, these that simpler models face in learning complex feature reptwo sub-sequences are concatenated into a single sequence resentations due to their limited parameters and layers, this
with special tokens in the format of “[CLS] IHU A [SEP] paper proposes a hierarchical knowledge distillation strategy.
IHU B [SEP]”. This strategy designs different knowledge transfer objectives
 During the training data generation, we create positive tailored to the characteristics of the output features at various
and negative samples at a 1:1 ratio. In 50% of the cases levels of the Transformer; it not only focuses on aligning
(positive samples), IHU B is the actual next continuous IHU the prediction distribution of the final output layer but also
sub-sequence that immediately follows IHU A in the sliding delves into the model’s intermediate hidden layers to ensure
window sampling of the same original session flow. In the that the student model can learn the fine-grained internal
remaining 50% of cases (negative samples), IHU B is an IHU representations formed by the teacher model during the feature
sub-sequence randomly sampled from a completely different extraction process. The specific method involves using a
session flow. The physical objective of SIP is to force the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss on the intermediate layers
model to predict whether two given IHU sub-sequences orig- to preserve precise feature alignment, and a Kullback-Leibler
inate from the same session flow context. (KL) divergence loss on the final layer to capture output
 Let the g-th pair of sub-IHU sequences be I(a) (b)
 g and Ig , distribution information. This hierarchical distillation strategy
 (a) (b)
combined as Ig = (Ig , Ig ) with the corresponding ground- can simultaneously ensure the precision of low-level features
truth label being yg ∈ {0, 1}. Here, yg = 1 indicates that and the distributional consistency of high-level representations.
the pair originates from the same session, while yg = 0 The specific distillation process is shown in Figure 5; the
indicates a different origin. The model uses the final hidden input IHU sequence data, after undergoing the same Tokenizastate corresponding to the [CLS] token, passing it through a tion and Embedding process, is fed into the teacher and student
HU et al.: IHUD-BERT: A LARGE-SCALE NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD 8485

models, respectively. Let the total number of layers in the model, which is the so-called “Dark Knowledge” [21]. The
teacher model be N, and the total number of layers in the KL divergence loss can capture fine-grained information at the
student model be M. distribution level, allowing the teacher model to transfer more
 Since the teacher and student models have different numbers structured knowledge to the student model and ensuring that
of layers, this paper adopts a uniformly distributed layer the student model’s output probability distribution is similar
mapping method to project the student model’s hidden layers to that of the teacher model.
into the dimensional space of the teacher model, thereby  T
 HN
 
 W f inal HSM
 
resolving the dimension mismatch. For each intermediate layer PTτ = softmax , PSτ = softmax (10)
m ∈ {1, . . ., M − 1} of the student model HSm ∈ RB×L×dS , τ τ
we compute the MSE between its mapped hidden state and LKL = τ2 DKL (PTτ k PSτ ) (11)
the hidden state HTn ∈ RB×L×dT of the corresponding teacher
 The intermediate layer MSE loss and the final layer KL
model layer n ∈ {1, . . ., N − 1}. Simultaneously, because the
 loss are combined through a weighted sum to form the overall
hidden dimension of the teacher (dT ) differs from that of
 distillation loss, as shown in Equation (12). In the experiments,
the student (dS ), we introduce an intermediate-layer linear
 ω1 + ω2 = 1.
projection matrix Wm ∈ RdS ×dT to project the hidden states
of the student into the same dimensional space as the teacher. Ldistll = ω1 · L MS E + ω2 · LKL (12)
To ensure that the loss is calculated only at valid, nonpadded token positions, we introduce an attention mask matrix It is crucial to note that during the distillation phase, the
M ∈ RB×L . The definition for the intermediate layers loss student model is trained exclusively using the distillation
L MS E is as shown in Equation (8), where represents element- loss Ldistill , without incorporating the standard pre-training
wise broadcast multiplication. task loss. This design choice is grounded in two reasons.
 M−1
 First, forcing a lightweight student model to simultaneously
 1 X optimize for hard labels (MIM/SIP ground truth) and soft
 L MS E = k Wm HSm M − HTn M k2F (8)
 M−1 labels (teacher feature distributions) often leads to gradient
 m=1
 conflicts, hindering stable convergence [25]. Second, given
 Through the MSE, we compel the student model to precisely the significant capacity gap between the teacher (BERT-base)
mimic the teacher model’s internal representations in the and the student (BERT-tiny), relying entirely on the robust
feature space. contextual knowledge provided by the teacher allows the
 For the model’s final output layer (i.e., the M layer), student to optimally utilize its limited parameters [26].
we utilize KL divergence to align the high-level feature In the fine-tuning stage, we use the distilled, lightweight
representations. Specifically, the KL divergence is applied student model as a new pre-trained model. It is crucial
directly to the final-layer hidden state vectors(projected to the to clarify the operational distinction between the training
teacher’s dimensional space) rather than the downstream task and inference phases regarding computational overhead. The
logits or token-level prediction heads. This method treats the knowledge transfer from Teacher to Student occurs exclusively
high-dimensional feature vectors as activation distributions, during the offline training phase. Upon completion, the heavy
encouraging the student to mimic the relative activation pat- Teacher model is immediately discarded, leaving only the
terns and structural knowledge encoded within the teacher’s lightweight Student model for the online inference pipeline.
feature space. KL divergence is an asymmetric metric that This ensures zero latency overhead during deployment, allowmeasures the difference between two probability distributions, ing the standalone student model to be efficiently fine-tuned
and its definition is shown in Equation (9).This formula for downstream tasks.
reflects the information loss incurred when approximating For a specific downstream classification task, we fine-tune
the teacher model’s distribution P with the student model’s the student model using the labeled data from that task. Specifdistribution Q. A smaller KL divergence indicates that the ically, the task data (which also undergoes IHU construction
student model is closer to the teacher model. and tokenization) is input to the student model, and a simple
 X P(n) classification layer is added on top of the model; the special
 DKL (PkQ) = P(n) log (9)
 Q(n) [CLS] token is used for the multi-class classification task.
 n
 The model’s optimization objective is to minimize the cross-
 For the final layer output of the model proposed in this entropy loss for the standard classification task. Only a few
paper, we apply a softmax function with a temperature param- epochs of training are required for the model to adapt to the
eter τ and calculate the KL divergence between the soft label specific task. Compared to training from scratch or directly
distributions, as detailed in Equations (10) and (11). Here, fine-tuning a large model, fine-tuning the distilled student
W f inal ∈ RdS ×dT is the final layer output projection matrix. model can greatly reduce training costs and inference latency
In knowledge distillation, the output of the teacher model, while ensuring high recognition accuracy, thus possessing
after being processed by a softmax function with a temperature greater practical application value.
coefficient τ, generates a smoother probability distribution than
the original “hard labels” (one-hot vectors); this is known
as “soft labels”. When τ > 1, the probability distribution IV. E XPERIMENTS
becomes flatter, which allows the negative labels to also carry In this chapter, we first introduce the selected pre-training
a certain amount of information. This strategy can amplify the and downstream datasets, and present the experimental envirelative differences between low-confidence classes, revealing ronment and some of the model parameters (Section IV-A).
the inter-class similarity information learned by the teacher Then, we conduct experiments with different models on
8486 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE I To conduct a systematic evaluation of the model, we catego-
 D OWNSTREAM DATASETS rized these datasets into two types based on their experimental
 roles. First, CIC200 and CSTNET share the same source
 domains as the pre-training corpus, assessing the model’s
 adaptability within familiar environments. Second, CP-IOS
 and CP-Android serve as heterogeneous datasets external
 to the pre-training data, rigorously validating generalization
 across unseen distributions.
 2) Data Pre-Processing: In this paper, we exclusively
 retain packets where the network layer is IPv4, filtering out
various datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness and genertraffic unrelated to the transmitted content, such as Address
ality of IHU-BERT and IHUD-BERT in different network
 Resolution Protocol (ARP) packets. Crucially, to prevent data
traffic scenarios (Section IV-B). Afterward, we validate the
 leakage and ensure rigorous evaluation, we employ a strict
effectiveness of the data augmentation method using sliding
 “inter-flow splitting” strategy during the fine-tuning stage.
window sampling of network layer packet header bytes, and
 Unlike random packet-level splitting, we partition each flow
the designed loss function in the distillation process; through
 into one of the training, validation, and testing sets at a ratio
comparative experiments, we select the optimal sliding winof 8:1:1 based on complete session flows. This ensures that all
dow size and the best parameters for distillation. By comparing
 packets belonging to a specific session (identified by the fivewith an undistilled model of the same size and parameters, we
 tuple) reside exclusively within a single subset, thereby forcing
further illustrate the performance advantages of IHUD-BERT,
 the model to learn generalized behavioral features rather
and finally, we demonstrate the robustness of our framework
 than memorizing session-specific artifacts. Subsequently, the
under label-scarcity conditions through few-shot experiments
 sliding window mechanism is applied to the packet sequences
(Section IV-C).
 within these already-partitioned flows to generate the final
 input feature samples (IHUs).
 3) Evaluation Metrics and Implementation Details: To
A. Experiment Setup
 comprehensively evaluate and compare model performance,
 1) Pre-Training Dataset and Downstream Tasks: In this we employ four standard metrics: Accuracy (AC), Precision
work, approximately 27.4 GB of unlabeled network traffic data (PR), Recall (RC), and F1-score (F1). To ensure a fair evalis used for pre-training. This dataset consists of two parts: uation across all classes, especially considering the inherent
(1) The Android malware dataset [27] (CICAndMal2017), long-tail distribution (class imbalance) typical in real-world
which is a network dataset for detecting malicious traffic, application traffic, the PR, RC, and F1 are calculated using the
containing both malware and benign software traffic. This data macro-average method. This treats all classes equally, providwas collected by running malware and benign applications on ing a more rigorous assessment of the model’s generalization
real smartphones, with a total size of approximately 17.3 GB. capabilities. To mitigate bias from a single data partition and
(2) The TLS 1.3 encrypted traffic collected from the China evaluate model stability, experiments are executed across three
Science and Technology Network (CSTNET), known as independent runs with varying random seeds. Performance is
CSTNET-TLS1.3 [5], with a total size of approximately reported as the Mean ± Standard Deviation, while sensitivity
10.1 GB. The pre-training dataset includes a wide variety of analysis maintain a single fixed seed. Additionally, to measure
network protocols; in addition to TCP/UDP, it also contains the model’s inference speed, we introduce Inference Time (IT)
common network protocols such as Transport Layer Security, as a speed evaluation metric; this metric represents the time
File Transfer Protocol, Hyper Text Transfer Protocol, as well taken for each group of IHU from input to output.
as other encrypted protocols. The selected teacher model is BERT-base, and the student
 For the downstream tasks, to evaluate the effectiveness and model is BERT-tiny. When |V| = 65536, the maximum input
generalization ability of IHU-BERT and IHUD-BERT, we sequence length for both models is 512. Detailed model
selected four open-source, large-scale network traffic datasets. parameters for the teacher and student models are shown
Their detailed statistics are shown in Table I: (1) The CICAn- in Table II. For the comparative experiments presented in
dMal2017 dataset contains a total of 1700 application classes; Section IV-B, we utilized the optimal hyperparameter conwe sorted them by the number of session flows and selected figuration identified in our subsequent sensitivity analysis
the top 200 applications to form the CIC200 dataset for (Section IV-C). Specifically, unless otherwise stated, the slidour downstream task. (2) The CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset con- ing window size is set to Nω = 12, the distillation temperature
tains 120 application classes; we constructed the downstream is τ = 2, and the intermediate layer loss weight is ω1 = 0.7
dataset, abbreviated as CSTNET, by randomly selecting a (with ω2 = 0.3).
maximum of 5,000 packets from each flow. (3) We selected In the pre-training stage, the batch size is set to 32, the
the Cross-Platform(IOS) and Cross-Platform(Android) open- total number of training steps is 500,000, and the learning
source datasets [28]; these datasets were created from the top rate is set to 2 × 10−5 . In the fine-tuning stage, we use
100 applications from software stores in the US, China, and the AdamW optimizer for training with a batch size of 32,
India, with each application running for three to ten minutes 10 epochs, a learning rate of 2 × 10−5 , and a Dropout ratio
while receiving real user input. For each of the two datasets, of 0.5. All experiments were implemented based on
we selected 196 application classes, naming them CP-IOS and Python 3.8 (Ubuntu 20.04), CUDA 11.3, PyTorch 1.10.0,
CP-Android. and the UER toolkit [29]. The training and GPU inference
HU et al.: IHUD-BERT: A LARGE-SCALE NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD 8487

 TABLE II
 M ODEL PARAMETER I NFORMATION

experiments were conducted on an NVIDIA RTX 4090D classification without relying on payloads. Instead, it natively
(24GB) GPU, while the CPU inference benchmark was per- utilizes session metadata. In our experiments, we strictly
formed on an Intel Xeon Platinum 8481C processor to evaluate adhered to the original protocol, modeling the traffic as
deployability. For inference timing, we employed a rigorous a Multivariate Time Series (MTS) by extracting two key
measurement protocol: a warm-up phase of 10 batches was statistical metadata features—packet size (bytes) and packet
followed by 10 independent repeated runs to calculate the direction—from the first 20 packets of each flow. This results
Mean ± Standard Deviation. We evaluated two scenarios: in a standardized input dimension of 20 × 2 for every sample.
real-time latency with a batch size of 1 and high-throughput IHU-LEXNet: To isolate and validate the effectiveness of
performance with a batch size of 32/64/128. The recorded time our proposed IHU feature representation, and to provide a
strictly captures the model’s forward pass latency, excluding direct header-native baseline, we introduced IHU-LEXNet.
data loading and I/O overhead. This variant replaces the input layer of the standard LEXNet
 to accept IHUs while keeping the remaining backbone architecture unchanged. Specifically, distinct from the standard
B. Experiment Results LEXNet which processes a 20 × 2 MTS matrix of statistical
 To rigorously assess the model’s performance across mul- features (packet sizes and directions), IHU-LEXNet is adapted
tiple evaluation criteria, we conduct comparative experiments to ingest a 12 × 12 input matrix. This input corresponds to the
on the four selected large-scale downstream network traffic optimal sliding window of 12 packets, where each packet is
datasets. We compare our proposed IHU-BERT and its dis- represented by its first 12 IP header bytes. Crucially, this raw
tilled student model, IHUD-BERT, with two baseline models: byte input is modeled as a single-channel image, allowing us
ET-BERT and LEXNet. Additionally, to validate the effec- to leverage the exact same 2D CNN backbone as the baseline.
tiveness of our proposed data processing method, we also To ensure a strictly fair comparison, both LEXNet and IHUintroduce the IHU-LEXNet model. LEXNet were trained under identical hyperparameter settings
 These two models are chosen as baselines because they derived from the original LEXNet configuration. Both models
represent two important directions in current large-scale traffic utilized a batch size of 64 and followed the same differentiated
classification research. ET-BERT is one of the pioneering learning rate schedule (e.g., 10−3 for feature extraction layers
works that successfully applied the pre-training paradigm to and 10−1 for prototype vectors). Additionally, the coefficients
this field, while LEXNet is currently the only representative for the combined loss function (incorporating cross-entropy,
model capable of classifying up to 200 classes. clustering, and separation losses) were kept strictly consistent.
 ET-BERT: This model learns contextual datagram-level Moreover, both models followed the same strict inter-flow
representations from encrypted traffic payloads [5]. To ensure splitting protocol to ensure that any performance gap is
a strictly fair comparison, we did not rely on the pre- attributable solely to the difference in feature representation.
trained weights provided by the original authors. Instead, we Comparing IHU-BERT with LEXNet and IHU-LEXNet
re-implemented the pre-training process from scratch. Specif- allow us to rigorously evaluate whether our proposed raw IP
ically, we extracted payload sequences formatted as BURSTs header pre-training yields superior representations compared
(defined as continuous sequences of time-adjacent packets to explicit statistical metadata engineering.
traveling in the same direction) from the same raw traffic The detailed results of all experiments are shown in
datasets (CICAndMal2017 and CSTNET-TLS1.3) used for our Tables III and IV.
IHU-BERT. Strictly adhering to the original methodology, A comparison of the performance between LEXNet and
we constructed the pre-training corpus by aggregating time- IHU-LEXNet clearly shows the superiority of our proposed
adjacent packets into BURSTs. The vocabulary was generated data processing method. On all datasets, by only replacing the
using BPE on bi-gram hexadecimal units, resulting in a input data from its original format with the IHUs generated by
vocabulary size of 65,536. Input sequences were formatted our method, IHU-LEXNet achieves a substantial improvement
with special tokens and truncated or padded to a fixed length in performance metrics over LEXNet. For example, on the
of 512 tokens. Furthermore, we strictly applied the inter- CIC200 dataset, the AC significantly increases from 0.5908 to
flow splitting strategy during the fine-tuning stage, ensuring 0.7828. This provides strong evidence that using IP headers
that all packets from the same session reside exclusively in and a sliding window mechanism can effectively extract key
one data partition to prevent data leakage and session artifact classification features from traffic. Furthermore, our proposed
memorization. Both models utilize the BERT-Base architecture IHU-BERT model exhibits state-of-the-art performance across
and share identical configurations across the pre-processing, all four datasets on all evaluation metrics (AC, PR, RC, F1).
pre-training, and fine-tuning phases. As the distilled student model, IHUD-BERT achieves an
 LEXNet: To provide a robust comparison against non- optimal balance between classification accuracy and inference
payload methods, we selected LEXNet [16] as our efficiency. As shown in Table III, its accuracy shows only a
strong metadata-based baseline. LEXNet is a state-of-the- slight decrease compared to the teacher model (e.g., a 3.2%
art lightweight CNN explicitly designed for encrypted traffic drop on CIC200). More importantly, the efficiency analysis in
8488 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE III
 C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON D IFFERENT DATASETS

 TABLE IV
 E ND - TO -E ND I NFERENCE C OST AND M EMORY F OOTPRINT ON D IFFERENT D EVICES

Table IV demonstrates the practical deployability of IHUD- Furthermore, Table IV reports the peak memory usage
BERT. To comprehensively evaluate real-world performance, during inference, providing key insights into hardware requirewe report the end-to-end inference latency, which strictly ments. On a standard CPU, IHUD-BERT requires only 63.75
encompasses the entire preprocessing pipeline (including IHU MB of RAM, which closely matches the theoretical footprint
creation, hex encoding, and BPE tokenization) alongside the of its 8.9M parameters and enables deployment on resourcemodel’s forward pass. On the GPU, the end-to-end inference constrained edge devices. On the GPU, the peak memory
delay per sample achieves remarkable real-time latency (batch usage reaches 123.85 MB due to hardware-specific factors
size= 1) of only 2884.63 µs, while it drops to 1589.42 µs under such as workspace pre-allocation, CUDA context initialization,
high-load settings (batch size= 64). There seems a seemingly and memory alignment for parallel computation. Neverthestrange phenomenon: when the batch size is 1, the average less, this remains significantly lower than the 1340.14 MB
GPU run time per sample is longer when the batch size is required by the teacher model (IHU-BERT), demonstrating the
larger. The reasons may be as follows. To enable the GPU lightweight nature of IHUD-BERT.
to execute tasks like the model’s forward pass, it must first Crucially for edge deployment, on a standard CPU,
go through a sequence of steps known as launch overhead or IHUD-BERT reduces the single-sample end-to-end latency to
Kernel Launch Latency. Consequently, for a very small task 6330.31 µs (≈ 6.33 ms), significantly outperforming the
like batch size= 1, this overhead cannot be amortized across teacher model. Regarding scalability, we observed a non-linear
multiple samples. In contrast, when the batch size is 32, 64, latency degradation for the heavy teacher model (IHU-BERT)
or 128, the non-computation overhead averaged per sample at large batch size (batch size= 128). This anomaly occurs
becomes relatively small. Hence, the average GPU inference because the large batch size exceeds the limited capacity of
delay seems shorter when batch size is larger than 1. the hardware’s high-speed memory. Specifically, the GPU is
HU et al.: IHUD-BERT: A LARGE-SCALE NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD 8489

forced to rely on slower external data transfers, while the CPU TABLE V
faces bottlenecks in retrieving data fast enough from the main S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS ON S LIDING W INDOW S IZE
memory. In contrast, the lightweight IHUD-BERT avoids these
memory walls. It is worth noting that for the student model
on the CPU, the amortized time for batch size= 64 is slightly
higher than the single-sample latency due to the overhead of
parallel scheduling, further confirming that IHUD-BERT is
efficient enough to be deployed in a serial, real-time manner.
 In experiments on the CP-IOS and CP-Android
datasets—two downstream datasets not included in the
pre-training data—both IHU-BERT and IHUD-BERT also
demonstrate excellent performance; this indicates that by
pre-training on IHUs, the model can learn more robust and
generalizable traffic feature representations.
 Overall, although IHU-BERT achieves the highest scores on
classification metrics, IHUD-BERT is undoubtedly the optimal
choice for real-world environments. It significantly reduces
 The experimental results are shown in Table V. It is
both the end-to-end inference latency to the millisecond level
 observed that as the window size increases from 1 to 12,
and the memory footprint to tens of megabytes on generic
 the classification accuracy of all models shows an increasing
CPUs, with almost no loss in accuracy, satisfying the stringent
 trend. Taking IHU-BERT (base) as an example, its accuracy
requirements for rapid responses in network environments. To
 significantly increases from 0.7832 at Nω = 1 to a peak of
further investigate the key factors affecting model performance
 0.9484 at Nω = 12. Similarly, the distilled student model,
and to conduct a more in-depth analysis of our proposed
 IHUD-BERT, achieves its optimal performance of 0.9174
framework, in the next section, we perform detailed parameter
 at this window size. This phenomenon provides strong eviselection and comparison experiments on the sliding window
 dence that extending the context length effectively enhances
size and the key hyperparameters in the distillation process.
 the model’s ability to discriminate traffic patterns, as longer
 sequences enable the model to capture more complex temporal
 dependencies between packets.
C. Sensitivity Analysis Notably, the performance peaks at Nω = 12, indicating that
 This section presents a sensitivity analysis to further inves- this length provides the model with nearly saturated effective
tigate the key factors affecting model performance. The first feature information. However, when the window size continues
group investigates the impact of IHUs generated with different to increase beyond 12 (e.g., Nω = 13, 14, 15, 20), the model’s
sliding window sizes on the final classification accuracy of the accuracy exhibits a saturation phenomenon and even a slight
model, while also validating the effectiveness of the distillation decline. For instance, the accuracy of IHU-BERT (base) drops
process. The second group examines the influence of different slightly to 0.9445 at Nω = 20. This suggests that excessively
hyperparameters during the distillation process on the student long windows may introduce redundant information or noise
model’s classification accuracy. The third group evaluates the irrelevant to the current classification task, which interferes
robustness of the proposed framework under label-scarcity with the model’s feature extraction process. This phenomenon
conditions through a series of few-shot experiments. is common in sequence modeling [30], where overly long
 1) Sliding Window Parameter Selection: To quantitatively inputs can dilute the model’s attention mechanisms. Based on
evaluate the impact of the sliding window size on model this analysis, we determine that the optimal sliding window
performance and to validate the effectiveness of our proposed size is Nω = 12; this configuration achieves the best trade-off
data augmentation method, this section presents a set of between ensuring information integrity and maintaining classystematic sensitivity analysis. As the core mechanism for sification precision, and is therefore applied in all subsequent
extracting IHUs from session flows, the size of the sliding experiments.
window (i.e., the number of packets contained within it, Nω ) Based on the analysis above, we determine that the optimal
directly determines the richness of the contextual information sliding window size is 12; this configuration achieves the best
embedded in each training sample. Theoretically, a suitable trade-off between ensuring information integrity and enhancwindow size should strike a balance between capturing suffi- ing the model’s classification accuracy, and is applied in all
cient dynamic sequence features and avoiding the introduction subsequent experiments.
of redundant noise. 2) Distillation Parameter Selection: To validate the effec-
 To investigate the optimal value for this parameter, we tiveness of our proposed distillation method and identify the
conduct experiments using a series of discrete window sizes, optimal hyperparameter configuration, we conducted a com-
Nω ={1,3,5,7,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,20}, while the sliding stride prehensive sensitivity analysis. We investigated the impact of
N s is fixed to 1 to ensure the most fine-grained sampling two key hyperparameters on the student model’s performance:
of the session flow. The experiments are conducted on three the distillation temperature τ, and the intermediate layer loss
models: IHU-BERT (base), IHU-BERT (tiny) (without distilla- weight ω1 (where ω2 = 1 − ω1 ). In the experimental setup,
tion), and the distilled IHUD-BERT, for which the distillation the sliding window size was fixed at the optimal value of
hyperparameters adopt the optimal configuration determined Nω = 12. We performed a grid search over the following
in Section IV-C.2. parameter spaces: τ ∈ {2, 3, 4}, and ω1 ∈ {0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}.
8490 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE VI V. C ONCLUSION
S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS ON D ISTILLATION PARAMETERS W ITH W EIGHTS To address the challenges of data scarcity, inference efficiency, and generalization failures caused by encryption
 artifacts, this paper proposes an integrated traffic classification
 framework based on pre-training and knowledge distillation.
 The core innovation begins with feature representation. We
 identify that encrypted payloads in modern protocols introduce
 session-specific encryption artifacts that hinder generalization
 across sessions. In response, we design the IP Head Unit
 (IHU), which relies solely on IP packet headers. To specifically
 tackle the problem of labeled data scarcity, we employ a
 sliding window mechanism as a strategic data augmentation
 technique. By generating multiple overlapping samples from
 a single traffic flow, this method significantly enriches the
 training corpus, allowing the model to learn effectively even
 with limited raw data. Furthermore, this approach captures
 stable traffic behavioral patterns that are invariant to encryption
 keys. This ensures that the model generalizes well even under
 strict inter-flow splitting settings, where traditional payloadbased methods fail. Building on this robust foundation, we
 pre-train a large teacher model, IHU-BERT, to learn universal representations and then employ hierarchical knowledge
Fig. 6. Comparison results on few-shot CIC200. distillation to transfer this knowledge into a lightweight student model, IHUD-BERT. Experimental results confirm that
 As shown in Table VI, by performing a grid search on the our solution effectively overcomes the limitations of session
distillation weights, we found that the model reaches a peak artifacts in encrypted traffic, maintaining high classification
accuracy of 0.9174 when ω1 = 0.7 (with ω2 = 0.3). This accuracy where baselines collapse. Furthermore, the distilled
suggests that placing a slightly higher emphasis on aligning student model significantly improves inference efficiency, prothe intermediate feature representations (L MS E ) enables the viding a practical path for deploying high-performance, robust
student model to better capture the complex structural pat- models in real-world network environments that require both
terns encoded by the teacher, effectively complementing the precision and speed.
probability distribution knowledge (LKL ) from the final layer. In summary, IHUD-BERT provides an efficient and
Consequently, we select τ = 2, and ω1 = 0.7, ω2 = 0.3 as robust solution for large-scale encrypted traffic classification.
the optimal distillation hyperparameter configuration for the Although the model has achieved superior performance across
IHUD-BERT model. multiple heterogeneous benchmark datasets, the inherent
 3) Impact of Labeled Data Scarcity: To validate the effec- volatility of header fields in non-stationary network environtiveness and robustness of our proposed framework under ments remains a critical area for future research. Future work
label-scarcity conditions, we design comparative experiments will leverage broader and more diverse real-world datasets
using varying proportions of training data. Specifically, we to further refine adaptive normalization techniques, aiming to
randomly sample 80%, 60%, 50%, and 40% of the original more effectively decouple intrinsic application behaviors from
labeled training instances from the CIC200 dataset while transient, path-induced regularities. Additionally, we plan to
strictly maintaining the identical, unseen test set for evaluation. extend the IHU mechanism to IPv6 architectures to ensure
As illustrated in Figure 6, the comparative results clearly long-term reliability in next-generation network environments.
demonstrate that our pre-training and distillation paradigm is
significantly more resilient to the reduction in data size. R EFERENCES
 The teacher model, IHU-BERT, exhibits remarkable robust-
 [1] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and
ness, with its accuracy merely degrading from 94.84% to M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traf-
92.35% when the data scale shrinks to 40%. Notably, our fic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3,
distilled lightweight model, IHUD-BERT, maintains an accu- pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
 [2] O. Salman, I. H. Elhajj, A. Kayssi, and A. Chehab, “A review on
racy of 72.44% under the extreme 40% few-shot setting, machine learning–based approaches for internet traffic classification,”
which still comprehensively outperforms the baseline LEXNet Ann. Telecommun., vol. 75, nos. 11–12, pp. 673–710, Dec. 2020.
even when LEXNet utilizes 100% of the training data. In [3] X. Ren, H. Gu, and W. Wei, “Tree-RNN: Tree structural recurrent neural
contrast, traditional supervised methods that lack pre-trained network for network traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 167,
 Apr. 2021, Art. no. 114363.
knowledge suffer from substantial performance deterioration. [4] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
For example, the accuracy of LEXNet plunges from 59.08% to of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
27.17% as the sample size is reduced. This empirical evidence Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Human Lang.
indicates that extracting invariant behavioral features from IP Technol., 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
 [5] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
headers via unsupervised pre-training empowers the model to contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
learn generalized representations, thereby mitigating the label- for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
scarcity bottleneck in real-world traffic classification. pp. 633–642.
HU et al.: IHUD-BERT: A LARGE-SCALE NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD 8491

[6] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding Yahui Hu received the Ph.D. degree. She is
 representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in currently an Associate Professor and a Master’s
 Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K), Supervisor with China University of Mining and
 Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8. Technology-Beijing, Beijing, China. Her main
[7] K. Boakye-Boateng, A. A. Ghorbani, and A. H. Lashkari, “Securing research interests include data center network transsubstations with trust, risk posture, and multi-agent systems: A compre- mission optimization, edge computing and edge
 hensive approach,” in Proc. 20th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust intelligence, computing power networks, network
 (PST), Aug. 2023, pp. 1–12. traffic analysis and optimization, and 6G.
[8] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification:
 An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May
 2019.
[9] A. S. Iliyasu and H. Deng, “Semi-supervised encrypted traffic classification with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 8, pp. 118–126, 2020.
[10] N. Williams, S. Zander, and G. Armitage, “A preliminary performance
 comparison of five machine learning algorithms for practical IP traffic
 flow classification,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 36, no. 5,
 pp. 5–16, Oct. 2006. Tiancun Deng is currently pursuing the master’s
[11] S. Kumar, S. Dharmapurikar, Y. Fang, P. Crowley, and J. Turner, degree with China University of Mining and
 “Algorithms to accelerate multiple regular expressions matching for deep Technology-Beijing, Beijing, China. His main
 packet inspection,” in Proc. Conf. Appl., vol. 36. New York, NY, USA: research interests include encrypted network traffic
 Association for Computing Machinery, 2006, pp. 339–350. classification.
[12] L. Xu, X. Zhou, Y. Ren, and Y. Qin, “A traffic classification method
 based on packet transport layer payload by ensemble learning,” in Proc.
 IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jun. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[13] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
 traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy (EuroS&P), Mar. 2016,
 pp. 439–454.
[14] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app identification using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, 2020.
[15] C. Wang, A. Finamore, L. Yang, K. Fauvel, and D. Rossi, “AppClassNet:
 A commercial-grade dataset for application identification research,”
 ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 19–27, Jul. Junping Song received the Ph.D. degree. She is
 2022. currently an Assistant Researcher with the Computer
[16] K. Fauvel, F. Chen, and D. Rossi, “A lightweight, efficient and Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of
 explainable-by-design convolutional neural network for internet traffic Sciences, Beijing, China. Her main research interests
 classification,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery include computing power networks and network
 Data Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 4013–4023. artificial intelligence.
[17] Y. Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
 approach,” 2019, arXiv:1907.11692.
[18] L. Z. Albert, “A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language
 representations,” 2019, arXiv:1909.11942.
[19] K. Clark, M.-T. Luong, Q. V. Le, and C. D. Manning, “ELECTRA: Pretraining text encoders as discriminators rather than generators,” 2020,
 arXiv:2003.10555.
[20] Md. S. Towhid and N. Shahriar, “Encrypted network traffic classification
 using self-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Netw.
 Softwarization (NetSoft), Jun. 2022, pp. 366–374.
[21] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531. Pengfei Fan is currently a Senior Engineer and
[22] X. Jiao et al., “TinyBERT: Distilling BERT for natural language a Master’s Supervisor with the Computer Network
 understanding,” 2019, arXiv:1909.10351. Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
[23] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “DistilBERT, a dis- Beijing, China. His main research interests include
 tilled version of BERT: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” 2019, future network architectures and technologies, and
 arXiv:1910.01108. computing power and network convergence tech-
[24] Y. Hu, Z. Zeng, J. Song, L. Xu, and X. Zhou, “Online network traffic nologies and applications.
 classification based on external attention and convolution by IP packet
 header,” Comput. Netw., vol. 252, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 110656.
[25] Z. Hayder, A. Cheraghian, L. Petersson, and M. Harandi,
 “MoKD: Multi-task optimization for knowledge distillation,” 2025,
 arXiv:2505.08170.
[26] B. Peng, J. Lu, G. Zhang, and Z. Fang, “Rethinking knowledge distillation: A mixture-of-experts perspective,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 10969–10979.
[27] A. H. Lashkari, A. F. A. Kadir, L. Taheri, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
 developing a systematic approach to generate benchmark Android malware datasets and classification,” in Proc. Int. Carnahan Conf. Secur. Xu Zhou received the Ph.D. degree. He is cur-
 Technol. (ICCST), Oct. 2018, pp. 1–7. rently a Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with
[28] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting the Computer Network Information Center, Chinese
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. His main
 2020, Art. no. 24412, doi: 10.14722/ndss.2020.24412. research interests include computer network archi-
[29] Z. Zhao et al., “UER: An open-source toolkit for pre-training models,” tectures, 5G mobile communications, and network
 2019, arXiv:1909.05658. artificial intelligence technologies.
[30] H. I. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Müller,
 “Deep learning for time series classification: A review,” Data Mining
 Knowl. Discovery, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 917–963, 2019.