Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

Full Length Article

Intrusion detection algorithm based on multi-scale feature fusion
Jinxian Zhao , Haidong Hou , Liang Chang *
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Heilongjiang University of Science and Technology, Harbin, 150022, China

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Network intrusion detection plays a crucial role in ensuring cybersecurity by promptly mitigating network at­
Intrusion detection tacks. However, existing deep learning methods have limited capabilities in capture network attack features and
Soft pool address class imbalances, resulting in low classification accuracy. This paper proposes a deep-learning intrusion
Multi-scale feature fusion
 detection model named FLSPPMRXt, which is built upon ResNeXt50. It enhances feature capture by improving
ResNeXt50
Focal Loss
 the backbone convolution and introducing a multi-scale feature fusion module, including the Soft Pool layer.
 Meanwhile, focal loss is employed as the loss function to effectively mitigate the impact of class imbalance on
 classification accuracy. Furthermore, this method proposes a data visualization processing algorithm to provide
 an image representation that is more consistent with the feature nearest neighbor distribution. Experimental
 results show that the FLSPPMRXt model achieves 93.3 % and 95.2 % in overall classification accuracy and F1
 score on UNSW_NB15 dataset, respectively. Compared with existing algorithms, such as the 2DCNN and RNN
 models, the method demonstrates superior network intrusion detection performance.

1. Introduction machine learning methods have achieved some success in detecting
 network intrusions, the majority of them are shallow learning algo­
 With the rapid development of emerging technologies such as cloud rithms that heavily rely on feature engineering. As cyberattacks
computing, fog computing, edge computing, and the Internet of Things, continue to evolve and mutate and the ability of bad actors to bypass the
the Internet has become indispensable in people’s daily lives. However, rule base increases, securing cyber information and communications
this convenience also comes with substantial cybersecurity implications. becomes increasingly challenging. Hence, there is an urgent need to
The popularity of the Internet has made our lives more convenient, but it enhance network security protection capabilities to address the pressing
has also provided opportunities for cyber intruders. It is crucial to create issues in network security.
an efficient cyber intrusion detection system in order to reduce the As the hottest technology nowadays, deep learning has excellent
threat that cyber intrusions pose. potential for network intrusion detection. The nonlinear activation layer
 Intrusion detection systems (IDS) (Hinton et al., 2006) can be cate­ can effectively extract the relevant features from the original data. A
gorized into host-based and network-based systems, depending on the system that can self-learn and detect unknown attacks can be established
origin of the detection data. Among these, the Network Intrusion by using the training set. After model training, the system demonstrates
Detection System (NIDS) is an integral component of the network se­ a significant effect in identifying unknown attacks and can be used to
curity protection system, which plays a pivotal role in detecting network detect novel, unknown, and abnormal data.
attacks and initiating corresponding defensive measures. Its primary When building deep learning networks with network intrusion
function lies in detecting and identifying illicit and malicious traffic, detection algorithms, on the other hand, the traditional convolutional
thus prompting security administrators to prevent cyberattacks and layer will have issues like gradient disappearance or gradient explosion
mitigate financial losses. when the network is too deep, which will lower the accuracy of the
 Intrusion detection (Anderson, 1980) technology has been proposed classification. To solve this problem, He et al. (He et al., 2016) proposed
for over 40 years, and various intrusion detection technologies are a residual network (ResNet) to solve the problem of performance
emerging. However, the continuous advancements in network equip­ degradation as the network layer deepens. This is why Wu et al. (Wu
ment and technology, coupled with the rapid growth of network data, et al., 2020) suggested a deep neural network made of residual blocks.
pose new challenges for network intrusion detection. While traditional This network had a low rate of false alarms in intrusion detection and

 * Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: 1992800405@usth.edu.cn (J. Zhao), changliang@usth.edu.cn (L. Chang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2025.104783
Received 25 May 2023; Received in revised form 14 October 2025; Accepted 21 November 2025
Available online 22 November 2025
0167-4048/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

fixed the issue of deep networks not working well. The residual learning adaptive pooling layer, thereby enhancing the model’s feature
model can learn deeper features, protect the integrity of information, capture capability.
and effectively solve the problem of network degradation, which has (3) The model’s loss function has been improved to focal loss to
certain advantages in the field of intrusion detection. Also, ResNeXt (Xie mitigate the impact of sample imbalances on classification.
et al., 2017) is an improved model based on the residual model, ResNet.
It can handle more data and perform better than ResNet with the same The technology roadmap of this paper is shown in Fig. 1. The
amount of computation, and it can lower the number of hyper­ remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the
parameters while keeping accuracy high (Zhao et al., 2023). related research work, including data imageization processing methods
 The quality of intrusion detection classification depends on extract­ and residual learning in the field of intrusion detection. Section 3 de­
ing data features and selecting parameters in the classifier. In traditional scribes the theoretical background and specific improvements of the
methods, these two aspects are optimized separately. However, with data-to-image method in this paper and introduces the core components
deep learning technology, both can be optimized simultaneously to of the proposed model. Section 4 conducts experimental analysis and
improve classification performance. Although deep learning has been evaluation and verif-ies this paper’s method’s reasonableness and
widely applied to intrusion detection in recent years, many existing effectiveness through multi-group comparison and ablation experi­
methods still have several challenges. Firstly, most approaches rely on ments. Section 5 summarizes this paper and outlines future research
individual feature vectors as input, thereby neglecting potential corre­ directions.
lations among different features in intrusion behaviors, particularly
those between non-consecutive features. Secondly, while image-based 2. Related work
processing methods offer novel perspectives for intrusion detection,
their image generation processes are either simplistic or overly complex, In recent years, deep learning has made remarkable achievements in
leading to increased computational costs. image recognition, speech recognition, natural language processing, and
 This paper proposes an intrusion detection method based on beyond. Its excellent performance in processing complex data has led to
ResNeXt50, aiming to tackle the aforementioned challenges. It has three innovative approaches for dealing with multi-feature intrusion detection
main parts: (1) processing the dataset; (2) changing the trunk convolu­ data. Numerous researchers are actively introducing various neural
tion and using the multi-scale feature fusion module SPPM (Soft Pool networks into the realm of intrusion detection. These deep learning-
(Stergiou et al., 2021) and Pyramid Pooling Module (Zhao et al., 2017)); based intruder detection algorithms have further propelled the
and (3) adding focal loss (Lin et al., 2017) because of the uniqueness of advancement of the network intrusion field.
the network flow data and the unevenness of the dataset to improve the
model’s final detection ability. 2.1. Some deep learning methods
 In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
 Xu C et al. (Xu et al., 2018) proposed an intrusion detection tech­
 (1) A data-imaging process is introduced to convert network flow nique that combines gate recurrent unit (GRU), multi-layer perceptron
 data into a two-dimensional image; this addresses the limitation (MLP), and recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures with a soft­
 of traditional methods, which fail to consider the spatial re­ max module. They experimentally confirmed the enhanced efficiency of
 lationships among features, and it enables the model to identify the model in the field of intrusion detection. Liu H et al. (Liu et al., 2019)
 potential relationships within the network flow data features. introduced an end-to-end detection method for analyzing payloads
 (2) Following the above data image processing, a classification using deep learning models. They proposed classification methods based
 model based on ResNeXt50 is suggested. This model uses aggre­ on convolutional neural networks (CNN) and recurrent neural networks
 gated residual blocks instead of basic residual blocks to calculate (RNN) for attack detection. Lee J H et al. (Lee and Park, 2021) utilized a
 the feature maps, thereby enhancing its expressiveness without generative adversarial network (GAN) to address dataset imbalance
 adding extra parameters. Furthermore, enhancing the model’s problems by generating virtual data, coupled with a random forest (RF)
 performance by adjusting its backbone convolutional structure for intrusion detection classification. According to Fu Y et al. (Fu et al.,
 and integrating it with the multi-scale feature fusion module 2022), attention mechanisms are employed with bidirectional long
 SPPM. Within this framework, soft pool effectively addresses the short-term memory (Bi-LSTM) networks for intrusion detection,
 issue of feature map information loss encountered by the original achieving high accuracy. However, the complexity of feature extraction

 Fig. 1. This article’s technology roadmap.

 2
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

might reduce the model’s ability to generalize. Cui J et al. (Cui et al., spatial correlation of features, but the image-processing steps are more
2023) proposed the use of stacked autoencoder (SAE) modules for complicated. The first method (Andresini et al., 2021) requires training
feature extraction, coupled with generative adversarial networks the autoencoder and then performing the nearest neighbor search in
(GANs) integrating Gaussian mixture models for classification. Dina A S order to complete the data image processing. The second method
et al. (Dina et al., 2023) proposed the application of the focal loss (Andresini et al., 2021) necessitates the coordinate mapping of the
function to convolutional neural networks to address sample imbalance Cartesian coordinate system and employs the convex hull algorithm to
issues in intrusion detection datasets. The above methods effectively determine the image size; additionally, it must address the intra-pixel
apply deep learning to intrusion detection and propose methods to solve collision issue (there is a case of multiple features within a pixel when
the data imbalance problem in network streams. However, most of the generating an image). In this paper, the proposed method does not
above approaches are vector learning of individual data stream features, require complex operations. It can directly perform image trans­
which ignores the potential relevance of the intrusion data. Specifically, formation on the pre-processed data.
they are unable to capture the spatial relationship between non-adjacent
features. In order to deal with this problem, this paper proposes a 2.3. Residual learning methods
method of data-to-image processing.
 In addition, Lu K D (Lu et al., 2025) et al. proposed a lightweight CNNs based on residual learning have achieved outstanding results
method, MODEO–CNN, based on multi-objective joint optimisation in image recognition (Chen et al., 2019), and they are easier to train and
combining Multi-Objective Discrete Extreme Optimisation (MODEO), optimize than ordinary CNNs. The superiority of residual learning in
Neural Architecture Search (NAS), and Hyperparameter Optimisation image classification and object recognition has been established in
(HPO). The method uses a hybrid variable-length coding strategy to numerous studies (Feng et al., 2020; McAllister et al., 2018; Li et al.,
characterise the network topology. It combines the principle of Pareto 2020). Therefore, many researchers have tried residual learning-based
Optimality to achieve better detection accuracy on Gas Pipeline, BoT- CNN to detect network intrusions.
IoT and Power System Attack datasets to achieve higher detection ac­ Man J. et al. (Man and Sun, 2021) constructed a deep network model
curacy. Zeng G Q et al. (Zeng et al., 2025) proposed EvoAAE, an unsu­ with residual blocks to achieve classification of network streaming data.
pervised anomaly detection method combining Generative Adversarial Duan X. et al. (Duan et al., 2023) proposed a method to find anomalies
Networks (GANs) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs). By tuning the that utilizes residual learning, wavelet transform, and multi-scale re­
hyperparameters and network architecture through improved Particle sidual features to capture detailed information across different levels
Swarm Optimization (PSO), they achieved higher accuracy in four IIoT and enhance detection performance. Sun M. et al. (Sun et al., 2022)
datasets.The above methods use sequence encoding to improve model proposed a deep convolutional intrusion detection model that combines
efficiency through automated search or adapt to unsupervised scenarios residual units and employs SMOTE to handle unbalanced datasets. Zhao
with scarce labels, but in this paper, the method break through the G. et al. (Zhao et al., 2023) proposed an intrusion detection algorithm
dependence of traditional sequence modelling methods on local features that leverages a generative adversarial network (GAN) to enhance mi­
by transforming network traffic data into image representations that nority samples. Subsequently, they employ a gated recurrent unit (GRU)
conform to the nearest-neighbour distributions of the features, and to extract the time-series features of the samples. Finally, they utilize a
explicitly capture the spatial correlations of the non-adjacent di­ residual network (ResNet) along with Softmax to categorize and
mensions in the attack features. normalize the results. The aforementioned research demonstrates the
 effectiveness of residual learning in the field of intrusion detection. This
2.2. 2D CNN methods paper employs ResNeXt, which builds upon the foundation of residual
 learning. The model integrates group convolution with residual
 To address the issue of dimension mismatch between intrusion learning, enhancing its accuracy without altering the number of model
detection data and deep learning models while maintaining the spatial parameters, thereby effectively improving its efficiency. The validity of
correlation of features, numerous scholars have made advancements in the model is ultimately corroborated through experimental evaluation.
the coding domain. These methods primarily involve mapping one- Table 1 summarizes the existing relevant research on network
dimensional data onto two-dimensional images, followed by image intrusion detection in this paper, including the technologies, data sets,
classification processing. and pros and cons used in the related work. This table provides a
 Li Z et al. (Li et al., 2017) introduced a coding technique named valuable reference for understanding the current research status of
grayscale coding, which converts digital features into 8-bit binary pixels network intrusion detection technology.
for classification using an image classification model. In a subsequent
study, Kim T et al. (Kim et al., 2018) expanded this method by applying 2.4. Discussion
it to pseudo-RGB images and employing convolutional neural networks
for classification. However, while these methods offer innovative ap­ This paper introduces a novel approach for data-to-image conver­
proaches to intrusion detection, they have limitations. Specifically, they sion, aimed at enhancing the retention of spatial knowledge among
can only map features into pixels in the order of their input, ignoring the features. It offers a compact representation of the image for model
spatial relationships among features. Consequently, the classification training and presents a method that combines multi-scale feature fusion
accuracy of the final model is not satisfactory (Liu et al., 2019). modules with a deep learning model.
 According to Andresini G et al. (Andresini et al., 2021), an autoen­ While focal loss, pyramid pooling module (PPM), and residual net­
coder (AE) was utilized to reduce the dimensionality, followed by works have been utilized in prior research, our approach stands out due
k-nearest neighbor (KNN) and clustering algorithms to create an image to the specific combinations employed within these structures and their
representation and identify potential connections between adjacent data practical effectiveness when integrated. Moreover, the central focus of
points. Finally, a CNN was employed to categorize the data into groups. this paper is to validate the effectiveness and reliability of the proposed
In a separate paper (Andresini et al., 2021) authored by the same re­ data-to-image transformation method. Indeed, the method proposed in
searchers, they used DeepInsight (Sharma et al., 2019), a novel approach this paper outperforms several other recent, related works in this field
for converting data into images. Subsequently, these images underwent on the same dataset. The research in this paper demonstrates the feasi­
processing with Auxiliary Classifier GAN (ACGAN) to generate samples bility of deriving a compact image representation of network flow data
for a few attack classes, thereby balancing the dataset and improving based on the similarity between features. This approach better preserves
classification accuracy. These two methods improve the shortcomings of the spatial neighborhood structure of the features. Furthermore, this
the above two parsimonious methods. They can effectively capture the paper pioneers the use of soft pooling in the field of intrusion detection.

 3
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Table 1 Table 1 (continued )
Summary of existing methods for network intrusion detection: technology, data Paper Technique DataSet Pros/Cons
set, and pros and cons.
 Using the new hybrid
 Paper Technique DataSet Pros/Cons variable-length
 Xu C et al. ( Use the GRU to store KDD 99 NSL- Automatic feature coding strategy.
 Xu et al., and extract features. KDD extraction. Multiple Zeng G Q Designing particle SWaT, WADI Solving the problem
 2018) MLP pairs were used models were et al. ( swarm optimisation MSL, PSA of scarcity of tagged
 for nonlinear validated. High Zeng strategies with data in IIoT
 classification accuracy. Using old et al., efficient binary
 decisions. datasets. Using a 1D 2025) coding strategies
 data stream that using unsupervised
 ignores relationships anomaly detection
 between disjoint based on automatic
 features. adversarial deep
 Liu H et al. ( Learning features CNTC-2017 High accuracy in learning.
 Liu et al., from raw network Webshell selected datasets. Li Z et al. (Li Convert data to 8 × 8 NSL-KDD Using old datasets.
 2019) packets. Extracting DARPA1998 Model Complexity. et al., grayscale images. Data-to-image
 feature information KDD99 CSIC- Using a 1D data 2017) Validation using methods are too
 using word 2010 HTTP stream that ignores ResNet and simple and ignore the
 embedding relationships between GoogLeNet as correlation between
 techniques. Proposing disjoint features. classifiers, features. Low
 CNN and RNN-based respectively. accuracy.
 classifiers. Kim T et al. ( Convert data to 12 × KDD Cup 1999 Correlation between
 Lee J H et al. Generating Minority CICIDS 2017 Solved the data set Kim et al., 12 RGB-like images. UNSW-NB15 features ignored in
 (Lee and Class Images Using imbalance problem. 2018) Using GooLeNet as a IDS2017 data-to-image
 Park, GAN. Using random High computational classifier. conversion. Low
 2021) forest classifiers. overhead. accuracy.
 Fu Y et al. ( Expanding datasets NSL-KDD Using old datasets. Andresini G Representation of KDDCUP99 Feature correlation is
 Fu et al., with adaptive Low accuracy. Using a et al. ( network streams as UNSW-NB15 considered in data-to-
 2022), synthetic sampling. 1D data stream that Andresini 2D images using CICDS2017 image conversion but
 Feature ignores relationships et al., nearest neighbor is computationally
 dimensionality between disjoint 2021) search and clustering complex. High
 reduction using a features. algorithms. Feature accuracy.
 stacked autoencoder. dimensionality
 A classifier was reduction using selfproposed based on encoders. Using a
 attention mechanisms custom CNN
 and bidirectional structural classifier.
 long-short-term Andresini G Representation of KDDCUP99 Novel and effective
 memory (Bi-LSTM). et al. ( network streams as UNSW-NB15 data-to-image
 Cui J et al. ( Stacked autoencoders NSL-KDD Low accuracy. Andresini 2D images using the CICIDS2017 method, but
 Cui et al., (SAE) modules are UNSW-NB15 Complex models with et al., DeepInsight AAGM17 computationally
 2023) used to reduce the high computational 2021) algorithm. Generating complex and timedimensionality and overhead. Using a 1D minority-class consuming. A timereconstruct the data. data stream that samples using consuming model
 Clustering based on ignores relationships ACGAN. Using a with high
 the Gaussian mixture between disjoint custom CNN computational
 model (GMM) was features. structural classifier. overhead. High
 used to undersample accuracy.
 most class samples. Man J et al. Convert the data to 14 UNSW-NB15 Using resize shapes
 Enrich minority (Man and × 14 images. Dealing directly to convert
 samples with GMM- Sun, with dataset data to images,
 based Wasserstein 2021) imbalances using ignoring the
 generative focal loss. Creating correlation between
 adversarial networks. Deep Convolutional features. Low
 Using CNN-LSTM- Neural Network accuracy.
 based classifiers. Classifiers with
 Dina A S Using focal loss to Bot-IoT WUSTL- An imbalance in the Residual Blocks.
 et al. ( cope with dataset IIoT-2021 number of dataset Using batch
 Dina imbalance. Using WUSTL-EHMS- categories was normalization and
 et al., CNN and FNN as 2020 considered. Proof of global average
 2023) classifiers, the validity of the pooling to avoid
 respectively. focal loss. Using a 1D overfitting.
 data stream that Duan X et al. Multi-scale KDD99 NSL- Model Complexity.
 ignores relationships (Duan generation of raw KDD UNSW- Low accuracy.
 between disjoint et al., flows using sliding NB15
 features. 2023) windows and wavelet CICIDS2018
 Lu K D (Lu Using multi-objective Gas Pipeline Designed a transforms. Feature
 et al., optimisation methods BoT-IoT Power lightweight reconstruction using a
 2025) based on Multi- System Attack convolutional neural stacked autoencoder.
 Objective Discrete network. High Constructing a
 Extreme Optimisation detection accuracy. multiplexed residual
 (MOEDEO), Neural swarm network to
 Architecture Search capture feature
 (NAS), and information.
 Hyperparameter Sun M et al. Generating Minority NSL-KDD Using old dataset.
 Optimisation (HPO). (Sun Class Samples with
 Borderline-SMOTE.
 (continued on next page)

 4
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Table 1 (continued ) structure appears in Table 2.
 Paper Technique DataSet Pros/Cons The input of each sample into the model is achieved by processing
 the data into two-dimensional grayscale images. In the initial stage of
 et al., The data were
 2022) converted to 32 × 32
 convolution algorithms, features are extracted from grayscale images.
 grayscale maps using After the output feature maps are fed into the module for fusing multiprincipal component scale features, fused feature maps containing different sensory fields
 analysis incorporating are generated. Finally, the fusion feature maps are input into the
 a bicubic
 grouped convolution module for training to yield the final classification
 interpolation
 algorithm. Creating results.
 CNN structural
 classifiers.
 Zhao G et al. Balancing datasets NSL-KDD Using old datasets. 3.2. Data pre-processing
 (Zhao using GAN. Extracting High computational
 et al., time-series features overhead. High
 The characteristics of the intrusion detection dataset indicate that
 2023) using GRU. accuracy.
 Classification using many data sets include character-based features such as protocols and
 residual networks. services, as well as other label features. Since non-numerical data is not
 uniformly processed, it is necessary to process this non-numerical data.
 Table 3 provides information on the non-numerical data feature types
Experiments show that the combination of soft pool and multi-scale and the appropriate processing operations.
feature fusion algorithms significantly enhances intrusion detection The character features contained in the dataset must be numerically
classification accuracy. processed using one-hot coding, while the label features must be labelcoded to obtain a dataset where all features are of a continuous type.
3. FLSPPMRXt method Additionally, due to the varying scales and disparities among each col­
 umn feature, it is necessary to normalize the data according to Eq. (1). In
 This section starts by explaining the structure of the ResNeXt-based
model, which is proposed in this paper. It then discusses the data pre-
 Table 2
processing and data visualization methods. Finally, it introduces the Structure of FLSPPMRXt model.
model’s main part, which is the multi-scale feature fusion module with
 stage output ResNeXt-50(32 × 4d)
an improved pooling layer. The model structure of the intrusion detec­
tion method in this paper is shown in Fig. 2. Conv1 9×9 5 × 5, 64, stride 2, padding 4
 Conv2 9×9 3 × 3, 64, stride 1, padding 1
 Conv3 9×9 3 × 3, 64, stride 1, padding 1
3.1. FLSPPMRXt architecture Conv4 9×9 Multi-scale feature fusion module -SPPM
 ⎡ ⎤
 ​ ​ 1 × 1, 128
 ⎣ 3 × 3, 128, C = 32 ⎦ × 3
 In this paper’s proposed FLSPPMRXt model, the initial convolution 1 × 1, 256
 ⎡ ⎤
of the backbone network consists of one 5 × 5 convolution coupled with Conv6 5×5 1 × 1, 256
 ⎣ 3 × 3, 256, C = 32 ⎦ × 4
two 3 × 3 convolutions (the original backbone convolution in this model
 1 × 1, 512
was a 7 × 7 convolution), which is determined based on the results of the Conv7 3×3
 ⎡
 1 × 1, 512
 ⎤
ablation experiments in Section 4.6. After completing this step, the ⎣ 3 × 3, 512, C = 32 ⎦ × 6
structure employs a multi-scale feature fusion module to enhance the 1 × 1, 1024
 ⎡ ⎤
 Conv8 2×2 1 × 1, 1024
model’s feature extraction abilities. For this application, the model ⎣ 3 × 3, 1024, C = 32 ⎦ × 3
employs a grouped convolution with a channel count of four and a group 1 × 1, 2048
count of 32. The model is activated using the sigmoid function after Conv9 1×1 Global average pool 2-d fc, sigmoid
global average pooling and full connectivity. A description of the model

 Fig. 2. Structure of FLSPPMRXt model.

 5
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

 Table 3 swap pair that yields the greatest error reduction. This process repeats
 Types and operations of data features. until convergence, yielding an optimal feature ordering. The Mr × Mc
 Feature Type Operation image is then filled with feature values according to this ordering. In the
 final image, semantically similar features (i.e., those with small dis­
 Character One-Hot Encoding
 Numerical – tances in F) are assigned to spatially adjacent pixels (i.e., those with
 Categorical Label Encoding small distances in I), forming a structured image with meaningful local
 patterns.
 This method calculates the error of both the initial feature rank
the equation, x represents each column feature, xmin denotes the mini­ matrix and the pixel rank matrix. The feature rank matrix is optimized to
mum value of each column feature, and xmax refers to the maximum reduce error by swapping the rank order of features iteratively. After
value of each feature in each column. error optimization, each sample Xi is finally transformed into an image
 x − xmin of Mr × Mc , where Mr × Mc = M.
x∗ = (1)
 xmax − xmin The distance in the above method is calculated using Euclidean
 distance, which treats differences between attributes (or measures) as
 equal. However, when dealing with intrusion detection data, there are
3.3. Improved data-to-image methods large differences between different attributes, and using Euclidean dis­
 tance may weaken some feature associations. Therefore, this paper im­
 This paper presents a data-to-image method by improving the algo­ proves it to a Standardized Euclidean distance, which is standardized
rithm of the Image Generator for Tabular Data (Zhu et al., 2021), according to Eq. (3) before performing the distance metric, where a
comprising the following steps. value of m indicates the mean value and a value of s indicates the
 For the overall sample data X, let X = N × M; where M is the amount standard deviation.
of features and N is the number of samples, Xi,: , X:,j , Xi,j refer to the el­
 X− m
ements of row i, column j and row i, column j respectively. A calculation X∗ = (3)
 s
is made of the distance between features on a pairwise basis using a
distance metric, in which small distances correspond to small ranks and This paper proposes a data visualization method that employs a
large distances correspond to large ranks. This matrix F represents a standardized Euclidean distance to determine the initial ranking matrix
matrix of feature distance rank. Assuming the target image is of size Mr for feature distances and the ranking matrix for pixel distances. The
×Mc (satisfying Mr × Mc = M), treat the image as a grid. Assign co­ larger the distance, the higher the rank, and the darker the color of the
ordinates to each pixel, compute the spatial distance between all pixel point, the more significant it becomes. As demonstrated in Fig. 3c, the
pairs, and sort these distances in ascending order to obtain a pixel dis­ feature rank matrix has been optimized by taking into account the pixel
tance rank matrix I. In both instances, F and I are M ×M symmetric rank matrix, resulting in a closer alignment between the optimized
matrices, which can be observed in the final generation of rank matrices feature distance rank matrix and the matrix of pixel distance ranks
for feature distances and pixel distances in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b However, compared to the original matrix.
comparing the two figures, the two matrices cannot be directly matched This article’s data image processing methods utilize three distance
because of their substantial differences, so it becomes necessary to measures: Euclidean distance, cosine distance, and Standardized
define the error function as follows: Euclidean (SeEuclidean) distance. All three distance measures can be
 used to measure the similarity between features. Their formulas are
 i− 1
 M ∑
 ∑
err(F, I) =
 (
 diff Fi,j , Ii,j
 )
 (2) shown in Eqs. (4), (5), and (6), respectively, where xi and yi denote the
 i=2 j=1 coordinates of different points in a particular dimension, respectively.
 √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
 ∑ n
With this function, we can measure and optimize two matrices, where Fi,j d(x, y) = (xi − yi )2 (4)
indicates the rank value of the ith feature and the jth feature, Ii,j contains i=1
the rank value of the ith pixel, and the jth pixel, and the diff(:, :) function ∑n
determines the distance between Fi,j and Ii,j either by absolute or i=1 xi yi
 cos(x, y) = 1 − √∑
 ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
 n
 √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
 ∑n 2 (5)
squared. i=1 xi
 2
 i=1 yi
 Initially, the i-th feature is assigned to the i-th pixel. By swapping the
 √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
pixel assignment order of features (i.e., reordering the feature √ n (
 √∑ xi − yi )2
sequence), the algorithm minimises err(F,I)to make F as close as possible d(x, y) = √ (6)
 si
to I It iteratively selects a feature that has not been swapped for the i=1

longest time, attempts to swap it with all other features, and chooses the

 Fig. 3. Correlation matrix of normalized Euclidean distance generated images: (a) Feature rank matrix, (b) Pixel rank matrix, (c)Optimized feature matrix.

 6
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

 Fig. 4 illustrates the images generated by each technique on ∑ eai ∗ ai
UNSW_NB15 dataset; Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b depict the image created by a=
 ̃ ∑ (7)
 j∈R e
 aj
Euclidean distance; Fig. 4c and Fig. 4d exhibit those derived from cosine i∈R

distance; and Fig. 4e and Fig. 4f demonstrate the graphics generation by a
Standardized Euclidean distance. In the process of image generation, the Where a represents the activation mapping of the region, ∑e i eaj repre­
 j∈R
distance metric serves as a measure of similarity between two pairs of sents the activation weight, which is the sum of the natural exponential
features (represented by distance). The optimization process aims to of the activation value divided by the natural exponential of all activa­
increase similarity (i.e., decreasing distance) and ultimately generate ̃ is the weighted sum of all weights and
 tion values, and the final output a
image representations with tightly arranged similar features. According the activation mapping a. The soft pooling accumulates activations in an
to the figures, the image generated by Standardized Euclidean distance exponentially weighted manner, and all activations within the convo­
exhibits a more compact feature representation (feature neighbor rep­ lution kernel contribute to the final result. The importance of activations
resentation with high similarity). varies depending on the weight, with higher activations indicating more
 The data-to-image method proposed in this paper optimizes the significant characteristics of the feature map. By using this method, the
image transformation by minimizing the difference between the feature down-sampled activation mapping can improve the accuracy of the final
distance ordering of tabular data and the pixel distance ordering of the classification by retaining more information.
generated image. Each feature corresponds to one pixel, resulting in Fig. 5 provides a more detailed illustration of the improved multisimilar features being displayed as closely adjacent pixels in the image. scale feature fusion module. The enhanced SPPM module is capable of
This approach thereby facilitates the generation of images from network effectively aggregating contextual information from diverse regions,
streaming data. thus facilitating the model’s acquisition of global information.

3.4. Improved multi-scale feature fusion module

 For deep learning networks, as the network becomes deeper, the
receptive field also increases, which can hinder the network’s ability to
effectively fuse global feature information, and PPM solves this problem.
However, the global average pooling (GAP) employed in PPM tends to
lose information during the compression process and has limited capa­
bilities for fusing and extracting information. Therefore, this paper
proposes an improvement by upgrading the pooling layer to a soft pool.
 Soft pooling is a technique that retains the basic input attributes by
utilizing a SoftMax-based weighting system during the upscaling of
more intense feature activation values, as demonstrated in the following
equation:
 Fig. 5. Structure of the SPPM module.

Fig. 4. Generate attack and normal images in different ways: (a) Normal image generated by Euclidean distance, (b)Attack image generated by Euclidean distance,
(c) Normal image generated by Cosine distance, (d)Attack image generated by Cosine distance, (e) Normal image generated by SeEuclidean distance, (f)Attack image
generated by SeEuclidean distance.

 7
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

 First, the model extracts features through the combined convolution (3) Classification model: A classification model FLSPPMRXt based on
of the backbone. Next, the SPPM module extracts features at different ResNeXt50 is constructed, and the training set is redivided into a
scales. Finally, the soft pooling generates four feature maps with training set and a validation set to train and tune the model for
different sizes (1, 3, 5, and 7). Subsequently, each of these feature maps intrusion detection purposes.
is down-sampled using 1 × 1 convolution to ensure the correct number
of channels. Next, each feature map is up-sampled to its original size,
and finally, the channel dimensions are concatenated to obtain the 4.1. Evaluation metrics
multi-scale feature-fused feature maps. Compared to the original Max
Pooling algorithm, the SPPM module incorporates feature information To evaluate model performance in this paper using overall classifi­
from diverse sensory fields and sub-regions, while the application of soft cation accuracy (OA), recall (R), and F1 score (F1). OA shows intrusion
pooling further enhances the features and boots the model’s detection systems’s capability of recognizing samples accurately. Recall
performance. refers to the capability of an intrusion detection system to detect all
 attacks. F1 represents the harmonic mean of precision(P) and recall(R).
3.5. Loss function A higher F1 score generally indicates a better balance between accuracy
 and completeness.
 By adjusting the internal weights, focal loss prevents a few samples
 TP + TN
from poorly fitting and negatively impacting classification results. The OA = (9)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
method involves adding a weight adjustment factor of (1 − p)γ to the
cross-entropy loss function to offset the effects of imbalances in the TP
number of rare sample categories or classification difficulty. The for­ R= (10)
 TP + FN
mula can be stated as follows:
 { TP
 − α(1 − p)γ log(p) y = 1 P= (11)
Li = (8) TP + FP
 − (1 − α)pγ log(1 − p) y = 0
 P⋅R
 The hyperparameter γ serves as a positive focus parameter, adjusting F1 − Score = 2⋅ (12)
the weights of both easy and hard-to-classify samples to direct the P+R
model’s attention towards the latter. The hyperparameter α functions as Where TN represents the number of samples that are normal and
a balancing parameter, compensating for the disparity in the influence correctly identified; TP represents the number of samples that are
of positive and negative samples on the loss values. Focused loss lowers attacked and correctly identified; FN represents the number of samples
the loss contribution of easy-to-score samples by changing the weight that are attacked but identified as normal; and FP represents the number
share between difficult and easy samples in the loss function. This of samples that are normal but identified as attacked.
approach is beneficial because it simplifies the model’s task of detecting
abnormal traffic patterns, eliminating the need for complex weight
 4.2. Environment and hyperparameter settings
mappings.
 The proposed model’s effectiveness has been validated on the NVI­
4. Experimental analysis and evaluation
 DIA GeForce RTX 3050Ti GPU model, operating under Windows.
 TensFlow1.14 and PyTorch1.10 were used to build the model, and the
 The general flow chart for our model’s detection of abnormal
 loss function’s hyperparameters were set to γ = 2, α = 0.25. In the
network data traffic is illustrated in Fig. 6.
 training process, a batch size of 64 was used, and optimization was
 conducted using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-4.
 (1) Data pre-processing: numerical processing of the character fea­
 To systematically select the optimal hyperparameters and evaluate
 tures of the original data, execution of one-hot encoding and label
 their impact on model performance, this paper conducts tuning exper­
 encoding operations, followed by data normalization.
 iments on two key hyperparameters during the training process: batch
 (2) Data-to-Image: The processed data are mapped from onesize and learning rate. The experimental results are shown in Table 4. As
 dimensional to two-dimensional image representation; a gray­
 seen from the table, there are some differences in model performance
 scale image is constructed for each network data, and its corre­
 under different combinations of batch size and learning rate. Among
 sponding labels are generated.
 them, when the batch size is 64 and the learning rate is 1e-4, the model
 achieves the highest overall accuracy (93.2 %) and F1 score (95.2 %),

 Fig. 6. Overall flow chart of FLSPPMRXt.

 8
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Table 4 distance between characteristics and pixels. This method spreads similar
Experimental results for different hyperparameter configurations. features to adjacent pixels to maximize feature correlation. Meanwhile,
 batchsize lr OA F1 R DeepInsight, another data-to-image algorithm, generates images using
 T-SNE projection and cannot represent features in the image using
 128 1e-4 92.2 94.1 92.1
 ​ 1e-3 92.7 94.8 98.1 pixels. The tabular image generator produces more feature-compact
 64 1e-4 93.3 95.2 96.3 images compared to the DeepInsight method and requires less training
 ​ 1e-3 92.6 94.8 99.5 time. Fig. 7d compares the two methods in terms of training time per
 32 1e-4 92.3 94.3 94.1 round.
 1e-3 91.8 93.8 91.1
 By utilizing the improved Image Generator for Tabular Data, it will
 ​

 be possible to overcome ignoring feature differences in the distance
indicating that the combination has strong generalisation ability while metric algorithm. To determine the optimal method for generating the
maintaining good convergence. In addition, the recall rate of 96.3 % for image dataset required for this study, we will compare the performance
this configuration suggests that the model also performs well in identi­ of three different metrics in image generation: Euclidean, Cosine, and
fying attack samples. Standardized Euclidean. Figs. 7a, 7b and 7c illustrate the variations in
 In contrast, a larger learning rate (1e-3) improves the F1 score in error that occur when using the three methods on different datasets for
some settings. Still, the overall stability is slightly worse, especially at image generation.
smaller batch sizes (e.g., 32), where a significant performance degra­ Fig. 7a, 7b, and 7c illustrate how the error value changes when
dation occurs. Larger batch sizes (e.g., 128) are more efficient, but fail to generating images for Euclidean distance, Cosine distance, and Stan­
achieve better classification performance than smaller batch sizes in dardized Euclidean distance on different datasets, respectively. The
most cases. Therefore, based on its comprehensive advantages in mul­ subsequent graph demonstrates that matrix error values decrease as it­
tiple evaluation indexes, batch size = 64 and learning rate = 1e-4 are erations increase. Fig. 7e and 7f represent the final error and the com­
chosen as the default hyperparameter configuration of the model in this parison of the time taken to generate the images using the three
paper. approaches for different datasets, respectively. From Fig. 7, it is evident
 that the Standardized Euclidean distance exhibits the most minor error
 value and requires the least amount of time on the same dataset.
4.3. Dataset introduction
 To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed data-to-image con­
 version method, comparative experiments were conducted using a
 This paper validated the model’s effectiveness using the publicly
 simple 2D-CNN model. The experimental results of the model on images
available dataset . The UNSW-NB15 (Moustafa and Slay, 2015; Moustafa
 generated by the proposed method and the DeepInsight method are
and Slay, 2016) dataset consists of 44 feature attributes, including three
 summarized in Table 6. On the NSL-KDD dataset, the proposed method
character feature attributes, one label attribute, and 40 numerical at­
 improved 3.73 % overall accuracy (OA) and 3.84 % in F1-score
tributes. These groups of features cover a wide range of attack types and
 compared to DeepInsight. A more pronounced performance gain was
include real data on everyday activity on modern networks. They better
 observed on the UNSW-NB15 dataset, where the OA increased by 20.91
reflect the properties of modern network traffic data, making them
 %, and the recall reached 85.6 %.
suitable for testing the performance of intrusion detection models. As
 This paper further validates the superiority of standardized
shown in Table 5, the training and test sets in the UNSW-NB15 dataset
 Euclidean distances by training and testing the three approaches on
contain 82,332 and 175,341 samples, respectively. The feature repre­
 different datasets using the simple 2DCNN model proposed in (Andresini
sentations of the dataset are presented along with the percentage and
 et al., 2021). Each result is displayed in Fig. 8. Fig. 8a and 8b show the
number of normal and attack samples. After data-to-image processing,
 test results on the UNSW_NB15 and NSL_KDD datasets, respectively. The
the pre-processed data will be converted into 14 × 14 images. The
 findings reveal that the OA, recall, and F1 scores for images generated
training set will be divided into training and validation sets according to
 using Standardized Euclidean distance exceed those achieved by the
7:3. A total of 57,632 sample sets will be used for training, while 24,700
 other two methods.
samples will be in the validation set.
 To compare the effectiveness of various generation methods, this
 The NSL_KDD dataset has 42 features, including three characterpaper compares the error rates and time consumption of three distance
based features, 36 numerical features and one labeled column. The
 metric methods by utilizing a simple CNN model structure. Following
pre-processed data will be processed into 11 × 11 images, the training
 the above analysis, it is evident that the use of Standardized Euclidean
set and validation set will be split according to the aforementioned rules,
 distance for image generation is both accurate and time-efficient.
and then the classification process will be carried out.
 Therefore, further experiments will be conducted utilizing images
 generated by this method.
4.4. Analysis of data-to-image results As shown in Fig. 9, the experiment also compared the overall clas­
 sification accuracy, recall, and F1 score of images on UNSW_NB15
 The Image Generator for Tabular Data algorithm assigns each feature generated using the Standardized Euclidean distance in both simple
to a pixel in the image. It achieves this by minimizing the pairwise 2DCNN models and more complex models such as ResNet50 and
 ResNeXt50. The ResNeXt50 model outperformed the other two models
Table 5 in all three indices, indicating its suitability as a benchmark model.
Description and feature type of the UNSW_NB15 and NSL_KDD data.
 UNSW_NB15 NSL_KDD 4.5. Comparison test
 Feature Type Total 44 42
 ​ Character 3 3 The comparison test aims to assess the performance of the
 ​ Numerical 40 36 FLSPPMRXt model by comparing it with other related works in the field,
 Categories 1 1
 ​
 utilizing the same dataset. This approach ensures that the evaluation is
 Data Distribution Train set Total 82,332
 ​ ​ Normal 37,000 (44.9 %) 67,343 (53.5 %) unbiased and minimizes the influence of different data samples on the
 ​ ​ Attack 45,332 (55.1 %) 58,630 (46.5 %) results. For the UNSW_NB15 dataset, among the methods considered for
 ​ Test set Total 175,341 22,544 comparison are one-dimensional convolution (Lopez-Martin et al.,
 ​ ​ Normal 56,000 (31.9 %) 9711 (43.1 %) 2019), two-dimensional image convolution (Andresini et al., 2021; Man
 Attack 119,341 (68.1 %) 12,833 (56.9 %)
 and Sun, 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; Al-Turaiki and Altwaijry, 2021), long
 ​ ​

 9
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Fig. 7. Training time and error variation of different methods on different datasets: (a) Euclidean error, (b) Cosine error, (c) SeEuclidean error, (d) Training time in
two different ways, (e) error variation, (f) Time to generate images.

 that it performs well in balancing the recall and precision, and the recall
Table 6
 and precision reach 96.3 % and 94.0 %, which are at the top of all the
Comparison of results of different data to image methods on different datasets.
 models, respectively. The results indicate the model performs well with
 DateSet Method OA F1 R low leakage detection and false alarm rates. For the NSL_KDD dataset,
 NSLKDD DeepInsight 77.47 77.56 – based on the OA metric, FLSPPMRX slightly outperforms SYN-GAN and
 ​ Our Method 81.2 81.4 72.3 is the best performer among all models. In addition, although SOM-
 UNSW_NB15 DeepInsight 68.29 81.10 –
 KINN has the highest OA, its F1 score is significantly low, indicating
 ​ Our Method 89.2 91.5 85.6
 that there is a particular category recognition bias; while traditional
 methods such as MLP and Naïve Bayes are relatively underperforming,
and short-term memory networks for network intrusion detection reflecting the advantages of deep learning models in processing complex
(Halbouni et al., 2022), feedforward neural networks (FNN) or deep and high-dimensional data. Overall, this paper’s approach is more
neural networks (DNN) (Lin et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020; Halbouni competitive in intrusion detection tasks, proving the feasibility of this
et al., 2022; Haitao et al., 2023), and machine learning techniques for approach.
network intrusion detection (ZHANG et al., 2022). Table 7 shows the In addition, specific traditional machine learning methods (e.g., RF,
results of testing this paper’s method on the UNSW_NB15 and NSL_KDD MLP, etc.) perform well on specific metrics, but the overall performance
datasets and the results of each metric for related studies under the same is much lower than that of deep learning models. However, machine
task.. learning and deep learning algorithms ignore the spatial correlation
 In related comparative work, overall classification accuracy, F1 between network flow features in these comparative studies. In contrast,
score, recall, and precision are used as evaluation metrics and cover the improved data image-based processing method considers the cor­
many models such as traditional machine learning, deep learning, and relation between features as much as possible by reducing the distance
hybrid architectures. The FLSPPMRXt model proposed in this paper error between features for imaging processing, which is the advantage of
performs well in all evaluation metrics. For the UNSW-NB5 dataset, its this method, and the final experimental results also prove the reason­
Overall Accuracy (OA) reaches 93.3 %, significantly higher than other ableness of the proposed theory.
methods. The F1 score of 95.2 % is at the top of the list, which indicates The experimental results presented in this paper confirm the

 10
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

 that also focus on processing data streams into images. The data trans­
 formation to image method proposed herein, as well as the model’s
 performance on different datasets, is sufficiently superior.

 4.6. Ablation experiments

 The ablation experiments first confirmed the effectiveness of the
 enhanced combined convolution. Subsequently, this study employed
 various padding values to assess the impact of varying initial feature
 map sizes on the final outcomes. Fig. 10 illustrates the fluctuations in
 loss and accuracy curves across different approaches on the
 UNSW_NB15 validation dataset.
 In Fig. 10, it can be seen that there is less oscillation and an efficient
 convergence rate when combining convolution with a feature map size
 of 9 × 9. The experimental validation results for the test set are pre­
 sented in Table 8, which compares the results obtained using different
 methods of test validation. Among the first rows, the convolution kernel
 is 7 × 7, and the corresponding feature map size is 7 × 7. The remaining
 rows show the performance metrics of the convolution structure with
 different output sizes, with a convolution kernel of 5 × 5 and differen
 combinations of stride and padding, and output feature maps with sizes
 of 7 × 7, 8 × 8, and 9 × 9, respectively.
 Based on the results of the experiments, subsequent experiments will
 use the ResNeXt50 model structure as a standard to extract initial fea­
 tures by combining convolution with an output size of 9 × 9. Several
 ablation tests have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed
 multi-scale feature fusion module, SPPM, and the focal loss method. The
Fig. 8. 2DCNN classification OA, Recall, and F1 score for different methods: (a) experimental results on the UNSW_NB15 and NSL_KDD datasets,
UNSW_NB15, (b) NSL_KDD. respectively, are presented in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11 depicts a set of original experiments followed by five sets of
 ablation experiments, arranged from bottom to top. The first set aims to
 assess the effectiveness of focal loss, while the test set is devoted to
 evaluating the ultimate model’s performance. A comarison of the first
 set of experiments with the original experiments reveals that focal loss
 can enhance model accuracy to a certain extent. Additionally, Fig. 12
 illustrates the fluctuation patterns of both loss and accuracy on the
 UNSW_NB15 validation dataset. This graph demonstrates that employ­
 ing focal loss attenuates the oscillation of accuracy and loss values
 within the validation set.
 The second and third sets of experiments verify that the binary crossentropy (BCE) loss module works effectively when combined with the
 PPM and SPPM modules. As shown in Fig. 11, the overall accuracy and
 F1 score of the test set in the second set of experiments improved after
 using the PPM module compared with the original experiments. After
 using the improved SPPM module in the third set of experiments, the
 model’s overall classification accuracy, recall rate, and F1 score all
 Fig. 9. Classification OA, Recall, and F1 score of three models. improved compared to the first set of experiments. This shows that the
 ideas in this paper work.
 Moreover, a comparison between the second and third groups of
reliability and validity of the proposed approach, which involves
initially mapping network stream data into two-dimensional images and experiments reveals that the effect is significantly better when the SPPM
 module is used. This demonstrates that SPPM, a multi-scale feature
subsequently utilizing these images as model inputs for training the
classification model. Although this concept has been explored in previ­ fusion module enhanced by integrating soft pooling, is superior in
 extracting features compared to the original PPM module. Soft pooling
ous studies, this paper introduces a novel method of mapping data into
images. The proposed data imaging processing method addresses the enables the preservation of more feature details during multi-scale
 feature extraction, thereby providing more feature information for the
limitations of the previous methods (Li et al., 2017; Zeng et al., 2025),
which overlooked the spatial correlation of features (Liu et al., 2019) final classification.
 In the fourth and fifth experimental groups, it was confirmed that the
also refers to it as a weakness). Specifically, the imaging processing takes
into account the potential relationship between non-adjacent features, combinations of FL with PPM Or sppm were effective. Fig. 11 demon­
 strates that both FL and PPM, as well as FL and SPPM, improved model
offering simplicity in operation. It enables image processing of network
flow data without the need for complex model training, facilitating performance compared to the original model. Nevertheless, the combi­
 nation of the SPPM module and focal loss exhibited the highest overall
integration with existing model structures, and enhancing the efficiency
of intrusion detection. Furthermore, this research introduces a model classification accuracy and F1 scores, with a recall rate on the
 UNSW_NB15 dataset reaching a high level of 96.3 %, leading to a su­
structure that exhibits superior feature extraction capabilities. As shown
in Table 7, the proposed method exhibited superior accuracy in several perior classification result.
 Overall, the SPPM structure performs optimally in most metrics,
sets of comparative experiments, outperforming other 2D CNN methods
 especially when combined with BCELoss and FocalLoss to achieve high

 11
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Table 7
Results of this paper on the UNSW_NB15 and NSLKDD datasets and related work.
 Dataset Methods Type Year OA ( %) F1 ( %) R P

 UNSW_NB15 FLSPPMRXt 2D-CNN 2023 93.3 95.2 96.3 94.0
 ​ TSDL (Khan et al., 2019) AE 2019 89.7 87.0 92.5 86.7
 ​ CNN-1D (Lopez-Martin et al., 2019) 1D-CNN 2019 89.8 91.3 98.0 85.5
 ​ SAVAER-DNN (Yang et al., 2020) FNN+DNN 2020 93.0 93.5 91.9 –
 ​ MSCNN (Zhang et al., 2020) 2D-CNN 2020 91.4 - – –
 ​ Pelican (Wu et al., 2020) DNN (residual) 2020 86.64 – – –
 ​ RLF-CNN (McAllister et al., 2018) 2D-CNN (residual) 2021 88.7 – 88.1 –
 ​ MAGNETO− GAN (Andresini et al., 2021) 2D-CNN+GAN 2021 89.7 92.0 – –
 ​ BCNN (Al-Turaiki and Altwaijry, 2021) 2D-CNN 2021 90.3 90.5 90.0 91.0
 ​ BCNN-DFS (Al-Turaiki and Altwaijry, 2021) 2D-CNN 2021 89.3 89.00 89.0 89.0
 ​ SAE-ELM-Ca (Kushwah and Ranga, 2022) SAE-ELM 2022 89.2 89.2 ​ ​
 ​ ICVAE-DNN (Halbouni et al., 2022) DNN 2022 89.1 - – –
 ​ ESWRF (ZHANG et al., 2022) RF+SMOTE 2022 78.0 76.0 78.0 80.0
 ​ MSRC (Li et al., 2020) SAE+ multi-channel residual block groups 2023 – 91.5 90.9 92.1
 ​ SEMI-GRU (Haitao et al., 2023) FNN+GRU 2023 88.1 88.1 81.6 96.3
 ​ XGBoost-Simple-RNN (Kasongo, 2023) RNN 2023 87.1 90.0 – –
 ​ LSTM (Kasongo, 2023) LSTM 2023 80.1 90.4 – –
 ​ GMM-WGAN Module (Cui et al., 2023) CNN+LSTM 2023 87.7 85.4 86.6 88.6
 ​ IGRF-RFE (Yin et al., 2023) MLP 2023 84.2 82.9 – –
 NSL_KDD FLSPPMRX 2D-CNN 2023 84.3 85.4 80.3 91.1
 ​ CRIPM-DM (Yuliana et al., 2024) Cross-Industry Standard Process for Data Mining 2024 80 81 97 69
 ​ SOM-KINN (Iftikhar et al., 2025) KNN 2024 84.4 63.2 63.0 –
 ​ MLP (Iftikhar et al., 2025) MLP 2024 72.7 71.9 83.4 –
 ​ SYN-GAN (Rahman et al., 2024) GAN 2024 84.0 84.0 84.0 85.0
 ​ Naïve Bayes (Kumar and Nagalakshmi, 2024) – 2024 74.4 – – –

 Table 8
 Different initial convolution methods’ OA, Recall, and F1 score.
 Feature map size kernel Stride Padding OA R F1

 7 × 7(Initial) 7×7 2 3 90.3 87.4 92.4
 7×7 5×5 2 2 90.4 89.3 92.7
 8×8 5×5 2 3 89.7 87.4 92.0
 9×9 5×5 2 4 90.6 88.5 92.8

Fig. 10. Accuracy and loss values of models on UNSW_NB15 dataset trained in
different ways versus size: (a) Different methods and sizes of accuracy, (b)
Different sizes and methods of loss.

classification performance. Specifically, for the UNSW_NB15 dataset,
SPPM+FocalLoss achieves an accuracy of 93.3 %, with a high recall of
 Fig. 11. OA, Recall, and F1 score for different modality combinations on
96.3 % and an optimal F1 score of 95.2 %. For the NSL_KDD dataset, different datasets.
SPPM+BCELoss achieves an overall accuracy (OA) of 84.7 % with an F1

 12
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

 Fig. 12. Accuracy and loss on UNSW_NB15 dataset values of different loss functions: (a) Accuracy Comparison, (b) Loss value comparison.

score of 85.3 %. SPPM+FocalLoss improves its recall to 80.3 % with an intrusion detection classification model, thereby addressing the chal­
F1 score of 85.4 %, showing its stronger ability to identify the attack lenge of detecting attack samples. This mitigates the impact of sample
class samples. category imbalances on categorization. Given the complexity and
 When comparing different ablation experiments, the proposed model imbalance of network flow data in real-world networks, the proposed
structure outperforms the original classification model in terms of method effectively captures richer information pertaining to the char­
classification accuracy. This demonstrates the feasibility and effective­ acteristics of the data flow. Consequently, the model possesses addi­
ness of combining all the components proposed in this paper. tional information for data flow classification and addresses the issue of
 sample imbalance during training. this approach facilitates the devel­
5. Conclusion opment of a more generalized model capable of accurately predicting
 unseen.
 Methods based on deep learning can uncover intricate intrinsic Experiments conducted using UNSW_NB15, a widely recognized
feature connections at an abstract level, greatly enhancing detection dataset in the field of intrusion detection, validate the effectiveness of
efficiency, reducing false positives and missed detections, and the proposed model. Finally, numerous ablation experiments and com­
improving the overall accuracy of detection. parisons demonstrate the paper’s method over other techniques ach­
 This paper proposes an intrusion detection method, FLSPPMRXt, ieves better classification performance with accuracy and F1 scores as
which is based on ResNeXt50. This method uses a better data imaging high as 93.3 % and 95.2 %, respectively.
processing algorithm that can turn one-dimensional network flow data Although the model has effectively distinguished between the cate­
features into a feature-compact image representation. This provides gories of network flow data, several challenges remain to be addressed.
deeper learning models with a better input format and enables the model While the UNSW_NB15 dataset is indeed complex, it still falls short of
to learn how network flow data might be spatially related. Simulta­ replicating real-world network traffic, particularly as intrusion detection
neously, the proposed method fine-tunes the backbone convolution aims to achieve real-time monitoring, which imposes stringent re­
structure of ResNeXt50. Then, it integrates a multi-scale feature fusion quirements on the speed and efficiency of the model. Therefore, in
module that enhances the pooling layer, thereby significantly improving future endeavors, we aim to identify datasets with broader actual traffic
the model’s classification accuracy. The utilization of soft pooling en­ coverage, thereby enhancing the model’s generalization capabilities and
hances the model’s ability to capture feature information. The model effectiveness. In addition, there’s a need to optimize the model in a more
employs focal loss to alleviate the bias towards normal samples in the lightweight direction, striking a balance between performance and

 13
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

efficiency in practical deployments. Intrusion Detection in IIoT. IEEe Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. https://doi.org/
 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3545363.
 Zeng, G.Q., Yang, Y.W., Lu, K.D., et al., 2025. Evolutionary Adversarial Autoencoder for
CRediT authorship contribution statement Unsupervised Anomaly Detection of Industrial Internet of Things. IEEe Trans. Reliab.
 https://doi.org/10.1109/TR.2025.3528256.
 Li, Z., Qin, Z., Huang, K., et al., 2017. Intrusion detection using convolutional neural
 Jinxian Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Funding networks for representation learning. In: International conference on neural
acquisition, Conceptualization. Haidong Hou: Writing – original draft, information processing. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 858–866.
Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70139-4_87.
 Kim, T., Suh, S.C., Kim, H., et al., 2018. An encoding technique for CNN-based network
Conceptualization. Liang Chang: Writing – review & editing,
 anomaly detection. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data).
Conceptualization. IEEE, pp. 2960–2965. https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData.2018.8622568.
 Liu, W., Liu, X., Di, X., et al., 2019b. A novel network intrusion detection algorithm based
 on Fast Fourier Transformation. In: 2019 1st international conference on Industrial
Declaration of competing interest Artificial Intelligence (IAI). IEEE, pp. 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/
 ICIAI.2019.8850770.
 Andresini G., Appice A., Malerba D. Nearest cluster-based intrusion detection through
 The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­ convolutional neural networks. Knowledge-Based Systems, 2021, 216: 106798. DOI:
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 10.1016/j.knosys.2021.106798.
 Jinxian Zhao reports financial support was provided by Heilongjiang Andresini, G., Appice, A., De Rose, L., et al., 2021b. GAN augmentation to deal with
 imbalance in imaging-based intrusion detection. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 123,
Province Department of Education. 108–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2021.04.017.
 Sharma, A., Vans, E., Shigemizu, D., et al., 2019. DeepInsight: a methodology to
Acknowledgement transform a non-image data to an image for convolution neural network
 architecture. Sci. Rep. 9 (1), 11399. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47765-6.
 Chen, Z., Zhou, Y., Huang, Z., 2019. Auto-creation of effective neural network
 This paper was financially supported by the Basic scientific research architecture by evolutionary algorithm and ResNet for image classification. In: 2019
business expenses of Provincial universities in Heilongjiang Province IEEE international conference on systems, man and cybernetics (SMC). IEEE,
 pp. 3895–3900. https://doi.org/10.1109/SMC.2019.8914267.
(NO: 2022-KYYWF-0532 NO:2024-KYYWF-1060). Feng, M., Lu, H., Yu, Y., 2020. Residual learning for salient object detection. IEEE
 Transact. Image Process. 29, 4696–4708. https://doi.org/10.1109/
Data availability TIP.2020.2975919.
 McAllister, P., Zheng, H., Bond, R., et al., 2018. Combining deep residual neural network
 features with supervised machine learning algorithms to classify diverse food image
 The data that support the findings of this study are openly available datasets. Comput. Biol. Med. 95, 217–233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
in UNSW Canberra at ADFA at https://cloudstor.aarnet.edu. compbiomed.2018.02.008.
 Li, T., Song, H., Zhang, K., et al., 2020. Recurrent reverse attention guided residual
au/plus/index.php/s/2DhnLGDdEECo4ys.
 learning for saliency object detection. Neurocomputing. 389, 170–178. https://doi.
 org/10.1016/j.neucom.2019.12.109.
References Man J., Sun G. A residual learning-based network intrusion detection system. Security
 and Communication Networks, 2021, 2021: 1–9. DOI: 10.1155/2021/5593435.
 Duan, X., Fu, Y., Wang, K., 2023. Network traffic anomaly detection method based on
Hinton, G.E., Osindero, S., Teh, Y.W, 2006. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets.
 multi-scale residual classifier. Comput. Commun. 198, 206–216. https://doi.org/
 Neural Comput. 18 (07), 1527–1554. https://doi.org/10.1162/
 10.1016/j.comcom.2022.10.024.
 neco.2006.18.7.1527.
 Sun, M., Liu, N., Gao, M., 2022. Research on Intrusion Detection Method Based on Deep
Anderson J.P. Computer security threat monitoring and surveillance. Technical Report,
 Convolutional Neural Network. In: Artificial Intelligence in China: Proceedings of
 James P. Anderson Company, 1980.
 the 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in China. Singapore:
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., et al., 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In:
 Springer Singapore, pp. 537–544. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-9423-3_67.
 Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
 Zhao G., Ren C., Wang J., et al. IoT intrusion detection model based on gated recurrent
 pp. 770–778. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
 unit and residual network. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications, 2023: 1–13.
Wu, P., Guo, H., Moustafa, N., 2020. Pelican: a deep residual network for network
 DOI:10.1007/s12083-023-01510-z.
 intrusion detection. In: 2020 50th annual IEEE/IFIP international conference on
 Zhu, Y., Brettin, T., Xia, F., et al., 2021. Converting tabular data into images for deep
 dependable systems and networks workshops (DSN-W). IEEE, pp. 55–62. https://doi.
 learning with convolutional neural networks. Sci. Rep. 11 (1), 11325. https://doi.
 org/10.1109/DSN-W50199.2020.00018.
 org/10.1038/s41598-021-90923-y.
Xie, S., Girshick, R., Dollár, P., et al., 2017. Aggregated residual transformations for deep
 Moustafa, N., Slay, J., 2015. UNSW-NB15: a comprehensive data set for network
 neural networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
 intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set). In: 2015 military
 pattern recognition, pp. 1492–1500. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.634.
 communications and information systems conference (MilCIS). IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Zhao, D., Ji, G., Zeng, S., 2023a. Network security situation assessment based on dual
 https://doi.org/10.1109/MilCIS.2015.7348942.
 attention mechanism and HHO-ResNeXt. Conn. Sci. 35 (1), 2174080.
 Moustafa, N., Slay, J., 2016. The evaluation of Network Anomaly Detection Systems:
Stergiou, A., Poppe, R., Kalliatakis, G., 2021. Refining activation downsampling with
 statistical analysis of the UNSW-NB15 data set and the comparison with the KDD99
 SoftPool. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
 data set. Informat. Secur. J. 25 (1–3), 18–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/
 vision, pp. 10357–10366. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.01019.
 19393555.2015.1125974.
Zhao, H., Shi, J., Qi, X., et al., 2017. Pyramid scene parsing network. In: Proceedings of
 Khan, F.A., Gumaei, A., Derhab, A., et al., 2019. A novel two-stage deep learning model
 the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2881–2890.
 for efficient network intrusion detection. IEEe Access. 7, 30373–30385. https://doi.
 https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.660.
 org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2899721.
Lin, T.Y., Goyal, P., Girshick, R., et al., 2017. Focal loss for dense object detection. In:
 Lopez-Martin, M., Carro, B., Sanchez-Esguevillas, A., et al., 2019. Shallow neural
 Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
 network with kernel approximation for prediction problems in highly demanding
 pp. 2980–2988. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.324.
 data networks. Expert. Syst. Appl. 124, 196–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Xu, C., Shen, J., Du, X., et al., 2018. An intrusion detection system using a deep neural
 eswa.2019.01.063.
 network with gated recurrent units. IEEe Access. 6, 48697–48707. https://doi.org/
 Yang, Y., Zheng, K., Wu, B., et al., 2020. Network intrusion detection based on supervised
 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2867564.
 adversarial variational auto-encoder with regularization. IEEe Access. 8,
Liu H., Lang B., Liu M., et al. CNN and RNN based payload classification methods for
 42169–42184. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2977007.
 attack detection. Knowledge-Based Systems, 2019, 163: 332–341. DOI: 10.1016/j.
 Zhang, J., Ling, Y., Fu, X., et al., 2020. Model of the intrusion detection system based on
 knosys.2018.08.036.
 the integration of spatial-temporal features. Comput. Secur. 89, 101681. https://doi.
Lee, J.H., Park, K.H, 2021. GAN-based imbalanced data intrusion detection system. Pers.
 org/10.1016/j.cose.2019.101681.
 Ubiquitous. Comput. 25, 121–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-019-01332-y.
 Al-Turaiki I., Altwaijry N. A convolutional neural network for improved anomaly-based
Fu, Y., Du, Y., Cao, Z., et al., 2022. A deep learning model for network intrusion detection
 network intrusion detection. Big Data, 2021, 9(3): 233–252. DOI:10.1089/big.20
 with imbalanced data. Electronics. (Basel) 11 (6), 898. https://doi.org/10.3390/
 20.0263.
 electronics11060898.
 Kushwah G.S., Ranga V. Detecting DDoS attacks in cloud computing using extreme
Cui, J., Zong, L., Xie, J., et al., 2023. A novel multi-module integrated intrusion detection
 learning machine and adaptive differential evolution. Wireless Personal
 system for high-dimensional imbalanced data. Appl. Intellig. 53 (1), 272–288.
 Communications, 2022, 124(3): 2613–2636. DOI:10.1007/s11277-022-09481-9.
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-022-03361-2.
 Halbouni, A., Gunawan, T.S., Habaebi, M.H., et al., 2022. CNN-LSTM: hybrid deep neural
Dina, A.S., Siddique, A.B., Manivannan, D., 2023. A deep learning approach for intrusion
 network for network intrusion detection system. IEEe Access. 10, 99837–99849.
 detection in Internet of Things using focal loss function. Internet of Things 22,
 https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3206425.
 100699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2023.100699.
Lu, K.D., Huang, J.C., Zeng, G.Q., et al., 2025. Multi-Objective Discrete Extremal
 Optimization of Variable-Length Blocks-Based CNN by Joint NAS and HPO for

 14
J. Zhao et al. Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

ZHANG, J., LI, H., LI, S., 2022. Research on Optimization of Random-Forest-Based J. Informat. Informat. Syst. Softw. Eng. Applic. (INISTA) 6 (2), 80–89. https://doi.
 Network Intrusion Detection Model. Comput. Digital Eng. 50 (01), 106–110. https:// org/10.20895/INISTA.V6I2.1389.
 doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1672-9722.2022.01.021. Iftikhar, N., Rehman, M.U., Shah, M.A., et al., 2025. Intrusion Detection in NSL-KDD
Haitao, L.I., Ruimin, W.A.N.G., Weiyu, D.O.N.G., Liehui, J.I.A.N.G., 2023. Semi- Dataset Using Hybrid Self-Organizing Map Model. CMES-Comput. Model. Eng. Sci.
 supervised Network Traffic Anomaly Detection Method Based on GRU. Computer 143 (1), 639–671. https://doi.org/10.32604/cmes.2025.062788.
 Sci. 50 (3), 380–390. https://doi.org/10.11896/jsjkx.220100032. Rahman, S., Pal, S., Mittal, S., et al., 2024. SYN-GAN: a robust intrusion detection system
Kasongo, S.M, 2023. A deep learning technique for intrusion detection system using a using GAN-based synthetic data for IoT security. Internet of Things 26, 101212.
 Recurrent Neural Networks based framework. Comput. Commun. 199, 113–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2024.101212.
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2022.12.010. Kumar, A.S., Nagalakshmi, T.J, 2024. Improving the accuracy of intrusion detection
Yin, Y., Jang-Jaccard, J., Xu, W., et al., 2023. IGRF-RFE: a hybrid feature selection system in the detection of DoS using Naive Bayes with Fisher’s score feature
 method for MLP-based network intrusion detection on UNSW-NB15 dataset. J. Big. elimination and comparing with Naive Bayes without feature elimination in wireless
 Data 10 (1), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-023-00694-8. adhoc network. In: AIP Conference Proceedings, 2871. AIP Publishing. https://doi.
Yuliana, Y., Supriyadi, D.H., Fahlevi, M.R., et al., 2024. Analysis of nsl-kdd for the org/10.1063/5.0228014.
 implementation of machine learning in network intrusion detection system.

 15