2940 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 LaGraph: Laplacian-Guided Graph Learning for
 Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Shicong Zeng , Guoqing Chao , Junquan Wei , Yanwei Yu , Member, IEEE, Zhijin Wang , Member, IEEE,
 and Dianhui Chu

 Abstract—Time series anomaly detection is crucial in fields such is to identify data points that significantly deviate from normal
as industrial monitoring, financial risk management, and net- temporal patterns. However, this task remains challenging due
work security. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated to the scarcity of anomalies, the diverse nature of anomaly types,
strong capabilities in capturing multivariate dependencies. However, existing methods often fail to adequately account for the tem- complex temporal dependencies, and the difficulty of modeling
poral proximity between adjacent time points and are susceptible hidden relationships among multiple variables.
to the influence of weak or noisy connections during graph-based The rarity of anomalous events, combined with the high cost
representation learning. To address these challenges, we propose and the need for expert knowledge during labeling, poses signif-
LaGraph, a novel framework that integrates GNNs with a mask- icant challenges in constructing large-scale labeled datasets [5],
optimized attention mechanism. Specifically, LaGraph decomposes
input sequences into stable and trend components using an Expert [6], [7]. Consequently, supervised methods are often impractical
Decomposition Block. The trend component is processed via a in real-world scenarios. In contrast, unsupervised methods have
Multi-layer Convolution Block, while the stable component is mod- garnered increasing attention in recent years, as they focus
eled with a Proximity-enhanced Graph Convolutional Network on modeling normal patterns and detecting anomalies based
that incorporates a Laplacian kernel to capture local temporal on deviations from these patterns, without requiring labeled
dependencies. Additionally, a Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block, based on the Straight-Through Estimator (STE), miti- anomaly data [8].
gates the negative effects of less informative edges, enhancing both Existing time series anomaly detection methods can be
representation quality and reconstruction performance. Extensive broadly categorized into statistical methods, traditional machine
experiments on five real-world benchmark datasets demonstrate learning methods, and deep learning-based methods [9], [10].
that LaGraph consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods,
 Statistical methods, such as ARIMA [11], seasonal decompoverifying its effectiveness and superiority for time series anomaly
detection. sition [12], and CUSUM [13], typically rely on assumptions
 of stationarity or known data distributions. While effective for
 Index Terms—Time series anomaly detection, temporal simple and regular patterns, their performance often deteriorates
proximity, Laplacian kernel, graph neural networks, maskoptimized attention.
 when applied to nonlinear, non-stationary, or high-dimensional
 time series. Traditional machine learning methods, including
 isolation forests [14], support vector machines [15], and k-
 I. INTRODUCTION nearest neighbors [16], depend on hand-crafted features and
 IME series anomaly detection plays a crucial role in fixed decision boundaries, making them sensitive to hyperpa-
T various real-world applications, including industrial fault
diagnosis, financial risk management, healthcare monitoring,
 rameter choices and limited in modeling long-range temporal
 dependencies.
and intelligent transportation systems [1], [2], [3], [4]. Its goal Deep learning methods have shown superiority to model
 complex temporal patterns. Among them, three main paradigms
 are commonly adopted. Prediction-based methods [17], [18],
 Received 1 August 2025; revised 26 January 2026; accepted 14 February
2026. Date of publication 17 February 2026; date of current version 9 April 2026.
 [19] train models to forecast future values and identify anomalies
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of based on prediction errors. Reconstruction-based methods [20],
China under Grant 62276079, in part by the Young Teacher Development Fund [21], [22], [23] aim to learn normal time series patterns and
of Harbin Institute of Technology under Grant IDGA10002071, in part by the
Research and Innovation Foundation of Harbin Institute of Technology under
 detect anomalies by measuring the discrepancy between the
Grant IDGAZMZ00210325, and in part by the Special Funding Program of original inputs and their reconstructed counterparts. Latent
Shandong Taishan Scholars Project. Recommended for acceptance by S. Whang. representation-based methods differentiate normal and abnor-
(Corresponding author: Guoqing Chao.)
 Shicong Zeng, Guoqing Chao, Junquan Wei, and Dianhui Chu are with the
 mal behaviors through discriminative or contrastive learning
School of Computer Sciences and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, objectives to learn effective representation [24], [25].
Weihai 264209, China (e-mail: guoqingchao@hit.edu.cn). Among deep learning approaches for time series anomaly de-
 Yanwei Yu is with the Faculty of Information Science and Engineering, Ocean
University of China, Qingdao 266005, China.
 tection, reconstruction-based methods have gained considerable
 Zhijin Wang is with the College of Computer Engineering, Jimei University, attention, particularly in unsupervised settings. These methods
Xiamen 361021, China. aim to model the underlying structure and temporal patterns
 To promote reproducibility and support future research, we have publicly
released the full implementation at https://github.com/hit-zsc/LaGraph.
 of normal data and reconstruct the input sequence. The core
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2026.3665696 idea is that inputs deviating from learned normal behavior will

 1041-4347 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZENG et al.: LAGRAPH: LAPLACIAN-GUIDED GRAPH LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2941

result in higher reconstruction errors, which can be used as Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block integrates longeffective signals for anomaly detection. Since these methods do range dependencies while suppressing irrelevant or noisy graph
not require labeled anomalies, they are suitable for real-world connections, thereby improving reconstruction quality. By
scenarios where annotated data is scarce or unavailable. In jointly modeling structural and temporal similarities and exaddition, reconstruction-based methods can capture complex plicitly addressing noise in the learned temporal graph, the
temporal dependencies and provide an interpretable anomaly proposed framework enhances both the expressiveness of the
scoring mechanism through reconstruction loss. Despite these reconstruction process and the reliability of anomaly detection.
advantages, reconstruction-based methods still face significant The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
challenges. Their effectiveness depends largely on the model’s follows:
ability to accurately capture normal patterns without overgen- r We propose an Expert Decomposition Block that sepaeralizing to unseen abnormal inputs. Thus, designing robust rates the input time series into stable and trend compomodel architectures and loss functions is crucial to guaran- nents, reducing the contamination of reconstruction by
tee reliable performance in diverse and complex time series non-stationary components and enabling targeted modelscenarios. ing of distinct temporal dynamics. This design improves
 Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [26] have demonstrated robustness by isolating trend-induced variations and restrong performance in modeling structural dependencies within constructing more stationary residual patterns.
multivariate time series, making them particularly suitable r We design a Proximity-enhanced Graph Convolutional
for reconstruction-based anomaly detection. By incorporating Network that incorporates a Laplacian kernel to emphasize
graph structures, GNNs explicitly capture relationships and temporal proximity between adjacent time points, prostructural similarities among variables, which is crucial for viding a principled temporal prior and thereby enhancing
accurate sequence reconstruction. However, conventional GNNs the model’s ability to capture fine-grained local temporal
often overlook an essential characteristic of time series data: dependencies.
temporal proximity, which refers to the intrinsic similarity r We propose a Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block
between adjacent time points. Ignoring this property limits based on the STE to adaptively suppress weak and noisy
the model’s ability to capture fine-grained temporal dynamics, connections in the temporal graph structure, leading to
which is critical for precise anomaly detection. Moreover, the more reliable feature aggregation and improving both relearned graphs in existing methods are often dense and noisy; construction accuracy and anomaly detection robustness.
spurious edges can propagate noise through message passing r Extensive experiments on five widely used benchmark
and destabilize reconstruction, especially under non-stationary datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-ofdrifts and level shifts. the-art performance compared with strong recent baselines,
 To address these issues, we propose a Laplacian kernel- verifying its effectiveness and superiority.
enhanced graph convolutional network that integrates temporal
awareness into the graph learning process. The proposed method II. RELATED WORKS
introduces an explicit temporal proximity prior and performs
noise-aware graph sparsification during message passing, avoid- A. Time Series Anomaly Detection
ing reliance on similarity-driven dense temporal graphs. Specif- Traditional time series anomaly detection methods can be
ically, we construct a time-aware graph using a Laplacian kernel broadly classified into statistical modeling and classical machine
to explicitly emphasize the temporal proximity between adjacent learning techniques. Statistical approaches typically decompose
time points. This kernel serves as a prior to modulating edge time series into trend, seasonal, and residual components to
weights in the graph convolution, enabling the model to capture detect anomalies, whereas machine learning methods are comlocally coherent temporal structures. Furthermore, to suppress monly based on clustering, classification, or density estimation
the influence of weakly connected nodes and noisy edges, we techniques. Despite their success in simple or low-dimensional
introduce a mask-optimized multi-head attention mechanism cases, these methods generally fail to scale effectively to highbased on the Straight-Through Estimator (STE) [27]. This dimensional and dynamically evolving multivariate time series.
mechanism adaptively filters out noisy connections, allowing In recent years, deep learning has emerged as a powthe model to focus more on the meaningful relationships or erful paradigm for time series anomaly detection. By distructures in the data, which improves anomaly detection. rectly learning temporal structures and nonlinear patterns
 Our proposed model, LaGraph, consists of four core mod- from raw data, these models eliminate the need for manules. First, the Expert Decomposition Block separates the raw ual feature engineering and offer enhanced modeling flexitime series into stable and trend components, enabling special- bility. Prominent architectures include recurrent neural netized modeling of distinct temporal dynamics and reducing the works (e.g., RNNs, LSTMs) [28] for modeling temporal
contamination of reconstruction by non-stationary components. dependencies, Transformer-based models [29] for capturing
Second, the trend component is passed through a Multi-layer long-range interactions via attention mechanisms, and GNNs
Convolution Block to extract global temporal patterns. Third, for encoding inter-variable relationships in multivariate setthe stable component is processed by the Proximity-enhanced tings. Compared with traditional methods, deep learning ap-
Graph Convolutional Network, which captures fine-grained tem- proaches have exhibited improved accuracy, adaptability, and
poral correlations using a time-aware graph structure that em- scalability, and have thus become a primary focus of recent
phasizes temporal proximity between time points. Finally, the research.
2942 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 5, MAY 2026

B. Graph Neural Network for Time Series C. Transformer for Time Series
 GNNs, a class of deep learning models designed for non- The Transformer architecture, first introduced by Vaswani
Euclidean structured data, have emerged as a powerful paradigm et al. [29], has become a foundational deep learning model
for modeling complex dependencies among multivariate time in time series analysis due to its strong modeling capacseries. Unlike traditional sequence models that treat each vari- ity and efficient parallel computation [44], [45], [46], [47],
able as an independent channel or rely solely on fixed temporal [48], [49], [50], [51]. However, conventional Transformer
orderings, GNNs employ an explicit graph-based framework to models encounter difficulties in processing long sequences,
model the inter-variable relationships, both spatial and temporal, particularly in capturing long-range dependencies. To adwhich are often dynamic. This framework enables the model to dress these limitations, various architectural enhancements
learn richer representations of temporal and structural patterns, have been proposed, including improved temporal encodenhancing both its expressiveness and generalization ability. ing strategies and optimized attention mechanisms, which
 Over the years, several variants of GNNs have been proposed reduce computational complexity and enhance efficiency.
to enhance their capacity for learning from graph-structured These innovations allow Transformer-based models to capdata. For instance, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) in- ture complex temporal dynamics and distant dependencies
troduced by Kipf and Welling [30] focus on spectral-based more effectively, thereby mitigating the shortcomings of earlier
graph convolutions to aggregate node features, while Graph approaches.
Attention Networks (GATs) [31] leverage attention mechanisms For instance, Zhou [52] introduced the sparse attention
to dynamically weight the importance of neighboring nodes. mechanism, effectively addressing the quadratic time com-
Additionally, GraphSAGE [32] employs inductive learning tech- plexity problem in Transformer models. Wu [53] replaced the
niques that allow for scalability to large graphs, and Graph self-attention mechanism with an auto-correlation mechanism,
Isomorphism Networks (GINs) [33] enhance expressive power achieving promising results. Zhou [54] proposed a frequencyby using more powerful aggregation functions. These advance- enhanced Transformer that efficiently captures temporal dynamments have greatly expanded the applicability of GNNs to a ics while reducing computational complexity, further enhancing
variety of tasks, such as node classification, link prediction, and the model’s scalability and performance.
graph generation.
 III. METHODOLOGY
 In time series anomaly detection, GNNs play a crucial role
in capturing the complex structural dependencies among vari- A. Problem Statement
ables [34], which are essential for identifying subtle deviations
 Given a multivariate time series X ∈ RT ×N , where T denotes
from normal patterns [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41].
 the number of time steps and N represents the number of
These dependencies may include temporal correlations within
 variables or sensor channels, the objective is to learn a function
individual time series, as well as interactions across multiple
 f : RT ×N → {0, 1}T that maps the input sequence to a binary
dimensions or sensor channels. The graph structure can either
 label sequence y ∈ {0, 1}T . Each element yt indicates whether
be constructed based on prior knowledge, such as physical
 the time step t corresponds to an anomaly (yt = 1) or not
topology or domain-specific layouts, resulting in static graphs,
 (yt = 0).
or learned adaptively from the data to reflect latent, time-varying
 This task is formally defined as a sequence-level anomaly
relationships. By integrating these dynamic graph structures
 detection problem, where the aim is to identify time points
with temporal modeling components, such as recurrent neural
 exhibiting abnormal behavior in any of the observed variables.
networks or attention mechanisms, GNNs form spatio-temporal
 The primary challenge lies in effectively modeling both the temarchitectures that can simultaneously model temporal evolution
 poral dependencies and the complex inter-variable correlations
and inter-variable interactions, which are critical for robust
 to detect subtle or sparse anomalies.
anomaly detection in time series data.
 Beyond Euclidean GNNs, recent studies have explored dynamic graph learning in Riemannian and hyperbolic spaces [42], B. Framework
[43]. By embedding nodes on curved manifolds and using Figure 1 illustrates the overall framework of the proposed
manifold-specific operations, such as exponential and logarith- method, which comprises four main modules: (1) the Expert
mic maps, these models are particularly effective when the Decomposition Block, responsible for decomposing the input
underlying relations exhibit strong hierarchy or tree-like struc- time series into stable and trend components; (2) the Multiture. In LaGraph, however, graphs are constructed within short layer Convolution Block, which applies lightweight convolusliding windows to model local temporal interactions, where tional operations to extract temporal patterns from the trend
relational patterns are largely non-hierarchical. In this regime, a component; (3) the Proximity-enhanced Graph Convolutional
Euclidean GCN provides a favorable accuracy–efficiency trade- Network, where the graph structure is refined using a Laplaoff while avoiding the additional computational overhead of cian kernel prior to enhance sensitivity to adjacent time steps;
manifold-based layers. Importantly, our key components are (4) the Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block, which
geometry-agnostic; thus, replacing the Euclidean GCN with a incorporates a mask matrix generated via the STE to sup-
Riemannian or hyperbolic variant is a natural extension that we press weak connections between distant time points in the
leave for future work. sequence.
ZENG et al.: LAGRAPH: LAPLACIAN-GUIDED GRAPH LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2943

Fig. 1. The framework of LaGraph is illustrated. (a) shows the process of the Multi-layer Convolution Block, (b) depicts the Proximity-enhanced GCN process,
and (c) explains the operation of the Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block. Expert Decomposition Block will be detailed in Fig. 2.

C. Expert Decomposition Block process is expressed as:
 To address the issue of significant performance variation Ht = FC (Conv (FC (Conv(Xt )))) , (6)
across different datasets in decomposition modules, we propose
the Expert Decomposition Block. Specifically, we define M where Conv(·) denotes a one-dimensional convolution operamoving average experts, each corresponding to an averaging tion with kernel size 3, and FC(·) represents a fully connected
operation with a distinct convolutional kernel size. A gating layer. By stacking these convolutional layers followed by fully
network is utilized to generate a set of weights for these experts. connected layers, the model effectively captures the temporal
The trend component is derived by performing a weighted fusion patterns embedded in the trend component. This hierarchical
of the expert outputs, and the stable component is obtained by architecture enhances the model’s representation capacity, alsubtracting the trend component from the original input. Given lowing for more accurate reconstruction of the original time
an input X ∈ RT ×N , this process can be formulated as follows: series, especially when subtle trend shifts carry significant
 information.
 Si = MAi (X) ∈ RT ×N , i = 1, 2, . . . , M, (1)
 g = Gate(X) ∈ RM , (2) E. Proximity-Enhanced Graph Convolutional Network
 α = Softmax(g) = [α1 , α2 , . . . , αM ] , (3) Conventional static graph structures are often inadequate for
 modeling time series data, as the underlying relationships may
 
 M
 vary over time. To address this limitation, we propose an adaptive
 Xt = αi Si , (4) graph construction approach based on a gating network. This
 i=1
 mechanism adaptively learns instance-specific graph topolo-
 X s = X − Xt . (5) gies, enabling the model to more effectively capture temporal
 dynamics.
 Here, MAi (·) is the moving average operator with kernel size
 Traditional GCNs typically focus on capturing structural
ki , implemented using symmetric edge padding followed by a
 similarity between nodes. However, this approach may be in-
1D average-pooling layer. This design ensures that MAi (X)
 sufficient for time series, which also exhibit strong temporal
preserves the original temporal length T , and each expert output
 proximity, meaning that adjacent time steps often share simi-
Si corresponds to a trend component extracted at a different
 lar characteristics. This temporal locality provides a valuable
smoothing scale. The gating network Gate(·) first aggregates
 inductive bias for anomaly detection tasks. In our setting, the
the input through global average pooling along the temporal
 adaptive graphs are constructed over short sliding windows
dimension and then applies a linear projection to produce an
 and are relatively dense and shallow; therefore, we adopt a
M -dimensional logit vector g. After Softmax normalization,
 standard Euclidean GCN, which is sufficient to model these
the resulting coefficients α = [α1 , . . . , αM ] satisfy αi ≥ 0 and
M local temporal dependencies while keeping the architecture and
 i=1 αi = 1, and therefore can be interpreted as the relative computation simple.
contribution of each expert. The final trend component Xt is
 To leverage this property, we compute a prior based on the
computed as a weighted sum of the expert outputs, and the stable
 Laplacian kernel, which is derived solely from the raw temporal
component Xs ∈ RT ×N is obtained by subtracting Xt from the
 correlations of the input time series. This prior serves to guide
original input.
 the optimization of the GCN by encouraging it to focus on
 short-range temporal dependencies, which are essential for time
D. Multi-Layer Convolution Block
 series anomaly detection. By embedding the graph structure
 To effectively leverage the latent patterns within the trend, we with the Laplacian kernel, we ensure that the model effectively
apply multiple stacked convolutional layers, each followed by a captures the smooth temporal variations that are crucial for
fully connected layer. Formally, for an input Xt ∈ RT ×N , the accurate anomaly detection. Before applying the graph module,
2944 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 5, MAY 2026

we project the stable component Xs ∈ RT ×N into a higher- graph, defined as:
dimensional space using a linear transformation to enhance the 
 1 
 T T
 Pi,j
model’s representational capacity: Lprior = KL(PA) = Pi,j ln . (17)
 T i=1 j=1 Ai,j
 Xl = Linear(Xs ) ∈ RT ×d , (7)
 Where Ai,j and Pi,j denote the elements in the i-th row
 and j-th column of the learned adjacency matrix A and the
where Xs is the stable component and Linear(·) denotes a
 Laplacian-based prior matrix P, respectively. This loss term
learnable linear projection.
 penalizes deviations between A and P, encouraging structural
 To obtain the adjacency matrix, we first introduce two learnconsistency. By minimizing the KL divergence, the model aligns
able transformation matrices, V1 ∈ RT ×k and V2 ∈ Rk×T ,
 its learned temporal connectivity with the prior distribution,
which are designed to capture the underlying spatial dependenthereby preserving temporal proximity in the learned graph.
cies within the multivariate time series, then we perform the
 KL divergence is chosen because it directly compares row-wise
following steps:
 probability distributions, is smooth and fully differentiable, and
 integrates naturally into gradient-based optimization. As a result,
 g1 = NodeGate1 ([Xl , V1 ]) ∈ RT ×1 , (8)
 Lprior serves as a useful inductive bias for time series anomaly
  
 g2 = NodeGate2 [Xl , V2 ] ∈ RT ×1 , (9) detection by regularizing the learned graph towards plausible
 temporal structures without imposing a hard constraint.
 P1 = g1  Linear1 (Xl ) ∈ RT ×k , (10) To aggregate temporal features across different receptive
 fields, we employ a multi-order graph convolution module.
 P2 = g2  Linear2 (Xl ) ∈ RT ×k , (11)
 Given the input sequence Xl ∈ RT ×d and a set of adjacency
 V1 = V1 + P1 , (12) matrices A, the computation proceeds as follows:
 V2 = V2 + P
 2, (13) H(0) = Xl , (18)

 A = Softmax (V1 V2 ) ∈ RT ×T . (14) H(1) = AH(0) , (19)
 H(k) = AH(k−1) , ∀k = 2, . . . , K, (20)
 We adopt an adaptive graph learning strategy that incorporates
two learnable node representations, V1 and V2 . Here, k denotes Hconcat = Concat H(0) , H(1) , . . . , H(K) , (21)
the dimension of a latent space that is specifically designed to
capture position-specific temporal semantics in a lightweight Hg = ReLU(MLP(Hconcat )). (22)
manner. These node matrices are concatenated with the projected input sequence Xl and fed into two gating networks, This formulation aggregates temporal information from both
NodeGate1 (·) and NodeGate2 (·), which produce the gating short-range and long-range dependencies, enabling the model
values g1 , g2 . The gate outputs modulate the results of two to capture multi-scale temporal dynamics essential for accuindependent linear transformations, Linear1 (·) and Linear2 (·), rate anomaly detection. By iteratively applying the adjacency
yielding refinement terms P1 and P2 . These refinement terms matrix and integrating multi-order representations, the model
are added to the node representations to obtain the updated constructs expressive temporal embeddings while maintaining
matrices V1 ∈ RT ×k and V2 ∈ Rk×T . Finally, the adjacency computational efficiency. Based on this framework, the corrematrix A is computed from the row-wise softmax of the bilinear sponding algorithm is provided in Algorithm 1.
similarity V1 V2 .
 The Laplacian kernel-based temporal prior is defined as fol- F. Mask-Optimized Multi-Head Attention Block
lows: To better capture the structural characteristics of time series
 data, we introduce a mask tailored for anomaly detection into the
 σ = Linear(Xl ) ∈ RT ×1 , (15) attention matrix. Unlike standard attention mechanisms, which
   treat all time points equally, time series data typically exhibit
 1 −|j − i| locality bias, where adjacent time steps are more strongly corre-
 P = Softmax exp . (16)
 σi σi i,j∈{1,...,T } lated, while distant points may be irrelevant or noisy. To address
 this, we design a learnable mask based on the STE, which
 Here, σ ∈ RT ×1 is a vector of position-wise scaling factors suppresses weak or spurious temporal dependencies and retains
generated by a learnable linear layer Linear(·), which maps only the most informative connections. This masked attention
each time step of Xl to a scalar controlling both the amplitude mechanism improves the model’s focus on salient patterns and
and the decay width of the kernel. Using these scale values, a reduces the risk of overfitting to noisy correlations, enhancing
Laplacian kernel is constructed as σ1i exp(−|j − i|/σi ) for each the robustness of anomaly detection.
temporal offset |j − i|, and a row-wise Softmax is then applied We generate the attention mask from the input representation
to normalize each row into a probability distribution, yielding Hg ∈ RT ×d as follows:
the temporal prior P. Z = Sigmoid(Linear(Hg )) ∈ RT ×T , (23)
 We introduce a Laplacian prior consistency loss to encourage
alignment between the learned graph structure and the prior M = STE(Z) ∈ RT ×T . (24)
ZENG et al.: LAGRAPH: LAPLACIAN-GUIDED GRAPH LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2945

 Algorithm 1: Proximity-Enhanced Graph Convolutional negligible attention weights. By combining hard binary masking
 Network. with soft attention scoring, the model strikes a balance between
 1: Input: Time series Xs ∈ RT ×N interpretability and adaptability, improving its robustness in
 2: Initialize: Node representations detecting temporal anomalies. We summarize this procedure as
 V1 ∈ RT ×d , V2 ∈ Rd×T the masked attention function MaskAttention(Q, K, V).
 3: Compute: Linear transformation Accordingly, we formulate the computation of our proposed
 Xl = Linear(Xs ) ∈ RT ×d Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block as follows:
 4: Compute: Gating values g1 = Y = Conv(Hg ), (29)
 NodeGate1 ([Xl , V1 ]), g2 = NodeGate2 ([Xl , V2 ])
 5: Apply: Qi = YWiQ , Ki = YWiK , Vi = YWiV , i = 1, . . . , n,
 P1 = g1  Linear1 (Xl ), P2 = g2  Linear2 (Xl ) (30)
 6: Update: V1 = V1 + P1 , V2 = V2 + PT2
 headi = MaskAttention(Qi , Ki , Vi ), i = 1, . . . , n, (31)
 7: Compute: Adjacency matrix
 A = Softmax(V1 V2 ) ∈ RT ×T Hs = Concat(head1 , . . . , headn )WO . (32)
 8: Compute Laplacian Kernel Temporal Prior:
 9: σ = Linear(Xl ) ∈ RT ×1 Here, Hg ∈ RT ×d denotes the input representation from
 10: P = Softmax([ σ1i exp( −|j−i|
 σi )]i,j∈{1,...,T } )
 the Proximity-enhanced Graph Convolutional Network. The
 11: Compute Consistency Loss: Lprior = KL(PA) Conv(·) module applies a learnable one-dimensional convo-
 12: Multi-Order Graph Convolution: lution over the sequence dimension to produce an intermedi-
 13: H(0) = Xl ate representation Y, providing a local feature transformation
 14: H(1) = AH(0) prior to the attention computation. WiQ , WiK , WiV ∈ Rd×dh
 15: for k = 2 to K do are the learnable projection matrices for the i-th attention head,
 16: H(k) = AH(k−1) with dh = d/n denoting the dimensionality per head. The cor-
 17: end for responding query, key, and value matrices are Qi , Ki , Vi ∈
 18: Aggregate: Hconcat = Concat(H(0) , H(1) , . . . , H(K) ) RT ×dh . MaskAttention(·) refers to the masked attention mecha-
 19: Output: Hg = ReLU(MLP(Hconcat )) nism introduced earlier. The outputs from all heads are concatenated into a matrix of shape RT ×d and projected using a shared
 matrix WO ∈ Rd×d . The final output Hs ∈ RT ×d integrates
 multi-head attention outputs into a unified representation.
 The input representation Hg is first projected by a learnable
 Finally, the reconstructed output Xrec ∈ RT ×N is obtained
linear layer Linear(·) to produce pairwise logits in RT ×T . Apby adding the trend-aware component Ht ∈ RT ×N , which is
plying Sigmoid(·) element-wise yields the soft attention map Z,
 derived from the Multi-layer Convolution Block, to a linearly
where Sigmoid(x) = 1+e1 −x . The STE is then used to binarize Z
 projected representation of the stable component Hs :
into a discrete mask M ∈ RT ×T while preserving gradient flow
during training. This mechanism enables the attention module Xrec = Hs Wrec + Ht , (33)
to suppress weak or noisy temporal connections and emphasize
 where Wrec ∈ Rd×N is a learnable projection matrix.
informative dependencies in an end-to-end trainable manner.
 This formulation allows the model to effectively integrate both
 To incorporate inductive bias favoring meaningful temporal
 the stable and trend components, enabling more accurate reconassociations, we apply the learned binary mask M within the
 struction of normal patterns in time series data. By preserving
self-attention computation. This design enables the model to
 the contributions of long-term trends while emphasizing stable
focus attention on relevant time steps while suppressing intertemporal dynamics, the model enhances its representational caactions that are likely to be noisy or spurious. Given the query,
 pacity, which is particularly beneficial for distinguishing subtle
key, and value matrices Q, K, V ∈ RT ×d , the masked attention
 anomalies from normal fluctuations.
mechanism is defined as:

 T = QK , (25) G. Loss Function

 S = T  M + (1 − M)  (−∞), (26) The total loss consists of two components: a reconstruction
 loss defined as the mean squared error (MSE) between the input
 S and the reconstructed output, and a prior alignment loss that
 MaskedScores = √ , (27)
 d promotes consistency between the learned adjacency matrix and
 Out = Softmax(MaskedScores) V. (28) the Laplacian-based temporal prior. The final loss function is
 defined as:
 This formulation ensures that only the temporal dependencies
 Ltotal = MSE(X, Xrec ) + λ · Lprior , (34)
selected by the learned binary mask contribute to the final
attention output. Specifically, positions with a mask value of 1 where MSE(X, Xrec ) measures the reconstruction quality, Lprior
are preserved and influence the attention computation, while po- denotes the Laplacian prior alignment loss, and λ controls the
sitions with a mask value of 0 are suppressed by assigning them relative importance of the two terms.
2946 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 5, MAY 2026

H. Anomaly Score TABLE I
 THE STATISTICS OF FIVE DATASETS
 To compute the anomaly score, we apply the mean absolute
error (MAE) between the input and the reconstructed sequence
at each time step. This yields a point-wise anomaly score for the
entire sequence. A threshold δ is then applied: if the anomaly
score at a specific time point exceeds δ, it is classified as
anomalous; otherwise, it is considered normal.
 Scorei = MAE(Xi , Xrec,i ), (35)
 
 1, if Scorei ≥ δ
 Yi = . (36)
 0, otherwise components of LaGraph scale linearly with respect to T . For
 extremely long sequences, we acknowledge that the quadratic
I. Time Complexity Analysis attention term may become a potential bottleneck, and exploring
 To evaluate the computational efficiency of the proposed more efficient attention variants represents an interesting direc-
LaGraph model, we analyze the time complexity of its major tion for future work.
components. The Expert Decomposition Block performs multiple moving average operations and weighted fusions, resulting IV. EXPERIMENTS
in a time complexity of O(M T N r), where M is the number of
experts, T denotes the number of time steps, N is the number A. Datasets and Settings
of variables (time series), and r denotes the kernel size of the 1) Datasets: We evaluate our method on five widely
moving-average operation, which can be implemented as a con- used real-world datasets: SMD, SWaT, MSL, Creditcard
volution with a fixed kernel. The Multi-layer Convolution Block (NIPS_TS_Creditcard), and GECCO (NIPS_TS_GECCO). The
involves stacked convolutional and fully connected layers, with statistics of these datasets are described in Table I.
a complexity of O(LkT N ), where L is the number of layers, k r SMD (Server Machine Dataset) is a publicly available
is the kernel size. The Proximity-enhanced Graph Convolutional multivariate time series dataset designed for anomaly de-
Network dynamically constructs graphs based on the input and tection in server monitoring scenarios. Collected and repropagates temporal features through graph convolutions. This leased by Su et al. [55], the dataset originates from the
process incurs a time complexity of O(T d), where d is the monitoring logs of 28 servers in a large Internet company.
feature dimension. Although the parameters involved in the Each server is monitored across 38 features, including CPU
graph construction remain fixed during inference, the graph load, memory usage, and network traffic, with data sampled
itself is still adaptively generated from the input. Therefore, the at one-minute intervals. The dataset spans a continuous
Proximity-enhanced Graph Convolutional Network contributes 10-week period, with the first 5 weeks used as the training
to the computational cost during inference. The Mask-optimized set and the remaining 5 weeks as the test set. Anomalies
Multi-head Attention Block includes convolution, linear pro- in the test set, along with the affected features, were lajections, and attention operations, resulting in a complexity of beled by domain experts based on actual incident reports.
O(T 2 d). The final output reconstruction step has a complexity The entire dataset contains approximately 1.4 million obof O(T N ). servations, with an anomaly ratio of about 4.16%. The
 By aggregating all components, the total time complexity of SMD dataset serves as a critical benchmark for evaluating
LaGraph during training is: and developing multivariate time series anomaly detection
 methods.
 O(M T N r + LkT N + T 2 d + T d), (37) r SWaT (Secure Water Treatment) [56] is a widely used
where M , L, r, kand d are typically small constants. benchmark for research on the security of industrial control
 During inference, although the graph structure is recomputed systems. Collected from a testbed that simulates a water
based on the input, the overall complexity remains tractable and treatment plant, the dataset covers a six-stage process, from
is dominated by: raw water storage to reverse osmosis. It records a variety of
 sensor and actuator data, including flow rates, water levels,
 O(T 2 d + LkT N ), (38)
 and chemical properties. The data were collected over 11
demonstrating the model’s efficiency for large-scale multivariate consecutive days, with the first 7 days representing normal,
time series anomaly detection. attack-free operation and the final 4 days containing various
 In our experiments, the sequence length T is at most around intentional attacks on the system. This dataset is commonly
one hundred time steps, and the feature dimension d is of used for training and evaluating intrusion detection models,
moderate size. Under this setting, the quadratic term O(T 2 d) contributing to the development of effective security mechintroduced by the Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block anisms that enhance the resilience of industrial control
is computationally affordable, and the overall runtime and mem- systems.
ory consumption are comparable to those of other attention- r MSL (Mars Science Laboratory) [57] is a real-world,
based time-series models used as baselines. Moreover, all other expert-labeled dataset of spacecraft telemetry collected
ZENG et al.: LAGRAPH: LAPLACIAN-GUIDED GRAPH LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2947

 from the Curiosity rover during its mission on Mars. The position embeddings, the method captures fine-grained
 dataset consists of multivariate time series data from 55 dependencies across long contexts and achieves state-oftelemetry channels, capturing various aspects of the rover’s the-art performance, including strong zero-shot results.
 operations and environment. It contains approximately r MTST (2024): A multi-resolution Transformer is intro-
 66,709 data points, annotated with 36 distinct anomaly duced that models temporal patterns at different frequensequences identified by mission experts through Incident cies using patch segments of varying lengths and rela-
 Surprise, Anomaly (ISA) reports. These anomalies reflect tive positional encoding. This design enables simultaneous
 actual issues encountered during rover activities, including learning of short-term fluctuations and long-term seasonboth point anomalies and contextual anomalies that depend alities, achieving state-of-the-art forecasting performance.
 on the temporal context of the data. The MSL dataset serves r iTransformer (2024): A Transformer-based time series
 as a valuable benchmark for evaluating anomaly detection forecasting model is proposed, which embeds time points
 methods in complex, dynamic, and high-stakes aerospace as variate tokens and applies attention across variates to
 scenarios. capture multivariate correlations. The model employs feedr Creditcard (NIPS_TS_Creditcard) [58] is a real-world, forward networks for each variate token to learn nonlinear
 expert-labeled dataset of credit card transactions collected representations without altering the core Transformer comby a European bank over two days in September 2013. The ponents, achieving strong performance and scalability.
 dataset contains multivariate time series and tabular data r DLinear (2023): A simple time series forecasting model
 representing 284,807 transactions, with 28 anonymized is proposed, which decomposes the series into trend
 principal components derived via PCA, along with time and remainder components, using separate linear netand amount features. Among these, only 492 transactions works for direct multi-step prediction. It outperforms
 are labeled as fraudulent, resulting in a highly imbalanced complex Transformer-based models by focusing on nondataset with an anomaly ratio of approximately 0.172%. autoregressive forecasting, rather than relying on the Trans-
 The anomalies correspond to actual fraud cases encoun- former’s temporal relation extraction.
 tered in real-world banking operations and include both r ModernTCN (2024): A convolution-based time series
 point anomalies and context-dependent anomalies. This model is proposed that modernizes and adapts the tradidataset serves as a valuable benchmark for evaluating tional TCN for time series tasks. It achieves state-of-the-art
 anomaly detection and imbalanced classification methods performance across multiple tasks by expanding the effecin complex, high-stakes financial scenarios. tive receptive field, balancing efficiency and accuracy more
 r GECCO (NIPS_TS_GECCO) [58] is a real-world, effectively than Transformer- and MLP-based models.
 expert-labeled dataset collected from an IoT-based drink- r TimesNet (2022): A general-purpose time series model is
 ing water quality monitoring system. Originally released as proposed that transforms 1D sequences into 2D tensors
 part of the GECCO 2018 Industrial Challenge, the dataset to capture intra- and inter-period variations using 2D kercontains multivariate time series data recording various nels. Its TimesBlock adaptively discovers multi-periodicity
 water quality metrics, such as chemical properties and flow and models complex temporal patterns efficiently, achievmeasurements, to monitor and ensure the safety of drinking ing state-of-the-art performance across diverse time series
 water. It includes both normal and anomalous patterns, with tasks.
 anomalies reflecting real-world events that deviate from ex- r Peri-mid Former (2024): A time series model is proposed
 pected operational behaviors. The GECCO dataset serves that decomposes multi-periodic variations into a hierarchias a valuable benchmark for evaluating anomaly detection cal periodic pyramid and applies self-attention to capture
 methods, particularly in IoT and environmental monitoring inclusion, overlap, and adjacency relations among periodic
 scenarios, where pattern-wise outliers are prevalent. components, achieving state-of-the-art performance across
 2) Baselines: We compare our method with 12 popular diverse time series tasks.
models, including CATCH [45], Timer-XL [59], MTST [60], r TSINR (2024): A time series anomaly detection frameiTransformer [19], DLinear [61], ModernTCN [62], Times- work, TSINR, leverages large language models to enhance
Net [63], Peri-mid Former [18], TSINR [64], Dcdetector [25], feature representations and employs implicit neural rep-
PatchTST [46], and Anomaly Transformer [24]. resentations to decompose signals into trend, seasonal,
 r CATCH (2025): A frequency patching framework for mul- and residual components, achieving state-of-the-art pertivariate time series anomaly detection is proposed. It formance on standard anomaly detection benchmarks.
 divides the frequency domain into patches to capture fine- r DCdetector (2023): A time series anomaly detection
 grained features and utilizes a Channel Fusion Module with model is proposed that learns discriminative, permutationmasked attention to learn dynamic channel correlations. invariant representations through multi-scale dual attention
 The framework is guided by a bi-level multi-objective and contrastive learning. By creating a permuted envioptimization approach. ronment and optimizing with pure contrastive loss, the
 r Timer-XL (2025): A unified time series forecasting model model achieves state-of-the-art performance on benchmark
 is introduced that reformulates multivariate forecasting datasets.
 as next-token prediction. Using a causal Transformer r PatchTST (2022): A Transformer-based model for multiwith a universal TimeAttention mechanism and temporal variate time series forecasting and self-supervised learning
2948 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 is proposed. It segments the series into subseries patches as events, while recall is defined based on the average directional
 tokens and uses channel-independent weights. This design distance from ground truth events to predicted anomalies. This
 preserves local semantics, reduces computation, and en- metric provides a more convincing evaluation of anomaly detecables longer dependencies, achieving state-of-the-art per- tion performance in the context of continuous time series data,
 formance in both forecasting and transfer learning. and is employed throughout our experiments.
 r Anomaly Transformer (2021): An unsupervised time series
 anomaly detection model is proposed that leverages self- B. Experimental Results
 attention to measure association discrepancies between
 We evaluated our proposed method against a range of statetime points. By detecting anomalies through biased local
 of-the-art baselines on five widely used benchmark datasets:
 associations and enhancing distinguishability via a min-
 SMD, SWaT, MSL, GECCO, and Creditcard. The detailed
 imax strategy, the model achieves state-of-the-art perforperformance comparison in terms of Precision, Recall, and
 mance across diverse benchmarks.
 F1-score is shown in Table II. The results demonstrate that
 All baselines use the configurations from their original paper
 our method achieves the highest F1-score across all datasets,
or the official code to ensure a fair comparison.
 effectively balancing precision and recall to validate its superior
 3) Implementation Details: For model training and evaluacomprehensive performance in time series anomaly detection.
tion, we apply a sliding window with a stride of 1 to generate
 Specifically, on the SMD dataset, our method achieved an F1-
diverse input pairs from the dataset. The training, validation,
 score of 0.8495, outperforming the next best baseline (CATCH)
and test sets are then normalized using the mean and standard
 by 0.21%. On the SWaT dataset, our model reached an F1-score
deviation computed from the training set.
 of 0.8771, exceeding the second-best method (ModernTCN) by
 Our experiments are implemented in PyTorch and run on a
 14.95%. For the MSL dataset, our model achieved a competitive
single NVIDIA RTX 4090 24 GB GPU. Model optimization
 F1-score of 0.7302, slightly surpassing PatchTST and DLinear.
is performed using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of
 On the GECCO dataset, our model achieved the highest F1-score
1 × 10−4 .
 of 0.9388, confirming its robustness in complex multivariate
 By default, the LaGraph framework adopts an input embedtime series. Notably, on the Creditcard dataset, our method
ding dimension of 256, transforming raw time series data into
 delivered an F1-score of 0.7546, outperforming all competing
a higher-dimensional latent space to enhance representational
 baselines.
capacity. The encoder consists of three stacked layers, designed
 These consistent improvements across multiple datasets
to capture hierarchical temporal dependencies through sequendemonstrate the comprehensive effectiveness and superiority of
tial feature transformation. A multi-head attention mechanism
 our method in managing the inherent trade-off between false
with four parallel heads is employed to enable the model to
 alarms and missed detections.
attend to diverse temporal patterns by aggregating information
from multiple subspaces. Additionally, the GCN is implemented
with three layers, facilitating the progressive integration of local C. Ablation Study
and high-order temporal dependencies via the learned graph To assess the contribution of each architectural component in
structure. our proposed framework LaGraph, we conduct comprehensive
 For each dataset, we tune the main hyperparameters using ablation studies involving its four principal modules: the Exa simple grid search over a small candidate set. Concretely, pert Decomposition Block, the Multi-layer Convolution Block,
the sliding-window size is selected from the range [36, 132] the Proximity-enhanced Graph Convolutional Network, and the
with a step of 12, and the model dimension dmodel is chosen Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block. For the Proximityfrom {64, 128, 256, 512} based on validation performance. This enhanced GCN, we evaluate its impact by first removing the
limited search space keeps the tuning overhead manageable, Laplacian kernel prior while retaining the graph convolution
while allowing LaGraph to adapt to different temporal scales and operations, and then by entirely eliminating the GCN module.
dataset characteristics and achieve robust performance across Similarly, for the Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block,
various benchmarks. we assess its effect by removing the learnable attention mask,
 4) Metrics: To evaluate model performance, we adopt pre- followed by the complete removal of the attention mechanism.
cision, recall, and F1 score as evaluation metrics. Traditional These controlled experimental settings enable a systematic evalmetrics, while effective for discrete tasks, may not fully capture uation of each module’s contribution to anomaly detection perthe nuanced nature of continuous anomaly patterns in time formance.
series data. A widely used alternative is the point adjusted F1 From Table III, it is evident that removing any individual comscore [65], which considers detecting a single anomaly within a ponent from LaGraph results in a performance decline across all
continuous segment as detecting all anomalies in that segment. datasets, confirming the effectiveness of each module. Among
However, this approach can lead to misleading results and per- them, the Multi-layer Convolution Block and the Expert Decomformance overestimation. position Block have the most substantial impact, as their removal
 To address this limitation, recent studies have adopted the leads to the largest reductions in F1 scores, particularly on the
affiliated F1 score [66], a more fine-grained metric that calcu- SMD and SWaT datasets, respectively. In contrast, removing
lates precision based on the average directional distance from the learnable mask causes the smallest performance degradation
predicted anomaly events to their corresponding ground truth across most datasets, indicating their impact is weaker than other
ZENG et al.: LAGRAPH: LAPLACIAN-GUIDED GRAPH LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2949

 TABLE II
THE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON FIVE DATASETS, WHERE P, R, AND F1 REPRESENT PRECISION, RECALL, AND F1 SCORE, RESPECTIVELY. BOLD INDICATES THE
 BEST RESULTS, WHILE UNDERLINED INDICATES THE SECOND-BEST RESULTS.

 TABLE III
 ABLATION STUDY ON THREE DATASETS. BOLD INDICATES THE BEST RESULTS.

Fig. 2. The framework of Expert Decomposition Block is illustrated.
 Fig. 3. Visualization of the learned adjacency matrices on the MSL dataset:
 (a) Original Model, (b) W/o Prior.

components. These findings underscore the importance of the TABLE IV
full model architecture and the complementary roles of each ABLATION STUDY ON THREE DATASETS WITH DIFFERENT PRIORS: F1 SCORE
module in achieving optimal anomaly detection performance. COMPARISON. BOLD INDICATES THE BEST RESULTS.
 In addition, we study the effect of integrating the Laplaciankernel prior into the proposed framework on the MSL dataset.
To this end, we analyze how the adjacency-matrix weights
change with and without the prior. Fig. 3 shows that introducing
the Laplacian prior noticeably amplifies the weights near the
diagonal, indicating a stronger emphasis on temporal proximity.
These observations suggest that the proposed prior helps the
model better capture local temporal dependencies in the learned and Laplacian+2 . As shown in Table IV, the Laplacian+KL
graph structure, thereby improving both the interpretability and configuration consistently achieves the best performance across
the empirical performance of the Proximity-enhanced GCN. all datasets, obtaining F1 scores of 0.8495 on SMD, 0.8771 on
 Moreover, to evaluate the effectiveness of different temporal SWaT, and 0.7302 on MSL. These results indicate that combinprior configurations in our LaGraph framework, we conduct an ing the Laplacian kernel with a KL divergence regularization
ablation study on three datasets, comparing the proposed Lapla- term provides a particularly effective inductive bias for time
cian+KL prior with other combinations such as Gaussian+KL series anomaly detection.
2950 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 5, MAY 2026

Fig. 4. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis on three datasets SWaT, MSL and SMD. (a) shows the trend of F1 scores as the sliding window size changes. (b) shows
the trend of F1 scores as the dimension of the stable component (d_model), after passing through a linear layer, changes. (c) shows the trend of F1 scores as the
number of heads changes. (d) shows the trend of F1 scores as number of Encoder Layers change. (e) shows the trend of F1 scores as λ Value change.

Fig. 5. Visualization comparison of the original input, reconstructed result, and anomaly scores across different anomaly categories. The first row in each sub-figure
compares the original input with the reconstructed result, while the second row displays the corresponding anomaly scores for global, contextual, seasonal, trend,
and shapelet anomalies.

 Fig. 4(d) shows that increasing the number of encoder layers
D. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis initially improves performance, but after a certain point, the F1
 There are four important hyperparameters in the proposed score starts to decrease. This suggests that while additional laymethod, LaGraph: Sliding Window Size, dmodel (dimension of ers can enhance performance, the gains diminish and eventually
the stable component after passing through a linear layer), the lead to performance degradation. To balance performance and
number of heads in the attention module, the number of encoder efficiency, we set the default number of encoder layers to 3,
layers, and λ (the weighting coefficient of the prior loss). We which yields optimal results without overfitting.
conduct experiments on three commonly used datasets: SWaT, Fig. 4(e) shows that the optimal value of λ varies across differ-
MSL, and SMD to analyze the model performance as these ent datasets. Specifically, the F1 score for MSL peaks at λ = 0.5,
parameters vary, as shown in Fig. 4. while SMD achieves its best performance at λ = 0.05. SWAT
 From Fig. 4(a), we observe significant changes in the F1 exhibits higher robustness, maintaining stable results across a
score with variations in the sliding window size. The optimal broader range of λ. Consequently, the value of λ is determined
sliding window size differs for each dataset, indicating that the individually for each dataset, reflecting the varying importance
model’s performance is sensitive to this parameter. Selecting of structural priors across different temporal dynamics.
an appropriate sliding window size is crucial, as it enables the
model to effectively capture temporal dependencies and trends.
 Fig. 4(b) shows the trend of F1 scores as the dimension of E. Visual Analysis
the stable component, dmodel , changes. The F1 score fluctuates Fig. 5 demonstrates a detailed comparison of the original
as dmodel increases, suggesting that this parameter significantly input, the reconstructed results, and the anomaly scores across
impacts performance. Tuning dmodel helps balance model com- different anomaly categories [58]. In this figure, the first row
plexity and detection accuracy, particularly for large datasets. of each sub-figure compares the original input with the recon-
 From Fig. 4(c), we see that the F1 score varies slightly as the structed result, while the second row displays the correspondnumber of heads in the attention module increases. Although ing anomaly scores for global, contextual, seasonal, trend, and
the F1 score fluctuates, the trend is not drastic, indicating that shapelet anomalies. The image clearly marks the locations of
the number of heads impacts model performance, but the ef- anomalies, with higher anomaly scores corresponding to these
fect is less pronounced than for other parameters. The optimal marked points, indicating significant deviations from expected
number of heads can be selected to balance performance and patterns. The reconstructed signals exhibit a smoother profile
computational efficiency. compared to the original inputs, suggesting the model’s effective
ZENG et al.: LAGRAPH: LAPLACIAN-GUIDED GRAPH LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2951

 suppress weak or noisy graph connections and improve feature
 fusion. Extensive experiments on five real-world datasets verified the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method
 LaGraph.

 REFERENCES
 [1] D. Fährmann, L. Martıń, L. Sánchez, and N. Damer, “Anomaly detection
Fig. 6. Visualization comparison of the efficiency of the four models on the in smart environments: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
SMD dataset in terms of runtime and memory usage. (a) reports the cost time of pp. 64006–64049, 2024.
each model per 100 iterations, while (b) presents their corresponding memory [2] X. Yang, X. Qi, and X. Zhou, “Deep learning technologies for time
usage. series anomaly detection in healthcare: A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
 pp. 117788–117799, 2023.
 [3] H. Wu, H. Zhou, M. Long, and J. Wang, “Interpretable weather forecasting
filtering of noise while preserving underlying temporal trends. for worldwide stations with a unified deep model,” Nature Mach. Intell.,
This smoothing effect is particularly noticeable during periods vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 602–611, 2023.
 [4] W. Zhang et al., “Irregular traffic time series forecasting based on asynof high fluctuation in the original data. The marked anomalies, chronous spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. 30th
where the original data shows greater deviations, are associated ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2024, pp. 4302–4313.
with significantly higher anomaly scores, further validating the [5] A. Blázquez-Garcıá, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on
 outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
model’s ability to detect substantial anomalies. These findings no. 3, pp. 1–33, Apr. 2021, doi:10.1145/3444690.
highlight the robustness of the LaGraph model for anomaly [6] M. Gupta, J. Gao, C. C. Aggarwal, and J. Han, “Outlier detection for
detection in time series analysis. temporal data: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 26, no. 9,
 pp. 2250–2267, Sep. 2014.
 [7] R. Tsay and A. Pankratz, “Outliers in multivariate time series,” Biometrika,
F. Efficiency Analysis vol. 87, pp. 789–804, Dec. 2000.
 [8] M. A. Belay, S. S. Blakseth, A. Rasheed, and P. Salvo Rossi, “Unsuper-
 On the SMD dataset, Fig. 6 compares LaGraph with three vised anomaly detection for IoT-based multivariate time series: Existing
representative baselines (CATCH, MTST, and iTransformer) in solutions, performance analysis and future directions,” Sensors, vol. 23,
 no. 5, 2023, Art. no. 2844.
terms of runtime and memory consumption. It should be noted [9] Z. Zamanzadeh Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. Aggarwal, and M. Salehi,
that the primary objective of LaGraph is to improve anomaly “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,” ACM Comdetection accuracy, particularly in terms of the F1-score, rather put. Surv., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1–42, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1145/3691338.
 [10] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly detection
than to optimize computational efficiency alone. This efficiency in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
analysis is therefore conducted to assess the practical feasibility pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
of the proposed method. For fairness, all methods are evaluated [11] G. E. Box, G. M. Jenkins, G. C. Reinsel, and G. M. Ljung, Time Series
 Analysis: Forecasting and Control. Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley Sons,
with the same batch size and sliding-window size, under the Inc., 2015.
same hardware and implementation settings. As shown in the [12] M. G. Kendall, “The advanced theory of statistics,” vol. 23, no. 1, p. 310,
figure, while LaGraph is not the most efficient model overall, 1961.
 [13] E. S. Page, “Continuous inspection schemes,” Biometrika, vol. 41, no. 1/2,
its overhead remains well controlled: it is clearly faster than pp. 100–115, 1954.
MTST and falls within the range of the other baselines. In terms [14] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE
of memory usage, LaGraph also exhibits stable and moderate Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
 [15] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Mach. Learn., vol. 20,
consumption, with a lighter footprint than MTST, which incurs no. 3, pp. 273–297, 1995.
the highest cost. Overall, although LaGraph does not achieve [16] E. Fix, Discriminatory Analysis: Nonparametric Discrimination, Consisthe best efficiency on every metric, its time and space overheads tency Properties, vol. 1. Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, USA:
 USAF School Aviation Med., 1985.
remain practical for deployment, especially considering its su- [17] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in
perior anomaly detection performance. multivariate time series,” vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4027–4035, 2021.
 [18] Q. Wu, G. Yao, Z. Feng, and Y. Shuyuan, “Peri-midFormer: Periodic
 pyramid transformer for time series analysis,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 V. CONCLUSION Process. Syst., 2024, vol. 37, pp. 13035–13073.
 [19] Y. Liu et al., “iTransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
 This paper proposed a novel model LaGraph, for time series series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024,
anomaly detection. To better preserve key temporal patterns and pp. 4004–4028.
reduce the interference of anomalies in reconstruction-based [20] C. Wang et al., “Drift doesn’t matter: Dynamic decomposition with
 diffusion reconstruction for unstable multivariate time series anomaly
frameworks, we introduced the Expert Decomposition Block, detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36,
which separates the input series into stable and trend compo- pp. 10758–10774.
nents. This design facilitates a more accurate representation of [21] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
temporal dynamics, which in turn enhances the reliability and 2018, pp. 3072–3090.
robustness of the reconstruction. To capture temporal proxim- [22] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
ity, we designed the Proximity-enhanced Graph Convolutional for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
Network, which leverages a Laplacian kernel to emphasize rela- [23] W. Yue et al., “Sub-adjacent transformer: Improving time series anomaly
tionships between adjacent time points. In addition, we proposed detection with reconstruction error from sub-adjacent neighborhoods,” in
the Mask-optimized Multi-head Attention Block to adaptively Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 2524–2532.
2952 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 5, MAY 2026

[24] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly Transformer: Time series [48] X. Wang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, J. Gao, B. Ding, and R. Jin, “Make transformer
 anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. great again for time series forecasting: Channel aligned robust dual trans-
 Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 5203–5222. former,” 2023, arXiv:2305.12095.
[25] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual [49] X. Wang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, J. Gao, B. Ding, and R. Jin, “CARD: Channel
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly aligned robust blend transformer for time series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024, pp. 20577–20615.
 Mining, 2023, pp. 3033–3045. [50] D. Du, B. Su, and Z. Wei, “Preformer: Predictive transformer with multi-
[26] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini, scale segment-wise correlations for long-term time series forecasting,” in
 “The graph neural network model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 20, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2023, pp. 1–5.
 no. 1, pp. 61–80, Jan. 2009. [51] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, and X. Li, “TSLANet: Re-
[27] Y. Bengio, N. Léonard, and A. Courville, “Estimating or propagating thinking transformers for time series representation learning,” 2024,
 gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation,” 2013, arXiv:2404.08472.
 arXiv:1308.3432. [52] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence
[28] A. Graves, “Long short-term memory,” in Supervised Sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35,
 Labelling With Recurrent Neural Networks. Berlin, Germany: Springer, no. 12, pp. 11106–11115.
 2012, pp. 37–45. [53] H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Autoformer: Decomposition
[29] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting,” Adv.
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, vol. 34, pp. 22419–22430.
[30] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph [54] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FEDformer:
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Inc. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017, Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series forepp. 2713–2726. casting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27268–27286.
[31] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio, [55] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf Learn. Representations, detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 2018, pp. 2920–2931. network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
[32] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, [56] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “Swat: A water treatment testbed
 vol. 30, pp. 1024–1034. for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber-
[33] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36.
 neural networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019, [57] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderpp. 9104–9120. strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
[34] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series: dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” IEEE Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 10466–10485, [58] K.-H. Lai, D. Zha, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, and X. Hu, “Revisit-
 Dec. 2024. ing time series outlier detection: Definitions and benchmarks,” in Proc.
[35] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial–temporal 35th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Track Datasets Benchmarks, 2021,
 graph attention network for time series anomaly detection,” Inf. Fusion, pp. 1868–1884.
 vol. 89, pp. 527–536, 2023. [59] Y. Liu, G. Qin, X. Huang, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Timer-XL: Long-context
[36] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GReLeN: Multivariate time series transformers for unified time series forecasting,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf.
 anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in Learn. Representations, 2025, pp. 51892–51916.
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397. [60] Y. Zhang, L. Ma, S. Pal, Y. Zhang, and M. Coates, “Multi-resolution time-
[37] S. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Lin, Y. Hu, Q. Huang, and B. Yin, “SAGoG: series transformer for long-term forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif.
 Similarity-aware graph of graphs neural networks for multivariate time Intell. Statist., 2024, pp. 4222–4230.
 series classification,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37,no. 8, [61] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective for
 pp. 4820–4832, Aug. 2025. time series forecasting?,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37,
[38] M. Han and Q. Wang, “Adaptive graph convolution neural differential no. 9, pp. 11121–11128.
 equation for spatio-temporal time series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. [62] D. Luo and X. Wang, “ModernTCN: A modern pure convolution structure
 Data Eng., vol. 37,no. 6, pp. 3193–3204, Jun. 2025. for general time series analysis,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Represen-
[39] B. Zheng et al., “Adversarial graph neural network for multivariate time tations, 2024, pp. 34187–34208.
 series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 12, [63] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet:
 pp. 7612–7626, Dec. 2024. Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in Proc.
[40] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning for 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 6423–6445.
 multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. [64] M. Li, K. Liu, H. Chen, J. Bu, H. Wang, and H. Wang, “TSINR: Capturing
 Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11802–11816, Sep. 2024. temporal continuity via implicit neural representations for time series
[41] X. Huang, W. Chen, B. Hu, and Z. Mao, “Graph mixture of experts anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2411.11641.
 and memory-augmented routers for multivariate time series anomaly [65] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
 detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, vol. 39, no. 16, for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
 pp. 17476–17484. 2018, pp. 187–196.
[42] L. Sun, J. Ye, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “A self-supervised Riemannian GNN [66] A. Huet, J. M. Navarro, and D. Rossi, “Local evaluation of time series
 with time varying curvature for temporal graph learning,” in Proc. 31st anomaly detection algorithms,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2022, pp. 1827–1836. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 635–645.
[43] L. Sun et al., “Hyperbolic variational graph neural network for modeling
 dynamic graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 5,
 pp. 4375–4383.
[44] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. H. Hoi, “ETSFormer:
 Exponential smoothing transformers for time-series forecasting,” 2022,
 arXiv:2202.01381. Shicong Zeng received the BS degree in computer
[45] X. Wu et al., “CATCH: Channel-aware multivariate time series anomaly science and technology from Central South Univerdetection via frequency patching,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. on Learn. sity, Changsha, China. He is currently working toward
 Representations, 2025, pp. 56894–56922. the MS degree with the Department of Computer Sci-
[46] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series is ence and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology,
 worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. 11th Weihai, China. His research interests include deep
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 33132–33155. learning, data mining, and time series analysis.
[47] S. Feng et al., “Multi-scale attention flow for probabilistic time series
 forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 2056–2068,
 May 2024.
ZENG et al.: LAGRAPH: LAPLACIAN-GUIDED GRAPH LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 2953

 Guoqing Chao received the PhD degree with the De- Zhijin Wang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD department of Computer Science and Technology, East gree from the Department of Computer Science and
 China Normal University, Shanghai, China, in 2015. Technology, East China Normal University, Shang-
 From 2015 to 2020, he was a postdoc with the Univer- hai, China, in 2016. He is currently an associate
 sity of Connecticut and Northwestern University, US professor with Jimei University, Xiamen, China. He
 and Singapore Management University, Singapore. is also the founder of Forecasting and Time Series
 He is currently with the Harbin Institute of Technol- (FAST) Community and leader of the pyFAST library
 ogy, Weihai, China. He has authored or coauthored for time series analysis. His research interests include
 more than 40 papers. His research interests include recommendation systems, time series forecasting,
 machine learning, data mining and bioinformatics. and artificial intelligence in health and healthcare.
 He is a reviewer of many prestigious journals such as
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, JMLR, IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, and IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering.
He is on the Editorial Board member of Machine Learning and Knowledge
Extraction and leading guest editor of Special issues in several prestigious
journals such as Applied Intelligence and Neural Processing Letters.

 Junquan Wei is currently working toward the BS Dianhui Chu received the PhD degree with the
 degree in artificial intelligence from the Harbin In- School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
 stitute of Technology, Weihai, China. His research Institute of Technology, Harbin, China in 2014. He
 interests include time series forecasting and time se- is currently the Shandong Taishan scholar. He has
 ries anomaly detection. authored or coauthored more than 50 papers. His
 research interests include service computing and software service engineering, cloud computing and mobile internet technology, data mining and Big Data
 analysis

 Yanwei Yu (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
 in computer science from the University of Science
 and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China, in 2014.
 From 2012 to 2013, he was a visiting scholar with
 Worcester Polytechnic Institute. From 2016 to 2018,
 he was a postdoctoral researcher with the College of
 Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania
 State University. He is currently a professor with the
 College of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean
 University of China. His research interests include
 data mining and machine learning.