10290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

 Large Language Model-Based Task Offloading and
 Resource Allocation for Digital Twin Edge
 Computing Networks
 Qiong Wu , Senior Member, IEEE, Yu Xie, Pingyi Fan , Senior Member, IEEE, Dong Qin ,
 Kezhi Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Nan Cheng , Senior Member, IEEE, and Khaled B. Letaief , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—In this paper, we propose a general digital twin edge experience [1], [2], [3]. However, this also leads to the generation
computing network comprising multiple vehicles and a server. Each of a large number of computing tasks. Vehicles’ limited computvehicle generates multiple computing tasks within a time slot, lead- ing resources make independent task handling impractical [4],
ing to queuing challenges when offloading tasks to the server. The
study investigates task offloading strategies, queue stability, and re- [5], [6], [7]. This limitation often results in significant delays
source allocation. Lyapunov optimization is employed to transform due to the inability to process tasks promptly, thereby adversely
long-term constraints into tractable short-term decisions. To solve affecting the quality of service (QoS) of the applications.
the resulting problem, an in-context learning approach based on To address this issue, vehicular edge computing (VEC) offers
large language model (LLM) is adopted, replacing the conventional a promising solution. VEC enables vehicles to offload tasks
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) framework. Experimental results demonstrate that the LLM-based method achieves to nearby servers by deploying VEC nodes or roadside units
comparable or even superior performance to MARL. along the road. These servers leverage their abundant computing
 resources to process the diverse tasks generated by vehicles
 Index Terms—Large language model, digital twin, resource
allocation, edge computing.
 and return the results efficiently [8], [9], [10], [11]. However,
 VEC introduces new challenges. Environmental dynamics and
 I. INTRODUCTION vehicle mobility often create uncertainty in the volume of tasks
 offloaded by each vehicle [12], [13], [14], [15]. This uncertainty
 HE growth of the Internet of things (IoT) has greatly
T expanded vehicular applications, improving the driving
 leads to competition among vehicles for the server’s computing resources, ultimately affecting the processing efficiency of
 Received 21 April 2025; revised 21 July 2025; accepted 9 February 2026. offloaded tasks [16], [17], [18], [19]. As a result, effectively
Date of publication 16 February 2026; date of current version 5 June 2026. scheduling task offloading and allocating server resources be-
This work was supported in part by Jiangxi Province Science and Technology comes a critical challenge.
Development Programme under Grant 20242BCC32016, in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62461036, Grant 62001201, Digital twin enables the simulation, analysis, and optimizaand Grant 61701197, in part by Basic Research Program of Jiangsu under tion of physical entities by creating digital replicas of real-world
Grant BK20252084, in part by the National Key Research and Development objects [20], [21], [22], [23], such as vehicles, industrial machin-
Program of China under Grant 2021YFA1000500(4), in part by the Hong
Kong Research Grant Council under the Area of Excellence (AoE) Scheme ery, and aviation engines. These digital replicas establish a full
Grant AoE/E-601/22-R, and in part by the 111 Project under Grant B23008. life cycle model for their corresponding physical entities [24].
Recommended for acceptance by J. Ko. (Corresponding author: Dong Qin.) In addition, IoT advancements have greatly enhanced digital
 Qiong Wu and Yu Xie are with the School of Internet of Things Engineering, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China, and also with the twin capabilities. They now support not only unidirectional
School of Information Engineering, Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of information mirroring but also bidirectional interaction through
Advanced Signal Processing and Intelligent Communications, Nanchang intra-twin communication [25]. Vehicles in dynamic environ-
University, Nanchang 330031, China (e-mail: qiongwu@jiangnan.edu.cn;
yuxie@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn). ments can be virtually modeled by leveraging digital twin tech-
 Pingyi Fan is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, State Key nology. Their digital replicas capture relevant vehicle informalaboratory of Space Network and Communications, Beijing National Research tion through intra-twin communication, enabling flexible task
Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China (e-mail: fpy@tsinghua.edu.cn). offloading and dynamic scheduling of server resources [26],
 Dong Qin is with the School of Information Engineering, Jiangxi Provin- [27], [28]. In a digital twin edge computing network, a vehicle
cial Key Laboratory of Advanced Signal Processing and Intelligent Com- may run multiple applications simultaneously, generating dimunications, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China (e-mail: qindong@ncu.edu.cn). verse computational tasks within a single time slot, rather than a
 Kezhi Wang is with the Department of Computer Science, Brunel University, single task as previously assumed. Additionally, task offloading
UB8 3PH London, U.K. (e-mail: kezhi.wang@brunel.ac.uk). by multiple vehicles may impact edge server queue stability.
 Nan Cheng is with the State Key Laboratory of ISN and the School of
Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China Therefore, developing a task offloading and resource allocation
(e-mail: dr.nan.cheng@ieee.org). scheme that ensures long-term queue stability becomes critically
 Khaled B. Letaief is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi- important.
neering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
(e-mail: eekhaled@ust.hk). The popular way to face the above problems is the deep
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMC.2026.3664866 reinforcement learning (DRL). The actions taken are gradually
 1536-1233 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING 10291

optimized through the constant interaction of the agent with DRL to formulate the optimal scheme. In [32], Zheng et al.
the environment until the optimal action is obtained for the proposed a DT-based prediction model to predict the waiting
highest long-term reward. However, this approach is not without time for a vehicle to connect to the network while using DRL to
its drawbacks. DRL requires a lot of effort to adjust the model minimize the long-term delay and energy consumption. In [33],
parameters in the process of training the model, and non-optimal Zhao et al. input the global information of vehicles into the
parameters may cause the model to fall into a local optimum. DT model to assist the clustering algorithm in reducing the task
LLM, as a novel approach, due to its strong capability resulting offloading range for the purpose of offloading prediction. In [34],
from multimodal pre-training, can save a lot of time and effort Li et al. modeled DTs for roadside units(RSUs), UAVs, and
in the inference, and only need to design the prompts for LLM. vehicles to assist in task offloading for vehicles and management
Moreover, it is possible to further optimize the scheme obtained of resources for RSUs and UAVs. These literatures have used
by MARL with the help of LLM method. the DRL approach or machine learning algorithms in solving
 In this paper, we construct a digital twin edge computing optimization problems, and no literature has yet used the large
network with a base station and a server.1 Facing the situation model approach to solve the problem.
that vehicles generate multiple types of computing tasks in a
single time slot, we analyze the delay and energy consumption of
each type of task under the influence of digital twin, and propose B. Large Language Model
a in-context learning method based on LLM to optimize the At present, the research on LLM for Edge Computing is still
average quality of service as well as the total energy consumption in the exploratory stage. In [35], Zhou et al. used LLM to invesof the whole system scenario. The main contributions of this tigate the case of power allocation for the base station, and the
paper are as follows: experiments show that LLM is able to avoid the tedious model
 r We propose a generic digital twin edge network scenario training and hyper-parameter fine-tuning of machine learning,
 and analyze the server queue backlog issue arising from while achieving performance results comparable to those of
 vehicles generating heterogeneous tasks within a single traditional DRL. In [36], Zhou et al. used generative AI for radio
 time slot. Furthermore, we examine the subsequent impact resource allocation and task offloading in an edge-cloud network
 of these queued tasks on both the system’s average QoS to compute the content generation delay via LLM and optimize
 and total energy consumption. To jointly optimize these the offloading decision using LLM. Simulations show that the
 two key metrics, we formulate and solve a corresponding proposed context learning approach achieves satisfactory results
 optimization problem. without specialized model training and fine-tuning compared to
 r We apply Lyapunov optimization to the constraints involv- traditional DRL. In [37], Lee et al. developed an LLM-based
 ing queue stability in the original problem, converting it resource allocation method for wireless communication systems
 from a long-term stability problem to a short-term deci- to maximize energy and spectrum efficiency, and confirmed the
 sion problem, and consequently reconstructing the original applicability and feasibility of the scheme through experiments.
 problem. In [38], Fu et al. proposed a hybrid Intrusion detection systems
 r We propose a MARL-guided context-based LLM approach based on LLM to solve the intrusion detection problem in the
 to the problem. Specifically, the LLM is made to output so- internet of vehicles. Experiments show that the proposed method
 lutions by designing prompts for the LLM and combining is able to make up for the shortcomings of traditional methods
 them with a case set provided by MARL. in several aspects such as classification compared to machine
 learning based methods. In addition, the proposed method per-
 II. RELATED WORK forms well on multiple intrusion detection challenge datasets
 and shows good generalized recognition ability for in-vehicle
 In this section, we first review related work on digital twins
 networks of different vehicles. In [39], Liu et al. modeled a
in vehicular edge network, and then survey existing studies on
 RIS-based IoT communication system using LLM and proposed
large models for connected car scenarios.
 an optimization strategy for wireless resource allocation, and
 the simulation results demonstrate the advantages of LLM-
A. Digital Twin in VEC
 enhanced reconfigurable intelligent surface. In [40], Chen et al.
 There has been some literature on the utilization of DT under proposed a dual deep deterministic policy gradient framework
VEC. In [12], Dai et al. used DT as well as deep reinforcement under the guidance of LLM to achieve efficient coordination
learning (DRL) to optimize the offloading delay under adaptive between connected electric vehicles and distributed networks.
DT network. In [29], Zhang et al. utilized digital twins to guide Experiments show that the proposed method performs well in
vehicles to aggregate edge services to minimize offloading costs. scheduling tasks compared to traditional methods. All the above
In [30], Liao et al. developed a DT model about a driver to literature have conducted a preliminary study on the application
predict his behavior in the context of an autonomous vehicle of LLM in vehicular environment, but the study on the allocation
and a human-driven vehicle. In [31], Zhang et al. constructed of vehicular resources and the generation of a queue of tasks for
a vehicle edge caching system by DT with VEC and used vehicular environment has not been addressed.
 As mentioned above, the literature related to digital twin ve-
 1 The source code has been released at: https://github.com/qiongwu86/-LLM- hicular network has not yet applied LLM whereas the literature
Based-Task-Offloading-and-Resource-Allocation-for-DTECN that has conducted a preliminary study on LLM has not yet dealt
10292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

 addition, the server is equipped with NE blocks of CPU cores
 and has a total resource of fE cycles per second for all CPUs.

 A. Digital Twin Model
 The digital twin model of vehicle n in the cloud can be
 represented as
 MnDT = {In , Γn (t)}, (1)
 where In is configuration information for vehicle n, including velocity vn and position ln (t), Γn (t) is the information
 about Task of vehicle n in time slot t, which denotes Γn (t) =
 {Dn,1
 t t
 , Dn,2 t
 , . . ., Dn,k t
 , . . ., Dn,K }. Here, In and Γn (t) are unrelated to each other, as In is the current operational state of the
 vehicle as it travels, while Γn (t) represents the vehicular tasks
 at a given time slot.

 B. Communication Model
 Since we deploy the digital twin in the cloud, we ignore
 the communication time between the twin model and the VEC
 server. In this scenario, we use orthogonal frequency division
 multiplexing technique for communication. Therefore, the transmission rate between vehicle n and BS can be expressed as
  
 t
 p n g n,b
 rnt = w log2 1 + , (2)
 ρ2
 where w is the channel bandwidth, pn is the transmission power
 t
 of vehicle n, gn,b is the channel gain between vehicle n and the
 base station at time slot t, and ρ2 is the channel noise between
 t
 vehicle n and the base station. For the channel gain gn,b at the
Fig. 1. Digital Twin Vehicle Edge Network. current time slot t, it can be modeled as [25]
 t
 gn,b = |stn,b |2 htn,b , (3)
with vehicular resource allocation. Therefore, we try to utilize where, htn,b is the large-scale fading component, which consists
LLM to conduct research on vehicular resource allocation in of path fading and shadow fading, where the path fading can be
digital twin edge network. calculated as 128.1 + 37.6 log10 (Dis(Vn , BS)), and the shadow
 fading follows the log normal distribution. dis(Vn , BS) is the
 III. SYSTEM MODEL distance between vehicle n and BS. stn,b is the small-scale channel fading component, which follows the circularly symmetric
 Fig. 1 shows a system scenario in which we construct a digital complex Gaussian with unit variance. To characterize it, we use
twin vehicular networking scenario with N vehicles traveling a first-order Gaussian Markov process for this purpose. Thus, it
on the road and a base station equipped with servers. It contains can be updated in a way that can be expressed as
two layers, i.e., the physical layer, which consists of N vehicles,
the base station and the server in the scenario, and the cloud n,b + en,b ,
 stn,b = κst−1 t
 (4)
digital twin layer, which includes the digital mapping of the
 where κ is the correlation coefficient and etn,b is the channel
entities in the physical layer on the cloud, i.e., the constructed
 innovation process with distribution CN (0, 1 − κ2 ). The corredigital copies. Specifically, within the communication coverage
 lation coefficient κ can be expressed as κ = J0 (2πfd Δt), where
of the base station, a vehicle traveling along the road generates
 J0 (•) is the zeroth-order Bessel function, and fd is the maximum
K types of tasks to be processed at each time slot. For the sake
 Doppler frequency, which can be computed as fd = (vn fc )/c,
of this study, we assume that the vehicle always travels within
 fc is the carrier frequency, and c is the transmission rate of the
the BS coverage area. Due to limited vehicular resources, the
 electromagnetic wave.
twin model of the vehicle in the cloud twin layer analyzes the
specific information about the tasks generated by the vehicle in
 C. Queue Model
that time slot, and issues commands to offload each task to the
server through transmission with the base station, which has K At the beginning of time slot t, vehicle n generates K
queues, and accepts the tasks from the vehicle. Then, it stores types of computing tasks, and thus, we denote the k-th type
 t
them in separate dedicated queues before they are processed. In of them as Dn,k . Upon receiving the offloading policy, vehicle
WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING 10293

n executes the offloading scheme for task k. Specifically, the real physical entity, the CPU frequency allocated by the VEC
vehicle will offload the ωn,k t
 |Dn,k
 t
 | portion of task k to the server to the k-th class task of vehicle n actually has an estimated
k-th queue at the VEC, |Dn,k | being the size of task Dn,k
 t t
 . bias Δfn,k
 est
 [26], which in turn has a bias in the latency of the
The cumulative amount of the k-th type of tasks arriving at final processing of the task, which is denoted as Δtest n,k , which
queue k within the time interval [t1 , t2 ) can be denoted as can be calculated as
Ck (t1 , t2 ) = Σtt21 −1 ΣN
 n=1 ωn,k |Dn,k |, where t1 and t2 are two
 t t t
 ωn,k |Dn,k
 t
 |ck Δfn,k
 est
adjacent time slots. For the tasks in the queue, the server executes n,k = −
 Δtest t f )(Δf est + αt f ) , (8)
 (αn,k E n,k n,k E
a resource allocation policy to allocate resources to the tasks in
each queue. We denote the CPU frequency required to process therefore, for the delay tedge
 n,k obtained after edge processing, it
per bit of data for the k-th type of tasks as ck . Thus, the number can be finally represented as
of k-th type tasks processed by the VEC server at time slot t can
 fE ΣN αt |Dn,k
 t
 | ωn,k
 t
 |Dn,k
 t
 |ck
be expressed as φk (t) = n=1 n,k
 ck
 t
 , where αn,k denotes the tedge
 n,k = t
 + t + Δtest
 n,k . (9)
proportion of resources for the k-th task of processing vehicle n rn αn,k fE
and fE is the total computing resources of the server. Therefore, For completing the task Dn,kt
 , it needs to complete both local and
the backlog of queue k at time slot t + 1 can be expressed offload processing, so its final processing delay can be expressed
as [41], [42] as
 qk (t + 1) = [qk (t) + Zk (t) − φk (t)]+ , (5) tn,k = tlocal edge
 n,k + tn,k . (10)
 n=1 ωn,k |Dn,k | denotes the number of tasks
where Zk (t) = ΣN t t
 To measure the relationship between the delay for completing
of type k that arrive at queue k at time slot t. Since the tasks a class k task for vehicle n and its maximum delay limit, we
generated in each time slot enter the queue, maintaining queue express it in terms of QoS, which can be calculated as [44]
stability is essential. If the queue is not kept stable, then the tasks tn,k
arriving at the queue are at risk of being discarded, which is Un,k (t) = 1 − max , (11)
 Tn,k
clearly not in line with the needs of the vehicle itself. Therefore,
we denote maintaining strong stability of queue k as [43] since the number of tasks generated by vehicle n in a single time
 slot is K, the average QoS for vehicle n is expressed as
 1 
 t−1 K
 lim sup E[qk (s)] < ∞, (6) 1 
 K
 t→∞ t s=0 Unave (t) = Un,k (t), (12)
 k=1
 K
 k=1
it is important to note that our work focuses on the long-term
stability of the queue under this network, which is manifested thus, for this network, the average QoS of the whole system can
by ensuring that the length of this queue is stable rather than be expressed as
continuously growing as time increases.
 1  ave
 N
 U sys (t) = U (t), (13)
D. Computing Model N n=1 n

 1) Qos: Vehicle n generates tasks and then offloads them 2) Energy: In addition to focusing on the QoS affected by
according to the offloading policy, for the k-th type of tasks, it processing delay under this system, the energy consumption of
will be partially offloaded according to ωn,kt t
 , when ωn,k = 0, it the system is equally important. Under this system, the total
will be processed directly locally, when 0 < ωn,k < 1, it indit energy consumption is mainly divided into local processing encates that the task will be partially offloaded for processing, and ergy and edge processing energy. For the local processing energy
when ωn,kt
 = 1, it will be completely offloaded for processing. consumption, it is mainly generated when the vehicle’s own
We let Dn denote the set of tasks generated by vehicle n. computing resources are used to process the local computing
For the k-th type of tasks Dn,k t
 among them, we denote it as tasks, which is calculated as follows
Dn,k = {|Dn,k |, Tn,k }, where Tn,k
 t t max max
 is the maximal latency N 
  K
limit of the k-th type of tasks generated by vehicle n. Therefore, E local (t) = fv 3 κve tlocal
 n,k , (14)
when the k-th type of tasks of vehicle n is executed locally, its n=1 k=1
latency can be calculated as where κve denotes the effective switching capacitance of the
 (1 − ωn,k
 t
 )|Dn,k
 t
 |ck computing device on the vehicle. For the calculation of the edge
 n,k =
 tlocal , (7) energy consumption, since it mainly involves the consumption
 fv of the CPU power of the server, based on the dynamic frequency
where fv is the vehicle’s own computing resources. For the regulation method that is widely used to construct the real CPU
offloading part of the task, it first needs to be transmitted to the power consumption, the edge energy consumption is calculated
server, and after it enters the server’s queue, the server executes as [41]
a resource allocation policy to allocate CPU frequencies to  3
process it. In addition, it should be noted that due to the mapping n=1 Σk=1 αn,k
 fE ΣN K t
 E (t) = NE κ
 edge se
 , (15)
difference between the digital twin model in the cloud and its NE
10294 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

where κse denotes the effective switching capacitance parameter Let Zkmax serves as an upper bound for Zk (t), then Zk (t) ≤ Zkmax
of the server hardware, which has the server hardware itself to can be obtained. Moreover, since ΣN n=1 αn,k ≤ 1 in φk (t) =
 t

decide. For the total energy consumption of the system under fE ΣN t
 n=1 αn,k
 ck , according to the drift plus penalty bound [45], the
this network, it consists of the local energy consumption and the
 first term on the right-hand side of (19) can be upper bounded
edge energy consumption, so we can get
 by
 E sys (t) = E local (t) + E edge (t), (16) 1  K 
 E Σk=1 (Zk (t) − φk (t))2 |Q(t)
 2
E. Optimization Problem
 1  2 2
 
 ≤ E ΣK k=1 (Zk (t) − φk (t) )|Q(t)
 Our goal is to maximize the average QoS of the system under 2
this network while minimizing the total energy consumption   2
of the system as much as possible, therefore, we construct the 1 max 2 fE
 = E ΣK (Z ) − |Q(t)
following optimization problem: 2 k=1 k
 ck

 P1 : min −U sys (t) + E sys (t) (17a) = B. (20)
 ( t
 ωn,k ,αtn,k )
 Bringing the result into (19), then
 1 
 t−1 K
 s.t. lim sup E[qk (s)] < ∞ (17b) ΔQ(t) ≤
 t→∞ t s=0   
 k=1
 fE ΣN t
 n=1 αn,k
 tn,k ≤ Tn,k
 max
 (17c) B+E ΣK
 k=1 qk (t) Zk (t) − |Q(t) .
 ck
 n=1 Σk=1 αn,k fE + Δfn,k ≤ fE
 ΣN K t est
 (17d) (21)
 t
 ωn,k ∈ [0, 1] (17e) We then employ the opportunistic minimization of expectations technique for the second term on the right-hand side of
 In particular, constraint (17b) indicates they need to ensure the (21), after which we obtain the following result
stability of the queue in order to avoid tasks being discarded, con-  
straint (17c) indicates that the latency obtained from completing fE ΣN t
 n=1 αn,k
the task must not exceed the maximum latency limit, constraint ΔQ(t) ≤ B − Σk=1 qk (t)
 K
 − Zk (t) . (22)
 ck
(17d) indicates that the computational resources consumed by
the offload processing portion of all vehicle-generated tasks fE ΣN αt
 Let n=1 n,k
 ck − Zk (t) be denoted by , so we finally rewrite
must not exceed the maximum amount of resources of the VEC
 (22) as ΔQ(t) ≤ B − ΣK k=1 qk (t). According to conditional
server itself, and constraint (17e) indicates a range of values for
 Lyapunov shift theory, if the upper bound on the Lyapunov shift
the offloading policy. Note that constraint (17b) is affected by
 ΔQ(t) is B − ΣK k=1 qk (t) for each time slot t, we can rewrite
the offloading decision, which is interconnected with the rethe constraints(16b) in Problem 1 as
source allocation decision, and both affect constraint (17c).
 1 
Thus, the complexity of this interaction makes it difficult to t−1 K
 B
solve problem P 1 using traditional operations. In order to over- lim sup E [qk (s)] ≤ . (23)
 t→∞ t s=0 
come this suffering, we transformed the problem constraints and k=1
reconstructed the problem using Lyapunov optimization. In this scenario, to maintain the stability of the queue, it is
 sufficient to ensure that the conditional Lyapunov shift has a
F. Lyapunov Optimization minimal tight upper bound, i.e., there exists an optimal an,k (t) to
 In this section, we will use Lyapunov optimization to pair minimize the right-hand side of (22). Combining this short-term
transform the long-run stability problem of the queue into a decision problem with problem P 1, we get problem P 2:
  
short-run problem. Let ΔQ(t) denote the conditional Lyapunov fE ΣN t
 n=1 αn,k
shift at time slot t, which is represented as P 2 : t mint βΣk=1 qk (t) Zk (t) −
 K
 (ωn,k ,αn,k ) ck
 
 ΔQ(t) = E {L(Q(t + 1)) − L(Q(t))|Q(t)} , (18) + (−U sys (t) + E sys (t)) (24a)
where Q(t) = [q1 (t), q2 (t), . . ., qK (t)] is the backlog of the tn,k ≤ Tn,k
 max
 (24b)
queue at time slot t. Let L(Q(t)) denote the Lyapunov function
used to measure the average queue backlog, which is denoted n=1 Σk=1 αn,k fE + Δfn,k ≤ fE
 ΣN K t est
 (24c)
as L(Q(t)) = 12 ΣK 2
 k=1 (qk (t)) . Squaring both sides of (5) and t
 ωn,k ∈ [0, 1] (24d)
bringing the Lyapunov function (18), then
 1  K  where β is a non-negative tradeoff factor.
 ΔQ(t) ≤ E Σk=1 (Zk (t) − φk (t))2 |Q(t) The reconstructed problem P 2 solves the long-run decision-
 2
   making problem, but the problem is still a complex optimization
 + E ΣKk=1 qk (t) (Zk (t) − φk (t)) |Q(t) , (19) problem. We choose to utilize LLM-based in-context learning to
WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING 10295

solve the problem, but before we can do so, we need to obtain a Critic: The structure of the critic network also includes an
example set which got after training through the MARL method. input layer, a fully connected layer and an output layer. The
 difference is that there is no softmax layer in the fully connected
 IV. PROPOSED SOLUTION layer, only three hidden layers, and their activation functions are
 Relu, Relu and Tanh respectively.
 To address the optimization problem, we first employ MARL The inputs to the estimation critique network are the states
to obtain an initial set of cases, and then utilize LLM to optimize and actions of all agents at the current epoch, and the output is
the actions learned from this case set. the Q value.
 After the case set obtained through MARL training we use
A. MARL-Based Case Set the LLM based on in-context learning to learn the case set and
 The framework required for MARL, i.e. state, action, reward then complete the decision-making for the randomly arriving
function, needs to be constructed. real-world situations.
 1) State: In this setting, we let the state consist of the task
Γn (t), vehicle position ln (t), vehicle speed vn , channel gain B. In-Context Learning-Based Approach
 t
gn,b , i.e.
 In-context learning means that LLM can learn from human
   characters, such as task descriptions and task solution cases, in
 sn (t) = Γn (t), ln (t), vn , gn,b
 t
 , (25)
 order to improve the performance of the target task. Context
therefore, the environment state is S(t) = {sn (t)}N . learning can be defined as [35]
 t
 2) Action: We take the offloading ratio ωn,k and the resource
 t
ratio an,k as the actions executed by the agent n after obtaining Dtask × texample × st × LLM ⇒ At , (28)
the observation, i.e. where Dtask is the task description, texample is a collection
  t  of some cases under time slot t, st is the environment state
 an (t) = ωn,k t
 , αn,k , (26)
 under the current time slot t, which is related to the target task,
after that, we can get the overall action, which is represented as LLM is the LLM model, as well as At is the output result of
A(t) = {an (t)}N . LLM. Specifically, by inputting a description Dtask of the task
 3) Reward: After considering various constraints, the reward we need to solve to the LLM, the LLM learns from the set of
function is expressed as cases texample , and then makes a decision At on the target task
 under the current time slot t based on the current state of the
 n=1 Σk=1 an,k fE + Δfn,k
 rn (t) = Unave − η fE − ΣN K t est
 , environment st . In the following, we will make a decision At
 (27) on the task description Dtask and the set of cases texample are
where η is a weight parameter used to keep the two terms on the described.
right-hand side of the equation to an order of magnitude. Then, 1) Task Description: Dtask is important for LLM to provide
the long-term discount reward is Rn (t) = Σtt0 γn rn (t), where t0 key information about the problem to be solved. Typically, a
is the previous time, γn is the discount factor. We can achieve task description Dtask consists of three parts, which are task
the optimal action by maximizing the long-term discount reward goal, task definition, and additional rules. Below is the prompt
of each agent. we designed to inspire the LLM, which contains a specific
 The algorithm procedure follows the implementation in [26]. description of the task.
Among the neural networks involved in the algorithm are the actor network, critic network and their respective target networks.
Their specific structure is as follows:
 Actor: We categorize the actor network into three layers:
the input layer, the fully connected layer, and the output layer.
The fully connected layer consists of three hidden layers and
a softmax layer. The first two hidden layers use the rectified
linear unit (ReLu) function as an activation function and the third
hidden layer uses the tangent (tanh) function as an activation
function. Since the actor network is divided into two parts, we
will explain the estimated actor network and the target actor
network separately.
 The input is the current state for the estimated actor network,
including the computing tasks generated by the vehicle, the vehicle position, the vehicle speed and the channel gain. The current
state is passed through three hidden layers after outputting the
probability of possible actions. Then after passing through the
softmax layer, the total probability of all actions is set to 1. For the task goal, it specifically refers to “you need to output
Finally, agent n randomly selects one of the outputs. the action based on the dataset and in the given state, and
10296 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

Fig. 2. Overall design of LLM-based context learning.

only the action and no other information”. Then we set the the purpose of the cue needs to be designed, in addition to adding
task definition to output dimension-specific actions in a given some guiding words in order to allow LLM to understand the
environment state, e.g., when the number of vehicles in the problem to be solved in the context of the case set.
environment changes, the LLM must take this situation into 2) Case Set: Examples are also critical for LLM in contexaccount. After that the case set is represented as “Here is a tual learning, so the selection of cases must be careful. This
dataset you can use for prediction”. Finally, we set up additional is because on the one hand cases are an important factor in
response rules. That is ”an offloading decision and resource LLM decision making, and LLM relies on cases to justify its
allocation task”, where the goal is to output offloading decision decisions, and on the other hand because the invocation of LLM
and resource allocation ratios from 0 to 1, because the former models usually has a token limitation, which means that it is not
requires LLM to focus on the decision-making process, while possible for us to send a large number of examples. Moreover,
the latter facilitates subsequent data extraction. since the state of the environment in the scenario of this paper
 The above task description provides a template for the defini- is continuous, which means that the number of cases is infinite,
tion of optimization tasks through formatted natural language, picking the most relevant and functional cases is challenging. We
which avoids the complexity that would arise from dedicating a choose the set of examples converged by MARL training in the
specific model for this purpose. Moreover, it is also user-friendly, previous section. It should be noted that the case set obtained by
as the operator only needs to make simple additions or deletions MARL is only preliminary, and it needs to be further optimized
to the task descriptions without any specialized knowledge of by LLM based on the cases in it.
optimization. 3) LLM-Based Context Learning: Fig. 2 shows the general
 Overall, the design of prompt requires the abstraction of the design of LLM-based context learning. Specifically, when a
optimization problem into natural language. The body of the vehicle in the physical layer generates a class K task at time slot
prompt to address the context of the optimization problem, then t, it means that the information of the vehicle has changed, and
WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING 10297

 TABLE I
 ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS

therefore, it will synchronize the information to the twin model
in the cloud digital twin layer via intra-twin communication.
Then, the twin model will invoke the LLM, i.e., it will input
the prompt into the LLM and the LLM will make a decision
for the new task state based on the historical dataset and it will
make two types of decisions, i.e., task offloading decision and
resource allocation decision. After making the decisions, the
cloud will return these two types of decisions to the vehicle and
the server respectively. After receiving the offloading decision,
the vehicle will offload the generated task to the server’s queue.
The server, on the other hand, will calculate and process the
resource allocation for the tasks in the queue according to the
resource allocation decision, and the result of the processing will
be returned to the vehicle. At the same time, it will be added to
the dataset as a new example.

 V. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
 The simulation environment in this paper is implemented
under Python 3.11.0 and the LLM model used is Llama 3.1-8b.
In terms of the environment setup, the parameters are set as
shown in Table I. Specifically, the bandwidth w is set to 20 MHZ,
the transmission power pn is 200 mW, the channel noise ρ2 is
−110 mdB, and the carrier frequency fc is 2 GHZ. In addition,
the amount of the vehicle’s own computing resources fv is
5 GHZ, the velocity of the vehicle vn is randomly chose in
[10, 15]m/s, the transmission rate of the electromagnetic is
3 × 108 m/s and the total amount of resources of the edge
serversfE is 400 GHZ. The task size |Dn,k t
 | is randomly chose
in [1000,1500]Byte and the frequency required per bit of the Fig. 3. Comparison of system energy consumption between LLM, SARL and
data ck is 0.25 MHZ/Byte. The effective switching capacity of MARL with different estimation bias.
the vehicle’s vehicular devices κve is 10−28 , and that of the
servers hardware has an effective switching capacity κse of well as the activation function are the same as described in
 1
(400GHZ)3 , and the number of CPUs on the server NE is 10. Section IV-B. For SARL, the number of hidden layers is the
In the experimental part, we set the non-negative coefficient β same but the activation function of the neural network is ReLu
in Problem 2 to 1. The discount factor γn is 0.95 and the updated function.
rate λ is 0.01.
 C. Performance Evaluation
B. Baseline Algorithm Fig. 3 shows the system energy consumption of LLM, MARL,
 We compared with current popular deep reinforcement learn- and SARL for different twin mappings. In Fig. 3(a), it can
ing algorithms, i.e. multi-agent or single-agent reinforcement be seen that for all the discussed methods, the system energy
learning (SARL). For MARL, the number of hidden layers as consumption increases with the number of vehicles, where
10298 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

Fig. 4. Comparison of task processing latency for LLM, SARL, and MARL
with different estimation biases.

 Fig. 6. Comparison of Edge Energy and Resource Ratios for LLM, SARL,
 and MARL with Different Estimation Biases.

Fig. 5. Comparison of QoS of LLM, SARL and MARL with different estima- environment of intense competition for resources. In contrast,
tion biases.
 LLM achieves better results than MARL because LLM performs
 comprehensive learning of the environment based on a typical
SARL has the highest energy consumption while LLM is able set of cases and makes smart inference decisions on new cases.
to achieve similar results as MARL. The energy consumption On the other hand, the delay when the bias is positive is lower
of SARL is higher since making decisions based on local in- than when it is negative. This is due to the fact that, as mentioned
formation, having relatively weak capability for task offloading earlier, the amount of resources estimated by the digital twin is
and resource scheduling. In order to be able to make a more higher when the bias is positive, which naturally leads to lower
specific comparison, we can get through Fig. 3(b) that the latency.
energy consumption achieved by MARL is higher than that Fig. 5 shows the comparison of LLM, SARL and MARL in
obtained through LLM. On the other hand, in order to compare terms of QoS. We can get that QoS decreases as the number
the situation under different estimation biases, we see through of vehicles increases. In this case, the negative value of QoS
Fig. 3(c) that the energy consumption achieved by LLM is lower for SARL is due to the fact that SARL’s task processing delay is
when the bias is positive than when it is negative. This is because, higher than the maximum delay tolerance due to poor scheduling
when the bias is positive, the amount of resources estimated by scheme in case of higher number of vehicles as shown in Fig. 4.
the digital twin will be higher, and therefore, less resources will On the other hand, even though the QoS is also decreasing, the
be subsequently invested, but on the contrary, more resources performance achieved by LLM is better than MARL.
will be invested. Fig. 6 compares the edge energy and resource ratios of LLM,
 Fig. 4 compares the task processing latency of LLM, SARL, SARL, and MARL for different estimation biases. It can be seen
and MARL for different estimation biases. It can be seen that that SARL achieves the lowest edge energy consumption, which
the task processing delay increases with the number of vehicles. is due to its relatively weak ability to schedule resources as well
In addition, SARL, as mentioned in the previous section, makes as offload tasks, as mentioned earlier. In addition, LLM is higher
decisions based on local information and thus fails to obtain than MARL in terms of edge consumption and resource share,
the optimal scheduling plan, i.e., SARL cannot adapt to the regardless of whether the deviation is positive or negative. This is
WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING 10299

because, as illustrated in Fig. 4, LLM occupies more computing [9] Q. Wu, Y. Zhao, Q. Fan, P. Fan, J. Wang, and C. Zhang, “MobilityAware
resources in order to get lower processing latency, which leads cooperative caching in vehicular edge computing based on asynchronous
 federated and deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal
to an increase in the resource share, and occupying more com- Process., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 66–81, Jan. 2023.
putational resources leads to higher edge energy consumption. [10] J. Shen, N. Cheng, X. Wang, F. Lyu, W. Xu, and Z. Liu, “RingSFL:
 An adaptive split federated learning towards taming client heterogeneity,”
 IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 5462–5478, May 2024.
 VI. CONCLUSION [11] N. Cheng, F. Lyu, W. Quan, C. Zhou, H. He, and W. Shi, “Space/Aerialassisted computing offloading for IoT applications: A learning-based
 In this paper, we considered the problem of generating mul- approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1117–1129,
tiple tasks by vehicles in a single time slot and queuing of May 2019.
 [12] Y. Dai and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive digital twin for vehicular edge computing
tasks in the server under digital twin edge networks, while and networks,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 48–59, Mar. 2022.
constructing a preliminary optimization problem by analyzing [13] W. Wang et al., “Value matters: A novel value of information-based
this situation. Since the preliminary constructed problem has resource scheduling method for CAVs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73,
 no. 6, pp. 8720–8735, Jun. 2024.
a long term decision constraint that is difficult to solve, we [14] W. Feng, S. Lin, N. Zhang, G. Wang, B. Ai, and L. Cai, “Joint C-V2X based
used Lyapunov optimization to transform this condition into a offloading and resource allocation in multi-tier vehicular edge computing
short term decision. After constructing the new problem, we system,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 432–445,
 Feb. 2023.
utilized the LLM method, which is not widely used in the [15] Q. Ren et al., “Resource allocation and slicing strategy for multiple
field of IoT today, to solve the problem. Experimental results services co-existence in wireless train communication network,” IEEE
have shown that the LLM-based In-context learning method Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 401–414, Jan. 2025.
 [16] Z. Zhang, Q. Wu, P. Fan, N. Cheng, W. Chen, and K. B. Letaief, “DRLcan achieve similar or even better performance than the widely Based optimization for AoI and energy consumption in C-V2X enabled
popular MARL. However, the method proposed in this paper IoV,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2144–2159,
also has limitations, such as the speed of operation of LLM Dec. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TGCN.2025.3531902.
 [17] X. Gu, Q. Wu, P. Fan, N. Cheng, W. Chen, and K. B. Letaief, “DRLis dependent on the performance of the hardware deployed. Based federated self-supervised learning for task offloading and resource
Therefore, there is a requirement for the deployment cost. In allocation in ISAC-Enabled vehicle edge computing,” Digit. Commun.
addition, overly complex optimization problem is a challenge for Netw., vol. 11, pp. 1614–1627, 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.dcan.2024.12.009.
 [18] X. Gu et al., “DRL-Based resource allocation for motion blur resistant
LLM. Therefore, in the future work, we will try to decompose federated self-supervised learning in IoV,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12,
the complex problem into several sub-problems and hand them no. 6, pp. 7067–7085, Mar. 2025.
over to LLM for processing. At the same time, we will also [19] Y. Xie et al., “Resource allocation for twin maintenance and task processing in vehicular edge computing network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12,
consider lightweight models to minimize deployment costs. We no. 15, pp. 32008–32021, Aug. 2025, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3576582.
summarize them as follows: [20] Z. Shao et al., “Semantic-aware spectrum sharing in Internet of Vehicles
 r The LLM can understand the tasks to be accomplished and based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 no. 23, pp. 38521–38536, Dec. 2024.
 the objectives of the tasks to be achieved through the cue [21] Z. Zhou et al., “Secure and latency-aware digital twin assisted resource
 words we designed. scheduling for 5G edge computing-empowered distribution grids,” IEEE
 r The LLM is able to learn the characteristics of the task Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 4933–4943, Jul. 2022.
 [22] C. Zhou, J. Gao, M. Li, N. Cheng, X. Shen, and W. Zhuang, “Digitalto be accomplished from a typical case set and can make twin-Based 3-D map management for edge-assisted device pose tracking
 reasoned decisions for new tasks. in mobile AR,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 17812–17826,
 May 2024.
 [23] Z. Yin, N. Cheng, T. H. Luan, Y. Song, and W. Wang, “DT-Assisted multi-
 REFERENCES point symbiotic security in space-air-ground integrated networks,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5721–5734, 2023.
 [1] B. Cao, Z. Li, X. Liu, Z. Lv, and H. He, “Mobility-aware multiobjective [24] Z. Wang et al., “Mobility digital twin: Concept, architecture, case
 task offloading for vehicular edge computing in digital twin environment,” study, and future challenges,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18,
 IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3046–3055, Oct. 2023. pp. 17452–17467, Sep. 2022.
 [2] X. Wang, K. Tao, N. Cheng, Z. Yin, Z. Li, and Y. Zhang, “RadioDiff: [25] J. Zheng et al., “Digital twin empowered heterogeneous network selection
 An effective generative diffusion model for sampling-free dynamic radio in vehicular networks with knowledge transfer,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
 map construction,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 2, vol. 71, no. 11, pp. 12154–12168, Nov. 2022.
 pp. 738–750, Apr. 2025. [26] C. Xu, Z. Tang, H. Yu, P. Zeng, and L. Kong, “Digital twin-driven
 [3] R. Sun, N. Cheng, C. Li, F. Chen, and W. Chen, “Knowledge-driven deep collaborative scheduling for heterogeneous task and edge-end resource via
 learning paradigms for wireless network optimization in 6G,” IEEE Netw., multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
 vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 70–78, Mar. 2024. vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3056–3069, Oct. 2023.
 [4] Q. Wu, Y. Zhao, and Q. Fan, “Time-dependent performance modeling [27] T. Liu, L. Tang, W. Wang, Q. Chen, and X. Zeng, “Digital-twin-Assisted
 for platooning communications at intersection,” IEEE Internet Things J., task offloading based on edge collaboration in the digital twin edge
 vol. 9, no. 19, pp. 18500–18513, Oct. 2022. network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1427–1444, Jan. 2022.
 [5] Q. Wu, S. Wang, H. Ge, P. Fan, Q. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “Delay-sensitive [28] E. Zhang, L. Zhao, N. Lin, W. Zhang, A. Hawbani, and G. Min, “Cooptask offloading in vehicular fog computing-assisted platoons,” IEEE Trans. erative task offloading in cybertwin-assisted vehicular edge computing,”
 Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2012–2026, Apr. 2024. in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Embedded Ubiquitous Comput., 2022,
 [6] Q. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Fan, P. Fan, C. Zhang, and Z. Li, “High stable and pp. 66–73.
 accurate vehicle selection scheme based on federated edge learning in [29] K. Zhang, J. Cao, and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive digital twin and multiagent
 vehicular networks,” China Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1–17, Mar. 2023. deep reinforcement learning for vehicular edge computing and networks,”
 [7] Y. Zhang et al., “An efficient caching and offloading resource allocation IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1405–1413, Feb. 2022.
 strategy in vehicular social networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, [30] X. Liao et al., “Driver digital twin for online prediction of personalno. 4, pp. 5690–5703, Apr. 2024. ized lane-change behavior,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 15,
 [8] T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, B. Mada, H. Flinck, S. Dutta, and D. Sabella, pp. 13235–13246, Aug. 2023.
 “On multi-access edge computing: A survey of the emerging 5G network [31] K. Zhang, J. Cao, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Digital twin empowered
 edge cloud architecture and orchestration,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., content caching in social-aware vehicular edge networks,” IEEE Trans.
 vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1657–1681, May 2017. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 239–251, Feb. 2022.
10300 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

[32] J. Zheng et al., “Data synchronization in vehicular digital twin network: A Yu Xie received the BS degree from the Suzhou Unigame theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 11, versity of Science and Technology, Suzhou, China, in
 pp. 7635–7647, Nov. 2023. 2022, and the MS degree from Jiangnan University,
[33] L. Zhao et al., “A digital twin-assisted intelligent partial offloading ap- Wuxi, China, in 2025. His research interests include
 proach for vehicular edge computing,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., digital twin, resource allocation, reinforcement learnvol. 41, no. 11, pp. 3386–3400, Nov. 2023. ing, and vehicular edge computing.
[34] B. Li, W. Xie, Y. Ye, L. Liu, and Z. Fei, “FlexEdge: Digital twin-enabled
 task offloading for UAV-Aided vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans.
 Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 11086–11091, Aug. 2023.
[35] H. Zhou et al., “Large language model (LLM)-enabled in-context learning for wireless network optimization: A case study of power control,”
 2024, arXiv:2408.00214.
[36] H. Zhou et al., “Generative AI as a service in 6G edge-cloud: Generation
 task offloading by in-context learning,” 2024, arXiv:2408.02549. Pingyi Fan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
[37] W. Lee and J. Park, “LLM-Empowered resource allocation in wireless degree from the Department of Electronic Engineercommunications systems,” 2024, arXiv:2408.02944. ing, Tsinghua University, in 1994. He is a professor
[38] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS: Hybrid and the director of open source data recognition innonetwork intrusion detection system in IoV using large language models,” vation center, Department of Electronic Engineering,
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb. 2025. Tsinghua University. He is member (Academician)
[39] Q. Liu, J. Mu, D. Chen, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, and T. Hong, “LLM enhanced of the United States national academy of artificial inreconfigurable intelligent surface for energy-efficient and reliable 6G IoV,” telligence (NAAI), fellow of IET and IET fellowship
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1830–1838, Feb. 2025. international assessor. From 1997 to 1999, he visited
[40] X. Chen, X. Lu, Q. Li, D. Li, and F. Zhu, “Integration of LLM and human– the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
 AI coordination for power dispatching with connected electric vehicles and the University of Delaware in the United States.
 under SAGVNs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1992–2002, He also visited many universities and research institutes in the United States,
 Feb. 2025. Europe, Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore. He has obtained many research
[41] Q. Wu, W. Wang, P. Fan, Q. Fan, J. Wang, and K. B. Letaief, “URLLC- grants, including national 973 Project, 863 Project, mobile special project and the
 Awared resource allocation for heterogeneous vehicular edge computing,” key R&D program, national natural funds and international cooperation projects.
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 11789–11805, Aug. 2024. He has published more than 600 papers (ORCID) including 171 IEEE journals
[42] X. Tan, M. Wang, T. Wang, Q. Zheng, J. Wu, and J. Yang, “Adaptive task and more than 10 ESI highly cited papers as well as 4 academic books. He
 scheduling in digital twin empowered cloud-native vehicular networks,” also applied for more than 40 national invention patents, 7 international patents.
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 8973–8987, Jun. 2024. He won 2025 NAAI AI Exploration Award, and 10 best paper awards of IEEE
[43] M. J. Neely, “Stochastic network optimization with application to commu- international conferences, including IEEE ICCCS2023 and 2024, ICC2020 and
 nication and queueing systems,” Synth. Lectures Commun. Netw., vol. 3, Globecom 2014, and received the best paper award of IEEE TAOS Technical
 no. 1, pp. 1–211, Sep. 2010. Committee in 2020, the excellent editor award of IEEE TWC (2009), the most
[44] L. Tang, Z. Cheng, J. Dai, H. Zhang, and Q. Chen, “Joint optimization of popular scholar award 2023 of AEIC, the second natural Prize of CIC (2023) and
 vehicular sensing and vehicle digital twins deployment for DT-Assisted several international innovation exhibition medals, i.e. Gold Medal at the Russian
 IoVs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 11834–11847, Invention Exhibition-2024, Silver Medal at Geneva Invention Exhibition-2023,
 Aug. 2024. and Silver Medal at Paris Invention Exhibition-2023 etc. and served as the
[45] Y. Li, S. Xia, M. Zheng, B. Cao, and Q. Liu, “Lyapunov optimization based editorial board member of several Journals, including IEEE and MDPI. He is
 trade-off policy for mobile cloud offloading in heterogeneous wireless currently an associate editor of IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communicanetworks,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 491–505, First tions and Networking (TCCN), the editorial board member of Open Journal of
 Quarter, 2022. Mathematical Sciences and IAES international journal of artificial intelligence,
 the deputy director of China Information Theory society, the co-chair of China’s
 6G-ANA TG4, and the chairperson of Network and Communication Technology
 Committee of IEEE ChinaSIP. His current research interests are in 6G wireless
 communication network and machine learning, semantic information theory and
 Qiong Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD generalized information theory, Big Data processing theory, intelligent network
 degree in information and communication engineer- and system detection, etc.
 ing from National Mobile Communications Research
 Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in
 2016. From 2018 to 2020, he was a postdoctoral
 researcher with the Department of Electronic Engi- Dong Qin received the PhD degree in information and
 neering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. He is communication engineering from Southeast Univercurrently an associate professor with the School of sity, Nanjing, China, in 2016. He joined the School
 Internet of Things Engineering, Jiangnan University, of Information Engineering, Nanchang University, in
 Wuxi, China. He is a Senior Member of China In- 2016. His current research interests lie in the area of
 stitute of Communications. He has published more cooperative communication and OFDM techniques.
than 100 papers in high impact journals and conferences, and authorized more
than 30 patents. He was elected as one of the world’s top 2% scientists in
2024 and 2022 by Stanford University. He has received the young scientist
award for ICCCS’24 and ICITE’24. He won the high-impact paper of Chinese
Journal of Electronics award. He has been awarded the National Academy of
Artifical Intelligence (NAAI) Certified AI senior engineer, and was the excellent
reviewer for Computer Networks in 2024. He has severed as the editorial board
member of Sensors and CMC-Computers Materials & Continua, the early career Kezhi Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
editorial board member of Radio Engineering and Chinese Journal on Internet of PhD degree from the University of Warwick, U.K.
Things, the lead guest editor of Sensors, CMC-Computers Materials & Continua, He is a professor with the Department of Computer
Radio Engineering and Frontiers in Space Technologies, the guest editor of Science, Brunel University of London, U.K. His
Electronics and Chinese Journal on Internet of Things, the TPC co-chair of research interests include wireless communications,
WCSP’22, the workshop chair of NCIC’23/25, ICFEICT’24/25, CIoTSC’24, mobile edge computing, and machine learning. He is
IAIC’24, RFAT‘25 and FRSE’25, as well as the TPC member and session chair a Clarivate Highly Cited researcher in 2023-2024.
for more than 10 international Conferences. His current research interest focuses
on vehicular networks, autonomous driving communication technology, and
machine learning.
WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING 10301

 Nan Cheng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BE Khaled Ben Letaief (Fellow, IEEE) received the BS
 and MS degrees from the College of Electronics and (Hons.), MS, and PhD degrees in electrical engineer-
 Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shang- ing from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA,
 hai, China, in 2009 and 2012, respectively, and the in 1984, 1986, and 1990, respectively. From 1990 to
 PhD degree from the Department of Electrical and 1993, he was a faculty member with the University of
 Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Wa- Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. Since 1993,
 terloo, ON, Canada, in 2016. He was a postdoctoral he has been with The Hong Kong University of Scifellow with the Department of Electrical and Com- ence and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong, where
 puter Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, he is currently the New Bright professor of engineer-
 ON, Canada, from 2017 to 2019. He is currently ing. At HKUST, he has held many administrative
 a professor with the State Key Laboratory of ISN positions, including an Acting Provost, the dean of
and with the School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Engineering, the head of the Electronic and Computer Engineering Department,
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China. He has published more than 90 journal papers in IEEE and the director of the Hong Kong Telecom Institute of Information Technology.
Transactions and other top journals. His current research focuses on B5G/6G, He is an internationally recognized leader in wireless communications and
AI-driven future networks, and space–air-ground integrated networks. He serves networks. His research interests include artificial intelligence, mobile cloud
as an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Vehicle Technology, IEEE and edge computing, tactile Internet, and sixth-genereation (6G) systems. In
Open Journal of the Communication Society, and Peer-to-Peer Networking and these areas, he has more than 720 articles with over 44,450 citations and an
Applications, and serves/served as a guest editor for several journals. H-index of over 100 along with 15 patents, including 11 U.S. inventions. He
 served as a member for the IEEE Board of Directors from 2022 to 2023. He
 is a member with the National Academy of Engineering, USA, and the Hong
 Kong Academy of Engineering Sciences; and a fellow with the Hong Kong
 Institution of Engineers. He is well recognized for his dedicated service to
 professional societies and IEEE, where he served in many leadership positions,
 including the president of the IEEE Communications Society from 2018 to
 2019, the world’s leading organization for communications professionals with
 headquarter in New York City, and members in 162 countries. He is recognized
 by Thomson Reuters as an ISI Highly Cited Researcher and was listed among
 the 2020 top 30 of AI 2000 Internet of Things Most Influential Scholars.
 He was a recipient of many distinguished awards and honors, including the
 2007 IEEE Communications Society Joseph LoCicero Publications Exemplary
 Award, the 2009 IEEE Marconi Prize Award in Wireless Communications,
 the 2010 Purdue University Outstanding Electrical and Computer Engineer
 Award, the 2011 IEEE Communications Society Harold Sobol Award, the 2016
 IEEE Marconi Prize Paper Award in Wireless Communications, the 2016 IEEE
 Signal Processing Society Young Author Best Paper Award, the 2018 IEEE
 Signal Processing Society Young Author Best Paper Award, the 2019 IEEE
 Communication Society and Information Theory Society Joint Paper Award,
 the 2021 IEEE Communications Society Best Survey Paper Award, and the
 2022 IEEE Communications Society Edwin Howard Armstrong Achievement
 Award. He is the founding editor-in-chief of the prestigious IEEE Transactions
 on Wireless Communications. He has been involved in organizing many flagship
 international conferences.