IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026 487

 Large-Scale BGP Routing Anomaly Detection
 Based on Graph Attention Auto-Encoder
 Zekang Wang , Fuxiang Yuan , Han Qiu , Yan Liu , and Xiangyang Luo

 Abstract—The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) enables the mechanism [1], [2], which makes the Internet susceptible
exchange of routing information between Autonomous Systems to routing anomalies such as network outages [3] caused
(ASes). The lack of routing verification makes it susceptible by route leaks [4], prefix hijacking [5], and configuration
to routing anomalies with major impact. Detecting large-scale
routing anomalies is crucial for monitoring network operation errors [6]. According to the impact scope of anomalies,
status. However, existing methods are affected by interference they can be categorized into small-scale and large-scale
from non-important ASes and insufficient labeled data, neces- routing anomalies [7], in which large-scale routing anomasitating improvements in detection performance. In this paper, lies seriously impact network reachability [8]. Large-scale
a large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection method based routing anomaly detection is of great significance in monon a graph attention auto-encoder is proposed. First, normal
BGP data is collected to construct AS-level topology graphs. itoring Internet operation status and maintaining network
Then, the graph attention auto-encoder model is pre-trained on stability [9].
topology graphs, where an attention mechanism is introduced Machine learning has been widely applied in large-scale
to assign higher weights to important ASes. Next, the AS-level BGP routing anomaly detection for years, achieving many
topology graph sequence is extracted from BGP data, and outstanding scientific achievements. Traditional methods based
the pre-trained model is utilized to obtain AS embeddings.
Finally, the AS embedding is classified to detect large-scale BGP on machine learning extract anomaly detection features manrouting anomalies based on multi-layer perceptron. The large- ually from routing information tables and UPDATE messages,
scale BGP routing anomaly event dataset is constructed using including statistical features [10], [11] (e.g., the number of
4,577,384 routing announcements, and extensive experiments are UPDATE messages, the average length of AS_PATH) and
conducted. The results show that the proposed method has graph features [12], [13] (e.g., clustering coefficient, censignificant advantages. Compared with typical methods BSVM,
BLSTM, BMLP, BGNN, BGIN, and BGAE, the detection accuracy trality). The machine learning model is trained to detect
increased by 14.47%, 3.73%, 8.11%, 2.64%, 5.99%, and 1.04%, large-scale BGP routing anomalies. However, the process of
respectively. manually extracting and selecting features relies on domain
 Index Terms—BGP routing anomaly detection, graph attention knowledge. With the development of deep learning, the emerauto-encoder, autonomous system, graph representation learning. gence of automatic feature extraction methods is expected to
 solve such problems. In these methods, graph representation
 learning [14] can effectively encode high-dimensional sparse
 I. I NTRODUCTION graph structure data into low-dimensional dense vectors [15],
 while preserving structural information in graphs, providing a
 HE INTERNET consists of over 80,000 Autonomous
T Systems (ASes), and ASes exchange routing information
via the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). However, BGP
 new way for BGP routing anomaly detection. In recent years,
 some studies have attempted to apply graph representation
was not designed with a routing trusted verification learning to large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection tasks.
 Based on graph convolutional neural network [16], graph
 Received 16 January 2025; revised 25 August 2025; accepted 1 November isomorphism network [17], and graph auto-encoder [18], the
2025. Date of current version 29 December 2025. This work was sup- information of neighbor nodes is aggregated to update AS
ported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No. 2022YFB3102900), the National Natural Science Foundation of China embeddings, and large-scale BGP routing anomaly is detected
(No. U23A20305), the Key Research and Development Project of Henan by classifying the AS embedding.
Province (No. 221111321200), the Innovation Scientists and Technicians Existing large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection meth-
Troop Construction Projects of Henan Province (No. 254000510007), the
Natural Science Foundation of Henan Province of China (No. 242300421415), ods based on graph representation learning have made initial
and the Key Science and Technology Project of Henan Province of China progress but still have some problems. Significant differences
(No. 252102211091). The associate editor coordinating the review of this arti- exist in the possibility of large-scale BGP routing anomalies
cle and approving it for publication was F. Valenza. (Corresponding author:
Xiangyang Luo.) caused by different ASes [19]. However, existing typical
 Zekang Wang, Fuxiang Yuan, Yan Liu, and Xiangyang Luo are with the detection methods aggregate features of neighbor ASes indis-
State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Computing, criminately, either by averaging or summing, to update AS
Zhengzhou 450000, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Cyberspace
Situation Awareness of Henan Province, Zhengzhou 450000, China (e-mail: embeddings, resulting in anomaly detection facing interference
wangzk_ieu@sina.com; rookieyfx@163.com; ms.liuyan@foxmail.com; from many non-important or even irrelevant ASes. In addiluoxy_ieu@sina.com). tion, existing methods typically train detection models in a
 Han Qiu is with the Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou
450000, China (e-mail: qiuhan410@aliyun.com). supervised manner, which requires a large amount of labeled
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3631527 BGP data. However, BGP anomaly data is insufficient. These
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
488 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

problems affect the effectiveness of large-scale BGP routing
anomaly detection.
 To solve the above problems, we propose a novel method
based on a graph attention auto-encoder for detecting largescale BGP routing anomalies. The attention mechanism is used
to assign higher weights to important ASes when aggregating
neighbor node information, minimizing the interference of
non-important ASes on anomaly detection. The reliance on
labeled data is reduced by pre-training the graph attention
auto-encoder model. The main contributions of this paper are
as follows.
 • A framework for detecting large-scale BGP routing
 anomalies using a method based on a graph attention
 Fig. 1. Illustration of large-scale BGP routing anomalies. (1) Route leaks:
 auto-encoder is proposed. The proposed method learns Routes from AS8 and AS9 are propagated to unintended ASes, including
 graph representations of Internet AS-level topologies AS11 and AS12. (2) Prefix hijacking: AS1 owns the network prefix a.b.c.*/24,
 based on a graph attention auto-encoder and utilizes a but the attacker AS5 illegitimately announces a route containing this network
 prefix. According to the BGP shortest path principle, the traffic is redirected
 multi-layer perceptron to classify the AS embedding, to AS5.
 achieving anomaly detection. Our method also provides
 a list of possible anomaly origin ASes, narrowing down
 the scope of anomaly origin AS localization. malicious attacks [23]. According to the scope of impact,
 • The attention mechanism is introduced into the graph these anomalies can be divided into small-scale and large-scale
 auto-encoder for large-scale BGP routing anomaly detec- routing anomalies. Large-scale routing anomalies [8] usually
 tion. When aggregating node features of neighbor ASes, cause a large number of IP address prefixes to be unreachable,
 the attention mechanism evaluates the importance of and the anomalies can be observed by most routing collectors,
 ASes and assigns weights to them, paying more attention posing a serious threat to inter-domain routing security.
 to important ASes that may cause large-scale BGP rout- Common large-scale BGP routing anomalies include route
 ing anomalies. This mechanism reduces interference from leaks [24] and prefix hijacking [25], as shown in Fig. 1.
 non-important ASes and improves detection accuracy. Route leaks are typically caused by misconfigurations made
 • Normal behavior of BGP routing is learned based on by network operators [26], where legitimate routing paths
 unsupervised learning. The graph attention auto-encoder are exposed to unintended ASes [27], putting critical Internet
 model is pre-trained on normal BGP data to learn infrastructure at risk. Prefix hijacking refers to an attack where
 routing behavior patterns, reducing the dependence on the attacker forges network reachability information and AS
 labeled routing data. The model effectively captures the path information to announce that they own the victim’s IP
 proximity and hierarchy properties of Internet AS-level address prefix [28], deceiving BGP routers to select incorrect
 topologies, which represent the AS routing roles. paths and redirecting network traffic to other ASes [29],
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. thereby stealing user sensitive data [30]. Detecting large-scale
Section II discusses the related work of large-scale BGP BGP routing anomalies is of great importance for protecting
routing anomaly detection. Section III elaborates on the critical Internet infrastructure and ensuring the security of user
proposed method based on a graph attention auto-encoder, data [31].
detailing the framework, model architecture, and effectiveness
analysis of the method. Section IV validates the effectiveness
of the proposed method and compares it with existing typical B. Large-Scale BGP Routing Anomaly Detection Methods
detection methods. Finally, the conclusion summarizes our Anomaly detection is one of the important branches of data
findings and outlines future research directions. mining. Its goal is to identify abnormal data, which is widely
 used in different scenarios [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37],
 II. R ELATED W ORK [38], [39]. Early large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection
 methods include time series analysis [40], statistical pattern
 We introduce the definition and classification of large-scale
 recognition [41], and reachability test [42]. In recent years,
BGP routing anomalies, and analyze existing typical methods
 machine learning has shown good performance in large-scale
for detecting large-scale BGP routing anomalies.
 BGP routing anomaly detection [43]. Machine learning-based
 detection methods are currently the mainstream approach.
A. Large-Scale BGP Routing Anomaly These methods focus on how to extract features effectively.
 BGP is the most widely used inter-domain routing proto- Currently, there are two approaches for feature extraction:
col [20], but it has obvious security flaws in design [21], [22]. manual extraction and automatic extraction based on graph
This protocol lacks an effective inherent mechanism to verify representation learning.
the authenticity and validity of route announcements. As a 1) Methods Based on Manual Feature Extraction:
result, the Internet becomes vulnerable to routing anomalies, Traditional methods detect large-scale BGP routing anomalies
such as network outages caused by configuration errors or by manually extracting features. The extracted features can
WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION 489

be mainly categorized into two types: statistical features and averagely. During the training process, the error for all ASes
graph features. is computed to update model parameters, capturing routing
 When large-scale BGP routing anomalies occur, rele- behavior patterns of different ASes.
vant features of UPDATE messages change significantly. In summary, while large-scale BGP routing anomaly detec-
Al-Rousan and Trajković [10] extracted 17 statistical features, tion methods based on graph representation learning have
including the number of UPDATE messages, the announce- made initial progress, they still have some problems. Existing
ment interval time, and the average length of AS_PATH. typical detection methods assign equal weights to all neigh-
These features were selected using fisher score and mRMR bor ASes when aggregating their information to update AS
algorithms, and a support vector machine classifier was trained embeddings, assuming that different ASes causing largeto detect large-scale BGP routing anomalies. Dong et al. [11] scale BGP routing anomalies have the same possibility.
extracted 33 statistical features regarding AS prefixes, peers, However, ASes that trigger large-scale BGP routing anomalies
and paths. A long short-term memory model combined with are usually important nodes with larger network scales and
a self-attention mechanism was utilized to detect large-scale significant network positions [19]. The existing method aggre-
BGP routing anomalies, in order to reduce the impact of noise gates features of neighbor ASes by averaging or summing,
in BGP data. which ignores the differences in importance between different
 Graph features reflect overall structural changes in Internet ASes. As a result, anomaly detection faces interference from
AS-level topology when large-scale BGP routing anomalies many non-important, even irrelevant ASes. Furthermore, BGP
occur. Sanchez et al. [12] compared large-scale BGP routing anomaly data samples are insufficient, and it is not guaranteed
anomaly detection performance of graph features such as that all data can be accurately labeled. This makes it chalcentrality, clustering coefficient, average degree of neighbor lenging to obtain a large amount of accurately labeled BGP
nodes, and maximum connected subgraph size using a multi- anomaly data required for supervised learning. These problems
layer perceptron. Huang et al. [13] extracted degree centrality affect the effectiveness of anomaly detection.
and closeness centrality features of ASes, achieving real-time
detection of large-scale BGP routing anomalies by analyzing III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
changes in AS centrality. To solve the problems of interference from non-important
 However, manual feature extraction and selection can easily ASes and the insufficiency of labeled BGP anomaly data, we
lead to feature redundancy or the omission of important propose a large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection method
features. In addition, feature design is time-consuming and based on a graph attention auto-encoder.
costly, which affects the accuracy of large-scale BGP routing
anomaly detection. A. Overview
 2) Methods Based on Graph Representation Learning for
Feature Extraction: Graph representation learning [14] can Considering that large-scale BGP routing anomalies are prirepresent a graph as a low-dimensional vector while retaining marily characterized by significant changes in the existence of
most network structure information. The features can be AS links [8], we represent the Internet AS-level topology as an
automatically extracted by inputting the graph and a small undirected graph G = (V,E,X). Here, V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN },
number of initial node features into a graph representation where vi denotes an AS and N is the number of ASes. E =
learning model. In recent years, some studies have made {e1 , e2 , . . . , eM }, ej indicates an edge between ASes, and M
progress in large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection based denotes the number of edges. X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } represents
on graph representation learning. the initial node features of ASes, and xk indicates the number
 Hoarau et al. [16] first designed a graph neural network of IP prefixes announced by an AS, reflecting its network size
model suitable for large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection. and connectivity capability. The notations used in the paper
By aggregating the embeddings of neighbor ASes averagely, are summarized in Tab. I.
AS embeddings are iteratively updated without manual feature The overview architecture of our proposed framework is
extraction. Then, AS embeddings are classified based on a shown in Fig. 2, which consists of two stages. In the graph
multi-layer perceptron to achieve large-scale BGP routing attention auto-encoder model pre-training stage, the model is
anomaly detection. Latif et al. [17] utilized the number of pre-trained in an unsupervised manner on AS-level topologies
UPDATE messages sent and received by ASes as the initial without anomalies to learn normal BGP routing behaviors.
node features and applied a graph isomorphism network model In the large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection based on
to automatically extract deep features of AS-level topologies multi-layer perceptron stage, the encoder from the pre-trained
for large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection. This model graph attention auto-encoder model is utilized to generate AS
employs a specialized information aggregation mechanism, embeddings of the AS-level topology graph sequence. The AS
which updates AS embeddings by summing the embeddings embedding is classified using a multi-layer perceptron to detect
of neighbor ASes and the ASes themselves, allowing for a large-scale BGP routing anomalies. For a specific AS, if an
more accurate distinction between similar AS-level topologies. anomaly is detected, the result ŷ = 1 is output. Otherwise,
Hoarau et al. [18] utilized a graph auto-encoder to learn graph ŷ = 0.
representations of AS-level topologies. The graph convolutional network is used as the encoder. The AS embeddings are B. Framework
updated by aggregating the information from neighbor ASes The main steps of the proposed framework are as follows.
490 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed detection framework. The framework consists of two stages: graph attention auto-encoder model pre-training and large-scale
BGP routing anomaly detection based on multi-layer perceptron.

 TABLE I
 Stage 1: Graph attention auto-encoder model L IST OF N OTATIONS
pre-training.
 Step 1: Construct Internet AS-level topology graphs.
Routing information tables and UPDATE messages, which do
not involve large-scale BGP routing anomalies, are collected,
and AS paths are extracted. Considering path information
may contain erroneous data, we clean it. Reserved ASes have
special purposes and sometimes appear in AS paths, which
are eliminated. There are many cases where the same ASes
are added to AS paths. Duplicate ASes are removed. Internet
Exchange Points (IXPs) are excluded because they do not
participate in the routing decision process. Operation and
maintenance personnel may have routing configuration errors,
resulting in self-loops in AS paths, so we filter them out.
On this basis, AS-level topology graphs in normal state are
constructed.
 Step 2: Obtain graph representations of AS-level topologies.
AS-level topology graphs are input into the encoder of the
constructed graph attention auto-encoder model. Stacked graph
attention layers encode AS-level topology graphs, mapping
high-dimensional graph structure data to a low-dimensional
representation space. The attention mechanism is introduced to
dynamically adjust the weights of AS embeddings within AS
neighbors, focusing on important ASes that may be involved
in large-scale BGP routing anomalies. The AS embeddings
are iteratively updated by aggregating node embeddings of
neighbor ASes, outputting graph representations of AS-level
topologies Z ∈ RS ×N . attention auto-encoder model receives graph representations
 Step 3: Reconstruct adjacency matrices of AS-level generated by the encoder, and maps them back to the original
topology graphs. The decoder of the constructed graph data space, reconstructing the adjacency matrix of the AS-level
WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION 491

topology graph. The model is trained by minimizing the
error between the real and reconstructed adjacency matrices,
updating the model weights to effectively learn graph representations of AS-level topologies under normal BGP routing
behavior.
 Stage 2: Large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection
based on multi-layer perceptron.
 Step 1: Construct a graph sequence of Internet AS-level
topologies. Routing information tables and UPDATE messages
within the detection period are collected from multiple vantage
 Fig. 3. The architecture of the encoder. The encoder computes coefficients
points deployed across the Internet. The AS paths are extracted between ASes using an attention mechanism, and iteratively updates AS
and preprocessed to remove erroneous data, including reserved embeddings.
ASes, duplicate ASes, IXPs, and self-loops. At different
timestamps, AS-level topology graphs are extracted from the
preprocessed path information, forming a sequence of graphs
Gseq = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT }, where the number of topology
graphs is T.
 Step 2: Obtain node embeddings of ASes in graph sequence
of AS-level topologies. The graph sequence is input into
the encoder of the pre-trained graph attention auto-encoder
model. During pre-training, this model has learned normal
BGP routing behavior patterns. Therefore, the weights of
 Fig. 4. The process of aggregating AS neighbors’ features based on the
the encoder are kept unchanged. The attention mechanism is graph attention layer. It consists of two parts: attention coefficient calculation
utilized to assign higher weights to important ASes, generating and new feature calculation.
AS embeddings Zn = {zn1 , zn2 , . . . , znT } ∈ RS ×T of the ASlevel topology graph sequence Gseq , where zni is the node
embedding of AS n in the AS-level topology graph Gi . matrix is used for feature enhancement. Then, the correlation
 Step 3: Detect large-scale BGP routing anomalies using a coefficient is obtained by concatenating and mapping the
multi-layer perceptron. The AS embedding Zn is flattened into features of AS itself and neighbor nodes. Next, the correlation
one-dimensional vector Ẑn . When large-scale BGP routing coefficient is normalized to compute the attention coefficient.
anomalies occur, ASes exhibit abnormal routing behavior, Finally, the features of neighboring ASes are weighted and
and the AS embeddings generated by the pre-trained graph summed according to the attention coefficients. The new AS
attention auto-encoder model will significantly differ from embedding is obtained after being processed by a nonlinear
the embeddings in normal state. Therefore, a multi-layer activation function.
perceptron is employed to classify these embeddings. The AS The features of AS i and its neighbor AS j are concatenated
embeddings are passed through the input, hidden, and output and linearly transformed using a learnable weight matrix
layers, learning complex mapping relationships between fea- W(k ) . After performing the self-attention operation on ASes,
 (k )
tures. This enables the detection of large-scale BGP routing the correlation coefficient eij between the two ASes is
anomalies, with the output of final detection results ŷ. obtained, as shown in Equation (1),
  T
  
 (k ) (k −1) (k −1)
 eij = LeakyReLU a(k ) W(k ) zi ||W(k ) zj (1)
C. Graph Attention Auto-Encoder Model Pre-training T
 The proposed method learns from a large amount of unla- where a(k ) is a learnable weight vector of the k th encoder
 (k −1)
beled BGP data without anomalies, capturing normal routing layer, and zi is the node embedding of AS i output from
 (0)
behavior patterns. The graph attention auto-encoder model the (k − 1) encoder layer. zi = xi denotes the initial node
 th
consists of an encoder and a decoder. The architecture of the feature.
encoder and decoder, as well as the loss function, are described It is necessary to use the same scale when comparing the
as follows. correlation coefficients between ASes. Therefore, the correla-
 1) Encoder Architecture: The encoder comprises two tion coefficient is normalized using the Softmax function, as
graph attention layers, as shown in Fig. 3. The first graph shown in Equation (2). The complete method for calculating
attention layer transforms initial AS features into AS embed- attention coefficients is shown in Equation (3).
dings that contain network structure information. The second  
 (k )
  exp eij
graph attention layer updates AS embeddings and learns more (k ) (k )
 αij = Softmax eij =    (2)
 (k )
complex, deeper features. ReLU is used as the activation l∈Ni exp eil
    
function between two neural network layers. T
 exp LeakyReLU a(k ) W(k ) zi
 (k −1) (k −1)
 ||W(k ) zj
 (k )
 The process of aggregating AS neighbors’ features based αij =     
 (k )T W(k ) z (k −1) ||W(k ) z (k −1)
on the graph attention layer is shown in Fig. 4. First, since the l∈Ni exp LeakyReLU a i l

dimension of initial node features is small, a learnable weight (3)
492 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 Fig. 6. The architecture of the multi-layer perceptron model. The model
 consists of input, hidden, and output layers, each layer fully connected to the
 next. The activation function of hidden layers is ReLU, while the activation
 function of the output layer is Softmax.

Fig. 5. Illustration of the multi-head attention mechanism (H = 4).
AS1 updates its node embedding within neighbor ASes using the multi- difference between the real adjacency matrix and reconstructed
head attention mechanism, where different colors represent different attention adjacency matrix, as expressed in Equation (7),
heads.
 1 
 N N  
 LGATE = − Aij log Âij
 Ep
 The new node embedding of AS i is computed using the i=1 j =1
learned attention coefficients. The AS embedding output by 1  
 N N
   
the k th graph attention layer in the encoder is shown in − 1 − Aij log 1 − Âij (7)
 En
Equation (4). The graph representation of AS-level topology i=1 j =1
 (k ) (k ) (k )
is denoted as Z (k ) = {z1 , z2 , . . . , zN }, where, Ep represents the number of positive edges in AS-
 N N
   level topology, Ep = j =1 Aij , and En represents
  (k −1)
 i=1
 zi
 (k )
 =
 (k )
 αij σ W(k ) zj (4) the number of negative edges in AS-level topology, En =
 N N
 j ∈Ni i=1 j =1 (1 − Aij ).

where σ denotes a nonlinear activation function. D. Large-Scale BGP Routing Anomaly Detection Based on
 The multi-head attention mechanism refers to the use of Multi-Layer Perceptron
H groups of mutually independent attention heads, where the The pre-trained graph attention auto-encoder model has
node embeddings output by each attention head are either learned graph representations of AS-level topologies without
concatenated or averaged to obtain final node embedding, as large-scale anomalies. The AS-level topology graph sequence
shown in Fig. 5. The multi-head attention mechanism enables is input into the encoder of the pre-trained model to generate
the graph attention layer to capture richer network information AS embeddings. Since there is a significant difference between
and reduce random noise interference. the embeddings of normal ASes and those with anomalies,
 The graph attention layer constructed in this paper computes a classifier is utilized to detect large-scale BGP routing
multiple independent attention heads simultaneously, thereby anomalies. The multi-layer perceptron [16], [18] can better
enhancing the representational capacity of the model. The classify AS embeddings that contain nonlinear relationships
output AS embeddings are averaged, as shown in Equation (5). through a multi-layer neural network structure. Therefore,
 the multi-layer perceptron is selected as the classifier. The
 1   (k ,h)  (k ,h) (k −1) 
 H
 (k ) architecture of the constructed multi-layer perceptron and the
 zi = αij σ W zj (5)
 H loss function are described as follows.
 h=1 j ∈Ni
 1) Multi-Layer Perceptron Architecture: The architecture
 2) Decoder Architecture: Since the graph representation of of the multi-layer perceptron model constructed in this paper
AS-level topology already contains node attributes of ASes is shown in Fig. 6. The AS embedding is flattened into a
and network structural information, an inner product decoder one-dimensional vector and passed through the input layer to
is employed to reconstruct the adjacency matrix. This approach hidden layers. Each neuron in hidden layers performs weight
is simple and efficient, with the computation process given in and bias operations, as shown in Equation (8), followed by
Equation (6), a nonlinear transformation using an activation function. The
 output is passed to the next hidden layer or the output layer,
   which generates the prediction probabilities of the normal and
 Â = σ Z Z T (6)
 abnormal classes. The class with the highest probability is
 selected as the final detection result, as shown in Equation (9),
where, σ represents the Sigmoid activation function.
 3) Loss Function: The training objective of the graph (l)
 
 s
 (l−1) (l−1) (l−1)
 hi = wij hj + bi (8)
attention auto-encoder model is to minimize the reconstruction
 j =1
error of the adjacency matrix. In this paper, binary crossŷ = arg max ŷk (9)
entropy [18] is used as the loss function to measure the k
WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION 493

 (l) (l−1) TABLE II
where hi represents the hidden layer output, wij is the T HE D EGREE AND ASR ANK OF AS ES T HAT T RIGGER L ARGE -S CALE
 (l−1) BGP ROUTING A NOMALIES
weight connecting different neurons, and bi is the bias
term.
 2) Loss Function: The binary cross-entropy is adopted as
the loss function, as shown in Equation (10), to compute
the error between the anomaly detection result and the true
class. The error is backpropagated from the output layer to
hidden layers to update model parameters, including weights
and biases,

 1 
 N
 LMLP = − [yi log(ŷi ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − ŷi )] (10)
 N
 i=1
where N denotes the number of samples, yi represents the
true class of the sample, and ŷi refers to the large-scale BGP matrix Â from the graph representation of AS-level topolrouting anomaly detection result output by the multi-layer ogy. The graph attention auto-encoder model learns a graph
perceptron model. representation that contains rich information by minimizing
 the error between the true and reconstructed adjacency matri-
E. Effectiveness Analysis ces, thereby more accurately capturing the state of AS-level
 We evaluate the proposed method’s effectiveness from the topology.
following two aspects: the effectiveness of obtaining AS Overall, it can be concluded that obtaining AS embeddings
embeddings based on a graph attention auto-encoder and the based on a graph attention auto-encoder is effective.
effectiveness of learning normal BGP routing behavior in an 2) Learning Normal BGP Routing Behavior in an
unsupervised manner. Unsupervised Manner: Machine learning-based methods con-
 1) Obtaining AS Embeddings Based on a Graph Attention sider large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection as a binary
Auto-Encoder: Existing large-scale BGP routing anomaly classification problem. The detection result ŷ ∈ {0, 1}.
detection methods based on graph representation learning Potential anomalies are detected by learning the differences
aggregate node embeddings of neighbor ASes using averaging between the AS embeddings under normal conditions and
or summing techniques. However, Comarela and Crovella [19] those during large-scale BGP routing anomalies. Existing
analyzed a large number of historical BGP data and found methods typically rely on supervised learning to learn BGP
that ASes triggering large-scale BGP routing anomalies are routing behaviors, requiring labeled anomaly data. However,
typically those with larger network scales and significant BGP anomaly data is insufficient, and the accuracy of labeled
positions in the network. We collect all routing information anomaly data cannot be guaranteed. Obtaining a large and
tables [44], [45], [46] from December 1, 2024, to extract AS accurate labeled dataset of BGP anomaly events is challenging,
paths. We preprocess the path information and then construct which impacts the effectiveness of large-scale BGP routing
the Internet AS-level topology graph to calculate the degrees anomaly detection.
of ASes. The degree and ASRank1 (ranked by the number We mine a large amount of unlabeled normal BGP data
of direct and indirect customers) of the ASes that trigger using a graph attention auto-encoder. The model is pre-trained
large-scale BGP routing anomalies are shown in Tab. II. in an unsupervised manner to learn normal BGP routing
AS174, AS12389, and other ASes exhibit large degrees and behaviors. When large-scale BGP routing anomalies occur
rank highly in ASRank. In contrast, the average degree of in the Internet, ASes exhibit anomalous routing behaviors,
the topology is 5.53. This suggests that existing methods, with significant changes in their connection relationships with
which aggregate AS neighbor information indiscriminately to other ASes. The pre-trained graph attention auto-encoder
obtain AS embeddings, involve many non-important or even model cannot accurately reconstruct such anomalous AS-level
irrelevant neighbor ASes, affecting the effectiveness of large- topologies, and the output AS embeddings show significant
scale BGP routing anomaly detection. differences from the embeddings of normal AS-level topolo-
 We introduce an attention mechanism into graph auto- gies. As shown in Fig. 7, for different large-scale BGP routing
encoder, learning AS embeddings using a graph attention anomaly events, the reconstruction error for normal AS-level
auto-encoder. The proposed graph attention auto-encoder con- topologies is small and remains stable, while the reconstruction
sists of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder computes error for abnormal AS-level topologies is large and fluctuates
attention coefficients α between each AS and its neighbor significantly.
nodes based on the scale and network structure of ASes, Overall, it can be concluded that learning normal BGP
assigning higher attention to important ASes that are more routing behavior in an unsupervised manner is effective.
likely to cause large-scale BGP routing anomalies. The
encoder outputs a low-dimensional graph representation of
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
the AS-level topology. The decoder reconstructs the adjacency
 To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
 1 https://asrank.caida.org/ conduct detection experiments on a dataset consisting of four
494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE III
 E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Fig. 7. Comparison of reconstruction errors between AS-level topologies with and without anomalies. During anomalies, ASes exhibit abnormal routing
behaviors. The pre-trained model fails to accurately learn such AS embeddings, and the reconstruction error of the AS-level topology increases rapidly and
becomes unstable.

 TABLE IV
large-scale BGP routing anomaly events. The experiments L ARGE -S CALE BGP ROUTING A NOMALY E VENTS
were executed on a workstation equipped with an Intel Xeon
Gold 6248 CPU, 256 GB RAM, and NVIDIA RTX 4090.
All methods were implemented with Pytorch geometric library
and scikit-learn library. The proposed method is compared
with existing typical detection methods, and its superiority is
analyzed.

A. Experimental Settings
 The experimental settings in this paper are shown in containing 3,038,314 routing announcement records. The AS
Tab. III, including the dataset, parameter settings, comparative paths are extracted to construct AS-level topology graphs,
methods, and evaluation metrics. which are used as positive samples. Routing information tables
 1) Dataset: We construct the dataset using large-scale BGP and UPDATE messages are collected one day before historical
routing anomaly events (TTNet, IndoSat) adopted by existing anomaly events, containing 1,539,070 routing announcement
typical detection studies [11], [12], [16], as well as recent records. We manually check this routing data based on three
large-scale BGP routing anomaly events (Rostelecom, India). authoritative sources, including Oracle blogs,4 BGPStream,5
The detailed information of anomaly events is shown in and BGPMon.6 During these periods, no large-scale BGP
Tab. IV. routing anomalies are reported. Therefore, we extract AS
 Existing studies widely utilize publicly available BGP data path information to construct AS-level topology graphs, which
to analyze anomaly events. The BGP data collection projects, are used as negative samples. There are 8 samples, with a
including RouteViews2 and RIPE RIS,3 deploy route collectors ratio of positive to negative samples of 1:1. For different
around the world to obtain real-time BGP data. We utilize the samples, the total duration of BGP data collection is 1 hour.
BML tool [47] to automatically collect routing information To balance the detection accuracy and inference time, we
tables and UPDATE messages about historical anomaly events,
 4 https://blogs.oracle.com/
 2 https://www.routeviews.org/routeviews/ 5 https://bgpstream.caida.org/
 3 https://www.ripe.net/ris/ 6 https://www.bgpmon.net/
WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION 495

 TABLE V
 R ESULTS OF L ARGE -S CALE BGP ROUTING A NOMALY D ETECTION

extract AS-level topology graphs with a two-minute interval. The proposed method and existing typical detection meth-
Each sample consists of 30 AS-level topology graphs, G = ods are used to detect large-scale BGP routing anomaly
{G1 , G2 , . . . , G30 }. events. The experimental results are shown in Tab. V. The
 2) Parameter Settings: The model performance is evalu- best result for each evaluation metric is highlighted in
ated using leave-one-out cross-validation. One anomaly event bold and underlined. The confusion matrix is shown in
from the dataset is used as the test set, while the remaining Fig. 8. For different large-scale BGP routing anomaly events,
anomaly events serve as the training set. This process is the proposed method achieves average values of accuracy,
repeated, with each anomaly event used as the test set. The precision, recall, F1 score, and FPR of 97.3%, 98.0%, 96.5%,
final performance evaluation is the average of experimental 97.2%, and 2.0%, respectively, outperforming all existing
results across all test sets. To minimize the impact of ran- typical detection methods. The proposed method achieves
domness, we repeated the experiment 50 times. Grid search the lowest FPR, indicating that it can effectively reduce
is employed to tune model hyperparameters. The optimal false alarms while maintaining high detection accuracy. The
parameters for the Graph Attention Auto-Encoder (GATE) experimental results show that the proposed method is effecmodel are a learning rate of 0.001, batch size of 16, attention tive. Utilizing a graph attention auto-encoder can generate
heads of 4, node embedding dimension of 16, and training AS embeddings with richer information, thereby enhancepochs of 100. The optimal parameters for the Multi-layer ing the detection performance of large-scale BGP routing
Perceptron (MLP) model are a learning rate of 0.001, output anomalies.
feature dimensions of 64, 32, and 1 for the input, hidden, and However, existing typical methods perform poorly in detectoutput layers, respectively, and training epochs of 100. ing recent anomaly events, including Rostelecom and India.
 The proposed method also has misclassifications. This can
 be attributed to the continuous expansion of Internet AS-
B. Comparison of Detection Performance level topology, with a significant increase in the number
 To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, we of nodes and edges. During the TTNet anomaly event on
compare it with typical detection methods based on manual December 24, 2004, there were 18,780 ASes and 69,691
feature extraction, including BSVM [10], BLSTM [11], and edges. During the India anomaly event on April 16, 2021, the
BMLP [12], as well as typical detection methods based on number of ASes increased to 71,387 and the number of edges
graph representation learning for feature extraction, including increased to 322,593. As the network becomes increasingly
BGNN [16], BGIN [17], and BGAE [18]. complex, interference from non-important, even irrelevant
496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 8. Confusion matrix heatmap. The figure demonstrates the detection performance of different methods on multiple anomaly event datasets.

ASes makes large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection more
challenging.

C. Attention Coefficient Analysis
 We present a statistical analysis of attention coefficients
learned by the constructed graph attention auto-encoder model
and compare them with the same weights assigned to neighbor
ASes.
 The entropy of the attention coefficients is computed to
quantify their distribution, as shown in Equation (11). A lower
entropy value indicates a highly concentrated distribution of
attention coefficients, with an entropy of 0 signifying that the
attention is entirely focused on a single AS. A higher entropy
value indicates a more dispersed distribution of attention
coefficients, with the highest entropy log(Ni ) occurring in the
case of a uniform distribution,
     
 H {αij }j ∈N (i) = − αij log αij (11)
 j ∈N (i)
 Fig. 9. Comparison of AS attention coefficient entropy distributions. We
where Ni is the number of neighbor nodes of AS i. compare the entropy of attention coefficients learned by the proposed method
 For different large-scale BGP routing anomaly events, the with a uniform distribution, where the same weights are assigned to all
 neighboring ASes.
entropy distribution of attention coefficients is statistically analyzed to produce a Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)
curve, as shown in Fig. 9. The attention coefficient entropy
 ASes, as shown in Equations (12) and (13). The set of
values learned by the proposed graph attention auto-encoder
 adjacent ASes with different proportions of common neighbors
model are predominantly concentrated between 0 and 0.5, |N (v )∩N (v )|
significantly higher than those under a uniform distribution. is denoted as Eadj = {(vi , vj ) | |N (vi )∪N (vj )| ≥ τ }, and
 i j
The model exhibits a lower entropy distribution of attention the set of non-adjacent ASes is denoted as Enon–adj =
coefficients, suggesting that it focuses more on certain impor- / E }.
 {(vi , vj ) | vi = vj ∧ (vi , vj ) ∈
tant ASes, thereby improving the accuracy of large-scale BGP
 d 
  2
routing anomaly detection.  
 dE zvi , zvj = zvi − zvj 2 = zvi ,k − zvj ,k (12)
 k =1
D. Representational Capacity Evaluation
 1
 We evaluate the representational capacity of the proposed s(u, v ) =   (13)
 1 + dE z v i , z v j
method from two perspectives: proximity and hierarchy.
 1) AS Proximity: We use the similarity metric s(vi , vj ) The adjacent AS sets are constructed with common neighbor
based on Euclidean distance dE (zvi , zvj ) to evaluate the proportions more than 25%, 50%, and 75%, respectively. Five
embedding differences between adjacent and non-adjacent thousand non-adjacent ASes are randomly sampled to form the
WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION 497

 Fig. 12. Detection accuracy using different parameter combinations. The
 detection accuracy is highest when L = 2, S = 16.

 including Tier 1 Internet service providers, whose degrees are
 significantly higher than other ASes. Conversely, stub ASes
 are located at the low tier of the Internet, accessing the Internet
Fig. 10. CDF of node embedding similarity for adjacent and non-adjacent
ASes. For adjacent ASes, the proportion of common neighbors is set to 0.25,
 via core ASes or their downstream networks. To verify the
0.5, and 0.75, respectively. representational capacity of AS hierarchy, we utilize the t-SNE
 method [48] to reduce the high-dimensional AS embedding to
 two dimensions for visual analysis.
 The results of t-SNE dimensionality reduction visualization
 for different anomaly events are shown in Fig. 11. Core
 ASes (the top 10 ASes by degree), stub ASes (ASes with
 a degree of 1), and other ASes are marked with different
 colors. It can be observed that the node embeddings of core
 ASes are relatively concentrated in distribution, exhibiting
 high similarity. In contrast, the node embeddings of stub ASes
 are widely dispersed, demonstrating significant heterogeneity.
 These results indicate that the proposed method effectively
 captures the hierarchical structure inherent in the Internet ASlevel topology.

 E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
 We analyze the impact of key parameters of the graph
 attention auto-encoder on large-scale BGP routing anomaly
 detection performance.
Fig. 11. The results of dimensionality reduction visualization for different
 The key parameters of the graph attention auto-encoder
anomaly events via t-SNE. There is a significant difference in the distribution include the depth of the encoder L and the dimension of the
of node embeddings between core ASes and stub ASes. AS embedding S. The encoder takes the AS embedding as
 input and outputs the transformed embedding. The depth of
 the encoder determines the scope of information propagation.
non-adjacent set. The embedding similarity between AS pairs The AS embedding is a low-dimensional vector containing
within the adjacent and non-adjacent AS sets is calculated, and graph structural information, and its dimension influences the
the CDF of similarity is shown in Fig. 10. The experimental model’s representational capacity.
results indicate that the embedding similarity of adjacent We set L = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and S = {1, 4, 8, 16, 32}.
ASes is significantly higher than that of non-adjacent ASes. Large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection experiments are
Furthermore, as the proportion of common neighbors increases conducted using different parameter combinations. The detec-
(i.e., the topological structure becomes more similar), the tion accuracy is shown in Fig. 12. L = 2, S = 16 is the optimal
embedding similarity of adjacent ASes increases. These find- parameter combination, with a detection accuracy of 97.3%.
ings demonstrate that the proposed method effectively captures The experimental results indicate that properly increasing the
the proximity between ASes. depth of the encoder can improve detection accuracy. But
 2) AS Hierarchy: The Internet AS-level topology exhibits over-smoothing occurs when the depth of the encoder is too
a hierarchical structure. Core ASes are located at the high tier large, causing the node embeddings of different ASes to tend
of the Internet and form the backbone of global connectivity, to be the same. Conversely, if it is too large, it may include
498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION E XPERIMENT R ESULTS C OMPARISON

noise and significantly increase computational resource
consumption.

F. Ablation Studies
 To evaluate the contribution of different components of
the proposed method for large-scale BGP routing anomaly
detection, we conduct ablation experiments on the attention mechanism, MLP model, and phased training strategy
employed in the proposed method.
 Graph auto-encoder and graph attention auto-encoder are
selected to obtain AS embeddings, and these embeddings
are classified using Support Vector Machine (SVM), Fully
Connected Layer (FC), and MLP models, respectively. The Fig. 13. Ranking of node embedding differences of anomaly origin ASes.
models are trained with joint training and phase-based training The node embedding difference rankings of the anomaly origin ASes are all
 within the top 10 for different anomaly events.
strategies, respectively. The average prediction performance on
different anomaly events for the combinations of models and
 TABLE VII
training strategies is shown in Tab. VI. L IST OF P OTENTIAL A NOMALY O RIGIN AS ES
 In terms of embedding acquisition, the detection
performance of the graph attention auto-encoder outperforms
that of the graph auto-encoder. This indicates that by
introducing the attention mechanism, the model can focus
more on important ASes where large-scale BGP routing
anomalies are likely to occur, thus improving the accuracy of
anomaly detection. In terms of embedding classification, the
MLP model performs significantly better than the SVM and
FC models, capturing the complex nonlinear relationships in
AS embeddings. In terms of training strategies, the detection
accuracy is higher under the phase-based training strategy.
The unsupervised loss aims to learn the features of the
normal topology, while the supervised loss aims to distinguish
anomalous states. There is some conflict between these two We use Euclidean distance to evaluate the differences
optimization objectives, and joint training in the second stage in node embeddings of all ASes after an anomaly event
results in a decline in prediction performance. occurs. The ranking of the differences in node embeddings
 for anomaly origin ASes is shown in Fig. 13. For the TTNet
 anomaly event, the node embedding difference of the anomaly
G. Anomaly Origin AS Localization origin AS9121 consistently ranked first. For the IndoSat
 Based on the differences between the AS embeddings during anomaly event, 8 minutes after the anomaly occurred, the node
anomaly events and those in a normal network state, we embedding difference of the anomaly origin AS4761 ranked
provide a list of possible anomaly origin ASes. first, indicating that the impact of the event spread gradually,
WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION 499

 TABLE VIII
 T HE I NFERENCE T IME OF D IFFERENT D ETECTION M ETHODS

and the illegal routing went through a period of rerouting in
the network. For the Rostelecom event, the node embedding
difference of the anomaly origin AS12389 ranked within the
top ten. Since the event lasted for a short time, the anomaly
origin AS returned to normal after 10 minutes. For the India
anomaly event, the node embedding difference of the anomaly
origin AS55410 ranked within the top five.
 Although not all anomaly events exhibit the largest node
embedding differences for the anomaly origin ASes, in practical applications, the list of potential anomaly origin ASes can
be inferred based on the node embedding differences, as shown
in Tab. VII. The actual anomaly origin ASes are highlighted
in bold and underlined, and their node embedding difference
rankings are all within the top 10. This suggests that inferring
 Fig. 14. Comparison of detection performance at different times after
potential anomaly origin ASes based on node embedding dif- anomaly events occur. The detection performance gradually improves and then
ferences helps significantly narrow down the scope of anomaly tends to stabilize.
origin AS investigations, supporting anomaly traceability and
localization.
 model training and testing. The average detection performance
H. Analysis of Inference Times and Response Times under different time windows is shown in Fig. 14.
 The experimental results indicate that 4 minutes after the
 We compare the inference times of the proposed method anomaly event occurs, the accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score,
and existing typical detection methods for different large-scale and FPR are 81.3%, 87.9%, 72.5%, 79.5%, and 10.0%, respec-
BGP routing anomaly events, and we analyze the response tively, achieving preliminary anomaly detection. Subsequently,
time of the proposed method. the detection performance gradually improves. Ten minutes
 1) Inference Times: Both the proposed method and existing after the anomaly event occurs, the accuracy, precision, recall,
typical methods consider large-scale BGP routing anomaly F1 score, and FPR are 96.8%, 97.5%, 96%, 96.7%, and
detection as a binary classification problem. They use machine 2.5%, respectively, and the detection performance eventually
learning to train detection models and deploy the trained stabilizes. This demonstrates that the proposed method is
models for anomaly detection, performing the inference pro- capable of detecting large-scale BGP anomalies in a short
cess. Therefore, we compare the inference times for detecting period. In the future, we will further investigate its real-time
anomalies on raw BGP data using the trained model in detection performance in practical deployment applications.
seconds, as shown in Tab. VIII. It can be seen that the
proposed method does not provide the fastest inference time,
but it is much faster than the BMLP method. This indicates V. C ONCLUSION
that the proposed method sacrifices some time to improve To solve the problems of interference from non-important
detection accuracy. In the future, the lightweight large-scale ASes and the insufficiency of labeled anomaly data in existing
BGP routing anomaly detection method will be the focus of typical detection methods, we propose a large-scale BGP
our research. routing anomaly detection method based on a graph atten-
 2) Response Times: Additionally, we analyze the response tion auto-encoder. The proposed method pre-trains the graph
time of the proposed method, which is the time interval from attention auto-encoder model to obtain AS embeddings and
the occurrence of the anomaly to its successful detection by classifies them based on the multi-layer perceptron to achieve
the model [16]. For different anomaly events, we sequentially large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection. The experimental
collect BGP data within the time window [t0 − 30, t0 + t], results on four large-scale BGP routing anomaly event datasets
from 30 minutes before the anomaly event occurs to t minutes show that the proposed method achieves higher detection
after its occurrence. t = {2, 4, 6, . . . , 30}. This data is used for accuracy than existing typical methods. In future work, the
500 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

lightweight anomaly detection method will be the focus of [23] B. Al-Musawi, P. Branch, and G. Armitage, “BGP anomaly detection
our research. And we will continue to evaluate our method by techniques: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 1,
 pp. 377–396, 1st Quart., 2017.
running it in a live deployment. [24] Y. Xie, Z. Zhang, N. Li, and H. Gao, “LeakFocus: Catching the
 perpetrator in routing leak event,” Comput. Security, vol. 150, Mar. 2025,
 Art. no. 104300.
 R EFERENCES [25] M. Kowalski and W. Mazurczyk, “Toward the mutual routing security
 [1] R. S. Silva and L. F. M. de Moraes, “GonoGo—Assessing the confidence in wide area networks: A scoping review of current threats and
 level of distribute intrusion detection systems alarms based on BGP,” countermeasures,” Comput. Netw., vol. 230, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 109778.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 209–219, Feb. [26] J. C. Cardona, S. Vissicchio, P. Lucente, and P. Francois, “‘I can’t get
 2025. no satisfaction’: Helping autonomous systems identify their unsatisfied
 [2] S. Murphy, “BGP security vulnerabilities analysis,” IETF, RFC 4272, interdomain interests,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 13, no. 1,
 2006. pp. 43–57, Mar. 2016.
 [3] C. Hu, K. Chen, Y. Chen, B. Liu, and A. V. Vasilakos, “A measurement [27] M. Zeng, D. Li, P. Zhang, K. Xie, and X. Huang, “Federated route leak
 study on potential inter-domain routing diversity,” IEEE Trans. Netw. detection in inter-domain routing with privacy guarantee,” ACM Trans.
 Service Manag., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 268–278, Sep. 2012. Internet Technol., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2023.
 [4] J. Li et al., “RoLL +: Real-time and accurate route leak locating with [28] T. Holterbach, T. Alfroy, A. Phokeer, A. Dainotti, and C. Pelsser, “A
 AS triplet features at scale,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 6, system to detect forged-origin BGP hijacks,” in Proc. USENIX Symp.
 pp. 1–16, Dec. 2024. Netw. Syst. Design Implement., 2024, pp. 1751–1770.
 [5] P. Sermpezis et al., “ARTEMIS: Neutralizing BGP hijacking within a [29] N. Rodday, G. D. Rodosek, A. Pras, and R. van Rijswijk Deij,
 minute,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 5263–5278, Dec. “Exploring the benefit of path plausibility algorithms in BGP,” in Proc.
 2018. IEEE Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., 2024, pp. 1–10.
 [6] S. Deshpande, M. Thottan, and B. Sikdar, “An online scheme for the [30] M. Zeng, X. Huang, P. Zhang, and D. Li, “Understanding the impact of
 isolation of BGP misconfiguration errors,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service outsourcing mitigation against BGP prefix hijacking,” Comput. Netw.,
 Manag., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 78–90, Jun. 2008. vol. 202, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108650.
 [7] K. Hoarau, P. U. Tournoux, and T. Razafindralambo, “Suitability of [31] B. A. Scott, M. N. Johnstone, and P. Szewczyk, “A survey of advanced
 graph representation for BGP anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE 46th border gateway protocol attack detection techniques,” Sensors, vol. 24,
 Conf. Local Comput. Netw., 2021, pp. 305–310. no. 19, p. 6414, 2024.
 [8] M. Chen, M. Xu, Q. Li, and Y. Yang, “Measurement of large-scale BGP [32] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
 events: Definition, detection, and analysis,” Comput. Netw., vol. 110, anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
 pp. 31–45, Dec. 2016. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.
 [9] P. Francois, O. Bonaventure, B. Decraene, and P.-A. Coste, “Avoiding [33] B. Du, R. Zhao, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A spectral-spatial based local
 disruptions during maintenance operations on BGP sessions,” IEEE summation anomaly detection method for hyperspectral images,” Signal
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1–11, Dec. 2007. Process., vol. 124, pp. 115–131, Jul. 2016.
[10] N. M. Al-Rousan and L. Trajković, “Machine learning models for [34] R. Zhao, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Beyond background feature
 classification of BGP anomalies,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. High Perform. extraction: An anomaly detection algorithm inspired by slowly varying
 Switching Routing, 2012, pp. 103–108. signal analysis,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
[11] Y. Dong, Q. Li, R. O. Sinnott, Y. Jiang, and S. Xia, “ISP self-operated pp. 1757–1774, Mar. 2016.
 BGP anomaly detection based on weakly supervised learning,” in Proc. [35] R. Zhao and L. Zhang, “GSEAD: Graphical scoring estimation for
 IEEE 29th Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols, 2021, pp. 1–11. hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
[12] O. Sanchez, S. Ferlin, C. Pelsser, and R. Bush, “Comparing machine Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 725–739, Feb. 2017.
 learning algorithms for BGP anomaly detection using graph features,” [36] R. Zhao, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A robust backin Proc. 3rd ACM CoNEXT Workshop on Big Data, Mach. Learn. Artif. ground regression based score estimation algorithm for hyperspectral
 Intell. Data Commun. Netw., 2019, pp. 35–41. anomaly detection,” ISPRS J. Photogrammetry Remote Sens., vol. 122,
[13] J. Huang, M. Odiathevar, A. Valera, J. Sahni, M. Frean, and W. K. Seah, pp. 126–144, Dec. 2016.
 “Realtime BGP anomaly detection using graph centrality features,” in [37] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via
 Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl., 2024, pp. 222–233. a sparsity score estimation framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
[14] S. Khoshraftar and A. An, “A survey on graph representation learning Sens., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3208–3222, Jun. 2017.
 methods,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–55, [38] Z. Yang et al., “A multi-scale mask convolution-based blind-spot
 2024. network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
[15] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “BGP2Vec: Unveiling the latent characteristics no. 16, p. 3036, 2024.
 of autonomous systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, [39] R. Zhao, Z. Yang, X. Meng, and F. Shao, “A novel fully convolutional
 no. 4, pp. 4516–4530, Dec. 2022. auto-encoder based on dual clustering and latent feature adversarial
[16] K. Hoarau, P. U. Tournoux, and T. Razafindralambo, “BGNN: Detection consistency for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
 of BGP anomalies using graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. no. 4, p. 717, 2024.
 Comput. Commun., 2022, pp. 1–6. [40] C. Labovitz, G. R. Malan, and F. Jahanian, “Internet routing instability,”
[17] H. Latif, J. Paillissé, J. Yang, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and P. Barlet-Ros, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 515–528, Oct. 1998.
 “Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for BGP anomaly [41] S. Deshpande, M. Thottan, T. K. Ho, and B. Sikdar, “An online
 detection,” in Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Graph Neural Netw., 2022, mechanism for BGP instability detection and analysis,” IEEE Trans.
 pp. 7–12. Comput., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 1470–1484, Nov. 2009.
[18] K. Hoarau, T. Razafindralambo, and P. U. Tournoux, “Unsupervised [42] C. Zheng, L. Ji, D. Pei, J. Wang, and P. Francis, “A light-weight
 representation learning for BGP anomaly detection using graph auto- distributed scheme for detecting IP prefix hijacks in real-time,” ACM
 encoders,” ITU J. Future Evol. Technol., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 120–133, SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 277–288, 2007.
 2024. [43] N. H. Hammood, B. Al-Musawi, and A. H. Alhilali, “A survey of BGP
[19] G. Comarela and M. Crovella, “Identifying and analyzing high impact anomaly detection using machine learning techniques,” in Proc. Int.
 routing events with pathMiner,” in Proc. ACM Internet Meas. Conf., Conf. Appl. Techn. Inf. Security, 2021, pp. 109–120.
 2014, pp. 421–434. [44] Z. Jin, X. Yin, X. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, and J. Wu, “TopoScope:
[20] J. Li, V. Giotsas, Y. Wang, and S. Zhou, “BGP-multipath routing Recover AS relationships from fragmentary observations,” in Proc. ACM
 in the Internet,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 3, Internet Meas. Conf., 2020, pp. 266–280.
 pp. 2812–2826, Sep. 2022. [45] K. G. Leyba, J. J. Daymude, J.-G. Young, M. E. J. Newman, J. Rexford,
[21] N. Rodday et al., “The resource public key infrastructure (RPKI): and S. Forrest, “Cutting through the noise to infer autonomous
 A survey on measurements and future prospects,” IEEE Trans. Netw. system topology,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2022,
 Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2353–2373, Apr. 2024. pp. 1609–1618.
[22] G. He, W. Su, S. Gao, J. Yue, and S. K. Das, “ROAchain: Securing route [46] Z. Wang, F. Yuan, R. Li, M. Zhang, and X. Luo, “Hidden AS link
 origin authorization with blockchain for inter-domain routing,” IEEE prediction based on random forest feature selection and GWO-XGBoost
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1690–1705, Jun. 2021. model,” Comput. Netw., vol. 262, May 2025, Art. no. 111164.
WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION 501

[47] K. Hoarau, P. U. Tournoux, and T. Razafindralambo, “BML: An efficient Han Qiu received the Ph.D. degree from
 and versatile tool for BGP dataset collection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Information Engineering University, China, 2008,
 Commun. Workshops, 2021, pp. 1–6. where she is a Professor. Her research focuses on
[48] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J. inter-domain routing security and network security
 Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008. evaluation.

 Zekang Wang is currently pursuing the
 Ph.D. degree with the State Key Laboratory
 of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Yan Liu is a Professor with the State Key
 Computing and also with the Key Laboratory Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and
 of Cyberspace Situation Awareness of Henan Advanced Computing and also with the Key
 Province. His main research interests include Laboratory of Cyberspace Situation Awareness
 Internet measurement, network security, and network of Henan Province. Her research interests lie in
 topology analysis. cyberspace surveying and mapping.

 Xiangyang Luo is a Professor with the State
 Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and
 Fuxiang Yuan is a Lecturer with the State
 Advanced Computing and also with the Key
 Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and
 Laboratory of Cyberspace Situation Awareness of
 Advanced Computing and also with the Key
 Henan Province. He is the author or the co-author
 Laboratory of Cyberspace Situation Awareness of
 of more than 200 refereed international journals and
 Henan Province. His main research interests include
 conference papers. He has obtained the support of
 cyberspace surveying and mapping, Internet meathe National Natural Science Foundation of China
 surement, and network security.
 and the National Key Research and Development
 Program of China. His main research interests lie in
 multimedia security and cyberspace surveying and
 mapping.