3156 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Learning in Multiple Spaces: Prototypical Few-Shot
 Learning With Metric Fusion for Next-Generation
 Network Security
 Fernando Martinez-Lopez, Lesther Santana, Mohamed Rahouti , Member, IEEE,
 Abdellah Chehri , Senior Member, IEEE, Shawqi Al-Maliki, and Gwanggil Jeon , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—As next-generation communication networks struggle to detect emerging, rare, or zero-day attacks. This
increasingly rely on AI-driven automation, ensuring robust challenge is especially acute when labeled data is scarce and
and secure intrusion detection becomes critical, especially attack behaviors evolve dynamically [2], [3], [4]. This growing
under limited labeled data. In this context, we introduce gap highlights the urgent need for adaptive, data-efficient, and
Multi-Space Prototypical Learning (MSPL), a few-shot intrusion
detection framework that improves prototype-based classification resilient detection frameworks. Such frameworks must operate
by fusing complementary metric-induced spaces (Euclidean, reliably in complex, AI-augmented network environments.
Cosine, Chebyshev, and Wasserstein) via a constrained weighting Few-shot learning (FSL) has emerged as a promising solumechanism. MSPL further enhances stability through Polyak- tion to these challenges by enabling models to generalize from
averaged prototype generation and balanced episodic training minimal labeled data using meta-learning principles [5], [6],
to mitigate class imbalance across diverse attack categories. In [7]. In the context of federated and distributed AI systems,
a few-shot setting with as few as 200 training samples, MSPL
consistently outperforms single-metric baselines across three
 FSL offers a pathway to privacy-preserving and scalable
benchmarks: on CICEVSE Network2024, AUPRC improves intrusion detection. However, early applications of FSL in
from 0.3719 to 0.7324 and F1 increases from 0.4194 to 0.8502; cybersecurity have revealed persistent issues—including data
on CICIDS2017, AUPRC improves from 0.4319 to 0.4799; and imbalance, limited scalability, and poor generalization to realon CICIoV2024, AUPRC improves from 0.5881 to 0.6144. These world network conditions [8], [9]. These limitations are further
results demonstrate that multi-space metric fusion yields more exacerbated by the rise of generative AI, model inversion,
discriminative and robust representations for detecting rare and and poisoning attacks, which threaten both data integrity and
emerging attacks in intelligent network environments.
 model trustworthiness. Addressing these concerns requires
 Index Terms—Few-shot learning, network intrusion detection, a new generation of secure and trustable AI-based systems
metric-based learning, multi-space prototypical learning. that can withstand adversarial manipulation while maintaining high detection performance in dynamic network
 I. I NTRODUCTION environments.

T HE integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into nextgeneration communication networks has revolutionized
threat detection. However, it has also introduced new vul-
 Recent advancements have sought to overcome these challenges through innovative frameworks and methodologies. For
 instance, Ma et al. [10] introduced a few-shot IoT attack
nerabilities that adversaries increasingly exploit. The rapid detection framework that integrates adaptive loss weighting to
evolution of cyber threats poses a critical challenge in cyber- enhance detection performance. Similarly, hybrid and metricsecurity. Attackers now leverage sophisticated techniques to based approaches, such as those proposed by Liang et al.
compromise AI-driven systems and exploit model weaknesses [11] and Zhou et al. [12], have shown promise in detecting
[1]. While traditional network intrusion detection systems anomalies in complex environments like industrial IoT and
(NIDS) remain effective against known attack signatures, they cyber-physical systems. Despite these advancements, critical
 gaps still need to be addressed, including the inability to
 Received 4 August 2025; revised 9 January 2026; accepted 13 February robustly handle diverse attack scenarios and limited scalability
2026. Date of publication 20 February 2026; date of current version 17 March
2026. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving for real-world deployment.
it for publication was A. Khowaja. (Corresponding author: Abdellah Chehri.) We present a multi-space prototypical learning (MSPL)
 Fernando Martinez-Lopez, Lesther Santana, and Mohamed Rahouti are with framework for few-shot attack detection that leverages comthe Department of Computer and Information Science, Fordham University, plementary metric spaces - Euclidean, Cosine, Chebyshev,
New York City, NY 10458 USA (e-mail: fmartinezlopez@fordham.edu;
lsantanacarmona@fordham.edu; mrahouti@fordham.edu). and Wasserstein distances - to capture diverse attack pattern
 Abdellah Chehri is with the Department of Mathematics and Computer properties [13], [14]. Our approach extends beyond Mar-
Science, Royal Military College of Canada (RMC), Kingston, ON K7K 7B4, tinez et al.’s dual-space methodology [15] to capture attack
Canada (e-mail: chehri@rmc.ca).
 Shawqi Al-Maliki is with the Information and Computing Technology (ICT) pattern characteristic through distinct geometric and statistical
Division, College of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, perspectives. In addition to that, our framework enables the
Doha, Qatar (e-mail: shalmaliki@hbku.edu.qa). use of Polyak-averaged prototype generation and balanced
 Gwanggil Jeon is with the Department of Embedded Systems Engi- episodic training to improve detection stability and represenneering, Incheon National University, Incheon 22012, South Korea (e-mail:
gjeon@inu.ac.kr). tation across attack types.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3665647 The main contributions of this work include:
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MARTINEZ-LOPEZ et al.: LEARNING IN MULTIPLE SPACES: PROTOTYPICAL FSL WITH METRIC FUSION 3157

 • A novel multi-space integration that combines four com- well as meta-learning [26], class-incremental learning [27],
 plementary distances through a constrained weighting space-decoupled prototypes [28], and graph-based methods
 scheme, demonstrating consistent improvements over [29], [30].
 single-metric baselines. Unlike approaches that modify the embedding architecture
 • Comprehensive validation across three benchmark (e.g., space decoupling or graph structure), MSPL improves
 datasets (CICEVSE2024 [16], CICIDS2017 [17], and robustness by enriching the distance computation itself via
 CICIoV2024 [18]) demonstrating the framework’s multi-metric fusion.
 generalizability and superior performance in detecting
 both high-profile and low-profile attacks, particularly
 A. Metric-Based Learning in Cybersecurity
 excelling at identifying rare and zero-day threats with as
 few as 200 training samples. The metric space is critical in FSL for intrusion detec-
 • A balanced episodic training strategy that ensures equal tion. While traditional approaches rely on Euclidean or
 representation of attack classes through stratified sam- cosine metrics, recent studies explore advanced spaces to
 pling and controlled repetition, specifically addressing the improve performance. Xu et al. [31] apply meta-learning with
 challenge of imbalanced cybersecurity datasets. task-specific adaptations, and Tian et al. [13] use the Wasser-
 • Polyak-averaged prototype generation that maintains stein metric for spoofing detection in WiFi systems. These
 exponential moving averages of prototypes across train- works show that different metrics capture distinct notions of
 ing episodes, substantially reducing representation vari- similarity
 ability and improving convergence. Unlike such single-metric formulations, MSPL integrates
 Collectively, these contributions form a cohesive MSPL Euclidean, Cosine, Chebyshev, and Wasserstein distances conframework that is both practically deployable and theoreti- currently, allowing the decision rule to benefit from both
cally grounded for next-generation network settings. In turn, pointwise and distributional discrepancies.
tackling these challenges not only progresses the forefront In [12], a Siamese network-based approach integrates mulof few-shot intrusion detection but also lays the groundwork tiple metrics for anomaly detection in industrial environments.
for creating more resilient and adaptable cybersecurity sys- While Siamese-style designs can combine similarity cues, they
tems. The integration of complementary learning paradigms are not designed as a constrained multi-space prototype fusion
highlights the potential for future research to explore hybrid mechanism for few-shot intrusion detection. MSPL complemethodologies that extend the framework’s capabilities to ments this line of work by formalizing multi-metric fusion
multimodal datasets and real-time detection systems [10], [19]. around prototypical representations and stabilizing learning
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: across episodes.
Section II reviews related work; Section III introduces the Additionally, Miao et al. [32] proposed a Siamese prototypfoundations of multi-space few-shot attack detection; Sec- ical network (SPN) incorporating out-of-distribution detection
tion IV presents MSPL; Section V analyzes its theoretical for traffic classification. This method is particularly adept
properties; Section VI reports the experimental results; and at identifying anomalous traffic patterns that deviate signifi-
Section VII concludes the paper. cantly from known attack profiles, demonstrating the utility
 of integrating prototypical networks with robust metric-based
 evaluation mechanisms. Autoencoder-based approaches have
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 also been explored for metric-driven FSL. He et al. [33] uti-
 FSL has emerged as a powerful approach to address data lized deep autoencoders to capture rich feature representations
scarcity in network intrusion detection [5], [6], [20]. Early for malicious traffic detection. Their approach combines feawork by Chowdhury et al. [21] demonstrated the effective- ture learning with metric-based classification, achieving high
ness of deep learning for detecting common attacks, though accuracy in few-shot scenarios. Further, Vijayakanthi et al.
scalability remained a challenge. Iliyasu et al. [22] improved [14] introduced a differential metric-based methodology for
discriminative power using supervised autoencoders, partic- non-profiled side-channel analysis, primarily in cryptographic
ularly for low-profile and imbalanced attacks. Other studies contexts. While their work is focused on a different domain,
applied FSL with prototypical networks [8], FS-IDS for imbal- it provides valuable insights into designing adaptive metricanced data [9], and IoT attack detection via self-supervised learning systems that could be applied to intrusion detection.
learning and adaptive loss weighting [10]. While these methods enhance generalization, they rely on a single similarity
space, limiting expressiveness under distributional shifts. In B. Hybrid and Multi-Space Approaches
contrast, our MSPL framework fuses four complementary met- Hybrid and multi-space learning approaches have shown
rics through constrained weighting, enabling richer prototype promise in addressing the limitations of single-metric models.
comparisons under data scarcity. For instance, ProtÉdge [19] combines multiple metrics to
 Generative and retrieval-based strategies have also been improve detection accuracy in software-defined networks, and
explored. Aharon et al. proposed a GAN-inspired frame- [34] applies cross-network meta-learning for unseen malwork for API attack detection [23] and a classification- ware variants. The effectiveness of metric fusion is further
by-retrieval approach leveraging embeddings [24], both demonstrated in [15], where a dual-space prototypical network
addressing dynamic API threats. Compared to these, MSPL enhances DDoS attack detection by integrating complementary
strengthens prototype geometry by integrating multiple metric metric spaces. Compared to prior fusion efforts that typically
perspectives. Further advancements include FSL for SCADA combine a small number of metrics/spaces (e.g., dual-space
[25], industrial IoT [11], and cyber-physical systems [12], as designs), MSPL broadens the fusion to four complementary
3158 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

metrics and couples it with a constrained weighting scheme • Attack variability across feature representations: Certo maintain stable prototype-based decision boundaries. tain attacks (e.g., adversarial traffic) exhibit directional
 Further studies, such as [22] and [35], focus on combining similarity in feature space, while others (e.g., protocol
supervised and unsupervised learning techniques to improve abuse) differ in absolute magnitude.
generalization. Additionally, [36] proposes a model-agnostic • Class distribution skewness: Network intrusion datasets
framework that integrates generative models with metric-based are inherently imbalanced, with some attack types siglearning, significantly improving the detection of low-profile nificantly underrepresented. A single distance metric can
attacks. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have also been utilized overfit to dominant classes while failing to generalize to
for few-shot anomaly detection [37], demonstrating the poten- rare attack instances.
tial of graph-based metrics in capturing structural patterns. In • Data geometry and structure: Some attack types are
contrast to hybrid pipelines that expand training signals via better differentiated based on distributional discrepancies
auxiliary objectives (e.g., generative or contrastive learning), (e.g., statistical shifts), while others require pointwise
MSPL targets the metric layer directly, using multi-metric comparisons based on individual feature deviations. In
fusion and episode-level stabilization to improve few-shot fact, critical discriminative features can alternate between
robustness. localized anomalies (single-feature spikes detectable
 Qin et al. [38] developed a meta-learning-based framework through Chebyshev distance) and systemic distribution
for zero- and few-shot face anti-spoofing. Although their shifts (Wasserstein-visible pattern deformations).
focus is on biometric security, the proposed meta-model offers By introducing multiple metric spaces, we can mitigate
insights into how meta-learning can generalize across unseen the biases inherent in monolithic learning and enhance the
attack scenarios, a principle that could be extended to intrusion ability to differentiate between diverse and overlapping trafdetection systems. More efforts include FewM-HGCL [39], fic patterns across multiple threat categories. Specifically,
which employs contrastive learning on heterogeneous graphs integrating Euclidean, Cosine, Chebyshev, and Wasserstein
for malware detection, and utilizes graph contrastive learning distances enables the framework to capture local and global
for classifying network flow attacks. These approaches under- structural variations in attack data.
score the importance of leveraging diverse feature spaces and
learning paradigms to tackle the evolving landscape of cyber
 A. Complementary Roles of Multiple Metric Spaces
threats.
 Each metric space directly addresses the limitations of
C. Uniqueness of This Paper single-space learning through complementary geometric perspectives:
 This paper introduces the MSPL framework, which com-
 • Euclidean distance: Measures absolute differences
bines four complementary metric spaces, Euclidean, Cosine,
 between feature vectors, effective for attacks with clear
Chebyshev, and Wasserstein, via a constrained fusion of
 separability based on magnitude.
normalized distancesP(z-score with clipping) with simplex
 • Cosine distance: Captures angular similarity between
weights (wm ≥ 0, m wm = 1), preventing scale domi- samples, useful for detecting adversarial perturbations or
nance across metrics and yielding a well-behaved combined
 slight variations in network traffic patterns.
distance. Unlike existing single-metric or dual-metric proto-
 • Chebyshev distance: Emphasizes the largest feature
typical baselines, MSPL uses this metric-preserving fusion to
 deviation across dimensions, helping to detect localized
exploit distinct topological cues under data scarcity. MSPL
 anomalies in specific network attributes.
further incorporates two stabilizers tailored to few-shot NIDS:
 • Wasserstein distance: Compares entire statistical dis-
(i) Polyak/EMA-based prototype generation to reduce episodetributions, enabling the detection of subtle, aggregated
to-episode embedding variance, and (ii) a balanced episodic
 deviations in attack behaviors.
sampling strategy that enforces per-episode class parity (with
controlled repetition when needed). Together, these design Each metric captures a different notion of similarity
choices lead to more robust detection of both high-profile (geometry, direction, worst-case deviation, distributional shift).
and low-profile attacks, with consistent gains on rare/zero-day MSPL normalizes these distances and fuses them with
categories. learned/assigned weights to leverage their complementary
 biases within each episode. The integration of these spaces
 III. F OUNDATIONS OF M ULTI -S PACE L EARNING FOR ensures that MSPL can effectively adapt to different attack
 F EW-S HOT ATTACK D ETECTION distributions and intrusion scenarios, leading to improved
 generalization.
 Conventional metric-based FSL frameworks typically
employ Euclidean distance to quantify relationships between
samples. While this is effective in many applications, this B. The Need for a Proper Metric Space Fusion
approach imposes a fixed topological assumption on the data, While individual metric spaces offer distinct geometric
potentially overlooking critical variations in attack patterns. In perspectives, their isolated application restricts the topocontrast, cyber threats manifest in diverse ways, ranging from logical expressiveness necessary for comprehensive attack
subtle deviations in statistical distributions to structural anoma- characterization. Integrating these metrics requires addresslies in network traffic, requiring a multi-faceted approach. ing fundamental challenges in distance synthesis. First,
 Single metric-based methods, like regular prototypical net- the numerical scales across metrics exhibit significant √
works, often fail to capture the full complexity of attack heterogeneity—Euclidean distances typically scale with d
patterns due to: for d-dimensional data, while Cosine distances are bounded
MARTINEZ-LOPEZ et al.: LEARNING IN MULTIPLE SPACES: PROTOTYPICAL FSL WITH METRIC FUSION 3159

within [0, 1], and Wasserstein distances reflect distributional While traditional regularization techniques (e.g., L1 /L2
properties with domain-specific magnitudes. These discrep- penalties, dropout) mitigate overfitting, they fail to address
ancies create disproportionate gradient contributions during the systemic instability arising from support set variability.
optimization, potentially destabilizing the learning process. This requires specialized stabilization mechanisms, such as
Second, direct linear combination of distances can compromise temporal smoothing through parameter averaging and balanced
the mathematical properties that ensure consistent prototype episodic construction, that specifically target the unique chalgeneration, particularly the triangle inequality essential for lenges of learning from minimal network attack samples.
well-formed decision boundaries. Specifically, for any pair
of samples xi and xj , the fusion process must preserve the IV. M ETHODOLOGY
relationship: The source code for our MSPL implementation is
 D(xi , xj ) ≤ D(xi , xk ) + D(xk , xj ) ∀xk ∈ X , (1) available at.1
where xi , xj , and xk represent individual data samples from
the input space X . The function D(xa , xb ) denotes the fused A. Problem Formulation
distance between two samples xa and xb , calculated as a Given a dataset D = {(xi , yi )}N d
 i=1 , where xi ∈ X ⊆ R and
weighted sum of normalized distances across multiple metric yi ∈ {1, . . ., C} is a single-label (multi-class) attack category.
spaces. Each individual distance is first normalized using For notational conveniencePC we also use its one-hot encoding
z-score normalization (with clipping), P and then combined yi ∈ {0, 1}C with k=1 yi,k = 1 (mutually exclusive
using non-negative weights wm such that wm = 1, ensuring classes). Our objective is to learn a robust embedding function
that the resulting fused distance maintains essential metric fθ : X → Rm that maps traffic inputs into a representation
properties like the triangle inequality. space where multiple distance metrics collectively enhance
 Third, attack patterns demonstrate contextual metric rele- intrusion pattern detection.
vance. Some intrusions primarily manifest through direction
shifts (favoring Cosine), while others show magnitude anoma- B. FSL for Attack Detection
lies (favoring Euclidean) or localized feature deviations
(favoring Chebyshev). Although a dynamic context-dependent In operational network environments, novel attack patweighting method might offer flexibility in highlighting the terns frequently emerge with extremely limited samples,
most informative metric for each attack type, our approach particularly in zero-day scenarios where attack signatures
opts for a predetermined weighting strategy. In practice, we are initially unknown. Our framework addresses this FSL
assign fixed, even-split weights—for instance, configurations challenge through a C-way K-shot formulation, where C
such as (1, 0, 0, 0), (1/2, 1/2, 0, 0), or (0, 1/3, 1/3, represents distinct attack classes, and K denotes the minimal
1/3)—to ensure a consistent contribution from each metric number of labeled samples available per attack type. Formally,
space according to the experimental setup. for each episodic task:
 T = {(c, Sc , Qc )|c ∈ Attack Classes}
C. Stability and Generalization in Few-Shot Learning
 where Sc represents the support set containing K examples
 Network intrusion detection systems face heightened sta- of attack class c, and Qc is the query set for evaluation. The
bility challenges in few-shot learning settings compared to stratified sampling ensures the representation of rare attack
conventional applications in computer vision or natural lan- patterns:
guage processing. The fundamental issue arises from statistical
irregularity; attack distributions exhibit multimodal character- P(|Sc | ≥ Kmin ) = 1, ∀c ∈ Attack Classes
istics with long-tailed distributions across feature dimensions.
 This formulation is particularly crucial for:
Consequently, when forming prototypes from extremely limited samples (often K < 5 for rare attack types), the resulting • Zero-day attack detection with limited samples, enabling
representations demonstrate high variance, particularly for rapid response to emerging threats
zero-day attacks where emerging patterns may manifest only • Attack variant identification despite adversarial modificain specific feature subspaces [2]. tions designed to evade detection
 This prototype variance problem manifests itself in three • Balanced learning across attack types regardless of their
critical ways specific to network security: natural frequency distribution, mitigating bias toward
 common attack patterns at the expense of rare but poten-
 • Prototype instability: Minor variations in the support
 tially severe intrusions
 set composition produce drastically different prototype
 vectors, particularly for statistically heterogeneous attacks
 like DDoS or port scanning. C. Multi-Space Prototypical Framework
 • Catastrophic forgetting: Sequential learning of new Our framework extends traditional prototypical networks
 attack patterns can disrupt previously established decision through three key innovations:
 boundaries, a phenomenon exacerbated by the inherent 1) Simultaneous operation across complementary metric
 volatility of episodic sampling. spaces
 • Confidence calibration: High variance in prototype 2) Constrained metric space integration
 computation leads to miscalibrated confidence scores, 3) Polyak-averaged prototype generation
 reducing the model’s ability to differentiate between
 known attacks and genuinely novel intrusions. 1 https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Dos-Project-325F
3160 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 The framework operates across four carefully selected met- The episode construction process begins with initial dataset
ric spaces M = {E, C, Ch, W }, each capturing distinct sampling to ensure class representation:
topological properties:
 1) Distance Metrics: For an embedding fθ (x) and proto- (Xtrain , Ytrain ) = stratified sample(D, nsamples ).
type ck , we define: Episodes E = {(Si , Qi )}N
 i=1 are then constructed, where
 1) Euclidean distance (dE ) to capture global geometric each episode contains support and query sets of fixed sizes:
 relationships: dE (x, ck ) = kfθ (x) − ck k2 .
 |Sk | = Ns and |Qk | = Nq , ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , C}.
 2) Cosine distance (dC ) to measure directional similarities:
 (x)·ck
 dC (x, ck ) = 1 − kffθθ(x)kkc kk
 . To address the inherent class imbalance in attack detection,
 3) Chebyshev distance (dCh ) to identify maximum devia- we employ an adaptive sampling mechanism. For each class
 tions: dCh (x, ck ) = maxi |fθ (x)i − cki |. k with insufficient samples, we utilize controlled repetition
 4) Wasserstein distance (dW ) to capture distribution- sampling:
 level differences: dW (x, ck ) = EU ∼U (0,1) [|Fx−1 (U ) −
 Fc−1 (U )|]. Sk = sample(Dk × d(Ns + Nq )/|Dk |e, Ns + Nq ).
 k

 2) Metric Space Integration: Each distance metric under- If a class has at least Ns + Nq distinct samples, we sample
goes z-score normalization with clipping to ensure comparable support/query without replacement and ensure Sk ∩ Qk = ∅.
scales:   For low-count classes, we use controlled repetition and avoid
 dm (x) − µm overlap whenever possible; overlap may occur only when
 dˆm (x) = clip , −γ, γ ,
 max(σm , ) unavoidable.
 For a query sample x, we use the negative fused distances
where  prevents division by zero and γ controls the clipping
 as logits `k (x) = −D(x, ck ), k ∈ {1, . . ., C}. The
range. Without normalization, the raw metric with the largest
 class posterior is computed with a softmax as pθ (y = k |
magnitude (typically Wasserstein, which scales O(102 − 103 )
compared to Cosine’s [0,2] range) would dominate gradient x) = PCexp(` k (x))
 . We then optimize the multi-class crossj=1 exp(`j (x))
contributions during backpropagation, effectively collapsing entropy over the query set Q:
the multi-space fusion to single-metric behavior. X
 The integration follows a constrained weighting scheme: L=− log pθ (y | x)
 X (x,y)∈Q
 D(x, ck ) = wm · dˆm (x, ck ) C
 X X
 m∈M =− yk log pθ (y = k | x), (2)
 (x,y)∈Q k=1
subject to:
 X At inference, MSPL predicts ŷ(x) = arg maxk pθ (y = k |
 wm = 1, wm ≥ 0 ∀m ∈ M. x) (equivalently, arg mink D(x, ck )); thus, no thresholding is
 m∈M
 used in the multi-class setting.

D. Model Stabilization Through Polyak Averaging
 F. Training Procedure
 We tested Polyak averaging at the model level to improve
 The training process follows Algorithm 1, which implestability and convergence in our few-sample setting. Rather
 ments our MSPL framework. The algorithm alternates between
than averaging prototypes directly, we maintain an exponential
 episode-based training and validation phases, maintaining
moving average (EMA) of the entire model parameters θ,
 model stability through gradient clipping and early stopping
which implicitly stabilizes the prototype generation process
 mechanisms.
through a more robust embedding function fθ .
 For each training iteration, the process:
 For model parameters at training iteration t, the EMA
parameters are updated as: 1) Computes embeddings for support and query sets
 through fθ .
 (t) (t−1)
 θEMA = βθEMA + (1 − β)θ(t) , 2) Generates class prototypes from support set embeddings.
 3) Calculates and normalizes distances across all metric
where β controls the temporal decay of previous parameter spaces.
values. This averaging provides three key benefits in our few- 4) Updates model parameters through gradient descent with
shot context: (1) stabilization of the embedding function fθ clipping.
across episodes, reducing variance in prototype computation, When Polyak averaging is enabled, θEMA is updated after
(2) implicit ensembling of models along the optimization each training parameter update, and only θEMA (not θ) is used
trajectory, and (3) smoothing of the optimization landscape for validation/model selection and inference.
to avoid sharp minima that often lead to poor generalization.
 The class prototypes ck are then computed using the EMA
model during inference as ck = |S1k | (xi ,yi )∈Sk fθEMA (xi ).
 P V. T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES AND M ODEL P ROPERTIES
 Our framework operates on a collection of metric spaces
 M, where each metric m ∈ M satisfies the fundamen-
E. Episodic Learning Framework tal properties of non-negativity (dm (x, y) ≥ 0), symmetry
 Our framework implements episodic training through strat- (dm (x, y) = dm (y, x)), and triangle inequality (dm (x, z) ≤
ified sampling to handle class imbalance in network attacks. dm (x, y) + dm (y, z)). To ensure comparable scales across
MARTINEZ-LOPEZ et al.: LEARNING IN MULTIPLE SPACES: PROTOTYPICAL FSL WITH METRIC FUSION 3161

Algorithm 1 MSPL Training and Inference via Episodic Meta- these conditions and our episodic training procedure with
Learning, Combining Normalized Multi-Metric Distances, Polyak averaging, the expected error convergence is bounded
Weighted Fusion, and Polyak (EMA) Averaging. by the following:
Input: Input: Dataset D, episodes Ne , ways Nway , support
 size Ns , query size Nq , metric weights {wm }m∈M , E[kθ(T ) − θ∗ k2 ]
 Polyak decay β
 !
 1 kθ(0) − θ∗ k2 ηG2
   X
Output: Best model parameters θ∗ ≤ + · wm Lm
 T η 2
 1: Initialize model parameters θ randomly m∈M
 2: (Xtrain , Ytrain ) ← sample(D)
 3: if using Polyak averaging then This bound accounts for the contribution of each metric
 4: Initialize θEMA ← θ space through their respective weights and Lipschitz constants.
 5: end if
 6: E ← CreateEpisodes(Xtrain , Ytrain , Ne , Nway , Ns , Nq )
 7: . Per episode: sample Nway classes; draw Ns support and B. Space Complementarity
 Nq query per class. The effectiveness of our multi-space approach derives from
 8: . If |Ik | ≥ Ns +Nq : sample w/o replacement so Sk ∩Qk = the fundamental properties of metric space interactions and
 ∅; else use controlled repetition (avoid overlap if possible). their collective contribution to learning discriminative repre-
 9: for epoch = 1 to E do sentations.
10: for each (S, Q) ∈ E do 1) Metric Space Interaction Properties: For any pair of
11: Zs ← fθ (S) metrics m1 , m2 ∈ M, their interaction is characterized by:
12: Zq ← fθ (Q) Property 1 (Metric Complementarity): For any two metrics
13: {ck } ← ComputePrototypes(Zs ) m1 , m2 ∈ M, there exists a subset of points Xm1 ,m2 ⊂ X
14: for each metric m ∈ M do where:
15: dm ← ComputeDistance(Zq , {ck }, m) |dˆm (x, y) − dˆm (x, y)| ≥ m ,m
 dˆm ← NormalizeDistance(dm )
 1 2 1 2
16:
17: end for for some m1 ,m2 > 0, ensuring each metric contributes unique
 D ← m∈M wm · dˆm
 P
18: discriminative information.
19: L ← ComputeLoss(D, Q) This means that there are pairs of samples for which
20: Clip gradients and update θ using ∇θ L different metrics disagree by a nontrivial margin, so each
21: if using Polyak averaging then metric can highlight distinctions that another metric may miss.
22: θEMA ← βθEMA + (1 − β)θ Property 2 (Multi-Metric Coverage): For any embedding
23: end if fθ (x), the combined metric space ensures comprehensive
24: end for coverage:
25: Validate model and save if improved
 max dˆm (x, y) ≥ λ · dtrue (x, y),
26: end for m∈M
27: return θ ∗
 where dtrue represents the true underlying distance and λ > 0.
 In practice, at least one metric in the set provides a
different metrics, each distance undergoes z-score normaliza- sufficiently strong separation that scales with the underlying
tion with clipping, transforming raw distances into normalized notion of dissimilarity, preventing uniformly weak distances
metrics dˆm . The weighted combination of these normalized across all metrics.
 D(x, y) =
 P ˆ 2) Extensibility Theorem: The framework maintains its
metrics, defined as m∈M wm dm (x, y) under
 P theoretical guarantees when extended with additional metrics
the constraint m∈M wm = 1, wm ≥ 0, preserves metric
properties while enabling flexible contributions from each that satisfy:
space. This preservation is demonstrated through the triangle
inequality: ∀mnew ∈ Mext : ∃αm > 0s.t. dmnew (x, y) ≥ αm kx − yk
 X
 D(x, z) = wm dˆm (x, z) In the context of attack detection, metric complementarity
 m∈M provides:
 1) Attack Pattern Coverage: For attack class c and normal
 X
 ≤ wm (dˆm (x, y) + dˆm (y, z))
 m∈M
 traffic n:
 = D(x, y) + D(y, z)
 ∃m ∈ M : P(dˆm (x, cc ) < dˆm (x, cn )|y = c) ≥ 1 − δm

A. Convergence and Stability 2) Multi-Faceted Attack Characterization:
 The convergence properties of our framework are established under three key conditions: Lipschitz continuity of each characterization(x) = [dˆE (x), dˆCh (x), dˆC (x), dˆW (x)]
normalized metric dˆm with constant Lm , β-smoothness of the
combined loss, and bounded gradients k∇θ Lk ≤ G. Given capturing different aspects of attack patterns.
3162 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. Comparison of MSPL framework variants using different metric combinations (euclidean, chebyshev, cosine, and wasserstein) across three benchmark
intrusion detection datasets. The results highlight the impact of metric fusion on detection accuracy, F1-score, and AUPRC, demonstrating the advantages of
multi-space integration over single-metric baselines.

C. Multi-Space Optimization Properties traffic/attacks), CICIDS2017 [17] (traditional enterprise net-
 The optimization process in our framework maintains sev- work traffic with common attacks), and CICIoV2024 [18]
eral key properties that ensure effective learning: (in-vehicle IoV CAN-bus traffic/attacks). To rigorously eval-
 1) Distance Normalization Stability: For any metric m ∈ uate the FSL capabilities, we restricted the training to only
M, the normalized distance satisfies: 200 instances. This constrained setting mirrors real-world
 scenarios where labeled attack data is scarce. The evaluation
 kdˆm (x, y)k∞ ≤ γ, emphasizes three key metrics, balanced accuracy, validation
where γ is the clipping threshold, ensuring bounded gradients F1-score, and area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC),
during optimization. providing insights into the framework’s ability to general-
 2) Prototype Convergence: Given the bounded embeddings ize, detect rare attack types, and maintain high classification
from fθ and z-score normalized distances, the prototype con- performance across imbalanced datasets. For AUPRC in the
vergence in expectation follows: multi-class setting, we compute one-vs-rest precision-recall
 per class using the softmax score pθ (y = k | x) and report the
 (t) 1 macro-average across classes.
 E[kck − c∗k k2 ] ≤ p · σk ,
 |Sk |
where σk represents the intra-class variance and |Sk | is the A. Performance Analysis
support set size for class k. 1) Cicevse Datasets: On the CICEVSE Network2024
 dataset, the baseline approach achieved a balanced accuracy of
D. Computational Complexity 0.7210, with a validation F1-score of 0.4194 and an AUPRC
 The computational complexity of our framework for each of 0.3719 (Table I, Baseline results, and Fig. 1). The MSPL
episode is O(Ns Nq |M|). This includes: framework significantly improved these metrics, increasing the
 balanced accuracy to 0.8200, raising the validation F1-score to
 • Support set embedding computation:O(Ns )
 0.8502, and elevating the AUPRC to 0.7324 (Table I, MSPL
 • Query set distance calculations:O(Nq )
 results). Integrating tri-metric spaces, Euclidean, Chebyshev,
 • Multi-space metric computations:O(|M|)
 and Cosine, provided complementary perspectives on intrusion
 The memory complexity is bounded by O(Ns + Nq + patterns, contributing to substantial performance gains.
|M|C), where C is the number of classes. Each experiment was conducted over 40 random seeds.
 Results are reported as the mean ± 95% confidence interval
 VI. E VALUATION (CI). The CIs are based on the Student’s t-distribution with
 This section comprehensively evaluates the proposed MSPL 39 degrees of freedom (N = 40), that is, x̄ ± t0.975,39 · √s40 ,
framework, demonstrating its efficacy in few-shot network where x̄ and s denote the sample mean and the sample
intrusion detection. standard deviation, respectively.
 The experiments employed three benchmark datasets with 2) CICIDS2017 Dataset: For the CICIDS2017 dataset, the
distinct contexts to assess performance under varied traffic baseline (Regular Prototypical without Polyak) achieved a
scenarios: CICEVSE2024 [16] (EV charging-station network balanced accuracy of 0.8585, a validation F1-score of 0.6327,
MARTINEZ-LOPEZ et al.: LEARNING IN MULTIPLE SPACES: PROTOTYPICAL FSL WITH METRIC FUSION 3163

 TABLE I
FSL ATTACK D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON U NDER FSL (200 S AMPLES , 40 SEEDS ). B EST R ESULTS P ER DATASET A RE BOLDED . S HADED
 ROWS I NDICATE O UR MSPL F RAMEWORK

and an AUPRC of 0.4319 (Table I). The MSPL framework structured/regular, yielding more separable attack patterns for
improved these results by attaining a balanced accuracy of feature-based classifiers.
0.8806, F1-score of 0.6731, and AUPRC of 0.4799. The use
of a tri-metric approach, combining Euclidean, Wasserstein, B. Polyak Averaging Effectiveness
and Cosine metrics, enabled better generalization across attack The effectiveness of Polyak averaging was evaluated
types, resulting in robust and consistent improvements. This across the datasets, revealing dataset-specific impacts. For
improvement indicates higher sensitivity under CICIDS2017’s the CICEVSE datasets, Polyak averaging introduced minimal
long-tailed class distribution, i.e., fewer missed detections for variations, with performance metrics remaining stable (Table I,
low-support attack categories in the few-shot regime. Polyak rows). In the case of CICIoV2024, it contributed to
 marginal stabilization in validation metrics, reflecting modest
 3) CICIoV2024 Dataset: The CICIoV2024 dataset exhibgains in reliability. The CICEVSE dataset exhibited the most
ited strong baseline results with a balanced accuracy of 0.8804,
 significant benefits from Polyak averaging, with noticeable
F1-score of 0.7321, and AUPRC of 0.5881 (Regular Prototypstabilization and smoothing effects (Table I, Polyak rows),
ical without Polyak). The MSPL approach delivered further
 highlighting its utility in high-performing environments.
improvements, with balanced accuracy of 0.8875, F1-score
of 0.7540, and AUPRC of 0.6144. The use of a bi-metric C. Metric Space Contribution
space combining Chebyshev and Cosine metrics demonstrated
 The transition from a single-metric Euclidean baseline to
adaptability, particularly in addressing class imbalance and
 a multi-space approach underlines the importance of metric
subtle attack signatures.
 complementarity. On the CICEVSE Network2024 dataset, the
 4) Non-DL Baseline: Besides deep-learning-based tri-metric approach enhanced pattern recognition by leverapproaches, we experimented with traditional machine learn- aging distinct geometric and directional properties (Table I,
ing models. Table I shows that for CICEVSE-Network2024, Metric Space column). For CICIDS2017, the tri-metric conperformance was relatively low (Balanced Accuracy: figuration (Euclidean, Wasserstein, Cosine) yielded consistent
0.7210, F1: 0.4194, AUPRC: 0.3719), and similarly for gains across the reported metrics (Table I), including AUPRC
CICEVSE-PowerB2024 (Balanced Accuracy: 0.7329, F1: (0.4799 vs. 0.4319) and balanced accuracy (0.8806 vs.
0.5420, AUPRC: 0.4187) and CICIDS2017 (Balanced 0.8585). For CICIoV2024, the bi-metric configuration (Cheby-
Accuracy: 0.7229, F1: 0.4147, AUPRC: 0.3669). In contrast, shev, Cosine) achieved the best MSPL results on that dataset,
performance was highest in CICIoV2024 (Balanced Accuracy: improving AUPRC from 0.5881 to 0.6144 and balanced accu-
0.8955, F1: 0.8274, AUPRC: 0.7615). These results indicate racy from 0.8804 to 0.8875, indicating that the optimal metric
that traditional approaches struggled with more complex or combination can be dataset dependent.
imbalanced datasets, while performing reasonably well on
simpler ones. This gap is likely due to the higher heterogeneity D. Key Observations and Discussions
and imbalance of EV-charging traffic in CICEVSE under 1) Generalizability: The MSPL framework demonstrated
few-shot supervision, whereas CICIoV2024 traces are more robust generalization capabilities in all datasets: CICEVSE
3164 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 2. Imbalanced few-shot conditions. (left) mean precision-recall curve over four datasets show stable performance, with relatively high AUPRC on
CICEVSE network (0.78) and CICIoV (0.63). (Center) row-normalized confusion matrix on CICEVSE network data set shows significant diagonal, validating
that it can still distinguish the different types of attacks, even with few training samples. (Right) Per-class AP, sorted by test set class frequency (rare →
frequent).

Network2024, CICIDS2017, and CICIoV2024. For which an SDN/NFV controller can map to actions (drop/deny,
CICIDS2017, balanced accuracy improved from 0.8585 throttling, rerouting/steering, or SFC updates). End-to-end
to 0.8806 and AUPRC from 0.4319 to 0.4799. For CICEVSE delay can be expressed as Ldec = Lfeat + Linfer + Lctrl
Network2024, balanced accuracy rose from 0.7210 to 0.8200 (controller-dependent); closed-loop latency/throughput benchand AUPRC from 0.3719 to 0.7324. Even on the high- marking with a specific controller is left for future work.
performing CICIoV2024 dataset, MSPL achieved further
gains from 0.8804 to 0.8875 in balanced accuracy and 0.5881
to 0.6144 in AUPRC. These improvements validate the E. Class-Imbalance Resilience
framework’s ability to generalize across heterogeneous traffic
profiles. Figure 2 provides more detailed performance breakdown
 under our strict few-shot settings. PR curves (left) show
 2) FSL Adaptation: The MSPL framework excelled in
 strong detection performance across all the datasets we have
limited-sample environments, particularly on datasets with low
 benchmarked, with AUPRC up to 0.78 on CICEVSE Network.
baseline performance. In CICEVSE Network2024, AUPRC
 Importantly, the class-wise evaluation on this dataset shows
improved from 0.3719 to 0.7324, and validation F1-score
 that MSPL can learn distinguishable signatures for minority
increased from 0.4194 to 0.8502. These improvements highclasses (e.g. slowloris, AP 0.45) in the presence of high
light the power of episodic training and multi-metric fusion
 data imbalance. The heavy diagonal in the confusion matrix
in learning from sparse data and enhancing adaptation to rare
 (center) indicates that most attack types are predicted with low
attacks.
 error rates, while the lower benign class performance is more
 3) Metric Space Complementarity: Integrating multiple dislikely due to its extreme sparsity (<0.01%) on this attacktance metrics enhanced detection accuracy. In CICIDS2017, a
 heavy dataset rather than model breakdown.
tri-metric design (Euclidean, Wasserstein, Cosine) improved
AUPRC (0.4799 vs. 0.4319). In CICIoV2024, a bi-metric
approach (Chebyshev, Cosine) raised AUPRC from 0.5881 VII. C ONCLUSION
to 0.6144. In CICEVSE Network2024, a tri-metric space
(Euclidean, Chebyshev, Cosine) boosted all metrics. These We proposed Multi-Space Prototypical Learning (MSPL)
results show that diverse metrics capture distinct intrusion for few-shot attack detection, targeting emerging and rare
behaviors, enabling MSPL to model threats more effectively. intrusions under limited labeled data. By integrating comple-
 4) Per-Dataset Interpretation: The strongest practical mentary metric spaces (Euclidean, Cosine, Chebyshev, and
impact is observed on CICEVSE (EV-charging), where the Wasserstein), MSPL captures diverse geometric and distrilarge AUPRC/F1 gains suggest MSPL substantially improves butional cues, while Polyak-averaged prototype generation
the precision-recall tradeoff under severe class imbalance, improves stability and episodic training promotes balanced
enabling more reliable detection of rare attacks in the few-shot adaptation across classes and datasets. Experiments show
regime. On CICIDS2017 (enterprise traffic), improvements are consistent gains in balanced accuracy and AUPRC over strong
smaller but consistent, indicating MSPL primarily enhances baselines, and our analyses confirm the benefits of metric
robustness across diverse attack types when baseline separa- complementarity and scalability across diverse intrusion scebility is already high. On CICIoV2024 (in-vehicle CAN bus), narios. From a deployment standpoint, MSPL is lightweight
the baseline performance is strong and MSPL yields modest and episodic, making it practical to integrate into SDN/NFVadditional gains, implying better capture of subtle CAN-bus based security controllers for near real-time detection and
attack signatures without requiring additional labeled data. response. Future extensions will explore multimodal network
 5) Online SDN/NFV Integration: MSPL can run online by data (e.g., flows, logs, and host telemetry) and real-time
embedding each record x as z = fθEMA (x) and scoring fused integration with SDN/NFV platforms for online adaptation and
prototype distances D(z, ck ) to output a class/confidence, intrusion prevention.
MARTINEZ-LOPEZ et al.: LEARNING IN MULTIPLE SPACES: PROTOTYPICAL FSL WITH METRIC FUSION 3165

 R EFERENCES [20] A. Parnami and M. Lee, “Learning from few examples: A summary of
 approaches to few-shot learning,” 2022, arXiv:2203.04291.
[1] M. Al-Zewairi, S. Almajali, M. Ayyash, M. Rahouti, F. Martinez, and [21] M. M. U. Chowdhury, F. Hammond, G. Konowicz, C. Xin, H. Wu,
 N. Quadar, “Multi-stage enhanced zero trust intrusion detection system and J. Li, “A few-shot deep learning approach for improved intrusion
 for unknown attack detection in Internet of Things and traditional detection,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Annu. Ubiquitous Comput., Electron.
 networks,” ACM Trans. Privacy Secur., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1–28, Aug. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON), Oct. 2017, pp. 456–462.
 2025. [22] A. S. Iliyasu, U. A. Abdurrahman, and L. Zheng, “Few-shot net-
[2] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detec- work intrusion detection using discriminative representation learning
 tion: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198, with supervised autoencoder,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 5, p. 2351,
 pp. 175–185, Jan. 2023. Feb. 2022.
[3] W. Wei, H. Gu, W. Deng, Z. Xiao, and X. Ren, “ABL-TC: A lightweight [23] U. Aharon, R. Marbel, R. Dubin, A. Dvir, and C. Hajaj, “Few-shot API
 design for network traffic classification empowered by deep learning,” attack detection: Overcoming data scarcity with GAN-inspired learning,”
 Neurocomputing, vol. 489, pp. 333–344, Jun. 2022. 2024, arXiv:2405.11258.
[4] E. Owusu et al., “Online network DoS/DDoS detection: Sampling, [24] U. Aharon, R. Dubin, A. Dvir, and C. Hajaj, “Few-shot API attack
 change point detection, and machine learning methods,” IEEE Commun. anomaly detection in a classification-by-retrieval framework,” 2024,
 Surveys Tuts., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 2543–2580, Aug. 2025. arXiv:2405.11247.
[5] Y. Wang, Q. Yao, J. T. Kwok, and L. M. Ni, “Generalizing from a few [25] Y. Ouyang, B. Li, Q. Kong, H. Song, and T. Li, “FS-IDS: A novel fewexamples: A survey on few-shot learning,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, shot learning based intrusion detection system for SCADA networks,”
 no. 3, pp. 1–34, May 2021. in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[6] R. Duan, D. Li, Q. Tong, T. Yang, X. Liu, and X. Liu, “A survey of [26] C. Lu, X. Wang, A. Yang, Y. Liu, and Z. Dong, “A few-shotfew-shot learning: An effective method for intrusion detection,” Secur. based model-agnostic meta-learning for intrusion detection in security
 Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–10, Oct. 2021. of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24,
[7] M. Fahad Malik, A. Gul, A. Saadia, and F. M. Alserhani, “Few-shot pp. 21309–21321, Dec. 2023.
 learning with prototypical networks for improved memory forensics,” [27] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, and Y. Jia, “A few-shot class-
 IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 79397–79409, 2025. incremental learning method for network intrusion detection,” IEEE
[8] Y. Yu and N. Bian, “An intrusion detection method using few-shot Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2389–2401, Apr. 2024.
 learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 49730–49740, 2020. [28] H. Sun et al., “Space decoupled prototype learning for few-shot attack
[9] J. Yang, H. Li, S. Shao, F. Zou, and Y. Wu, “FS-IDS: A framework detection in cyber–physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 for intrusion detection based on few-shot learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 12350–12362, Oct. 2024.
 vol. 122, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 102899. [29] T. Bilot, N. El Madhoun, K. Al Agha, and A. Zouaoui, “Few edges are
[10] W. Ma, L. Ma, K. Li, and J. Guo, “Few-shot IoT attack detection based enough: Few-shot network attack detection with graph neural networks,”
 on SSDSAE and adaptive loss weighted meta residual network,” Inf. in Proc. Int. Workshop Secur., 2024, pp. 257–276.
 Fusion, vol. 98, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 101853. [30] H. Pan, Y. Fang, W. Guo, Y. Xu, and C. Wang, “Few-shot graph
[11] W. Liang, Y. Hu, X. Zhou, Y. Pan, and K. I. Wang, “Variational classification on cross-site scripting attacks detection,” Comput. Secur.,
 few-shot learning for microservice-oriented intrusion detection in dis- vol. 140, May 2024, Art. no. 103749.
 tributed industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8, [31] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 pp. 5087–5095, Aug. 2022. detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Foren-
[12] X. Zhou, W. Liang, S. Shimizu, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Siamese neural sics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
 network based few-shot learning for anomaly detection in industrial [32] G. Miao, G. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Tong, and B. Lu, “SPN: A
 cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, method of few-shot traffic classification with out-of-distribution detecpp. 5790–5798, Aug. 2021. tion based on Siamese prototypical network,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
[13] Y. Tian, N. Zheng, X. Chen, and L. Gao, “Wasserstein metric-based pp. 114403–114414, 2023.
 location spoofing attack detection in WiFi positioning systems,” Secur. [33] M. He, X. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Xi, L. Jin, and X. Wang, “Deep-feature-
 Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–12, Apr. 2021. based autoencoder network for few-shot malicious traffic detection,”
[14] G. Vijayakanthi, J. P. Mohanty, A. K. Swain, and K. Mahapatra, Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2021.
 “Differential metric based deep learning methodology for non-profiled [34] C. Rong, G. Gou, C. Hou, Z. Li, G. Xiong, and L. Guo, “UMVD-FSL:
 side channel analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Smart Electron. Syst. Unseen malware variants detection using few-shot learning,” in Proc.
 (iSES), Dec. 2021, pp. 200–203. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2021, pp. 1–8.
[15] F. Martinez et al., “Redefining DDoS attack detection using a dual-space [35] R. Kale and V. L. L. Thing, “Few-shot weakly-supervised cybersecuprototypical network-based approach,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Comput. rity anomaly detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 130, Jul. 2023, Art. no.
 Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), Jul. 2024, pp. 1–9. 103194.
[16] E. D. Buedi, A. A. Ghorbani, S. Dadkhah, and R. Ferreira, “Enhancing [36] J. He et al., “Model-agnostic generation-enhanced technology for few-
 EV charging station security using a multi-dimensional dataset: shot intrusion detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 3181–3204,
 Cicevse2024,” in Proc. ESORICS Conf., 2024, pp. 171–190. Feb. 2024.
[17] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward [37] T. T. Thein, Y. Shiraishi, and M. Morii, “Few-shot learninggenerating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic based malicious IoT traffic detection with prototypical graph neural
 characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, networks,” IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 106, no. 9, pp. 1480–1489,
 Portugal, Jan. 2018, pp. 108–116. 2023.
[18] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches [38] Y. Qin et al., “Learning meta model for zero-and few-shot face antiagainst DoS and spoofing attack in IoV CAN bus,” Internet Things, spoofing,” in Proc. Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 2020, vol. 34, no. 7,
 vol. 26, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 101209. pp. 11916–11923.
[19] A. Demirpolat, A. K. Sarica, and P. Angin, “ProtÉdge: A few-shot [39] C. Liu, B. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Zhen, X. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “FewM-HGCL:
 ensemble learning approach to software-defined networking-assisted Few-shot malware variants detection via heterogeneous graph contrastive
 edge security,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 32, no. 6, learning,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Oct.
 p. 4138, Jun. 2021. 25, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3216902.