IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026 2465

 Lightweight Multimedia Anomaly and Integrity
 Detection for Consumer IoT Using
 Knowledge Distillation
 Fasee Ullah , Hamid Asmat, Arfat Ahmad Khan , Muhammad Ismail Mohmand , Farman Ali ,
 Rayan Hamza Alsisi , Theyazn H. H. Aldhyani , and Daehan Kwak , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— The rapid growth of Consumer Internet of Things I. I NTRODUCTION
(CIoT) devices has significantly increased real-time multimedia
data exchange, heightening vulnerability to attacks targeting
audio, video, and image content. This paper introduces
Multimedia Anomaly and Integrity Detection using Knowledge
Distillation (MAID-KD), a lightweight multi-task framework that
 T HE rapid expansion of Consumer Internet of Things
 (CIoT) ecosystems, including smart surveillance cameras,
 voice-enabled home assistants, health-monitoring wearables,
performs anomaly detection and integrity verification in CIoT and connected vehicles, has dramatically increased the volume
environments. MAID-KD leverages a Transformer-based teacher of multimedia data (e.g., video, audio, and images) transmitted
model to extract rich spatio-temporal features from multimedia across heterogeneous consumer devices. These multimedia
streams, while a compact CNN-LSTM student model optimized
for edge deployment is trained through feature alignment,
 streams carry high-value information and are susceptible
soft-target distillation, and variational projection. Experimental to attacks such as video feed tampering, deepfake audio
results demonstrate that MAID-KD achieves superior accuracy injection, data exfiltration, and unauthorized redistribution,
and F1-score compared to state-of-the-art baselines, while posing severe threats to user privacy and trust. As the
reducing model size and inference latency by over 60%. These adoption of CIoT devices accelerates [1], [2], ensuring robust
results highlight MAID-KD’s ability to deliver scalable, privacypreserving, and multimedia-aware security for CIoT devices such
 security and privacy has become increasingly challenging.
as smart surveillance systems, health-monitoring wearables, and These devices operate under strict computational and energy
connected home platforms. constraints, making them attractive targets for sophisticated
 Index Terms— Multimedia security, malware detection, intru- attacks, including multimedia-specific exploits such as frame
sion detection system (IDS), CIoT, edge computing, knowledge injection, video/audio stream tampering, and steganographydistillation, CNN-LSTM hybrid, privacy preservation, real-time based data hiding [3], [4].
threat detection. Lightweight anomaly detection solutions have emerged as a
 primary defense for CIoT environments; however, deploying
 conventional deep learning models at the edge remains
 Received 5 August 2025; revised 18 October 2025; accepted 6 December challenging due to energy, latency, and memory limitations [5].
2025. Date of publication 15 December 2025; date of current version 25 March This is particularly critical for multimedia applications such
2026. This work was supported in part by the Deanship of Scientific Research,
Vice Presidency for Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, King Faisal as live surveillance and smart home monitoring, where cloud
University, Saudi Arabia, under Grant KFU253713; and in part by the offloading is often infeasible. Complementary multimedia
“Regional Innovation System and Education (RISE)” through the Seoul RISE security mechanisms such as encrypted data transmission,
Center, funded by the Ministry of Education (MOE) and Seoul Metropolitan
Government under Grant 2025-RISE-01-018-01. (Corresponding authors: steganography detection, and watermarking-based integrity
Farman Ali; Daehan Kwak.) checks have been proposed, but integrating these into edge
 Fasee Ullah is with the Department of Computing, Universiti frameworks is still in its early stages [4], [6]. Multimedia
Teknologi PETRONAS, Seri Iskandar 32610, Malaysia (e-mail:
fasee.ullah@utp.edu.my). streams often contain sensitive user information and can
 Hamid Asmat is with the Department of Computer Science, University of be manipulated to bypass authentication systems or mislead
Haripur, Haripur 22620, Pakistan (e-mail: hamid@uoh.edu.pk). automated surveillance. Existing solutions, like watermarking
 Arfat Ahmad Khan is with the Department of Computer Science, Khon
Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand (e-mail: arfatkhan@kku.ac.th). and multimedia encryption, provide partial protections but
 Muhammad Ismail Mohmand is with the Department of Computer Engineer- remain difficult to integrate with lightweight anomaly
ing and the Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Istanbul Atlas Uni- detection models. This gap highlights the need for unified
versity, 34408 Istanbul, Türkiye (e-mail: muhammad.mohmand@atlas.edu.tr).
 Farman Ali is with the Department of Applied AI, Sungkyunkwan approaches that secure both the device and its multimedia
University, Seoul 03063, South Korea (e-mail: farman0977@skku.edu). content without sacrificing real-time performance.
 Rayan Hamza Alsisi is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Knowledge Distillation (KD) has become a promising
Islamic University of Madinah, Madinah 41411, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
ralsisi@iu.edu.sa). strategy to enable lightweight models by transferring
 Theyazn H. H. Aldhyani is with the Applied College, King Faisal University, knowledge from large teacher networks to compact student
Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: taldhyani@kfu.edu.sa). models [7]. In the context of CIoT, KD enables on-
 Daehan Kwak is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Kean University, Union, NJ 07083 USA (e-mail: dkwak@kean.edu). device anomaly detection and multimedia integrity verification
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3644297 without transmitting raw multimedia data externally, thereby
 1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

reducing privacy risks. However, hybrid frameworks that • A detailed evaluation of accuracy, adaptability, multimecombine KD with multimedia encryption or federated learning dia data integrity, and privacy across multiple multimedia
still face issues like task interference and model inversion attack scenarios.
attacks, particularly when teacher models are trained on The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
multiple detection objectives simultaneously [8], [9], [10]. Section II reviews related work on the use of KD in secure
 A key limitation of existing approaches is the isolated IoT settings. Section III details the proposed MAID-KD
treatment of anomaly detection and integrity verification framework and its underlying algorithms. Section IV presents
as separate tasks, which hinders their ability to detect the experimental setup. Results are explained in Section V.
blended or multi-stage attacks where abnormal data patterns Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
overlap with tampered multimedia content [11]. Single-task
solutions also struggle to adapt across heterogeneous consumer II. R ELATED W ORK
platforms where multimedia data types and attack surfaces Security and privacy in Consumer Internet of Things
vary significantly [12]. These gaps underscore the need for (CIoT) environments have become increasingly critical with
a unified, multi-task approach tailored for consumer-grade the rise of multimedia data exchange through devices such
devices that also protects multimedia data integrity. as wearables, smart appliances, and connected vehicles.
 The core research problem addressed in this work Early studies emphasized securing multimedia content in
is how to design a lightweight and privacy-preserving consumer electronics using cryptographic and biometric
framework capable of jointly performing multimedia anomaly mechanisms [15], [16]. These foundational methods focused
detection and integrity verification under the computational on protecting audio-visual data streams and consumer privacy
and bandwidth constraints of consumer IoT environments. across home networks. More recently, multimedia-centric
To address these challenges, this study proposes a Multimedia threats, such as data tampering and covert exfiltration, have
Anomaly and Integrity Detection using Knowledge Distillation emerged in CIoT environments, motivating stronger protection
(MAID-KD) framework that consolidates anomaly detection for user identity, behavior, and content integrity [17], [18].
and multimedia integrity verification in a single student Recent work has proposed specialized tampering detection
model optimized for CIoT devices. The teacher model frameworks for images and video using multiscale attention
leverages a Transformer-based encoder to capture long-range and spatio-temporal analysis [19], [20], as well as deep
dependencies from multimedia-rich data, while the student learning-based methods for audio deepfake detection [21].
employs a CNN-LSTM hybrid architecture to preserve spatio- These advances are essential to preserve the authenticity of
temporal representations in a lightweight form. Knowledge multimedia data generated by CIoT devices.
transfer is performed using teacher-guided feature alignment Blockchain and federated learning (FL) are increasingly
and probabilistic variational projection, with a multi-objective adopted for distributed multimedia security. For instance,
optimization function balancing classification, reconstruction, redactable blockchain frameworks, such as TMRB, address
and distillation losses. This design enables MAID-KD to immutability and content redaction needs in multimedia
provide strong detection accuracy while maintaining minimal scenarios [22]. FL integrated with blockchain has been shown
computational and memory overhead, making it suitable to improve trust and privacy by eliminating the need for central
for real-time deployments in multimedia-intensive CIoT data aggregation [23], [24]. Similarly, Zero-Trust Architecture
environments such as smart surveillance systems, connected (ZTA) approaches leverage AI-driven profiling to verify
home cameras, and health-monitoring wearables. interactions in real-time [14], [25], offering a robust framework
 The proposed MAID-KD framework focuses on for hostile environments where multimedia traffic must
multimedia-centric security, unlike existing KD-based be authenticated continuously. Complementary watermarking
IoT solutions such as FLEKD [13], and DTKD-IDS [14], techniques, such as secure watermarking schemes tailored for
which primarily rely on network traffic data. MAID-KD IoT devices [26], [27], have also been employed to protect
introduces a unified multi-task distillation system that ownership and detect content manipulation in multimedia
performs both anomaly detection and multimedia integrity streams.
verification within a single lightweight model. It further KD is widely explored for enabling lightweight edge
incorporates a variational knowledge projection module to models capable of processing multimedia data streams locally.
handle uncertainty in multimedia data, enabling the student Multi-branch KD frameworks have been shown to perform
model to detect blended or tampered content efficiently under intrusion detection and malware analysis without cloud
resource constraints. These design choices distinguish MAID- dependency [28], [29]. Unified KD-based models capable
KD as a novel, real-time solution tailored for consumer IoT of handling multiple detection objectives simultaneously are
environments. of particular relevance to multimedia-driven CIoT, where
 The contributions of this work are as follows: blended attacks are common. Recent reviews also emphasize
 • A unified anomaly detection and multimedia integrity the importance of maintaining content integrity during KD
 verification framework using task-aware knowledge training for regulatory and consumer trust [30].
 distillation. Agent-based and situationally aware Intrusion Detection
 • A training pipeline that prevents raw multimedia Systems (IDS) have also emerged as promising solutions
 data exposure while enabling flexible deployment on for multimedia environments. For example, privacy-preserving
 consumer hardware. agent IDSs adapt dynamically using contextual multimedia
ULLAH et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT MULTIMEDIA ANOMALY AND INTEGRITY DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT 2467

 Fig. 2. Deployment Phase: The trained student model (MAID-KD) performs
 real-time threat predictions using live IoT data.

 processed by a Transformer-based teacher model to learn
 rich spatio-temporal and cross-modal representations, while a
 lightweight CNN+LSTM student model is trained in parallel
 on smaller data batches. Knowledge is distilled through
 high-level features and soft targets, limiting the student’s
 exposure to raw data and reducing privacy risks. In the
 Deployment Phase, the trained student runs locally on CIoT
 edge devices to analyze live multimedia streams, performing
 anomaly detection and anomaly type classification without
 teacher support or cloud dependency. This approach minimizes
 computational and bandwidth overhead while maintaining
 multimedia data confidentiality and integrity across CIoT
Fig. 1. Training Phase: The teacher model guides the student using environments.
knowledge distillation, while a multi-objective loss function optimizes the
student parameters.
 B. System Model
 We consider a distributed CIoT network comprising N edge
features [31], while deep feature extraction and compression nodes, D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , d N }, where each node processes
have been proposed to reduce resource consumption on edge multimedia data (e.g., video, audio, telemetry) under strict
devices [32], [33], [34]. Additionally, cryptographic com- resource constraints. The framework combines a high-capacity
pression and watermarking techniques have been integrated teacher model Tφ , trained offline on large-scale CIoT datasets,
with GANs and hybrid storage schemes to enable secure with a lightweight student model Sθ deployed on edge devices.
multimedia model transmission across CIoT networks [35], The objective is to transfer knowledge from Tφ to Sθ for
[36]. These advancements collectively highlight the evolving anomaly detection and anomaly type classification, while
nature of multimedia security challenges and the growing maintaining user data privacy.
focus on integrating lightweight, multi-task learning models Each node di observes input-label pairs
for real-time protection in CIoT applications. ( j) ( j)
 Existing methods are useful in certain domains. However, Zi = {(xi , yi )}nj=1
 i
 , (1)
they are insufficient for real-time multimedia security in CIoT. ( j)
 where xi ∈ Rd represents multimedia feature vectors and
Federated learning and blockchain provides high latency and ( j)
communication overhead, which makes them unsuitable for yi ∈ C denotes the corresponding labels.
low-power edge devices. The main difference between KD- The global task set is defined as
based intrusion detection systems and the watermarking and T = {Tanom , Ttype }, (2)
encryption techniques is that network traffic is the primary
target of intrusion detection, and the integrity of multimedia covering both anomaly detection and anomaly type classificontent is not addressed, while watermarking and encryption cation. By distilling Tφ ’s knowledge into Sθ across T in (2),
tools guarantee authenticity but do not detect anomalies in the the framework provides robust protection against multimediatraffic. Such limitations support the importance of having a driven blended attacks in CIoT environments.
single, lightweight, and privacy-aware solution that combines
anomaly detection and multimedia integrity checking of C. Teacher-Guided Feature Transformation
resource-constrained CIoT devices.
 Let the input x ∈ Rd represent multimedia data such as
 video frames, audio streams, and telemetry packets commonly
 III. T HE P ROPOSED M ODEL
 found in CIoT environments. These heterogeneous inputs are
A. Overview of the Proposed MAID-KD Framework drawn from a distribution X and often include blended attack
 The MAID-KD framework enhances multimedia security patterns, making robust representation learning essential.
in CIoT devices by enabling on-device threat detection under To address this, we define the teacher model Tφ : Rd → HT
resource constraints. As shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, MAID- and the student model Sθ : Rd → H S as parameterized
KD has two phases. In the Training Phase, heterogeneous mappings that transform the input x into their respective latent
multimedia IoT data (video, audio, images, telemetry) are spaces HT and H S .
2468 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 The teacher generates a high-level embedding of the input Algorithm 1 Teacher-Guided Feature Transformation
using a linear projection followed by a non-linear activation, Result: Updated student parameters ω S
as shown in Equation (3) Input: Multimedia input set X = {xi }i=1 N , temperature

 τ , learning rate η, teacher weights ωT , initial
 FT (x) = σ (WT x + bT ), (3) student weights ω S , penalties λ, α
 Output: Optimized student parameters ω S
where WT ∈ Rk×d and bT ∈ Rk denote the trainable weights Initialize student weights ω S := {M, c} ;
and biases. Analogously, the student performs a similar // Projection layer parameters
transformation into its latent space shown in Equation (4) Set total loss L := 0 ; // Initialize loss
 accumulator
 F S (x) = σ (W S x + b S ), (4) foreach sample xi in X do
 Compute teacher embedding: zT := σ (Axi + a) ;
where W S ∈ Rk×d and b S ∈ Rk are the student parameters. // Rich multimedia features
 To ensure the student embedding space remains consistent Compute student embedding: z S := σ (Mxi + c) ;
with the teacher, we minimize the squared ℓ2 -norm distance // Lightweight representation
between FT (x) and F S (x) as defined in Equation (5) for j := 1 to k do
 Feature alignment error: δ j := (z T, j − z S, j )2
 1F = ∥FT (x) − F S (x)∥22 . (5) Accumulate feature loss: L := L + δ j
 end
This objective is averaged across the data distribution, as in
 Regularization: R := p,q M 2pq
 P
Equation (6), to obtain the empirical alignment loss
 Teacher and student logits:
 ℓT := T (xi ), ℓ S := S(xi ) Softened probabilities:
 J1 (θ ) = Ex∼X [1F ] . (6)
 πT := softmax(ℓT /τ ), Pπ S := softmax(ℓ S /τ )
 π
 KL divergence: D := c πT,c log πT,c
To further improve generalization, a regularization term based S,c

on the Frobenius norm of the student’s weight matrix is added Total loss: L := λ · L + α · R + τ 2 · D
 end
to Equation (7)
 for t := 1 to Tmax do
 Gradient: ∇ω S := ∇ω S L ;
 R1 (θ ) = λ1 · J1 (θ ) + α∥W S ∥2F , (7)
 // Backpropagation
 Parameter update: ω S := ω S − η · ∇ω S
where λ1 balances the alignment term and α penalizes large end
weights. return ω S ; // Final trained student
 In addition to latent feature alignment, the student also network
mimics the teacher’s output distribution using temperaturescaled softmax logits in Equations (8) and (9)

 Tφ (x)
  
 ŷT = softmax , (8) D. Variational Knowledge Projection
 τ
 
 Sθ (x)
  In multimedia-centric CIoT environments, data streams such
 ŷ S = softmax , (9) as video frames, audio signals, and telemetry often contain
 τ
 overlapping attack signatures. To enhance the robustness of the
where τ > 0 is the temperature parameter that softens class student model against such blended anomalies, the extracted
probabilities. The divergence between the softened outputs features are projected into a probabilistic latent subspace using
is measured using the scaled Kullback–Leibler divergence variational inference. This enables the student model to learn
Equation (10) compact multimedia-aware representations while maintaining
 uncertainty estimates for better generalization and resilience
 LKD = τ 2 · KL( ŷT ∥ ŷ S ). (10) against adversarial noise.
 We define a variational posterior distribution qθ (z|x) over
 Together, the feature alignment loss R1 (θ) from Eq. (7) and the latent variable z ∈ Rm conditioned on the input sample
the knowledge distillation loss LKD from Eq. (10) establish a x ∈ Rd . As expressed in Equation 11, this posterior is modeled
dual-objective function that enforces structural similarity in the as a multivariate Gaussian distribution
latent space and consistency at the decision level. Algorithm 1
outlines the teacher-guided feature transformation process. qθ (z|x) = N (z | µθ (x), 6θ (x)) (11)
It aligns the student’s lightweight multimedia representations
with the teacher’s richer embeddings by minimizing feature- where the mean vector µθ (x) and covariance matrix 6θ (x)
level and output-level discrepancies. The algorithm iteratively are derived from the student feature space F S (x). The mean
updates student parameters using feature alignment loss, mapping is computed as
KL-divergence on softened probabilities, and regularization,
resulting in a compact yet accurate student model. µθ (x) = Wµ F S (x) + bµ (12)
ULLAH et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT MULTIMEDIA ANOMALY AND INTEGRITY DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT 2469

where Wµ ∈ Rm×k and bµ ∈ Rm are learnable parameters. Algorithm 2 Variational Projection of Student Features
Similarly, the covariance in Equation 13 is obtained using an Result: Latent embedding z and reconstructed
exponential activation to enforce positivity multimedia-aware feature Fz
 6θ (x) = diag (exp(Wσ F S (x) + bσ )) (13) Input: Student multimedia features f (video, audio,
 telemetry), projection weights Wµ , Wσ , Wz ,
ensuring numerical stability and a valid Gaussian distribution. biases bµ , bσ , bz , iterations K
 Latent variable sampling follows Equation 14, where Output: Projection loss J2
the reparameterization trick introduces stochasticity while Initialize multimedia prior p(z) := N (0, I) ;
preserving differentiability // Gaussian prior over latent space
 1/2
 z = µθ (x) + 6θ (x) ⊙ ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0, I) (14) for k := 1 to K do
 Compute latent mean µ := Wµ f + bµ ;
This sampled latent vector z is subsequently decoded to
 // Encodes feature statistics from
reconstruct the original feature embedding using Equation 15
 multimedia data
 Fz = ReLU(Wz z + bz ) (15) Compute latent variance 6 := exp(Wσ f + bσ ) ;
where Wz ∈ Rk×m and b ∈ Rk parameterize the decoder. // Ensures positive-definite
 z
 The objective function in Equation 16 is designed to balance covariance
the reconstruction fidelity of multimedia features and the foreach sample ϵ ∼ N (0, I) do √
regularity of the latent space Compute latent code z := µ + 6 ⊙ ϵ ;
 h i // Reparameterization trick
 LVAE = Ez∼qθ (z|x) ∥F S (x) − Fz ∥2 + β · KL (qθ (z|x)∥ p(z)) Decode multimedia-aware reconstruction
 (16) Fz := ReLU(Wz z + bz ) ;
This loss combines two objectives: the first term preserves // Reconstruction layer
the accuracy of reconstructed multimedia features, while Evaluate reconstruction loss r := ∥ f − Fz ∥2 ;
the second term regularizes the latent space to maintain // Enforces fidelity in
generalization and prevent overfitting. The first term ensures multimedia features
that reconstructed features accurately reflect multimedia- end
specific information, while the second term enforces proximity Compute posterior q := N (z|µ, 6) ; // Latent
to a prior p(z) = N (0, I) as defined in Eq. 17: posterior distribution
 Estimate KL-divergence D := KL(q∥ p(z)) ;
 p(z) = N (0, I) (17) // Aligns latent codes with prior
Regularization through this KL-divergence prevents overfitting for robust generalization
and guarantees a well-structured latent space, which is critical Combine total loss L := r + β · D ;
for detecting subtle anomalies in compressed multimedia // Weighted reconstruction and
signals. This standard normal prior serves as a reference regularization
distribution that stabilizes the latent representation and avoids Backpropagate gradient ∇θ L ; // Parameter
bias toward specific multimedia samples. optimization
 Finally, the scaled variational loss in Equation 18 is Update parameters θ := θ − η · ∇θ L ;
integrated into the overall optimization objective of the student // Gradient descent step
 end
 J2 (θ ) = λ2 · LVAE (18)
 Compute final objective J2 := λ2 · L ; // Scaled
The coefficient λ2 adjusts the influence of the variational variational loss
projection during training, ensuring that the model learns return J2 and reconstructed feature Fz
uncertainty-aware yet efficient feature representations.
 where λ2 > 0 controls the contribution of this probabilistic
projection to the multi-objective optimization. The above
Equations 11 to 18 enhance the ability of the student model to E. Multi-Objective Student Optimization
operate reliably in CIoT scenarios where privacy constraints
 The optimization objective in the proposed framework
prohibit centralized multimedia data storage and real-time
 must ensure that the student model Sθ effectively captures
anomaly detection must occur at the edge.
 the teacher’s decision boundaries while preserving latent-
 Algorithm 2 illustrates the variational projection of student
 space regularity and maintaining high classification accuracy.
features. It constructs a probabilistic latent space using
 To this end, we define a composite loss function comprising
variational inference to capture heterogeneous CIoT data
 three terms: knowledge distillation (KD), variational encoding
patterns. The algorithm estimates Gaussian distributions
 (VAE), and task-specific cross-entropy (CE).
over latent codes, applies the reparameterization trick for
 The supervised classification loss is formulated as:
sampling, and reconstructs multimedia features. By jointly
minimizing reconstruction error and KL-divergence, it ensures X
robust, privacy-preserving, and uncertainty-aware student LCE = − yc log ŷ S,c (19)
representations. c∈C
2470 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

where yc and ŷ S,c denote the ground-truth label and Algorithm 3 Multi-Objective Optimization of Student
predicted probability for class c, respectively. Minimizing LCE Parameters
guarantees discriminative training on hard labels and enforces Result: Optimized parameters θ t+1 and task accuracy
separability among anomaly categories and normal segments. AccTaski
 To unify the objectives, we define the total loss: Input: Training data x, ground truth y; loss weights
 LTotal = λ1 LKD + λ2 LVAE + λ3 LCE (20) λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ; gradient penalty γ ; learning rate η;
 Lipschitz constant bound C; total iterations T
where LKD (Eq. 10) aligns soft decision boundaries, Output: Trained parameters θ
LVAE (Eq. 16) enforces latent-space regularization, and Initialize parameters θ := θ 0 ; // Initial
LCE enforces classPdiscrimination. The non-negative weights student parameters
 3
λ1 , λ2 , λ3 satisfy i=1 λi = 1, ensuring convexity of the Set cumulative loss L := 0
combined objective. for t := 1 to T do
 To mitigate instability due to noisy gradients from Compute logits s := Sθ (x) ; // Student
heterogeneous multimedia inputs, we penalize large gradients forward pass
by introducing: Compute class probabilities ŷ := softmax(s) ;
 // Prediction scores
 R2 (θ) = γ · ∥∇θ LTotal ∥22 (21) Evaluate CE loss ℓ3 := − c yc log ŷc ;
 P

where γ > 0 controls the smoothness of the optimization // Classification objective
trajectory. By the quadratic penalty in Eq. 21, we bound Retrieve KD loss ℓ1 := LKD ; // Soft
the spectral norm of the Hessian Hθ , thereby improving the boundary alignment
Lipschitz continuity of the update step. Retrieve VAE loss ℓ2 := LVAE ; // Latent
 The parameter update for the student model is then regularization
expressed as: Merge loss components: L := λ1 ℓ1 + λ2 ℓ2 + λ3 ℓ3
 Compute gradient penalty: G := γ · ∥∇θ L∥2
 θ t+1 = θ t − η · ∇θ (LTotal + R2 (θ )) (22) Update parameters: θ ′ := θ − η · ∇θ (L + G)
 Compute displacement: δ := ∥θ ′ − θ∥2
where η is the learning rate. Under the assumption of β-
 Clip update if unstable:
smoothness of LTotal , the displacement of parameters satisfies:
 δ > ηC ⇒ θ ′ := θ − η · Cδ · ∇θ (L + G)
 1θt = θ t+1 − θ t (23) Apply parameter update θ := θ ′
 end
 ∥1θt ∥2 ≤ η(L 1 + L 2 + L 3 ) (24)
 foreach task i do
where L 1 , L 2 , L 3 are Lipschitz constants associated with LKD , Predict labels: ŷ j := arg maxc Sθ (x j )
 Compute accuracy: ai := N1i Nj=1
 P i
LVAE , and LCE , respectively. Eq. 24 guarantees bounded step I[ ŷ j = y j ]
sizes and avoids divergence when optimizing over highly end
imbalanced multimedia datasets. |T |
 return θ, {ai }i=1
 By leveraging the above bounds, the expected loss is shown
to converge exponentially:
 E[LTotal ] ≤ L0 · e−ηt + ρ (25)
 Algorithm 3 performs joint optimization of the student
where L0 is the initial loss value and ρ is the minimum model by combining knowledge distillation, variational reguachievable floor determined by inherent data uncertainty. This larization, and classification objectives. It adaptively balances
convergence property is critical for resource-constrained CIoT these loss components, applies gradient penalty and Lipschitz
devices, ensuring stable training even with non-stationary input constraints for stability, and updates parameters using
distributions. stochastic gradient descent while monitoring convergence and
 Finally, the predictive performance of the student model for accuracy across tasks.
each security task Ti is measured as:
 i N
 1 X IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
 AccTaski = I[ ŷ j = y j ] (26)
 Ni
 j=1
 The experimental setup validates the effectiveness of the
where Ni denotes the number of samples for task Ti and I[·] proposed MAID-KD framework across three dimensions:
is the indicator function. Eq. 26 explicitly quantifies the task- knowledge transfer fidelity, multimedia feature representation
level accuracy, which is optimized jointly with the alignment quality, and predictive accuracy under multi-task conditions.
and regularization losses. These objectives are achieved through experiments
 Through the integration of Eqs. 19–26, the student model using a large-scale multimedia anomaly/tampering
is trained to balance multimedia-aware feature alignment, detection dataset, teacher–student model architectures
latent uncertainty modeling, and predictive accuracy, making of different capacities, and comprehensive evaluation
it robust for real-time deployments in CIoT environments. metrics.
ULLAH et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT MULTIMEDIA ANOMALY AND INTEGRITY DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT 2471

A. Computational Environment TABLE I
 H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS U SED FOR E XPERIMENTATION
 All experiments were carried out on a workstation equipped
with an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU (24 GB VRAM), an Intel
Core i9 CPU, and 64 GB RAM, running Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.
The models were implemented in PyTorch 2.1 with CUDA
12.1 and cuDNN 8.9 support. Python 3.11 was used for
all scripting. Fixed random seeds were applied throughout
the pipeline to ensure reproducibility. The configuration was
chosen to reflect real-world CIoT constraints, where edge
deployments must be memory and latency-efficient.

B. Dataset
 To evaluate multimedia security performance, we employed
the UCF-Crime dataset [37], a large-scale video anomaly
dataset widely used for multimedia tampering and intrusion D. Implementation and Training Details
detection research. This dataset contains 1,900 untrimmed Both the teacher and student models were adapted for
surveillance videos (approximately 128 hours) collected sequential video frame analysis. The teacher network was
from real-world CIoT-like environments such as parking configured as a deep Transformer-based encoder capable
lots, subway stations, and residential areas. The videos of capturing long-range spatio-temporal dependencies in
span 13 anomaly categories, including vandalism, burglary, video sequences. The student model employed a lightweight
tampering, fighting, robbery, and abuse, as well as a normal CNN-LSTM backbone optimized for edge deployment,
category representing benign activities. preserving essential spatio-temporal representations while
 For our experiments, we split each video into fixed-length reducing computational cost. Models were implemented in
segments of 64 consecutive frames sampled at 10 FPS. This PyTorch, initialized using Xavier initialization, and trained
segmentation allows the MAID-KD framework to operate at with the Adam optimizer. The learning rate followed a
the sequence level while preserving spatio-temporal context. cosine annealing schedule, and early stopping was triggered
Two multi-task learning objectives were defined: (i) Task 1 based on validation loss. All experiments were conducted
– anomaly detection: classify each segment as anomalous or for a fixed number of epochs with dropout and batch
normal, and (ii) Task 2 – anomaly type classification: classify normalization applied for regularization. Hyperparameters
anomalous segments into one of the 13 predefined anomaly used are summarized in Table I.
categories. The dataset was partitioned into training (70%),
validation (10%), and test (20%) splits, ensuring balanced
distribution of classes across splits. E. Evaluation Metrics and Baseline Schemes
 The reason for selecting the UCF-Crime dataset is that
its surveillance videos closely resemble the multimedia The performance of the proposed MAID-KD framework
information produced by consumer IoT devices such as was evaluated using metrics capturing classification accuracy,
home cameras and smart sensors. It has a variety of scenes, robustness, and resource efficiency for multimedia-aware
anomalies, and environmental variations representing CIoT intrusion detection. The primary metrics include Accuracy,
operating conditions. Therefore, it gives a practical baseline Precision, Recall, and F1-score for both anomaly detection
against which the performance of MAID-KD in identifying and anomaly type classification tasks. AUC-ROC is used
multimedia anomalies and checking the integrity of content to assess discriminative ability, while inference latency and
can be assessed based on edge conditions. memory footprint quantify computational efficiency on edge
 devices. These evaluation metrics were selected because they
 represent both analytical performance and real-world usability
C. Consumer IoT Testbed Configuration of the proposed framework. Accuracy and F1-score indicate
 The experimental environment was designed to replicate a how reliably MAID-KD distinguishes between normal and
realistic CIoT deployment where multimedia data fromtributed abnormal multimedia activities, while precision and recall
surveillance, esuch aseras and smart devices is processed show how well it balances false alerts and missed detections.
at heterogeneous edge nodes. Multiple virtual edge nodes Inference time and memory use measure its responsiveness
were instantiated, each holding a partition of the dataset and efficiency on constrained IoT devices, confirming that
to simulate the non-IID (non-identically distributed) data the framework can operate effectively in practical consumer
distribution common in CIoT. The teacher model was deployed settings.
on a central node with high computational capacity, while To evaluate the quality of knowledge transfer, the divergence
student models were trained and evaluated on resource- between teacher and student probability distributions was
constrained edge nodes. This setup enabled controlled analyzed. MAID-KD was compared against three competitive
evaluation of communication overhead, latency, and scalability baselines: FLEKD [13], VAD-MTL [38], and TAML [19],
in multimedia-intensive CIoT environments. each adapted for multimedia anomaly detection by replacing
2472 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 3. Comparison of teacher and MAID-KD student models across accuracy, F1-score, and precision–recall AUC. Results show that the student closely
approximates the teacher’s performance while maintaining lightweight efficiency suitable for CIoT deployment.

their original feature extraction pipelines with video and audio
feature encoders.

 V. R ESULTS
 The results section provides a comprehensive evaluation of
the proposed MAID-KD framework in terms of performance,
efficiency, and scalability for multimedia anomaly detection
tasks. The analysis is divided into two subsections. The first
subsection evaluates the teacher and student models to assess
the effectiveness of the knowledge distillation process. The
second subsection compares the proposed MAID-KD student
model with baseline schemes, highlighting its performance
advantages.

 Fig. 4. Loss convergence trends of teacher and MAID-KD student models
A. Teacher Vs Student Analysis during training and validation. The student achieves faster convergence with
 slightly higher final loss.
 This subsection presents a comparative evaluation of
the teacher and the MAID-KD student models across
multiple performance metrics, including accuracy, precisionrecall AUC, F1-score, loss convergence, inference time, the student (49.4%), indicating improved discrimination
and model complexity. These analyses provide insights into capability for positive multimedia anomaly classes (e.g.,
the knowledge distillation effectiveness and computational tampered frames and injected audio).
advantages achieved by the MAID-KD student model. Figure 4 shows the loss convergence patterns during
This comparison demonstrates that the student model can training. The teacher model’s training and validation losses
effectively process heterogeneous multimedia CIoT data (e.g., decrease steadily, achieving lower final loss values. The
video segments, audio streams, and multimedia telemetry) MAID-KD student model converges faster but stabilizes at
while maintaining strong predictive accuracy, a critical factor slightly higher loss values compared to the teacher. This
for safeguarding multimedia-rich CIoT applications. behavior is expected as the student trades off model capacity
 Figure 3(a) illustrates the accuracy comparison across for reduced complexity. Faster convergence and competitive
multiple runs. The teacher model consistently achieved higher accuracy are particularly beneficial in CIoT deployments
accuracy, with a mean accuracy of around 97%, while the where continuous multimedia streams must be analyzed and
MAID-KD student model followed closely with approximately anomalies detected in real time.
95%. This confirms that the student model successfully Figure 5 compares inference times, revealing a significant
approximates the teacher’s predictive capability with only a efficiency gain for the student model. The teacher model incurs
marginal drop in accuracy. Figure 3(b) presents the F1-score an average inference time of 18.5 ms per video segment, while
comparison, where the teacher demonstrates higher the student achieves a much lower 7.3 ms, demonstrating
F1-scores with tighter confidence intervals, highlighting its suitability for resource-constrained multimedia edge
superior balance between precision and recall. The student’s environments in CIoT systems.
F1-scores remain competitive, validating the effectiveness of Finally, Figure 6 compares model complexity in terms of
the MAID-KD knowledge distillation strategy. Figure 3(c) size and parameter count. The teacher model contains 120 MB
shows the precision-recall AUC comparison. The teacher and 24 million parameters, while the student is significantly
achieves a slightly higher AUC (50.6%) compared to lighter at 45 MB and 9 million parameters. This reduction
ULLAH et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT MULTIMEDIA ANOMALY AND INTEGRITY DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT 2473

Fig. 5. Inference time comparison per video segment between teacher and
student models. The student achieves significantly lower latency. Fig. 7. Performance comparison of MAID-KD and baseline schemes
 (FLEKD, VAD-MTL, and TAML) across accuracy, precision, recall, and
 F1-score. MAID-KD consistently achieves superior detection performance
 with higher overall balance between accuracy and efficiency.

Fig. 6. Model size (MB) and parameter count (Million) comparison between
teacher and student networks. MAID-KD achieves a smaller memory footprint
while preserving strong detection accuracy, optimizing for resource-limited
consumer devices. Fig. 8. Loss convergence analysis for MAID-KD and baseline schemes over
 20 epochs. The proposed model converges faster and achieves lower final loss
 values, highlighting its robust optimization and stability.
highlights the efficiency gained through the MAID-KD
framework without severely compromising performance.
 In summary, the MAID-KD student model demonstrates As shown in Figure 7, the proposed MAID-KD consistently
competitive performance with substantial reductions in compu- achieves the highest scores for all four evaluation metrics,
tational cost, memory footprint, and inference latency. These surpassing FLEKD, VAD-MTL, and TAML. The improved
improvements validate the proposed knowledge distillation accuracy illustrates that MAID-KD captures more discrimstrategy as highly effective for deploying anomaly and inative patterns through its knowledge distillation pipeline.
integrity detection models in multimedia-intensive CIoT Similarly, higher precision and recall values demonstrate the
environments. ability to reduce both false positives and false negatives,
 leading to a superior F1-score and balanced detection
 performance in multimedia contexts.
B. Baseline Scheme Comparison Figure 8 shows the loss convergence trends. MAID-KD
 This subsection compares the proposed student model converges substantially faster than the baseline schemes and
with three state-of-the-art baseline schemes: FLEKD [13], stabilizes at a lower final loss value. This faster convergence
VAD-MTL [38], and TAML [19]. All baseline models were not only reduces the number of epochs needed to reach
adapted for multimedia anomaly and integrity detection optimal performance but also highlights stronger optimization
by replacing their original feature extraction modules and a more robust ability to generalize to unseen multimedia
with video feature encoders. Each scheme was trained data.
and evaluated under identical conditions for fairness. The The inference time distribution in Figure 9 demonstrates
comparison focuses on key performance metrics, including the efficiency of MAID-KD. It achieves significantly lower
accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, inference time, and inference latency compared to the baselines, making it suitable
resource utilization, emphasizing the generalization ability and for real-time multimedia CIoT applications. This improvement
efficiency of the proposed framework. Unlike the baselines, is attributed to the compact architecture of MAID-KD, which
MAID-KD maintains superior performance when analyzing executes faster without sacrificing detection performance.
diverse multimedia data streams from CIoT devices, such Lower inference latency allows MAID-KD to respond more
as real-time surveillance video and sensor-generated video quickly to threats in multimedia-intensive deployments where
sequences. delayed detection can lead to serious breaches.
2474 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 accuracy and F1-score indicate that the performance gains of
 MAID-KD compared to the baseline schemes are statistically
 significant and not due to random variation.

 D. Additional Practical Validation
 To test the applicability of MAID-KD in real applications,
 it was evaluated under three conditions: (i) video compression
 and packet loss, (ii) lower resolution and frame rate, and
 (iii) edge inference using a CPU. In all these environments,
 MAID-KD maintained high accuracy. However, it exhibited
 slight degradation at high compression and low frame rates,
Fig. 9. Inference time distribution of MAID-KD and baseline schemes. and incurred sub–real-time latency under CPU-only execution.
MAID-KD demonstrates the lowest latency, confirming its real-time efficiency These results demonstrate its capability and preparedness for
for multimedia processing on CIoT edge devices. CE/CT devices such as smart cameras and wearables.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 This work introduces MAID-KD, a lightweight knowledge
 distillation model for multimedia anomaly and integrity
 detection in consumer IoT systems. It combines anomaly
 detection and integrity verification in a single edge-optimized
 model, achieving high accuracy with smaller model size and
 lower latency. The results indicate that MAID-KD is more
 efficient and robust than existing state-of-the-art baselines
 in multimedia-intensive scenarios. Its privacy-conscious and
 lightweight design allows it to be practically used in smart
 surveillance, health wearables, and home-connected devices,
Fig. 10. Model size and parameter count comparison between MAID-KD while providing low-latency, bandwidth-efficient operation.
and baseline schemes. The lightweight architecture of MAID-KD enables Although the performance is impressive, it can degrade on
resource-efficient deployment without compromising performance accuracy. ultra-low-power devices, and slight privacy risks may still exist
 when sensitive data is processed. The further research in the
 field will concentrate on adaptive optimization and privacy
 Finally, Figure 10 compares model size and parameter
 improvement to optimize the application of CIoT in the real
counts. MAID-KD achieves the smallest model size and
 world.
lowest parameter count among all schemes, making it the
 MAID-KD has high accuracy and efficiency, but it still
most resource-efficient option. Its compact design facilitates
 has some limitations. The student model can perform poorly
deployment on resource-constrained CIoT edge devices, where
 when run on small, low-power hardware with limited memory
memory and storage are limited. Despite this lightweight
 or without GPU acceleration. Also, although the framework
design, MAID-KD consistently outperforms the larger,
 reduces the exposure of the data by storing the knowledge in
more resource-intensive baseline schemes. Overall, these
 a distilled form, the partial privacy areas might still exist in
results validate that MAID-KD delivers superior accuracy,
 the process of dealing with sensitive multimedia content. The
efficiency, and robustness, aligning with the requirements
 existing results are based on the datasets. However, real-world
of real-time multimedia anomaly and integrity detection in
 CIoT deployments can exhibit unexpected noise and non-
CIoT environments. MAID-KD performs better because its
 homogeneous data quality. Future work will explore extending
knowledge distillation and multi-task design reinforce each
 the framework to deepfake detection and multi-modal security
other. Distillation helps the student model learn compact
 tasks, further strengthening multimedia integrity in nextyet expressive features from the teacher, while the multigeneration CE applications.
task setup allows shared learning between anomaly detection
 The proposed MAID-KD framework is closely related to
and integrity verification. This combination improves feature
 consumer electronics (CE) and consumer technologies (CT).
quality and stability, leading to stronger accuracy and
 Its privacy-conscious and lightweight design allows it to be
efficiency than the baseline methods.
 deployed on CE devices such as smart cameras, healthmonitoring wearables, and voice-activated home hubs to
C. Statistical Validation handle real-time multimedia data processing. MAID-KD may
 All experiments were repeated 5 times using various be executed directly on edge processors or embedded firmware
random seeds to make the results more reliable. Mean and to perform on-device anomaly detection and multimedia
standard deviation of each measure were calculated, and integrity checks without cloud support. This attribute lowers
95% confidence interval was obtained using the Student’s latency, ensures user privacy, and enhances confidence in nextt-distribution. The narrow intervals (from +1.2% to -1.2% ) in generation CE/CT systems.
ULLAH et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT MULTIMEDIA ANOMALY AND INTEGRITY DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT 2475

 R EFERENCES [20] N. Akhtar, M. Hussain, and Z. Habib, “DEEP-STA: Deep learningbased detection and localization of various types of inter-frame video
 [1] D. Pal, V. Vanijja, X. Zhang, and H. Thapliyal, “Exploring the tampering using spatiotemporal analysis,” Mathematics, vol. 12, no. 12,
 antecedents of consumer electronics IoT devices purchase decision: A p. 1778, Jun. 2024.
 mixed methods study,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 67, no. 4,
 [21] Z. Almutairi and H. Elgibreen, “A review of modern audio deepfake
 pp. 305–318, Nov. 2021.
 detection methods: Challenges and future directions,” Algorithms,
 [2] M. Sayad Haghighi, F. Farivar, A. Jolfaei, A. B. Asl, and W. Zhou, vol. 15, no. 5, p. 155, May 2022.
 “Cyber attacks via consumer electronics: Studying the threat of covert
 [22] T. Zhang, “TMRB: Trusted multimedia scheme with redactable
 malware in smart and autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
 blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2,
 Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 825–832, Nov. 2023.
 pp. 3099–3107, May 2025.
 [3] S. Mukherjee, S. Mukhopadhyay, and S. Sarkar, “ParticleStego: A
 steganographic algorithm for securing consumer electronics enabled [23] F. S. Alsubaei, “Smart deep learning model for enhanced IoT intrusion
 social Internet of Things (SIoT),” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., detection,” Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 20577, Jul. 2025.
 vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 2592–2602, May 2025. [24] H. Peng, C. Wu, and Y. Xiao, “FD-IDS: Federated learning
 [4] S. Hu, F. Zou, Y. Xiao, H. Ke, and J. Wang, “Integrating embedded with knowledge distillation for intrusion detection in noncyber-physical systems in smart energy for AI-enhanced real-time IID IoT environments,” Sensors, vol. 25, no. 14, p. 4309,
 crowd monitoring and threat detection,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., Jul. 2025.
 vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 8363–8373, Aug. 2025. [25] C. Hazman, A. Guezzaz, S. Benkirane, and M. Azrour, “Enhanced IDS
 [5] M. Koca, “Real-time security risk assessment from CCTV using hand with deep learning for IoT-based smart cities security,” Tsinghua Sci.
 gesture recognition,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 84548–84555, 2024. Technol., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 929–947, Aug. 2024.
 [6] T. Srour, A. M. El-Rifaie, M. A. M. El-Bendary, M. Eltokhy, [26] R. Wazirali, R. Ahmad, A. Al-Amayreh, M. Al-Madi, and A. Khalifeh,
 A. E. Abouelazm, and B. Neji, “Multimedia privacy protection: An “Secure watermarking schemes and their approaches in the IoT
 N-round cascaded cryptosystem based on merged multi-chaotic maps technology: An overview,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 14, p. 1744,
 under various image attacks,” Frontiers Comput. Sci., vol. 7, May 2025, Jul. 2021.
 Art. no. 1551166. [27] K. Talathi and A. S. Biswas, “An efficient digital watermarking technique
 [7] S. Yang, X. Zheng, Z. Xu, and X. Wang, “A lightweight approach for small scale devices,” 2025, arXiv:2506.06691.
 for network intrusion detection based on self-knowledge distillation,” [28] S. Ali, O. Abusabha, F. Ali, M. Imran, and T. Abuhmed, “Effective
 in Proc. ICC-IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., May 2023, pp. 3000–3005. multitask deep learning for IoT malware detection and identification
 [8] B. Asal and A. B. Can, “Ensemble-based knowledge distillation for using behavioral traffic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
 video anomaly detection,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 3, p. 1032, Jan. 2024. vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1199–1209, Jun. 2023.
 [9] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir, [29] L. Ma, J. He, K. Lu, D. Wang, L. Yin, and Z. Li, “A contrastive learning
 “An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics and knowledge distillation-based framework for efficient federated
 network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913, intrusion detection in IoT,” Syst. Sci. Control Eng., vol. 13, no. 1,
 Nov. 2023. Dec. 2025, Art. no. 2518963.
[10] R. Chen, H. Xia, K. Wang, S. Xu, and R. Zhang, “KDRSFL: A [30] A. K. Singh, D. Kundur, and M. Conti, “Introduction to the special
 knowledge distillation resistance transfer framework for defending issue on integrity of multimedia and multimodal data in Internet of
 model inversion attacks in split federated learning,” Future Gener. Things,” ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 20,
 Comput. Syst., vol. 166, May 2025, Art. no. 107637. no. 6, pp. 1–4, Mar. 2024, doi: 10.1145/3643040.
[11] G. Almahadin et al., “VANET network traffic anomaly detection using [31] V. Rey, P. M. Sánchez Sánchez, A. Huertas Celdrán, and G. Bovet,
 GRU-based deep learning model,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., “Federated learning for malware detection in IoT devices,” Comput.
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4548–4555, Feb. 2024. Netw., vol. 204, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108693.
[12] D. Wang, Q. Wang, Q. Hu, and K. Wu, “Temporal-spatial decoupled [32] K. Wang, A. Zhang, H. Sun, and B. Wang, “Analysis of recent deepself-supervised multi-task learning for video anomaly detection and learning-based intrusion detection methods for in-vehicle network,”
 localization in intelligent transportation surveillance systems,” IEEE IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1843–1854,
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., early access, Apr. 21, 2025, doi: Feb. 2023.
 10.1109/TITS.2025.3559166. [33] A. Rehman et al., “Immersive embedded consumer model lever-
[13] J. Shen, W. Yang, Z. Chu, J. Fan, D. Niyato, and K.-Y. Lam, “Effective aging AI with zero-trust architecture for cyber-physical system,”
 intrusion detection in heterogeneous Internet-of-Things networks via IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Mar. 25, 2025, doi:
 ensemble knowledge distillation-based federated learning,” in Proc. ICC- 10.1109/TCE.2025.3554095.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2024, pp. 2034–2039. [34] W. Lo, H. Alqahtani, K. Thakur, A. Almadhor, S. Chander, and
[14] B. Xie, Z. Wang, Z. Zeng, D. He, and S. Chan, “DTKD-IDS: A G. Kumar, “A hybrid deep learning based intrusion detection system
 dual-teacher knowledge distillation intrusion detection model for the using spatial–temporal representation of in-vehicle network traffic,” Veh.
 industrial Internet of Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 174, Jul. 2025, Commun., vol. 35, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100471.
 Art. no. 103869. [35] X. Wang, A. Shankar, K. Li, B. D. Parameshachari, and J. Lv,
[15] P. Corcoran and A. Cucos, “Techniques for securing multimedia content “Blockchain-enabled decentralized edge intelligence for trustworthy 6G
 in consumer electronic appliances using biometric signatures,” IEEE consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
 Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 545–551, May 2005. pp. 1214–1225, Feb. 2024.
[16] A. M. Eskicioglu and E. J. Delp, “An overview of multimedia content [36] F. Ullah, N. Mohammad, L. Mostarda, D. Cacciagrano, and Y. Zhao,
 protection in consumer electronics devices,” Signal Process., Image “Q-P2FL: Quantum-enhanced federated edge intelligence for privacy-
 Commun., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 681–699, Apr. 2001. preserving adversarial attack detection on consumer edge devices,”
[17] Z. Lv, L. Qiao, and H. Song, “Analysis of the security of Internet of IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4914–4924,
 Multimedia Things,” ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., May 2025.
 vol. 16, no. 3s, pp. 1–16, Dec. 2020. [37] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
[18] W. Z. Khan, M. Y. Aalsalem, and M. K. Khan, “Communal acts of surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 IoT consumers: A potential threat to security and privacy,” IEEE Trans. Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
 Consum. Electron., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 64–72, Feb. 2019. [38] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan,
[19] L. Dong, W. Liang, and R. Wang, “Robust text image tampering M. Popescu, and M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video
 localization via forgery traces enhancement and multiscale attention,” via self-supervised and multi-task learning,” in Proc.
 IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3495–3507, IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021,
 Feb. 2024. pp. 12742–12752.