This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

 Lightweight Privacy-Preserving IDS for ITS:
 Integrated Federated Learning
 and Blockchain
 Jiawei Zha , Guoan Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Li Jin , Shuping Dang , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Wei Duan

 Abstract—As intelligent transportation systems (ITS) become Index Terms—Federated learning, blockchain, knowledge dismore integrated into modern infrastructure, vehicular communi- tillation, intrusion detection, IoV.
cation systems face increasing cybersecurity threats. Traditional
centralized intrusion detection system (IDS) has significant limi-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
tations in terms of the scalability, privacy preservation, and trust
establishment, which are critical challenges in ITS environments.
To address these issues, this paper proposes an intrusion detection method tailored specifically for ITS, integrating federated
 W ITH the development and increasing sophistication
 of the Internet of Vehicle (IoV) [1], [2], [3], vehicles are facing an escalating array of cybersecurity threats,
learning (FL) and blockchain technology to create a secure,
scalable, and privacy-preserving threat detection system for the including hacker attacks, malware, and unauthorized access.
Internet of Vehicle (IoV). The proposed method utilizes FL for These threats will jeopardize the functionality of vehicles and
distributed model training, avoiding the sharing of raw data the safety of passengers. As a result, the robust intrusion
and employing encryption techniques to protect user privacy at detection system (IDS) has become an urgent necessity in
the edge devices. Blockchain technology ensures the integrity IoV [4], [5], [6], [7]. The primary objective of IDS is to
and tamper-proof nature of model updates and fosters trust
between entities. Moreover, to accommodate the heterogeneous safeguard the integrity and security of both onboard and
and dynamic data environment in IoV, the method supports both external networks by addressing increasingly complex threats.
independent and identically distributed (IID) and non-IID data In IoV, IDS implements multi-layered defenses, involving
scenarios, enhancing the system’s adaptability and robustness. access control mechanisms to prevent unauthorized access,
Given the computational limitations of vehicular devices, this and comprehensive traffic analysis to identify potential attack
work incorporates knowledge distillation and lightweight model
designs, effectively reducing the local computational burden. behaviors. For example, IDS deployed at network gateways
Experimental results demonstrate the significant effectiveness of can intercept malicious packets before they propagate, while
the proposed approach: on the CICIDS2017 dataset, the model in-vehicle IDS is normally integrated within the controller area
achieves an accuracy of 97.10% with 11,904 parameters and a network (CAN) [8], [9], [10], electronic control units (ECUs),
memory consumption of 0.045MB; on the Car-Hacking dataset, and various sensors to provide comprehensive protection.
it achieves an accuracy of 99.10% with 9,989 parameters and a
memory consumption of 0.038MB; on the CICIoV2024 dataset, However, as vehicle interconnectivity continues to increase,
it achieves an accuracy of 99.65% with 9,861 parameters and IDS also evolves, offering adaptive solutions to emerging
a memory consumption of 0.038MB. Compared to traditional threats and ensuring robust security for modern automobaseline models, the proposed approach significantly reduces both tive systems. By leveraging artificial intelligence technologies
the number of training parameters and memory consumption, (AI), IDS can adaptively learn and update attack signatures,
while maintaining high accuracy, making it highly suitable
for deployment in resource-constrained vehicular environments thereby improving detection accuracy and efficiency, meanwithin ITS. while enhancing its adaptive capabilities [11], [12], [13].
 In recent years, machine learning-based intrusion detection
 methods have been widely researched and applied in intelligent
 Received 16 August 2025; revised 12 December 2025; accepted 29 January transportation systems. Yang et al. [14] proposed a multitiered
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62471258 and Grant 62571278, in part hybrid IDS that integrates both signature-based and anomalyby the Key Research and Development Program of Nantong under Grant based detection mechanisms to address known and unknown
GZ2024002, in part by Nantong Municipal Science and Technology Program attacks in vehicular networks. Lu et al. [15] developed a deep
for Social Livelihood under Grant MS2024068, and in part by the Natural
Science Foundation of Nantong under Grant JC2024103. The Associate Editor convolutional factorization machine-based IDS for CAN bus
for this article was X. Li. (Corresponding authors: Guoan Zhang; Li Jin.) data. It captured both local features and interaction information
 Jiawei Zha, Guoan Zhang, Li Jin, and Wei Duan are with the School between high-order and raw binary features, achieving the
of Information Science and Technology, Nantong University, Nantong
226019, China (e-mail: 2330320030@stmail.ntu.edu.cn; gzhang@ntu.edu.cn; precision, accuracy, and F1 scores of 0.868, 0.918, and 0.923,
jin.li@ntu.edu.cn; sinder@ntu.edu.cn). respectively. Sayem et al. [16] presented a deep learning-
 Shuping Dang is with the School of Electrical, Electronic and Mechan- based ensemble framework, including dynamic preprocessing,
ical Engineering, University of Bristol, BS8 1UB Bristol, U.K. (e-mail:
shuping.dang@bristol.ac.uk). optimal feature selection, and handling of imbalanced data. It
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3661633 achieved 90.6% and 99.6% accuracy on two publicly available
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

and popular network traffic datasets, namely UNSW-15 and • Constructing a domain-specific knowledge graph from
CICIDS2017. Zhang et al. [17] introduced a transformer- vehicular IDS datasets by transforming raw traffic records
based transfer learning system, which analyzed spatiotemporal into semantically rich entities and relationships. This
sequences, along with a self-supervised box classification graph-based structured representation not only facilitates
mechanism to enhance detection of unknown threats. Wu et al. advanced feature extraction, enabling the capture of high-
[18] proposed an intelligent IDS combining fuzzy rough sets, order dependencies and contextual correlations, but also
generative adversarial network (GAN), and convolutional neu- significantly reduces redundancy and noise in the input
ral network (CNN), leveraging big data mining and efficient data, leading to substantially improved intrusion-detection
feature extraction for intrusion detection. accuracy and robustness.
 Despite such advances, IDS still faces significant privacy • Our work employs a model compression technique,
and trust challenges in the IoV. Vehicle-generated data inher- specifically knowledge distillation, to transfer knowlently contains sensitive user information, and the lack of edge from a complex teacher model to a more compact
effective privacy protection not only undermines trust but also and efficient student model. The process of transferring
increases the risk of non-compliance with data regulations. knowledge enables the student model to leverage the
This absence of privacy protection further complicates the representations and decision-making capabilities learned
establishment of trust between onboard units, cloud servers, by the teacher model, while maintaining a reduced comand security centers, creating barriers to effective collabo- putational overhead.
ration. To address such issues, several studies have applied • We propose a federated model parameter encryption
federated learning (FL) for intrusion detection in certain fields. and decryption mechanism based on CRT, and employ
Cui et al. [19] designed a collaborative intrusion detection parallel batch encryption, which enables lightweight and
system (CIDS), using FL for collaborative model training parallelizable protection of model updates without relying
among software-defined networking (SDN) nodes. Liu et al. on heavyweight cryptographic primitives such as rivest-
[20] developed a delay and energy-efficient asynchronous FL shamir-adleman (RSA) or homomorphic encryption (HE).
framework for intrusion detection for heterogeneous indus- Furthermore, it incurs much lower overhead in terms of
trial internet of things (IoT) environments. Zhang et al. [21] encryption and decryption time.
proposed an anomaly-based federated IDS with a hierarchical The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Secaggregation scheme using weighted voting. Aouedi et al. [22] tion II presents the preliminary background. Section III details
introduced a federated semi-supervised approach leveraging our proposed methodology. Section IV provides the experilabeled and unlabeled data collaboratively. However, without mental evaluation. Finally, section V concludes this paper.
encryption, FL is still vulnerable to gradient leakage.
 Meanwhile, to improve IDS accuracy, increasingly complex deep learning models have been developed. However, II. P RELIMINARIES
their deployment in vehicular environments is constrained by In this section, we present the foundational concepts undersevere resource limitations. In the IoV, ECUs are with limited lying the techniques employed in this study, including CRT,
computing power, memory, and energy, making it difficult blockchain, and FL.
to run large models in real-time. Lightweight deep learning
models aim to reduce complexity and speed up inference
through simpler structures and efficient computations, while A. Chinese Remainder Theorem
maintaining acceptable accuracy.
 CRT, which was first appeared in the 3rd century in the
 Motivated by these challenges, we propose a lightweight
 work Sunzi Suanjing by the Chinese mathematician Sunzi, in
privacy-preserving IDS based on blockchain and FL. Unlike
 its modern form, CRT has been widely used in areas such
our previous work [23], which enhanced the performance of
 as computer science, cryptography, parallel computing, and
IDS in IoV by leveraging knowledge graphs and machine
 error-correcting codes [24].
learning techniques to improve detection capabilities against
 The theorem primarily addresses the solution of systems of
various types of attacks, our previous work conducted intrusion
 simultaneous linear congruences of the following type:
detection on a centralized server, and utilized shapley additive
explanations (SHAP) for interpretability analysis to enhance
 8
 ˆ x ≡ a1 (mod m1 ),
the transparency of the model’s decision-making process. Our
 ˆ
 ˆ
 < x ≡ a2 (mod m2 ),
 ˆ
main contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
 .. (1)
 • This paper introduces an intrusion detection approach ˆ
 ˆ
 ˆ .
 ˆ
 specifically designed for IoV, integrating blockchain, :
 x ≡ ak (mod mk ),
 FL, and advanced AI models to ensure the security of
 vehicular data. By leveraging the distributed ledger char- when the moduli m1 , m2 , . . . , mk are pairwise coprime, the
 acteristic of blockchain, data integrity and transparency above system has a unique solution modulo M = m1 m2 · · · mk ,
 are guaranteed. The application of FL addresses issues and its solution can be explicitly constructed as:
 related to data privacy and decentralized storage, enabling k
 collaborative training among vehicles without sharing raw x≡
 X
 ai Mi yi (mod M), (2)
 data or compromising security. i=1
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN 3

where Mi = mMi , and yi is the modular inverse of Mi modulo
mi , satisfying
 Mi yi ≡ 1 (mod mi ). (3)
Clearly, this formulation guarantees both the existence and
uniqueness of the solution, providing an efficient computational method. By allowing computations to be carried out
in parallel over smaller moduli and then recombined, CRT
significantly enhances computational efficiency.

B. Blockchain
 Blockchain is a decentralized, transparent, tamper-resistant
distributed ledger technology. Initially proposed by Satoshi Fig. 1. Fundamental workflow of FL.
Nakamoto in 2008 to support the bitcoin system, it leverages
cryptographic techniques to eliminate the need for trusted
centralized institutions, enabling the immutable recording and C. Federated Learning
updating of information across untrusted participants.
 FL is a distributed collaborative training framework in
 A blockchain is composed of a series of blocks connected
 which each participant (client) retains its local data and colin chronological order. Each block typically consists of the
 laboratively trains a global model through periodic exchange
following components:
 of model parameters, rather than sharing raw data directly.
 • Hash value of the previous block Hi−1 , The main process is illustrated in Fig. 1, which can be
 • Timestamp T i , summarized as follows:
 • Random number Ni ,
 1) The central server initializes the global model parame-
 • Merkle root MT i ,
 ters upon startup.
 • Block body {T X1 , T X2 , . . . , T Xn }, containing a list of
 2) Each client downloads the global model and performs
 transactions.
 local training using its private data to obtain local model
 The complete data content of block Bk , denoted as Dk , updates each round.
includes all transactions and metadata (e.g., timestamp, merkle 3) All local model parameters are uploaded to the central
root), server for aggregation.
 Dk = {T X1 , T X2 , . . . , T Xn , T k , Nk , MT k }, (4) 4) The server aggregates the local parameters (e.g., via
where each block’s hash value Hi is computed from its weighted averaging) to obtain an updated set of global
contents as: model parameters for the next training round.
 Hi = Γ(Hi−1 k Dk ), (5)
with Γ as a cryptographic hash function i.e., SHA-256, and k III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
as the concatenation. The proposed scheme consists of eight stages: real-world
 Because each block includes the hash of the previous block, attack scenario, system model, data preprocessing, model
the blocks are chained together. Thus, any modification to one distillation, local model training, parameter encryption, global
block will affect all subsequent blocks’ hash values, ensuring model aggregation, and local model updating.
the immutability of overall system.
 If an attacker attempts to tamper with the data Dk in block
Bk , then all hash values from Hk onward should be recomputed A. Real-World Attack Scenario
to preserve the chain’s integrity, otherwise, the chain becomes As shown in Fig. 2, this section presents specific attack
invalid. For instance, if the data is modified as D0k , then the scenarios that vehicles may encounter in intelligent transportanew hash value becomes: tion systems (ITS). Hackers can directly infiltrate vehicles
 and control their in-vehicle networks (e.g., controller area
 Hk0 = Γ(Hk−1 k D0k ) , Hk . (6)
 network, CAN), or they can penetrate further by attacking
Before being tampered, the hash value of the next block is various communication links associated with the vehicle (i.e.,
determined by the current block, obtained from: the vehicle’s external networks), ultimately gaining control of
 the vehicle. Once a vehicle is compromised, it may become a
 Hk+1 = Γ(Hk k Dk+1 ). (7)
 malicious node and launch attacks on other vehicles, posing
Then the modified Hk+1 can be defined as: a significant threat to public safety. In the following, we will
 analyze the various attacks depicted in the figure in details.
 0
 Hk+1 = Γ(Hk0 k Dk+1 ) , Hk+1 . (8)
 V2V link attack: Hackers can disrupt or hijack the com-
Because Hk0 , Hk , Hk+10
 , Hk+1 also holds. By induction, for munication link between vehicles (V2V), allowing them to
 0
all i ≥ k, we have Hi , Hi . That is, all subsequent hash values forge or alter information transmitted between vehicles. Such
are altered. The above process demonstrates the robust security attacks could lead to the failure of collaboration between
of blockchain in safeguarding data integrity and privacy. vehicles, causing traffic accidents or operational errors, which
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 2. The real-world attack scenario for IoV in ITS.
 Fig. 3. System architecture of the proposed scheme.
in turn affects vehicle coordination and cooperation, severely
compromising traffic safety.
 V2I link attack: Hackers can attack the communication
 as illustrated in Fig. 3. To protect vehicular privacy data, we
link between vehicles and infrastructure (V2I), such as by
 employ a FL distributed framework, where local training is
tampering with traffic signals or accessing traffic control inforperformed on individual vehicles. Once the teacher model
mation. This type of attack can disrupt traffic control systems,
 training is completed, the vehicles perform the training of the
potentially causing system crashes or operational errors, which
 student model locally. After training, the model parameters
can affect the normal operation of the entire traffic network and
 are uploaded and stored on blockchain to prevent tampering.
pose significant public safety risks.
 Each block generates a unique hash value: if a malicious
 V2N link attack: Hackers can communicate with vehicles
 user attempts to alter the model parameters, the hash value
through the network link (V2N), forging or altering commands
 will change, thereby ensuring integrity. Then, a randomly
from external networks, leading to faults in the vehicle conselected aggregator performs parameter aggregation for the
trol systems or the leakage of sensitive data. This type of
 current training round, producing a unified set of model
attack could result in the loss of vehicle functionality or data
 parameters. These aggregated parameters are subsequently
breaches, threatening vehicle safety and user privacy.
 uploaded back to the blockchain, after which local models
 V2P link attack: Hackers can compromise the communicaretrieve the updated parameters and retrain until optimal accution link between vehicles and pedestrians (V2P), potentially
 racy is achieved. The following descriptions provide detailed
endangering pedestrian safety or causing misunderstandings or
 explanation of the content in the figure:
incorrect responses during interactions between vehicles and
pedestrians. This attack not only jeopardizes pedestrian lives • RSU: As a central node in the network, the RSU is
but could also negatively impact the normal functioning of the responsible for aggregating and coordinating data transtraffic system. mission between different vehicles and may also act as
 In-vehicle attack: Attackers can target the vehicle’s CAN an aggregator. The RSU can also maintain the blockchain
by sending large amounts of invalid or malicious data, causing to verify and record all model updates.
the vehicle control system to overload. As a result, the vehicle • Teacher Model: The teacher model is used in the RSU
may experience system failures or loss of control, leading to for model management, acting as a mechanism to transfer
more severe traffic accidents. knowledge. It serves as a guide for other vehicles (student
 Consequently, in the context of in-vehicle networks, IDS models), allowing them to obtain knowledge from the
can be deployed on the ECU or the in-vehicle gateway teacher model for better training outcomes.
to monitor communication data flows within the vehicle’s • Blockchain: In the context of ITS, blockchain technology
internal network, identifying potential malicious attacks. For is introduced primarily to address the trust establishment
IDS deployment in external vehicular networks, it can be and secure collaboration challenges in the distributed
positioned at locations such as road side units (RSUs), V2V vehicular networks. In an open environment consisting
communication nodes, and cloud-based security centers, where of numerous vehicles and roadside units, ensuring the
it can continuously monitor and analyze network traffic in real- immutability and traceability of key information such as
time to detect anomalous behaviors or attacks. model updates is crucial. Blockchain, with its decentralized, transparent, and tamper-resistant distributed ledger
 properties, provides a trustworthy collaborative platform
B. System Model for all participants. Any updates to model parameters
 In light of the requirements of the above intelligent trans- are encrypted and chained in the blockchain. If any
portation system, we propose an intrusion detection method, malicious node attempts to alter the data, its behavior
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN 5

Fig. 4. Constructed knowledge graph on CICIDS2017, Car-Hacking and CICIoV2024 dataset.

 will be immediately detected due to the breakage of irrelevant features, thereby reducing the dimensionality of
 the hash chain, effectively preventing model poisoning the dataset. Subsequently, we construct the datasets into a
 attacks. This creates a trust mechanism that does not rely knowledge graph using the resource description framework
 on a central authority, which is crucial for the safety- (RDF). Knowledge graphs possess strong expressive capacritical systems of intelligent transportation. In section II, bilities for modeling attack categories and network behavior
 we provide a specific analysis and proof of blockchain’s characteristics, effectively capturing high-order correlations in
 immutability feature, which ensures data integrity and attack patterns. By leveraging rich semantic representations,
 trust within the system. knowledge graphs can automatically uncover latent relation-
 • Lock: The yellow lock icon in the figure represents the ships between features.
 encryption operation, ensuring that data remains secure Specifically, knowledge information is stored in the form of
 and is not tampered with or accessed by unauthorized RDF triples (s, p, o), where s represents the subject, used to
 entities during the process of uploading and download- identify the entity or concept being asserted, p symbolizes
 ing model parameters to and from the blockchain. The the predicate, used to describe the relationship or attribute
 gray lock icon represents the decryption operation, used between the subject and object, and o means the object,
 for decrypting during global parameter aggregation and indicating the value or entity connected to the subject through
 vehicle parameter updates. the predicate. In the process of constructing RDF triples, we
 first use rdflib.Graph() to create an RDF graph, and then define
C. Data Preprocessing a namespace to uniformly identify entities and properties. Sub-
 First, we preprocess the datasets related to IoV, including sequently, we iterate through each row of the dataset, defining
Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024, and CICIDS-2017, which contain each piece of network traffic data as an RDF entity and adding
normal network traffic data and various types of attack data. traffic features as the corresponding properties. Additionally,
These datasets include some missing values and outliers. an attack type (label) is assigned as a property of each record in
The preprocessing procedure involves data cleaning, feature the dataset. For example, each row of the preprocessed dataset
selection, followed by knowledge graph construction, and is treated as a network flow and assigned a unique identifier,
finally, standardization. such as the entity f low1. If it is identified as a DoS attack,
 1) Data Cleaning: Raw data containing missing values or it can be represented as ( f low1, is, DoS ), or if its Flow IAT
outliers is removed to ensure that the processed dataset is free Mean is X, it is represented as ( f low1, hasFlowIAT Mean, X).
of such irregularities. The triple representation forms the basic structure of the
 2) Feature Selection: We employ a machine learning model knowledge graph, facilitating the structured organization and
to assess the importance of features and select the top 23 retrieval of interconnected information. Finally, all generated
features based on their importance ranking, along with their triples are added to the graph for the construction of the
corresponding label columns. knowledge graph. We visualize the constructed knowledge
 3) Knowledge Graph Construction: Vehicular network graph, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Furthermore, the knowledge
attacks often exhibit contextual associations and higher-order graph shown in Fig. 4(a) does not encompass all three datasets
dependencies, which traditional feature vectors struggle to used in this study. It is specifically the knowledge graph
effectively capture. The construction of the knowledge graph is constructed from the CICIDS2017 dataset. In order to ensure
primarily aimed at significantly enhancing the deep semantic the clarity and readability of the content in the figure, we
understanding of complex and intricate attack patterns in only present a portion of it. The knowledge graphs constructed
IDS. Prior to constructing the knowledge graph, data cleaning from the other two datasets, namely the Car-Hacking and
and feature selection are performed to remove redundant and CICIoV2024 datasets, are shown in Fig. 4(b-c). Similarly, data
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

cleaning process is initially performed, with the distinction Algorithm 1 Knowledge Distillation
that no feature selection was conducted for the Car-Hacking Input: Teacher model fT , training data X, training labels y,
and CICIoV2024 datasets. We extracted features such as CAN epochs E, batch size B, temperature T , loss weight α
ID, packet size, and vehicle sensor data, and subsequently Output: Trained student model fS
transformed them into RDF triples. Following this, knowledge 1: Get teacher logits t ← fT (X)
graphs are constructed. 2: Define callbacks:
 4) Standardization: Different features may have varying callbacks = [
scales and magnitudes (e.g., port numbers may range in the ReduceLROnPlateau(monitor=’loss’, factor=0.5,
thousands, while packet sizes may reach the millions). With- patience=2, min lr=1e-6, verbose=True),
out standardization, certain features may disproportionately EarlyStopping(monitor=’loss’, patience=3, restore b
influence gradient updates during model training, leading to est weights=True, verbose=True),]
oscillations or even failure to converge. For instance, in neural 3: for epoch  (1, E + 1) do
networks, unnormalized data can easily result in vanishing or 4: for batch  (0, len(X), B) do
exploding gradients. Therefore, we apply min-max normaliza- 5: Get current batch:
tion, calculated as follows: 6: X batch = X[batch: batch + B]
 x − xmin 7: y batch = y[batch: batch + B]
 X= . (9) 8: t batch = t[batch: batch + B]
 xmax − xmin
 9: Get Student predictions: s ← fS (X batch)
 10: Calculate distillation loss:
D. Model Distillation 11: distill loss ← KL (softmax(tbatch /T ), softmax(s/T ))·
 With the continuous limitations in computational resources, (T 2 )
memory, and power consumption of IoV devices, especially in 12: Calculate student loss: student loss ←
real-time intrusion detection tasks that require processing large CCE(y batch, s)
amounts of network traffic data, running traditional large deep 13: Combined loss: total loss ← α·student loss+(1−
learning models becomes extremely challenging. To effectively α) · distill loss
address this issue, this paper proposes a lightweight model 14: Update the student model fS through total loss and
design method based on knowledge distillation to alleviate gradients
the computational burden on vehicular devices and improve 15: Weight pruning for the student model fS
model efficiency. Therefore, for the local models, we adopt 16: end for
a model compression technique known as knowledge distil- 17: end for
lation, which transfers knowledge from a complex teacher 18: return fS
model to a smaller, more efficient student model. The teacher
model is usually trained on computationally abundant cloud
servers or RSUs, while the student model is deployed on consecutive epochs, automatically restoring the model
vehicular devices with limited computational resources. In this weights from the epoch with the lowest loss.
way, the student model not only learns the high-level feature Additionally, we employ the neural network weight prunrepresentations and decision-making abilities embedded in ing method (apply pruning), whose core functionality is to
the teacher model but also maintains a low computational reduce the number of effective parameters in the model by
and storage demand, ensuring efficient operation on vehicular setting weights with absolute values smaller than a specified
devices. threshold to zero, thereby achieving model compression and
 The knowledge distillation process is outlined in Algo- acceleration. This method accepts an optional parameter, prunrithm 1. During the knowledge distillation process, the ing threshold (default value: 0.01), to control the intensity of
temperature parameter is set to 5.0. This parameter controls pruning: a higher threshold leads to more aggressive pruning
the smoothness of the student model’s output, enhancing the (more weights are zeroed out), while a lower threshold results
model’s learning capability. And the weight ratio between in more conservative pruning (retaining more weights).
the distillation loss and the true label loss (i.e., alpha) is
initially set to 0.8 to enhance the model’s learning ability while E. Local Model Training
minimizing the computational burden on resource-constrained Within the framework of IoV, the data generated by vehicles
vehicles. As training progressed, the alpha value gradually contains a substantial amount of sensitive information, which
decreases to 0.3 to balance the distillation loss and the student is subject to stringent data protection regulations. Traditional
model’s training on the true labels. Moreover, we implement centralized processing methods present a significant risk of
two callback functions: privacy leakage. Therefore, to address the privacy and dis-
 • ReduceLROnPlateau: This strategy dynamically adjusts tributed characteristics of data in ITS, we employ the FL
 the learning rate by monitoring the training loss. If the framework for local models. In this approach, local vehicles
 loss fails to decrease for two consecutive epochs, the only need to upload model parameters rather than raw data,
 learning rate is halved, with a lower bound set at 1×10−6 . fundamentally preventing data from leaving the vehicle. This
 • EarlyStopping: An early stopping mechanism that halts approach aligns perfectly with the stringent privacy and comtraining if the loss shows no improvement for three pliance requirements of ITS. Otherwise, in the real world, the
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN 7

Fig. 5. Data sample distribution on each client under the IID setting.

Fig. 6. Data sample distribution on each client under the non-IID setting.

data on each client may not follow an identical distribution. determined based on empirical values from multiple tests
We consider two distinct scenarios: IID and non-IID. In the conducted during the experiments. Meanwhile, we employe
IID scenario, the samples in the dataset are independent and a dropout layer to prevent overfitting, with the dropout rate
identically distributed, meaning that the data from each vehicle set to 0.2. To further prevent overfitting, L2 regularization is
share similar distributions and categories. To achieve this, we applied to the weights of all fully connected layers, with a
employ stratified sampling to ensure that the data distribution regularization coefficient of 1e-4.
across local vehicles aligns with the global dataset. This To achieve optimal classification performance, we incorpoapproach helps simulate a real-world scenario where multiple rate two loss functions during model distillation: Kullbackdevices share similar data distributions, as illustrated in Fig. 5. leibler (KL) divergence and categorical cross-entropy (CCE),
To simulate a more challenging scenario, the data distribution which are combined to compute the total loss function, as
in the Non-IID mode is randomly disturbed, resulting in formalized in Algorithm 1. KL divergence is primarily used in
discrepancies in the data distributions between vehicles. This the knowledge distillation process. Specifically, during student
makes model training more challenging for each vehicle. model training, the KL divergence quantifies the discrepancy
To address this, we introduce a dynamic non-IID sampling between the output probability distribution (softmax outputs)
method, which incorporates an appropriate deviation factor of the student model and the soft targets (probability distrito simulate the data heterogeneity that may exist between bution) generated by the teacher model [25], [26], [27]. CCE
different vehicles in real-world settings, as shown in Fig. 6. measures the difference between the model’s predictions and
 In our experiments, we set up 10 vehicles, with each vehicle the ground-truth labels in classification tasks [28], [29], [30].
independently training its local model and utilizing the global The mathematical formulations of these loss functions are:
model’s weights for training. In the first training round, each X 
 P(xi )
 
vehicle initializes the model parameters, while subsequent DKL (P k Q) = P(xi ) log , (10)
 i
 Q(xi )
rounds utilize the aggregated global model parameters from
the previous round. During each iteration process, local vehi- 
 P(t) P(s)
 
cles train their models based on their own data and then distill loss = DKL k , (11)
 T T
submitted the model updates to the global model. After each
iteration, all local vehicles send their updated model weights to c
 X
the server for weighted aggregation. Additionally, both local student loss = − ytrue,i log(ystudent,i ), (12)
vehicles and the global model are trained for 25 iterations. i=1

During the model training process, the local models used by total loss = α · student loss + (1 − α) · distill loss
the vehicles are either trained based on knowledge distillation c
 !
from a teacher model or through conventional training, with a
 X
 =α − ytrue,i log(ystudent,i )
multilayer perceptron (MLP) serving as the base architecture. i=1
And we use the adam optimizer with an initial learning  
 P(t) P(s)
 
rate set to 0.001. The batch size is set to 32, which was + (1 − α) DKL k . (13)
 T T
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Eqs. (10) and (11) represent the KL divergence functions. To further enhance privacy and reduce storage overhead,
Specifically, Eq. (10) denotes the KL divergence after temper- each client employs CRT to encrypt each block. Specifically,
ature scaling, while Eq. (11) corresponds to the KL divergence given the following congruence system:
without temperature scaling, commonly referred to as the
 CT 1,r ≡ b(i,r)
 8
 1 (mod p1 ),
distillation loss. The loss function used for the student model
 ˆ
 ˆ
 ˆ (i,r)
 CT 2,r ≡ b2 (mod p2 ),
 ˆ
is defined in Eq. (12), based on the cross-entropy loss. The
 <
total loss function is described in Eq. (13). In these equations, ˆ .
 ..
 (15)
 ˆ
i denotes the class index (e.g., class 1, class 2, etc.), P(xi )
 ˆ
 ˆ
 CT m,r ≡ b(i,r) (mod pm ).
 :
represents the probability predicted by the teacher model for m

class i, while Q(xi ) denotes the corresponding probability CRT ensures that each partial value bk (the k-th paramepredicted by the student model. P(t) and P(s) refer to the ter block from Step 3 in Algorithm 2) can be uniquely
full probability distributions output by the teacher and student embedded into the final ciphertext CT i,r while remaining
models, respectively. The parameter T is the temperature recoverable during decryption. Leveraging CRT, the origicoefficient, which controls the smoothness of the output nal model parameters are first encoded (i.e., converted into
distributions during distillation. ytrue,i indicates the ground- integers) and subsequently partitioned into multiple random
truth distribution for class i, typically expressed in one-hot smaller blocks. Each block can be encrypted independently
encoding, and ŷstudent,i denotes the predicted probability for and in parallel, enabling efficient computation on low-power
class i output by the student model. multi-core platforms. This approach is particularly well suited
 for resource-constrained vehicular network scenarios. The
Algorithm 2 Model Parameters Encryption encryption process can be formulated as:
Input: Client 1 to n model parameters Wi,r , security parame- m
 X
 ters CT i,r = bk S k T k mod (S ), (16)
Output: Encrypted model parameters CT i,r k=1
 1: Vectorize parameters: W i,r = ϕ(Wi,r ) where bk denotes the k-th parameter block generated in Step 3,
 N N
 S k represents a modulus from the predefined modulus set S
 bi,r = W i,r − Mi( j,r) + M (i,r)
 P P
 2: Blind: W j
 j=1 j=1 for constructing congruence equations, T k is the multiplicative
 3: Split the parameters into m random blocks {b(i,r)
 k }, ensuring
 inverse or construction factor correspondingQ to modulus S k
 linear reconstructability that satisfies CRT conditions, and S (S = m k=1 pk ) serves as
 Pm
 4: Use CRT to encrypt blocks: CT i = k=1 bk S k T k mod (S )
 the composite modulus enabling all encrypted blocks to be
 5: Return encrypted model parameters CT i,r incorporated into a unified congruence system.

 G. Global Model Aggregation
 Upon receiving all model upload transactions from local
F. Parameter Encryption clients, blockchain validators must first verify the validity
 After completing local model training, client Ci obtains of the submitted transactions. Subsequently, an aggregator is
the local model parameters Wi,r for round r. To protect randomly selected to perform the aggregation operation, as
privacy, each client encrypts its model parameters according detailed in Algorithm 3. It primarily consists of the following
to Algorithm 2. First, to convert original model parameters three steps:
into integers for encoding, the transformation function ϕ(x) is Step 1: Transaction validation. The system verifies the
defined as follows: integrity of each block to detect potential malicious attacks
 or tampering. Any unauthorized modification to a block will
 (
 x × 10t , if x × 10t − x × 10t < 0.5,
 ˘  ˘
 ϕ(x) =  (14) alter its corresponding hash value, which can be identified
 x × 10t + 1, otherwise,
 ˘
 by examining the complete blockchain and verifying the
where t is a positive integer (e.g., t = 5), which controls the previous hash values.
precision of the transformed model parameters. If the decimal Step 2: Aggregator selection and operation. After all
part of x × 10t is less than 0.5, the value is rounded down, local clients upload their locally trained model parameters, the
otherwise, it is rounded up. designated aggregator (central server) retrieves these encrypted
 Then, blinding encoding is applied to enhance security. model parameters from the blockchain and computes their
Specifically, random matrices Mi( j,r) and M (i,r) are used to per- aggregated value.
 j
form weighted masking and shifting, ensuring that the original Step 3: Block generation. The aggregated parameters for
parameters cannot be directly inferred, even if ciphertexts are round r of the specific model training task are encrypted and
exposed. packaged into a new block, denoted as blockr , which is then
 Subsequently, random block partitioning is performed, split- appended to the blockchain.
 bi,r into m random blocks {b(i,r) } while preserving linear
ting W k
reconstructability. This ensures that no single block contains H. Local Model Updating
complete parameter information, instead, all blocks must be During the update phase, each client Ci extracts the aggrecombined to recover the original data. gated parameters from blockr and executes the decryption
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN 9

Algorithm 3 Model Aggregation TABLE I
Input: Encrypted model parameters stored in the blockchain C ONFUSION M ATRIX
 N
 {CT i,r }i=1
Output: New block blockr
 1: Verify the transactions uploaded by local clients
 2: Randomly select an aggregator from all nodes
 N
 3: Compute the aggregation value: wr =
 P
 CT i,r
 i=1
 4: Encrypt the aggregation parameter wr and generate new and 64 GB of RAM. The system operated on a 64-bit
 block blockr Microsoft Windows 10 Professional (version 22H2, build
 5: Return the new block blockr 19045.3803) with UEFI firmware and a polestar Z790 M-
 ATX D4 motherboard. The hardware platform, identified as
Algorithm 4 Decryption and Update device XS-20250502KFBO, provided sufficient computational
Input: Aggregated and encrypted model parameter wr capacity for model training and evaluation under realistic
Output: Decrypted model parameter Wr experimental conditions.
 (r)
 1: Decrypt aggregated parameter wr : Bk = wr mod pk
 (r)
 2: Convert Bk from
 ( finite field to integers using: B. Dataset
 (r)
  
 (r) B − pk , pk /2 ≤ B(r)
 k < pk The datasets utilized in this work include Car-Hacking,
 3: f −1 Bk = (r) k
 (r)
 Bk , 0 ≤ Bk < pk /2 CICIoV2024, and CICIDS2017, each serving distinct purm poses in the evaluation of IDS and vehicular network security.
 4: Sum all transformed values: W r = B(r)
 P
 k
 k=1
 A detailed overview of each dataset is provided as follows:
 5: Compute final parameters: Wr = 10Wt ×N
 r Car-Hacking Dataset: This dataset primarily contains
 6: Return Wr attack behavior data from vehicular networks, making it a
 crucial resource for evaluating IDS in the context of IoV.
 This dataset is collected from a simulated vehicular network
protocol specified in Algorithm 4. Firstly, the initial decryption environment, which includes both normal traffic and various
step applies modular reduction to ciphertext wr , producing attack types, such as denial of service (DoS) attacks, spoofing,
discrete values {B(r) m and unauthorized access. The Car-Hacking dataset provides
 k }k=1 through the operation:
 an invaluable resource for assessing the resilience of IDS
 B(r)
 k = wr mod (pk ) (17) models in detecting and mitigating security threats within the
 automotive network environment.
where the set {pk } consists of pre-selected pairwise distinct
 CICIoV2024 Dataset: This dataset is specifically designed
large prime numbers, which are employed to implement CRTfor research in the security of vehicular networks, with a
based encryption/decryption mechanism.
 focus on testing the effectiveness and robustness of intrusion
 Then, negative value handling is performed. Through the
 detection systems in an IoV context. It includes a wide array
function f −1i, map B(r)
 k ∈ [0, pk ) to the symmetric interval
h of network traffic data, along with various attack behaviors
 − 2 , 2 , supporting the aggregation of negative values
 pk −1 pk −1
 associated with vehicular communication systems. This dataset
(e.g., model parameters may be negative). is particularly useful for evaluating IDS performance under
 Sum all transformed values B̂(r) k to obtain W r , then divide real-world conditions, where vehicular networks face a range
by 10t × N to get the aggregated model parameters Wr for of sophisticated and evolving attack vectors.
round r. The calculation formulas can be obtained from: CICIDS2017 Dataset: This dataset, released by the Canam
 X dian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC), is widely regarded as
 Wr = B̂(r)
 k , (18) one of the standard datasets for network traffic intrusion deteck=1 tion. It includes both normal network traffic and numerous
 Wr types of cyber-attacks, such as brute force attacks, botnet
 Wr = , (19)
 10t × N traffic, and DoS attacks. This dataset is extensively used to
where 10t is the quantization factor and N is the number of benchmark IDS algorithms and has become a key resource
local clients. in the field of network security, facilitating the evaluation of
 detection systems in a variety of attack scenarios.
 IV. E XPERIMENT AND E VALUATION
A. Environment Setup C. Evaluation Metrics
 The proposed method was implemented utilizing several To evaluate the detection performance, we defined a confupython libraries, including scikit-learn, base64, rdflib, numpy, sion matrix as shown in Table I.
hashlib, tensorFlow, pytorch, and seaborn. All experiments In Table I, TP denotes the number of network flows that
were conducted on a high-performance workstation equipped are actually anomalous and correctly predicted as anomalous.
with an intel (R) core (TM) i7-14700HX processor (20 phys- FN represents the number of network flows that are actually
ical cores, 28 logical threads, base frequency of 2.10 GHz) anomalous but incorrectly predicted as normal. FP indicates
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

the number of network flows that are actually normal but Memory consumption: This quantifies the dynamic memerroneously predicted as anomalous. TN corresponds to the ory usage during model training and inference, primarily
number of network flows that are both actually normal and influenced by parameter scale, batch processing data size,
correctly predicted as normal. and intermediate activation values. Excessive memory require-
 Specifically, based on this confusion matrix, we define sev- ments may hinder the model’s deployability on resourceeral metrics to assess their ability to predict whether a network constrained devices. assuming each parameter (including
flow is normal or anomalous. The following performance weights and biases) occupies 4 bytes, the memory consumpindicators are used to evaluate the classification effectiveness: tion is calculated as:
 TP + TN
 ACC = , (20) M = Ptotal · 4. (26)
 T P + T N + FP + FN
where accuracy (ACC) represents the proportion of correctly These metrics collectively form a balanced evaluapredicted packets to the total number of packets. Higher tion framework for model performance and computational
values indicate better performance. While accuracy provides efficiency.
an overall indication of the classifier’s performance, it does
not fully capture the model’s effectiveness when dealing with D. Evaluation Results
imbalanced datasets or different types of classification errors. The proposed method adopts a lightweight model design,
Following accuracy, precision (P) focuses specifically on the which reduces memory consumption and the number of
positive predictions made by the model. parameters by simplifying the neural network architecture. In
 TP addition, knowledge distillation is utilized. By leveraging the
 P= , (21) soft labels provided by the teacher model, the local model
 T P + FP
where P measures the impact of misclassified instances on can effectively learn the teacher’s knowledge and achieve
correctly classified instances. In addition to precision, recall relatively high accuracy, thereby achieving a balance between
(R) provides insight into how well the model detects actual computational load and detection accuracy.
anomalies. We evaluate our method on three datasets and observe
 TP high performance. Specifically, on the Car-Hacking and
 R= , (22)
 T P + FN CICIoV2024 datasets, the model achieves an accuracy exceedwhere R is the ratio of correctly predicted attacks to the actual ing 99%. On the CICIDS2017 dataset, the accuracy reaches
attack traffic. Finally, the F1-score combines precision and over 97%, as shown in Table II. The differences in detection
recall into a single metric. accuracy can be attributed to two factors: differences in
 P·R datasets and data distribution. Car-Hacking and CICIoV2024
 F1 − score = 2 · , (23) datasets primarily simulate various attack types targeting vehi-
 P+R
where the F1-score represents the harmonic mean of precision cles, with a focus on security issues in in-vehicle networks.
and recall, serving as a comprehensive performance metric. Their attack patterns are relatively concentrated, resulting in
 Moreover, we comprehensively evaluate key performance better model performance on these datasets. CICIDS2017
metrics such as model complexity, the number of trainable dataset contains external network traffic data, which has a
parameters, and memory consumption, which are specifically wider variety of attacks and encompasses a broader range
defined as follows: providing quantitative guidance for model of network security threats. Its complexity and the diverselection in practical applications. sity of attacks may cause the model to perform slightly
 Model complexity: This reflects the structural intricacy of worse on certain attack categories, particularly in terms of
a model, typically quantified by metrics such as the number of intrusion detection accuracy. As well as, the difference in
network layers, neuron count (for neural networks), or deci- data distribution is another important factor contributing to
sion rules (for tree-based models). Higher model complexity performance fluctuations. In practical applications, the data
may enhance representational capacity but can also lead to from vehicular devices and networks are often not independent
overfitting and increased computational overhead. and identically distributed (non-IID). As a result, the model
 Trainable parameters: This refers to the total number may not generalize well due to the large variability between
of learnable weights and bias terms in a model. A larger the data, leading to a decrease in accuracy. Furthermore, we
parameter count generally implies stronger fitting capability calculate the number of parameters and memory consumption
but significantly raises computational resource demands and of the local model and compare it with the baseline models.
training time costs. The parameter count for each layer is According to Eq.(25) to Eq.(26), the number of parameters
calculated as: in the proposed model on the Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024, and
 Player = (Nin + 1) · Nout , (24) CICIDS2017 datasets is 9,989, 9,861, and 11,904, respectively, with corresponding memory consumption of 0.038 MB,
where Nin is the input dimension (i.e., the number of neurons 0.038 MB, and 0.045 MB. In contrast, MLP model exhibits
in the previous layer), and Nout is the output dimension (i.e., parameter counts of 44,293, 44,228, and 48,007 on the same
the number of neurons in the current layer). Then, the total datasets, with memory consumption of 0.169 MB, 0.168 MB,
number of parameters is the sum of all layer parameters: and 0.183 MB, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
 Typically, the traditional MLP consists of at least three
 X
 Ptotal = Player . (25)
 layer hidden layers with 256, 128, and 64 neurons, whereas our
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN 11

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON OF M ETHODS ON T HREE DATASETS

Fig. 7. Comparison of model paramers and memory usage.

Fig. 8. Accuracy comparison of the proposed method on three datasets under IID and non-IID conditions.

proposed lightweight model consists of only two layers with and memory usage to approximately one-quarter of that of
128 and 64 neurons. Although the proposed model exhibits the baseline model.
lower accuracy than the conventional MLP across all three To further evaluate the classification performance,
datasets, it significantly reduces the number of parameters Figs. 9–11 present the heatmaps of the proposed model on
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 9. Heatmap on multi-class classification on the Car-Hacking dataset.

Fig. 10. Heatmap on multi-class classification on the CICIoV2024 dataset.

Fig. 11. Heatmap on multi-class classification on the CICIDS2017 dataset.

the three datasets in the process of model training, which are Labels) represents the categories predicted by the model,
essentially confusion matrices. The horizontal axis (Predicted while the vertical axis (True Labels) indicates the true labels.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN 13

 TABLE III with a categorical cross-entropy loss function, a batch size
P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION ON D IFFERENT DATASETS U NDER IID AND of 128, and 100 epochs. The LSTM model consists of three
 N ON -IID C ONDITIONS LSTM layers with 256, 128, and 64 neurons, respectively,
 to capture temporal dependencies in sequential data. ReLU
 activation is applied to the fully connected layers, and the
 output layer uses a softmax activation function for multi-class
 classification. To prevent overfitting, a 50% dropout layer is
 included. The model is trained using the adam optimizer with
 a categorical cross-entropy loss function, a batch size of 128,
Each cell in the matrix reflects the relationship between and 100 epochs. The transformer model, suitable for sequence
predicted and actual categories. Values along the diagonal data classification, includes multi-head self-attention layers
represent correctly classified samples, whereas off-diagonal and position-wise feed-forward networks. The input is first
values indicate misclassifications. The color intensity of each mapped to a 64-dimensional embedding space through a dense
cell corresponds to the magnitude of the value. From the layer, followed by several transformer blocks. Information is
heatmaps, it is evident that the proposed IDS model achieves aggregated through a global average pooling layer, and a dense
satisfactory classification results across all datasets. layer with a ReLU activation function and a dropout layer
 Considering that client data in real-world scenarios is often are applied to prevent overfitting. The output layer uses a
non-IID, we conduct comparative experiments under both IID softmax activation function. The model is trained using the
and non-IID settings. As shown in Fig. 8, the accuracy under adam optimizer with sparse categorical cross-entropy loss, a
the non-IID setting is initially lower than that under the IID batch size of 32, and 100 epochs.
setting, but both scenarios converge to high accuracy after Experimental results demonstrate that although our method
several rounds of training. This demonstrates that the proposed exhibits slightly lower accuracy than certain deep learning
scheme is well-suited not only for IID but also for more models on specific datasets, it significantly outperforms them
realistic non-IID environments, highlighting its robustness and in terms of parameter efficiency and memory utilization. In
practical applicability. To enhance the comprehensiveness of the Car-Hacking dataset, the parameter count of our approach
the experimental evaluation, we add the evaluation metrics is only 8.01% of that of CNN, 22.55% of MLP, 1.95%
defined in Eq.(21) to Eq.(23) (i.e., precision (P), recall (R), and of LSTM, and merely 0.31% of the transformer. On the
F1-score), as shown in Table III. The model achieves precision CICIoV2024 dataset, the parameter count accounts for just
of 99.86%, recall of 99.83%, and F1-score of 99.84% on the 7.93% compared to CNN, 22.30% of MLP, 1.93% of LSTM,
Car-Hacking dataset, precision of 99.91%, recall of 99.91%, and 0.31% of the transformer. Similarly, on the CICIDS2017
and F1-score of 99.91% on the CICIoV2024 dataset, and dataset, our method requires only 9.56% of the parameters
precision of 97.82%, recall of 97.73%, and F1-score of 97.70% of CNN, 24.80% of MLP, 2.31% of LSTM, and 0.36% of
on the CICIDS2017 dataset. Under the non-IID scenario, the transformer. However, this lightweight design slightly reduces
model achieves precision of 99.78%, recall of 99.73%, and the accuracy. To select the appropriate model configuration
F1-score of 99.75% on the Car-Hacking dataset, precision based on different application requirements, we balance the
of 99.88%, recall of 99.88%, and F1-score of 99.88% on following factors. For applications that require high accuracy,
the CICIoV2024 dataset, and precision of 97.13%, recall of more complex models can be chosen, although this will
96.98%, and F1-score of 96.94% on the CICIDS2017 dataset. increase memory and computational burdens. To this end,
The evaluation metrics above indicate that, with IID data, we adjust the MLP model architecture and conduct relevant
the distribution is more uniform, leading to better training experiments for validation. The adjusted MLP consists of three
performance and more stable results. hidden layers, with 128, 128, and 64 neurons in each layer.
 Moreover, to comprehensively evaluate the performance In both IID and non-IID scenarios, the accuracy on the Carof the proposed method, we conduct a comparative analysis Hacking dataset reaches 99.85% and 99.80%, respectively; on
against several mainstream deep learning models, including the CICIoV2024 dataset, the accuracy is 99.98% and 99.97%,
CNN, long short-term memory networks (LSTM), MLP, and and on the CICIDS2017 dataset, the accuracy is 98.10% and
transformer architectures. As shown in Table II, the compar- 97.96%. Compared to the 128-64 MLP, this adjustment leads
ison spans multiple dimensions of multi-class classification to significant accuracy improvements. Specifically, the accutasks, such as classification accuracy, the number of model racy on the Car-Hacking dataset increases by approximately
parameters, and memory consumption. Next, we will provide a 0.7%, on the CICIoV2024 dataset by about 0.3%, and on
detailed explanation of the settings for the comparison models. the CICIDS2017 dataset by around 1%. Besides, we compare
 The CNN model performs feature extraction and classifica- the average processing time per packet under different MLP
tion through convolutional layers and fully connected layers. architectures, as shown in Fig. 12(a) displays the average
The first convolutional layer has 256 neurons, followed by two processing time per packet for the 128-64 MLP model archiadditional convolutional layers with 128 and 64 neurons, using tecture: 0.013 ms on the Car-Hacking dataset, 0.015 ms on
the ReLU activation function. A maxPooling1D layer is used the CICIoV2024 dataset, and 0.020 ms on the CICIDS2017
to reduce the feature map size, and the final classification is dataset. Fig. 12(b) presents the average processing time per
done using a fully connected layer with a softmax activation packet for the 128-128-64 MLP model architecture: 0.015 ms
function. The model is trained using the adam optimizer on the Car-Hacking dataset, 0.017 ms on the CICIoV2024
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF THE N UMBER OF PARAMETERS AND ACCURACY U NDER D IFFERENT MLP A RCHITECTURES

Fig. 12. Average processing time per data packet.

 TABLE V time of only 19.93 ms and a decryption time of 19.02
C OMPARISON OF E NCRYPTION AND D ECRYPTION T IME FOR D IFFERENT milliseconds. In contrast, RSA exhibits a clear disadvantage
 M ETHODS IN O NE FL ROUND W ITH MLP(128-64) in processing time, requiring 24.83 ms for encryption and
 41.13 ms for decryption. In addition, HE exhibits significantly
 higher computational overhead due to its inherent complexity,
 with encryption and decryption times of 35.14 milliseconds
 and 215.30 ms, respectively. These results clearly indicate that
 TABLE VI HE may introduce substantial performance costs in such appli-
C OMPARISON OF E NCRYPTION AND D ECRYPTION T IME FOR D IFFERENT cation scenarios compared to CRT and RSA. Similarly, the
 M ETHODS IN O NE FL ROUND W ITH MLP(128-128-64) encryption and decryption time vary depending on the MLP
 model architecture. Therefore, we conduct relevant experiments to evaluate the impact of encryption methods on system
 latency. As shown in Table VI, the encryption and decryption
 time for CRT are 31.92 ms and 30.9 ms, respectively, for RSA,
 they are 65.86 ms and 112.43 ms, and for HE, the encryption
dataset, and 0.026 ms on the CICIDS2017 dataset. Compared and decryption times are 65.42 ms and 408.46 ms, respectively.
to the 128-64 MLP, the average processing time per packet It is evident that, apart from CRT, the other two encryption
increased by 0.02 ms, 0.02 ms, and 0.06 ms on the three methods have relatively high encryption and decryption times.
datasets, respectively. Similarly, we also compared the number To ensure that the encryption and decryption time do not
of parameters and memory consumption, as shown in Table IV. exceed the system’s latency requirements, we adopt a strategy
In terms of the number of parameters, the adjusted 128-128- of compressing the model parameters in this paper. This
64 MLP model had 26,501, 26,371, and 28,423 parameters approach reduces the parameter size, thereby lowering the
on the Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024, and CICIDS2017 datasets, computational overhead during encryption and decryption.
respectively, with memory consumption of 0.101 MB, 0.101 This ensures that the system can meet the stringent real-time
MB, and 0.108 MB. Compared to the 128-64 MLP, the requirements of ITS while maintaining high accuracy.
number of parameters increase by 16,512, 16,510, and 16,519, These findings strongly indicate the potential of the
and memory consumption increased by 0.063 MB, thereby proposed method for deployment in resource-constrained
increasing the computational burden on onboard resources. vehicular environments, such as in-vehicle systems within
 In addition, in our proposed scheme, the encryption and intelligent transportation networks.
decryption method based on CRT is compared with two widely
used cryptographic RSA and HE in terms of encryption and
 V. C ONCLUSION
decryption time performance, as shown in Table V.
 The CRT-based method demonstrates superior efficiency in To protect vehicular privacy data, this paper proposed a
both encryption and decryption phases, with an encryption lightweight intrusion detection method for IoV based on FL
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN 15

and blockchain technology. In this framework, each vehicle [15] Y. Lu, Y. Guo, S. Chen, and J. Li, “An intrusion detection model based
trained a model locally and shares only model parame- on deep convolutional factorization machine for controller area network
 bus in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 22,
ters, thereby significantly reducing the risk of data leakage. pp. 36203–36213, Nov. 2024.
Moreover, blockchain was employed to prevent malicious [16] I. Mohammed Sayem, M. Islam Sayed, S. Saha, and A. Haque, “ENIDS:
participants from tampering with locally trained model param- A deep learning-based ensemble framework for network intrusion
 detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 5,
eters. In addition, knowledge distillation was also utilized pp. 5809–5825, Oct. 2024.
to compress the model, leading to substantial reductions in [17] T. Zhang et al., “Hybrid transfer and self-supervised learning approaches
parameter count and memory consumption for local devices. in neural networks for intelligent vehicle intrusion detection and
 analysis,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 7677–7692, Apr.
Experiments conducted on the Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024, 2025.
and CICIDS2017 datasets demonstrated that, compared with [18] Y. Wu, L. Nie, S. Wang, Z. Ning, and S. Li, “Intelligent intrusion detecbaseline models, the proposed approach achieved a parameter tion for Internet of Things security: A deep convolutional generative
 adversarial network-enabled approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10,
size of only 9989, 9861, 11904 and a memory footprint of no. 4, pp. 3094–3106, Feb. 2023.
0.039, 0.038, 0.045 MB. The relevant code has been uploaded [19] J. Cui et al., “Collaborative intrusion detection system for SDVN: A
 fairness federated deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
to GitHub for readers to replicate the experimental results: Syst., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2512–2528, Sep. 2023.
zhajiawei666/Lightweight-Privacy-Preserving-IDS-for-ITS. In [20] S. Liu et al., “Delay and energy-efficient asynchronous federated
future work, we plan to further improve the model archi- learning for intrusion detection in heterogeneous industrial Internet of
 Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 14739–14754, Apr.
tecture to enhance detection accuracy on the CICIDS2017 2024.
dataset. [21] J. Zhang, C. Luo, M. Carpenter, and G. Min, “Federated learning for
 distributed IIoT intrusion detection using transfer approaches,” IEEE
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 8159–8169, Jul. 2023.
 R EFERENCES [22] O. Aouedi, K. Piamrat, G. Müller, and K. Singh, “Federated semisu-
[1] H. Sedjelmaci, N. Kaaniche, A. Boudguiga, and N. Ansari, “Secure pervised learning for attack detection in industrial Internet of Things,”
 attack detection framework for hierarchical 6G-enabled Internet of IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 286–295, Jan. 2023.
 Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 2633–2642, [23] L. Jin et al., “Intrusion detection for duture ITS: Integrated knowledge
 Feb. 2024. graph and artificial intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
[2] X. Li et al., “Cognitive AmBC-NOMA IoV-MTS networks with IQI: vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 14680–14689, Oct. 2025.
 Reliability and security analysis,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., [24] J. Zhang, J. Cui, H. Zhong, Z. Chen, and L. Liu, “PA-CRT: Chinese
 vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2596–2607, Feb. 2023. remainder theorem based conditional privacy-preserving authentication
[3] W. Jiang and X. Lv, “A distributed Internet of Vehicles data scheme in vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
 privacy protection method based on zero-knowledge proof and Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 722–735, Mar. 2021.
 blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 6332–6345, [25] S. Ji, Z. Zhang, S. Ying, L. Wang, X. Zhao, and Y. Gao,
 May 2024. “Kullback–Leibler divergence metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
[4] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 2047–2058, Apr. 2022.
 [26] F. E. Tosun, A. M. H. Teixeira, J. Dong, A. Ahlén, and S. Dey,
 intrusion detection system in intelligent transportation systems using
 “Kullback-leibler divergence-based observer design against sensor bias
 rule extraction methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 injection attacks in single-output systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023.
 Security, vol. 20, pp. 2763–2777, 2025.
[5] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS:
 [27] X.-X. Ren, G.-H. Yang, and X.-G. Zhang, “Historical data-based
 Hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language
 stealthy attack design on cyber-physical systems under Kullback–Leibler
 models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb.
 divergence,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6664–6672,
 2025.
 Apr. 2024.
[6] Y. Wu et al., “Intrusion detection for Internet of Things: An anchor [28] Y. Ho and S. Wookey, “The real-world-weight cross-entropy loss
 graph clustering approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, function: Modeling the costs of mislabeling,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
 pp. 1965–1980, 2025. pp. 4806–4813, 2020.
[7] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev, [29] H. N. Monday et al., “Enhancing ECG classification in cardiac diagnos-
 “IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development tics: A novel approach using adaptive focal cross-entropy loss function,”
 in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 7161–7174, Oct.
 no. 12, pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023. 2025.
[8] A. Chougule, I. Kulkarni, T. Alladi, V. Chamola, and F. R. Yu, [30] C. Sun, H. Li, M. Song, and S. Hong, “A ranking-based cross-entropy
 “HybridSecNet: In-vehicle security on controller area networks through loss for early classification of time series,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 a hybrid two-step LSTM-CNN model,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 11194–11203, Aug. 2024.
 vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 14580–14591, Oct. 2024. [31] A. R. Javed, S. U. Rehman, M. U. Khan, M. Alazab, and T. G. Reddy,
[9] X. Lin et al., “ByCAN: Reverse engineering controller area network “CANintelliIDS: Detecting in-vehicle intrusion attacks on a controller
 (CAN) messages from bit to byte level,” IEEE Internet Things J., area network using CNN and attention-based GRU,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 vol. 11, no. 21, pp. 35477–35491, Nov. 2024. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1456–1466, Apr. 2021.
[10] H. J. Jo and W. Choi, “A survey of attacks on controller area networks [32] S. Cherfi, A. Lemouari, and A. Boulaiche, “MLP-based intrusion detecand corresponding countermeasures,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., tion for securing IoT networks,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage., vol. 33, no. 1,
 vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6123–6141, Jul. 2022. p. 20, Jan. 2025.
[11] X.-Y. Kong and G.-H. Yang, “An intrusion detection method based on [33] Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Xue, and J. Ma, “LSTM-based intrusion detection
 self-generated coding technology for stealthy false data injection attacks system for VANETs: A time series classification approach to false
 in train-ground communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., message detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12,
 vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 8468–8476, Aug. 2023. pp. 23906–23918, Dec. 2022.
[12] Y. Xue, J. Pan, Y. Geng, Z. Yang, M. Liu, and R. Deng, “Real- [34] Z. Zeng, B. Zhao, X. Deng, X. Liu, J. Zheng, and J. Chen, “Toward inteltime intrusion detection based on decision fusion in industrial control ligent attack detection with causal transformer in Internet of Things,”
 systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Cyber-Phys. Syst., vol. 2, pp. 143–153, IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 10751–10767, Apr. 2025.
 2024. [35] H. Zhang et al., “Efficient and secure outsourcing scheme for RSA
[13] L. Wei, J. Yang, H. Jin, J. Cui, J. Li, and D. He, “Sustainable learning- decryption in Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8,
 based intrusion detection system for VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Intell. pp. 6868–6881, Aug. 2020.
 Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 10080–10091, Jul. 2025. [36] S. Reddi et al., “Privacy-preserving electronic medical record sharing
[14] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid for IoT-enabled healthcare system using fully homomorphic encryption,
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet IOTA, and masked authenticated messaging,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Infor-
 Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022. mat., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 10802–10813, Sep. 2024.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 Jiawei Zha received the B.E. degree from Xuzhou Shuping Dang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 University of Technology, Xuzhou, China, in 2023. B.Eng. (Hons.) degree in electrical and electronic
 He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with engineering from The University of Manchester,
 the School of Information Science and Technology, Manchester, U.K., the B.Eng. degree in electrical
 Nantong University, Nantong, China. His current engineering and automation from Beijing Jiaotong
 research focuses on intrusion detection in vehicular University, Beijing, China, in 2014, via a joint “2+2”
 networks. Dual-Degree Program, and the D.Phil. degree in
 engineering science from the University of Oxford,
 Oxford, U.K., in 2018. He has joined Research
 and Development Center, Huanan Communication
 Company Ltd., after graduating from the University
 of Oxford and was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Computer, Electrical and
 Mathematical Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University
 of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. He is currently a Lec-
 Guoan Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the turer with the School of Electrical, Electronic and Mechanical Engineering,
 B.S. degree in precision instruments, the M.S. degree University of Bristol, Bristol, U.K. His research interests include 6G commuin automatic instruments and equipment, and the nications, wireless communications, wireless security, and machine learning
 Ph.D. degree in communication and information sys- for communications.
 tems from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in
 1986, 1989, and 2001, respectively. He is currently
 a Full Professor with the School of Electronics and
 Information, Nantong University, Nantong, China.
 His current research interests include cognitive wire- Wei Duan received the Ph.D. degree from Chonless networks and vehicular ad hoc networks. buk National University, Jeonju, South Korea, in
 2017. He is currently a Full Professor with Nantong
 University, Nantong, China. He has participated in
 the World Class University Project, sponsored by
 the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant
 funded by the Korean Ministry of Education Science
 Li Jin received the B.S. degree in computer science and Technology as a Vice Head Researcher. He has
 and technology degree from Nanjing University of authored more than 90 journal articles. His research
 Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in interests include a variety of topics in the areas
 2004, the M.S. degree in soft engineering from of wireless communications. He served as a Guest
 Southeast University, Nanjing, in 2007, and the Editor for IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL Special Issue on Near-Field
 Ph.D. degree in communication and information Communications (NFC) in Internet of Everything, IEEE Network Special
 system from Nantong University, Nantong, China, in Issue on Near-Field Communications: Challenges and Opportunities in the
 2020. She is currently an Associate Professor with Networking Landscape, and China Communications Special Issue on New
 the School of Information Science and Technology, Advances in Nonorthogonal Multiple Access; and a Lead Guest Editor for
 Nantong University. Her research interests include Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Special Issue on Architecwireless communication, artificial intelligence, and tures, Challenges, and Opportunities within 6G Emerging Technologies. He
vehicular networks. is an Editor of Frontiers in Communications and Networks.