3960 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

LitCVit: A Lightweight Self-Supervised Contrastive
 Vision Transformer for Encrypted Malicious
 Traffic Detection
 Mehr Un Nisa, Adnan Noor Mian , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Mubashir Husain Rehmani , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Malicious traffic detection often requires large, has further expanded the threat landscape, as cybercriminals
labeled datasets, which are challenging due to privacy con- increasingly exploit these encrypted channels to launch percerns, labeling costs, and evolving threat patterns. Although sistent and evasive attacks, effectively bypassing conventional
recent self-supervised pretraining methods address this issue,
they rely on complex transformer-based architectures that are defenses [1]. Additionally, advancements in encryption protocomputationally expensive and have high inference times, making cols, such as TLS 1.3 and DNS over HTTPS, have reduced the
them unsuitable for real-time use. In addition, most existing availability of previously accessible metadata [2]. These trends
approaches process packets or flows independently, and often emphasize the urgent need for robust and efficient detection
rely on per-packet dataset splits that introduce implicit flow- techniques to identify malicious patterns within encrypted
level data leakage, thereby limiting their ability to capture
meaningful semantic and behavioral relationships across flows for network traffic.
detecting stealthy encrypted threats. To address these issues, we Artificial intelligence (AI)-based techniques have emerged
propose LitCVit, a lightweight self-supervised contrastive Vision as an effective alternative to rule-based and signature-based
Transformer-based framework that captures cross-flow semantic methods for detecting encrypted malicious traffic [3]. Most of
and behavioral patterns to generate robust latent representations these methods rely on manually engineered features extracted
of encrypted traffic. Without relying on decryption or manually
engineered features, our method enables efficient detection of from protocol headers, flow, or handshake metadata to identify
encrypted malicious flows with low inference time. Extensive eval- malicious patterns. However, these methods provide limited
uations on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed visibility into fine-grained encrypted network traffic, leading to
framework achieves an average detection accuracy of 98.10% and higher false alarm rates (FAR), challenges in high-speed traffic
F1-score of 98.08%. Compared to the best state-of-the-art model, processing, and poor generalization across diverse network
LitCVit achieves an average improvement of 2.49% in F1-score,
2.12% in precision, and 2.50% in recall, highlighting its superior conditions [4].
detection capability in encrypted traffic scenarios. Additionally, End-to-end deep learning methods address the limitations of
LitCVit achieves an 8.7× reduction in inference time compared manual feature engineering by automatically learning relevant
to the best existing self-supervised approach, making it highly features from raw data. However, they require large volumes
suitable for deployment on resource-constrained devices. of labeled data for effective training to achieve satisfactory
 Index Terms—Encrypted malicious traffic, self-supervised performance. Acquiring and labeling such data across diverse
malicious traffic detection, pre-training models, contrastive learn- network environments is a time-consuming and resourceing, malware or attack classification. intensive process, often introducing significant security and
 privacy risks [5]. Self-supervised approaches have emerged
 I. I NTRODUCTION to address these challenges by leveraging large volumes of
 unlabeled data for pretraining. These methods reduce the
T HE rapid proliferation of encrypted traffic has not only
 enhanced user security and privacy but also created new
opportunities for adversaries to conceal malicious activities
 reliance on labeled datasets and improve generalization across
 diverse network environments. However, they have comwithin encrypted payloads, facilitating sophisticated attacks plex transformer-based architectures [6], [7], [8], [9] which
such as command-and-control (C2). In parallel, the rise of are unsuitable for real-time intrusion detection due to high
cyber-physical systems and the Internet of Things (IoT) computational and latency requirements. Additionally, most
 techniques process packets independently and adopt per-packet
 Received 21 August 2025; revised 10 March 2026; accepted 6 April 2026. data splits [6], [10], [11], which introduce implicit flow-level
Date of publication 13 April 2026; date of current version 21 April 2026. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for data leakage [9] and fail to capture meaningful semantic and
publication was Dr. Meng Li. (Corresponding author: Adnan Noor Mian.) behavioral relationships across flows necessary for detecting
 Mehr un Nisa and Adnan Noor Mian are with the Cyber Intelli- sophisticated threats.
gence Laboratory, Department of Computer Science, Information Technology University, Lahore 54600, Pakistan (e-mail: mehr.nisa@itu.edu.pk; In this paper, we propose LitCVit, a lightweight contrastive
adnan.noor@itu.edu.pk). Vision Transformer-based framework, for encrypted malicious
 Mubashir Husain Rehmani is with the Department of Computer Sci- traffic detection. Our core idea is to efficiently capture features
ence, Munster Technological University, Cork, T12 P928 Ireland (e-mail:
mshrehmani@gmail.com). from raw encrypted traffic at both fine and coarse grained
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2026.3683528 levels through a hierarchy of lightweight encoder blocks.
 1556-6021 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
NISA et al.: LitCVit: A LIGHTWEIGHT SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE VISION TRANSFORMER 3961

Moreover, we model semantic and behavioral relationships results, Section VII discusses the findings, Section VIII proacross flows by clustering semantically similar traffic patterns vides the ablation study, and Section IX concludes the paper.
through contrastive representation learning, aligning flows
with similar behaviors in the latent space rather than modeling II. R ELATED W ORK
explicit causal interactions. This enables the model to learn We categorize related work into three types: feature-driven,
compact and discriminative representations of encrypted traffic raw-traffic-based, and pre-training-based techniques.
flows without requiring large labeled datasets. To enhance
computational efficiency, we propose a simple yet effective A. Feature-Driven Techniques
lightweight architecture that replaces traditional heavy trans-
 Feature-driven methods extract fields from encrypted traffic,
former designs, significantly reducing complexity and memory
 including header features [13], flow or connection statistics
overhead while preserving critical traffic features.
 [14], and side-channel features [15], [16] to infer malicious
 The proposed design significantly reduces trainable parambehavioral signatures. Some techniques analyze Secure Socketers (0.658 million) and inference latency (2.32 milliseconds)
 ets Layer/ Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) handshakes
while preserving strong detection performance. Given its comfor features such as cipher suites [17], JA3/JA3S hashes, and
pact design, LitCVit aligns well with the resource constraints
 self-signed and expired certificates [18].However, TLS 1.3
of typical edge and IoT devices, as prior studies [12] indicate
 handshake encryption and manual feature engineering limit
that models with sub-million parameters, FLOPs in the range
 their effectiveness in real-time environments.
of a few million, and inference latencies between 10 − 500 ms,
are considered practically deployable in such environments.
 B. Raw Bytes-Based Techniques
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
 Raw bytes-based methods use end-to-end deep learning on
 • We propose LitCVit framework, which introduces a byte-level traffic via Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
 lightweight architecture tailored for encrypted malicious [19], [20], hybrid Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Biditraffic detection through two key design strategies: rectional Gated Recurrent Units (BiGRUs), and CNNs [21],
 – Firstly, LitCVit integrates an efficient convolutional [22] to capture spatial and temporal features. While effective,
 patchify stem and three hierarchical windowed fac- they require large labeled datasets, which are difficult to
 torized attention (wf-Attention) modules, designed acquire in real time. To overcome this, self-supervised learning
 to capture fine-grained intra-flow patterns at byte, techniques have been proposed.
 packet, and flow levels. This architecture significantly reduces the computational overhead of the C. Pre-Training-Based Techniques
 vanilla Vision Transformer (ViT) architecture while Pre-training–based methods reduce reliance on labeled data
 preserving fine-grained spatial representations of by learning general traffic representations for downstream fineflows. tuning. Natural language processing (NLP)-based architectures
 – Secondly, LitCVit employs contrastive learning to model packet- or flow-level byte sequences as linguistic tokens
 capture semantic and behavioral relationships across and apply Large Language Models (LLMs) such as Bidirecflows. By clustering ET-flow with similar patterns, tional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT)
 the model learns robust and discriminative repre- [6], [10], [11], [23], a Packet-level End-to-end Attentive
 sentations that separate malicious and benign traffic, Network for encrypted traffic classification (PEAN) [24], a
 thereby enhancing detection performance and gener- Lite BERT (ALBERT) [25], [26], GPT [27], and T5 [9] to
 alization across diverse threat scenarios. learn representations of encrypted traffic. MIETT [28] further models inter-packet dynamics via multi-instance learning
 • We perform a comprehensive computational complexity
 with novel flow-level contrastive pre-training tasks to learn
 analysis, demonstrating that the proposed model operates
 representations of encrypted traffic. Similarly, vision-inspired
 with substantially fewer parameters and reduced memory
 approaches such as Yet another Traffic Classifier (YaTC) [8],
 usage than conventional multi-head self-attention mod-
 Flow-MAE [29], and NetMamba [30] transform traffic into
 els, making it highly suitable for resource-constrained
 image-like grids and employ ViT-style architectures. Other
 deployments.
 methods identify malware traffic using channel-level behavior
 • We validate LitCVit’s effectiveness and efficiency across
 sequences [7], adversarial pre-training [31], and cross-modal
 six real-world network traffic datasets, demonstrating its
 contrastive learning (tFusion [32]).
 superior performance over state-of-the-art self-supervised
 Despite strong results, recent work reveals that many
 methods. The model’s lightweight design and low
 pre-training–based classifiers suffer from shortcut learning,
 inference latency make it suitable for deployment in
 data leakage, and unrealistic evaluation practices, leading
 resource-constrained environments such as edge and IoT.
 to inflated performance and limited generalization [9], [33].
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Moreover, their complex architectures lead to high inference
Section II reviews related work, Section III introduces the costs. In contrast, Our lightweight ViT-based model addresses
threat model and design goals, Section IV details the archi- these issues through leakage-free evaluation, reduced comtecture of LitCVit, Section V presents the computation plexity, and windowed factorized attention with contrastive
complexity analysis, Section VI reports experiments and learning.
3962 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 III. T HREAT M ODEL AND D ESIGN G OALS to maintain high inference speed and throughput, making it
 suitable for deployment in high-bandwidth environments.
A. Threat Model
 We consider a passive encrypted traffic monitoring scenario C. Design Motivation of the Proposed Architecture
where LitCVit operates as a non-intrusive module integrated
 The design of LitCVit is motivated by three key limitawith a network monitoring device via port mirroring. The
 tions of existing approaches. First, although transformer-based
adversary communicates over encrypted channels to perform
 architectures provide strong global context modeling, their
malicious actions such as C2 communication, data exfilquadratic attention complexity makes them unsuitable for
tration, ransomware, or denial-of-service (DoS) attacks. We
 resource-constrained environments. Second, classical ML
assume the attacker controls the generation of malicious trafmethods depend on handcrafted statistical features that offer
fic, including payload (prior to encryption), timing behavior,
 limited adaptability to modern encrypted protocols such as
and communication endpoints, but cannot tamper with the
 TLS 1.3. Third, lightweight convolutional models capture
monitoring infrastructure. The defender passively observes
 local spatial patterns but fail to model long-range behavioral
mirrored traffic, including packet headers and raw encrypted
 dependencies present in encrypted traffic. To address these
payload bytes, without plaintext access. Labeling is available
 limitations, LitCVit adopts a hierarchical Vision Transformer
only during offline fine-tuning, and no online feedback or
 with windowed factorized attention, enabling efficient capture
adaptation occurs during deployment. Although an adaptive
 of byte, packet, and flow-level semantics within a compact and
attacker may attempt traffic shaping or padding to mimic
 lightweight architecture. The comparative and ablation results
benign flows, protocol-constrained header fields and encrypted
 in Section VIII validate these design choices quantitatively.
byte patterns limit complete obfuscation, enabling the model to
learn robust structural and semantic representations from raw
 IV. P ROPOSED A RCHITECTURE
traffic data. The system operates without prior knowledge of
attack signatures and learns generalizable flow representations In this section, we present the architecture of the prothrough contrastive self-supervised pretraining across diverse posed framework for encrypted malicious traffic detection,
environments and encryption protocols. inspired by the ViT [34]. The proposed architecture utilizes a
 lightweight convolutional patchify stem, which preserves local
 spatial features. To further enhance efficiency, we incorporate
B. Design Goals and Problem Definition a multi-scale windowed factorized attention mechanism that
 We aim to design a lightweight and generalizable framework decomposes attention operations across byte-level, packetfor encrypted malicious traffic detection. Unlike traditional level, and flow-level representations, significantly reducing
traffic classification, which identifies applications or users, our computational complexity and memory overhead. A congoal is to determine whether an ET-flow is benign or malicious trastive loss term is added to the training objective to produce
by passively analyzing encrypted traffic. embeddings that distinguish among various ET-flows during
 the pre-training phase. The overall architecture consists of
 1) Problem Formulation: Let F = { f1 , f2 , . . ., fN } denote
 three phases: Pre-processing, Pre-training, Fine-tuning & Evala set of encrypted traffic flows within a t seconds winuation phase, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Each of these phases is
dow, where each flow fi is uniquely identified by a
 explained in detail in the following sections.
5-tuple: xi = hsrcIP, srcPort, dstIP, dstPort, protocoli and fi =
{pi1 , pi2 , . . ., piM }, where each packet pi j ∈ {0, 1}B represents
a fixed-length sequence of B bytes. These packet bytes are A. Pre-Processing Phase: Flow-Level Image Construction
encoded into a flow matrix Xi ∈ Rh×w , which serves as the To construct a structured and information-preserving repinput representation for the model. The goal is to learn an resentation, we extract ET-flow information directly from the
encoder function E : Rh×w → zi ∈ Rd that maps ET-flow raw Packet Capture (PCAP) file, similar to [8]. Fig. 1 Block
images to a low-dimensional latent representation zi . A shows the pre-processing phase. We use both unlabeled
 During fine-tuning, the pretrained encoder E is concate- and labeled PCAP data in preprocessing phase. First, we
nated with a lightweight classifier C : zi → yi and trained extract N flows based on IP addresses, port numbers, and
using a small labeled dataset Dlabeled = {(Xi , yi )}, where transport-layer protocols, port numbers, and the transport layer
yi ∈ {0, 1, . . ., C−1} is the ground truth label. The goal is to protocol. Second, each flow is truncated or zero-padded to
accurately detect malicious encrypted flows, while ensuring M = 5 packets to ensure fixed-length representation where
efficiency, generalization, and low inference latency. p1 j , p2 j , . . ., p M j represent the M packets of the j-th flow. Eth-
 2) Design Goals: To address the scarcity of labeled ernet headers are removed and IP addresses and port numbers
encrypted malicious traffic, LitCVit aims to learn seman- are anonymized to ensure user privacy and reduce datasettically rich flow-level representations through contrastive specific bias. Each packet is encoded using n bytes, reshaped
self-supervised pretraining, reducing the dependency on man- into a two-dimensional matrix of shape p×w, where p denotes
ual annotation and rule-based heuristics. The system must be the number of rows and w the number of bytes per row. For
capable of detecting a wide range of threats without relying a flow consisting of M packets, these matrices are vertically
on protocol-specific features, ensuring robust generalization stacked to form a single flow-level matrix:Xi ∈ R(M·p)×w . In
across diverse encryption protocols and traffic patterns, includ- our case, we take p = 8 and w = 40 consisting of n = 320 bytes
ing 5G and IoT. In addition, the detection pipeline is required of a packet. Finally, this matrix is saved as an ET-Flow image,
NISA et al.: LitCVit: A LIGHTWEIGHT SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE VISION TRANSFORMER 3963

 Fig. 1. The proposed framework for encrypted malicious traffic detection.

preserving both the internal byte-level structure of packets and based on depthwise and pointwise convolutions, has not been
their sequential order. The output of this phase consists of explored in encrypted traffic detection frameworks.
labeled and unlabeled ET-Flow images, to be used for fine- Finally, positional encoding is applied to preserve spatial
tuning and pre-training, respectively. relationships, and resulting n-dimensional position embeddings are passed to the wf-Attention modules (line 4).
 2) Hierarchical Windowed Factorized Attention: To capture
B. Pre-Training Phase: Contrastive Representation Learning
 multi-scale flow patterns, we adopt a lightweight hierarchical
With ViT
 design that models fine-grained encrypted traffic behaviors at
 The pre-training phase aims to learn robust and discrimina- the byte, packet, and flow levels. Each stage consists of a
tive representations of encrypted traffic flows without requiring lightweight transformer block composed of Layer Normallabeled data. It consists of three main components: a con- ization followed by a WF-Attention module. To reduce the
volutional patchify stem, hierarchical windowed factorized quadratic cost of multi-head self-attention, we adopt a lowattention (wf-Attention), and a contrastive embedding head. rank factorized attention mechanism that directly projects
The overall pre-training process is shown in Fig 1 Block B token sequences into a shared, low-dimensional space (r 
and described in Algorithm 1. The input to this phase is d), without relying on additional compression matrices, as
unlabeled ET-flow images generated during the pre-processing in Linformer [36], which significantly lowers computational
stage. These images are first passed through the convolutional overhead. Furthermore, to avoid costly global attention compatchify stem, which tokenizes them into patch embeddings. putations, we employ windowed attention [37] at byte and
The embeddings are then processed by wf-Attention modules packet levels, restricting attention to local windows and thus
of the transformer, enabling multi-scale feature extraction at significantly reducing computational overhead while maintainbyte, packet, and flow levels. Finally, the encoder output is ing fine-grained flow representations. This effectively reduces
passed through the contrastive learning head to produce robust the number of attention computations from O(N 2 ) to O(N ·w),
latent representations for downstream fine-tuning. The details where w is the window size.
of each component are provided in the following subsections. Although windowed attention limits local interactions at
 1) Convolutional Patchify Stem: Unlike traditional patch early stages long-range dependencies are preserved through
embeddings [34] that divide images into large patches hierarchical composition. Byte- and packet-level encoders
and apply computationally expensive linear projections with induce sparse local attention, while the final flow-level global
limited spatial inductive bias, our design is inspired by the effi- factorized attention produces dense interactions across all
cient spatial decomposition in MobileNetV4 [35]. As shown in packet tokens and the CLS token. Consequently, the stacked
Algorithm 1 (lines 1-3), the Stem employs depthwise separable attention layers maintain a fully connected token interaction
convolutions tailored for ET-flows, capturing localized flow graph, preserving global contextual modeling with reduced
patterns early in the network while significantly reducing complexity. The attention is computed as [36]:
operations compared to the standard convolutions in [8]. To
the best of our knowledge, such convolutional tokenization, Q = XWQ , K = XWK , V = XWV ,
3964 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Algorithm 1 LitCViT Pretraining

 Fig. 2. UMAP visualization of embeddings generated by pre-trained LitCViT.

 Upon completion of the pre-training phase, during which the
 ntXent loss is employed to optimize the model parameters, the
 encoder is preserved and its pre-trained weights are transferred
 for use in the fine-tuning phase (Block C).
 3) Contrastive Embedding Head: We train LitCVit using
 the Normalized Temperature-scaled Cross Entropy (ntXent)
 loss [38] (lines 17-19):
  +
 zi ·zi
 1 XN exp τ
 LntXent = − log  + P , (1)
 N zi ·zi N
 exp τ + j=1, j,i exp iτ j
 z ·z 
 i=1

 where zi is the embedding of the i-th sample, z+ i is a positive
 (similar) pair, and z j are negative (dissimilar) embeddings. τ is
 a temperature parameter that adjusts the smoothness of the
 similarity distribution during contrastive learning.
 Fig. 2 shows the quality of the learned embeddings at
 temperature parameter τ = 0.3, visualized using Uniform
 Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP). UMAP
 projects high-dimensional representations into 2D space while
 preserving local and global structures, making it suitable for
 qualitatively assessing clustering behavior. The visualization
 indicates that LitCVit forms distinct clusters of benign and
 malicious encrypted traffic flows, highlighting its ability to
 capture meaningful flow correlations in a self-supervised manner. Quantitatively, the learned embeddings achieve a cluster
where WQ , WK , WV ∈ Rd×r . purity of 0.7579 and a Normalized Mutual Information (NMI)
 score of 0.508, indicating reasonably good separability of
 QK >
  
 Attention(X) = softmax V, flow behaviors despite encryption. These representations are
 τattn expected to become more discriminative during supervised
 fine-tuning. The impact of different τ values on clustering
where τattn is a learnable temperature parameter that controls quality is presented in Section VIII. After the pre-training,
attention sharpness. we freeze the encoder and preserve the learned weights for
 The byte-level encoder (lines 5-9) performs factorized downstream fine-tuning tasks.
self-attention within fixed-size windows of size w over
the byte-level representations to capture local dependencies.
The resulting features are pooled into packet-level tokens C. Fine-Tuning & Evaluation Phase: Supervised Adaptation
and passed to a second encoder inter-packet wf-Attention for Malicious Traffic Detection
(lines 10-12), which performs inter-packet windowed factor- We fine-tune the pre-trained model to detect various types
ized attention to model to capture cross-packet relationships. of malicious encrypted traffic, as illustrated in Block C of
The Intra-flow global Fact-Attention (lines 13-14) applies Fig. 1. Labeled ET-flow images are first processed through
global factorized attention across the entire flow to model the convolutional patchify stem to generate patch embeddings,
long-range dependencies. Between each stage, lightweight which are passed through the pre-trained encoder connected
depthwise convolutions inject spatial inductive biases and to a lightweight MLP-based classifier. The classifier consists
compress intermediate features. Finally, the encoded tokens are of three fully connected layers with GELU activations and a
aggregated via average pooling and passed through a two-layer dropout rate of 0.2, ending in a softmax layer. Final predictions
MLP projection head to produce compact latent embeddings are obtained directly from the supervised softmax probability
for contrastive learning. distribution; LitCVit does not employ reconstruction-based
NISA et al.: LitCVit: A LIGHTWEIGHT SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE VISION TRANSFORMER 3965

Algorithm 2 Fine-Tuning TABLE I
 A SYMPTOTIC C OMPLEXITY OF L IT CV IT C OMPONENTS

 standard convolutional embedding which costs O(n · cin · k · d))
 when (k  d), while preserving representational capacity. Moreover, hierarchical wf-Attention modules significantly
 reduce sequence length and the computational cost compared
 to traditional multi-head attention O(n · h · d2 ) [40], where h is
 the number of heads and d is the per-head dimension. In our
 approach, we employ low-rank factorized attention, resulting
 in a more efficient complexity of O(n·r·w) operations for local
 attention within windows of size w and O(n·d·r) operations for
 low-rank projections, where r  d is the factorization rank.
 During pretraining, full forward and backward passes are
 computed over the entire architecture, including contrastive
 objectives. The total pre-training
  complexity is O n · (r · w +
 d · r) + d · d0 + B2 · d0 , where the first two terms correspond
anomaly scoring or threshold-based drift detection. Initially, to the attention and projection layers, and the last term arises
the encoder is frozen, and only the classification head is trained from the pairwise similarity computations in ntXent. The time
to prevent overfitting in the early stages. After 100 epochs, the complexity is dominated by the higher order of O(B2 · d0 )
last two encoder blocks are unfrozen to enable the adaptation due to the quadratic scaling with batch size, while other
to the downstream classification task. The model is optimized components scale linearly with the number of tokens n and
using the standard multi-class cross-entropy loss LCE [39], as remain comparatively lightweight. Similarly, space complexity
defined in Equation 2. This process of fine-tuning is described during pre-training is dominated by O(B·d0 ) term from storing
in Algorithm 2 (lines 3-13). projection embeddings for all samples in the batch, with the
 N C remaining components contributing only linear growth in n.
 1 XX
 LCE = − yi,k log(ŷi,k ) (2) In the fine-tuning phase, we compute the total cost by
 N adding the time complexity of convolutional patchify stem,
 i=1 k=1
 the last two encoder blocks, and the classification head with
Here, N is the number of samples, C is the total number
 a softmax cross-entropy loss. Since contrastive learning is
of classes, yi,k is a binary indicator and ŷi,k is the predicted
 only used during pretraining, computational cost is dominated
probability for class k.
 by the two unfrozen encoder blocks, while the classification
 In the final stage of our framework, we evaluate the finehead contributes a comparatively small cost. The dominant
tuned LitCVit model on labeled test data that was not used
 time cost of fine-tuning phase is O(n · r · (w + d)). Space
during training. This step ensures the model’s ability to
 complexity is dominated by storing intermediate activations
generalize from the learned representations to classify unseen
 for the two unfrozen encoder blocks, with the classification
encrypted traffic flows accurately.
 head adding a negligible footprint compared to pretraining,
 where batch-wise projection embeddings dominated memory
 V. C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS
 use. The space complexity of fine-tuning phase is O(n·(w+d)).
 We analyze the computational complexity of each compo- Finally, at inference, the model executes only a lightweight
nent in LitCVit to highlight its architectural efficiency. Despite forward pass, without the contrastive head, resulting in an
its multi-stage hierarchical design, the model maintains a low efficient runtime complexity of O(n·d·r) and space complexity
overall computational cost. Similar to [40], we express the of O(n·d). As a result, LitCViT achieves a significantly smaller
complexity in terms of the convolution kernel size k, the num- memory footprint and faster inference.
ber of tokens n, input dimension cin , and output embedding
dimensions d. We find both time and space complexities of VI. I MPLEMENTATION AND E XPERIMENTS
each component as summarized in Table I.
 Convolutional patch embedding stem employs a depthwise A. Datasets
and pointwise factorization where the depthwise stage pro- To evaluate the performance and generalization of the processes channels independently with cost O(n · cin · k) and the posed LitCVit, we utilize four real-world traffic datasets that
pointwise stage costs O(n·cin ·d). This yields a total complexity include benign and malicious network traffic across diverse
of O(n · cin (k + d)), which is substantially lower than the environments.
3966 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 USTC-TFC2016 [19] provides encrypted traffic generated TABLE II
by a wide range of benign applications such as Skype, Bit- K EY H YPERPARAMETERS OF L IT CV IT T RAINING
Torrent, and YouTube, as well as malicious traffic from ten
malware families, including Cridex, Geodo, Htbot, Miuref,
Neris, Nsis-ay, Shifu, Tinba, Virut, and Zeus. These malware
families represent a wide spectrum of attack behaviors: Tinba
and Geodo are banking trojans designed for credential theft,
Cridex and Zeus are known for man-in-the-browser attacks.
Miuref is associated with click fraud campaigns, while Virut
represents a polymorphic file-infector. For our analysis, we
retain only complete encrypted traffic flows to ensure data
integrity and consistency.
 CICIOT-2022 [41] is designed for behavioral analysis and
intrusion detection in IoT. It contains both benign and mali- negative diversity for stable contrastive optimization without
cious traffic, with two primary attack categories: brute-force requiring a memory bank, as supported by our clustering
attacks (performed using Nmap and Hydra) and flooding results in Table VIII. The temperature τ = 0.3, achieve the
attacks. best clustering performance in terms of purity and NMI. All
 5GAD-2022 [42] is a 5G network traffic dataset collected attention modules adopt low-rank factorized self-attention with
by Idaho National Research Laboratory. It captures network r = 16, balancing expressiveness and efficiency.
traffic in simulated 5G environments to support ML-based During fine-tuning, to address severe class imbalance
attack detection. The dataset encompasses 10 attack categories, present in datasets such as CICIoT-2022, we employ classincluding reconnaissance, network reconfiguration, and DoS weighted cross-entropy with inverse-frequency weights comattacks, providing a comprehensive benchmark for evaluat- bined with class-balanced sampling, preventing majority class
ing detection models under diverse and realistic 5G threat dominance during both pretraining and fine-tuning. To avoid
scenarios. overfitting during early training, The encoder is initially frozen
 Malware Capture Facility Project (MCFP) [43], maintained for the first 100 epochs, after which the last two transformer
by the Czech Technical University in Prague, provides a blocks are unfrozen for deeper fine-tuning. All experiments
rich repository of network traffic captured in controlled envi- were conducted on Intel i5-7400 CPU, NVIDIA GeForce GTX
ronments. For our study, we extracted malicious samples 1080 GPU, and 32GB RAM using PyTorch.
from diverse malware families, such as BitcoinMiner, Botnet, Fig. 3 shows the accuracy and loss curves during fine-tuning
Cobalt, Dridex, and Trojan Downloader. To create a balanced across all datasets, illustrating LitCVit’s stable convergence
evaluation set, we additionally selected 600 benign PCAP files behavior and robust generalization across diverse traffic scefrom the CTU-Normal series. narios. The model consistently converges within 500 epochs,
 IoT-23 [44] is a large-scale IoT network traffic dataset after which no significant improvements are observed. Traincontaining benign and malicious traces captured from real IoT ing is, therefore, halted to avoid unnecessary computational
devices and botnet infections. It includes labeled attack sce- overhead. Notably, a slight spike in loss and accuracy flucnarios alongside normal traffic to support intrusion detection tuation is observed around epoch 100. This is because, at
and malware analysis research. this point, the last two encoder blocks are unfrozen to enable
 TII-SSRC-23 [45]is a network traffic dataset for IDS deeper fine-tuning. This controlled unfreezing strategy refines
research containing benign and malicious traffic with 26 attack high-level representations while maintaining overall training
classes. It covers 8 main traffic types, including background, stability.
multimedia, brute-force, DoS, Mirai botnet, and informationgathering activities.
 C. Baselines and Evaluation Metrics
 We utilize USTC-TFC2016 and CIC-IoT-2022 datasets
during the pretraining phase, allowing the model to learn To evaluate LitCVit, we select baselines spanning featuregeneralizable encrypted traffic representations. The rest of driven, end-to-end, and self-supervised pretraining-based techdatasets are used solely during the fine-tuning phase to eval- niques. All methods are retrained on the six datasets using their
uate the model’s generalization on novel traffic patterns and default hyperparameters for fair comparison.
attack scenarios. Fine-tuning and evaluation are performed on • Feature-driven: AppScanner [14] employs flow-level
all datasets to ensure a comprehensive assessment of LitCVit’s statistical features with Random Forest (RF) and SVM for
detection performance across diverse network environments. application traffic classification. Kitsune [15] is an unsupervised method utilizing packet-level metadata features
B. Implementation Overview with an autoencoder ensemble to model benign behavior.
 We adopt a two-phase training strategy of pre-training • End-to-end: 2D-CNN [19] transforms raw encrypted
followed by fine-tuning, with key hyperparameters summa- traffic into 2D grayscale images classified via convolurized in Table II. During pre-training, the ntXent optimization tional neural networks.
is stabilized via cosine learning rate scheduling with linear • Self-supervised and representation learning:
warmup. A batch size of 128 provides sufficient in-batch PEAN [24] pre-trains an attention-based autoencoder to
NISA et al.: LitCVit: A LIGHTWEIGHT SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE VISION TRANSFORMER 3967

 TABLE III
 A P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF P ROPOSED A RCHITECTURE W ITH BASE -L INES

Fig. 3. Accuracy and loss curves during fine-tuning across all datasets. Training converges stably within 500 epochs, with a brief spike around epoch 100
due to unfreezing blocks of the pretrained encoder.

 learn generalized traffic embeddings. PERT [46] and ET- all reported results correspond to an embedding dimension of
 BERT [6] adopt BERT-style masked language modeling d = 192, which achieves the best classification performance as
 for contextual traffic representations. YaTC [8] applies a determined by the ablation study in Section VIII. For latencymasked autoencoder for pretraining on raw traffic bytes sensitive deployments, d = 128 is recommended as discussed
 followed by supervised classification. NetMamba [30] is in Section VIII.
 a model based on the Mamba architecture. Pcap-Encoder
 [9] is a recent representation learning model specifically
 designed to extract features from protocol headers. A. Detection Performance
 For evaluation, we report accuracy, precision, recall, and Fig. 4 shows confusion matrices illustrating LitCVit’s classi-
F1-score to assess overall classification effectiveness, along- fication performance across all datasets, highlighting its strong
side True Positive Rate (TPR) True Negative Rate (TNR), ability to distinguish attack types and benign traffic with
False Positive Rate (FPR), and False Negative Rate (FNR), to high confidence and minimal misclassifications. For USTCevaluate robustness against false alarms, critical in malicious TFC2016, LitCVit achieves detection rates exceeding 97%
traffic detection where minimizing missed attacks and false for all malware families, except Geodo and Miuref, which
positives is essential. attain detection accuracies of 92% and 96%, respectively. For
 CICIOT-2022, the model effectively identifies brute-force and
 flooding attacks while maintaining a low false positive rate for
 VII. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
 benign flows. Notably, 5GAD-2022 and MCFP, IOT-23, and
 We evaluate LitCVit across six real-world network traffic TII-SSRC-23 were kept completely unseen during pretraining,
datasets, comparing detection effectiveness and computational yet LitCVit shows excellent generalization, achieving above
efficiency against state-of-the-art methods to demonstrate its 95% detection rate across all classes. In 5GAD-2022, AMFsuitability for practical deployment. Unless otherwise stated, FakeInsert attack reaches a detection rate of 95%, while all
3968 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 5. PR-curves of the proposed LitCVit model on all datasets.

 B. Comparative Performance Analysis
 Table III presents a comprehensive comparison of LitCVit
 against state-of-the-art encrypted traffic detection methods.
 Across six datasets, LitCVit consistently achieves superior
 detection performance, outperforming all baselines in terms
 of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. Notably, it sur-
 Fig. 4. Performance confusion matrices of all datasets.
 passes pretraining-based models PEAN and ET-BERT across
 all metrics, with accuracy gains of 34.17% and 12.15%
 on USTC-TFC2016, and 60.9% and 9.7% on CICIOT-2022,
other classes surpass 98%. Similarly, on MCFP and IOT-23, respectively. Despite being recent strong baselines, NetMamba
all malware classes are detected with at least 97%, despite and PcapEncoder lag behind LitCVit by 7-9% on most
the diversity and complexity of their behaviors. Similarly, datasets. PcapEncoder is designed for packet-level classion TII-SSRC-23, LitCVit accurately separates benign and fication using only header information, when evaluated at
malicious traffic with detection rates exceeding 97%, confirm- the flow level, its performance degrades significantly, highing its robustness across diverse real-world encrypted traffic lighting the advantage of LitCVit’s flow-image representation
scenarios. over header-only packet-level approaches. On unseen datasets,
 Fig. 5 demonstrates Precision-Recall (PR) curves to evaluate 5GAD-2022, MCFP, IOT-23 and TII-SSRC-23 LitCVit mainthe proposed framework’s performance on datasets with imbal- tains an average accuracy improvement of 5-8% over the best
anced class distributions. Minority malicious traffic classes, baseline, demonstrating strong generalization capabilities. It
such as Miuref and Nsis-ay in USTCTFC, and Hydra in also achieves the best precision and recall balance, indicating
CICIOT, pose detection challenges due to their limited repre- robustness to diverse encrypted traffic patterns and minimizing
sentation in the dataset. Despite this, LitCVit maintains robust false predictions.
detection performance. Despite this, LitCVit maintains robust Fig. 6 provides a detailed comparison of TPR and FPR
detection performance, achieving PR-AUC values exceeding across all baselines and datasets, providing a comprehensive
0.97 for all malicious traffic classes of USTCTFC, including evaluation of detection capability and false alarm reduction.
Tinba, Geodo, Cridex, Zeus, and Virut. In CICIOT, LitCVit LitCVit consistently achieves the highest detection rates across
attains a reasonable PR-AUC of 0.70 for the minority Hydra all datasets, exceeding 98% on USTC-TFC, CICIoT-2022,
class, while achieving perfect PR-AUC scores of 1.00 for MCFP, IOT-23, and TII-SSRC-23, while maintaining strong
Benign, Flood, and Nmap traffic. The reason is that Hydra has performance on the diverse 5GAD-2022 dataset with a TPR
a significantly smaller number of samples. On 5GAD, which of 97%. In contrast, feature-driven methods, AppScanner
consists of eight attacks with a nearly balanced distribution, and Kitsune exhibit significantly lower TPRs (52%–64% and
LitCVit consistently achieves high PR-AUC values, ranging 61%–84%, respectively), highlighting their limited capability
from 0.99 to 1.00, across all classes. Similarly, on MCFP, in handling encrypted traffic scenarios. In terms of false
IOT-23, and TII-SSRC-23, LitCVit maintains strong detection alarms, LitCVit achieves the lowest FPR, remaining below
performance, achieving PR-AUC scores exceeding 0.99 across 0.02 across all datasets. Conversely, AppScanner and the
all classes. These results highlight the LitCVit’s strong ability self-supervised PEAN suffer from substantially higher FPR
to maintain high precision and recall across all datasets, values, reaching up to 0.32 and 0.21, respectively. These
indicating robust performance with minimal false predictions. results demonstrate that LitCVit not only improves detection
NISA et al.: LitCVit: A LIGHTWEIGHT SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE VISION TRANSFORMER 3969

Fig. 6. Comparison of TPR, TNR, FPR, and FNR across all state-of-the-art methods on the USTC-TFC-2016, CICIOT-2022, 5GAD-2022, MCFP, and
TII-SSRC-23.

 TABLE IV
 T HE E FFICIENCY C OMPARISON OF P ROPOSED L IT CV IT
 W ITH P RE -T RAINING -BASED T ECHNIQUES

 Fig. 7. Robustness of LitCVit under adversarial byte perturbations.

capability but also effectively minimizes false alarms, ensuring highly suitable for deployment in resource-constrained envireliable encrypted traffic classification. ronments.
 LitCVit demonstrates robust detection performance with This efficiency is achieved primarily due to LitCVit’s
minimal variance across datasets, effectively reducing false lightweight convolutional patchify stem, which effectively
alarms and maintaining both high detection accuracy and reduces the input dimensionality and the low-rank windowed
operational stability in diverse and challenging network envi- factorized attention mechanism, which drastically cuts down
ronments. Its superior performance is due to its hierarchical the number of learnable parameters by performing attention in
attention design, which progressively captures fine-grained a compressed token space. These design choices preserve the
byte-level and packet-level patterns and global flow-level core capabilities of self-attention while significantly lowering
dependencies. By employing windowed factorized attention, computational overhead.
LitCVit focuses on local contexts while preserving essential token interactions, ensuring robust feature extraction D. Adversarial Robustness Analysis
throughout the hierarchy. Additionally, contrastive learning
 To assess robustness against simple adversarial manipulawith ntXent loss further enhances the learned embeddings by
 tion, two perturbation strategies are simulated: padding-byte
pulling semantically related ET-flows closer and pushing apart
 insertion and random byte injection. Padding-byte insertion
dissimilar ones.
 appends null bytes to packet payloads, simulating traffic
 padding commonly used in protocol obfuscation. Random
 byte injection replaces a random fraction of payload pixel
C. Computational and Memory Analysis
 values with uniform random bytes, simulating arbitrary pay-
 Table IV demonstrates that LitCVit offers an efficient solu- load corruption. All perturbations are applied exclusively to
tion for encrypted malicious traffic detection., maintaining a payload rows, preserving header structure to reflect realistic
minimal memory footprint of approximately 14.83 MB with encrypted traffic manipulation. Perturbation experiments are
only 0.321 million parameters. LitCVit achieves a single- conducted on USTC-TFC2016, the most class-diverse dataset
sample inference latency of 2.67 ms on GPU, measured with with 11 traffic categories. As shown in Fig. 7, LitCVit
batch size = 1, 50 warm-up iterations, and 300 timed rep- maintains accuracy above 85% under both strategies even at
etitions with GPU synchronization, making it approximately 20% perturbation, with a maximum degradation of 8.97% for
8.7 times faster than the fastest self-supervised pretraining- padding-byte insertion and 7.36% for random byte injection.
based method YaTC while achieving superior detection The convergence of both curves at higher perturbation levels
performance. Moreover, the model requires only 115.55 mil- indicates consistent resilience independent of perturbation
lion multiply-accumulate operations (MMACs), making it type. These results demonstrate that LitCVit captures structural
3970 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE V
 C OMPONENT-W ISE A BLATION S TUDY OF THE P ROPOSED L IT CV IT ACROSS S IX B ENCHMARK DATASETS

and semantic traffic patterns at multiple granularities rather
than relying on precise byte positions, making it inherently
resilient to simple byte-level adversarial perturbations.

E. Resource-Constrained Inference Analysis
 To evaluate deployment feasibility on resource-constrained
platforms, LitCVit is evaluated under GPU and CPU settings.
Specifically, single-thread CPU inference is conducted on a
system with 8 GB RAM and an Intel i5-7400 @ 3.00 GHz,
deliberately chosen to simulate resource-constrained deployment conditions. With dim = 128, rank = 16, the model
contains only 0.32 M parameters and requires 115.55 MMac.
It achieves 2.67 ms per-sample latency on GPU, 5.32 ms
under multi-thread CPU execution, and 8.70 ms ± 0.98 in
single-thread mode. The model maintains a compact memory
footprint (14.83 MB total, nearly 4.66 MB runtime overhead), demonstrating real-time capability and suitability for Fig. 8. Model complexity and inference latency vs. rank ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64} for
resource-constrained platforms. Physical validation on embed- embedding dimensions ∈ {128, 156, and192}. x-axis: Rank in all subplots.
ded platforms such as Raspberry Pi or NVIDIA Jetson is left
as future work.

 VIII. A BLATION S TUDY
A. Component-Wise Ablation Study
 Table V presents a component-wise ablation study of the
proposed LitCVit on six benchmark datasets. Removing the
flow-level encoder causes the most severe degradation, with
Macro-F1 dropping to as low as 30.29% on USTC-TFC2016
and 33.63% on TII-SSRC-23, confirming the importance of
global context aggregation across packet tokens for reliable
traffic classification. Removing the byte-level encoder results Fig. 9. Inference latency comparison of windowed attention configurations
in the second largest performance drop, highlighting the at dim = 128.
importance of fine-grained byte-level feature extraction in
capturing low-level traffic patterns. Without self-supervised
pre-training, the performance declines consistently across in Fig. 8, parameters and MMACs increase monotonically
datasets, demonstrating that pre-training provides meaningful with both r and d, confirming predictable scaling behavior.
semantic representations. Overall, each component contributes GPU latency remains relatively stable across ranks, while
meaningfully to performance, with the hierarchical encoder CPU latency grows more noticeably with dimension, reflecting
structure and self-supervised pre-training providing the most limited CPU parallelism for larger matrix operations. Notably,
significant gains. rank r = 16 achieves the lowest inference latency across all
 dimensions. Detection accuracy remains stable across ranks,
 and the marginal gains at higher ranks confirm that encrypted
B. Impact of Rank traffic features lie in a low-dimensional subspace where com-
 We conduct an ablation study over rank r ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64} pact factorized attention is sufficient. Thus, r = 16 and d = 128
and embedding dimension d ∈ {128, 156, 192} to analyze their are adopted as default for the optimal accuracy–efficiency
effect on model complexity and inference efficiency. As shown trade-off.
NISA et al.: LitCVit: A LIGHTWEIGHT SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE VISION TRANSFORMER 3971

 Fig. 10. UMAP embeddings of encrypted benign and malicious traffic under different temperature values τ of ntXent loss.

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDY ON VARIOUS W INDOW C ONFIGURATIONS . P ERFOR - P ERFORMANCE AND E FFICIENCY C OMPARISON OF C ONVENTIONAL
 MANCE I S B EST W ITH B OTH PACKET AND B YTE -L EVEL W INDOWS L IGHTWEIGHT M ODELS W ITH L IT CV IT

 TABLE VIII
C. Effect of Windowed Attention E FFECT OF T EMPERATURE PARAMETER τ ON C ONTRASTIVE V I T

 Ablation results in Fig. 9 show that GPU inference
latency remains invariant across all window configurations
(∼ 2.6–2.9 ms), indicating that windowed attention introduces negligible computational overhead on GPU. On CPU,
enabling both byte and packet windows reduces latency by
15 − 25% compared to global attention at dim = 128. This
suggests that restricting the attention span reduces redundant E. Impact of Temperature Parameter
computation at the CPU level, where parallelism is more The effect of Temperature parameter τ in ntXent loss on
limited than on GPU. Table VI further reports consistent clustering quality is illustrated in Fig. 10 and Table VIII.
improvements in Accuracy and Macro-F1 when both windows Lower values of τ (e.g., 0.1) yield reduced loss; however,
are applied. We attribute this to the hierarchical design, where higher values (e.g., 0.9) resulted in improved global structure,
early local attention reduces premature global token mixing as reflected by higher NMI, Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), and
and encourages spatially coherent byte and packet patterns, Silhouette scores, indicating better separation between benign
while long-range dependencies are preserved by the flow-level and malicious traffic. The best overall clustering performance
transformer through full global attention across packet tokens. is achieved at τ = 0.3, which provides an effective tradeoff between local compactness and global separability in the
D. Performance Comparison With Conventional Models learned representations.

 To justify our architecture, we compare LitCVit against
 IX. C ONCLUSION
tree-based (RF, XGBoost) and lightweight neural baselines
(2DCNN, GRU, BiLSTM) under identical settings. Since In this paper, we propose a lightweight self-supervised contree-based and lightweight neural models are inherently CPU- trastive vision transformer framework for encrypted malicious
based, CPU latency is used as the common efficiency metric traffic detection. The model integrates an efficient convofor fair comparison. Tree-based models use flattened 1600-d lutional patchify stem to encode local spatial features and
ET-flow vectors, while neural baselines use flow-image rep- employs low-rank windowed factorized self-attention mechresentations. As shown in Table VII, XGBoost exceeds 90% anisms at byte, packet, and flow levels to multi-granularity
Macro F1 on USTCTFC and CICIOT but degrades on MCFP, representations. Additionally, a contrastive pretraining objecindicating limited generalization. RF incurs high latency tive enables the model to learn ET-flow semantic features
(27.46 ms) despite zero trainable parameters due to sequential without relying on labeled data. Extensive experiments on
tree traversal. Lightweight neural models offer low latency six real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed framebut inconsistent performance (GRU/BiLSTM up to 71.52% work outperforms the state-of-the-art method, including recent
Macro F1) with notable MCFP degradation. LitCVit consis- baselines, achieving 5-8% average accuracy improvement on
tently achieves the highest Macro F1 across all datasets with unseen datasets while maintaining a compact footprint of
a compact footprint and competitive latency, demonstrating 0.321 M parameters and 2.67 ms GPU inference latency
superior generalization-efficiency balance. approximately 8.7 times faster than YaTC. These results
3972 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

validate LitCVit’s strong generalization across diverse attack [21] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
scenarios while maintaining high efficiency and low inference encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
time, making it highly suitable for deployment in resource- [22] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Cluster and conquer: Malicious traffic
constrained environments. Future work will explore model classification at the edge,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21,
compression via pruning and quantization, as well as physical no. 3, pp. 2700–2714, Jun. 2024.
 [23] S. Guthula, R. Beltiukov, N. Battula, W. Guo, A. Gupta, and
validation on embedded platforms such as Raspberry Pi and I. Monga, “NetFound: Foundation model for network security,” 2023,
NVIDIA Jetson. arXiv:2310.17025.
 [24] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
 Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
 R EFERENCES
 [25] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
 representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
[1] M. A. I. Mallick and R. Nath, “Navigating the cyber security landscape: Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K),
 A comprehensive review of cyber-attacks, emerging trends, and recent Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.
 developments,” World Sci. News, vol. 190, no. 1, pp. 1–69, 2024. [26] X. Zang, T. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Gong, P. Gao, and G. Zhang, “Encrypted
[2] J. Ahn, R. Hussain, K. Kang, and J. Son, “Exploring encryption malicious traffic detection based on natural language processing and
 algorithms and network protocols: A comprehensive survey of threats deep learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 250, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 110598.
 and vulnerabilities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 27, no. 6, [27] J. Qu, X. Ma, and J. Li, “TrafficGPT: Breaking the token barrier for
 pp. 3587–3614, Dec. 2025. efficient long traffic analysis and generation,” 2024, arXiv:2403.05822.
[3] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic [28] X.-Y. Chen, L. Han, D.-C. Zhan, and H.-J. Ye, “Miett: Multi-instance
 analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., encrypted traffic transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
 vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023. 39th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 39, 2025, pp. 15922–15929.
[4] M. Almehdhar et al., “Deep learning in the fast lane: A survey on [29] Z. Hang, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, and Y. Xie, “Flow-MAE: Leveraging
 advanced intrusion detection systems for intelligent vehicle networks,” masked AutoEncoder for accurate, efficient and robust malicious traf-
 IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol., vol. 5, pp. 869–906, 2024. fic classification,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions
[5] Y. Feng et al., “Unmasking the internet: A survey of fine-grained Defenses, Oct. 2023, pp. 297–314.
 network traffic analysis,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 27, no. 6, [30] T. Wang, X. Xie, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “Netmamba:
 pp. 3672–3709, Dec. 2025. Efficient network traffic classification via pre-training unidirectional
[6] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A mamba,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Oct.
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers 2024, pp. 1–11.
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022, [31] M. Zhan, J. Yang, D. Jia, and G. Fu, “EAPT: An encrypted traffic
 pp. 633–642. classification model via adversarial pre-trained transformers,” Comput.
[7] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: Netw., vol. 257, Feb. 2025, Art. no. 110973.
 A channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic [32] C. Fu, Q. Li, E. Bertino, and K. Xu, “Training with only 1.0%
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025, samples: Malicious traffic detection via cross-modality feature fusion,”
 2023. in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2025,
[8] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked pp. 3930–3944.
 autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, [33] N. Wickramasinghe, A. Shaghaghi, G. Tsudik, and S. Jha, “SoK:
 no. 3, pp. 2012–2025, Jun. 2024. Decoding the enigma of encrypted network traffic classifiers,” in Proc.
[9] Y. Zhao, G. Dettori, M. Boffa, L. Vassio, and M. Mellia, “The sweet IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1825–1843.
 danger of sugar: Debunking representation learning for encrypted traffic [34] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 classification,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., Sep. 2025, pp. 296–310. for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[10] L. Peng, X. Xie, S. Huang, Z. Wang, and Y. Cui, “Ptu: Pre-trained model [35] D. Qin et al., “Mobilenetv4: Universal models for the mobile
 for network traffic understanding,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Netw. ecosystem,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 78–96.
 Protocols (ICNP), Oct. 2024, pp. 1–12. [36] S. Wang, B. Z. Li, M. Khabsa, H. Fang, and H. Ma, “Linformer: Self-
[11] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An attention with linear complexity,” 2020, arXiv:2006.04768.
 efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. [37] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
 Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860. shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
[12] S. Naveen and M. R. Kounte, “Compact optimized deep learning model Oct. 2021, pp. 10012–10022.
 for edge: A review,” Int. J. Electr. Comput. Eng. (IJECE), vol. 13, no. 6, [38] C. Wen, X. Li, H. Huang, Y.-S. Liu, and Y. Fang, “3D shape contrastive
 p. 6904, Dec. 2023. representation learning with adversarial examples,” IEEE Trans. Multi-
[13] A. A. Bhutta, M. U. Nisa, and A. N. Mian, “Lightweight real-time WiFi- media, vol. 27, pp. 679–692, 2023.
 based intrusion detection system using LightGBM,” Wireless Netw., [39] Z. Zhang and M. R. Sabuncu, “Generalized cross entropy loss for
 vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 749–761, Feb. 2024. training deep neural networks with noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
[14] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smart- Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 31, 2018, pp. 8792–8802.
 phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE [40] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[15] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [41] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong,
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidi-
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, 2018. mensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy,
[16] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2022, pp. 1–11.
 robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31, [42] C. Coldwell et al., “Machine learning 5G attack detection in prono. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023. grammable logic,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
[17] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of Dec. 2022, pp. 1365–1370.
 TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14, [43] Stratosphere Malware Capture Facility Project Datasets. Accessed: Jul.
 no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://mcfp.felk.cvut.cz/publicDatasets/
[18] C. Kondaiah, A. R. Pais, and R. S. Rao, “Enhanced malicious traffic [44] S. Garcia, A. Parmisano, and M. J. Erquiaga, “IoT-23: A labeled dataset
 detection in encrypted communication using TLS features and a multi- with malicious and benign IoT network traffic,” Version 1.0.0, Zenodo,
 class classifier ensemble,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage., vol. 32, no. 4, p. 76, Stratosphere Lab., Czech Tech. Univ. Prague, Prague, Czech Republic,
 Oct. 2024. 2020, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4743746.
[19] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic [45] D. Herzalla, W. T. Lunardi, and M. Andreoni, “TII-SSRC-23
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation dataset: Typological exploration of diverse traffic patterns for intrusion
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717. detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 118577–118594, 2023.
[20] L. Yu et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network [46] H. He, Z. Yang, and X. Chen, “Payload encoding representation from
 for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021, transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” ZTE Commun., vol. 19,
 Art. no. 108117. no. 4, p. 90, 2021.