8892 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 LLM-HGAN: LLM-Enhanced Heterogeneous Graph
 Attention Networks for Advanced Persistent
 Threat Detection
 Kun Lan , Gaolei Li , Member, IEEE, Wenkai Huang , Jianhua Li , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Yantao Yu , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) have evolved organization, tactical stealth, persistent engagement, proactive
into highly stealthy and organized cyber attacks, posing one of adversarial maneuvers, and high-impact disruption, posing
the most severe challenges to global cyber security. However, fundamental threats to global cyber infrastructure [1], [2],
existing detection methods often suffer from high false positive
rates and explosion of provenance graphs, making it difficult to [3], [4], [5], [6]. Beyond large-scale service disruptions, APT
counter sophisticated evasion techniques, diverse attack stages, campaigns also endanger data confidentiality and user privacy
and long latency periods. To address these challenges, this article by enabling covert exfiltration of sensitive information from
proposes LLM-HGAN, a twostage APT detection framework that government agencies, enterprises, and critical infrastructure
combines heterogeneous graph attention networks (HGAN) with
 networks [7], [8]. Escalating geopolitical rivalries further drive
large language models (LLMs). Specifically, suspicious processes
are first identified by learning similarity on heterogeneous prove- state-sponsored APT actors to intensify cyber operations amid
nance graphs using LLM-HGAN, enabling the detection of subtle intensifying international competition. [9] shows the cyber kill
behavioral deviations across complex attack surfaces. Then, the chain model of APT attacks, as shown in Fig. 1.
detected anomalies are correlated with candidate attack paths and In this model, the life cycle of an APT attack consists of
verified against a curated TTP (tactics, techniques, and procedures) seven key stages, including target reconnaissance, weapon conrule base. Finally, LLMs operate in parallel to generate, normalize, and continuously update TTP rules from threat intelligence struction, payload delivery, vulnerability exploitation, implant
and system telemetry, ensuring that the detection process remains installation, command and control (C&C), and task execution.
adaptive to evolving attacker behaviors. Extensive experiments on a In December 2024, Russia-backed APT29 (Earth Koshchei)
hybrid dataset that combines curated APT samples from five public employed “malicious RDP” technology, utilizing forged rerepositories with a highfidelity emulated APT scenario corpus mote desktop protocol configuration files to target global highshow that LLM-HGAN achieves 95% detection accuracy, surpasses
stateoftheart baselines by at least 14%, and reaches 98% accuracy value entities. The attacks notably disrupted operations across
on realworld APT variants, demonstrating strong robustness and Ukrainian government, military, and research institutions. Rapid
generalization to unknownvulnerability attacks. and accurate APT attack detection in complex environments is a
 Index Terms—Heterogeneous graph attention network, large
 key research focus in global cybersecurity [10], [11]. This study
language models, provenance graph, TTP. analyzes recent APT incidents and technical reports, identifying
 emerging trends and key challenges in the current threat landscape:
 I. INTRODUCTION r Detection evasion techniques are becoming increasingly
 DVANCED Persistent Threats (APTs) epitomize an emer-
A gent cyber attack paradigm marked by institutionalized
 sophisticated: APT groups are shifting toward fileless attacks to evade samplebased detection, employing attributionobfuscation techniques such as falseflag implantation
 Received 8 January 2026; revised 3 April 2026; accepted 20 April 2026. via targeted IPs/services, C&C infrastructure concealment
Date of publication 24 April 2026; date of current version 8 May 2026. This in webhosted environments, etc.
work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under r Attacks demonstrate progressively heightened complex-
Grant 2023YFB3107702, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62572314 and Grant 62471301, and in part by Sichuan ity and diversification: Modern APT groups increasingly
Science and Technology Program under Grant 2026YFHZ0223. Recommended adopt LivingOffTheLand tactics, leveraging trusted system
for acceptance by Dr. Lan Zhang. (Corresponding authors: Gaolei Li; Jianhua
Li; Yantao Yu.) tools. The expansion of opensource software has broadened
 Kun Lan is with the China Electronics Technology Cyber Security Com- supplychain attack surfaces, while the exploitation of zeropany, Ltd., Chengdu 610041, China, and also with the School of Computer day vulnerabilities enables attacks beyond traditional APT
Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail:
2331lankun@sjtu.edu.cn). frameworks.
 Gaolei Li, Wenkai Huang, Jianhua Li, and Yantao Yu are with the School of r The long-term and persistent nature of the attack pro-
Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e- cess is more obvious: Global APT groups distribute taimail: gaolei_li@sjtu.edu.cn; sjtuhwk@sjtu.edu.cn; lijh888@sjtu.edu.cn; yantaoyu@sjtu.edu.cn). lored Trojans via botnets. Postbreach, they conduct staged
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2026.3687554 preparations—scoping environments, identifying targets,

 2327-4697 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8893

Fig. 1. Illustration of the APT attack lifecycle, depicting major attack stages, employed techniques, and ultimate objectives.

 and disabling security controls—to ensure reliability, while detection technology based on HGAN. The second stage detects
 evading sandboxes and manipulating vectors to prolong attack activities. The technical approach involves clustering
 operations. anomalous processes to reconstruct attack phases, employing
 In recent years, APT detection research has remained ac- an enhanced forward traversal algorithm to extract complete
tive [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]. Chen et al. attack paths from the provenance graph. These paths are then
(2025) introduced a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning matched against meticulously maintained TTP rules to achieve
(MARL) framework to address the inherent uncertainty and precise APT attack identification. Simultaneously, the LLM
dynamic adaptability of adversarial behaviors [17]. Xiao et al. module continuously generates and updates the TTP knowl-
(2025) proposed an RL-based APT defense scheme to optimize edge base, ensuring the detection framework adapts to evolvboth the continuous scan interval of metering data and repair rate ing attacker behavior. Crucially, second-stage TTP generation
to mitigate the potential loss for meter data management systems need not be concurrent with first-stage anomalous behavior
(MDMSs) in smart grids with large-scale meters [18]. From the processing, greatly enhancing efficiency and feasibility. HGAN
perspective of attack sample generation, Cheng et al. (2025) pro- outperforms traditional graph neural networks like Recurrent
posed a system called TAGAPT, which can automatically gener- Graph Neural Networks, Convolutional Graph Neural Networks,
ate a large number of APT samples with source-level granular- and Graph Autoencoders in detecting APTs. Its advantages stem
ity [19]. Moothedath et al. (2024) proposed an information flow from heterogeneous modeling, meta-paths, multi-level attention,
tracking game-theoretic framework for resource-optimized APT semantic comprehension, and relational reasoning, enabling it to
detection [20]. A prominent research focus involves transform- uncover hidden correlations and patterns in extensive datasets.
ing system-generated logs and alerts into provenance graphs to Traditional graph convolutional network (GCN) are inherently
facilitate graph-theoretic APT attack detection [21], [22], [23]. limited to graphs with uniform node and edge types. In con-
Contemporary approaches face two fundamental limitations: trast, provenance graphs derived from log data are inherently
detecting multi-year incubating APTs necessitates excessive heterogeneous, comprising diverse system entities and interacprovenance graph storage and manual rule updates, severely tion relations. HGAN leverages this heterogeneity to selectively
compromising operational feasibility; sophisticated evasion tac- emphasize critical information, suppress irrelevant interference,
tics markedly degrade attack visibility during lateral movement and refine the graph structure, thereby achieving superior perand data exfiltration by minimizing exposure durations and formance in detecting complex, stealthy, and multidimensional
obfuscating behavioral signatures. Rule-based packet inspection attack behaviors.
exhibits high false positives in high-throughput networks, as Previous research such as [42] and [43] employed HGANs
benign traffic frequently adheres to legitimate communication to detect APT attacks but did not involve LLMs. Meanwhile,
patterns. Real-time detection mandates immediate alert gener- studies [47] and [48] mentioned using LLMs for APT attack
ation during active communication sessions. Existing technical detection but did not incorporate graph attention networks. To
approaches cannot perform complex, computationally intensive the best of our knowledge, the uniqueness of LLM-HGAN lies in
analyses within tight time constraints, severely compromising its pioneering integration of LLMs with HGANs. On one hand,
the efficacy of packet-based detection methodologies. LLMs enable automated updates to TTPs, thereby achieving
 To address these challenges, this study presents LLM-HGAN, dynamic enhancement of LLM-HGAN itself. On the other hand,
a novel detection framework that integrates HGAN and LLM HGANs help control the scale of the provenance graph. Conto enhance the effectiveness of APT detection. By leveraging sequently, this approach significantly enhances detection capatwostage decision theory from systems science, LLM-HGAN bilities against APTs from two distinct perspectives. Given that
decomposes complex APT detection into sequential phases, rep- LLMs are primarily architected for natural language processing,
resenting a clear methodological departure from conventional their unmediated application to attack threat detection presents
approaches. The first stage detects anomalous behaviour, aiming significant limitations. Although HGAN demonstrate unique
to initially exclude non-complex attack anomalies to narrow merits in regulating the scale of attribution graphs, traditional
the attack detection scope. The technical approach combines methodologies are often burdened by a reliance on hand-crafted
provenance graph analysis, similarity learning, and anomaly TTPs. This integration, therefore, represents more than an
8894 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

engineering task; it is a principled approach to amalgamating Irshad et al. (2021) developed TRACE, a static analysis tool
the respective capabilities of each model, aligning them with the that limits provenance tracking to internal program-unit dependistinct phases of APT attack detection to achieve a synergistic dencies [28]. Its reliance on outdated data hinders practical
effect. The study identifies a research gap in understanding the use, whereas LLM-HGAN leverages large-scale models for
familial characteristics of APT attacks, underscores the need for intelligent analysis with enhanced scalability. Li et al. (2024)
long-term dynamic adjustment mechanisms in future detection proposed T-trace, building event provenance graphs via log cormethods, and introduces three key innovations: relation/tensor decomposition [29] to target active APT attacks
 r To address the growing technical challenges posed by (visible impact); LLM-HGAN detects latent APT behaviors
 increasingly evasive APT detection techniques, the LLM- (no significant damage). Wu et al. (2023) proposed Paradise,
 HGAN model employs a LLM to integrate advanced TTP a real-time distributed intrusion detector using provenance derules from multiple global sources. These include updates pendencies for pruning/extracting process feature vectors [30].
 from the MITRE ATT&CK framework, threat intelligence LLM-HGAN skips pruning the attribution graph to retain hidplatforms, open-source intelligence communities, and in- den APT attack clues. Kurniawan et al. (2022) introduced
 ternal enterprise attack data. This integration enables in- KRYSTAL, which integrates threat detection, attack graphing,
 depth characterization of adversarial strategies such as file- scenario reconstruction, and RDF analysis [31]. Its effectiveless operations, false-flag spoofing, and C&C obfuscation. ness diminishes against APT attacks that evade known rules,
 r Aiming at the problem of APTs are becoming more whereas LLMHGAN targets unknown attack detection. [32][33]
 complex and diverse. The LLM-HGAN framework ini- expanded tag semantics with APT behavior-state semantics, retially constructs an anomalous process detection model fined rules, and incorporated complex semantics/external knowlby integrating provenance graphs, HGAN, and similarity edge. Though enhancing expressiveness, this complexity comlearning, followed by TTP-based behavioral matching to plicates implementation. LLM-HGAN integrates provenance
 identify APT activities. This approach enables dynamic graphs and TTP rules algorithmically for improved usability.
 discovery of novel attack entities, behavioral patterns, and Alsaheel et al. (2021) proposed ATLAS, extracting attack/nonexecution trajectories. attack sequences from attribution graph entities for learning [34],
 r To address APT attacks’ prolonged duration, LLMHGAN but LLM-HGAN avoids ATLAS’s overfitting/underfitting isintegrates large language models’ continuous learning of sues. Yang et al. (2023) developed PROGRAPHER for anomaly
 the latest attack features with the HGAN mechanism. This detection; however, its dependence on a manually predefined
 combination effectively manages APT provenance graph node count limits practicality [35], LLMHGAN overcomes this
 scale, enabling dynamic and longterm detection efficacy. constraint. Xu et al. (2022) introduced DEPCOMM, a graph
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II summarizer that compresses dependency graphs through propresents related work, Section III introduces TTP and prove- cesscentric community partitioning and structural summarizanance graph, Section IV describes the LLM-HGAN model, Sec- tion [36]. This approach, however, involves complex multition V describes the experiments conducted on the LLM-HGAN dimensional balancing in path scoring, whereas LLMHGAN
model. Section VI summarizes the study and proposes the future reduces such module dependencies. Akbar et al. (2023) proposed
research plan. APT detection using data provenance and metric learning [37],
 but the reliance on manual feature extraction for online adaptive
 II. RELATED WORKS training limits its practicality.In contrast, LLM-HGAN leverages
 LLM to automatically generate TTPs, offering flexibility and
 The literature relevant to LLM-HGAN primarily falls into
 high efficiency.
three domains: provenancebased analysis, HGAN and LLM for
 Provenance-graph-based APT detection, while critical, faces
attack detection.
 challenges including interference from irrelevant graph elements
 and the computational burden of large-scale features in long-
A. APT Attack Detection Based on Provenance Graphs term attack scenarios.
 Akbar et al. (2023) used a provenance graph to detect anomalous host node behavior [24], but this method was weak in
detecting zero-day APT attacks, while the LLM-HGAN method B. APT Attack Detection Based on HGAN
demonstrated strong capabilities.Aly et al. (2024) proposed Zhou et al. (2024) proposed PANNER, a POS-aware nested
MEGRAPT, a provenancegraphbased APT detection frame- named entity recognition model using dilated random walks on
work. Its batch kernel log processing reduces graph diversity grammatical paths to build heterogeneous graphs [38]. However,
and detection efficacy [25]. In contrast, LLMHGAN constructs PANNER has low accuracy, while LLM-HGAN outperformed
provenance graphs directly from audit log sequences, offering others in experiments. Li et al. (2021) introduced dual GNNs,
greater adaptability. Chen et al. (2022) developed APT-KGL, using metapath aggregation for provenance graphs and edge
a provenance and GNNbased detector targeting singlepoint enhancement for host graphs to model APT behaviors across
attacks [26]. LLMHGAN, in contrast, is designed for com- network and system levels [39]. While reliant on combined
plex, multistage network attacks. Wang et al. (2022) proposed environmental data, this differs from LLM-HGAN, which
THREATRACE [27], a GraphSAGE-based anomaly detection detects unknown attacks without such constraints. Duan et al.
framework, but it ignores practical storage scalability, while (2023) proposed a semi-supervised intrusion detection method
LLM-HGAN focuses on dynamic provenance graph storage. using dynamic graph neural networks (DLGNN) to convert
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8895

network traffic into spatiotemporal graphs [40]. Liu et al. LLM-based cyberattack detection approach utilizing network
(2022) introduced FewM-HGCL, a self-supervised framework flow statistics, though its detection accuracy warrants further
for detecting malware variants using heterogeneous graph improvement.Directly converting large-scale network traffic
contrastive learning, enabling graph-instance-based discrim- into natural language for LLM input presents practical feasibility
ination [41]. Zhang et al. (2025) proposed a preprocessing challenges.
method for network logs to establish an APT detection model In summary, existing provenance-graph-based approaches are
based on an improved graph convolutional network [42]. limited by irrelevant noise and scalability issues, while current
Research on HGAN for detecting APT attacks is in its early HGAN-based methods primarily focus on structural modeling
stages, with reliance on graph attention networks without TTP without integrating TTP semantics.Current LLMbased APT deknowledge posing challenges. Wu et al. (2025) proposed an tection methods are often conceptual or domainspecific, facing
efficient intrusion detection via HGAN and parallel provenance scalability and heterogeneous data processing challenges.To
analysis [43], However, unlike this approach, LLM-HGAN does overcome these limitations, this research proposed LLM-HGAN
not utilize parallel provenance analysis to detect intrusions. [44], framework jointly leverages HGAN for fine-grained abnormal
[45], [46] mentioned methods using graph attention networks process detection and LLM for dynamic TTP rule generation,
to detect network anomalies, but these approaches differ thereby achieving accurate, adaptive, and scalable APT designificantly from those used for APT attack detection and tection across diverse attack scenarios.Notably, LLM-HGAN
LLM-HGAN. Ghafir et al. (2018) introduced a supervised utilizes the continuous learning capability of LLM to effectively
machine learning-based APT detection system (MLAPT), which mitigate APT attacks exploiting zero-day vulnerabilities and
demonstrates limited adaptability to anti-analysis techniques family-based variants. Experiments based on real network traffic
in modern APT attacks [89]. In contrast, the LLM-HGAN demonstrate that the proposed scheme outperforms existing
approach proposed herein integrates graph attention networks methods. Yang et al. (2025) proposed an LLMbased APT detecwith large language models (LLMs), facilitating efficient tion framework (LLMAPTDS) but did not address key aspects
and flexible adaptation to the evolving landscape of APT such as attack attribution graph generation [91]. In contrast,
attacks. Presekal et al. (2024) developed an EGC-LSTM-based LLMHGAN introduces a comprehensive twostage detection
approach for APT detection in cyber–physical power systems, methodology.
which depends extensively on domain-specific network
features. In contrast, the proposed LLM-HGAN offers greater
 III. PRELIMINARIES
generalizability by eliminating the requirement for such
specialized scenario-dependent characteristics [90]. A. Special Characteristics of APT Attack Provenance Graph
 A provenance graph is a bipartite structure with system enti-
C. Leveraging LLM for APT Detection in Complex Networks ties as nodes and system events as directed edges, representing
 temporal and typological relationships.Through the systematic
 Benabderrahmane et al.(2025) proposed APT-LLM, an analysis of over 300 documented APT attack cases, this study
embedding-based anomaly detection framework com- empirically demonstrates that data-centric operational patterns
bining LLMs (BERT, ALBERT, DistilBERT, RoBERTa) (e.g., anomalous file access activities) persistently manifest
with autoencoder architectures for APT detection [47]. within system log traces across all attack phases, irrespective
Xu et al. [48]introduced APTSniffer, an encrypted APT of the sophistication level of the intrusion. Quantitative analysis
traffic detection model that leverages fewshot inference identifies substantial process similarity among APT family atand generalization capabilities of LLMs by converting raw tacks, which can be formally modeled via set theory and process
traffic data into natural language inference instances. Selim algebra (1).
et al. [49] presented a proof-of-concept validation of LLM for
cyber attack detection in smart inverters via textual control A = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn } ∪ {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pn },
commands. He et al. [50] proposed a collaborative vehicular ⎧
threat-sharing framework leveraging vehicular honeypots to ⎪
 ⎪ 1) Temporal relationship: ∀Si , ∃Sk | Si → Sk ,
 ⎪
 ⎪ 
aggregate threat data for fine-tuning LLMs, thereby enhancing ⎪
 ⎪ 2) Process mapping: ∃f : S → 2 ,
 ⎪
 ⎪
IoV security. LLM-based APT attack detection remains in ⎨3) Completeness:  f (S ) = {P , . . . , P },
 i 1 m
its conceptual infancy or is confined to specific scenarios. Yu
 ⎪4) Attack complexity: C = f (|S|, |P |), f : S → R+ ,
 ⎪
et al. [51] proposed a Label-free Detection against APTs in Edge ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎪ 5) Collaborative relationship: ∃Pα , Pβ ∈ Π, Pα ↔ Pβ ,
Networks via LLM and GCN. GOLEC et al. [52] presented the ⎪
 ⎪
 ⎩
first systematic reviewand taxonomy for LLM-assisted APT 6) Attack chain inevitability: A = ∅ ⇒ (∃S) ∧ (∃P ).
detection in 6G networks, this method is primarily designed (1)
for 6G wireless networks. HMIMOU et al. [53] proposed a
Multi-Agent System for Cyber security Threat Detection and In the above equation, A denotes an APT attack activity, where
Correlation Using LLM, this method requires multiple agents Si ∈ Σ represents an attack step (with Σ being the space of all
and is still in the model exploration phase, where its maturity is possible attack steps) and Pj ∈ Π denotes a process (with Π
not yet high. Zuo et al. [54] presented a LLM-based semantic being the system’s entire process space). Moreover, n ⩾ 1 indienhancement method for APT detection without involving cates that at least one attack step must be included, and m ⩾ 1
specific detection techniques. Leopoldo et al. [55] proposed an ensures that at least one process is involved.
8896 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I
 FUNCTIONAL MODULES OF LLM-HGAN MODEL.

 Fig. 2. Workflow between functional modules of the LLM-HGAN model.

B. Basic Characteristics of TTP
 recognition, aligning with (1)’s logic. It is effective, particularly
 TTP characteristics encapsulate semantic descriptions of APT for detecting family-based APT attacks:
attackers’ tactical intent, technical capabilities, and procedural Stage I: LLM-HGAN constructs provenance graphs from sysexecution, reflecting their strategic methodologies during op- tem logs, employs subgraph extraction with similarity learning
erations. Operational constraints that slow tool and personnel and HGAN to identify anomalous processes through comparison
updates make TTPs more stable than IOCs within specific threat with benign baselines.
groups. Consequently, TTPbased detection is more effective for Stage II: LLM-HGAN clusters anomalous processes from
identifying APT activities. Notably, according to [56], APT at- Stage I and matches them with TTP-based attack patterns genertackers employ diverse attack technique combinations to execute ated by the LLM to identify attack stages. An improved forward
the same tactical objective, yet APT attack families generally traversal algorithm extracts the attack path, and feature-based
utilize highly similar attack techniques and paths. While prior ranking is applied to detect APT attack behavior.
methodologies have incorporated cyber threat intelligence (CTI) From an algorithmic perspective, the LLM-HGAN model
and knowledge bases, the proposed LLM-HGAN framework consists of three functional modules: an HGAN-based anomaly
leverages LLMs to enable continuous, automated learning of detection module, a TTP-based attack detection module, and an
evolving threat intelligence. This approach significantly dimin- LLM-based TTP generation module, with their functions and
ishes dependence on labor-intensive manual analysis inherent in deployment locations detailed in Table I.
conventional techniques. Furthermore, it introduces a novel en- LLM-HGAN optimizes resource allocation via modular desemble learning framework to systematically mitigate accuracy- coupling of three core components: anomaly detection, attack
related challenges. detection, and LLM-driven TTP analysis. This separation yields
 two benefits: i) reduced computational overhead, and ii) im-
 IV. MODELS AND METHODS proved dynamic adaptability of the LLM-based infrastructure.
 The first stage completes fine-grained anomaly detection,
A. The Basic Principles of LLM-HGAN while the second stage combines TTP rules matching to fur-
 LLM-HGAN integrates HGAN and LLM, which will enable ther detect multi-step APT attack behaviour. Introducing the
more flexible and efficient capture of hidden correlations and mechanism of LLM constantly updating TTP in the two-phase
patterns, thereby significantly improving the ability to discover detection mode will allow more attack clues to be detected, thus
complex APT attack chains. LLM-HGAN involves two de- detecting early APT attack behaviors.
tection stages: abnormal process detection (Stage I) and at- The long-term learning capability of LLM-HGAN refers to
tack activity detection (Stage II). LLM-HGAN employing three the capacity of LLMs to continually understand and process
modules: HGAN-based anomaly detection, TTP-based attack TTPs in the ATT&CK framework. This is achieved through
detection, and LLM-based TTP generation (Table I), with its their advanced language understanding, contextual reasoning,
workflow illustrated in Fig. 2. pattern generalization, and knowledge association capabilities.
 APT attacks now feature more sophisticated attack/defense By leveraging extensive pre-trained security knowledge, semantactics, marked by longer latency and stronger stealth. The tically modeling natural language descriptions, and employing
two-stage decision theory decomposes such processes into two flexible in-context learning mechanisms, these models can effecsequential and logically interconnected stages to achieve analyt- tively identify, generate, reason about, and simulate TTP-related
ical optimization: anomaly identification then malicious activity behaviors.
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8897

Fig. 3. LLM-HGAN driven anomaly detection framework.

 Algorithm 1: Construction of provenance graph.
 1: Input: D  System audit log
 2: Output: G = (V, E)  Provenance graph
 3: Init: V ← ∅, E ← ∅
 4: For each e ∈ D do
 5: if Bsink ∈/ V then
 
 6: create new node Bsink
 
 7: V ← V ∪ {Bsink }
 8: if Asrc ∈
 / V then
 9: create new node Asrc
 10: V ← V ∪ {Asrc }
 11: end if
 12: E ← E ∪ {(Asrc → Bsink )}
 13: else
 14: if Asrc ∈
 / V then
 15: create new node Asrc
 16: V ← V ∪ {Asrc }
Fig. 4. E-Merge Example and N-Merge Example.
 17: end if
 18: E ← E ∪ {(Asrc → Bsink )}
 19: end if
B. HGAN-Based Anomaly Detection Module (Stage I) 20: end for

 Provenance graphs contain heterogeneous entities (e.g., processes, files, network connections) with distinct roles in system
activities and attacks. LLM-HGAN integrates HGAN to capture in complex multi-phase APT attacks. This situation requires
node-weighted graph features and extract contextual interaction compression techniques to reduce computational demands while
info from process nodes, enabling precise malicious process maintaining detection effectiveness. Additionally, noise from
identification and reducing APT detection false positives. Mean- benign events complicates analysis. To tackle these issues,
while, it detects malicious processes by analyzing behavioral LLM-HGAN utilizes two compression strategies: E-Merge and
similarities between unknown and known benign processes, N-Merge.
without needing prior APT attack knowledge (Fig. 3): E-Merge: Multiple parallel edges between process and
 The HGAN-based anomaly detection module of LLM-HGAN file/network nodes in provenance graphs indicate frequent shortmainly consists of three parts: Construction of provenance interval read/write operations from repeated system calls under
graph, subgraph extraction, and similarity learning. resource constraints. As [57] shows, such edges offer little
 LLM-HGAN models a provenance graph as G = (V, E), additional value for APT detection, but merging them improves
where V is the set of nodes and E ⊆ V × V is the set of directed graph readability and analyzability. Merging requires: i) edge
edges. An event is represented as e = (Asrc , r, Bsink ), where type homogeneity, ii) identical associated node types, and iii)
Asrc ∈ V denotes the initiator (source node), r the event type, temporal proximity below a predefined threshold α, as illustrated
and Bsink ∈ V the recipient (sink node). The provenance graph in Fig. 4(a).
is constructed following Algorithm 1 and implemented using N-Merge: Prior studies [58], [59] show that provenance
NetworkX. graphs contain numerous read-only files, such as libraries,
 System-log-derived provenance graphs effectively record configuration files, and process initialization resources (e.g.,
host activities, but their large size leads to dependency explosion /lib64/libdl.so.2). Merging nodes of the same type into a
8898 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE II
 FEATURE VECTOR OF NODES.
 Algorithm 2: Generation of P-pair graph data.
 1: Input: SG = {SG1 , SG2 , . . ., SGn }  Set of attack
 nodes A
 2: Output: P-pair of graphs T
 3: Normal subgraph set: S ← ∅, Malicious subgraph set:
 M ← ∅, T ← ∅;
 4: For each SGi : SG do
 5: if SGi ∈ A then  contains attack nodes
single node preserves the semantics of a process’s core system 6: SGi assigns label yi = 1
activities, as illustrated in Fig. 4(b). 7: M = M ∪ (SGi , yi )
 Diverse user types cause parameter naming confusion, yet 8: else
file names and similar attributes lack practical significance for 9: SGi assigns label yi = 0
APT detection. LLM-HGAN standardizes file-type node names 10: S = S ∪ (SGi , yi )
while preserving semantic information, grouping them into 11: end if
file/network categories. File class node names are uniformly rep- 12: end for
resented as: system_file, lib_file, programs_file, user_file. Net- 13: For each ei : (SGi , yi ) ∈ S do
work class node names are uniformly represented as: ip_address, 14: For each ej : (SGj , yj ) ∈ M do
domain, url, connection, session. 15: if SGi and SGj belong to the same class of
 For each file-type node in the provenance graph, the node processes using subgraphs then
name is normalized to its corresponding entry in the prede- 16: if yi == yj then
fined vocabulary. For example, /user/secret.pdf is mapped to 17: The label y = 1 for the subgraph pair SGi
user_file. To address provenance graph heterogeneity, LLM- and SGj
HGAN decomposes node initialization feature vectors into two 18: T ∪ {(SGi , SGj ), y}
components: identity descriptors and structural attributes. Since 19: else
process names remain static during host operation whereas 20: The label y = −1 for the subgraph pair SGi
APT processes typically adopt random identifiers (e.g., Linux and SGj
attackers generating malware with random strings in /tmp), the 21: T ∪ {(SGi , SGj ), y}
framework instead leverages execution paths as unique process 22: end if
identifiers. 23: end if
 System entities show stable distribution and regular neighbor- 24: end for
access patterns. Notably, provenance graphs from compromised 25: end for
systems deviate significantly from benign ones, especially in
malicious processes’ abnormal access frequency to adjacent
nodes. Thus, during preprocessing, LLM-HGAN systematically
 Research indicates that setting the k value for subgraph samcalculates per-node edge-type frequencies and integrates these
 pling in the provenance graph to 2 ensures system stability
metrics with node metadata and type classifications to build
 during APT attacks. Parameter values exceeding 3 may cause
comprehensive node feature vectors. Results are summarized
 exponential inflation, resulting in weak correlations between
in Table II:
 numerous nodes and increased computational costs. After sub-
 Name embeddings encode node identifiers, type embeddings
 graph sampling, the set of subgraphs of all process nodes in the
specify node categories, and relationships such as Was Generprovenance graph was obtained SG = {SG1 , SG2 , . . ., SGn }.
ated By and Used quantify edge-type frequencies.Experiments
 The training set data must be labeled for each subgraph for model
show LLM-HGAN cuts APT success rates (using file deletraining. The training set data will contain the corresponding
tion/concealment in benign files) by at least 50%, thanks to
 attack entities {B,C}. If the sampled subgraph contains attack
induced anomalies in file access/generation/deletion patterns
 entities, the label will be 1; otherwise, it will be 0.
detected by fine-grained execution-path tracing.
 To address imbalanced attack/benign subgraph distributions,
 LLM-HGAN uses subgraphs to represent the activity infor-
 LLM-HGAN uses similarity learning to integrate dual submation of APT attack processes. Given a process node vp ,
 graph features, boosting training efficiency by prioritizing structhe LLM-HGAN methodology employs (2) as the foundational
 tural over process-level attributes. This method requires paired
computational framework for subgraph sampling, specifically
 subgraph inputs: Algorithm 2 generates labeled subgraphs
designed to extract a k-order subgraph centered on a target
 (1=attack-containing, 0=benign), then pairs them as 1 (same
process node vp from the constructed provenance graph G =
 process class) or -1 (cross-class) by origin.
(V, E).
 The similarity learning method of LLM-HGAN converts
 
 {vj |(vi , vj ) ∈ E}, k=1 paired subgraphs (G11 , G12 ) and (G21 , G22 ) into graph sequences
SG(k) (vi , G)= 1 (k−1) (G11 , G12 , G21 , G22 ), which are used as inputs for the same HGAN,
 {SG (vz , G)|vz ∈ SG (vi , G)}. k > 1
 outputs the corresponding feature vector hv . Then, in HGAN,
 (2) the feature vectors corresponding to the subgraphs are fused
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8899

Fig. 5. HGAN structure consisting of four steps.

through four steps: meta-path sampling, node-level attention, a meta-path set M = {M1 , M2 , . . . , Mm } is generated through
hierarchical feature aggregation, and path-level attention to a context-based search process. Specifically, the process first
obtain the similarity score hG of the two subgraph feature vec- R1 R2
 randomly selects a meta-path schema M Si = A1 −→ A2 −→
tors. Inspired by [60], [61], [62] and [63], the structure of HGAN R t Rl−1
 . . . At −→ At+1 . . . −−−→ Al , and then performs a random walk
in LLM-HGAN including four steps: 1) meta-path sampling,
 on the subgraph according to this schema.
where heterogeneous provenance data are converted into a uni-
 The LLM-HGAN baseline is based on a hierarchical attention
fied graph representation; 2) node-level attention, LLM-HGAN
 mechanism that includes node-level and semantic-level attenutilizes neighbor node information from each subpath to learn
 tion. Node-level attention assesses the significance of nodes relthe semantic information of the current node; 3) hierarchical
 ative to their neighbors in an isomorphic subgraph generated by
feature aggregation, LLM-HGAN employs a hierarchical neural
 each meta-path, dynamically assigning weights. Semantic-level
network architecture to capture the semantic and structural inattention fuses node representations from various meta-paths
formation of this meta-path using node-level attention networks;
 with importance weighting, enabling the model to learn each
and 4) path-level attention, Feature vectors for each meta-path
 meta-path’s contribution to downstream tasks automatically.
were generated through node-level attention networks and hier-
 The transition probability from node vi to node vi+1 at step
archical dense connection networks, As shown in Fig. 5.
 i is defined in (3).
 In heterogeneous graph attention networks, sensitivity is not a
 ⎧
directly tunable parameter but is automatically learned through 1
 ⎨ |Ni+1 (vi )| ; (vi , vi+1 ) ∈ E, ϕ(vi+1 )=At+1 ,
 ⎪
its hierarchical attention mechanism (node-level attention and
 P (vi+1 |vi , M Si )= 0; (vi , vi+1 ) ∈ E, ϕ(vi+1 ) = At+1 ,
semantic-level attention). Therefore, the core of adjusting “sen- ⎪
 ⎩
sitivity” lies in influencing the distribution of attention weights 0; (vi , vi+1 ) = E.
through model design and the training process. LLM-HGAN (3)
learns node embedding vectors by considering context weight
coefficients at three levels: node-level, layer-level, and path- Where ϕ(vi ) = At , Ni+1 (vi ) are the neighbour node of node
level. As shown in Fig. 5, multiple meta-paths are first sampled vi with node type Ai+1 , meta-path sampling will repeat this
using the heterogeneous graph context search algorithm (Fig. 5 process. Among them, the meta-path neighbours of node v in
Step 1). Then LLM-HGAN designed a node-level attention net- meta-path Mi (1 ≤ i ≤ m) are defined as shown in (4):
work to aggregate node features along the meta-path (Fig. 5 Step Nvi = {u|(u, v) ∈ Mi , (v, u) ∈ Mi }. (4)
2), Second, by integrating node features from different layers
through layer-level dense-connected neural networks (Fig. 5 The importance of node u to node v along meta-path i is captured
Step 3), Finally, a path-level attention network is designed to by eivu , which is used to learn the attention weight coefficient
learn weight coefficients between different paths and gener- i
 αvu . For a node pair (v, u) in the meta-path, this importance is
ate a feature vector for the entire subgraph (Fig. 5 Step 4). computed as shown in (5).
The following content provides a further introduction to the
computational process. For the input subgraph SG = (V, E), eivu = AT Tnode (hv , hu ; Mi ). (5)
8900 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Where AT Tnode represents the neural network structure of the In the above equation, Sim denotes similarity, cos denotes
computational node-level attention. After obtaining the impor- the cosine similarity calculation function, and hGi1 and hGi2
tance between node pairs based on the meta-path, this research denote the feature vectors of the two process subgraphs. The
 i
normalize them using (6) to obtain the weight coefficient αvu : loss function is calculated using (12).
  
 exp σ b hv
 (i)(k)
 ||hu
 (i)(k)  p

αvu =Sof tM ax(evu ) =
 i (i)(k)   . l = (Sim(Gi1 , Gi2 ) − yi )2 . (12)
 (i)(k) (i)(k)
 j∈Nvi exp σ b hv ||hj i=1

 (6) Refer to [64], [65] for the method of handling linear similarity
 between two sequences, the similarity score between subgraphs
Then, the feature vector of node v on the meta-path is aggregated is calculated using (13). Among them, h i and h i represent
 G1 G2
from the feature information of its neighbours and the relevant the feature vectors of the two process subgraphs, and their
coefficients, as shown in (7): similarity scores are positively correlated with the process se-
 ⎛ ⎞
  mantic similarity. hGi1 and hGi2 learn process dynamics (e.g.,
 h(i)(k)
 v = σ ⎝ α (i)(k−1)
 vu · h (i)(k−1) ⎠
 v . (7) context interaction, type) via a heterogeneous graph attention
 j∈Nvi network, and cosine similarity comprehensively compares their
 multi-faceted similarities.
Here, k ∈ 1, 2, . . ., K represents the index of the network layer,
hv
 (i)(k)
 denotes the feature vector of process node v in meta- ei ∈hGi ej ∈hGi ei .ej
 Sim(Gi1 , Gi2 ) =  1
  2 . (13)
path Mi , and σ denotes the activation function. The feature e 2× 2
 ei ∈hGi i ej ∈hGi ej
aggregation process of the hierarchical neural network structure 1 2

AGGlayer is shown in (8): LLM-HGAN uses similarity learning to optimize inter-process
 hv(i)(k) (0) (1)
 = AGGlayer (hv , hv , . . . , hv ) (k) distances between benign and malicious activities, enabling
 malicious process detection via feature vector analysis with
 = M LP ([h(0) (1)
 v : hv : · · · : hv ]).
 (k)
 (8) provenance graphs. It identifies anomalies by comparing process
 (i)(k)
 vector similarity to predefined thresholds λ. This study finds
Where [] denotes the aggregation operation and hv denotes that when λ is too small, all nodes are classified as normal
the feature vector of process node v of meta-path Mi . At the nodes, while when λ is too large, all nodes are classified as
same time, use (9) to calculate the weight coefficient of the malicious nodes.This prevents the correct classification of nor-
 (i)(k+1)
eigenvector hv of the meta-path Mi : mal and malicious nodes, and the corresponding λ values differ
   across different datasets. In this study, λ denotes an empirical
 (i)(k+1) (j)(k+1)
 exp σ b Wb hv ||Wb hv parameter, set to 0.63 for the ATLAS [34] dataset and 0.53 for
 βi =   . (9)
 (i)(k+1) (j , )(k+1) the DARPA TC dataset.
 j , ∈mexp σ b W h b v ||W h
 b v

 (j)(k+1) C. TTP-Based Attack Detection Module (Stage II)
Where hv denotes the eigenvector of the subpath Mj ,
b denotes the trainable parameters, Wb denotes the weight The output of the stage I is an abnormal process and serves
coefficient matrix, || denotes the concat operation, and σ de- as the input for the stage II, but it still needs to be processed
notes the nonlinear gate function. The feature aggregation of all through DFS to generate a suspected attack path before TTP can
meta-paths is calculated by (10): be used for attack comparison. LLM-HGAN employs clustering
 
 m algorithms to group malicious processes executing coordinated
 hG = AGGpath = AT T (h(i)(k+1)
 v )h(i)(k+1)
 v . (10) attacks, then develops a temporally-aware forward DFS (Depthi=1 First Search) approach to reconstruct attack paths by correlating
Referencing the research methodologies in [43] and [45], and distributed behaviors. It matches path behaviors with ATT&CK
drawing from the proven effectiveness demonstrated in most TTPs via designed mapping rules to detect APT events, and
literature and practice, the optimal choice is to set the attention improves DFS to associate resource nodes (e.g., files) with
layer depth to 2. The primary reason for this is the “over- processes (Algorithm 3).
smoothing” issue inherent to heterogeneous graphs, where net- The input of Algorithm 3 is the original provenance graph
works with excessive layers tend to obscure the intrinsic se- without preprocessing, because this graph retains all system
mantic information of nodes and crucial meta-path informa- entities and dependencies, and the set of abnormal process
tion. During training, the dataset consists of p subgraph pairs V = {v1p , v2p , . . ., vsp } obtained in the Stage I (Section IV-B), and
(Gi1 , Gi2 ), i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., p}, and each subgraph pair has a cor- the output is the attack path. There may be multiple attack paths
responding label yi ∈ {+1, −1}. The similarity score for each obtained through Algorithm 3. LLM-HGAN uses threat severity
pair of graphs is calculated using the cosine similarity function, to determine the path most likely to contain a APT attack. Threat
as shown in (11). severity is calculated using (14):
 hGi1 · hGi2 1  1
 Sim(Gi1 , Gi2 ) = cos(hGi1 , hGi2 ) = . (11) fu = . (14)
 ||hGi1 || · ||hGi2 || F req(prov) F req(ei )
 ei ∈LLM −HGANpaths
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8901

 Algorithm 3: Attack path extraction.
 1: Input: Original provenance graph G, abnormal
 process V
 2: Output: LLM − HGAN _paths;  Set of attack
 paths
 3: path ← v1p
 4: For each vip : V = {v2p , . . ., vsp } do
 5: For each path : LLM − HGAN _paths do
 p
 6: if havepath(vi−1 ∈ path, vip ) then
 p
 7: path ← path(vi−1 ∈ path, vip )
 8: else
 9: newpath ← vip
 10: P T HGL ← AP T _paths ← newpath
 11: end if
 12: end for
 13: end for
 14: For each path : LLM − HGAN _paths do
 15: For each v p : LLM − HGAN _paths do
 16: path ← aDF S(G, v p )
 17: end for
 18: end for
 Fig. 6. The framework for generating ATT & CK TTPs using LLM.

In the above equation, F req(prov) denotes the number of file
processing events in the provenance graph prov, and F req(ei ) and precision of indicators. Leveraging multi-task learning and
denotes the frequency of event ei within the attack paths (LLM- contextual comprehension capabilities, LLMs enable systematic
HGAN_paths). A smaller F req(ei ) corresponds to a larger fu , TTP generation for APTs by effectively integrating heterogeindicating that infrequently occurring file processing events are neous threat intelligence. Monica et al. (2022) introduced how
more likely to signify core cyber attack activities, whereas fre- to use LLM for zero-shot and few-shot information extraction
quently observed events in provenance graphs typically reflect in clinical texts, as well as how to use guided prompts and
benign background tasks. parsers to improve the structure of the output [66]. Wei et al.
 LLM-HGAN defines text generation TTP mapping rules M (2023) developed a powerful information extraction (IE) model
based on TTP technology, where M = E ∪ R, E represents by directly prompting an LLM, converting the zero-shot IE task
the set of conditions that system entities must satisfy, and R into a multi-round QA problem [67]. Polak et al. (2024) proposed
represents the set of conditions that causal events must satisfy. the ChatExtract method, which utilizes advanced conversational
TTP mapping rules are a set of rules that include entity mapping large LLM to perform highly accurate data extraction in a fully
rules and relationship mapping rules, APPENDIX A shows an automated manner with minimal background knowledge [68].
example of mapping rules for attack technique TTP1566. Recent studies [69][70] show that as LLMs improve their abil-
 The TTP mapping rule matching algorithm leverages prede- ity to process long texts, background knowledge (e.g., netfined TTP rules to associate attack paths with corresponding work threat intelligence, output templates, enterprise ATT&CK
TTPs, thereby bridging the semantic gap between system logs frameworks) can be input. Given a prompt, LLM processes input
and abstract adversarial behaviors (Algorithm 4). To stream- and outputs it according to the template. Inspired by the above
line research, this study adopts an established combination of research findings, LLM-HGAN utilizes instruction prompts and
Dedupe, PyKEEN, and LLM Prompt to tackle entity and relation contextual learning to generate APT attack TTPs by calling the
matching tasks. The algorithm takes TTP rules and attack paths LLM interface, as shown in Fig. 6.
as inputs and produces APT attack paths annotated with their The LLM-based TTP generation module identifies atomic opmatched TTPs as outputs. During matching, path events are erations based on attack steps from network threat intelligence,
compared against the rules, and an event is identified as an APT then outputs them according to the output template, thereby
activity only when both the entity and relationship constraints are mapping the APT attack process into ATT&CK TTP.
satisfied. The proposed LLM-HGAN’s path-aware identification Zhao et al. (2025) indicated that using large language models
methodology significantly enhances the detection accuracy of to address network architecture composition problems can lead
multi-stage APT attack campaigns by enabling sequential phase to model output errors [71]. Issues like LLMs illusion and
analysis. insufficient attack process details lead to accuracy and reliability
 problems in the generated ATT&CK TTP. This study identifies
 systemic challenges in deploying LLMs for TTPs, particularly
D. LLM-Based TTP Generation Module
 persistent systemic data biases and model hallucination phenom-
 The LLM-HGAN framework demonstrates that TTP-based ena, which existing single-model approaches remain insufficient
detection efficacy critically depends on the temporal relevance to address. The mitigation measure of LLM-HGAN is to propose
8902 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Algorithm 4: Based on TTP rule matching APT attack as shown in (19):
 events. 
 N −1 N
 2
 1: Input: TTP Rules M; Attack path LLM-HGAN_paths C= Cij . (19)
 2: Output: Matching detected APT attack events N (N − 1) i=1 j=i+1
 Result_APT
 Based on TTP conflicts among diverse large models, LLM-
 3: Inf opathlist ←
 HGAN design an ensemble learning framework adopting ma-
 GetP athList(LLM − HGAN _paths)
 jority voting. As a fundamental integration paradigm, its core
 4: For each inf opath : Inf opathlist do
 principle is formally expressed by (20):
 5: isM atchedEntity ← M atchEntities(
 M.E, inf opath) V (y) = mode{ε1 c1 (x), ε2 c2 (x), . . ., εi ci (x)}. (20)
 6: if isMatchedEntity is True then
 In the above formula, V (y) represents the final voting result,
 7: isM atchedRelation ← M atchRelaion(
 ci (x) represents the classification result of the i − th model
 M.R, inf opath)
 for sample x; εi is the weight coefficient used to control the
 8: end if
 proportion of outputs from LLMs of different scales; the mode{}
 9: if isMatchedRelation is True then
 function returns the number that appears most frequently in a set
 10: Result_AP T ←
 of numbers, i.e., the category selected by the majority of models.
 Result_AP T ∪ (inf opath, T T P )
 11: end if
 V. EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS
 12: end for
 A. Research Questions and Experimental Objectives
 This study systematically evaluates the performance, robustan ensemble learning framework based on model collision,
 ness, adaptability, and structural validity of LLMHGAN for APT
which utilizes the complementary advantages of multiple heteroattack detection, with emphasis on comparison against stateoftgeneous LLMs and the majority voting mechanism to improve
 heart approaches. Specifically, this research aim to address the
generation accuracy. Model collision refers to divergent outputs
 following research questions:
from multiple models given identical inputs during ensemble r RQ1: Comparative Detection Performance: Can LLMlearning (15).
 HGAN achieve higher accuracy and F1score than stateei = 1 − ai , i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., t}, (15) oftheart provenancegraphbased APT detection methods?
 r RQ2: Detection of UnknownVulnerability APTs: IsLLM-
 In the above equation, t denotes the total number of LLM HGAN capable of effectively identifying APT campaigns
models. In the LLM-HGAN study, t = 3, corresponding to the exploiting previously unseen vulnerabilities?
use of three models: Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, GPT-3.5 Turbo, and r RQ3: Reliability of LLMGenerated TTPs: Can LLMgener-
DeepSeek R1-0528-7B. The term ai represents the accuracy of ated TTPs maintain high accuracy and practical utility for
the i-th model (0 ≤ ai ≤ 1), while ei denotes its error rate. To APT detection in dynamic threat environments?
evaluate the correlation between the error predictions of two r RQ4: Robustness to Family Variants and Evasion Techmodels, Pearson’s correlation coefficient ρij is employed, with niques: Does LLM-HGAN demonstrate resilience against
its specific formulation given in (16). familybased APT variants and sophisticated evasion strategies?
 (ei,k − ei )(ej,k − ej ) r RQ5: Rationalization of LLM-HGAN using -order sub-
 ρij =   , (16)
 (ei,k − ei )2 (ej,k − ej )2 graph sampling operations: Does the use of subgraphs
 to represent process behavior have an impact on anomaly
where ei,k and ej,k represent the error predictions of models i detection?
and j on sample k (error is 1, correct is 0), while ei and ej are
calculated using (17): B. Experimental Setup
 1) Hardware Configuration and Dataset Design for Compar-
 1 1 
 n n
 ei = ei,l , ej = ej,m . (17) ative Experiments of Different Detection Methods: The operan n m=1 tional environment for implementing LLM-HGAN is described
 l=1
 as follows. LLM-HGAN employs Python’s NetworkX library
For any two models i and j, their collision rate Cij is estimated
 to construct provenance graphs. The experimental environment
based on their error rates and the correlation of their error
 is configured with an NVIDIA A100 GPU (128GB VRAM), an
predictions, as shown in (18):
 8-core/16-thread CPU, and 1TB of storage. Development is car-
 Cij = ei × ej × ρij , (18) ried out using Python 3.7 with PyTorch and TensorFlow 2.15.0,
 deployed on Ubuntu.
where Cij measures the probability that two models simultane- This study constructs the anomaly process detection dataset
ously give incorrect predictions. The overall collision rate can from ATLAS [34] and DARPA TC open-source datasets, the
be calculated by considering all possible model combinations, specific data details of ATLAS [34] are shown in Table III)
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8903

 TABLE III baselines [34][78]. As provenance-graph detectors, ATLAS [34]
 DETAILS OF THE ATLAS [34] DATASET USED IN THE EXPERIMENT.
 and PROVDETECTOR [78] served as references. Performance
 is assessed via Precision, Recall, and F1-score.
 2) Strategies for Detecting of APT Attacks Exploiting Unknown Vulnerabilities: This study assesses LLM-HGAN’s detection of unknown APT activities via TTP methodologies. Realworld unknown APT samples are unavailable due to security,
 stakeholder, and privacy concerns. [79], [80]conducting similar experiments involves mixing conventional traffic with APT
 attack traffic, inspired by [24] [32] [33], this research utilizes
below. While existing provenance-based APT detection systems network attack tools, as shown in APPENDIX B, to simulate
predominantly utilize DARPA TC, its undisclosed evaluation multi-stage APT attacks in a controlled environment, focusing
audit logs necessitate supplementary data sources. LLM-HGAN on complex data exfiltration and remote web penetration sceincorporates ATLAS to address this gap, as both datasets are narios.To maximize proximity to a realistic cyberattack environpublicly accessible for direct download. ment, the cyberattack tools are installed on other hosts within the
 2) Robustness Detection Experimental Environment for Fa- experimental network environment. APT attack stages employ
milial APT and Unknown Attacks: The experimental environ- multiple software tools collaboratively, enabling tool rotation
ments for family-based APT attack samples and unknown at- to simulate diverse attack patterns. The 217-day experiment
tack samples are configured as follows. The TTP-based APT evaluated detection performance using precision, recall, and F1-
detection experiments were conducted on an Ubuntu 22.04 LTS score, while assessing LLM-HGAN’s efficacy against persistent
system equipped with an 8-core/16-thread CPU, 16GB RAM, APT campaigns. LLM-HGAN was benchmarked against the
and an NVIDIA RTX 2060 GPU. For unknown vulnerability AirTag method [88] across diverse host environments to evaluate
detection, a Windows 10 (x64) virtual machine was configured its detection capability for APT behaviors exploiting zero-day
with an Intel i9 CPU (1G), 128GB RAM, and a TITAN RTX vulnerabilities.
GPU (24GB), on which APT simulation tools and diverse docu- 3) Strategies for Testing the Accuracy of TTPs Generated
ment samples were deployed. Family behavior analysis utilized Based on LLM: To ensure the accuracy of the experimental
the APTnotes, AlienVault OTX, and MalwareBazaar datasets results evaluation, following the experimental design
(excluded from training). Notably, these datasets contain active methodology outlined in [81], 10 high-quality APT attack threat
APT29 and Lazarus samples [72]. intelligence reports were selected. Experimental validation
 3) Generating TTP Using LLM Experimental Environment: utilized only 10 APT threat intelligence reports, constrained
To fairly evaluate the accuracy of LLM-generated TTP strate- by legal restrictions on disclosing sensitive technical details of
gies without affecting the detection capability of LLM-HGAN, real APT incidents. Most publicly accessible threat intelligence
this research configured a separate operational environment reports lack sufficient detail or verifiable evidence, rendering
for the LLMs. LLM-based TTP generation requires collabo- them unsuitable for directly evaluating the accuracy of TTPs
rative computation across multiple models, necessitating high- generated by LLMs. Future work will focus on mitigating
performance system configurations. The experimental environ- the small-sample problem in threat intelligence via methods
ment is deployed on an 8-GPU NVIDIA A100 cluster (HGX like transfer learning, alongside exploring strategies to defend
A100 motherboard) with Intel Xeon Scalable processors, 512GB against training data compromise. To ensure experimental
DDR4 ECC memory, dual 480GB SSDs in RAID1, and 3.84TB operability and reproducibility while accounting for the
NVMe SSD arrays connected through high-speed interconnects practical utility of LLM-generated outputs, this study selected
to enable full-bandwidth GPU communication. 10 high-quality cyber threat intelligence reports. 3 analysts
 The dataset consists of real-world APT threat intelligence col- with cyber security expertise conducted detailed, independent
lected from open-source platforms, including FreeBuf and OS- examinations of these reports and constructed TTPs along with
INT. The LLMs employed in the experiments include Qwen2.5- annotated data based on a predefined ontology. The manually
7B-Instruct, GPT-3.5 Turbo (accessed via its API ecosystem annotated results will subsequently be compared and analyzed
with open-source toolchains), and DeepSeek R1-0528-7B. against those generated automatically by the LLM-HGAN
 model. Determining an appropriate sample size of threat
 intelligence and assessing the feasibility of manual analysis
C. Experimental Strategy efficiency remain key issues to be addressed in subsequent
 1) Strategies for Comparative Testing of APT Detection Ca- experimental stages. The experimental results will be analysed
pabilities: When designing experiments to evaluate the accu- from the perspectives of Precision, Recall, and F1-score.
racy of APT attack detection technologies, [73], [74], [75], [76], 4) Strategies for Testing the Ability to Detect APT Family
[77] employed the method of using representative references as Variants and Escapes: The experiment used three mainstream
the comparison baseline. This study employs the ATLAS [34] and publicly available family-based APT attack datasets: APTand DARPA TC datasets’ Engagement 3 project, specifically the notes, AlienVault Open Threat Exchange (OTX), and Malware-
CADETS and TRACE sub-datasets, as benchmarks for evalu- Bazaar. APTnotes includes 3 families and their 4 variants (2
ating the LLM-HGAN model, comparing with state-of-the-art families each have 1 variant, and the other family has 2 variants),
8904 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Fig. 8. Experimental results on the detection capability of LLM-HGAN for
 APT attacks based on unknown vulnerabilities.

 ATLAS Lab dataset and the DARPA TC dataset are depicted in
 Fig. 7(a) and (b).
Fig. 7. Comparison of experimental results from LLM-HGAN, ATLAS [34], The reason for this result is that ATLAS [34] and PROVDEand PROVDETECTOR [78]. TECTOR [78] use deep learning models based on natural
 language processing to classify the single execution path of
 a node, ignoring other adjacent nodes. In contrast, the prowith variant patterns including base samples, obfuscated variants posed LLM-HGAN effectively models contextual dependencies
(packing/code obfuscation), and C&C protocol changes; OTX among multi-step attack techniques while enhancing the disincludes one family and its two variants, with variant patterns criminative separation between benign and malicious nodes via
being base samples and obfuscated variants; MalwareBazaar similarity-based metric learning. Concurrently, the integration
includes one family and three variants, with variant patterns of LLM with HGAN endows the LLM-HGAN detection model
being base sample iterations and C&C protocol changes. The with outstanding scalability, thereby enabling robust perforaforementioned datasets are not used in the model training mance across diverse datasets during experimentation.
of LLM-HGAN. Finally, this study analyses the experimental 2) LLM-HGAN Has Excellent Capabilities for Detecting
results in terms of variant detection rate, false alarm rate (FAR), APT Attack Activities That Exploit Unknown Vulnerabilities:
and F1 score. The results in Fig. 8(a) present the evaluation of LLM-HGAN
 5) Strategies for Testing the Rationality and Feasibility of in terms of precision, recall, and F1-score. Based on exten-
K-Order Subgraph Sampling Operations: During the experi- sive experimentation, the convergence behavior summarized
ments, refer to [82] for the approach to handling subgraphs,the in Fig. 8(b) shows that the detection accuracy stabilizes at
ATLAS [34] dataset was sampled with 2nd-order subgraphs and approximately 98.9%, while the loss value converges to around
the DARPA TC dataset with 6th-order subgraphs to capture 0.004. Meanwhile, in Fig. 8(b), the detection accuracy steadily
process behavior. These representations were then compared increased over the first 15 days, stabilising thereafter. This
against those derived from the full provenance graph, while precisely reflects the long-term self-learning and optimisation
keeping all other experimental parameters consistent. process of LLM-HGAN in countering unknown attack threats.
 Fig. 9 shows the comparative results of LLM-HGAN versus the
 AirTag method [88] and the HASGDetector method [46]. The x-
D. Experimental Result and Analysis axis denotes the count of distinct background applications (e.g.,
 1) LLM-HGAN Significantly Outperforms Representative document editors, music players, games, programming develop-
Methods of the Same Type in Terms of Accuracy in Detecting Ab- ment tools) installed on the target host (4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14,16), and
normal Processes: The experimental results are shown in Fig. 7, the y-axis illustrates the accuracy rate distribution from 237 runs
indicating that the comprehensive performance of LLM-HGAN of both methods on the experimental host. Results indicate that
is significantly superior to that of ATLAS [34] and PROVDE- LLM-HGAN outperforms AirTag in detection performance and
TECTOR [78]. Specifically, the experiments conducted at the generalization capability. While AirTag’s accuracy improves
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8905

Fig. 9. Comparative experimental results under different system log background conditions. . Fig. 11. Experimental results demonstrating the detection capability of LLM-
 HGAN for familial APT variants.

 learning voting mechanism, which can effectively control the
 output error of LLMs. However, the precision of TTP generation
 remains strongly dependent on both the volume and fidelity of
 the training dataset.
 4) LLM-HGAN Demonstrates Remarkable Accuracy and
 Adaptability in Detecting APT Variants: Drawing upon the analytical approach to experimental results outlined in [85], [86],
 [87], Fig. 11 shows that LLM-HGAN has excellent detection
 capabilities for variants of the APT family, with the highest
 recognition rate for variants of the APTnotes family. This is
Fig. 10. The accuracy of LLM-HGAN in generating TTP. mainly because the open-source APTnotes dataset is comprehensive and rich, and the large model is used to continuously
 learn and update TTPs. The MalwareBazaar family’s experiwith more iterations, its performance deteriorates as background mental results are insufficient due to the lack of comprehensoftware increases (generating more log files)—consistent with siveness of the open source dataset. The fundamental reason
the limitation in [88] where its effectiveness depends on train- lies in MalwareBazaar itself being a publicly accessible project.
ing data availability. As noted in [46], HASGDetector excels Constrained by legal considerations and attackers’ reluctance
at learning normal behavior patterns and detecting unknown to disclose details, the quantity and quality of authentic APT
anomalies without prior knowledge or labeled data. While it attack samples available are extremely limited. These samples
achieves high accuracy in simple networks, its performance are either relatively outdated versions, incomplete, or tampered
drops in complex environments. This is because, as network attack chains. Furthermore, directly downloading samples into
applications grow, it struggles to quickly learn diverse normal experimental environments may trigger minimal security polibehaviors, leading to reduced detection accuracy. cies (such as false positives for malicious activity), leading to
 These findings indicate that LLM-HGAN can reliably detect unsatisfactory experimental results. Subsequent research may
long-term APT attacks and continuously learn and adapt to employ techniques like adversarial sample generation, transevolving attack behaviors. Similar analysis approaches are also fer learning, and reinforcement learning to explore how to
reported in [83], [84]. enhance the generalization capability of LLM-HGAN under
 3) LLM-HGAN Uses LLM to Generate TTPs With Outstand- small-sample conditions. Experimental results also indicate that
ing Accuracy: Fig. 10 presents the results, where the X-axis LLM-HGAN has achieved practical detection levels for familial
denotes the TTP types to be generated and the Y-axis shows APT variants.
the precision, recall, and F1-score. LLM-HGAN achieves high 5) LLM-HGAN Significantly Improves Anomaly Detection
accuracy in TTP generation, reaching a practically usable level. Using Subgraph Representation of Process Behavior: The ex-
The specific details of the experimental results regarding the perimental results are shown in Fig. 12, the x-axis represents
accuracy of using LLM to generate TTP are shown in Table IV. the percentage and the y-axis represents the effect of comparing
Values in the table such as −1 and +1 represent the number the use of the entire provenance graph and k-order subgraph
of false negatives and false positives, respectively. The number sampling from three perspectives, Fig. 12(a)–(b) present experof false negative and false positive cases in Table IV does imental results using the ATLAS [16] and DARPA TC datasets,
not exceed 2, indicating that LLM-HGAN adopts ensemble respectively.
8906 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE IV
 RESULTS ON THE ACCURACY OF LLM-HGAN IN GENERATING TTP.

 LLM+GCN yields the lowest. The observed performance gap
 originates from the uniform weighting of neighboring nodes in
 GCN-based methods, which persists even when LLMs enhance
 TTP generation. This aggregation scheme limits efficiency and
 accuracy in complex, heterogeneous provenance graphs. Conversely, HGAN employs attention to dynamically weight key
 nodes, offering a refined and more effective alternative to standard GCN.

Fig. 12. Experiments on the operational rationality of LLM-HGAN sampling VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
using k-order subgraphs.
 This study presents LLM-HGAN, a novel framework that
 integrates HGAN with LLM capabilities to detect APTs through
 Full provenance graphs hinder process detection by trapping TTP analysis. Existing detection approaches commonly rely on
irrelevant host activities. When learning node features, redun- attribution graphs, yet they suffer from two notable limitations:
dant data interference blurs key patterns. i) rule-based methods often generate a large number of false positives for benign system activities, and ii) provenance graphs constructed from system logs are typically very large, making it dif-
E. Ablation Experiment
 ficult to efficiently locate malicious behaviors. To address these
 To rigorously validate the seamless integration of LLM and challenges, LLM-HGAN adopts a two-step detection paradigm.
HGAN within the proposed LLM–HGAN framework, as well First, it combines similarity learning with a heterogeneous graph
as to quantitatively demonstrate the substantial performance attention network to improve the detection rate of abnormal proimprovements achieved by this synergistic fusion in the con- cesses. Next, the framework applies anomaly process clustering
text of APT detection efficacy, detection accuracy served as and an enhanced forward traversal algorithm to identify potential
the primary metric. To evaluate the performance of the four attack paths, which are subsequently matched against TTP rules
methods, this experiment conducted ablation experiments on for attack detection. In addition, the system leverages LLMs to
100 distinct APT attack process samples, each generated using enable automated and continuous updating of the TTP rule base.
cyberattack tools randomly selected from Appendix B. For Empirical evaluations demonstrate that LLM-HGAN effectively
each method, three independent trials were conducted, and the withstands detection evasion techniques, complex attack patfinal results were obtained by averaging across the three runs. terns, and prolonged covert activities across four experimental
Similar evaluation protocols have been adopted in prior studies scenarios, establishing itself as a highly promising innovative
[24], [51], [73]. The ablation experiment results are shown in approach. The computational demands of the LLM-HGAN ap-
Table V, wherein the GCN were implemented using PyTorch proach can be effectively managed through techniques including
Geometric.Experimental results show that the LLM-HGAN ar- graph sampling, meta-path optimization, model lightweighting,
chitecture achieves the highest APT detection accuracy, while and feedback-based optimization, enabling its application to
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8907

 TABLE V
 RESULTS OF ABLATION EXPERIMENT.

 TABLE VI APPENDIX A
 TTP1566 RULE: PHISHING TECHNIQUES.
 An example of mapping rules for TTP1566 is shown in
 Table VI.

 APPENDIX B
 Tools of detecting unknown APT are shown in Table VII.

 REFERENCES
 [1] S. Feng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “Dynamic resource management to defend against advanced persistent threats in fog computing: A game theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput.,
 vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 995–1007, Jul./Sep. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TCC.2019.
 2896632.
 [2] S. Feng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and A. Leshem, “Evolving risk
 management against advanced persistent threats in fog computing,” in
 Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Cloud Netw., Tokyo, Japan, Oct. 2018, pp. 1–6,
 TABLE VII doi: 10.1109/CloudNet.2018.8549403.
 TOOLS USED IN SIMULATED UNKNOWN APT ATTACK DETECTION [3] L.-X. Yang, K. Huang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Xiang, and Y. Y. Tang,
 EXPERIMENTS. “Defense against advanced persistent threat through data backup and
 recovery,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2001–2013,
 Jul./Sep. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2020.3040247.
 [4] A. Alshamrani, S. Myneni, A. Chowdhary, and D. Huang, “A survey on advanced persistent threats: Techniques, solutions, challenges,
 and research opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 21,
 no. 2, pp. 1851–1877, Second quarter 2019, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2019.
 2891891.
 [5] Y. Wang, H. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Su, and J. Li, “Combating advanced persistent
 threats: Challenges and solutions,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 324–333,
 Nov. 2024, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2024.3389734.
 [6] J. Liang, S. Guo, Z. Hong, E. Zhou, C. Zhang, and B. Xiao, “SecPQ: Secure
 prediction queries on encrypted outsourced databases,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 4534–4548, Sep./Oct. 2025,
 doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3549052.
 [7] Z. Peng et al., “Generative artificial intelligence models for emerging
 communication systems: Fundamentals and challenges,” IEEE Commun.
 Mag., vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 36–43, Sep. 2025, doi: 10.1109/MCOM.001.
 2400730.
 [8] H. Yue, T. Li, D. Wu, R. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Detecting APT attacks using
 an attack intent-driven and sequence-based learning approach,” Comput.
 Secur., vol. 140, 2024, Art. no. 103748, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2024.103748.
 [9] M. L. Martin, “Cyber kill chain,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.
small-to-medium-scale heterogeneous graphs. To address com- lockheedmartin.com/en-us/capabilities/cyber/cyber-kill-chain.html
 [10] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance
putational cost and operational feasibility, open-source LLMs analysis for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc.
can be utilized with strategies including selective parameter 2020 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, May 2020, pp. 1172–1189,
updates, lightweight models, and periodic retraining. doi: 10.1109/SP40000.2020.00096.
 [11] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “UNICORN:
 The current implementation of TTP rule derivation remains Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in
limited to English-language LLM-based approaches. Future Proc. 27th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., Feb. 2020, pp. 1–6,
investigations will explore: i) integration of multilingual APT doi: 10.14722/ndss.2020.24046.
 [12] Y. Hu, Y. Liu, Z. Lv, Y. Chen, Z. Lin, and Y. Du, “Privacy-preserving
threat intelligence feeds, and ii) integration of multilingual few-shot traffic detection against advanced persistent threats via federated
APT threat intelligence sources and continuous collection of meta learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2549–2560,
high-value threat intelligence. iii) conduct research into adver- May/Jun. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2023.3304556.
 [13] H. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Lv, Y. Chen, Z. Lin, and Y. Du, “Explainable intelligencesarial sample generation, producing diverse APT attack samples driven defense mechanism against advanced persistent threats: A joint edge
to continually refine the generalization capabilities of LLM- game and AI approach,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19,
HGAN. no. 2, pp. 757–775, Mar./Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2021.3130944.
8908 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[14] X. Yang, G. Li, J. Wu, K. Zhou, J. Li, and W. Yang, “Backdoor-empowered [35] F. Yang, J. Xu, C. Xiong, Z. Li, and K. Zhang, “PROGRAPHER:
 regulable privilege authorization for edge-level graph learning in 6G An anomaly detection system based on provenance graph embedvehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, ding,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., Berkeley, CA, USA, 2023,
 pp. 6307–6318, May 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2025.3533648. pp. 4355–4372.
[15] W. Huang, G. Li, M. Chen, J. Li, and H. Zhu, “Silent penetrator: Breach- [36] Z. Xu, P. Fang, C. Liu, X. Xiao, Y. Wen, and D. Meng, “DEPCOMM: Graph
 ing cross-domain federated fine-tuning via feature shift-induced back- summarization on system audit logs for attack investigation,” in Proc.
 door,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 7106–7120, 2025, IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2022, pp. 540–557,
 doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3581026. doi: 10.1109/SP46214.2022.9833632.
[16] R. Xu et al., “Toward covert and reliable communication for [37] K. Akbar et al., “Advanced persistent threat detection using data proveanti-eavesdropping transmission in V2X networks,” in IEEE Trans. nance and metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
 Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 6429–6442, Aug. 2025, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 3957–3969, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 doi: 10.1109/TWC.2025.3553132. [38] L. Zhou, J. Li, Z. Gu, J. Qiu, B. B. Gupta, and Z. Tian, “PANNER:
[17] J. Chen, X. Lan, Q. Zhang, W. Ma, W. Fang, and J. He, “Defending against POS-aware nested named entity recognition through heterogeneous graph
 APT attacks in cloud computing environments using grouped multiagent neural network,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 11, no. 4,
 deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 4718–4726, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2022.3159366.
 pp. 19459–19470, Jun. 2025, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3542119. [39] Z. Li, X. Cheng, L. Sun, J. Zhang, and B. Chen, “A hierarchical approach
[18] L. Xiao, H. Liu, Z. Lv, Y. Chen, Z. Lin, and Y. Du, “Reinforcement- for advanced persistent threat detection with attention-based graph neural
 learning-based APT defense for large-scale smart grids,” IEEE In- networks,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, 2021, Art. no. 5588062.
 ternet Things J., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 11917–11925, May 2025, [40] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3519134. line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
[19] W. Cheng et al., “TAGAPT: Toward automatic generation of APT samples learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 699–714, 2023,
 with provenance-level granularity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2022.3228493.
 vol. 20, pp. 4137–4151, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3557742. [41] C. Liu, B. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Zhen, X. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “FewM-HGCL:
[20] S. Moothedath et al., “Dynamic information flow tracking for detection Few-shot malware variants detection via heterogeneous graph contrastive
 of advanced persistent threats: A stochastic game approach,” IEEE Trans. learning,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Oct.
 Autom. Control, vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 6684–6699, Oct. 2024. 25, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3216902.
[21] M. M. Anjum, S. Iqbal, and B. Hamelin, “ANUBIS: A provenance [42] L. Zhang, “Implementing RGCN model in network security Big Data
 graph-based framework for advanced persistent threat detection,” in Proc. analysis,” J. Cyber Secur. Mobility, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 505–530, 2025,
 37th ACM/SIGAPP Symp. Appl. Comput., Apr. 2022, pp. 1684–1693, doi: 10.13052/jcsm2245-1439.14210.
 doi: 10.1145/3477314.3507097. [43] L. Wu et al., “Efficient intrusion detection via heterogeneous graph at-
[22] A. Ding, G. Li, X. Yi, X. Lin, J. Li, and C. Zhang, “Genera- tention networks and parallel provenance analysis,” Comput. Netw., 270,
 tive AI for software security analysis: Fundamentals, applications, and 2025, Art. no. 111552.
 Challenges,” IEEE Softw., vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 46–54, Nov./Dec. 2024, [44] H. Liu, C. Zeng, Z. Li, L. Lu, J. Chen, and Z. Zhou, “DAMAGE: Directed
 doi: 10.1109/MS.2024.3416036. heterogeneous network attack sequence inference through graph attention
[23] K. Lan, G. Li, W. Huang, and J. Li, “HFL-RD: Heterogeneous federated matrix generation embedding and reinforcement learning,” IEEE Syst. J.,
 learning-empowered ransomware detection via APIs and traffic features,” vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 392–403, Jun. 2025.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 4096–4111, [45] Y. Hei et al., “HAWK: Rapid android malware detection through heteroge-
 Oct. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3574716. neous graph attention networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
[24] K. A. Akbar et al., “Advanced persistent threat detection using data prove- vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4703–4717, Apr. 2024.
 nance and metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., [46] G. Xie, X. Xu, H. Gao, and M. Iqbal, “HASGDetector: An effective hostvol. 20, no. 5, pp. 3957–3969, Sep./Oct. 2023. based IntrusionAnomaly detection framework with Large-ScaleAttribute
[25] A. Aly, S. Iqbal, A. Youssef, and E. Mansour, “MEGR-APT: A heterogeneous graphs,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 3,
 memory-efficient APT hunting system based on attack representation pp. 7523–7538, Aug. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2025.3592903.
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 5257–5271, [47] S. Benabderrahmane, P. Valtchev, J. Cheney, and T. Rahwan, “APT-
 2024. LLM: Embedding-based anomaly detection of cyber advanced persistent
[26] T. Chen et al., “APT-KGL: An intelligent APT detection system based threats using large language models,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Digit.
 on threat knowledge and heterogeneous provenance graph learning,” Forensics Secur., Boston, MA, USA, 2025, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/IS-
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Dec. 26, 2022, DFS65363.2025.11011912.
 doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3229472. [48] H. Xu, C. Si, Z. Zhou, C. Wang, P. Sun, and Q. Liu, “APTSniffer: Detecting
[27] S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based threats APT attack traffic using retrieval-augmented large language models,” in
 in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Foren- Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., Hyderabad, India,
 sics Secur., vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022. 2025, pp. 1–5, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP49660.2025.10888022.
[28] H. Irshad et al., “TRACE: Enterprise-wide provenance tracking for [49] A. Selim, J. Zhao, and B. Yang, “Large language model for smart inverter
 real-time APT detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, cyber-attack detection via textual analysis of volt/VAR commands,” IEEE
 pp. 4363–4376, 2021. Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 6179–6182, Nov. 2024.
[29] T. Li, X. Liu, W. Qiao, X. Zhu, Y. Shen, and J. Ma, “T-Trace: Construct- [50] C. He, Y. Wang, J. Hu, T. H. Luan, Y. Bi, and Z. Su, “Collaborative
 ing the APTs provenance graph through multiple syslogs correlation,” vehicular threat sharing: A long-term contract-based incentive mechanism
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1179–1195, with privacy preservation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25,
 May/Jun. 2024. no. 12, pp. 21528–21544, Dec. 2024.
[30] Y. Wu et al., “Paradise: Real-time, generalized, and distributed provenance- [51] T. Yu, G. Liu, C. Wang, and Y. Yang, “LLMGRAPH: Label-free detection
 based intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., against APTs in edge networks via LLM and GCN,” IEEE Trans. Devol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1624–1640, Mar./Apr. 2023. pendable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 7256–7271, Nov./Dec. 2025,
[31] K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling, and G. Quirchmayr, “KRYSTAL: doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3596092.
 Knowledge graph-based framework for tactical attack discovery in audit [52] M. Golec, Y. Khamayseh, S. Melhem, and A. Alwarafy, “LLM-driven APT
 data,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, 2022, Art. no. 102828. detection for 6G wireless networks: A systematic review and taxonomy,”
[32] C. Xiong et al., “Conan: A practical real-time APT detection system with IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 145271–145288, 2025.
 high accuracy and efficiency,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., [53] Y. Hmimou, M. Tabaa, A. Khiat, and Z. Hidila, “A multi-agent system
 vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 551–565, Jan./Feb. 2022. for cybersecurity threat detection and correlation using large language
[33] T. Chen et al., “APTSHIELD: A stable, efficient and real-time models,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 150199–150215, 2025.
 APT detection system for linux hosts,” IEEE Trans. Depend- [54] F. Zuo, J. Rhee, and Y. Choe, “Knowledge transfer from LLMs to proveable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 5247–5264, Nov./Dec. nance analysis: A semantic-augmented method for APT detection,” 2025,
 2023. arXiv:2503.18316.
[34] A. Alsaheel et al., “ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for attack [55] G. Leopoldo, D. Juan-Jose, S. Joerg, and M. Inmaculada, “LLM-Based
 investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., Berkeley, CA, USA, cyberattack detection using network flow statistics,” Appl. Sci.-Basel,
 2021, pp. 3005–3022. vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 12–25, 2025, doi: 10.3390/app15126529.
LAN et al.: LLM-HGAN: LLM-ENHANCED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT DETECTION 8909

[56] N. I. CheMat, N. Jamil, Y. Yusoff, and M. L. M. Kiah, “A systematic [77] T. Li, Y. Jiang, C. Lin, S. Obaidat, Y. Shen, and J. Ma, “DeepAG: Attack
 literature review on advanced persistent threat behaviors and its detection graph construction and threats prediction with bi-directional deep learnstrategy,” J. Cybersecurity, vol. 10, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. tyad023. ing,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 740–757,
[57] R. Li, X. Meng, and Y. Zhang, “Group-aware dynamic graph rep- Jan./Feb. 2023.
 resentation learning for next POI recommendation,” IEEE Trans. [78] Q. Wang, W. U. Hassan, D. Li, K. Jee, and X. Yu, “You are what you do:
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 2614–2625, May 2025, Hunting stealthy malware via data provenance analysis,” in Proc. Netw.
 doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2025.3538005. Distrib. System Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 1–16.
[58] T. Zhu, J. Wang, L. Ruan, C. Xiong, J. Yu, and Y. Li, “General, effi- [79] Y. Hu, J. Wu, G. Li, J. Li, and J. Cheng, “Privacy-preserving few-shot traffic
 cient, and real-time data compaction strategy for APT forensic analy- detection against advanced persistent threats via federated meta learning,”
 sis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 3312–3325, 2021, IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2549–2560, May/Jun. 2024.
 doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3076288. [80] C. Chen et al., “The last mile of attack investigation: Audit log analysis
[59] Y. Zhang, F. Zhang, H. Li, S. Zhang, X. Guo, and Y. Chen, “Data- toward software vulnerability location,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.,
 aware adaptive compression for stream processing,” IEEE Trans. vol. 19, pp. 9566–9581, 2024.
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 4531–4549, Sep. 2024, [81] X. He, H. Huang, C. Wang, F. Hu, T. Cai, and Z. Zheng, “A fairnessdoi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3377710. guaranteed framework for semi-asynchronous federated learning,” IEEE
[60] G. Mei, Z. Guo, L. Pan, Q. Li, F. Li, and S. Liu, “LIHAN: A lattice- Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 4462–4479, Nov./Dec. 2025,
 guided incomplete heterogeneous information network embedding model doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3572223.
 for node classification,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, [82] B. Wang, B. Jiang, and C. Ding, “FL-GNNs: Robust network represenpp. 7411–7420, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2024.3405569. tation via feature learning guided graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
[61] S. Fan, G. Liu, and J. Li, “A heterogeneous graph neural net- Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 750–760, Jan./Feb. 2024.
 work with attribute enhancement and structure-aware attention,” IEEE [83] G. Shenderovitz and N. Nissim, “Bon-APT: Detection, attribution, and
 Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 829–838, Feb. 2024, explainability of APT malware using temporal segmentation of API calls,”
 doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2023.3239034. Comput. Secur., vol. 142, 2024, Art. no. 103862.
[62] F. Wu et al., “Multi-variate time series prediction of traffic and [84] Y. Shi, G. Li, J. Wu, J. Li, and H. Fang, “BPF-DAG: Byte-packet-flow
 users for dynamic RRH-BBU mapping in C-RAN,” IEEE Trans. features fusion via dynamic attributed graph for reliable encrypted traffic
 Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 10557–10572, Oct. 2025, classification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 21, pp. 197–211,
 doi: 10.1109/TMC.2025.3570851. 2026.
[63] W. Wang et al., “HGATE: Heterogeneous graph attention auto-encoders,” [85] X. Tang et al., “ROBY: A byzantine-robust and privacy-preserving server-
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3938–3951, Apr. 2023, less federated learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.,
 doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3138788. vol. 20, pp. 7824–7838, 2025.
[64] J. He et al., “Advancing non-intrusive load monitoring: Predicting [86] X. Tang, M. Shen, Q. Li, L. Zhu, T. Xue, and Q. Qu, “Pile: Roappliance-level power consumption with indirect supervision,” IEEE bust privacy-preserving federated learning via verifiable perturbations,”
 Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2957–2973, Jul./Aug. 2025. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 5005–5023,
[65] W. Li et al., “MUCVR: Edge computing-enabled high-quality Nov./Dec. 2023.
 multi-user collaboration for interactive MVR,” IEEE Trans. Par- [87] C. Fu et al., “Label inference attacks against federated learning,” in Proc.
 allel Distrib. Syst., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 2058–2072, Oct. 2025, USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 1397–1414.
 doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2025.3595801. [88] H. Ding, J. Zhai, and Y. Nan, “Shiqing ma AIRTAG: Towards automated
[66] M. Agrawal, S. Hegselmann, H. Lang, Y. Kim, and D. Sontag, attack investigation by unsupervised learning with log texts,” in Proc.
 “Large language models are few-shot clinical information extrac- USENIX Secur. Symp., Anaheim, CA, USA, 2023, pp. 125–136.
 tors,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Nat. Lang. Process., 2022, [89] I. Ghafir et al., “Detection of advanced persistent threat using machinepp. 1998–2022. learning correlation analysis,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst. vol. 89
[67] X. Wei et al., “ChatIE: Zero-shot information extraction via chatting with pp. 349–359, 2018.
 ChatGPT,” 2023, arXiv:2302.10205v2. [90] A. Presekal, A. Stefanov, I. Semertzis, and P. Palensky, “Spatio-temporal
[68] M. P. Polak and D. Morgan, “Extracting accurate materials data advanced persistent threat detection and correlation for cyber-physical
 from research papers with conversational language models and power systems using enhanced GC-LSTM,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
 prompt engineering,” Nature Commun., vol. 15, 2024, Art. no. 1569, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1654–1666, Mar. 2025.
 doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-45914-8. [91] L. Yang et al., “LLM-APTDS: A high-precision advanced persistent threat
[69] J. Li, M. Wang, Z. Zheng, and M. Zhang, “LooGLE: Can long-context detection system for imbalanced data based on large language models
 language models understand long contexts?,” in Proc. Annu. Meeting with strong interpretabilit,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 178, 2026,
 Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2024, pp. 16304–16333. Art. no. 108315.
[70] Z. Dong, T. Tang, J. Li, W.X. Zhao, and J. Wen, “BAMBOO: A comprehensive benchmark for evaluating long text modeling capacities of large
 language models,” in Proc. Joint Int. Conf. Comput. Linguistics, Lang.
 Resour. Eval. (LREC-COLING), 2024, pp. 2086–2099.
[71] J. Zhao, T. Wen, and K. Cheong, “Can large language models be trusted as
 evolutionary optimizers for network-structured combinatorial problems?,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,vol. 13, pp. 1191–1206, 2021.
[72] H. M. Soliman, D. Sovilj, G. Salmon, M. Rao, and N. Mayya, “RANK:
 AI-assisted end-to-end architecture for detecting persistent attacks in
 enterprise networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21,
 no. 4, pp. 3834–3850, Jul./Aug. 2024.
[73] J. Mi, Q. Li, Z. Han, W. Liao, and J. Fu, “Graph learning on instruction stream-augmented CFG for malware variant detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Informat. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 3015–3030, 2025.
[74] X. Li, X. Jiang, H. Wan, and X. Zhao, “TeRed: Normal behaviorbased efficient provenance graph reduction for large-scale attack foren- Kun Lan is currently working toward the Ph.D. desics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 9463–9476, gree with the School of Computer Science (School
 2025. of Cyberspace Security and the School of Cryp-
[75] T. Yu, G. Liu, C. Wang, and Y. Yang, “A risk management approach to tography), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shangdefending against the advanced persistent threat,” IEEE Trans. Dependable hai, China. Since 2005, he has been working with
 Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 6„ pp. 1163–1172, Nov./Dec. 2020. China Electronics Technology Cyber Security Com-
[76] J. Yang, Q. Zhang, X. Jiang, S. Chen, and F. Yang, “POIROT: Causal cor- pany Ltd. He is also a Researcher-Level Senior Enrelation aided SemanticAnalysis for advanced PersistentThreat detection,” gineer conducting in-depth research in the field of
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 3546–3563, cyberspace security. His research interests include
 Sep./Oct. 2020. cyber attack threat detection and deep learning.
8910 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Gaolei Li (Member, IEEE) is currently an Asso- Jianhua Li (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
 ciate Professor with the School of Computer Science, a Professor/Ph.D. degree Supervisor and the Dean
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. with the Institute of Cyber Science and Technology,
 He has authored or coauthored more than 100 pa- Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. He
 pers, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMA- is also the Director with the National Engineering
 TION FORENSICS AND SECURITY (IEEE TIFS), IEEE Laboratory for Information Content Analysis Tech-
 TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COM- nology, Director of Engineering Research Center for
 PUTING (IEEE TDSC), NDSS, ACM CCS, ACM Network Information Security Management and Ser-
 MM, and AAAI. His research interests include ma- vice of Chinese Ministry of Education. He has auchine learning security and privacy-preserving. He thored or coauthored more than 400 papers, including
 was the recipient of the many awards, including the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE
Outstanding Paper Award of IEEE ISPA 2024, Third Prize of Science and COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECU-
Technology Progress Award of China Electric Power Development Acceleration RITY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
Committee in 2024, Best Conference Paper Award of China Cryptology Society EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, ACM CCS, ACM MobiHoc, and IEEE
in 2020, and Best Conference Paper Award of IEEE CSIM Committee in 2018. Infocom. His research interests include information security, signal process,
He was also a TPC Member for CVPR 2024–2025, AAAI 2023&2024&2025, and computer network communication. He was the recipient of many awards,
ACM MM 2023&2024&2025, and ICLR 2025. He is a Reviewer of IEEE TIFS, including Second Prize of National Technology Progress Award of China in
IEEE TDSC, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, IEEE JOURNAL 2005, First Prize of Science and Technology Progress Award of the Ministry of
ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON Education, First Prize of Science and Technology Progress Award of Shanghai,
NETWORKING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, IEEE TRANS- Best paper award of IEEE CSIM Committee in 2016, IEEE TETC in 2017, ESI
ACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, and IEEE TRANS- Highly Cited Scientist from 2022 to 2024.
ACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING.

 Yantao Yu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. de-
 Wenkai Huang received the B.S. degree in informa- gree in information and communication engineering
 tion security (with IEEE Hons. Class) in 2023 from from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2025.
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, From 2023 to 2024, he was a Visiting Scholar at
 where he is currently working toward the Ph.D degree the Faculty of Computer Science, University of New
 with the School of Computer Science. His research Brunswick, Canada. He is currently a Postdoctoral
 interests include backdoor learning, federated learn- Researcher with the School of Computer Science,
 ing, and data security. Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. His
 research interests mainly include security and privacy
 in Internet of Things, applied cryptography, and privacy computing.