IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026 2403

 LLMBA: Efficient Behavior Analytics via Large
 Pretrained Models in Zero Trust Networks
 Senming Yan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Lei Shi , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
 Wei Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Jing Ren , Member, IEEE, Ying Li, and Limin Sun

 Abstract—Guided by the principle of “Never Trust, Always I. I NTRODUCTION
Verify”, Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA) mandates continuous
monitoring and analysis of users and entities, highlighting the
critical role of behavior analytics. However, the growing volume
of audit data and its complex contextual information render
many existing behavior analytics methods insufficient. Moreover,
most approaches rely on high-quality labeled data for supervised
 M ODERN information technologies, such as cloud computing, the Internet of Things (IoT), and generative
 artificial intelligence (GenAI), are being widely adopted but
training, limiting their effectiveness against previously unseen also introduce new cybersecurity threats. These technologies
malicious behaviors. To address these challenges, we propose
the Large Language Model for Behavior Analytics (LLMBA) have become targets of emerging attacks, including ranframework. LLMBA leverages a Large Language Model (LLM) somware, advanced persistent threats (APTs), and supply chain
to analyze behavioral patterns of internal users and entities, attacks [1], [2], [3]. Conventional defense systems typically
capitalizing on the LLM’s strong ability to model sequential rely on perimeter-based security architectures to mitigate such
data. We introduce a multi-level behavior encoding scheme to threats [4], [5], [6]. However, due to the prevalence of insider
capture both contextual and temporal information from behavior
records, producing rich input representations for the LLM- threats and unknown attacks, perimeter-based defenses are
enhanced model. The LLM is fine-tuned using self-supervised increasingly ineffective, which has driven growing interest
learning, enabling the detection of unknown malicious behaviors. in Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA) [7], [8]. Guided by the
To reduce the computational and storage overhead inherent principle of “Never Trust, Always Verify” [9], ZTA does not
in LLMs, we apply knowledge distillation to compress the implicitly trust any user or entity; instead, it continuously
model while maintaining high detection performance. Extensive
experiments on the CERT Insider Threat dataset demonstrate evaluates all access requests.
that LLMBA outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in detection A core technology for realizing ZTA is User and Entity
accuracy. Furthermore, the compressed student model achieves Behavior Analytics (UEBA), which identifies anomalous
superior performance compared with existing methods under behavior patterns of users and entities based on the analysis
comparable runtime constraints, making LLMBA highly suitable of their behavior records, thereby strengthening zero trust
for real-world deployment.
 networks [10], [11]. In UEBA systems, operations performed
 Index Terms—Cyber security, behavior analytics, threat detec- by users and entities are recorded in audit logs and contintion, large language models, knowledge distillation. uously monitored, reducing the risks posed by both insider
 and external threats. By automatically analyzing audit logs
 Received 9 July 2025; revised 19 January 2026; accepted 12 February 2026.
Date of publication 19 February 2026; date of current version 4 March 2026. to detect abnormal behaviors, UEBA minimizes the need for
This work was supported in part by the Major Key Project of Pengcheng manual inspection. Once potentially malicious users or entities
Laboratory under Grant PCL2024A03, in part by the National Natural Science are identified, ZTA can trigger appropriate response actions to
Foundation of China under Grant 92467201 and Grant U20A20156, in part by
the Key Research Project of Chinese Academy of Sciences under Grant RCJJ- mitigate security risks.
145-24-17, and in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation underL234033. Existing UEBA methods have incorporated modern data-
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the IEEE International driven techniques, including classical Machine Learning (ML)
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP’26). The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for and Deep Learning (DL) models, to enhance the feature
publication was Dr. Jason (Minhui) Xue. (Corresponding author: Wei Wang.) representation of audit logs [12], [13], [14]. Despite achiev-
 Senming Yan and Limin Sun are with the Institute of Information Engi- ing strong detection performance, these methods still face
neering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with
the School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, several significant challenges. First, as behavioral records
Beijing 100085, China (e-mail: yansenming@iie.ac.cn; sunlimin@iie.ac.cn). become increasingly large and complex, existing approaches
 Lei Shi is with the School of Integrated Circuits (School of Electronic struggle to extract discriminative information that effectively
Information and Electrical Engineering), Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: shi.lei@sjtu.edu.cn). distinguishes anomalous behaviors from normal ones. Second,
 Wei Wang and Ying Li are with the Department of Strategic and Advanced although both contextual and temporal features are critical
Interdisciplinary Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China for modeling behavior patterns, they are not fully exploited,
(e-mail: wei wang@ieee.org; liying8800@163.com).
 Jing Ren is with the Department of Strategic and Advanced Interdisciplinary limiting the ability of current methods to capture complex
Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China, and also with behavioral patterns. Third, many existing methods rely on
the School of Information and Communication Engineering, University of labeled data for behavior classification, which hampers their
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China (email: renjing@uestc.edu.cn). ability to detect previously unseen or unknown malicious
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2026.3666459 activities. Finally, the additional runtime overhead introduced
 1556-6021 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2404 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

by DL-based approaches is often overlooked, reducing their
practicality for deployment in real-world environments.
 To address these challenges, we propose Large Language
Model for Behavior Analytics (LLMBA), an LLM-based
behavior analytics framework designed to enhance zero trust
networks through systematic evaluation of behavior records.
Unlike traditional methods that rely on expert knowledge
to extract features or employ classic serialization modeling
techniques, our goal is to model the distribution of normal behaviors under highly heterogeneous, evolving, and
open-world conditions, where attacks manifest as semantic
deviations rather than sequential or statistical anomalies. From
this perspective, to effectively capture implicit behavioral
information, we introduce a multi-level behavior encoding
scheme that generates vectorized representations incorporating
both temporal and contextual features. Building on these rep- Fig. 1. An example of behavior records generated by a red-team user in
 the CERT r4.2 dataset. The usernames, timestamps, hosts, and activities are
resentations, we fine-tune a Llama-2–based behavior learning recorded in a structured format.
model to exploit the rich semantic information embedded
in the encoded vectors. The LLM serves as a pretrained
semantic representation backbone that captures rich contextual based behavior learning model, the knowledge distillationand temporal dependencies across events. Owing to the strong based compression method, and our behavior analytics
representation and generalization capabilities of LLMs, the algorithm. We present the experiment settings in Section IV.
proposed model can effectively model normal behavioral pat- We propose the main research questions and analyze the
terns and accurately detect anomalies. Furthermore, to improve evaluation results in Section V. Finally, conclusions and future
computational and storage efficiency, we employ a knowledge work directions are presented in Section VI.
distillation strategy to transfer learned knowledge from the
LLM-based model to a lightweight student model. We conduct II. R ELATED W ORK
extensive experiments on the CERT Insider Threat dataset, and To implement behavior analytics in ZTA, the behavior
the results demonstrate that the proposed LLMBA framework history of users and entities needs to be recorded. Fig. 1 shows
consistently outperforms existing methods in detection perfor- an example of preprocessed behavior audit logs, containing
mance, highlighting the effectiveness and practicality of the behavior records generated by a red-team user from the CERT
LLM-enhanced approach. r4.2 dataset. As users generate massive behavior records over
 To summarize, we have made the following contributions time, which are hardly processed by human experts, ML and
in this work: DL techniques are leveraged for automatically analyzing this
 • We propose LLMBA, an LLM-enhanced behavior ana- structured data.
 lytics framework that fine-tunes the LLaMA-2 foundation The core idea of behavior analytics is to distinguish the
 model for accurate, efficient behavior learning and patterns between normal and abnormal behaviors. To this end,
 anomaly detection. To the best of our knowledge, different behavioral features and various advanced techniques
 LLMBA represents the first effort to adapt large language are used in previous works. Some of the existing methods use
 models for behavior analytics in zero trust networks. statistical features from behavior records to detect anomalies.
 • We introduce a novel Multi-Level Behavior Encod- Le and Zincir-Heywood [15] propose to extract numerical
 ing (MLBE) scheme for LLMBA that preserves both features from behavior logs and employ an ensemble of MLcontextual and temporal information from behavior based models for insider threat detection. Lv et al. [12] propose
 records, enabling a more comprehensive understanding of a hybrid framework that leverages an ensemble of Isolation
 behavioral patterns. Forest and Markov models to learn both numerical and tem-
 • By leveraging self-supervised fine-tuning, LLMBA can poral features. Xu et al. [16] propose to extract numerical
 effectively detect previously unseen malicious behaviors, features of log events and parameters and use the Principal
 making it well-suited for real-world environments char- Component Analysis (PCA) algorithm to detect anomalies.
 acterized by unpredictable and evolving threats. These methods heavily rely on feature extraction methods,
 • To mitigate the runtime overhead of the proposed LLM- which are limited by the predefined rules, making them less
 enhanced framework, we employ a knowledge distillation effective in processing evolving attacks.
 strategy to compress the LLM-based model while largely Since behavior records are essentially sequential, structured
 preserving its detection performance. data, they can be processed in a similar way to natural
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In language. Therefore, in addition to statistical features, some
Section II, we thoroughly present and compare the exist- recent works use DL-based sequential models to learn coning research works. In Section III, we introduce the key textual information. Meng et al. [13] propose an end-to-end
components proposed in the LLMBA framework in detail, framework that uses the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
including the multi-level behavior encoding method, the LLM- network to model the sequential behavior patterns and classify
YAN et al.: LLMBA: EFFICIENT BEHAVIOR ANALYTICS VIA LARGE PRETRAINED MODELS 2405

 Fig. 2. The pipeline of our proposed LLMBA framework.

behavior records. The classification-based approach requires B. Problem Definition
manually labeled categories for training. Different from classi- Behavior analytics aims to determine whether a set of
fication, some researchers design DL-based behavior analytics behavior records is normal or abnormal, which can be formuapproaches in a self-supervised manner to reduce the need lated as a binary classification problem. Formally, we denote
for labeled data. DeepLog [17] is an LSTM-based method a set of original behavior records as S , where
for log anomaly detection, which identifies outlier patterns
by making predictions on the following events. Transformer S = (a1 , a2 , . . . , al ), (1)
models have shown their advantages in processing sequential
data. Huang et al. [14] propose the ITDBERT framework com- where l is the length of the behavior records and ai denotes
bining BERT-based encoders with LSTM models for threat the i-th activity. Therefore, the goal of the behavior analytics
detection. With the rapid development of Large Language task is to determine whether S is normal or not.
Models (LLMs), some researchers also employ LLMs for To fit the LLM-based models, the original sequence is
analyzing behavior records. Song et al. [18] use the Chain- further preprocessed to extract fixed-length activity sequences
of-Thought (CoT) reasoning to break down the task and with length (w) as inputs and the next activities as labels.
utilize LLM agents to analyze behavior records. Different Supposing that p pairs of inputs and labels are extracted from
from these sequential model-based methods, Liu et al. [19] the original sequence, the preprocessed data is denoted as
utilize richer contextual information from behavior logs and
 Sinput = (Sinput
 1 , Sinput
 2 , . . . , Sinput
 p ),
propose a Log2Vec approach. Log2Vec models user behaviors
as heterogeneous graphs, proposes a graph embedding method Slabel = (Slabel
 1 , Slabel
 2 , . . . , Slabel
 p ), (2)
to acquire compact vectorized data, and uses a clustering
 where
algorithm to detect anomalies.
 Sinput
 i = (ainput
 i , ainput input
 i+1 , . . . , ai+w−1 ),
 III. M ETHODOLOGY Slabel = (ainput
 i i+w ). (3)
 In this section, we introduce the LLMBA framework in
detail. We present the overview of LLMBA, the formal After that, the extracted sequences are vectorized by the
definition of our task, the multi-level behavior encoder, the Behavior Encoder (BE):
LLM-based behavior learning model, the knowledge distilla-
 Xinput = BE(Sinput ). (4)
tion method, and the anomaly detection algorithm for behavior
analytics. After encoding, we fine-tune an LLM-enhanced model to learn
 the behavior patterns of normal users, which is denoted as
A. Overview of the LLMBA Framework
 Y pred = BLM(Xinput ), (5)
 An overview of the LLMBA framework is illustrated in
Fig. 2. During the preprocessing stage, LLMBA first extracts where BLM is the Behavior Learning Model. The fine-tuning
fixed-length activity sequences from raw behavior records. procedure is formulated as
These sequences are then transformed by a multi-level behavior encoder into vector representations that preserve both f f t (Slabel |Y pred ), (6)
behavioral and temporal features. Subsequently, an LLM- where f f t is the fine-tuning algorithm.
based model is designed to learn patterns from the encoded After fine-tuning, we use the knowledge distillation techbehavior data. The model consists of three main components: nique to compress the BLM, i.e, the teacher model, while
an input network that maps the encoded vectors to the LLM retaining its detection performance. Knowledge distillation
input space, multiple pretrained Llama-2 Transformer blocks, follows the teacher-student architecture. Supposing that Y student
and an output network tailored to the behavior learning task. is the output of the compressed student model and fkd is the
The LLM-based model is trained to predict the next activity knowledge distillation algorithm, the procedure is denoted as
given preceding sequences, and the fine-tuned model is ultimately employed for behavior analytics. fkd (Y pred |Y student ). (7)
2406 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 1) Activity-Level Encoding: For activity names, we employ
 a word embedding approach to transform the original activity labels into vector representations, enabling the LLMBA
 framework to capture their contextual semantics. We denote
 this vectorization process as:
 xname = Emb(aname ). (9)
 2) Time-Level Encoding: Unlike activity names, the temporal features—specifically hours and weekdays—are vectorized using a cyclical encoding scheme to capture the inherent
 periodicity in behavior records. We adopt a Sine–Cosine
 encoder [20] to separately encode hours and weekdays. For
 the hour field, which takes integer values from 0 to 23, the
 resulting encoded vectors are denoted as:
 ahour
  
 xh sin = sin 2 ∗ π ∗ ,
 24
 ahour
  
Fig. 3. Illustration of multi-level behavior encoding. The activities are
encoded using word embedding, while the temporal features are encoded xh cos = cos 2 ∗ π ∗ . (10)
using cyclical encoding. The encoded features are concatenated as the encoded 24
vector. For the weekday field, whose value range is an integer
 between 0 and 6, the encoded vectors are denoted as
 aweek
  
C. Multi-Level Behavior Encoding
 xw sin
 = sin 2 ∗ π ∗ ,
 The behavior encoder in our framework is designed to trans- 7
 aweek
  
form behavior records into serialized encoded vectors suitable
for the LLM-based behavior learning model, as formulated in xw cos = cos 2 ∗ π ∗ . (11)
 7
Equation 4. During the encoding process, we aim to preserve
 After behavioral and temporal encoding, the encoded vecas much information as possible from the original audit data.
 tors are concatenated as a whole vector, which is denoted as
To this end, we propose a multi-level encoding strategy that
jointly captures sequential and temporal features within the xinput = (xname , xh sin , xh cos , xw sin , xw cos ). (12)
LLMBA framework. An overview of the proposed multi-level
encoding method is illustrated in Fig. 3. Finally, the multi-level behavior encoder generates embed-
 To evaluate user behavior within an organization, it is ding vectors that capture both behavioral and temporal
essential to capture behavior patterns that are sensitive to features, which are subsequently utilized by the LLM-based
both activity types and their temporal context. With respect model for learning.
to activity patterns, contextual relationships within activity
sequences provide valuable cues for behavior analytics. For D. Adapting LLMs for Behavior Modeling
instance, a user who frequently accesses removable devices After multi-level behavior encoding, the encoded vectors
to copy and store files may pose a risk of confidential data contain both contextual and temporal information from the
exfiltration. Meanwhile, from the temporal perspective, the original behavior records, effectively representing serialized
timing of activities can also signal anomalous behavior. For data. Using these vectors, we design an LLM-based behavexample, a user who repeatedly logs into internal systems ior learning model to capture sequential patterns and detect
during off-hours may exhibit potentially malicious intent. anomalous behaviors, as formulated in Equation 5.
 In the original behavior records, structured fields such as Since its introduction in 2017, the Transformer architecture
activity ID, activity name, timestamp, username, host, and has demonstrated significant advantages across a wide range
other auxiliary information are logged. In the proposed multi- of domains [20], [21], [22]. More recently, the advent of Genlevel behavior encoding scheme, we primarily leverage the erative Pre-trained Transformers (GPT) [23], [24] has spurred
activity name and timestamp fields. To preserve temporal the development of numerous large language models (LLMs),
characteristics, we extract the hour of the day and the day including Llama [25], Gemini [26], and DeepSeek [27], which
of the week from the timestamp of each behavior record: have driven substantial advances across multiple fields. Due to
 a = (aname , ahour , aweek ), (8) their strong ability to model serialized data, LLMs have been
 increasingly applied to tasks such as time-series analysis [28],
where an , ah , and aw denote the name, hour, and weekday mathematical reasoning [29], and wireless communications
of a certain activity, respectively. [30]. Building on these capabilities, we develop an LLM-based
 Subsequently, we vectorize the extracted features to make behavior learning model within the LLMBA framework to
them compatible with the LLM-based model. In the LLMBA effectively capture patterns from the encoded behavior vectors.
framework, we adopt a multi-level behavior encoding strategy The architecture of the behavior learning model in LLMBA
to jointly capture both contextual and temporal information. is illustrated in Fig. 4. We adopt the Meta Llama-2-7B
YAN et al.: LLMBA: EFFICIENT BEHAVIOR ANALYTICS VIA LARGE PRETRAINED MODELS 2407

 Transformer Blockn as the n-th Transformer block in our
 LLM and denote Hn as its output. The computation of each
 Transformer block is formulated as
 Hn = Transformer Blockn (Hn−1 ). (15)
 To capture the contextual information extracted by the
 LLM-based backbone, we use the final hidden state of the
 Llama model. Let the LLM consist of N Transformer blocks;
 the final hidden state is denoted as H N . To leverage these
 contextual features for behavior prediction, the LLM-based
 behavior learning model is trained to predict the next activity
 in the sequence. Specifically, the output of the LLM backbone is passed through fully connected layers, followed by
 a Softmax layer to generate the probability distribution over
 all possible next activities. Assuming there are doutput distinct
 activities in the behavior records, the output layer of the
 behavior learning model is defined as
 Y output = LINEAR(H N ), (16)
 where
 LLM output
Fig. 4. Illustration of our LLM-based behavior learning model (where the H N ∈ Rb×d , Y output ∈ Rb×d . (17)
ice symbol represents the frozen components, and the fire icons represent
trainable parameters). The behavior learning model is trained to accurately predict
 the next activity based on the preceding sequence, effectively
foundation model as the backbone and modify its architecture minimizing the likelihood of incorrect predictions. As the
for our task. The model is fine-tuned on an unsupervised activity prediction task is inherently a multiclass classification
prediction task, enabling it to learn normal behavior patterns problem, we adopt the Cross-Entropy (CE) loss. The loss
and detect anomalies. Specifically, the LLM-based behavior function used to fine-tune the BLM is formulated as
learning model is trained to continuously predict the next LossBLM = CE Loss(Y output , Y label )
activity given preceding sequences extracted from normal output
 dX
behavior data. The detailed fine-tuning procedure is described
 =− Y label
 i log Y output
 i . (18)
in the following.
 i=1
 As introduced previously, the multi-level behavior encoder
transforms raw behavior records into vectors. Let Xinput and During training, the parameters of the Llama-2 backbone
Y label denote a batch of vectorized inputs and their correspond- are frozen, while the appended fully connected layers remain
ing labels for training the BLM, with a batch size of b. To trainable. After fine-tuning, the LLM-based model is deployed
adapt the encoded vectors to the LLM-based model, we project for behavior analytics within the LLMBA framework.
them to match the LLM input dimensionality. Denoting the
dimensions of the encoded vectors and the LLM input layer E. Knowledge Distillation for Model Compression
as dinput and d LLM , respectively, this projection is performed
 The high runtime overhead of existing behavior anavia fully connected layers, represented as:
 lytics approaches poses a significant barrier to real-world
 H0 = LINEAR(Xinput ), (13) deployment. While our LLM-based behavior learning model
 demonstrates strong capabilities in modeling sequential data, it
where
 input LLM also introduces additional computational overhead. To mitigate
 Xinput ∈ Rb×d , H0 ∈ Rb×d . (14)
 this issue, we employ knowledge distillation, an effective
 Next, we employ the Llama-2-7B base model as the model compression technique that reduces model complexity
backbone of our behavior learning model to effectively cap- while preserving detection performance [32], [33].
ture contextual features in behavior records. The Llama-2 Knowledge distillation, a form of transfer learning, uses a
model consists of multiple Transformer blocks that process teacher–student architecture to transfer dark knowledge—the
the encoded vectors generated by the multi-level behavior implicit information captured from training data—from a
encoder. Compared with the conventional Transformer archi- large-scale teacher model to a lightweight student model [34],
tecture, Llama introduces several modifications. As described [35]. During this process, the dark knowledge is typically
in [25], instead of the standard positional encoding used in represented as soft labels, which enhances the generalization
Transformers, Llama-2 employs Rotary Position Embedding capability of the student model [36]. In recent years, numer-
(RoPE) to improve generalization. In addition, Llama uses ous variants of knowledge distillation have been developed,
Root Mean Square Layer Normalization (RMSNorm) [31] including adversarial distillation, multi-teacher distillation, and
to enhance computational efficiency and stability. We denote cross-modal distillation [37], [38], [39].
2408 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 In addition to the distillation loss, the student model is
 trained to accurately predict the next activities, ensuring it
 fulfills the behavior learning task. Analogous to the LLMbased behavior learning model, the prediction loss for training
 the student model is denoted as
 LossPred = CE Loss(Y student , Y label )
 output
 dX
 =− Y label
 i log Y istudent . (22)
 i=1

 Then, the overall loss function of knowledge distillation is
 formulated as
 LossKD = α · LossDistill + β · LossPred , (23)
 where α and β are the hyperparameters controlling the ratio of
 two loss functions. The student model is trained to transfer the
 dark knowledge from the LLM-based teacher model using the
 loss function above. After knowledge distillation, the distilled
Fig. 5. Illustration of our knowledge distillation approach for low-cost student model is used for the behavior analytics task with low
behavior analytics. runtime overhead.

 In our framework, the LLM-based behavior learning F. Deploying LLMBA for Behavior Analytics
model functions as the teacher, while a lightweight deep We describe our behavior analytics approach in the LLABA
learning–based sequential model serves as the student. framework in the following. The LLMBA framework uses
Through knowledge distillation, the teacher’s strong detection the previously fine-tuned and compressed behavior model
capabilities are transferred to the student, significantly reduc- for recognizing anomalous patterns and identifying malicious
ing the computational overhead of the LLM-based approach. behaviors. As shown in Algorithm 1, we design an online
As illustrated in Fig. 5, the proposed knowledge distillation detection algorithm for behavior analytics.
procedure is as follows. First, we construct a lightweight
DL-based sequential model, denoted as BLMlight , to serve as Algorithm 1 LLMBA for Behavior Analytics
the student. Analogous to the LLM-based behavior learning
model, the student model is trained to predict the next activity
given preceding activity sequences, which is formulated as
 Y student = BLMlight (Xinput ). (19)
 Next, we extract the dark knowledge from the teacher
model. Following the standard knowledge distillation approach
[36], a temperature-scaled Softmax function is applied to
generate the soft labels, which are computed as
 exp(Y output /T )
 Qoutput
 i = Pdoutput
 i
 output
 , (20)
 j=1 exp(Y j /T )

where T is the temperature value and Qoutput
 i is the i-st element
in the the soft label (Qoutput ).
 Subsequently, the dark knowledge is transferred to the
student model. To enhance the generalization capability of the
lightweight model, the student is trained to match the soft
labels generated by the teacher. The Kullback–Leibler (KL)
divergence is used to measure the difference between the soft
labels and the student model’s outputs, and the student is
optimized to minimize this distance. The resulting distillation
loss is denoted as
 LossDistill = DKL (Y student ||Qoutput )
 output
 dX Specifically, given a sequence of behavior records as input
 Y student (Sorigin ), we iteratively extract p pairs of fixed-length subse-
 = Y istudent log ioutput . (21)
 i
 Qi quences (Sinput ) and corresponding ground-truth labels (Slabel ).
YAN et al.: LLMBA: EFFICIENT BEHAVIOR ANALYTICS VIA LARGE PRETRAINED MODELS 2409

For a single pair of input and label (Sinputi and Slabel
 i ), we first were recorded. The CERT r5.2 dataset, in contrast, comprises
use our multi-level BE to get the encoded input. Then, we use behavior records from 2,000 internal users collected over the
the LLM-enhanced BLM to output the probability distribution same 74-week period. This dataset includes 1,901 benign users
of the next activities (Y ipred ). From the probability distribution, and 99 malicious users, with the malicious users simulating
we extract K indexes of activities with the highest probabilities all four attack scenarios.
in descending order, which are denoted as
 Pi = (a1i , a2i , . . . , aiK ) = Top-K(Y ipred ), (24) B. Dataset Preprocessing
 The CERT r4.2 and r5.2 datasets store different types
where Aki is the activity name with k-highest probability in of behavior records in separate files (e.g., logons, network
the i-th behavior sequence. Since our LLM-based behavior records, file operations, etc.). Therefore, we first extract the
learning model is fine-tuned to learn the sequential features activities from these files and combine them by username.
in normal data, we identify abnormal behavior patterns by Then, all the activities are sorted by timestamp. Additionally,
comparing the predicted Top-K activities with the ground-truth since our proposed behavior encoding method leverages multilabel, where K is a preset parameter related to the number level temporal information, we extract the hours and weekdays
of activity categories. An anomalous pattern is detected if a from the original timestamps.
ground-truth label is not in the corresponding Top-K activities. In the first experiment, for CERT r4.2, we randomly select
We denote normal as 0 and abnormal as 1, then the detection 100 users from the normal users for testing and the other
result (ri ) of a single subsequence is formulated as 830 users for training. For CERT r5.2, considering the dataset
 (
 1, i f Slabel < Pi ; scale, we randomly select 20 benign users for training and
 ri = i
 (25) 100 for testing. Meanwhile, all the malicious behavior records
 0, otherwise.
 in these two datasets are tested. Besides, as our model takes
 Then, we define the risk score (R) of a behavior sequence fixed-length sequences as inputs, we use a sliding window
as the ratio of its abnormal subsequences: with W = 10 to iteratively extract activity sequences as inputs
 p and the next activities as labels. In the second experiment, to
 1X evaluate the performance of LLMBA in detecting changing
 R= ri . (26)
 p i behavior patterns, we use the normal and abnormal data
 generated by all malicious users for testing.
 Finally, LLMBA uses a threshold-based detection approach
for behavior analytics, where the threshold value is preset based on expert knowledge. An anomalous sequence is C. Baselines
detected if its risk score is above the threshold (τ). In our experiments, we compare the LLMBA framework
 with some advanced baselines. We give a brief introduction to
 IV. E VALUATION S ETTINGS these methods as follows.
A. Evaluation Datasets 1) PCA: Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a widely
 applied ML method for extracting significant features from
 We conduct the experiments on the Insider Threat Test input data. PCA is originally used for dimensionality reduc-
Dataset (CERT Dataset) released by Carnegie Mellon Univer- tion. It can also detect anomalies by reconstructing the original
sity [40]. The CERT dataset is a collection of synthetic insider data and measuring the reconstruction loss.
threat test datasets that record the behaviors of both normal 2) Isolation Forest: Isolation Forest (IF) [42] is an unsuand malicious users within an enterprise [41]. Since the CERT pervised ML algorithm for outlier detection. IF aims to isolate
r4.2 and r5.2 datasets contain rich red-team data, we evaluate abnormal data points and assign anomaly scores with the
our proposed LLMBA framework on them. outputs of a set of decision trees. IF has a linear time
 In the CERT r4.2 and r5.2 datasets, four different insider complexity and low runtime overhead.
attack scenarios are simulated: 3) Anomaly Clustering: Anomaly clustering algorithms
 1) Scenarios #1: inner users begin to log in after hours, use aim to cluster data and identify outlier clusters. In this
 removable drives, and upload data to an online website. work, we implement the LogCluster method [43], an anomaly
 2) Scenarios #2: inner users search for jobs from competi- clustering approach in the log anomaly detection domain. It
 tors and use thumb drives to steal data. extracts statistical features from behavior records and then
 3) Scenarios #3: malicious users take control of the clusters these records.
 supervisors’ accounts and send out emails to cause 4) DeepLog: DeepLog [17] is the first DL-based approach
 panic. for anomaly detection in the log analysis domain. DeepLog
 4) Scenarios #4: users log into other users’ devices, search uses multiple LSTM layers to learn the sequential features
 for private files, and email them to their own accounts. from serialized data. After training, DeepLog detects abnormal
 The CERT r4.2 dataset contains behavior records gener- sequential patterns based on its predictions.
ated by 1,000 users, including 930 normal users and 70 5) ITDBERT: ITDBERT [14] uses both Word2Vec and
malicious users. The malicious users simulate the first three BERT to encode the temporal information in behavior records.
attack scenarios described above. Over a period of 74 weeks, Then, ITDBERT employs the LSTM-based model to learn
a total of 32,770,227 operations performed by these users sequential features and classify user behaviors. The original
2410 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

ITDBERT model is trained for binary classification with (FN), and then calculate three metrics to evaluate all the
supervised learning. In this work, we modify the ITDBERT methods, including Precision = T P+FP
 TP
 , Recall = T P+FN
 TP
 , and
architecture to train a prediction-based anomaly detector, sim- F1 S core = 2 ∗ Precision+Recall .
 Precision∗Recall

ilar to the DeepLog method. We also compute the area under the receiver operating
 6) Transformer: We implement a Transformer-based characteristic curve (AUC) to assess the ability of differbehavior learning model, combining our proposed behavior ent detectors to discriminate between normal and malicious
encoding approach and a multi-layer Transformer encoder- data. In addition, to evaluate the effectiveness of the model
based model. Similar to DeepLog, it also leverages a compression method, we consider three metrics to quantify
prediction-based anomaly detection method. the runtime overhead of log-based anomaly detectors: the
 7) LogBERT: LogBERT [44] employs BERT [45] to auto- number of parameters (#Params), the number of floating-point
matically analyze system log data. Analogous to the masked operations (FLOPs), and the inference time per input sequence.
language modeling paradigm, LogBERT detects anomalies by
evaluating the prediction likelihoods of masked log events. V. E VALUATION AND A NALYSIS
 8) Qwen: We implement a Qwen-based behavior learning
 In this section, we aim to answer the following research
model, which shares a similar architecture with LLMBA with
 questions to evaluate the performance of our proposed method:
a lighter base model, i.e., Qwen-3-1.7B.1
 RQ1. How is the overall performance of our proposed
 LLMBA framework compared to the baseline methods?
D. Implementation Details
 RQ2. Is the LLMBA framework able to detect unknown
 In this work, we use the Meta Llama-2-7B2 model as the malicious behavior patterns?
backbone of our behavior learning model. In the preprocessing RQ3. Is the LLMBA framework able to identify the changes
stage, we use a sliding window with W = 10 to acquire in user behavior patterns?
fixed-length input sequences. After behavior encoding, the user RQ4. How effective is our knowledge distillation approach
activities are represented as 20-dimensional vectors, compris- in compressing the behavior learning model?
ing 16 dimensions for activity type, 2 for hour information,
and 2 for weekday information (dinput = 20). These input
 A. Evaluation of User-Level Anomaly Detection (RQ1 &
vectors are subsequently projected to match the hidden size of
 RQ2)
Llama (d LLM = 4096). Finally, the dimensionality of the Llama
outputs is reduced to the number of activity types, yielding an In the first experiment, we evaluate the overall detection
output dimension of doutput = 7. performance of the proposed LLMBA framework on the CERT
 For hyperparameter settings, limited by computing r4.2 and r5.2 datasets. All evaluated methods are trained excluresources, we train LLMBA and Qwen-based model with sively on benign data and tested on a mixture of benign and
batch size = 128, epoch = 10, and learning rate = 3e−4 malicious data. The objective of all methods is to distinguish
to acquire the best performance. We use AdamW to benign user behaviors from malicious ones. We compare the
optimize these LLM-based models. Besides, we set K = 1 LLMBA framework with several baseline approaches using
for our behavior analysis algorithm. For other baselines, the evaluation metrics described in Section IV.
we implement the DeepLog and ITDBERT models with The evaluation results are presented in Table I. Overall,
num layers = 2 and hidden size = 128. For the Transformer the proposed LLMBA framework outperforms all evaluated
model, we set num heads = 2, num layers = 2, and methods across both datasets, achieving an F1 score of 99.41%
hidden size = 128. For LogBERT, we set num heads = 4, and an AUC of 1.000 on CERT r4.2, as well as an F1 score
num layers = 4, and hidden size = 128. We train all these of 92.31% and an AUC of 0.961 on CERT r5.2. These results
DL-based baselines for 100 epochs with batch size = 512 demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in learning disand learning rate = 5e−3 to achieve the best performance. criminative behavior patterns that reliably distinguish normal
 For knowledge distillation, we set T emp = 0.1, α = 1.0, and users from malicious ones.
β = 1.0 in the loss function. We train some DL-based sequen- For the classical ML-based baselines, including PCA, Isotial models as the student in the distillation process. We train lation Forest, Anomaly Clustering, and One-Class SVM, the
these student models for 10 epochs with batch size = 512 experimental results indicate consistently low detection perand learning rate = 5e−3 to achieve the best performance. formance. In particular, the One-Class SVM model is almost
 We conduct the experiments on a server with Ubuntu 20.04, unable to distinguish malicious users on both datasets. These
an Intel Xeon CPU, 128GB memory, and NVIDIA A6000 findings suggest that, although classical ML models are effec-
GPUs. We implement all the methods with CUDA 11.8, tive at learning from numerical features, they struggle to
Python 3.9, and PyTorch 2.5. capture contextual information, which is crucial for behavior
 analytics tasks.
E. Evaluation Metrics The DL-based methods, including DeepLog, ITDBERT,
 Transformer, LogBERT, Qwen, and LLMBA, achieve sub-
 We count four indicators, including True Positives (TP),
 stantially higher performance than the ML-based baselines,
False Positives (FP), True Negatives (TN), and False Negatives
 indicating that deep sequential models are more effective
 1 https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-1.7B for modeling serialized behavior records. The Transformer
 2 https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b model implemented in our experiments adopts an architecture
YAN et al.: LLMBA: EFFICIENT BEHAVIOR ANALYTICS VIA LARGE PRETRAINED MODELS 2411

 TABLE I
 E VALUATION OF OVERALL P ERFORMANCE ON CERT R 4.2 AND R 5.2 DATASETS

similar to DeepLog but replaces recurrent components with and monitored, as insider users may also engage in malicious
Transformer encoder layers to better capture contextual depen- activities. In this context, the second experiment evaluates
dencies. As a result, the Transformer consistently outperforms the capability of the proposed LLMBA framework to detect
DeepLog and ITDBERT in terms of both F1 score and changes in user behavior over time.
AUC, demonstrating the superior representation capacity of In the CERT r4.2 and r5.2 datasets, researchers simulate
the Transformer architecture. scenarios in which internal employees transition from benign
 Notably, the proposed LLMBA framework achieves the users to malicious attackers. The timestamps at which users
highest performance across all evaluation metrics among the begin to exhibit abnormal behaviors are explicitly labeled,
DL-based approaches. On the CERT r4.2 dataset, LLMBA enabling the partitioning of red-team users’ activity sequences
improves the F1 score by 2.17% and the AUC by 0.6% com- into normal and abnormal segments. This setup allows us to
pared with LogBERT, a state-of-the-art log anomaly detection assess the effectiveness of all evaluated methods in identifying
method. Furthermore, while LLMBA achieves performance evolving behavioral patterns. In this experiment, both benign
comparable to Qwen on CERT r4.2, it delivers a signif- and malicious records from red-team users are extracted as
icant improvement on CERT r5.2, highlighting the strong labeled test data, and the evaluated methods aim to distinguish
capability of the deployed Llama-2 model in representing between these two classes of behaviors.
complex contextual features. Overall, these results demonstrate The evaluation results are presented in Table II. Consistent
that the LLMBA framework effectively distinguishes normal with the first experiment, the ML-based baselines exhibit
from anomalous behavior patterns and achieves high detection relatively low detection performance, while the DL-based
accuracy with fewer false alarms, making it well-suited for methods generally outperform their ML counterparts. Overreal-world deployment. all, the proposed LLMBA framework achieves the highest
 More importantly, the LLM-based behavior learning model detection performance across both datasets. Notably, LLMBA
is trained exclusively on benign data; therefore, the behav- attains performance comparable to Qwen on the CERT r4.2
ior patterns of malicious users in the test set are entirely dataset, while significantly outperforming it on CERT r5.2.
unseen by the LLMBA framework. The experimental results In addition, on CERT r5.2, the Transformer and LogBERT
shown in Table I demonstrate the superior capability of the models achieve marginally higher AUC scores than our proproposed framework in identifying previously unseen mali- posed LLMBA framework (by approximately 0.1%); however,
cious behavior patterns, making LLMBA effective in handling LLMBA consistently outperforms these methods across the
unpredictable and evolving attack strategies. remaining evaluation metrics on both datasets.
 In summary, the first experiment shows that the proposed In summary, the second experiment demonstrates that the
LLMBA framework achieves high detection performance proposed LLMBA framework can effectively detect evolving
while effectively capturing the behavioral characteristics of behavior patterns of red-team users. Owing to its strong
malicious users. Moreover, it confirms that LLMBA can detection performance, LLMBA is well-suited to enhance zero
robustly detect unknown malicious behaviors, highlighting its trust networks through continuous monitoring and analysis of
practical applicability in real-world security scenarios. user behavior.

B. Detection of Changes in Behavior Patterns (RQ3) C. Evaluation of Model Compression (RQ4)
 In ZTA, trust is never implicitly granted; consequently, As ZTA requires continuous monitoring and analysis of
zero trust networks do not distinguish between internal and user behavior, the runtime efficiency of behavior analytics
external users. All user behaviors are continuously recorded approaches is critical for real-world deployment. In LLMBA,
2412 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE II
 D ETECTION OF C HANGES IN B EHAVIOR PATTERNS ON CERT R 4.2 AND R 5.2 DATASETS

 TABLE III
 E VALUATION OF RUNTIME E FFICIENCY ON THE CERT R 4.2 DATASET

we adopt a knowledge distillation approach to compress the evaluated for the teacher and student models to assess the
proposed LLM-enhanced behavior learning model. To evaluate effectiveness of the proposed framework. The results of the
the effectiveness of this distillation strategy, we conduct a knowledge distillation experiments are presented in Table III.
series of experiments using the dataset from the first experi- Student #1 adopts the same architecture as the Transformerment (i.e., the overall performance evaluation). We implement based baseline evaluated in the first experiment. After
several Transformer- and LSTM-based models as student knowledge distillation, Student #1 significantly outperforms
networks within the distillation framework. The detailed archi- the Transformer baseline, achieving 97.65% accuracy, a
tectures of these student models are described as follows: 99.29% F1 score, and an AUC of 0.994. This improvement
 • Student Model #1: a multi-layer Transformer Encoder- demonstrates that the dark knowledge embedded in the LLMbased lightweight BLM with num layer = 2, enhanced teacher model is effectively transferred to the student
 num head = 2, and hidden size = 128. through the proposed distillation approach. Similarly, the
 • Student Model #2: a Transformer Encoder-based LSTM-based student model (Student #3) exhibits a substantial
 lightweight BLM with num layer = 1, num head = 1, performance gain after distillation, reaching 97.65% accuracy,
 and hidden size = 32. a 97.18% F1 score, and an AUC of 0.994.
 • Student Model #3: a multi-layer LSTM-based lightweight Importantly, although these DL-based student models
 BLM with num layer = 2 and hidden size = 128. achieve slightly lower detection performance than the LLM-
 • Student Model #4: an LSTM-based lightweight BLM based teacher, they incur significantly reduced computational
 with num layer = 1 and hidden size = 32. and storage overhead. In particular, the Transformer-based
 Following the procedure described in Section III, we trans- student (Student #1) preserves 97.83% of the teacher model’s
fer knowledge from the LLM-enhanced teacher model to the detection performance while reducing FLOPs, parameter
student models. Both performance and efficiency metrics are count, and inference time by over 99%. These results confirm
YAN et al.: LLMBA: EFFICIENT BEHAVIOR ANALYTICS VIA LARGE PRETRAINED MODELS 2413

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 A BLATION S TUDY ON E NCODING A PPROACH A BLATION S TUDY ON M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

that knowledge distillation effectively mitigates the runtime
overhead associated with the LLM-based behavior learning
model. Llama, the proposed LLMBA framework significantly outper-
 Furthermore, our results indicate that, while dark knowledge forms the baseline models, highlighting the strong capability
can be successfully transferred, the performance of student of LLMs in modeling sequential features. These findings
models remains constrained by their model capacity. As shown demonstrate that the Llama-2 language model adopted in
in Table III, Student #2 and Student #4, which have more com- LLMBA is effective at capturing implicit and complex patterns
pact architectures, achieve lower performance after distillation in user activities.
compared with larger student models.
 In summary, this experiment demonstrates that the proposed
knowledge distillation approach can effectively compress F. Limitations
the LLM-based behavior learning model while preserving Although the proposed LLMBA framework achieves strong
high detection performance. After distillation, the resulting performance in behavior analytics, several limitations remain.
lightweight behavior learning models are significantly more First, the LLM-based architecture introduces additional oversuitable for practical deployment in real-world environments head during fine-tuning of the Llama model, resulting in higher
with constrained computational and storage resources. storage and computational costs compared with traditional
 ML- and DL-based methods. Nevertheless, we argue that this
 overhead is justified by the substantial improvement in detec-
D. Ablation Study on Encoding Approach
 tion performance. Second, owing to its end-to-end LLM-based
 To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed multi-level design, the framework offers limited interpretability relative to
behavior encoding approach, we replace the encoding module classical machine learning approaches, which may affect the
in LLMBA with the following alternatives:(I) a combination of transparency and trustworthiness of its analytical outcomes.
one-hot encoding and cyclic encoding, and (II) word embed- Finally, like other DL-based systems, the proposed framework
dings for activity names. The modified behavior learning may be vulnerable to AI-driven attacks, such as adversarial
models are retrained and evaluated under the same experi- attacks, backdoor attacks, and data poisoning [46]. Adversaries
mental settings described in Section IV. could potentially exploit these weaknesses to evade detection
 The experimental results are presented in Table IV. The and bypass zero trust defenses. Addressing such adversarial
results show that the proposed multi-level behavior encod- threats is left for future work.
ing approach, which integrates word embeddings with cyclic
encoding, provides richer contextual information to the LLM VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
and leads to superior detection performance on both datasets.
These findings confirm the effectiveness of the proposed In this work, we propose LLMBA, an LLM-enhanced
behavior learning approach. behavior analytics framework for zero trust networks. We
 introduce a novel multi-level behavior encoding scheme that
 transforms behavioral data into vector representations while
E. Ablation Study on Model Architecture preserving both contextual and temporal information. Further-
 In our proposed LLMBA framework, Llama-2-7B is more, we fine-tune an LLM-based behavior learning model
employed as the backbone of the behavior learning model. to leverage the strong representation and generalization capa-
To evaluate the effectiveness of this design, we replace the bilities of large language models. The model is trained in a
Llama backbone with alternative models, including a multi- self-supervised manner, enabling the detection of previously
layer LSTM, a multi-layer Transformer, and a Qwen LLM, unseen behaviors. To reduce the computational and storage
while keeping the encoding methods and all other experimental overhead of the LLM-based model, we further employ a
settings identical to the original LLMBA configuration. knowledge distillation strategy that compresses the model
 The evaluation results are presented in Table V. Empirical while largely retaining its detection performance. In addition,
results on both datasets indicate that, when enhanced with we design a prediction-based detection algorithm tailored
2414 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

for behavior analytics. Extensive experiments on the CERT [19] F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng, “Log2vec:
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and advantages of the A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for detecting cyber
 threats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Comproposed LLMBA framework. mun. Secur., Nov. 2019, pp. 1777–1794.
 For future work, several research directions merit further [20] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
investigation. First, the adoption of DL models in behav- Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
 [21] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
ior analytics introduces new security vulnerabilities, such as for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. ICLR, May 2021, pp. 1–16.
adversarial attacks and backdoor attacks. Accordingly, future [22] F. Sun et al., “BERT4Rec: Sequential recommendation with bidirectional
research should explore robust adversarial attack and defense encoder representations from transformer,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf.
 Inf. Knowl. Manage., Nov. 2019, pp. 1441–1450.
mechanisms for DL-based behavior analytics systems. Second, [23] L. Ouyang et al., “Training language models to follow instructions with
the limited interpretability of end-to-end deep models remains human feedback,” in Proc. NIPS, Nov. 2022, pp. 27730–27744.
a key challenge that hinders their practical adoption. Beyond [24] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei,
 “Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,” in Proc. Int.
achieving high detection accuracy, future work should focus Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 4299–4307.
on developing interpretable behavior analytics methods to [25] H. Touvron et al., “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat
improve transparency and trustworthiness. models,” 2023, arXiv:2307.09288.
 [26] G. Team et al., “Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across
 millions of tokens of context,” 2024, arXiv:2403.05530.
 [27] X. Bi et al., “DeepSeek LLM: Scaling open-source language models
 R EFERENCES with longtermism,” 2024, arXiv:2401.02954.
 [28] M. Jin et al., “Time-LLM: Time series forecasting by reprogramming
[1] I. H. Sarker, A. I. Khan, Y. B. Abushark, and F. Alsolami, “Internet of large language models,” in Proc. ICLR, Vienna, Austria, May 2024,
 Things (IoT) security intelligence: A comprehensive overview, machine pp. 1–24.
 learning solutions and research directions,” Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 28, [29] J. Ahn, R. Verma, R. Lou, D. Liu, R. Zhang, and W. Yin, “Large lanno. 1, pp. 296–312, Feb. 2023. guage models for mathematical reasoning: Progresses and challenges,”
[2] F. K. Parast, C. Sindhav, S. Nikam, H. I. Yekta, K. B. Kent, and 2024, arXiv:2402.00157.
 S. Hakak, “Cloud computing security: A survey of service-based [30] B. Liu, X. Liu, S. Gao, X. Cheng, and L. Yang, “LLM4CP: Adapting
 models,” Comput. Secur., vol. 114, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 102580. large language models for channel prediction,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw.,
[3] I. Nevat et al., “Anomaly detection and attribution in networks with vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 113–125, Jun. 2024.
 temporally correlated traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, [31] B. Zhang and R. Sennrich, “Root mean square layer normalization,” in
 pp. 131–144, Feb. 2018. Proc. NeurIPS, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Dec. 2019, pp. 12360–12371.
[4] R. Rais, C. Morillo, E. Gilman, and D. Barth, Zero Trust Networks: [32] D. Liu, P. Cheng, Z. Dong, X. He, W. Pan, and Z. Ming, “A general
 Building Secure Systems in Untrusted Networks. Sebastopol, CA, USA: knowledge distillation framework for counterfactual recommendation via
 O’Reilly Media, 2024. uniform data,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf.
[5] X. Wang, W. Shi, Y. Xiang, and J. Li, “Efficient network security Retr., Jul. 2020, pp. 831–840.
 policy enforcement with policy space analysis,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., [33] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, X. Wu, S. Jha, and A. Swami, “Distillation
 vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2926–2938, Oct. 2016. as a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks,”
[6] S. Chen and Q. Song, “Perimeter-based defense against high bandwidth in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2016, pp. 582–597.
 DDoS attacks,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 16, no. 6, [34] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
 pp. 526–537, Jun. 2005. survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 6, pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
[7] Y. He, D. Huang, L. Chen, Y. Ni, and X. Ma, “A survey on zero trust [35] X. Xu et al., “A survey on knowledge distillation of large language
 architecture: Challenges and future trends,” Wireless Commun. Mobile models,” 2024, arXiv:2402.13116.
 Comput., vol. 2022, no. 1, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 6476274. [36] G. E. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a
[8] S. Hong, L. Xu, J. Huang, H. Li, H. Hu, and G. Gu, “SysFlow: Toward neural network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
 a programmable zero trust framework for system security,” IEEE Trans. [37] X. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Sun, and J. Qi, “KDGAN: Knowledge distillation
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 2794–2809, 2023. with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. NeurIPS, Dec. 2018,
[9] V. Stafford, “Zero trust architecture,” NIST Special Publication, vol. 800, pp. 783–794.
 no. 207, pp. 207–800, 2020. [38] S. Gupta, J. Hoffman, and J. Malik, “Cross modal distillation for super-
[10] S. Khaliq, Z. U. Abideen Tariq, and A. Masood, “Role of user and entity vision transfer,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 behavior analytics in detecting insider attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 2827–2836.
 Warfare Secur. (ICCWS), Oct. 2020, pp. 1–6. [39] N. Papernot, M. Abadi, Ú. Erlingsson, I. J. Goodfellow, and K. Talwar,
[11] R. Freter, “Zero trust reference architecture,” U.S. Dept. Defense, Wash- “Semi-supervised knowledge transfer for deep learning from private
 ington, DC, USA, Tech. Rep., DoD Zero Trust Reference Architecture, training data,” in Proc. ICLR, Toulon, France, Apr. 2017, pp. 1–14.
 Version 2.0, 2022. [40] B. Lindauer. (Sep. 2020). Insider Threat Test Dataset.
[12] B. Lv, D. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Lv, and D. Lu, “A hybrid model based on [Online]. Available: https://kilthub.cmu.edu/articles/dataset/
 multi-dimensional features for insider threat detection,” in Proc. WASA, Insider Threat Test Dataset/12841247
 vol. 10874, Tianjin, China, Jun. 2018, pp. 333–344. [41] J. Glasser and B. Lindauer, “Bridging the gap: A pragmatic approach to
[13] F. Meng, F. Lou, Y. Fu, and Z. Tian, “Deep learning based attribute generating insider threat data,” in Proc. IEEE Secur. Privacy Workshops,
 classification insider threat detection for data security,” in Proc. IEEE May 2013, pp. 98–104.
 3rd Int. Conf. Data Sci. Cyberspace (DSC), Guangzhou, China, Jun. [42] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
 2018, pp. 576–581. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Jun. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[14] W. Huang, H. Zhu, C. Li, Q. Lv, Y. Wang, and H. Yang, “ITDBERT: [43] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering
 Temporal-semantic representation for insider threat detection,” in Proc. based problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc.
 IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Sep. 2021, pp. 1–7. IEEE/ACM 38th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Companion (ICSE-C), May 2016,
[15] D. C. Le and N. Zincir-Heywood, “Anomaly detection for insider threats pp. 102–111.
 using unsupervised ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., [44] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “LogBERT: Log anomaly detection via
 vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1152–1164, Jun. 2021. BERT,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2021,
[16] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. Patterson, and M. Jordan, “Online system pp. 1–8.
 problem detection by mining patterns of console logs,” in Proc. 9th IEEE [45] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 Int. Conf. Data Mining, Miami, FL, USA, Dec. 2009, pp. 588–597. of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
 Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang.
[17] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
 Technol., vol. 1, Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
 [46] C. Zhang, X. Costa-Pérez, and P. Patras, “Adversarial attacks against
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
 deep learning-based network intrusion detection systems and defense
[18] C. Song, L. Ma, J. Zheng, J. Liao, H. Kuang, and L. Yang, “Audit-LLM:
 mechanisms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 1294–1311,
 Multi-agent collaboration for log-based insider threat detection,” 2024,
 Jun. 2022.
 arXiv:2408.08902.
YAN et al.: LLMBA: EFFICIENT BEHAVIOR ANALYTICS VIA LARGE PRETRAINED MODELS 2415

 Senming Yan (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) Jing Ren (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and
 received the B.E. degree in software engineering Ph.D. degrees in communication engineering from
 from Xidian University, China, in 2020. He is cur- the University of Electronic Science and Technology
 rently pursuing the joint Ph.D. degree with the Insti- of China (UESTC), Chengdu, China, in 2007 and
 tute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy 2015, respectively. She is currently an Associate
 of Sciences, and the School of Cyber Security, Researcher with UESTC and a Research Assis-
 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His tant with the Peng Cheng Laboratory. Her research
 research interests include network security, zero trust interests include network architecture and protocol
 security, and AI for security. design, software-defined networking, and network
 security.

 Lei Shi (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received
 the B.E. degree from the Electronic Information
 School, Wuhan University, China, in 2021. She
 is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
 School of Integrated Circuits (School of Electronic
 Information and Electrical Engineering), Shanghai Ying Li received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees in com-
 Jiao Tong University. Her research interests include munication engineering from the National University
 network security, intrusion detection, cybersecurity of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, in 2001
 situational awareness, and AI for security. and 2006, respectively. She is currently a Researcher
 with the Peng Cheng Laboratory. Her research interests include network architecture design, zero trust
 security, and cognitive radio network.

 Wei Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 degree from Central South University, Changsha,
 China, in 2010, the M.S. degree from Southeast
 University, Nanjing, China, in 2013, and the Ph.D.
 degree from The University of New South Wales,
 Sydney, Australia, in 2017. From 2018 to 2021,
 he was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with The
 University of New South Wales. From 2022 to 2025,
 he was a Senior Research Scientist with the Peng
 Limin Sun received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. Since 2026, he
 from the National University of Defense Technology,
 has been a Professor with the School of Information
 Changsha, China, in 1988 and 1998, respectively.
Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen. His
 He is currently a Professor with the Institute of
research interests include millimeter-wave communications, machine learning
 Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Scifor wireless communications, and cybersecurity. He was a recipient of the
 ences, Beijing, China. He is also with the School
2023 IEEE ComSoc AP Outstanding Young Researcher Award and the Best
 of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy
Paper Awards at the IEEE ICCC 2016 and 2024. He served as the co-chair for
 of Sciences, Beijing. His research interests include
multiple symposia and workshops at major IEEE conferences. He serves as an
 mobile vehicle networks, the Internet of Things
Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING and previously
 security, and wireless sensor networks.
served as an Editor for IEEE W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS L ETTERS.