IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026 5943

 Log Anomaly Detection via Transformers
 Pre-Trained on Massive Unlabeled Data
 Senming Yan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Lei Shi , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
 Jing Ren , Member, IEEE, Wei Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Limin Sun , and Wei Zhang , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Cyber attacks pose serious threats to computer sys- I. INTRODUCTION
tems. Automatically detecting anomalous patterns in system logs
is critical for identifying and mitigating security risks. However, A. Background and Motivations
as log data grows increasingly complex and labeled logs remain
 ITH the rapid advancement of modern information techscarce, existing detection methods face significant challenges. To
address these issues, we introduce the pre-training and fine-tuning
paradigm for log analysis and propose a hybrid pipeline tai-
 W nologies such as cloud computing, artificial intelligence,
 and the Internet of Things (IoT), cyberattacks have become a
lored for accurate and low-cost log anomaly detection. Specifically, major threat to cyberspace [2], [3], [4], [5] and are increasingly
we employ a masked log reconstruction strategy to pre-train a extending into the physical world [6]. Exploiting networks as a
Transformer encoder–based foundation model by leveraging the
sequential dependencies in unlabeled logs. The model is then finemedium, attackers adopt sophisticated and diverse techniques
tuned on an event prediction task to derive the anomaly detec- to compromise the availability, integrity, and confidentiality
tor. To reduce computational and storage overhead, we further of computer systems [7]. To identify and mitigate such cyber
design a knowledge distillation method tailored for compressing threats, a practical approach is to analyze system operation logs
log anomaly detectors. Beyond fitting the detector’s outputs, our to detect anomalies and implement corresponding countermeamethod also exploits its internal representations to transfer richer
knowledge. Experiments on the HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird
 sures.
public datasets demonstrate that our framework outperforms Modern computer systems generate logs to record their critstate-of-the-art baselines in multiple metrics. Empirical evalua- ical runtime information [8]. The ever-increasing complexity
tion on a reconstructed HDFS dataset confirms that it can adapt of computer systems and the exponentially growing amount of
to real-world scenarios where labeled data is scarce. Moreover, log data render manually analyzing logs infeasible [9]. Consethrough our knowledge distillation approach, the lightweight detectors achieve outstanding performance with substantially lower
 quently, automatic log analysis and anomaly detection have been
overhead, while maintaining robustness in real-world scenarios. developed as effective technologies to monitor the security status
 and therefore safeguard computer systems [10], [11], [12], [13].
 Index Terms—Cyber security, log analysis, log anomaly detec- Log anomaly detection refers to identifying atypical behavtion, pre-trained model.
 iors that fall outside the expected patterns of normal system
 Received 22 October 2025; revised 18 December 2025; accepted 9 January operations. The anomalies in logs indicate the presence of
2026. Date of publication 15 January 2026; date of current version 27 January system failures and even malicious attacks. System operators
2026. This work was supported in part by the Major Key Project of Pengcheng
Laboratory under Grant PCL2024A03, in part by the National Key Research leverage log anomaly detection methods to identify anomalies
and Development Program of China under Grant 2020YFA0711400, in part by before further taking mitigation measures. Log anomaly detecthe National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U20A20156 and tion methods utilize structured log data as inputs, which are
Grant 92467201, in part by the Key Research Project of Chinese Academy of
Sciences under Grant RCJJ-145-24-17, and in part by Beijing Natural Science typically generated by parsing raw logs. The objective of log
Foundation under Grant L234033. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Yuan anomaly detection is to accurately classify input logs as either
Wu. (Corresponding author: Wei Wang.) normal or abnormal. Its core methodologies focus on analyzing
 Senming Yan and Limin Sun are with the Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100045, China, and also with the School the discernible patterns within logs and distinguishing normal
of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, log patterns from abnormal ones.
China (e-mail: yansenming@iie.ac.cn; sunlimin@iie.ac.cn). Numerous log anomaly detection methods are proposed in
 Lei Shi is with the School of Integrated Circuits (School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai existing works. Some researchers propose to extract quantitative
200240, China (e-mail: shi.lei@sjtu.edu.cn). features from log sequences and leverage classic machine learn-
 Jing Ren is with the Department of Strategic and Advanced Interdisciplinary ing (ML)-based algorithms to detect anomalous patterns [14],
Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China, and also with
the School of Information and Communication Engineering, University of [15]. Different from classic ML-based methods, since logs are
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail: essentially structured time-series event sequences, they can be
renjing@uestc.edu.cn). processed as natural language. Therefore, sequential deep learn-
 Wei Wang is with the Department of Strategic and Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China (e-mail: ing (DL)-based models, even Large Language Models (LLMs)
wei_wang@ieee.org). are leveraged for analyzing logs and detecting anomalies [12],
 Wei Zhang is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommuni- [16], [17].
cations, The University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2033, Australia
(e-mail: w.zhang@unsw.edu.au). Despite achieving high detection performance, existing meth-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2026.3654089 ods still face some significant challenges, making them difficult

 2327-4697 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5944 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

to apply in real-world scenarios: (i) as modern computer systems unlabeled logs are hard to acquire. Our framework is the
evolve, the types of system logs become more diverse, and the one that is still effective in such scenarios.
volume of log data is exploding, leading to the demand for
developing more powerful log anomaly detectors; (ii) existing C. Paper Structure
methods commonly train anomaly detectors on labeled logs,
which are scarce in real-world scenarios, as the amount of log The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We introdata is extremely large and manual labeling requires heavy labor duce related works and present essential background knowledge
work; (iii) most existing works only consider the performance regarding system log analysis, generative pre-trained transformmetrics of anomaly detectors but ignore the computational and ers, and knowledge distillation in Section II. Then, we give an
storage overhead issues, limiting their practical deployment. overall introduction to our hybrid log anomaly detection framework in Section III. After that, in Section IV, we describe our
 pre-training, fine-tuning, knowledge distillation, and anomaly
B. Our Contributions detection approaches in detail. We introduce the experiment
 Since logs are essentially time series data, we design a Trans- settings in Section V. We conduct several experiments and
former encoder-based model to acquire both learning capabil- analyze the results in Section VI. Finally, conclusions and some
ities and computing efficiency. We propose a hybrid training future work directions are presented in Section VII.
method following the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm as
in Large Language Models [18]. Specifically, to exploit the II. RELATED WORK
information within massive unlabeled logs, i.e., the volume of In this section, we review the existing research works on sysunlabeled log data is significantly larger than manually labeled tem log analysis, log anomaly detection, generative pre-trained
ones, we pre-train a foundation model to learn the sequential Transformers, and knowledge disillation, to provide sufficient
features in logs with an input-masking-inspired self-supervised background and identify the main research gaps.
training task, i.e., masked log reconstruction. Then, we fine-tune
it for the event prediction task to discern abnormal patterns
 A. System Log Analysis
and gain advanced detection capabilities for complex log data.
To reduce the computational and storage overhead of our log Modern computer systems generate logs to record their critianomaly detector, we propose a knowledge distillation method cal runtime events. By analyzing logs, system operators are cato compress the fine-tuned model while preserving its detec- pable of monitoring the operational status of computer systems
tion performance. We also implement a framework for online and taking measures when anomalies occur. Therefore, as the
anomaly detection, including data processing, model training, requirements for the availability of computer systems increase,
model compression, and anomaly detection modules. We eval- it is critical to effectively analyze system logs to maintain high
uate our log anomaly detection framework on three widely reliability [19], [20].
used public datasets, including HDFS, BGL, and Thunder- System logs are structured text printed by logging software,
bird. The evaluation results demonstrate the advantages of our i.e., loggers. Generally, loggers generate log entries by populatframework. ing predefined templates with parameters that record the critical
 To summarize, in this work, we have mainly made the follow- operating status. In order to extract effective information for
ing contributions: system administrators from massive log data, researchers have
 r We propose the masked log reconstruction approach to made significant progress in a wide range of fields such as log
 pre-train a Transformer-based foundation model and fine- parsing, log anomaly detection, and system failure detection [8],
 tune it for the event prediction task to train the detector. [19].
 Inspired by input masking-based pre-training objectives, Since logs are essentially semi-structured data generated by
 our proposed training approach effectively exploits the logging software, it is significant for automatic analysis tools
 bidirectional sequential information of log data. to extract key information from raw logs and generate strucr We propose a hybrid pipeline tailored for log anomaly tured data, which is the purpose of log parsing techniques.
 detection. Different from existing works, our framework An example of log parsing is illustrated in Fig. 1. A raw log
 follows the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, which message generated by the Hadoop Distributed File System
 exploits unlabeled data and reduces the demand for manual (HDFS) is processed by the log parser. The log message is
 labeling. a natural language-like string containing information about a
 r We propose a multi-level knowledge distillation approach system event, including time, level, operations, etc. Log parsers
 for log anomaly detection, which leverages both internal aim to extract this information into a structured format. However,
 and external information from Transformer-based anomaly the contents of the log messages are difficult to extract, since their
 detectors. The distilled detector has high computational formats are customized by developers. To this end, log parsing
 and storage efficiency while maintaining outstanding de- methods are proposed to automatically identify the format of
 tection capabilities. log messages, i.e., log templates, to provide structured data
 r We evaluate our framework on three public datasets, and for the subsequent log analysis process. As a necessary step
 our framework outperforms the existing state-of-the-art in automatic log analysis, researchers have proposed a variety
 methods. Also, we simulate real-world scenarios where of log parsing methods [21], [22], [23] and developed a series of
YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA 5945

 in log event sequences. However, these ML-based methods are
 still limited by feature engineering and difficulties in processing
 high-dimensional, contextual information in log data.
 2) DL-Based Methods: To alleviate the shortcomings of classic ML-based methods, some works use DL models to learn
 sequential log features automatically [33]. Some research works
 preprocess raw logs into image-like data and propose to use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn the spatial features
 end-to-end. Lu et al. [34] propose a framework combining the
 logkey2vec encoding technique and multiple 1D-CNN models
 to accurately detect anomalies on the HDFS dataset. Wang et al.
 [35] propose to use the temporal convolutional network (TCN)
 for log anomaly detection to leverage both temporal and spatial
 information in log sequences.
 As system logs are essentially time-series semi-structured
 data, most DL-based methods detect abnormal patterns in a
 way similar to processing natural language. Some researchers
Fig. 1. An example of log parsing on the HDFS dataset. propose to train recurrent neural network (RNN)-based models
 for anomaly detection [12], [13], [36], [37]. DeepLog [12]
 first suggests using the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
log parsing tools [24], [25], [26], [27]. In this work, we use the model [38] to learn the contextual features of normal log
Drain parser [25] to process raw logs and generate log templates event sequences and detect abnormal patterns based on its
in order to provide structured data for our Transformer-based predictions. LogAnomaly [13] extends DeepLog and proanomaly detector. poses the Template2Vec approach to extract both sequential
 and quantitative features. Thanks to the richer information
 extracted by Template2Vec, LogAnomaly achieves stronger
B. Log Anomaly Detection detection capabilities. Unlike these works, some researchers
 In this work, we focus on the log anomaly detection task, also use the Bi-directional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) models to learn
which aims to analyze log data and recognize anomalous patterns the bi-directional contextual log features, which are reported
automatically. The general process of log anomaly detection is to outperform traditional LSTM-based methods [39], [40].
shown in Fig. 2. First, raw logs are processed by log parsers Yu et al. [39] propose to use the attention-based Bi-LSTM
to extract structured data, according to which log events are model [41] to replace the classic LSTM model for predictionextracted. Then, the log events are sorted by timestamps, and based log anomaly detection. Zhang et al. [42] propose to
thus time-series event sequences are acquired. After that, the train a sentiment language model based on logging-related
extracted event sequences are input into the log anomaly detec- source codes and use a Bi-LSTM model for log anomaly detor. Finally, the detector identifies whether anomalous patterns tection. In addition to the variants of LSTMs, researchers use
exist in the event sequences. Therefore, the core technology of the gated recurrent unit (GRU) model [43], which is also a
log anomaly detection is to learn and identify the key features commonly used RNN model, to learn sequential features in logs
that distinguish normal logs from anomalous ones [33]. in order to achieve higher computational efficiency [44], [45],
 Previous works have proposed numerous methods for log [46], [47].
anomaly detection, which can be generally categorized into two Researchers also propose to use the autoencoder architecture
types: (I) classic ML-based and (II) DL-based techniques. We for log anomaly detection. The autoencoder is a self-supervised
systematically summarize and discuss them in the following. learning model consisting of an encoder and a decoder, where
 1) Classic ML-Based Methods: Some works propose to ex- the encoder compresses the input data into low-dimensional
tract statistical features and then train classic ML models for vectors, and the decoder aims to reconstruct them into the
anomaly detection [14], [15], [28]. Xu et al. [14] propose original data [48]. Autoencoder is originally designed for feato extract statistical features of events and parameters in raw ture compression and generative tasks, but has recently been
logs. Then, they use the PCA algorithm to detect anomalies. used for anomaly detection [49]. Zhang et al. [50] propose
Lin et al. [15] propose the LogCluster method, which clusters to use an attention-based deep neural network (DNN) to caplog sequences according to quantitative features and generates ture the contextual information in log data and then train an
representative samples for anomaly detection. Restricted to the autoencoder-based architecture to detect anomalies based on
quality of extracted features and learning capabilities, these the reconstruction loss. Wang et al. [51] propose to use the
classic ML-based methods perform poorly in production en- BERT model to acquire contextual features and use the varivironments. To alleviate this problem, Luo et al. [29] propose a ational autoencoder (VAE) [52] for log anomaly detection.
Noise-Contrastive Learning (NCL) technique to create synthetic Wadekar et al. [53] combines both convolutional autoencoder
negative samples for binary classification and further use an (CAE) and VAE models for hybrid, self-supervised log anomaly
ensemble of decision tree models to capture the dependencies detection. Wu et al. [54] propose the Pre-LogMGAE framework
5946 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 2. The general process of log anomaly detection.

that combines the masked graph autoencoder model with con- effective. In addition, the lack of labeled data is another difficulty
trastive learning for self-supervised pre-training and anomaly in supervised learning. To this end, the ‘pre-training and finedetection. In addition to the autoencoder, as a DL-based gener- tuning’ paradigm is widely applied in the deep learning domain.
ative model, the generative adversarial network (GAN) is also For instance, researchers from OpenAI pre-train a Transformer
introduced to the log anomaly detection task [55], [56]. decoder-based foundation language model with the next-token-
 With the rapid progress of DL, the Transformer architec- prediction task, and then fine-tune it to downstream generative
ture has taken enormous advantage in various fields [57], [58] tasks with Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based algorithms to
and thus is leveraged for log anomaly detection [59], [60], align with humans and acquire the Generative Pre-trained Trans-
[61]. Recently, researchers have also proposed to leverage the formers (GPTs) model [18], [71], [72].
powerful learning capabilities of LLMs for log analysis [62], The ‘pre-training and fine-tuning’ paradigm includes pre-
[63], [64]. Sakong et al. [65] propose a Transformer-based training and fine-tuning phases. The goal of the pre-training
framework that uses the Drain parser and Doc2Vec embedding phase is to learn the basic semantic features in input data, without
for reconstruction-based log anomaly detection. Guo et al. [30] considering the downstream tasks. Researchers typically use
propose the LogBERT framework, which trains a BERT-like self-supervised learning to pre-train the foundation models. In
model as the anomaly detector by generating masked tokens the fine-tuning phase, the foundation models are further trained
in normal sequences. Xiao et al. [31] propose Loader, which to fit specific downstream tasks. To fine-tune the foundation
uses multiple Transformer layers to analyze log patterns and models, the parameters of their low-level layers are usually
proposes a ‘Top-P’ algorithm to detect anomalies. In [1], we frozen, and they are optimized using labeled data from specific
propose a detection framework to train a Transformer encoder- tasks. Our framework applies the pre-training and fine-tuning
based detector with pre-training and fine-tuning approaches. paradigm. We pre-train the foundation model to learn the general
Le et al. [32] propose to leverage the BERT model to process semantic features in log sequences. Then, we fine-tune the founand analyze raw logs, reducing the reliance on log parsers. dation model to the event prediction task. As introduced above,
Then, the BERT model is adapted for a binary classification labeled log data is difficult to acquire in real-world scenarios.
task. Recently, language models have also been applied for The pre-training phase is suitable for extracting and learning
log anomaly detection. Guo et al. [66] propose a pre-training features in unlabeled data, which makes our framework perform
and fine-tuning pipeline to adapt language models for binary well in such scenarios.
classification of log lines. Han et al. [17] propose to pre-train
a GPT-2 language model and fine-tune it using reinforcement D. Knowledge Distillation
learning to detect anomalies. Although achieving high detection Rapid development of ML, especially DL technologies, has
performance, these advanced DL-enhanced methods lead to brought significant changes to many fields, but it also faces the
relatively heavy runtime overhead. Ott et al. [67] propose to challenges of high computing and storage overhead. For examuse different pre-trained language models, such as BERT and ple, it is difficult to deploy large-scale DL models on embedded
GPT-2, to generate embedded representations for log messages, devices with limited energy and hardware resources. Thereto enhance the robustness and generalization capabilities of fore, DL-based models need to be compressed to be suitable
DL-based log anomaly detectors. for deployment in such scenarios. To this end, the knowledge
 distillation method is proposed to effectively compress the scale
C. Generative Pre-Trained Transformers (GPTs) of DL models while retaining acceptable performance. As a
 transfer learning method, knowledge distillation leverages the
 Since being first proposed in 2017, the Transformer architec- ‘Teacher-Student’ architecture and aims to transfer dark knowlture has achieved dominant advantages in many fields, such as edge, i.e., the hidden knowledge learned from training data, from
natural language processing [68], computer vision [69], recom- a large-scale teacher model to a lightweight student model [73].
mender systems [70], etc. The original Transformer architecture Hinton et al. [74] propose a temperature-based (T emp) Softmax
contains multiple encoder and decoder layers, which leverage function to extract dark knowledge and generate soft labels (qi )
the positional encoding and self-attention mechanism to learn from output logits (zi ), which is defined as
the complex contextual features in the input data [68]. As the
scale of Transformer-based models continues to increase in exp(z i /T emp)
 qi =  . (1)
 j exp(z /T emp)
these years, traditional supervised learning approaches are less j
YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA 5947

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF LOG ANOMALY DETECTION METHODS

The knowledge distillation uses both soft labels and ground truth heavily on such data. Therefore, the information contained
labels (i.e., hard labels) to train the lightweight student model. in unlabeled logs should be fully exploited.
Unlike hard labels, soft labels contain the understanding and r Most existing studies focus primarily on performance
preferences of the teacher model, thus improving the general- while overlooking runtime overhead, which limits their
ization capabilities of the trained student model [74]. In recent applicability in real-world deployments.
years, numerous knowledge distillation methods have been pro- In this work, we propose a hybrid log anomaly detecposed to adapt to different model compression tasks, such as tion framework to address the aforementioned challenges. The
adversarial distillation, multi-teacher distillation, cross-modal framework adopts a pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm to
distillation, etc [75], [76], [77]. Due to the efficient transfer fully exploit unlabeled logs and reduce the reliance on labeled
learning abilities of knowledge distillation, it is also applied training data. It employs a multi-layer Transformer encoder
in natural language processing, computer vision, recommender architecture to effectively capture contextual dependencies in
systems, and cybersecurity domains [73], [78], [79]. log event sequences. Furthermore, to enhance its practicality in
 In this work, we leverage the powerful model compression and real-world deployments, the framework integrates a multi-level
knowledge-transfer capabilities of the knowledge distillation knowledge distillation technique to achieve accurate and costtechniques and propose a multi-level distillation method suitable efficient anomaly detection.
for log data.

E. Summary III. OVERVIEW OF OUR FRAMEWORK
 We systematically review and compare the representative In this paper, we introduce the pre-training and fine-tuning
log anomaly detection methods in Table I. Although existing paradigm to the log analysis domain and propose a hybrid log
approaches have achieved strong detection performance, several anomaly detection framework. We first pre-train a foundation
critical challenges remain to be addressed: model on large-scale unlabeled log data to learn the basic ser As system logs grow increasingly complex and large-scale, quential features. Then, we fine-tune it on labeled logs to discern
 there is a need to develop more powerful log anomaly outlier patterns and gain anomaly detection capabilities. After
 detection models. that, the fine-tuned model is further compressed while preservr In practice, high-quality, manually labeled log data ing its performance. The trained detector identifies anomalous
 for training is scarce, yet most existing methods rely patterns by comparing its predictions with ground-truth events.
5948 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 3. The overview of our framework.

Our framework exploits sequential information within logs to very similar to processing and analyzing natural language. In
achieve better performance in real-world scenarios. other words, our aim is to understand the language that the log
 As shown in Fig. 3, our framework includes four modules: data speaks. Therefore, we design our model training module
(i) Data Preprocessing, (ii) Model Training, (iii) Model Com- referring to some state-of-the-art techniques in the NLP field.
pression, and (iv) Anomaly Detection. Specifically, raw logs are Log event sequences are first encoded into vectors. Since the
processed into event sequences in the first module. The second scale of log templates is relatively small in common systems,
module uses the extracted sequences to train the foundation we select One-Hot encoding as the vectorization approach,
model and then the prediction model with self-supervised learn- which is simple yet sufficient for our task. Our model training. The third module uses the knowledge distillation technique ing module follows the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm.
to compress the fine-tuned model. Finally, the compressed pre- Specifically, in the pre-training phase, we propose the masked
diction model serves as the anomaly detector in the last module. log reconstruction-based technique to train a foundation model,
We give a detailed introduction to our framework as follows. which learns the contextual features in event sequences. Then,
 in the fine-tuning phase, we train the foundation model to make
A. Data Preprocessing Module correct predictions on the next log events in normal sequences,
 which actually gives the model the ability to learn normal
 Loggers typically populate predefined templates and print
 patterns. After that, the fine-tuned prediction model is further
out logs, which are formatted strings that record critical runcompressed in the next module.
time information of computer systems. Therefore, massive raw
logs can be processed into events according to log templates,
which significantly reduces the amount of input data. We sort C. Model Compression Module
the extracted events by timestamp to generate structured event
 Existing research works rarely consider the computational
sequences. After that, these event sequences serve as input data
 efficiency or storage overhead of log anomaly detectors. Thus,
for subsequent modules.
 in the model compression module, we aim to leverage knowledge distillation to train a compressed model while preserv-
B. Model Training Module
 ing the high performance of the fine-tuned prediction model.
 According to previous works [12], [13], there are specific se- Specifically, we propose a multi-level knowledge distillation
quential patterns within logs that distinguish normal sequences method suitable for sequential log data. Our knowledge distilfrom abnormal ones. The objective of log anomaly detection lation method calculates three separate loss values to train the
is to identify these patterns from time series log data, which is compressed model so that the compressed model achieves high
YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA 5949

Fig. 4. An illustration of our proposed pre-training and fine-tuning methods. After pre-training, the Transformer layers (green part) are frozen and serve as the
backbone of the fine-tuned model.

prediction performance while accurately fitting the fine-tuned the core idea of which is to train models to learn key features
model. After model compression, the lightweight distilled model by recovering masked inputs. In this paper, we introduce the
serves as the anomaly detector in the next module. input masking technique to the field of log analysis and propose
 a masked log reconstruction approach for pre-training. Our
D. Anomaly Detection Module approach randomly masks part of the input events and trains
 the model to automatically recover the original sequences. The
 We deploy the compressed event prediction model as the process of our mask-based pre-training methods is shown in
log anomaly detector, which continuously predicts the next Fig. 4(a).
events based on previous event sequences. In particular, the To illustrate our approach, suppose that an original sefine-tuned model from the second module can also serve as an quence Sorigin has L events, then we have Sorigin =
anomaly detector because the model compression module only 1
 [Sorigin 2
 , Sorigin 3
 , Sorigin L
 , . . ., Sorigin ]. To acquire the masked
reduces its scale. Since the prediction model is trained to learn sequence, we randomly choose L ∗ r events with a masking
normal patterns, it detects anomalies simply by comparing the rate (r) and replace them with a masking token ([mask]).
predictions with actual events. Assuming that the second event is masked, the masked se-
 1
 quence (Smask ) is formulated as Smask = [Sorigin , [mask],
 3
 IV. METHODOLOGY Sorigin , . . ., Sorigin ]. Given masked sequences, the foundation
 L

 In this section, we give a detailed introduction to our pre- model is trained to accurately recover the masked sequences,
training, fine-tuning, and knowledge distillation methods. These i.e., to maximize the probabilities of outputting the correspondmethods are leveraged in the second and third modules of our ing original sequences. Therefore, the loss function is defined
log anomaly detection framework. as the distance between the output vector (X recover ) and the
 original vector (X origin ), where X origin is the vectorized input
 sequence. In this paper, we leverage the Mean-Squared Error
A. Pre-Training Based on Masked Log Reconstruction
 (MSE) loss to measure the distance. Supposing that X j is the
 In the pre-training phase, the foundation model learns the j th value in the vectors, the loss function of our pre-training
semantic features. Transformers [68] have achieved dominant approach is formulated as
advantages in multiple fields, which are extremely suitable for
processing time series data and significantly outperform RNN Losspt = M SE_Loss (X origin , X recover )
models. Therefore, we use the Transformer as the basis of our
 1  j 2
 L
foundation model. It leverages multiple Transformer encoder = X origin − X jrecover . (2)
layers to learn the sequential patterns and concatenates fully L j=1
connected layers to generate outputs.
 Inspired by BERT [80] and Masked Autoencoder [81], we To train the foundation model, we continuously update its
pre-train the foundation model using input masking techniques, parameters to minimize the loss value. After pre-training, the
5950 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

foundation model obtains the contextual information in the input deployment. To this end, we introduce the knowledge distillalog sequences. The trained foundation model is further fine- tion technique into our framework. In this work, we propose a
tuned in the next phase. multi-level knowledge distillation method suitable for log data,
 which are essentially large-scale serialized sequences of discrete
B. Fine-Tuning Based on Next Event Prediction log events. We distill our fine-tuned prediction model using
 our knowledge distillation method to compress it. The distilled
 As mentioned above, the foundation model learns the seman- prediction model has a significant decrease in the number of
tic features from the log data. Although the pre-trained model parameters, storage usage, and inference time. We will give
contains valuable information, it is insufficient for detecting a detailed introduction to our proposed knowledge distillation
anomalies. Therefore, we fine-tune the foundation model to method in the following.
a downstream task, i.e., next event prediction, which aims to As introduced in Section II, knowledge distillation is a widely
predict the next events according to previous sequences. We applied compression method in the DL domain. In the classic
train the model on labeled data so that it learns specific patterns knowledge distillation framework, the student model continuthat distinguish normal sequences from abnormal ones. ously learns knowledge from the teacher model, so that the
 To accomplish the prediction task, as shown in Fig. 3, we small-scale student model can achieve generalization capabilinitially modify the structure of the trained foundation model ities similar to the teacher model. In our framework, the fineby removing its output layers and freezing the parameters of tuned prediction model serves as the teacher, while a small-scale
the Transformer encoder layers since the semantic features are transformer-based model is trained as the student. The student
contained in these layers. Then, we concatenate a fully connected model has a similar structure to the teacher model, with fewer
classifier to the modified foundation model, which aims to output Transformer encoder layers and a smaller hidden vector size.
the probabilities of the next events. Actually, other ML models The overview of our knowledge distillation method is shown
that have prediction capabilities can act as the classifier, e.g., in Fig. 5. To train the student model, we first need to extract fixed-
LSTM, 1D-CNN, etc. We fine-tune the prediction model by length input sequences from the training dataset. Let Xinput be
continuously optimizing the parameters of the concatenated a vectorized input sequence that is fed into both the teacher
classifier. Consequently, the fine-tuning phase requires much and student models. The teacher model then produces a logit
less training time than pre-training. Y teacher and the student model produces a logit Y student . After
 As shown in Fig. 4(b), the modified model takes previous se- that, these output logits are further calculated by the Softmax
quences as inputs and outputs the predictions of the next events, function to acquire the output probabilities, i.e., Qteacher and
which are vectors containing the probabilities that different Qstudent . Suppose that Y j is the probability of the j th value in
events occur next. To train the prediction model, we iteratively Y , Qi is the probability of the ith event. The Softmax function
sample fixed-length sequences from labeled datasets as inputs is calculated by comparing a single logit with others, which is
and the next events as labels. Given previous sequences, the formulated as
model aims to maximize the probabilities that target events are
 exp(Y i /T emp)
correctly predicted. Therefore, the loss function is defined as the Qi = n , (4)
 j=1 exp(Y /T emp)
 j
difference between the output probabilities (Y output ) and the
vectorized target label (Y true ). Using the Cross-Entropy (CE) where T emp is the temperature parameter. A larger temperature
loss to measure the difference, the loss function is formulated as value makes the output probability distribution smoother. The
 Lossf t = CE_Loss(Y output , Y true ) output probability vector of the teacher model (Qteacher ) is the
 soft label of the input sequence. Since the goal of knowledge
 
 n
 distillation is to compress the teacher model while preserving
 =− Y itrue log Y ioutput , (3) its generalization capabilities, the student model is trained to fit
 i=1
 the teacher model. In other words, given an input sequence, the
where n is the number of log event types and Y i is the probability student model is trained to minimize the distance between the
value of the ith event. soft label (Qteacher ) and the output vector (Qstudent ). Using the
 In the fine-tuning phase, all the training data are extracted from KL Divergence method to measure the distance, the distillation
normal logs. After training, the prediction model learns normal loss function is defined as
sequential patterns and can accurately predict normal events. Lossdistill = DKL (Qstudent ||Qteacher )
The fine-tuned prediction model is adopted for log anomaly
detection. 
 n
 Qistudent
 = Qistudent log , (5)
 i=1
 Qiteacher
C. Knowledge Distillation for Efficient Log Anomaly where i is the index of Qteacher and Qstudent .
Detection
 In addition to training the student model to fit the teacher
 The storage and computing efficiency of log anomaly detec- model, we also expect the student model to perform well on the
tors is critical to deployment in real-world scenarios. However, log event prediction task. To this end, the student model is trained
existing research works rarely consider either storage or com- to fit the ground-truth labels, not just soft labels. Therefore,
puting efficiency issues, which leads to difficulties in real-world the training goal is similar to the fine-tuning phase, which is
YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA 5951

Fig. 5. The overview of our knowledge distillation method. As in the shaded area, we extend the conventional knowledge distillation method by introducing an
additional loss term to measure the distance between the hidden representations of two models.

to maximize the probability that the student model accurately assuming that h is the size of the hidden vector and j is the index
predicts the ground truth event. The loss function is defined as of the hidden vector.
the distance between the output vector (Qstudent ) and the target The overall loss function of our knowledge distillation method
label (Y true ). Using CE loss, the prediction loss function is is defined as the combination of the above three loss functions:
formulated as
 LossKD = α · Lossdistill + β · Losspred + γ · Losshidden ,
 Losspred = CE_Loss(Qoutput , Y true ) (8)
 where α, β, and γ are parameters to control the ratio of these
 
 n
 =− Y itrue log Qioutput . (6) losses. To train the student model, we iteratively extract fixedi=1
 length log event sequences from the training dataset as input.
 Then, we feed the input sequences into both the teacher and
 Unlike conventional knowledge distillation methods, we pro- student models to acquire outputs and calculate the loss values,
pose to learn not only the outputs of the teacher model but also its based on which the parameters of the student model are updated.
hidden representations in intermediate layers. The Transformer After knowledge distillation, the student model acquires compalayers in our prediction model include the sequential features rable performance with the original prediction model with much
learned from log event sequences. In order to make the student lower computational and storage overhead.
model learn more knowledge from the teacher model, we propose to extend the conventional knowledge distillation method D. Anomaly Detection With Pre-Trained Transformers
by additionally training the student model to fit the outputs of the
hidden layers in the teacher model. As shown in the shaded area After the pre-training, fine-tuning, and knowledge distillation
in Fig. 5, we extract the output of the final Transformer encoder phases, the prediction model effectively learns the sequential
layer from both the student and teacher models, i.e., H student patterns of normal logs. It is capable of predicting the next events
and H teacher . Our training goal is to maximize the probability in normal logs according to previous sequences. Therefore, the
that the student model outputs the same hidden vector as the behaviors of a functioning system can be precisely predicted
teacher model. Therefore, the loss function is defined as the by the model. In this way, outlier system operations that are
distance between H student and H teacher . Using MSE loss to beyond the expectations of the model are detected as anomalies.
measure the distance, the hidden loss function is formulated as Inspired by this, we implement a prediction-based anomaly
 detection approach in our framework. Specifically, given input
 Losshidden = M SE_Loss(H student , H teacher ) sequences, the trained prediction model outputs vectors containing the probabilities that certain log events will occur next. As
 1 j
 h the fine-tuned prediction model makes accurate predictions on
 = (H − H jteacher )2 , (7) normal logs, the ground truth events are expected to appear in
 h j=1 student
 the events with top-k probabilities; otherwise, anomaly patterns
5952 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Algorithm 1: Log Anomaly Detection. Isolation Forest [28], and LogCluster [15] implemented in
 Loglizer.1 For DL-based methods, we evaluate six stateof-the-art anomaly detectors, including Deep Autoencoder,
 DeepLog [12], LogAnomaly [13], Loader [31], LogGPT [17],
 and LogBERT [30].

 C. Implementation Details
 For the HDFS dataset, we use the regex tool to extract log
 events according to the open-source log templates provided by
 Xu et al. [83]. For BGL and TBird datasets, we use the Drain
 parser to extract log templates and structured log data from raw
 logs [24], [25]. We use the sliding window to extract fixed-length
 sequences with sequence_length = 10 and step_size = 1.
 Then, we leverage one-hot encoding (HDFS and BGL) and
 word embedding (TBird) to obtain vectorized representations.
 In the pre-training phase, we initialize the Transformer-based
 foundation model with hidden_size = 128. We set the number
 of Transformer encoder layers as 12 for the HDFS dataset and
 4 for the BGL dataset. We randomly mask 10% of the input
 events to pre-train the foundation model. To detect anomalies,
 considering the size of event templates, the value of k is set
 as 3, 39, and 120 for the HDFS, BGL, and TBird datasets,
 respectively.
 For RNN-based baselines, we set num_layers = 2
are identified. The algorithm for online anomaly detection is and hidden_size = 64 for both the DeepLog and
presented in Algorithm 1. LogAnomaly models. For Transformer-based baselines, we set
 hidden_size = 64, num_layers = 4, and num_headers = 4
 V. EVALUATION SETTINGS for the Deep Autoencoder, Loader, and LogBERT. We train the
 above DL-based baseline models for 500 epochs to achieve the
A. Datasets best performance. For the LLM-enhanced LogGPT method, we
 We evaluate our method on three popular public log set num_layers = 4 and num_headers = 4 for the GPT-2
datasets [82], including the HDFS dataset [83], the BGL language model. We pre-train LogGPT for 100 epochs and
dataset [84], and the Thunderbird [84] dataset. The detailed fine-tune it for 20 epochs with the RL algorithm to achieve the
information about these datasets is introduced as follows. best performance.
 HDFS: The Hadoop File System (HDFS) dataset contains To evaluate our knowledge distillation method, we set
11,175,629 logs collected from a Hadoop cluster deployed on num_layers = 1 and hidden_size = 8 for the student model.
200 Amazon EC2 nodes. These logs record 29 different types of The fine-tuned prediction model serves as the teacher model.
log events in the Hadoop system. The dataset is further processed We set α = 1.0, β = 1.0, and γ = 2.0 for our knowledge distiland labeled by human experts. There are 575,061 blocks in the lation method. For the baseline distillation method, which only
cluster, 16,838 of which are manually labeled as abnormal. leverages distillation and prediction losses, we set α = 1.0 and
 BGL: The BGL dataset is collected from the BlueGene/L β = 1.0. We train both student models for 100 epochs to achieve
(BGL) supercomputer system at Lawrence Livermore National the best performance.
Labs (LLNL). The BGL dataset contains 4,747,963 logs, among We run all the experiments on a server with Ubuntu 20.04,
which 348,460 logs are labeled abnormal. These logs include Intel Xeon 2.90 GHz CPU, 256 GB memory, and NVIDIA
377 different types of log events in the BGL supercomputer. RTX A6000 GPUs. We implement our method and the baseline
 Thunderbird (TBird): The TBird dataset records runtime logs models with Python 3.9 and PyTorch 2.5.
collected from the Thunderbird supercomputer system at Sandia
National Labs (SNL). As in previous work, we extract the first D. Evaluation Metrics
20,000,000 lines of log messages from the raw data, among In our experiments, we count the TP, FP, TN, and FN values
which 41,543 lines are labeled as abnormal. After log parsing, and compute the following three metrics to evaluate all meththese logs include 1,207 different types of log events in the ods, including P recision = T PT+F P , Recall = T P +F N , and
 P TP
Thunderbird supercomputer.
 F 1 Score = 2 ∗ P recision+Recall .
 P recision∗Recall

 To evaluate our knowledge distillation method, we calcu-
B. Baselines late three indicators to measure the computational and storage
 In this paper, we compare our framework with nine baseline methods. For ML-based methods, we evaluate PCA [83], 1 Loglizer. https://github.com/logpai/loglizer. [9]
YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA 5953

 TABLE II
 EVALUATION OF OVERALL PERFORMANCE

 to block_id, and the BGL and TBird datasets are divided by time.
 These datasets are split as shown in Fig. 6(a). For our framework,
 we pre-train the foundation model on Dataset 1 and fine-tune
 it on Dataset 2. For the baselines, we train them on a dataset
 combining Dataset 1 and Dataset 2. We test all the methods on
 Dataset 3 and Dataset 4.
 The experimental results are shown in Table II. Overall, our
 framework achieves the best performance among all methods,
 which indicates that it learns semantic features from normal
 log data and effectively detects outlier log patterns. Although
 ML-based methods achieve high performance in specific met-
Fig. 6. Dataset partition in our experiments. rics (e.g., PCA achieves 100% recall on the HDFS and TBird
 datasets), their overall performance is much lower than DLbased methods, proving that such methods have lower learning
overhead of log anomaly detectors, including the number of abilities than DL models.
parameters, the number of Floating Point Operations (FLOPs), Among all the DL-based methods, AE achieves relatively
and inference time (Infer Time) for each input sequence. For poor results (92.06% F1 score on HDFS, 30.52% F1 score
the inference time metric, we first warm up the GPUs for 1,000 on BGL, and 92.08% F1 score on TBird). Especially on the
repetitions and then measure the inference time of a single input BGL dataset, AE has serious overfitting problems. The other six
sequence (batch_size=1) 1,000 times. We report the average DL-based models, including DeepLog, LogAnomaly, Loader,
inference time to ensure reliable results. LogGPT, LogBERT, and our framework, achieve higher detection performance. On the HDFS dataset, our method achieves
 VI. EVALUATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 99.50% precision, 99.43% recall, and 99.47% F1 score, all
 In this section, we aim to answer the following research of which outperform the DL-based baseline models. On the
questions to evaluate our proposed framework: BGL dataset, the DL-based baselines achieve comparable per-
 RQ1: How is the overall detection performance of the pro- formance while our method achieves 99.28% precision, 98.81%
posed framework compared to the SOTA baselines? recall, and 99.05% F1 score, significantly outperforming other
 RQ2: How does the proposed framework perform in real- DL-based models. Besides, on the TBird dataset, all the DLworld scenarios where high-quality labeled training data is based methods perform well, and our method achieves the
scarce? best performance among them with 99.96% F1 score. These
 RQ3: How effective is the proposed knowledge distillation ap- experimental results indicate that our method detects more
proach? How much is the inference overhead of the compressed anomalies while triggering fewer false alarms, which is critical
model for real-world deployment? for deploying anomaly detectors in production environments.
 RQ4: Is the proposed knowledge distillation approach robust It is also shown that the Transformer-based architecture
to real-world scenarios? and the training methods in our framework play a significant
 role. Among the DL-based detectors, our method, Loader, and
 LogBERT utilize the Transformer Encoder-based architecture
A. Evaluation of Overall Performance (RQ1)
 to extract and learn the sequential features within log data,
 In the first experiment, we compare the overall performance while DeepLog and LogAnomaly use the LSTM model. The
of our framework with baselines on the HDFS, BGL, and TBird evaluation results show that these Transformer-based methods
datasets. It is notable that the HDFS dataset is divided according outperform the LSTM-based ones on the HDFS and BGL
5954 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

datasets, demonstrating the superiority of the Transformer-based TABLE III
 EVALUATION OF REAL-WORLD SCENARIOS ON THE HDFS DATASET
architecture. Moreover, our method performs better than Loader
and LogBERT models on all three datasets, which indicates that,
following the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, our training
method makes the model learn more key features and better
distinguish unexpected patterns.
 To conclude, in the first experiment, we train and evaluate
our method and nine baseline models on three public datasets,
where all the data are assumed to be labeled, which conducts
an overall evaluation of all these methods and provides unified
metrics of their performance. Experimental results show that our
framework achieves the best performance among these methods.
In the following experiment, we will further prove the superiority
of our framework in real-world scenarios.

B. Evaluation of Real-World Scenarios (RQ2)
 In the second experiment, we compare the performance of our
framework and the DL-based baselines in real-world scenarios.
As described above, existing works typically train their anomaly
detection models on normal log data and test them on both
normal and abnormal data. They assume that all the log data
in the dataset is labeled. However, labeled log datasets are
extremely difficult to obtain, as manually labeling logs requires is more difficult for the fine-tuned model to distinguish between
a heavy workload. Therefore, the amount of unlabeled log data is normal and abnormal patterns. Despite a slight degradation in
significantly larger than the labeled data in real-world scenarios. detection performance, our framework is the only method that
We believe that it is essential to evaluate anomaly detectors in achieves acceptable evaluation results.
such circumstances. To summarize, in the second experiment, we prove that our
 We reconstruct the HDFS dataset to simulate real-world sce- framework is suitable for real-world scenarios. Among all DL
narios. As shown in Fig. 6(b), abnormal data is divided into two methods, our framework is the only one that achieves high
parts, where Dataset 4 contains α% of it and Dataset 5 contains performance in such scenarios.
the rest. For our framework, we first pre-train the foundation
model on an unlabeled dataset combining Dataset 1 and Dataset
4, and then fine-tune it on Dataset 2. We train the baselines on a C. Evaluation of Knowledge Distillation (RQ3)
dataset combining Dataset 1, Dataset 2, and Dataset 4 to obtain In the third experiment, we evaluate the performance of our
fair evaluation results. All methods are tested on Dataset 3 and model compression method on HDFS, BGL, and TBird datasets.
Dataset 5. As introduced above, the knowledge distillation framework
 We select the value of α as 20, 40, and 60 to construct our consists of a teacher model and a student model, aiming to
datasets and run the experiments on these datasets separately. As transfer knowledge from the teacher to the student. In our
shown in Table III, the evaluation metrics prove that our frame- framework, the fine-tuned model serves as the teacher model,
work remarkably outperforms the baselines. More importantly, while a Transformer-based model with a similar architecture
the performance of the baseline models drops significantly serves as the student model. It is worth noting that the student
compared to the first experiment (α = 0), while our framework model has fewer layers and smaller hidden sizes than the teacher
achieves similar performance, making our method the only one model, as our goal is to compress the fine-tuned model. We
that can adapt to real-world scenarios where unlabeled logs evaluate our knowledge distillation method on the datasets of
are leveraged for training. As trained on unlabeled datasets, the first experiment. In addition to the performance metrics, we
the baselines learn the sequential features within normal and also calculate the number of parameters, FLOPs, and inference
abnormal logs, making these patterns more indistinct and thus time for the teacher model, the student model, and DL-based
resulting in significant degradation in performance. Unlike them, baselines, in order to prove the advantages of our knowledge
our framework first pre-trains the foundation model to exploit distillation method.
unlabeled data and then fine-tunes it on labeled data to acquire The evaluation results are shown in Table IV. On all three
detection capabilities. Consequently, our framework performs datasets, the student model achieves comparative performance
well in real-world scenarios. to the teacher model. On HDFS and TBird datasets, the distilled
 In addition, it is also shown that the performance of our frame- model slightly overfits on normal data, thus detecting a few more
work decreases slightly as α increases. With more abnormal data false positives. Despite this, the distilled student model achieves
combined in the pre-training phase, the foundation model learns high detection performance on all three datasets (99.56% on
more abnormal patterns. Given the same fine-tuning dataset, it HDFS, 99.05% on BGL, and 99.93% on TBird), proving that our
YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA 5955

 TABLE IV
 EVALUATION OF OUR KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION METHOD

knowledge distillation method is capable of retaining the high TABLE V
 EVALUATION OF KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION IN REAL-WORLD SCENARIOS
detection performance of original detectors. More importantly,
the compressed model has low computational overhead and
storage usage. On the HDFS dataset, our knowledge distillation method reduces the number of parameters by 95.01%,
the number of FLOPs by 98.23%, and the inference time by
88.82%. On the BGL dataset, our method reduces the number
of parameters by 20.29%, the number of FLOPs by 70.72%, and
the inference time by 68.16%. Meanwhile, on the TBird dataset,
our method reduces the number of parameters by 13.76%,
the number of FLOPs by 28.14%, and the inference time by
57.14%. The significant decline in these indicators demonstrates
that our knowledge distillation method effectively improves the distillation method to compress the three models trained in the
computational and storage efficiency of the fine-tuned prediction second experiment, which are pre-trained with 20%, 40%, and
model. Moreover, it is also shown in Table IV that the distilled 60% abnormal data, respectively.
student model achieves higher detection performance than the The evaluation results are shown in Table V. It is shown that
DL-based baselines with much lower computational overhead. the detection performance of all three student models decreases
 To conclude, the third experiment proves that our knowledge slightly after knowledge distillation, which is caused by the
distillation method can significantly compress the scale of log reduction in capacity of the lightweight models. Despite the
anomaly detectors while preserving comparable detection per- slight performance degradation, our distilled lightweight model
formance. After knowledge distillation, the lightweight model achieves significantly higher performance than the DL-based
has significantly lower runtime overhead, which is suitable baselines, as shown in Table III. In addition, the advantages are
for real-world deployment where computational and storage even greater when more abnormal data are mixed. These results
resources are limited. prove that our distilled lightweight models perform well in the
 simulated real-world scenarios, demonstrating the robustness of
D. Evaluation of Our Knowledge Distillation Approach in our knowledge distillation approach.
Real-World Scenarios (RQ4)
 In this experiment, we evaluate the robustness of our knowl- E. Ablation Study on Training Pipeline
edge distillation approach in real-world scenarios where labeled To illustrate the effectiveness of our hybrid training method,
data is scarce. To this end, we use the same dataset as the second we compare it with a Transformer-based prediction model
experiment. Specifically, we leverage the proposed knowledge trained with supervised learning. The baseline shares the same
5956 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE VI TABLE VIII
 ABLATION STUDY ON TRAINING PIPELINE ABLATION STUDY ON KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

 TABLE VII
 COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF PRE-TRAINING TASKS

architecture as our fine-tuned model and is trained with a super- Fig. 7. Evaluation of masking rate in pre-training.
vised task, i.e., log event prediction.
 We conduct experiments on a dataset as that in the first experiment. The results are shown in Table VI. Overall, our training The evaluation results are shown in Table VIII. On the HDFS
method performs better than the supervised learning method on and TBird datasets, our MLKD method achieves higher F1
all datasets. Since these models share the same architecture, the Scores than conventional knowledge distillation. On the BGL
evaluation results demonstrate the advancement of our hybrid dataset, limited by the data scale, our method achieves comtraining pipeline. parative performance to the baseline. These results indicate
 that, trained with the additional hidden loss, the student model
F. Evaluation of Pre-Training Task acquires more knowledge from the teacher model. In conclusion,
 we prove that our multi-level knowledge distillation method ex-
 To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed masking-based ceeds conventional methods in knowledge transfer capabilities.
pre-training task, i.e., Masked Log Reconstruction (MLR), we
conduct a comparative experiment against the BERT MLM
 H. Evaluation of Hyperparameter Sensitivity
approach. In the experiments, we pre-train two foundation
models with the MLR and MLM tasks, respectively, and then 1) Masking Rate: We evaluate the effectiveness of our
fine-tune them on the next event prediction task for anomaly masking-based pre-training approach under diverse input maskdetection. The model architecture, the fine-tuning approach, and ing rates, including 10%, 20%, 30%, and 50%, on three puball hyperparameters are set to the same for the two methods. lic datasets. The evaluation results are presented in Fig. 7. It
The evaluation results are shown in Table VII. It is shown is shown that the detection performance decreases with bigthat, pre-trained with our proposed MLR task, the detection ger masking rates, and the best performance is achieved with
performance of fine-tuned detectors is significantly improved on masking rate = 10%.
all three datasets, demonstrating the advantage of our proposed 2) Temperature Coefficient: We evaluate the effectiveness
pre-training approach tailored to log anomaly detection. of our knowledge distillation method with diverse temperature
 settings, including 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0. The evaluation
 results are presented in Fig. 9. It is shown from the figure
G. Ablation Study on Knowledge Distillation that the optimal knowledge distillation results occur when the
 We evaluate our Multi-Level Knowledge Distillation temperature coefficient is set to 1.0 or 2.0.
(MLKD) approach in this experiment. We compare it to the 3) Multi-Level Knowledge Distillation Coefficients: We
conventional knowledge distillation framework, which only uses evaluate the contributions of the three coefficients, i.e., α, β,
the prediction and distillation losses to transfer knowledge. We and γ, in our multi-level knowledge distillation approach (8).
evaluate these two methods on the HDFS, BGL, and TBird We conduct a grid search over the three coefficients, each taking
datasets. values from {1.0, 2.0}, and then evaluate the distilled detectors
YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA 5957

Fig. 8. Training and inference time consumption of DL-based models.

 TABLE IX
 EVALUATION OF MULTI-LEVEL KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION COEFFICIENTS

 Fig. 9. Evaluation of temperature settings in knowledge distillation.
accordingly. The evaluation results are presented in Table IX.
The coefficient setting reported in our work (α=1.0, β=1.0,
γ=2.0) achieves the best performance across datasets. affects the overhead of online training of the detector. To this
 end, we measure the training and inference time cost of our
 method and the DL-based baselines, which are shown in Fig. 8.
I. Evaluation of Time Consumption Different phases of model training, including pre-training (PT),
 The application of DL technology has greatly improved the fine-tuning (FT), and knowledge distillation (KD), are evaluated
performance of log anomaly detectors, but their runtime over- separately.
head has also increased. The time consumption of the training For inference overhead, it is shown that the inference time of
and inference phases in DL-based approaches is critical to our fine-tuned model is relatively low among all DL-based methreal-world deployment. Specifically, the inference time affects ods. After knowledge distillation, the inference cost is further
the feasibility of actual deployment, while the training time reduced. With the high detection performance, our framework is
5958 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

extremely suitable for real-world deployment. For training time [8] A. J. Oliner, A. Ganapathi, and W. Xu, “Advances and challenges in log
consumption, the training overhead of our framework is higher analysis,” Commun. ACM, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 55–61, 2012.
 [9] S. He, J. Zhu, P. He, and M. R. Lyu, “Experience Report: System log
than the RNN-based baseline (DeepLog and LogAnomaly), but analysis for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel.
is comparable to the Transformer-based methods. We believe Eng., Ottawa, ON, Canada, Oct. 2016, pp. 207–218.
that the additional training consumption of our framework is [10] M. Du and F. Li, “Spell: Online streaming parsing of large unstructured system logs,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 2213–2227,
acceptable, considering its outstanding performance. Nov. 2019.
 [11] R. Christensen and F. Li, “Adaptive log compression for massive log data,”
 in Proc. SIGMOD Conf., Jun. 2013, pp. 1283–1284.
J. Limitations and Future Work [12] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
 Despite the high performance and efficiency, our study has SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Dallas, TX, USA, Oct. 2017,
potential limitations. First, our data preprocessing and input pp. 1285–1298.
encoding approaches are based on pre-defined log templates. [13] W. Meng et al., “LogAnomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
 quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Although log templates can be automatically extracted by Intell., Macao, China, Aug. 2019, pp. 4739–4745.
parsers, such template-based methods hardly generalize to new [14] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. A. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Ontypes of logs. To this end, we suggest studying LLM-enhanced line system problem detection by mining patterns of console logs,”
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Miami, FL, USA, Dec. 2009,
template-free methods that directly process unstructured, natural pp. 588–597.
language-like log data. Second, our Transformer encoder-based [15] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering based
framework introduces additional runtime overhead compared to problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int.
 Conf. Softw. Eng. Companion, May 2016, pp. 102–111.
conventional ML and DL-based methods. Therefore, in future [16] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
work, we aim to investigate the application of other lightweight autoencoders,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
techniques, such as model quantization and pruning, in this field. Mining, Halifax, NS, Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 665–674.
 [17] X. Han, S. Yuan, and M. Trabelsi, “LogGPT: Log anomaly detection via
Finally, due to the robustness issues of DL models, it is possible GPT,” in Proc. IEEE BigData, Sorrento, Italy, Dec. 2023, pp. 1117–1122.
that our approach is vulnerable to AI-based attacks, such as [18] L. Ouyang et al., “Training language models to follow instructions
adversarial examples and backdoor attacks, motivating us to with human feedback,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Nov. 2022,
 pp. 27730–27744.
study the adversarial robustness of DL-based detectors in future [19] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
work. automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
 vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 130:1–130:37, 2022.
 VII. CONCLUSION [20] Z. Chen, J. Liu, W. Gu, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Experience report: Deep
 learning-based system log analysis for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:
 In this work, we have proposed a hybrid framework for log 2107.05908.
anomaly detection. Our framework follows the pre-training and [21] V. Beck, M. Landauer, M. Wurzenberger, F. Skopik, and A. Rauber,
 “System log parsing with large language models: A review,” 2025,
fine-tuning paradigm to leverage log data and achieve better arXiv:2504.04877.
learning capabilities. We have proposed the masked log recon- [22] Y. Liu et al., “Interpretable online log analysis using large language
struction approach to pre-train a Transformer-based foundation models with prompt strategies,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Program.
 Comprehension, Lisbon, Portugal, Apr. 2024, pp. 35–46.
model and fine-tune it to detect anomalous log patterns. We have [23] Z. Ma, D. J. Kim, and T. P. Chen, “LibreLog: Accurate and efficient
also proposed a knowledge distillation technique to compress the unsupervised log parsing using open-source large language models,” in
fine-tuned model while maintaining its performance. Evaluation Proc. IEEE/ACM ICSE, Ottawa, ON, Canada, May 2025, pp. 924–936.
 [24] J. Zhu et al., “Tools and benchmarks for automated log parsing,” in Proc.
results on three widely used public datasets show that our IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Softw. Eng. Pract., Montreal, QC,
framework outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods and is Canada, May 2019, pp. 121–130.
ideal for real-world applications. [25] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
 approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv.,
 Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2017, pp. 33–40.
 REFERENCES [26] M. Du and F. Li, “Spell: Streaming parsing of system event logs,” in
 Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Mining, Barcelona, Spain, Dec. 2016,
 [1] S. Yan et al., “Log-based anomaly detection with transformers pre-trained pp. 859–864.
 on large-scale unlabeled data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Denver, [27] H. Hamooni, B. Debnath, J. Xu, H. Zhang, G. Jiang, and A. Mueen,
 CO, USA, Jun. 2024, pp. 1–6. “LogMine: Fast pattern recognition for log analytics,” in Proc. 25th ACM
 [2] B. C. Das, M. H. Amini, and Y. Wu, “Security and privacy challenges of Int. Conf. Inform. Knowl. Manage, Indianapolis, IN, USA, Oct. 2016,
 large language models: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1573–1582.
 pp. 1–39, Feb. 2025. [28] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 [3] B. Yuan et al., “Minimizing financial cost of DDoS attack defense in clouds Conf. Data Mining, Pisa, Italy, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
 with fine-grained resource management,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., [29] P. Luo et al., “System log anomaly detection with noise-contrastive learnvol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2541–2554, Oct.–Dec. 2020. ing and pattern feature,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 11–24,
 [4] Y. Otoum, A. Asad, and A. Nayak, “Blockchain meets adaptive honeypots: 2026.
 A trust-aware approach to next-gen IoT security,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. [30] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “LogBert: Log anomaly detection via BERT,”
 Eng., vol. 13, pp. 2270–2287, 2026. in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., Shenzhen, China, Jul. 2021, pp. 1–8.
 [5] Y. Gong, C. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Zero-day malware defence with limited [31] T. Xiao et al., “Loader: A log anomaly detector based on transformer,”
 samples,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 340–347, 2024. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3479–3492, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 [6] Y. Qin, X. Yang, L.-X. Yang, and K. Huang, “Mitigating social engineering [32] V. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing,”
 attacks through cost-effective security awareness training policy,” IEEE in Proc. 36th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng., Melbourne,
 Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 3145–3158, Jul./Aug. 2025. VIC, Australia, Nov. 2021, pp. 492–504.
 [7] Y. Xia, X. Liu, Y. Zhao, and Y. Wang, “FCLA-DT: Federated continual [33] M. Landauer, S. Onder, F. Skopik, and M. Wurzenberger, “Deep learning
 learning with authentication for distributed digital twin-based industrial for anomaly detection in log data: A survey,” Mach. Learn. Appl., vol. 12,
 IoT,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 362–373, 2024. 2023, Art. no. 100470.
YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA 5959

[34] S. Lu, X. Wei, Y. Li, and L. Wang, “Detecting anomaly in Big Data [57] M. Ma, L. Han, and C. Zhou, “Research and application of
 system logs using convolutional neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. transformer based anomaly detection model: A literature review,”
 Conf. Dependable, Autonomic Secure Comput., 16th Intl Conf. Pervasive 2024, arXiv:2402.08975.
 Intell. Comput., 4th Int. Conf. Big Data Intell. Comput. Cyber Sci. Technol. [58] B. Liu, X. Liu, S. Gao, X. Cheng, and L. Yang, “LLM4CP: Adapting large
 Congr., Aug. 2018, pp. 151–158. language models for channel prediction,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 9,
[35] Z. Wang, J. Tian, H. Fang, L. Chen, and J. Qin, “LightLog: A lightweight no. 2, pp. 113–125, 2024.
 temporal convolutional network for log anomaly detection on the edge,” [59] S. Huang et al., “HitAnomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly
 Comput. Netw., vol. 203, 2022, Art. no. 108616. detection in system log,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4,
[36] R. Xiao, H. Chen, J. Lu, W. Li, and S. Jin, “AllInfoLog: Robust diverse pp. 2064–2076, Dec. 2020.
 anomalies detection based on all log features,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service [60] Q. Du, L. Zhao, J. Xu, Y. Han, and S. Zhang, “Log-Based anomaly
 Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2529–2543, Sep. 2023. detection with multi-head scaled dot-product attention mechanism,” in
[37] Y. Fadili, Y. El Yamani, J. Kilani, N. El Kamoun, Y. Baddi, and F. Bensalah, Proc. Int. Conf. Database Expert Syst. Appl., Virtual Event, Sep. 2021,
 “An enhancing timeseries anomaly detection using LSTM and Bi-LSTM vol. 12923, pp. 335–347.
 architectures,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Wireless Netw. Mobile Commun., [61] R. Xiao, W. Li, J. Lu, and S. Jin, “ContexLog: Non-parsing log anomaly
 2024, pp. 1–6. detection with all information preservation and enhanced contextual
[38] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural representation,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 4,
 Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997. pp. 4750–4762, Aug. 2024.
[39] D. Yu, X. Hou, C. Li, Q. Lv, Y. Wang, and N. Li, “Anomaly detection [62] C. Almodovar, F. Sabrina, S. Karimi, and S. A. Azad, “LogFiT: Log
 in unstructured logs using attention-based Bi-LSTM network,” in Proc. anomaly detection using fine-tuned language models,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Netw. Intell. Digit. Content, Beijing, China, Nov. 2021, Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1715–1723, Apr. 2024.
 pp. 403–407. [63] Z. Zhang, S. Li, L. Zhang, J. Ye, C. Hu, and L. Yan, “LLM-LADE: Large
[40] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust and unified language model-based log anomaly detection with explanation,” Knowl.
 deep learning based log anomaly detection for diverse faults,” in Proc. Based Syst., vol. 326, 2025, Art. no. 114064.
 IEEE 31st Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., Coimbra, Portugal, Oct. 2020, [64] X. Li et al., “AnomalyGen: An automated semantic log sequence genpp. 92–103. eration framework with LLM for anomaly detection,” 2025, arXiv:
[41] Z. Huang, W. Xu, and K. Yu, “Bidirectional LSTM-CRF models for 2504.12250.
 sequence tagging,” 2015, arXiv: 1508.01991. [65] W. Sakong, J. Kwon, K. Min, S. Wang, and W. Kim, “Anomaly transformer
[42] D. Zhang, D. Dai, R. Han, and M. Zheng, “SentiLog: Anomaly detecting ensemble model for cloud data anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cloud
 on parallel file systems via log-based sentiment analysis,” in Proc. ACM Comput., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1305–1313, Oct.–Dec. 2024.
 HotStorage. Virtual Event, Jul. 2021, pp. 86–93. [66] H. Guo et al., “Logformer: A pre-train and tuning pipeline for log anomaly
[43] J. Chung, Ç. Gülçehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Vancouver, BC, Canada,
 of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014, arXiv: Feb. 2024, pp. 135–143.
 1412.3555. [67] H. Ott, J. Bogatinovski, A. Acker, S. Nedelkoski, and O. Kao, “Robust
[44] A. Farzad, “Log message anomaly detection with oversampling,” Int. J. and transferable anomaly detection in log data using pre-trained lan-
 Artif. Intell. Appl., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 53–65, 2020. guage models,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell., 2021,
[45] S. Gu, Y. Chu, W. Zhang, P. Liu, Q. Yin, and Q. Li, “Research on pp. 19–24.
 system log anomaly detection combining two-way slice GRU and GA- [68] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process.
 attention mechanism,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Big Data, 2021, Syst., Long Beach, CA, USA, Dec. 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
 pp. 577–583. [69] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
[46] C. Li, J. Mo, G. Zhou, and G. Li, “Log anomaly detection based on parallel image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 fusion of CNN and GRU,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2024, Virtual Event, Austria, May 2021, pp. 1–22.
 pp. 1–8. [70] F. Sun et al., “Bert4rec: Sequential recommendation with bidirectional
[47] W. Yuan, S. Ying, X. Duan, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, and J. Shang, “MidLog: encoder representations from transformer,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf.
 An automated log anomaly detection method based on multi-head GRU,” Inform. Knowl. Manage., Beijing, China, Nov. 2019, pp. 1441–1450.
 J. Syst. Softw., vol. 226, 2025, Art. no. 112431. [71] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. B. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei,
[48] P. Li, Y. Pei, and J. Li, “A comprehensive survey on design and application “Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,” in Proc. Neural
 of autoencoder in deep learning,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 138, 2023, Inf. Process. Syst., Long Beach, CA, USA, Dec. 2017, pp. 4299–4307.
 Art. no. 110176. [72] OpenAI, “GPT-4 technical report,” 2023, arXiv: 2303.08774.
[49] K. Berahmand, F. Daneshfar, E. S. Salehi, Y. Li, and Y. Xu, “Autoencoders [73] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
 and their applications in machine learning: A survey,” Artif. Intell. Rev., survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 6, pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
 vol. 57, no. 2, 2024, Art. no. 28. [74] G. E. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
[50] L. Zhang et al., “LogAttn: Unsupervised log anomaly detection network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
 with an autoencoder based attention mechanism,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [75] X. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Sun, and J. Qi, “KDGAN: Knowledge distillation
 Knowl. Sci., Eng. Manage., Tokyo, Japan, Aug. 2021, vol. 12817, with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 pp. 222–235. Montréal, QC, Canada, Dec. 2018, pp. 783–794.
[51] Q. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Wang, and Z. Cao, “Log sequence anomaly [76] S. Gupta, J. Hoffman, and J. Malik, “Cross modal distillation for superdetection method based on contrastive adversarial training and dual feature vision transfer,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Las
 extraction,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 69. Vegas, NV, USA, Jun. 2016, pp. 2827–2836.
[52] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc. [77] N. Papernot, M. Abadi, Ú. Erlingsson, I. J. Goodfellow, and K. Talwar,
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Banff, AB, Canada, Apr. 14-16, 2014, “Semi-supervised knowledge transfer for deep learning from private trainpp. 1–14. ing data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Toulon, France,
[53] A. Wadekar, T. Gupta, R. Vijan, and F. Kazi, “Hybrid CAE-VAE for Apr. 2017, pp. 1–16.
 unsupervised anomaly detection in log file systems,” in Proc. 10th [78] D. Liu, P. Cheng, Z. Dong, X. He, W. Pan, and Z. Ming, “A general
 Int. Conf. Comput., Commun. Netw. Technol., Kanpur, India, Jul. 2019, knowledge distillation framework for counterfactual recommendation via
 pp. 1–7. uniform data,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inform.
[54] A. Wu and Y. Kwon, “Pre-LogMGAE: Identification of log anomalies Retrieval, Virtual Event, China, Jul. 2020, pp. 831–840.
 using a pre-trained masked graph autoencoder,” in Proc. 43rd Int. Symp. [79] N. Papernot, P. D. McDaniel, X. Wu, S. Jha, and A. Swami, “Distillation
 Reliable Distrib. Syst., Charlotte, NC, USA, Sep. 2024, pp. 294–306. as a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks,”
[55] X. Han and S. Yuan, “Unsupervised cross-system log anomaly detection in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, San Jose, CA, USA, May 2016,
 via domain adaptation,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inform. Knowl. pp. 582–597.
 Manage., Queensland, Australia, Nov. 2021, pp. 3068–3072. [80] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
[56] X. Duan, S. Ying, W. Yuan, H. Cheng, and X. Yin, “A generative adversar- of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
 ial networks for log anomaly detection,” Comput. Syst. Sci. Eng., vol. 37, Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang.
 no. 1, pp. 135–148, 2021. Technol., Minneapolis, MN, USA, Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
5960 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[81] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. B. Girshick, “Masked Wei Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. degree from Central South University, Changsha,
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., New Orleans, LA, USA, Jun. 2022, China, in 2010, the M.S. degree from Southeast
 pp. 15979–15 988. University, Nanjing, China, in 2013, and the Ph.D.
[82] M. Landauer, F. Skopik, and M. Wurzenberger, “A critical review of com- degree from The University of New South Wales,
 mon log data sets used for evaluation of sequence-based anomaly detection Sydney, NSW, Australia, in 2017. From 2018 to 2021,
 techniques,” in Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., 2024, vol. 1, pp. 1354–1375. he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with The
[83] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. A. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Detecting University of New South Wales. He is currently a
 large-scale system problems by mining console logs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Senior Research Scientist (equivalent to Associate
 Mach. Learn., Haifa, Israel, Jun. 2010, pp. 37–46. Professor) with Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen,
[84] A. J. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five China. His research interests include millimeterwave
 system logs,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. communications and machine learning for wireless communications. Dr. Wang
 Netw., Edinburgh, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 575–584. was the recipient of 2023 IEEE ComSoc AP Outstanding Young Researcher
 Award and Best Paper Awards in the IEEE ICCC 2016, 2024. He is the Editor
 of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING. He was the Editor of IEEE
 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS and Co-Chair of multiple symposia and
 workshops at major IEEE conferences.

 Senming Yan (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 received the B.E. degree in software engineering
 from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2020. He
 is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with Limin Sun received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese from the National University of Defense Technol-
 Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and also with ogy, Changsha, China, in 1988 and 1998, respecthe School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese tively. He is currently a Professor with the Institute
 Academy of Sciences, Beijing. His research interests of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
 include network security, zero trust security, and AI Sciences, Beijing, China. He is also with the School
 for security. of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy
 of Sciences, Beijing. His research interests include
 mobile vehicle networks, Internet of Things security,
 and wireless sensor networks.

 Lei Shi (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received
 the B.E. degree from Electronic Information School,
 Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2021. She is
 currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the Wei Zhang (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 School of Integrated Circuits (School of Electronic from The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
 Information and Electrical Engineering), Shanghai Kong, in 2005. He is currently a Professor with the
 Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Her research School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommuinterests include network security, intrusion detec- nications, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
 tion, cybersecurity situational awareness, and AI for NSW, Australia. His research focuses on 6 G comsecurity. munications and networks. He was the recipient of
 the IEEE Communications Society Joseph LoCicero
 Award for Exemplary Service to Publications in 2024.
 He was an IEEE ComSoc Distinguished Lecturer
 from 2016 to 2017. Within the IEEE ComSoc, he
 has taken many leadership positions, including the Chair of the Wireless
 Communications Technical Committee from 2019 to 2020, Vice Director of
 the Asia–Pacific Board from 2016 to 2021, Editor-in-Chief of IEEE WIRELESS
 Jing Ren (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS from 2016 to 2019, Member-at-Large on the Board
 Ph.D. degrees in communication engineering from of Governors from 2018 to 2020, Technical Program Committee Chair of APCC
 the University of Electronic Science and Technol- 2017 and ICCC 2019 and 2024, Award Committee Chair of the Asia–Pacific
 ogy of China (UESTC), Chengdu, China, in 2007 Board, and Award Committee Chair of the Technical Committee on Cognitive
 and 2015, respectively. She is currently an Asso- Networks. He has been the Vice President of IEEE Communications Society,
 ciate Researcher with UESTC and Research Assistant since 2022.
 with Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. Her
 research interests include network architecture and
 protocol design, software-defined networking, and
 network security.